JMTEB10JR, of WATLTHAM ABBEY 

Efsex. 














I > 
'. f '/,>,-:r : 
/ 



* 









> 




THE NEW 



BRITISH TRAVELLER; 



OR, 



MODERN PANORAMA 

OF 



Cnglanti anfc 




Exhibiting, at one comprehensive View, 
AN AMPLE, ACCURATE, AND POPULAR ACCOUNT, 

HISTORICAL, TOPOGRAPHICAL, AND STATISTICAL, 

Or this most important Portion of 

THE BRITISH EMPIRE. 

DE6CBIPTIVI OF 

ITS SEVERAL COUNTIES, CITIES, TOWNS, AND OTHER SUBDIVISIONS; THEIR SITUATION, 
EXTENT, CLIMATE, SOIL, AND PRODUCTIONS, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL: 

IMPROVEMENT AND PRESENT STATE OF 

THE ARTS, SCIENCES, MANUFACTURES, 
AGRICULTURE, CO31MERCE, POPULATION, AND SOCIETY. 

Forming a complete Survey of 

SOUTH BRITAIN; 

COMPRISING AUTHENTIC INFORMATION ON EVERY SUBJECT OF A LOCAL OR GENERAL NATURE, 

AND INTERSPERSED WITH 

Biographical Particulars of Eminent and Remarkable Persons, 



BY JAMES DUGDALE, LL. D. 



ILLUSTRATED BY A COMPLETE SET OF CORRECT MAPS; VIEWS OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS, 

ANTIQUITIES, &c. &c. 



VOL. II. 




LONDON: 
PRINTED BY AND FOR J. AND J. CUNDEE, 

IVY-LANE. PATERNOSTEE-ROW, 







v.2- 




D E RB Y 



!M m -!i Mil,-, 
* i* tf f J g < 



THE NEW 



BRITISH TRAVELLER. 



DERBYSHIRE. 



GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY. 



THE County of Derby is situated nearly in the 
centre of the island. It is bounded on the 
north by Yorkshire, and part of Cheshire, the 
Etherow separating it from the latter ; on the 
east it is bounded by Nottinghamshire ; on the south 
by Leicestershire, which also surrounds one of its 
parishes ; and, on the west, it is divided from Che- 
shire and Staffordshire, by theGoyt, the Dove, and the 
Trent. On the northern and eastern sides its boun- 
dary line must be considered rather artificial than 
natural. The longest diameter of Derbyshire, from 
north to south, is nearly fifty-five miles ; its breadth 
at the northern extremity, is about thirty-three ; but 
it contracts as it advances southward, and, near its 
junction with Leicestershire, it terminates almost in 
a point. Gough, in his additions to Camdcn, esti- 
mates its contents at 720,640 acres ; but, according 
to the last Population Returns, it contains no more 
than 689,280 acres. 

The figure of this county is remarkably irregular ; 
its sides sometimes swelling into projections, and 
sometimes retreating in curves. Its general ap- 
pearance is also very^ dissimilar ; its northern and 
southern parts presenting a strong contrast : the 
former is eminently distinguished by its hills and 
vallies, whilst the latter is not remarkable for either. 
From this irregularity of surface, the upper and 
middle parts of the county are generally denominat- 
ed the High Peak, and the Wapentake, or Low 
Peak. The mountainous tract of country which 
commences from the Low Peak, extends in one great 
chain varying in breadth, to the southern extremity 
of Scotland. The course of this range, in its pro- 
gress through Derbyshire, inclines somewhat to the 
west ; but as it advances, it spreads to the north, at 
length occupies the whole of the north- west angle, 
and also branches off in an easterly direction. 

In the southern extremity of the Peak, the ground 
rises gradually into hills, which, in their progress 
northward, being piled one upon another, form the 



very elevated tract called the High Peak. This is 
a region of bleak barren heights, and long extended 
moors, interspersed with deep vallies, through which 
the smaller streams meander. " Here," observes a 
contemporary writer, " the scenery is in many parts 
romantic and sublime ; but, on the whole, inferior 
in picturesque effect to that of other mountainous 
countries. Beauty, indeed, is only resident in the 
vallies ; the high grounds appearing dreary, and 
destitute of entertainment ; and in many situations 
not a single house or tree is seen, to divert the eye 
of the traveller, or relieve the weariness that arises 
from the contemplation of sterility and nakedness. 
Unpleasing, however, and even disgustful to the 
imagination, as the moors are, they yet serve, by 
way of contrast, to heighten the beauty of the dales 
and vallies by which they are intersected ; and the 
sudden change which these occasion in the appear- 
ance of the country, at once surprises and interests : 
admiration is excited by the comparison ; and the 
mind readily admits that its pleasure would hare 
been less perfect, if the preceding scenes had been 
more beautiful." 

The most considerable eminences in the High 
Peak are the Ax-cdge, and Kinder-scout. The 
former is situated near Buxton ; and, according to 
Whitehurst, it is about 2100 feet higher than the 
town of Derby, and 1000 feet above the valley in 
which Buxton Hall stands. Kinder-scout rises 
near the north-east angle of the Peak : its height 
has not been taken ; but, as it overlooks all the 
neighbouring eminences, its elevation is thought to 
be greater than that of Ax-edge. 

In the Low Peak are numerous eminences, of va- 
rious height and extent. Alport, near Wirksworth ; 
Crich-cliff; and Brassington Moor, which command 
very extensive prospects, are the most lofty. From 
Alport, on a clear day, the Wrekin, in Shropshire, 
may be distinctly seen. 

On the eastern side of the county there is a lofty 







ridge, 



DERBYSHIRE. 



ridge, of considerable length and extent : it com- 
mences to the south of Hardwick, and continues, in 
another direction, to the extremity of Derbyshire, 
where it enters the county of York. 

The southern part of this county is, in general, 
pleasant and well cultivated ; but it presents no par- 
ticular variety of scenery. Dr. Aikin, in his " De- 
scription of the Country round Manchester," ob- 
serves, that " the mountainous part of this county 
is distinguished from the rest by the greater quan- 
tity of rain which falls in it. At Chatsworth, which 
is by no means the highest tract, about thirty-three 
inches of rain have been found to fall annually, at a 
medium. The High Peak is peculiarly liable to 
very violent storms, in which the rain descends in 
torrents, so as frequently to occasion great ravages 
in the lands ; it is also subject to very high winds. 
These causes, together with the elevation of the 
country, render it cold, so that vegetation is back- 
ward and unkindly. Some kinds of grain will not 
grow at all in the Peak, and others seldom ripen till 
very late in the year. The atmosphere is, however, 
pure and healthful, and the higher situations are ge- 
nerally free from epidemic diseases, though agues 
and fevers sometimes prevail in the vallies. One 
disease is, however, endemic in these parts, and even 
as far south as Derby : this is the Bronchocelc, or 
Derby-neck : it is an enlargement of the glands of 
the throat, and is a degree of the same disease that 
is known in the alps, and other mountainous tracts." 

RIVERS.] The Crawlow, the Derwent, the Dove, 
the Errewash, the Rothcr, the Trent, and the Wye, 
are the principal rivers of Derbyshire. 

The Crawlow waters the northern parts of the 
county, but possesses nothing to entitle it to parti- 
cular attention. 

The Derwent rises in the mountainous district of the 
High Peak, and is soon increased by various tor- 
rents, which flow from the dreary waste by which its 
source is enclosed. These unite near Hathi-rsage in 
one stream, which, taking a south eastern course, 
emerges from its native wilds ; and, passing through 
Chatsworth Park, soon afterwards receives the wa- 
ters of the Wye. It has been remarked, that the 
stream of the Derwent is of a dusky colour, which 
it derives from the soil it passes through. Its tem- 
perature is higher than that of most rivers ; a cir- 
cumstance ascribed to the numerous warm springs 
which mingle with the current during its progress. 
After passing through Chatsworth ^ark, the Der- 
went, enlarged by the waters of the Wye, enlivens 
the pleasant vale of Dsrlcy, till i's channel is sud- 
denly engulphed between those loi'ty rocks, which, 
in their winding recesses, enclose the romantic 
scenery of Matlock vale. In the words of the 
poet : 

; Here tl-.p HIGH TOR 

Rears Us mighty head, a!ong. \\hosc broad bold base. 
Impatient Dervrcnt foam 1 :, among the craggs 
' impetuous, till Uis.lyrxe all lost, 



Gentle and still, a deep and silent stream, 
He scarcely seems lo move : o'er him the boughs 
Bend their green foliage, shivering with the wind, 
And dip into his surface." 

At this part, the scenery on the banks of the Der- 
went is highly interesting. From the turnpike-gate, 
at Matlock, to the Old Bath, the margin is one 
complete incrustation of tuphus, which gradually 
acquires such a degree of hardness that most of the 
buildings in the vicinity are built with it. The cliff 
which bounds the eastern bank, particularly that 
part of it called the High Torr, is remarkably bold 
and picturesque. The prospect of the cliff from the 
Old Bath is also very striking : and that from the 
front of Froggat's Hotel, though not the most w ild 
and romantic, is the most pleasing to the eye. The 
trees, which clothe the opposite steep, exhibit a 
beautiful variety of tints, which finely contrast with 
the bare and rugged protuberances of the rock, 
that advance to meet the view. The Derwent, 
murmuring along, forms a gentle curve in front of 
the hotel, and the ground here is laid out with par- 
ticular taste and attention, though nature prevails, 
as if disdaining the controul of art. Emerging 
through the rocks at Cromford, the Darwent flows 
through several deep vallies, enters the cultivated 
j vale which extends to Derby, and, suddenly turning 
! to the east, it passes quietly to the wide plain enli- 
vened by the Trent, into which it flows, on the Lei- 
cestershire border, near Wilnr, 

The Dove, which is said to derive its name from 
the glossy blue or purple colour of its water, resem- 
bling the colour of the bird of the same name, rises 
in the Peak of Derbyshire, at a little distance to the 
south of Buxton, and, running south-east, divides this 
county from Staffordshire, and falls into the Trent, 
a few miles north of Burton-upon-Trent. This 
river sometimes swells, in the course of twelve hours, 
to an amazing height, and frequently carries away 
whole flocks of sheep and herds of cattle, ami returns 
as suddenly to its natural channel. These inunda- 
tions are occasioned by shoots of water, which this 
river frequently receives in its course through so 
j mountainous a country. The current of the Dove 
is supposed to pass through a lime-stone stratum, 
which renders the waters so fertile, that, if it over- 
flow its banks in the spring, it greatly enriches the 
meadows. The country people say in April, Dove's 
flood is worth a king's good. The Dove is remark- 
able for producing a fish called grayling, and for 
trouts, which are said to be the finest in England. 
It is thus immortalised in the antiquated verses of 
Cotton : 

" Thy murmurs, Dpve, 
Plea.'ing lo lovers, or men fallen in love ; 
With thy bright beauties, and thy fair blue eyes, 
Wound like a Parthian, while the b hooter il ies ; 
Ol all lair Thetes, none so bright, V 

So pleasant lo the taste, none to the sight, 
None \itld the gentle angler fudi del'ghl. ) 



DERBYSHIRE. 



To which the bounty of a stream is such, 
As only with a swift and transient touch, 
T' inrich her sterile borders as she glides. 
And force sweet flowers from their marble sides." 

The Errewash, which rises in the cold district 
near Alfretou, divides this county from Nottingham- 
shire, and falls into the Trent eleven miles east- 
south-east of Derby. 

The Rother derives its origin from several rivu- 
lets to the south of Chesterfield, which it passes 
in its course ; when, taking a north easterly direc- 
tion, it enters \orkshire between Kilmarsh and 
Beighlon. 

Tlie Trent, which rises in Staffordshire, enters 
Derbyshire at a little distance south of Catton ; for 
several miles it forms the south-western boundary of 
the county ; but taking a more easterly direction 
near Newton rfolney, it flows by Twyford and 
Swarkston to the confines of Leicestershire, and, 
after continuing its course between the counties 
for some miles, finally quits Derbyshire near 
Barton. 

The Wye rises amongst the bleak heights in the 
vicinity of Bnxton ; and, receiving in its romantic 
course, the waters of several minor streams, it flows 
in a south easterly direction, by the town of Eake- 

* Akhemillu, vulgaris. Common ladies' mantle, or bears- 
foot ; in mountainous meadows and pastu-cs, 
common. 

slrcnaria vcrna. Mountain chickweed; in (lie Peak about 
Wirksworth, and elsewhere. 

Bryum hypnoides. Wooly brvum ; on mountainous heaths, at 
Matlock Bath. 

hypnoidts A variety of the last ; on the mountains 

in the Peak. 

Byssus saxatilis. Stone Byssus: on limestone rocks. 

Campanula lutijolia. Giant throatwort ; in the mountainous 
pastures by the hedge sides, plentifully. 

Cqfdamme hirsuta. Hairy ladies' smock; about the mouth of 
Poole's hole, plentifully. 

impatient. Impatient laches' smock; by brooks 

in mountainous meadows, and on moist rocks 
and stones. 

CocMcarea o/icinalis. Common, or garden scurvy grass ; on 
the mountains atCastleton in the Peak, about 
(he great subterraneous vault or cavern called 
Peak's hole. 

' officinalis y. Grznlandica: Greenland scurvy 

grass ; about the entrance into Peak's hole 

Comarum palustre. Purple marsh cinquefoil ; near the ebbine 
and flowing well at Tideswell. 

Draba murahs. Speedwell-leaved whitlow crass : iii the fis- 
sures of rocks, and in mountainous and stony 
pastures, especially of a chalky soil. 

Empetnm ntgrum. Blackberried heath, crow or crakeberries 
on the mountains in the Peak, common. 

Enca cinerca. Fine leaved heath ; on the mountains near 
nathersedge in the Peak. 

Erysimum ehicranthoide*. Treacle wormseed ; near Ashburn 
in the Peak. 

Geranium lucidum. Shining dove' foot crane's bill ; about 
die entrance into Peak's hole 

Lichen jubutus. Fennel liverwort ; on the rocks near Danvent 

lu the Peak. ' 

omplMs.^ Purple liverwort; on the rocks in the 

VOL. ii. NO. 4fj. 



well, and falls into the Derwent, a few miles be- 
low. 

PLANTS.] The delightful meadows and pastures 
in the southern and eastern parts of this county, 
produce all the common herbs which flourish in 
other parts of the island : those which are noticed 
by Camden, as more rare, are given in the noto 
below.* 

MINES AND MINERALS.] Derbyshire is rich in 
mineral produce ; the mines of lead, iron, calamine, 
coal, &c. affording employment to many of its inha- 
bitants. Some of the lead-mines have been wrought 
through a long succession of ages. They were for- 
merly of greater value than at present ; as the 
veins become poorer, the deeper the mines are exca- 
vated. Camden was of opinion, that Derbyshire 
was alluded to by Pliny, when he said, " In Britain, 
lead is found near the surface of the earth in such 
abundance, that a law is made to limit the quantity 
that siiail be gotten." However this may be, it is x 
ceriain that the Romans had lead works in tiiis part 
of the island, as several pigs of lead have been found 
here inscribed with Roirian characters. One of these 
was discovered on Cromford Moor, in the year 1777, 
bearing the following inscription : 

IMP. CAES. HADRIANI. AUG. MEI. LVI. 



Lijeopodium clavntum. Common clubmoss, or) onthcmoun- 

wolvesclaw; / tains near 

selago. Fir clubmoss ; on rocks f Uerwent in 

, and ) tin, p ej k. 

I'olypndium fiiijc famina. Female polypody ; in maishy and 

shady places about Wingerworth Common. 

" fragile. Brittle polypody ; about Peak's hole. 

margiiiale. Marginal polypody; about Huxton, 

this plant has not been long known to be a na- 
tive of England. 
Polytrichum commune. Common polytrichum', or golden 

maidenhair; in the Peak. 
Prenunthes muralis. Ivy leaved wild lettuce; on old walls 

and about the entrance into Peak's hole. 
Ilubus idttus. Raspberry bush, framboise, or himibcrry ; in 

the hedges in the Peak. 
Rumex maritimus. Golden dork; in the meadow by the 

roadside leading to Swarston Bridge, which in 

floods are overflowed by the Trent. 

Saxtfraga hypnoidet. Trifid sengrecn ; on tlie mountains. 
T/iahctrcim minus. Lesser meadow rue ; about tlie entrance 

into P.-ak's hole. 
Thlaspi montunum. Mountain mithridate mustard ; in the 

Peak. 
Tremelta utriculata. Bladder tremella ; on stones in rivulets, 

near Tkh-swell. 
Vacciniwn oiycoccus< Cranberries, mossberries, or moorber- 

ries; on boggy places iu the Pe.ik. 
'*'* idaa. Red whorls, or whortleberries ; in the 

mountain* of the Peak, plentifully. 
faleriania ojjidmilis ft. Mountain valerian; near Biixton 

\Vell, above a stony and thorny pLice callecf 

Ashwood. . 
J'iola gnmdiflora. Yellow violet, or pansies ; .-bnut Pool's 

hole and Eldt-n hole, and ,n the Peak. 
tricolor. Pansies, or Heart-east-; in the mountain? 

amongst the corn, and upon the mud walls 

and fences of stone. 



\ 



This 



6 



DERBYSHIRE. 



this was interpreted by the late Rev. Mr. Pegge, 
who made some observations on it in the fourth vo- 
lume of the Archajologia, thus : " The Sixth Le- 
gion inscribe* this in Memory of the Emperor Ha- 
drian." Another block of lead was discovered in 
the year 1783, in Matlock Bank ; but the meaning 
of the inscription was more difficult to be ascertained, 
as the words were not only much abbreviated, but 
also consisted of compounded letters : these, how- 
ever, were in sharp relief, and as perfect as when 
newly formed. Mr. Pegge [conjectured the inscrip- 
tion might, be thus explained : " The property of 
Lucius Aruconius Verecundus, Lead Merchant, of 
London." This block measured twenty-two inches 
on the lower surface, five in breadth, and weighed 
eighty-four pounds. A third block, which weighed 
about eighty-nine pounds, was discovered at Mat- 
lock, at a period still later. The following letters 
were inscribed upon it. : 

TI. CL. TR. LVT. BR. EXARG. 

These, according to the conjecture of the Rev. 
Mr. Clifford, stand for the words " Tiberii, Clau- 
diani. Triumviri, Lutudari Ex Argentaria." 

It is apparent that the lead-mines of Derbyshire 
were known to the Saxons, as a mine near Castle- 
ton is called Odin, from the name of one of their 
deities : the same circumstance proves it to have 
Keen opened prior to the introduction of Christianity. 
It appears also, that there were lead-mines in the 
Wapentake of , Wirksworth in the year 835 ; for at 
that period Kenewara, Abbess of Rcpton, granted 
her estate at " Wircesworth" to Humbert, the Al- 
derman, on condition that he annually gave lead, of 
the value of 300 shillings, to Archbishop Cestnoth, 
for the use of Christ Church, Canterbury. The 
bus'iu'ss of the lead-mines was doubtless carried to 
a considerable extent at the time of the Norman 
Survey, as the Domesday Book mentions no less 
than seven in this county. 

Before we proceed to specify, or describe the re- 
spective minerals of this county, it seems proper to 
; remark, that veins of lead ore arc distinguished, on 
account of their various positions in the earth, by 
the technical or local names of " pipe," " rake," 
and " flat" works. The first of these lie between 
two rocks, or strata, yet seldom follow any regular 
inclination, but fill up fissures, the lines or branches 
running parallel to each other, and more or less ho- 
rizontally. The branches have a general connection, 
or communication, by means of fine slender threads, 
or " leadings." The rock which forms the " roofs" 
and " soles" of these veins, is sometimes pierced 
though by the leadings, which frequently conduct 
to a fresh range. These works are always accom- 
panied by considerable; portions of clay ; and when 
the branches of the vein become imperceptible, the 
day is frequently followed as a sure guide to new 
veins. The principal pipe veins arc Yate Stoop, 
near Winster ; llubberdalo, near Money-ash ; Wa- 
tergrove, Milleraine, and Lanehead, at Castjcton. 



The veins nre sometimes twenty or thirty yards 
wide, and sometimes not more than two inches : 
they generally have toadstone, either above or below, 
in the neighbourhood. 

The perpendicular veins, termed " rake," are 
found in the clefts and chasms of limestone ; conse- 
quently, instead of extending uniformly between the 
same strata, they follow the direction of the cavities, 
and sometimes penetrate 150 or 200 yards into the 
earth. "NearCastletou," we understand, " they ge- 
nerally run from east to west, and are traced, or 
discovered, from the surface. They are not exactly 
perpendicular, but ' hade,' or incline, about one 
foot in ten ; sometimes to the north, and sometimes 
to the south. There are veins that have a more 
northerly or southerly direction, and are then called 
cross veins : sometimes they intersect each other, 
and where they unite, they are generally very rich. 
Small veins, usually called ' strings,' or ' serins,' 
often extend from the rake, and take various direc- 
tions : all arc worked as long as they are found pro- 
fitable, and the intermediate substances that divide 
them are called ' riders.' When the veins are se- 
parated, which is sometimes the case, by ' clay,' 
' bind,' or ' toadstone,' they are observed, where the 
lower parts are again discovered, to be thrown on 
one side, according to the ' hade' of the vein, and 
are thence said to ' leap.' The principal rake veins 
are in the neighbourhood of Castleton, Wirksworth, 
Matlock, Winster, and a few other places." 

Although the " Flat-works" bear considerable 
resemblance to the " pipe," they disagree in some 
points. The principal leader, or stem, in the pipe, 
is accompanied by many branches, but the " P'lat" 
has none ; the latter spreads wider, yet seldom ex- 
tends more than 100 yards. It is also found near 
the surface, and in the solid rock. It is doubtful, 
whether the " pipe" or the " rake" veins are more 
prevalent. 

Foul air, and water, constitute the greatest im- 
pediments to working the mines. To relieve them 
from the former, a pipe or tube is generally intro- 
duced down the shaft, and extended along the roof 
of the gallery to the place where the work is carried 
on. To remove the water, many " adits," or, as 
they are here termed, " soughs," are driven from 
the Derwent to Alport, and called the Hilcar Sough. 
It cost upwards of 50,000.'. ; relieves a considerable 
number of mines ; and is nearly four miles in length. 
Another, and one of the most considerable, at Wirks- 
worth, is called Cromibrd Sough. It is full two 
miles in length, and was driven at an expence of 
30,000/. The proprietors receive a certain propor- 
tion of lead ore from the mines ; though the latter 
are now beneath the level, and o!' course but ineffec- 
tually drained by it. The relieving of the mines at 
Wirksworth by this adit, has long been only a se- 
condary object ; as the water delivered by it at 
Cromtord has proved of immense value. The cele- 
brated Sir R. Arkwright employed the stream to 
work his cotton mill ; and it is still applied to a 

similar 



DERBYSHIRE. 



similar purpose, haying the great advantage of not 
being liable either to considerable increase or dimi- 
nution. Another sough, driven from the level of the 
Derwent, is called Wirksworth Moor Sough: it lies 
to the east of that town, aud is nearly three miles in 
length. It has been observed, that a low level in 
the limestone drains an extensive tract of country, 
all the waters falling into it, from miles around. 

Lead ore is divided into four classes, according to 
its degrees of goodness. The largest and best sort 
is denominated " Bing;" the next in size, and 
nearly equal in quality, is called " Pesey ;" the 
third is " Smitham," which passes through the sieve 
iu washing ; the fourth, which is fine as flour, and 
caught by a very slow stream of water, is termed 
" Belland :" 'this is inferior to all the others, on ac- 
count of an admixtureof foreign particles. All the ore, 
as it is raised from the mine, is beaten into pieces, 
and washed before it is sold : this part of the busi- 
ness is performed by women, who earn about eight- 
pence a day. When the ore is properly prepared, 
it is carried to the smelting furnaces. These for- 
merly were of two kinds, the hearth, and cupola ; 
but the latter is now generally used. The hearth 
furnace was formed of large rough stones so as to 
make an oblong cavity, about two feet deep and 
wide, and fourteen long, into whick the fuel and ore 
were placed in alternate layers ; the heat being rais- 
ed by means of a large pair of bellows, worked by a 
water-wheel. The lead produced by this process 
was pure, soft, and ductile ; but a considerable 
quantity of metal continuing in the stags, these were 
smelted in an intense coak-fire ; and the lead ob- 
tained by this means was inferior in quality to the 
former. The cupola furnace was introduced into 
Derbyshire about seventy or seventy-five years 
since, by a physician of the name of Wright. It is 
of an oblong form, somewhat resembling a long 
chest, the top and bottom of which are a little con- 
cave. The fire being placed at one end, and a 
chimney at the other, the flame is drawn through the 
furnace, in which about 1800 weight of ore is strew- 
ed at one time, and smelted by the reverberation of 
heat, without toucjiing the fuel. The time required 
for this process is uncertain, some ores being work- 
ed in six hours, while others require nine, according 
to the nature of the substances that are attached to 
them. The ore which is united with the spar is 
most easily fused ; and sometimes a small portion of 
this mineral is thrown into the furnace to accelerate 
the process. When the flame is applied to the ore, 
great care is taken that it may not be intense, as a 
strong heat occasions the lead to fly off with the 
sulphur. 

The lead, when smelted, is poured into moulds of 
difivrcnt sizes, according as it is intended for the 
Hull, Bawtry, or London markets. Two blocks 
make a pig ; ami eight of these, a fodder. In dif- 
ferent parts of the county, a large quantity of this 
metal is converted into red lead. This process is 
performed in an ovea having three divisions ; the 



fire is placed in the two outer spaces, and the lead 
in the middle. The flames, reverberating on thfi 
metal, convert it into a calx, or powder ; which on 
a second exposure to the fire, assumes a red colour. 
In the former part of the operation particular care is 
employed in duly regulating the heat. 

The quantity of lead annually obtained from the 
Derbyshire mines cannot be correctly ascertained, 
but it may be estimated at an average of between 
five and six thousand tons. It has been generally 
thought that the trade of late years was on the de- 
cline, as the increasing depth of the mines renders 
them both more expensive and more difficult to be 
worked ; but, from the improvements that have been 
made in the art of smelting, and the better methods 
employed to relieve the mines of water, by the driv- 
ing of new levels, and the erecting of some improv- 
ed steam-engines, advantages have been obtained, 
which, to a certain extent, counterbalance the in- 
creased expences. 

Though lead ores generally contain a portion of 
silver, none in Derbyshire, that have yet undergone 
anal v/at ion, yield a sufiicient quantity of that valua- 
ble metal to defray the expences attendant on its 
separation. The most common lead ore found here, 
is " galena," -which in general lies in smaller or 
larger veins and masses ; frequently in nodules, 
with " cauk," a name here used for barytes. (jia- 
lena is frequently crystallized in cubes, with the an- 
gles truncated ; also in the octahedron, and its mo- 
difications ; it is of a bright lustre, and flaky frac- 
ture. Another variety, when broken, is beautifully 
bright and foliated : when exposed to the atmo- 
sphere, it decomposes, and becomes tarnished. An- 
other kind of galena, on account of its hardness and 
granulated appearance whfn broken, is called steel- 
grained lead ore. This kind appears sometimes 
fibrous, not unlike the common compact ore of anti- 
mony. Masses of galena frequently contain small 
holes, the surfaces of which being nearly black, ap- 
pear as if corroded : sometimes carbonate of lead 
appears in its various states and forms ; some of the 
chrystals appear transparent, others dirty-white, 
and some hare a semi-metallic appearance : the 
shape chiefly the prism, and the double hexagonal 
pyramids joined at the base. Barytes sometivuoS 
contain two, three, or four veins of galena., the whole 
not more than two inches and a half broad. These 
veins are perpendicular, and aifbrd a pleasing re- 
presentation of the large -veins of ore. Spherical 
nodules of lead ore are not unfrequently found in 
caverns in the mines, whither they must have been 
conveyed by water : some of them are hollow, and 
contain native sulphur. A pulverulent black-lead 
ore, sometimes disseminated on the matrix, appears 
to arise from th.i decomposition of the galena, occa- 
sioned perhaps by their super-oxygenation. 

" Slikenside" (shining, as though polished by art, 
on one side) " is a singular variety of galena, of a 
bright metallic polish, with a reflection almost equal 
to that of a mirror. It appears tliiuly plated on one 



8 



DERBYSHIRE. 



side of a substance called " kevcl," or " kcblc," 
and generally forms the side of a vein, or a cavity ; 
but sometimes composes a kind of double vein, the 
smooth surface on each side being closely in contact, 
though without the smallest degree of cohesion. 
When divided by an iron wedge, or pierced by the 
miner's tool, it first begins to crackle, then rends 
violently, and explodes with a noise as though 
blasted with gunpowder. If the miners neglect to 
retreat sufficiently early, they are sometimes wound- 
ed by these fragments, which cut them as if 
they had been stabbed by a chissel in various places. 
A satisfactory explanation of this extraordinary phe- 
nomenon has never been given : it occurs chiefly at 
Haycliff and Lady-Wash mines at Eyam, and the 
Odin mine' at Castleton. In the former, an asto- 
nishing explosion happened in the year 1738 ; at 
which time, Mr. Whitehurst affirms, the quantity of 
200 barrels of minerals was exploded at one blast ; 
each barrel being supposed to contain nearly four 
hundred weight. At the time of explosion, the sur- 
face of the ground was observed to shake, as by an 
earthquake. A new variety of slikenside, of a me- 
tallic lustre, was discovered a few years ago, coated 
with blende, of a light stone colour, sometimes dark 
brown, or a fine violet fluor matrix. 

Corroded, but perfectly malleable, masses of lead 
are sometimes found in old mines, which appear 
stalactitic. At an early period the miners were ac- 
customed to melt the lead ore in the veins, and these 
substances may probably have remained there ever 
since. The antimoniated lead ore runs interwoven, 
in filaments, like network, and is sometimes accom- 
panied with indurated bitumen : this kind is rarely 
iridescent. A variety is sometimes met with in oc- 
tahedrons beautifully iridescent ; the colours are at 
first vivid, but become tarnished, and lose their 
beauty on being exposed to the atmosphere. This 
kind is generally areompamed with crystallized fluor 
affixed to its surface. Sometimes a, variety of car- 
bonate of lead occurs, which does not adhere to the 
galena : masses have been found finely crystallized 
on the surface, of a horn colour, semi-transpa- 
rent. 

Muriate of lead, in perfect crystals, of a beautiful 
tra~* Daren t yellow colour, is sometimes found. 
What is cH " glass lead," appears as though it 
had undergone *U.e action of fire; is transparent, 
and occasionally cry^allized ; but otherwise of an 
opake waxy white : it is easily melted with a blow- 
pipe. Nodules of carbonated lead have also been 
discovered, formed in prisms, and sometimes of a 
considerable size, acicular, fibrous, and interwoven, 
in the loose earth. 

Carbonated nodules are also found in loose ferrugi- 
nous earth, granular, and of a shining micaceous frac- 
ture, easily reducible to a sandy powder : this variety 
might be called sandy lead ore. C rystals are likewise 
found appearing semi-metallic; sometimes one part of 
tk<; same crystal a dull blue colour, the other a trans- 
parent horn colour. A singular kiud of carbonated 

6 



lead is found, in ferruginous earth, in nodules, -with 
hydrophanous steatite, &.C. appearing' like a decom- 
posed breccia, in small veins half transparent. Till 
within these few years, these ores attracted so little 
attention, that they were not known to contain 
lead. 

An argillaceous variety, " wheat-stone," is found 
in a large vein ; it is of a light stone colour, riot 
transparent, very heavy, with black spots and con- 
tains arsenic : the fracture is earthy, having traces 
of small semi-metallic veins, and a few bright metal- 
lic scales ; it is extremely easy of fusion, during 
which it emits a strong smell of sulphur and arse- 
nic. Phosphate of lead, of a green colour, is some- 
times found on barytes, in hexagonal prisms, at- 
tached to sandstone. Molybdate of lead, of a fine 
yellow approaching to an orange colour, sometimes 
occurs in the cavities of galena, and of carbonated 
lead : this variety rarely appears. 

Galena commonly yields from fifty to eighty per 
cwt. at the furnace : many arts are employed in the 
dressing to make it appear clean and rich, that it 
may fetch a higher price. The carbonate of lead 
is so filled with heterogeneous matter, that it rarely 
yields more than from thirty to fifty per cwt. ; this 
does not produce such ductile metal as the galena. 

The regulations of the rights of the miners, and 
the dues payable for the ore, in different parts of the 
mining, district, are numerous and various. The 
principal tract of lead is called the " King's-field :" 
this denomination comprises the whole Wapentake of 
Wirksvf orth, and part of the High Peak. The mine- 
ral duties of King's-field have been from time im- 
memorial let on lease : the present farmer of those 
in the High Peak is the Duke of Devonshire ; and 
those in the Wapentake of Wirksworth the Rolles 
family. They have each a steward and bar-master, 
in the districts they hold of the crown. The stew- 
ard presides as judge in the Barmote Courts, and, 
with twenty-four jurymen, determines all disputes 
which arise from the working of the mines. The 
courts are held twice a year ; those of the High 
Peak, at Money-ash ; and those of the Wapentake, 
at Wirksworth. The chief duty of the bar-master 
is putting miners in possession of the veins they 
have discovered, and collecting the ore due to the 
Lord of the Manor. If a miner discover a new vein 
of ore in King's-field, by application to the bar- 
master, he may obtain an exclusive title to it, pro- 
vided it be not in an orchard, garden, or high-road. 
Possession of it is given in the presence of two jury- 
men, by marking out in a pipe, or rake-work, two 
" meares" of ground, each containing twenty-nine 
yards ; and in a Hat work, fourteen yards square. 
When, however, a miner neglects to avail himself of 
his discovery beyond a limited time, he may be de- 
prived of his vein, and the bar-master may dispose 
of it to another adventurer. The other parts of the 
bar-master's office, the superintending the measure- 
ment ot the ore, and receiving the dues of the lessee 
of the crown, are attended with some difficulty, 

arising 



DERBYSHIRE. 



arising from the variety of claims, which differ great- 
ly.in different places. In general, a thirteenth of 
the ore is due in the King's-field ; but seldom more 
than a twenty-fifth is taken. There are also a tithe- 
tine, and another called cope ; but the latter is paid 
by the buyer of the ore. The Dish, or, as it is 
sometimes called, Hoppet, by which the ore is mea- 
sured, contains sixteen pints in the High Peak ; 
but only fourteen in the Low Peak. In the latter, 
the Brazen Dish by which the measures of ore are 
rejulated, has the following inscription : 

" Tliis Dislie was made the iiy day of October the 
iiij yere of the Reigne of Kyni* Henry the vm before 
George Erie of Shrowesbury Steward of (lie Kyng's 
most Honourable household and also Steward of all 
the honour of Tutbury by the assent and consent as 
well of all the Mynours as of all the Brtnners within 
and adioyning the Lordshyp of Wyrkysworlh Percell 
of the said honour This iJishe to Uemayne In the 
Moole hall at Wyrkysworth hanging by a Cheyne so 
as the Mchanntes or Mynours may have rcsorte to 
the same att all tyuies to make the trw Mesnre at the 
wine." 

History has not recorded the origin of the mineral 
laws of Derbyshire ; but there is a statement of Ed- 
ward the First having directed the sheriff of the 
county to call a meeting, at Ashbourn, to such per- 
sons as were^ best acquainted with the rights and 
customs of the mines ; on which occasion, the miners 
petitioned that their privileges should be confirmed 
under the Great Seal, as an act of charity to reserve 
them from the danger to which they were exposed. 
In the reigns of Edward the Sixth and Queen Mary, 
several alterations were made in the mineral laws ; 
and within the last thirty or forty years various new 
regulations have been adopted at the Great Bar- 
mote Courts of the High Peak and Wapentake. 

Mineralogists have remarked, that the colour and 
texture of the iron ore in this county are various. 
Those of the argillaceous kind are the most common, 
and are principally used in the iron-works. They 
form a tUin stratum in the coal countries, and some- 
times enclose shells and coralloids. Calcareous, or 
sparry iron ores r of a fine brownish red colour, 
sometimes bright yellow, scaly, and dirty brown, are 
found in amorphous masses near the surface, and 
filling insulated places. The calcareous masses 
seem predominant. This sort is very serviceable 
to mix with other iron ores ; and, in the manufac- 
ture of steel, it is particularly useful. 

The iron-stone, or oxide of iron, presents itself 
throughout the whole district in which coal has beeu 
discovered ; the Chinley Hills excepted. The depth 
at which it lies from the surface is extremely vari- 
ous ; but frequently, from the great dipping of the 
strata, it " bassets out to day" as the miners term 
it, when any metallic substance appears on the sur- 
face. In such cases, a hole is made like the shaft of 
a coal-pit, which is gradually enlarged as it is car- 
ried deeper, till the cavity assumes the sbape of a 
bell. These shafts are seldom sunk lower than fifty 

VOL. n. NO. 46. 



or sixty feet ; at which depth, fresh ground is bro- 
ken, and new openings are made. From this prac- 
tice, the laud receives greater injury by working 
iron mines, than those of coal ; and it is, therefore, 
not judged expedient to dig for iron ore, unless the 
beds are very rich. Their thickness varies from two 
to twelve inches. The most valuable beds of iron- 
stone, which have yet been discovered, are in Morley- 
Park, near Heage, in Wingerworth, Chesterfield, 
and 5>tavely. The furnaces, at these places, are of 
a circular or conical shape, having the fire with a 
blast at the bottom. The furnace being prepared 
and properly seasoned, the process of smelting be- 
gins ; and alternate layers of fuel, ore, and rtsix are 
put in continually day and night ; the fire not being 
permitted to go out till the furnace wants repair, 
which is after a period of some, years. Coak is in 
general used for fuel, and limestone is the universal 
flux. The ore previously to being smelted is burnt 
in beds in the open air, first with coak, and then 
with coal slack : it is afterwards broken into small 
pieces and screened. By varying the proportions 
of ore, flux, and fuel, different kinds of iron are pro- 
duced. When the fusion of the iron-stone begins, 
the smelted metal passes through the layers of coak 
and limestone, and collecting at the bottom of the 
furnace is let it out into the beds of sand, moulded 
to the forms required. When first obtained from 
the ore, the metal is brittle, and wants the due mal- 
leability ; to give it this property, it is conveyed to 
the forge, where it is wrought into bars. A pig of 
iron is three feet and a half long, and weighs one 
hundred pounds. This county produces annually 
between fifteen and sixteen thousand tons of iron. 

An ore of manganese and iron, called " black- 
wad," is met with in different states ; generally in 
masses not unlike hard balls of soot, which, being 
very loose and friable, crumble to powder on expo- 
sure to the atmosphere : when broken, capillary 
vein* appear, somewhat of a metallic lustre. If 
mixed with linseed oil, it becomes ignited in the 
space of forty or fifty minutes. This is much 
esteemed by painters for its drying qualities ; but its 
chief appropriation has been to ship-painting, and 
large quantities have been consumed by supplying 
the Royal Navy : before it is used it is generally 
calcined. Mr. Wedgewood, in an analysis of this 
mineral, found twenty-two parts contained nearly 
two of indissoluble earth, chiefly micaceous, one of 
lead, about nine and a half of iron, and the same 
proportion of manganese. 

" Blende," " pseudo-galena," or " black-jack," 
is found in amorphous masses, frequently crystal- 
lized, and generally accompanied with fluor and ba- 
rytes. It rs of a blackish brown colour, approaoh- 
ing to a metallic lustre, and partially transparent. 
A variety, called ruby-blende, is crystallized on 
calcareous spar, and is of a beautiful transparent 
red. Another variety, from its "iridescent hues, is 
called pigeon-necked blende. 

" Pyrites" is found at Ashover, in a bright silver 
c coloured 



10 



DERBYSHIRE. 



coloured ve'n, running beautifully through transpa- 
rent fluor ; some other varieties, of a golden colour, 
sprinkled over the surface of the fluor, is also found 
here. A number of other kinds occur in different 
parts of the county : they arc, in general, exceed- 
ingly hard, and strike fire with steel. Martial 
ochres abound ; the best, of a rich yellow colour, 
found in a cavern termed the Water-hull, near Cas- 
tleton ; dark brown ochre is found in lead mines 
under the High Tor, at Matlock ; and balls of yel- 
low ochre are met with in the shale at Hassop. 
These pigments are exceedingly durable. Lapis cala- 
minarus, or the calamine stone, is found at Castle- 
ton, Cromford, Bensall, and Wirksworth. It occurs 
at different depths, and, in general, is found near a 
rein of lead ore : sometimes the two minerals run a 
considerable way by the side of each other, some- 
times they are mixed ; but more frequently, one 
ceases where the other begins ; and two good veins 
never appear in the same place. This ore is gene- 
rally found in a bed of yellow or reddish brown clay. 
The beds are very similar to pipe-works, and are 
formed of lumps of various sizes and irregular 
shapes. The calamine is prepared by being first 
washed in the current of a small stream, and then 
again in sieves in a vessel of water ; where all ad- 
ventitious substances, as cauk, spar, and lead ore, 
are separated from it. When, by repeated wash- 
ings, it is sufficiently purified, it is calcined in a re- 
verboratory furnace of almost the same shape as the 
cupola ; after this operation it is again picked, 
ground to a fine powder, and washed ; and is then 
fit for use. About 500 tons are annually prepared 
in this county. Its value is from three to four 
pounds a tori in its rough state, but when refined it 
is sold at nine or ten. By the variety of operations 
it undergoes, before it is sold, about eight parts in 
twenty are lost. 

Coal mines were wrought in this county so early 
as the reign of Edward the Second ; as Thomas de 
Chaworth, Lord of Alfreton, made a grant, in this 
reign, to the monks of Beauchief, giving them li- 
cense to supply themselves with any quantity of coal 
within the liberties of Norton and Alfreton. Clay, 
and some other substances, frequently separate the 
vein of coal, which is sometimes found twenty yards 
higher on one side than on the other. The pits are 
freed from inflammable air by means of a- small 
shaft placed within a few yards of that by which the 
coal is drawn up : a pipe is conveyed from the 
smaller shaft, through the large one, to that part of 
the mine in which the men are working ; about a 
bushel of burning coals is then suspended in a vessel 
in the smaller shaft : by this contrivance the air 
becomes rarefied, fresh air rushes to supply its 
place, and a complete circulation is obtained in 
every part of the miue. Coal is met with in great 
abuiiiiance, and at various depths ; the best is com- 
monly of a bright black colour, of the smallest spe- 
cific gravity, finely laminated, and on being con- 
sumed leaves the fewest ashes. Canal or candle 



coal is very compact and light, sonarous when 
struck, jet black, burning with a luminous flame, 
and capable of receiving- a beautiful polish. Mr. 
Piikiugton thus describes the peculiar qualities of 
coal, according to the places where it is met with, in 
this county : " At Hmalley, West Hallam, and 
Ilkeston, the coal is of a shining and lamellar tex- 
ture. It is neither very heavy, nor solid : at first 
it burns very briskly, but soon buries itself in a white 
ash. At Heanor, and Shipley, the hard coat is of a 
dull, scaly, compact, and solid texture. It takes fir 
with difficulty, and b'irns very slowly ; but when 
once lighted, it diffuses a lively and durable heat, 
and burns a long time before it is entirely consumed. 
It is sometimes attended with a strong sulphureous 
smell, and yields a reddish brown ash. At Derby, 
Ripley, Swanwick, and Alfreton, the hard coal par- 
takes of the qualities of the two sorts which have 
been described. It is of a scaly, moderately com- 
pact, and rather bright texture. It burns with a 
strong and regular heat, and lasts a considerable 
length of time : it is pretty free from sulphur, and 
mostly gives a white or grey coloured ash. At Nor - 
manton, and Blackwell, the hard coal agrees in most 
of its properties with that which is last mentioned : 
the chief circumstance in which it differs is, that it 
is harder and more refractory, and therefore more apt 
to sparkle and fly in the fire. At Chesterfield, and 
Eckington, the hard coal is but little sulphureous, 
and yields a large quantity of ashes. That which is 
found at Nevvhall, and Measham, is very nearly of 
the same kind. The coal near Buxton is shattery, 
and exceedingly sulphureous." Pieces of coal are 
sometimes found in this county weighing upwards of 
four hundred pounds. Leicestershire, Nottingham- 
shire, Lincolnshire, and Northamptonshire, are sup- 
plied annually with large quantities ; Sheffield also 
receives a great quantity ; and the home consump- 
tion is very considerable. 

Our limits will not permit us to enter into a mi- 
nute detail of the remaining mineralogical substances 
of this county ; but we shall present such a brief 
sketch, as may be interesting to the general reader ; 
referring others, for more scientific and copious ac- 
counts, to Whitehurst's " Enquiry into the Forma- 
tion of the Earth," Bakewell's " Elements of Geo- 
logy," Mawe's " Mineralogy of Derbyshire," Mar- 
shall's " Review of Agricultural Reports," &c. 

Whitehurst has justly observed, that " the book 
of nature is open to all men, written in characters 
equally intelligible to all nations ; but, perhaps, in 
no part of the world more than in Derbyshire ; for 
amidst all the apparent confusion and disorder of the 
strata in that mountainous country, there is, never- 
theless, one constant invariable order in their ar- 
rangement, and of their various productions, or im- 
pressions, of animal, vegetable, and mineral sub- 
stanees." 

The uppermost stratum is argillaceous grit, and 
its accompanying beds of clay, coal, iron-stone, &c. 
Its thickness is various, according as the surface is 

more 



DERBYSHIRE. 



11 



more or less uneren. This stratum generally indi- 
cates iron ore, which is frequently found under it in 
lamhue and nodules. The strata of argillaceous 
grit and iron are generally incumbent on coal, which 
lies in lamina, of various quality and thickness. 
Between the layers of coal, and frequently incumbent j 
on that substance, are various strata of a schistose 
clay, called by the different names of under-soil, 
bind, clu;ich, hard-stone, metal, plate, &c. accord- 
ing as it is more or loss indurated. All these aro of 
unequal thickness ; being sometimes only a few j 
inches ; at others, seven feet. Nodules of iron ore : 
are frequently found, which easily divide, and show . 
very fine impressions of plants, flowers, coralloids, | 
and shells. All the strata, indeed, incumbent on ! 
coal, whether argillaceous stone, or clay, contain a 
givat variety of impressions of vegetables ; ami par- 
ticularly the bamboo of India, striated, a:id joined at 
different distances ; the euphorbia of the East In- 
dies ; the American ferns, corn, gnvss, and many 
other species of the vegetable kingdom, not known 
to exist in any part of the world in a living state. 
These vegetable forms, and the strata containing 
them, are considered to be a certain indication of 
coal, not only in Derbyshire, but in every quarter of 
tke kingdom. The stratum of argillaceous grit may 
be observed in the vicinity of Smalley, lleynor, 
Derby, Heage, Alfreton, Carnfield, Chesterfield, 
and many other places. The surface of the country 
where it appears, is in general uniform ; the hills" 
are nearly regular, and rise by an easy inclination, 
forming vales of considerable extent. 

The next stratum is coarse silicious grit, compos- 
ed of granulated quartz, and quartz pebbles, of va- 
rious sizes, but seldom exceeding a quarter of an 
inch in diameter : some retain the sharpness of j 
fragments newly broken ; others appear to have i 
been rounded by attrition. This stratum is about 
120 yards in thickness, and variable both in appear- 
ance and texture. A particular variety easily di- 
vides with a knife, and being an excellent substitute 
for slate,, has become an article of commerce. This 
stratum is not productive of minerals ; but there are 
some instances of lead ore having been found in it. ' 
It forms long and narrow mountains, rather than j 
hills ; it is uppermost at Wirksworth Moor ; Crom- 
forcj Moor, near Winster ; the East Moor ; Birch- 
over ; Matlock Town ; the Edge-side Hills ; from 
Eyam to Castleton, and various other places. No 
impressions either of animal or vegetable figures 
have been discovered in it. 

Shale, or schistus, the third stratum, is of a dark 
brown, or blackish colour, bituminous, and appear- 
ing like indurated clay. Its thickness varies from 
120 to 150 yards. This stratum is not considered 
as generally productive of minerals ; though iron- 
stone in nodules, and in thin beds, has sometimes 
been found in it ; and also veins of lead ore. In its 
sparry veins are frequently cavities, called lochs by 
the miners, which are encrusted with a great variety 
of fine and rare crystallizations of calcareous spar. 



In contains no impressions either of animal or vege- 
table bodies ; but impressions of marine substances 
are sometimes discovered in it. The waters passing 
through it are chalybeate, and frequently warm. 

Limestone regularly stratified, but varying con- 
siderably in thickness, being in some places not 
more than four fathoms, yet in others upwards of 
200, is the fourth stratum. It seems wholly com- 
posed of marine exuviae, and abounds with a variety 
of shells, etitrochi, coralloids, madrepores, and many 
other species of crustaceous animals. In it are 
found the principal veins or fissures which contain 
galena, sulphuret, and native oxyde of zinc, a va- 
riety of ochres, fluors, barytes, calcareous crystalli- 
zations, pyrites, &c. It lies in laminie, more or less 
thick, and U frequently separated, at irregular dis- 
tances, by a m.irl, containing adventitious sub- 
stances ; in some places only a few inches thick ; 
but in others two or three feet. This limestone 
forms a variety of beautiful marbles ; some black ; 
others of a brown red, much used for chimney-pieces, 
and different ornaments ; some mottled grey, and 
some of a light stone colour. The limestone in the 
Peak Forest is regarded as the bust : it is compact, 
sonorous when struck; its fracture, scaly bright. 
It is much used for the purposes of agriculture, and 
burns to a fine white lime, losing nearly thirty per 
cent, of the carbonic gas during the operation, which 
occupies about thirty hours in a strong fire. On 
the surface of this stratum, rotten-stone is some- 
times found, particularly near VVardlow Mire and 
Ashford : it is generally accompanied with a silici- 
ous substance, in nodules, called chert, which is 
likewise found in large detached masses, aiut thin 
strata, within the limestone. T iiis substance is full 
of marine figures, and animal remains : its origin, 
has been commonly attributed to a partial dissolu- 
tion of the limestone stratum. The forms and ge- 
neral appearance of the limestone mountains are 
greatly diversified ; they exhibit evident marks of 
interior convulsions of the earth, which have dislo- 
cated and thrown the strata near the surface into 
every variety of confusion. In many parts they'are 
perpendicular, and overhanging ; presenting bare 
and rugged forms, and pursuing the wildest direc- 
tions. Various openings or caverns, locally termed 
shakes, or swallows, exist in the limestone : these 
are large fissures, the depth and communications of 
which cannot be ascertained ; yet they have been 
rendered of great service in several mines, through 
being made receptacles for the deads, or rubbish ; 
arid have also been appropriated as aqueducts to- 
carry off the water. This stratum is uppermost at 
Winster, Ashford, Eyam, Buxtou Hills, Moneyash, 
the southern vicinity of Castleton, and various other 
places. 

The next stratum is toadstoue ; a substance ex- 
ceedingly irregular in appearance, thickness, and 
disposition ; not laminated, but consisting of one 
entire mass, aud breaking alike in all directions. 
" Toadstoue," observes Whitehurst 3 " contains 

blauder 



12 



DERBYSHIRE. 



bladder holes, like the scoria of metals, or Iceland 
lava, and has the same chemical property of resist- 
ing acids. It does not produce any minerals, or 
disfigured stones, representing' any part of the ani- 
mal or vegetable creation ; nor are any adventitious 
bodies enveloped in it : neither does it universally 
prevail, as the limestone strata ; nor is it, like them 
equally thick ; but in some instances varies in thick- 
ness, from 6 feet to 600. It is likewise attendee 
with other circumstances, which leave no room to 
doubt of its being as much a lava as that which 
flows from Ilecla, Vesuvius, or Etna."* This sub- 
stance forms the surface in many parts of the coun- 
ty, beginning in the neighbourhood of Matlock, and 
dividing the limestone for a considerable distance : 
near Buxton, and particularly at Wormhill in that 
neighbourhood, it is of considerable extent, uneven, 
and rocky ; but far less so than the preceding stra- 
tum. The miners in different parts of Derbyshire 
distinguish it by the various names of black-stone, 
channel, cat-dirt, and black-clay. The same ap- 
pellations, however, are frequently given to sub- 
stances which scarcely resemble toadstone in any 
respect but colour. 

After toadstone, limestone again presents itself; 
below which no miners in Derbyshire have yet pe- 
netrated. 

Such is the general disposition of the superior 
strata in this county ; but in particular instances, 
the order is somewhat diversified. The Rev. Mr. 
Pilkington, in his View of Derbyshire, has remark- 
ed, that the position of the strata is governed by one 
uniform law, their declination being always towards 
those parts of the country where gritstone has ap- 
peared on the surface : but the degree of their dip- 
ping is various and irregular. In some instances 
they dip at the rate of six inches in a yard ; in 
others, at twelve; and even eighteen in a similar 
space. In particular places, this dipping seems to 
be much influenced by the vallies ; the strata on one 
side being nearly horizontal ; while, on the opposite, 
they have an oblique, or even perpendicular, direc- 
tion. At Chesterfield and Ileanor, the position of 
the strata is extremely peculiar ; they dip for a con- 
siderable space towards one common centre, and by 
this means form a sort of bason, or deep circular 
cavity. 

Whichever stratum, however, in the preceding 
general arrangement, whether grit, schistus, or lime- 
stone, occupies the surface in any part of the coun- 
ty, the subsequent beds invariably follow in the or- 

* It may be observed generally, that the arguments by 
which the vulcanic origin of the toadstone is Mtpperted, are 
founded on the supposition of a centra] fire, the expansive force 
of which elevated and burst the incumbent strata prior to the 
convuls on that threw them into their present state of confusion. 
" Fissures be.ng thus opened over the melted matter, the vio- 
lent pressure might cause it to ascend till it met with an ob- 
struction superior to the impelling- force; and the lava being 
thus circumstanced, would consequently have a proportionable 
lateral pressure, and might therefore 'penetrate between the 



der enumerated. This rule universally prevails, 
except with respect to the toadstone, which only 
partially occurs. Those situations in which the in- 
cumbent beds of argillaceous grit, &c. have not been 
found, are supposed to have been the scenes of ex- 
treme disruptions of the earth, in which the upper- 
most strata have been swallowed up by the yawn- 
ing chasms rent in its bosom by contending ele- 
ments. 

Calcareous concretions are found in abundance in 
almost every part of the Peak. There is scarcely a 
cavern but what 'is lined with encrustations of this 
kind, assuming almost every possible form, and re- 
splendent with an amazing variety of colours. The 
transparent calcareous spar is astonishingly variable 
in appearance ; yet, when minutely examined, is 
discovered to originate wholly from one form, the 
rhombic ; though its various combinations can hardly 
be enumerated. The fluor spar, or, as it is here 
termed, Blue John, is frequently confounded with 
calcareous spar, from which, however, it differs es- 
sentially. It contains an acid, the most penetrating 1 
and corrosive of any we are yet acquainted with, and 
which is very different from the carbonic. From its 
peculiar properties of corroding glass and silicious 
substances, it has been employed in France for en- 
graving glass plates. When moderately heated, it 
becomes phosphorescent ; in a strong heat, it 
melts of itself, and emits fumes that are extremely 
noxious ; by a certain degree of heat, its blue co- 
lour is changed into a fine red, or reddish purple ; 
but with a greater heat, all its colours are discharged, 
and it becomes white. Its great beauty lias occa- 
sioned it to be manufactured into a variety of urns, 
vases, columns, &c. The only mountain where it 
can be obtained in sufficient abundance and quality 
for the purposes of manufacture, is situated to the 
west of Castleton, between Mam Tor and the emi- 
nences which compose the Long Cliff; but even 
there it is less plentiful than formerly, and its price 
has been gradually advanced to 40/. per ton. The 
mountain itself appears like an assemblage of vast 
rocks of limestone, without connection or regularity, 
and is full of openings or caverns of immense depth. 
The fluor is found in pipe veins of various direc- 
tions ; in caves, filled with clay and loose adventi- 
tious substances : it appears in detached masses, 
bearing every appearance of having been broken 
from the limestone, on which it seems to have been 
formed ; for it has frequently that substance for a 
nucleus, around which it seems first to have crystal- 



strata, and force its way till it lost its fluidity by the coldness 
of the adjacent beds. "Being thus extended to some distance, 
and passing over other fissures, it mi^ht rill them up more or 
less, as they happened to be more or less wide, and the lava 
more or less fluid." This hypothesis has received the support 
of many scientific characters of our own nation ; but foreigners 
have not been equally inclined to adopt it. They observe, 
that the Derbyshire toadstone is nothing but a somewhat diver- 
sified variety of the Swedish trapp, and by no means volcanic 
in its origin. 

$ lized, 



DERBYSHIRE. 



13 



li/,ed, and afterwards increased by accumulation : 
frequently, however, the centre is hollow. Some of 
the pieces of fluor are u foot in thickness, and have 
four or five different and distinct veins ; but such 
large pieces are very rare : in general, they are only 
about three or four inches thick, some having only 
one strong vein, while others present many, but 
smaller : those which display a geographical figure, 
like a coloured map, are more rare and valuable. 
The colouring matter has by some been supposed to 
be iron : Mr. Mavve imagines it to be asphalt, con- 
taining pyrites in a decomposed state ; but there are 
many singular varieties which have not undergone 
any analysis. 

Alabaster, plaster-stone, or gypsum, is found 
principally in large masses, filling up cavities, or 
insulated places, in the argillaceous grit, at Elvas- 
ton, and Chellaston. It never forms a stratum, but 
is generally attended with gravel, strong red clay, 
and an earthy covering, which frequently contains 
innumerable shells. Some kinds are much harder 
than others, and of a closer texture, but it is gene- 
rally so soft as to be scraped with the nail. Near 
the surface it is striated, and sometimes crystallized, 
in which state it bears the name of selciiitc ; beneath, 
it is more compact : when calcined, which is 'easily 
effected, it forms plaster-of-Paris, and greedily ab- 
sorbs water, (jypsum is generally veined with red, 
but is frequently variegated with tints of blue and 
green. Its chief varieties are capillary or hair gyp- 
sum, appearing in delicate milky filaments, three or 
four inches long, but so tender as to render it nearly 
impossible to be procured perfect : in the Cumber- 
land mine, near Matlock, specimens of this kind 
have been found with the fibres about eight inches 
in length : plumose gypsum, like white and ele-- 
gantly circled feathers, on limestone ; gypsum rock 
alabaster ; striated silky alabaster ; selenite in 
transparent prisms, and rhombs ; and green sele- 
nite, extremely rare. The more compact kinds of 
gypsum are frequently used for architectural pur- 
poses, as it is less expensive, and works more freely, 
than marble, forming elegant columns, pilasters, and 
other ornaments for the interior of buildings. It is 
also extremely useful, when calcined, for moulds of 
figures, and even for the figures themselves, as well 
as for flooring, and other economical appropriations. 
< jypsum forms an article of commerce ; considera- 
ble quantities are conveyed to the metropolis, and to 
all parts of the kingdom ; and, of late years, it has 
been extensively employed by agriculturists, as a 
niost valuable manure. 

Several fossils belonging to the argillaceous genus 
have been already mentioned. Others found in this 
county, are terra-porcellanea, of a most delicate 
white colour, and very fine texture, in a lead mine 
at Brassington ; pipe clay, at Bolsover and Newlia- 
ven ; potter's clay, of a yellowish or grey colour, at 
Brampton, Morley Moor, Heague, and various 
other places ; schistus tegularis, roof slate, at Chin- 
ley Hills and Hayfield, of a grey colour, and lamel- 

VOL. n. no. 4(3. 



lar texture, shines with mica, and does not give fire 
with steel. Amongst the silicious substances, are 
topazine and rose-coloured quartz in hexagonal 
prisms, with double pyramids detached. These are 
found in a yellowish red earth near Buxton, and 
are generally termed Buxton diamonds; they are 
very small : amethystine quartz, finely tinged ; with 
perfect hexagonal prisms, terminated by two pyra- 
mids, detached like the former : pellucid quartz in 
fragments, colourless ; some enclosing bitumen ; 
these varieties are loose in the limestone : thin la- 
minated beds of chert, horn- stone, or petrosilex, are 
found near Bradwell, Buxton, Middleton, and other 
places : in Peak Forest are numerous chert beds of 
various thicknesses ; some are in contact with the 
granulated limestone, though limestone full of shells 
is both above and below it ; its colour is dove blue : 
large quantities of this substance are annually used 
in the manufacture of earthen ware, in Yorkshire, 
and Staifordshire. Dark green chert, bearing a 
resemblance to jasper, has been found near the High 
Tor at Matlock. " Of the Barytic order," says 
Mr. Mawe, " the most general is the substance 
called cauk, or cawk, from its resembling chalk, 
which is not found in the north. It occurs in great 
quantities, being commonly attendant on lead ore : 
the colour is often white, but more frequently a grey- 
ish white, inclining to the cream tinge, which some- 
times rises to the ochre yellow. It is soft, but pon- 
derous : fracture, earthy, sometimes scaly : it often 
contains small veins of fluor or blende. Barytes 
occasionally occurs crystallized in tabulated rhombs, 
on gritstone ; but more generally in delicate tabu- 
lated crystals, which, by combination, form spheri- 
cal balls. Oiie variety is stalactitic, sometimes with 
transparent crystals and native sulphur. The arbo- 
rescent barytes is composed of ligaments of various 
colours, intervening each other, appearing some- 
what like branches with foliage : one variety exhi- 
bits dark brown and lilac figures, beautifully inter- 
spersed with blue in a geographic form, or like a 
coloured map, affording beautiful contrasts. Ba- 
rytes has lately been found, confusedly crystallized, 
of a sky blue colour ; the fracture foliated. Other 
specimens occur in tabulated crystals, opake, white, 
half an inch in diameter, but as thin as leaf gold, on 
a cellular gypseous matrix, with native sulphur. 
Another variety has a plumose appeamnce, being 
covered with transparent crystals oi fluor." 

This county is remarkable for its extraneous fossils, 
which are amazingly numerous, and variable, and 
which occur in almost every part. Some classes, how- 
ever, are more numerous than others. The entrechi are 
exseedingly abundant ; and the number of anomiae 
is likewise prodigious : continued beds of the former 
may be traced for upwards of twenty miles. The 
cone-within-cone coralloid is found in a bed ten 
inches deep, on the surface of the shell marble at 
Tupton, near Wingerworth ; the cones are ex- 
ceedingly distinct. Another fine specimen of the 
cone-within-couc coralloid, has been found at Black- 
D well ; 



14 



.DERBYSHIRE. 



well ; and a third at the depth of forty-seven feet at 
AUercar, in the parish of Heanor. Coralloids, with 
small tubes, have been met with at Eyam, otjffifceing 
in every particular with the recent coral found in the 
Red Sea, named tubularia purpureu : porpites, and 
madrepores with round branches, have also been ob- 
tained at the same place. At Stony Middlctou, 
some very perfect specimens of pori fungitic have 
been met with ; and conite fungitaj have been found 
at Ashover ; as well as very elegant screwstoucs. 
Mellepores, coral, branched, with the surface and 
extremity punctured as if with the point of a needle ; 
and tubipores, a congeries of coralline tubes, paral- 
leled or variously curved, have been procured at 
Middleton Dale. The cornua ammonis abounds in 
the black marble of Ashford ; astroites, coril, of tu- 
bular texture, with small stars on the surface, and 
honeycomb-work withinside, is likewise procured 
there. At Castleton, have been found the eoraliina 
reticulata, or sea fan ; plates of echini, very curious- 
ly formed, the plates pentagonal, with a small point 
rising in the middle ; spines of echini ; belcmnites, 
cylindrical, but conical at one, and sometimes at 
both ends, about three, inches long, anil three quar- 
ters of an inch thick ; anomiie, bivalve, one valve 
gibbous, and often perforated at the base, the other 
plane; retepores ; terrebratulte ; and ostreopectines. 
Gryphites, bivalve, oblong, somewhat resembling a 
boat, but narrow, and remarkably curved upwards 
at one end, the valve plane, has been met with in 
the red clay over the gypsum at Chellaston. Hushes, 
branches of yew, and a substance greatly resembling 
a cauliflower, have been found petrified at Matlock. 
A regular stratum of mussel shells has been disco- 
vered eleven yards deep at Swanwiek ; and mussel 
shells have been found in iron-stone, at Tupton, Ches- 
terfield, and Cotmenhay ; at the latter place they 
were obtained at the depth of eighty-four yards. 
At Ashford, a small alligator, and various groups of 
flies, have been found in the black marble ; and also 
the tail and back of a crocodile. At Swanwiek, a 
beetle in iron-stone, and a butterfly, have been ob- 
tained. An entire sunflower, with all the seeds per- 
fectly marked, was discovered in an iron-stone over 
the bed of coal at Swanwiek ; where also all the fol- 
lowing fossils were obtained : the resemblance of a 
bamboo ; a flower of chrysanthemum, very perfect ; 
a flower of coltsfoot ; equisetum, or horse-tail ; a 
plant of maiden-hair ; several plants of fern, very 
perfect, in iron-stone and bind ; the cone of a pine 
tree ; a branch of a box-tree ; and a s;nall branched 
moss : the three last in iron-stone. At Holmesfield, 
a resemblauce of the flower of a cactus has been 
found. Various other vegetable impressions have 
been met with in the iron stone, and bind, t>oth at 
Chesterfield and Ncwhall. 

It remains to be mentioned, that, amongst the in- 
flammable substances which have been discovered in 
Derbyshire, the most peculiar and remarkable is the 
clastic bitumen, or mineral cahoutchouc. Of late 



years, this has been found in various states ; and it 
has apparently the same properties as the common 
vegetable India rubber. It is generally found be- 
tween the stratum of schistus and the limestone ; 
rarely, in small cavities adhering to the gangert, or 
matrix, and sometimes containing lead ore, fluor, 
and other bodies. When first detached, the taste'is 
very styptic, as though blended with decomposed 
pyrites. It varies in colour, irom the blackish or 
greenish brown, to the light red brown, and is easily 
compressed ; but sometimes the same piece is less 
elastic in one part than another : on burning it, the 
smell is rather pleasant. One variety, but very rare, 
contains nodules of indurated shining black bitumen, 
resembling jet. Another variety has been seen in a 
marine shell, in a piece of limestone. A third, but 
extremely scarce, has been found of a dull red co- 
lour, and transparent, in crystallized floor. A va- 
riety yet more rare, but less elastic, appears to be 
composed of filaments, and has a singularly acid 
taste. The characteristics arc very different from 
any other sort, and might probably, if investigated, 
account for the origin oi this substance : on cutting, 
and in other circumstances, it resembles soft cork, 
or old bark from a tan-yard. Indurated bitumen, 
appearing like jet, has been found in amorphous 
masses, and in globules of a shining black, but some- 
times liver coloured : this kind is electric, when 
rubbed ; and is sometimes found in barytes. A spe- 
cimen has been met with in the centre of an anomia 
at Castleton. Petroleum, or roek-oil, is found in 
veins of the black marble at Ashford ; when the sun 
shines upon the stone, it gently txudes. Stones 
containing' a considerable quantity of rock-oil were 
formerly met with near Stony Middleton ; and were 
.so common, that the miners used to burn the oil they 
produced in lamps. Native sulphur has been dis- 
covered in the cellular parts of baroselenite, and also 
in galena. Veins of pyrites, which the miners have 
commonly, but improperly, called sulphur, have 
been found in the virgin mines near Bradwell, and 
in the Odin mine at Castleton : in the former in- 
stance, it was so pure as to ignite with a candle. 
Sulphur is sometimes met with in shale. 

MINERAL AND MEDICINAL SPRINGS.] In Derby- 
shire, a country abounding with fossils, there are, as 
we might suppose, numerous medicinal and mineral 
waters. Those of the chalybeate and of a sulphu- 
reous nature arise invariably in beds of shale, and 
are doubtless impregnated with that substance; the 
warm" springs also are noticed as appearing near 
these beds, though they break out almost exclusively 
in a stratum of limestone. Matlock and Buston are 
celebrated for their warm springs ; they are also 
found at Stony" Middleton ; and there was one for- 
merly at Middleton, near Wirksworth, which was 
cut off by driving a sough to remove the water from 
some lead mines in the neighbourhood. The springs 
of Matlock and Buxton are famous lor their medi- 
cinal qualities, and are resorted to annually by per- 
sons 



DERBYSHIRE. 



sons of fashion both lor health and pleasure.* Near 
the ceufre between Crich and Helper, and within 
tlie liberty ot lleage, a martial vitriolic spring rises, 
the only one at present known in this county. A 
labouring man discovered it some years ai^o in (!!- 
tfiug a sou-h to drain some of the neighbouring 
grounds. This man had long suffered with, an ttl- 



* Dr. Darwin having bestowed much attention upon the 
natural history of the Matlock and Buxton waters, we sliall here 
take the libeityof introducing some extracts from a letter of 
his upon the subject, winch originally appeared in the Rev. 
Mr. Pilkington's " View of Derbyshire." 

" Several philosopher?,'- observes Dr. Darwin, " have sup- 
. j> sed thai the wann springs of this county acquire their heat 
from the chemical decomposition of pyrites ; and it was affirm- 
ed by the late Mr. Tissington, and has been lately cited in an 
ingenious work of Mr. Kirwan on Mineralogy, that the warm 
water about Matlock owed its heat lo the blue marl, which is 
mixed with pyn'.es, an d is found in thin strata above and below 
the beds of lava, or loadstone ; but it has sinc been observed, 
that, though warm water \\as found sometimes in these beds of 
pyrites and marl, yet, tint no smell or taste then attended it, 
which must have occurred, if the pyrites had been in a state of 
decomposition ; and secondly, that cold water was found in 
these beds oftener than warm. 

" The arguments in favour of another opinion appear to me 
to be much more conclusive, vi/. that the water ot these springs 
is raised in vapour by subterraneous lires deep in the earth, and 
that this vapour is condensed under the surface ot the mountain 
in the vicinity of the spring. 

" I. The heat of these springs has been invariable, perhaps, 
for many centuries ; certainly, as long as we have had good 
thermometers; which shows that the water, which they arise 
fr >m, is in a boiling state in some part of the earth. For as 
boiling water acquires a certain degree of heat, viz. 212, the 
steam svhieh arises from it (where it is not confined) inu^t al- 
ways be of that degree of heat. Now the internal parti of the 
earth, a few feet below the surface, being always, botii in winter 
and summer, of forty-eight degrees of heat ; it follows, that if 
Ihe steam of water, after it is condensed, flows through a sjiven 
distance ot the cold earth, it will become cooled from 212 to 
some degree ol heat above 48, proportional to the distance be- 
tween tlie mountain in which it is condensed, and the place <ii 
jts exit: and thus may, for many ages, preserve an uniformity 
of the degree of heat, which could not happen, it it was pro 
duced by chemical combinations of materials near the suriace 
of the eaith. 

"2. In the very dry summer of 1780, when all the cold 
springs in this part ofthe counlrv e (her totally ceased, or were 
much diminished, 1 was well informed on the spot, both at 
Mallock and Buxton, that the warm springs had suffered no ob 
servable decrease of their water. Whence I conclude, that the 
sources of these warm springs were at a much greater depth be- 
low the surface of the earth than the cold ones; and that, on 
that account, the water must first have been raised in the form 
of steam from those greater depths. Another circumstance 
hows, that the source of many of these waters is situated be- 
neath the origin of the cold springs ; even alter the s tarn which 
produces them, is condensed into water; which is, that their 
heat con inues always the same both in winter and summer, in 
wet sernoiis and in dry ; evincing, that no cold wa!er from tin- 
dews, or springs in consequence of them, is mixed with t m si- 
sources ot warm water, &c. 



" (a) Dr. Priestley, from five ounces of limestone, obtained 
1 160 ounce-meaMires of air nine tenths of which was fixed air, 
and the other tenth phi igisticated air. From tour minces ot 
white spar he obtained 830 ounce-measures of air ; the first 



cerous disorder in his leg 1 , which during 1 the conti- 
nuance of his labour gradually disappeared, and 
when his undertaking was finished he was entirely 
cured. This excited an idea that the spring was 
medicinal, and on examination it became evident 
from the vitriolic taste of the waters. It has been 
supposed to contain some quantity of fixed air ; not 

I Olil y 

" 3. The rocks of limestone in all this part of the counlrv 
abound with perpendicular clefts, in which are found the ores 
of zinc, lead, and copper; and it is hence probable, that not 
only the steam of water at present, which produces these warm 
springs, but that those metals themselves, and the (luor, or ba- 
roselenite, which attends them, have, in former ages, been 
raised into those perpendicular clefts by the subterraneous 
lires, which raised the continents and islands from Uie primeval 
ocean. 

" 4. The existence of central fires in the earth in the early 
ages of the world, is demonstrated by the elevation of the solid 
parts of the globe above the ocean, and the shattered condition 
of its strata, with the immense masses of lava then produced, 
which go under the names of loadstone, basaltes, moor- stone, 
porphyry, and granite, as are so well explained in Mr. White- 
hurst's and in Dr. Button's Theories of the Earth. '1 he .pre- 
sent existence of central fires seems probable from the many 
volcanoes, which are spiracula, or chimnies, belonging to those 
great tires ; and it is probable, that by the escape of elastic va- 
pours from these, is owing the small extent ot modern earth- 
quakes, compared with those of remote antiquity, the vestiges 
of which remain all over the globe. Another argument for the 
present existence of immense subterraneous fires, is, that the 
great earthquake at Lisbon produced undulations on the lakes 
of Scotland; and was felt in the mines o! Derbyshire; (Philos. 
Transact.) which could not easily happen, but by a percussion 
on one side of a confined fluid lava, which would be propagat- 
ed to the other; as striking the greatest blow on one side of a 
bladder distended with water, is felt by the hand placed 
on the other side: to whicji may be added, that in some 
mines the deeper you descend, the warmer you perceive 
them, &c. 

" 5. Because there are springs of hot water in all countries, 
where open volcanoes evidently exUt : whence Irom analogy we 
may conclude, that the hot springs in countries where open vol- 
canoes have existed, but are not now open, are owing to the 
same cause acting in a less powerlul manner. 

" r>. Add to this, that it those uaters had been heated by the 
chemical decomposition of p rites, some of them at least would 
piobablv have retained a strong chalybeate taste, orsulphureous 
smell ; or that they would all of them have been impregnated 
with some similar material, which, on the chemical analysis of 
thi-se waters of Buxton, and Matlock, does not appear to be tho 
fact. 

" 7. I come now to another circumstance, which very much 
corroborates the above theory of Ihe production of these springs 
Irom the steam raised from deep subterraneous fires, and not 
from any decomposition of pyrites. The strata in this part of 
Deibyshire consist of beds of limestone, and of lava, (o'r load- 
stone,) which lie reciprocally one above the otheN Now it we 
suppose the steam rising from subterraneous fires to be owing 
partly to water slowly subsiding upon those fires, and to lime- 
stone gradually calcined by them, it. must happen, that the 
steam rising through the perpendicular clefts in the supercum-, 
bent rocks, must be replete w|th calcareous gas, (or fixed air ;) 
with some phlogisticated air. (.1) 

portion of which had but one- fourth of fixed air; which, how- 
ever, varied in the course of the experiment, bemg once three- 
fourths, then one-half, llita one-third of fixed air." 



IB 



DERBYSHIRE. 



only from the number of bubbles which appear, when 
first put into a glass at the spring, but also from the 
circumstance, that when tightly enclosed in a cask, 
or bottle, it will break either, with a slight degree o: 
agitation ; an effect attributed to the 'efforts of the 
fixed air to make its escape. Besides the beneficial 
efficacy of Heage water in ulcerous diseases, it has 
been found useful in stopping inward bleedings ; ami 
when applied outwardly, is said to have this effect, 
as soon, and as completely, as extract of lead. 



" If this steam, so impregnated, be condensed in limestone 
strata, the fi\ed air in this hot steam will super-saturate itseli 
again with calcareous earth (a). Now this is what precisely 
happens to the walers of Matlock, which are replete with cal- 
careous particles, as appears by the copious deposition ol 
tupha, or calcareous incrustations, along the channels in which 
they flow, for, in general, it happen*, that springs of water 
were themselves rallies from their sources, as is d:.nc by the 
water at Buxlon ; but those springs at Matlock have produced 
rocks and mountains of sponge-like calcareous slimes between 
their fountain!) and the Oerwent, with which all the houses at 
Matlock are constructed, ami many of ihe stone fences. 

" In the beginning of October, 1780, 1 was present, with my 
friend Mr. Edgeworth, at the opening of two of the springs ol 
. M.itlock, about 200 yards above their usual places of appear- 
ance. We found them both at these new openings about one 
degree of heat, or somewhat more, warmer than ;>t their plact-s 
of usual exit. The upper one, which could be best seen, issued 
from some cracks or fissures in ihe upper suriace of a bed of 
loadstone, and belween.il and ihe blue marl which lies over it ; 
under which marl it seems to have been condensed, and (hence 
to have super-saturated itself with calcareous particles. I ex- 
amined this marl by means of acids, and found it to be calcare- 
ous, except some shining bits of' whitish pyrites, which had no 
appearance of being in a state of decomposition. 

" On the contrary, the steam which produces the water at 
Buxlon, is probably condensed in the substance of the toad- 
stone, or lava, and not in a stratum of marl or limestone, like 
the Matlock water; and hence the great difference of their 
contents. As one edge of these strata of limestone and lava, 
wherever there are springs, is always elevated higher than the 
other, it would be easy, by attending to the inclination of these 
strata, to discover on which side of the bath is situated the 
mountain in which the steam is condensed, which probablv 
may not be more than a mile or two from the eruption of the 
springs; because, on opening the springs at Matlock, at a place 
about 200 yards above the Wells, the water (though already 
collected inlo a kind of vein) was cooled more than s degree; 
and this cooling must proceed much faster where the water is 
diffusely and thinly spread between two contiguous slrala : and 
further, as the progress of this water must warm in some degree 
the sirrface of the earth, beneath which it passes aftsr its con- 



" (a) It may seem extraordinary that fixed air, or calcareous 
gas, which is known to precipitate lime from water, should ren- 
der limestone more soluble in water. This, however, is evinc- 
ed by the experiments ot Mr. Cavendish, who added to lime 
water, which had been rendered turbid by means of calcareous 
gas, more of the same gas, which enabled the water to re-dis- 
solve the precipitated limestone. Water, by a large quantity 
of calcareous gas,' will thus, in close vessels, super-saturate it- 
self with lime; which will gradually precipitate in ihe form of 
limestone, when exposed to the air, by the evaporation of the 
superfluous g<i." 

" (b) I cannot leave this account of calcareous or hard waters 
without adding, that I suppose, from the great affinity between 
calcareous earth and saccharine acid, may be explained a cir- 



The number of chalybeate waters is very great ; 
but the most celebrated spring is at Quarndon, near 
Derby. When taken in sufficient quantities, assist- 
ed by exercise, it operates as a purgative : it also 
proves extremely beneficial to persons of a weak and 
relaxed habit. From Dr. Short's experiment it ap- 
peared that a pint contained one grain of fixed sak ; 
and that two gallons, when evaporated, leit half a 
dram of a light-coloured sediment, half of which 
was nitrous earth. Its temperature is about forty- 
nine 



clensation, and particularly at the place of its condensation, it is 
not improbable but its course might be detected by observa- 
tions made in rimy mornings, or when snow has lain long on 
the ground, by the melting or disappearing of it first in that 
part ; or, perhaps, by the earlier vegetation ot ihe grass or trees 
on those parls ot (he surface. A Mr. Taylor, who once kept 
this b.ith, produced earlv vegetables, by conveying a stream of 
the warm water under a border of his garden. It this source 
should ever be discovered by mining, I suppose the water, by 
being received nearer the place of its devaporalion, would be 
found of a greater degree of heat, from 82, its pre-,ent heat, up 
to 212, or ihe heat of boiling water. 

" The contents of the waters of Buxlon and Mullock must 
countenance the theory above delivered ; for it steam be raised 
from subterraneous furnaces, where limestone is probably in a 
stale of calcinalion, much calcareous gas, or fixed air, and some 
phlogislicaled air, would arise with Ihe aqueous steam : these 
are found in the Buxton water, in the loose slate of bubbles, 
according lo the analysis of Dr. Pearson ; and in this state the 
Buxton water resembles the waters at Bath, which are said, by 
Dr. Priestley, to possess similar kinds of air; and as these airs 
seem to be the principal ingredients of both these waters, there 
is reason lo believe, both from this circumstance, and from their 
success in relieving similar diseases, that iheir medicinal powers 
are very similar, &c. 

" In the Buxlon water the fixed air is found in loose bubbles, 
because it does not meet with any kind of calcareous earth, or 
limestone, to combine itself with: in the Matlock water the 
contrary occurs ; it has no loose air-bubbles, because the fixable 
air is combined with lime, and thus this water is replete with 
calcareous tarth in subtile solulion ; and in this respect I sup- 
pose resembles the Bristol water. 

" By Ihe experiments of Bergman and Scheele, it appears 
lhat ihe stony concretions in animal bodies consist of saccha- 
rine acid and air, and lhat this acid has a greater affinity than 
any other to calcareous earth (b). Now as the saccharine acid 
is perpetually generated in Ihe stomach during ihe digestion of 
our aliment, it is probable that the salutary effects of these cal- 
careous waters, such as Matlock and Bristol, may be owing lo 
their saturating the super abumlancy of this saccharine acid, 
and that thus they may prevent ihe tendency which some of 
our fluid secretions po-.sess, of producing calculous, and per- 
^ haps 

cumstance, the theory of which has never been understood, and 
therefore the fact has generally been doubted ; and that is, that 
hard waters make stronger beer than soft ones. I appeal to the 
brewers of Burton for ihe fact, who have the soft water of the 
Trent running on one side of their brewhouses ; and yet prefer 
universally Ihe hard or calcareous water supplied by Iheir 
primps. I suppose then 1 may be some saccharine acid in the 
malt, (which is nol all of it equally perfectly made into sugar 
by the vegetable digestive power of the germinating barley,) 
which, by its attracting Ihe calcareous earth of hard waters, may 
jroduce a kind of mineral sugar, which, like the true sugar, 
nay be convertible into spirii : for a similar purpose, I sup- 
>ose lime is used by Ihe sugar-bakers in refining their sugars, 
hough (he theory of its effects is unknown to them." 



DERBYSHIRE. 



17 



ttine and a half. Within a short distance of the 
Xvarm spring at Buxton, a chalybeate water, similar 
to that of Quarndon, is found ; the only essential 
difference is, that the calcareous gas, by which in 
the latter iron is held in solution, may be set at li- 
berty with a less degree of heat than is requisite for 
that at Buxton : its taste too is not so rough and 
ferruginous. Morley, GMiesterfield, Tibshelf, Duf- 
field, aud Bradley also contain chalybeate waters of 
different kinds. 

Of the sulphureous waters of Derbyshire, that 
which is most in repute rises in the park of Lord 
Scarsdale, at Kedleston. It appears very clear and 
transparent in a glass ; but in the well, it appears of 
a blackish blue colour, tinged with purple ; and any 
substance thrown into it, assumes the same hue. 
That it is impregnated with sulphur, is evident from 
its strong taste aud smell, and also from its chang- 
ing silver to a dark copper colour : in its passage 
from the well, a whitish sediment is deposited, hav- 
ing the appearance of sulphur. That it is also im- 
pregnated with other substances, is proved by the 
experiments of Dr. Short, who observe*, that eight 
pints evaporated, left two scruples of sediment, 
twenty-one grains of which were a dark brownish 
earth, and the rest salt : in these respects it appears 
similar to the water at llarrowgate. Kedleston 
water is celebrated for its anti-scorbutic qualities. 
Taken inwardly it operates as a diuretic, and affords 
relief in cases of the gravel. It has also been found 
efficacious, from external application, in cutaneous 
diseases, ulcerous complaints, &c. In the summer 

haps gouty and bilious concretions ; and prevent the increase 
in size of those already formed : on the same principle they 
may tend to render purulent matter less acrimonious, as they 
are supposed to be of advantage in pulmonary and scrophulous 
ulcers, &c." 

In addition to the above ingenious remarks of Dr. Darwin, 
\ve shall here quote the particulars of a theory, advanced in a 
inore recent publication, to account for the Tieat, and also for 
the petrifying qualities of the Matlock springs, by Mr. George 
Lipscomb, of Birmingham. This gentleman commences with 
the following remark: " First, it is well known, from the ex- 
periments ot Dr. Percival, and others, that a portion of saline 
matter is detected in these waters ; and secondly, it is well 
known, that the acid sea salt will dissolve lime in considerable 
quantities." He then proceeds: " May we be permitted to 
conjecture, that the water of these springs being previously 
impregnated with salt, becomes saturated with lime in its pas- 
sage through the strata beiore described (beds of limestone 
and lava, or foadstonc which lie reciprocally one upon another,) 
and is afterwards decomposed by the addition of pyrites dis- 
solved in rain water, which percolates through the stipercum- 
bfnt strata ! For pyrites containing sulphur, the heat which 
Uikes place during the solution ot pyrites, will necessarily dis- 
engage a certain portion of its acid": and sulphuric acid will 
immediately unite with lime when held in solution by the 
weaker acids ; and when united with it, fall down in what is 
cUemkally denominated calcareous si.lphate ; and heat is again 
generated by the process. The following circumstance will 
appear to support tfiis hypothesis. 

" i. That there is at present in the Mullock water, a much 

greater quantity of calcareous matter than common water is 

Known to be capable of holding in solution, without (he assi t- 

ance of an acid. 2. That muriate ol iron, which would be ne- 

VOL. II. NO. 40. 



it is frequently used by the inhabitants of Derby as 
a substitute for malt liquor : the charge of carriage, 
which is one penny per quart, affords stibsistence 
for a few poor people of the neighbourhood. The 
temperature of the spring is about forty-seven de- 
grees. A few other sulphureous springs are found 
in different parts of the county, but the examination 
of them hitherto has been very slight. 

ETYMOLOGY.] It appears probable that Derby, 
and consequently Derbyshire, derives its name either 
from the river Dcrwent, called by the British Deur- 
winden, or the winding of the water, and bye, the 
Saxon word for a habitation ; or, from the Saxon 
term Deoraby, which has the same meaning. A 
traditional assertion, however, prevails, that the site 
of the town was formerly a park stocked with deer, 
whence Dcer-by ; this is supported by reference to 
the town arms, exhibiting a buck cone-hunt in a park. 
But this supposition is overturned, when it is con- 
sidered, that the two former terms prevailed, long 
before the introduction of heraldic emblems. To 
instance how precariously the arms of corporations 
were taken up, we need only mention Oxford. Tho 
magistrates of that place, ignorant that it derived its 
name from Olsleyford, adopted the device of an ox 
in a ford. 

GENERAL HISTORY.] The civil and military his- 
tory of this comity is less important than that of any 
which it has yet been our task to notice. Previously 
to the Roman invasion it formed a part of the nation 
of the Coritani, which occupied also the counties of 
Nottingham, Lincoln, Rutland, Leicester, andNorth- 



cessarily formed by the marine acid uniting with the iron of 
the p\ rites, after ihe I'urmiT had been disengaged from the 
lime by the sulphuric ;icid which hail previously existed in 
combination with the p\ rites, is most perfectly soluble in water, 
but may be detected tin-rein by the purple colour which U 
communicated by the addition 01 the infusion of galls, as in the 
experiment made by Dr. IVnnington, of Cambridge. 3. That 
on a chemical analysis oi the calcareous encrustations deposit- 
ed by the water, they have bern tound to contain a small por- 
tion of iron mixed will) sulphate of lime: and Dr. Short de- 
tected the presence of iron also, in the residuum procured by 
co-operating the water, soivu; of the particles in it being at- 
tracted by the loadstone. In this manner," continues Mr. 
Lipscomb, " all the phenomena observable at Matlock, and in 
similar >prings may, I think, be reasonably accounted tor, on 
principles well understood, and capable ot "the clearest demon- 
stration ; and 1 must beg leave, to add, that, since the above 
remarks were committed to paper, a circumstance has been 
presented to my observation, \\ Inch so strongly corroborates 
them, that it may b considered as little short of the demon- 
stration resulting fiom synthftical experiment. 

" Having, at the suagestion of my learned and ingenious 
friend, Dr. Uache, been induced to "investigate the effects of 
carbonic .acid upon lime water, by blowing through a small 
tube into a glass containing a port on of that liquid, carbonate 
of lime was speedily produ.-ed in considerable quantity : we 
then dropped in a litile sulphuric acid, which occasioned the 
precipitate to be dissolved with great facility ; and the liquid, 
thus restored to its original transparency,, was suffered to stand 
undisturbed tor several da>s, at the end of which, the sides and 
rdge- of the glass were covered with a transparent crjstalliza- 
tion, exactly simi'ar to the spar and stalactic found in" the sub- 
terranean caverns near Matlock." 

E ampton. 



DERBYSHIRE. 



ampton. The term Coritam is of uncertain deri- 
vation ; but probably it had its origin in the British 
word Corani, or Coraniaid ; appellations denoting 
men who are liberal, generous, or profuse. In the 
Welch Triades, the Coranians are spoken of as one 
of the " three molestations that came into this island, 
and never went away again ;" and in another an- 
cient memorial in the Welch language, they are 
classed amongst the seven nations which invaded 
Britain. The order of their coming is placed im- 
mediately before that of the Romans. By those 
people, Derbyshire was comprised in the division 
FJavia Ciesariensis ; but during the Saxon domina- 
tion, it became part ot the kingdom of Mercia ; and 
its inhabitants, in conjunction with those of Notting- 
hamshire, were distinguished, from their situation 
being principally on the northern side of the river 
Trent, by the name of Mercii Aquilonarcs. From 
this period, the history of Derbyshire, although the 
county was the scene of many conflicts between the 
Saxons and the Danes, appears to be so blended 
with that of the kingdom in general, as almost to 
defy separation. 

ANTIQUITIES.] The antiquities of this county are 
not of the first order in point of extent, or of inter- 
est. At times, however, various Druidical, Roman, 
and Saxon remains have been discovered ; but, as 
those which are entitled to notice will be duly de- 
scribed in their respective places, we shall not here 
detain the reader by any specific enumeration. Of 
buildings, All Saints Church, at Derby ; Beauchief 
Abbey ; Bolsover Castle ; Castleton Castle ; Cod- 
nor Castle; Dale Abbey; Gressby Castle ; Melborn 
Castle, &c. will repay the attention of the antiquary. 
There are no itinerary Roman stations, of note, in 
this county ; but the military way, which comes out 
of Warwickshire, leads to Derby. 

CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL DIVISIONS.] Derby- 
shire is dividad into six hundreds, as follow : Ap- 
pletree, High Peak, Morleston and Litchurch, 
Repton and Gressley, Scarsdale, and Wirksworth. 
These hundreds are subdivided into one hundred 
and thirty-five parishes, and six parts of parishes. 

The administration of the civil policy of this and 
the adjoining county of Nottingham appears to have 
been generally entrusted to the same chief officers, 
till the reign of Henry the Third : the sheriff was 
the same ; and the assizes of both districts were held 
at Nottingham ; but about this period the burgesses 
of Derby purchased the right of having the assizes 
for their own shire held alternately at their own 
town. This arrangement continued till the year 
1560, when tin act was passed for allowing a sheriff 
to each county : from this time, with a few excep- 
tions, the assizes have been holdeu at Derby. 

This county ?s in the province of Canterbury, and 
diocese ot Liitchfield and Coventry. 

PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.] Derbyshire 
returns only lour mrMnbers to Parliament ; two for 
the county, an-d two for the borough of Derby. It 
is understood, that the interest of the Duke of De- 



vonshire returns those for the borough, and also on 
for the county. 

MABJCET'IOWNS.] There are eleven market-towns 
in this county, of which the following is a list : 

Derby 

DronefieUl 
Ticleswell 



Alfreton 

Ashborne 

Bakewell 

Bolsover 

Cliapel-in-le-Frith 

Chesterfield 



Winster 
Wirksworth 



TRADE, MANUFACTURES, &c.] This county is the 
seat of various extensive manufactures. It partici- 
pates with Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire in the 
manufacture of stockings ; with Lancashire in that 
of cotton ; and with Yorhshire in those of woollen 
cloth and iron. At Chesterfield, a considerable 
quantity of iron is employed for cast goods, in an 
unwrought state : this metal is also manufactured in 
the neighbourhood of Sheffield, and in some other 
parts of the north-east district of the county. The 
High Peak, bordering on Yorkshire, is the principal 
seat of the wootten manufacture. Cotton is manu- 
factured in different modes, and in various parts of 
the county ; but, at Cromford, and Belper, the prin- 
cipal factories, the cotton, as will be seen by the ma- 
chine which was invented by the late Sir Richard 
Arkwright. The silk manufacture is, in a great 
measure, confined to the town of Derby ; but the 
number of frames employed, including those on which 
silk and cotton stockings are wrought, has been esti- 
mated at from thirteen to fourteen hundred. The 
hosiery business is in the most flourishing state at 
Litton, near Tide-swell, and in those parts which 
border on Nottinghamshire. A manufacture, pecu- 
liar to this county, and almost confined to the town 
of Derby, is that of spar ornaments, which are here 
produced in great variety, and of exquisite beauty. 

POPULATION.] In the year 1700, the population 
of this county was estimated at 93,800 ; in 1750, it 
had increased to 109,500 ; and, according to the 
Parliamentary Population Returns of the year 1801, 
it had still further increased to 161,142; of whom 
79,401 were males, and 81,741 females : 39,516 
were returned as being employed in trade, manufac- 
tures, &c. 31,743 in agriculture, and the remainder 
in other pursuits. In the year 1811, as appears at 
length from the annexed table, the population ef 
Derbyshire was composed of 91,494 males, and 
93,993 females ; making a total of 185,487 : the 
number of inhabited houses was 35,658, and of those, 
which were uninhabited and building, 1418 : the to- 
tal number of families was 27,440 ; of which 14,283 
were employed in agriculture, 15,825 in trade, ma- 
nufactures, or handicraft ; and 7332 in other pur- 
suits. The scale of mortality in this county, upon 
an average of ten years, is found to be about one in 
fifty-six. The average of baptisms is one to thirty- 
three ; that of marriages one to one hundred and 
thirty-seven. From the scale of mortality, Derby- 
shire appears to be one of the sixteen healthiest 
counties in Great Britain. 

Summary 



DERBYSHIRE. 



19 



Summary of the Population of the County of. Derby, as published by Authority of Parliament in 1811. 





HOUSES. 


OCCUPATIONS. 


PERSONS. 






>.i 






* - 


>. . 


.if 













5 ^ 




tj 


U.S 4,- 


"5.= i o 


^r ^ J' 










6 


o . 


til 


V 






2 c ^^ 






Total 


WARDS, &c. 


2 


OJ 


c 


I 


./> ^. ; " 


y> ^"^ "T 


u 8 5O 


Males. 


Females. 


of 




1 


~~ "c 


~ 


B 


J-J 


-^ '"H.-C 3 


5 'o ~ " 






Persons. 




* \ 


5*1 





5 


S 5 So 

BBI 


| e^ 


to -C 

^ . 2 ^ 










4904 


5243 


26 


87 


2709 


1944 


590 


12849 


13501 


26350 


High Peak 


7179 


741 1 


45 


347 


2610 


28Q9 


1902 


18303 


18865 


37168 


Morleston and Litchurclt 


5555 


5773 


20 


114 


2136 


3001 


636 


14535 


15089 


29624 


Repton and Gressley 


2988 


3123 


5 


58 


1787 


925 


411 


7532 


7691 


15223 




8284 


8661 


47 


284 


3379 


3103 


2179 


20385 


21 1 17 


41502 




4104 


4305 


45 


164 


1567 


1571 


1 167 


9655 


10665 


20320 




2644 


2924 


34 


142 


95 


2382 


447 


5978 


7063 


13043 


Local Militia 
















2257 




2257 
























Totals 


35658 


37440 


222 


1196 


14,283 


15825 


7332 


91494 


93993 


185487 





CHIEF TOWNS, PARISHES, &c. 

ALFRETON.] This little town, supposed to have 
been built by, and named from the renowned Alfred, 
is situated in the hundred of Scarsdale, 16 miles 
north-north-east from Derby, and 141 J north-north- 
west from London. The market, which is a consi- 
derable one for corn, is holden on Fridays ; and 
there are two fairs, on the 31st of July, and the 22d 
of November. 

Tradition states, that the royal founder had a pa- 
lace at Alfreton. The church is a rude structure, 
with an embattled town and pinnacles. Here are 
two free-schools. 

The inhabitants of Alfreton are chiefly employed 
in the manufacture of stockings, and in the neigh- 
bouring coal-works ; but a few of them derive their 
living from the manufacture of brown earthen- 
ware. 

At a remote period, the manor of Alfreton be- 
longed to a family, which took its surname from the 
place; one of whom, thn founder of Beauchiei' Ab- 
bey, has erroneously been considered as one of the 
murderers of Thomas d Becket, Archbishop of Can- 
terbury. The joint heiresses of De Alfreton mar- 
ried, about the time oi' Henry the Third, to Cha- 
worth and Lathom. The interest of the latter was 
sold to Chaworth, in whose family and name the 
estate continued till the time of Henry the Seventh, 
when it was conveyed, by marriage, to John Or- 
mond, Esq. and afterwards to the Babingtons of 
Destricke, who sold it to the Zouches of Codnor 
Castle. It was subsequently purchased by the 
Morewoods, and in that family it continued from the 
early part of the seventeenth century to the death of 
the last heir male, who left it to his widow, who 
married the Rev. Mr. Case, who assumed the name 
of Morewood. The family scat occupies an elevated 
and pleasant spot. 



Mr. Pilkington mentions, that, at a place called 
Greenhill Lane, at some distance from Alfreton, an 
urn, containing about 700 Roman coins, was found 
by a labouring man, whilst employed in repairing a 
fence. 

ARBELOWS.] The Arbor-Low, or Arbelows, a 
Druidical circle, surrounded by a ditch and vallum, 
situated between two and three miles north-east of 
Newliaven, at a short distance beyond the Roman 
road from Buxton to Little Chester, is justly consi- 
dered as one of the most remarkable monuments of 
antiquity in this county. Less lofty than some of, 
the neighbouring eminences, it yet commands an... 
extensive view, especially to the north-east. Its 
area is about 150 feet in diameter : from a slight 
declination of the ground towards the north, it ap- 
pears, at certain points, somewhat elliptical. The 
stones which compose this circle, or ellipsis, avf 
rough and unhewn masses of limestone, about thirty 
in number, several of which are broken. Most of 
them are from six to eight feet in length, and three 
or four broad in the widest part ; their thickness is 
more variable, and their respective shapes are differ- - 
ent. They all lie on the ground, and generally in 
an oblique position ; but the opinion, that the nar- 
rowest end of each pointed towards the centre^ in 
order to represent the rays of the sun, the supposed 
object of worship, is inaccurate ; for they almost as 
frequently point towards the ditch, as otherwise. 
Whether they ever stood upright, as most of the 
stones of Druidical circles do, would not be easy to 
determine : Mr. Pilkington was informed, that a 
very old man remembered, when a boy, to have seen 
them standing obliquely on one end. The view of 
the stones themselves^ however, and their relative 
situations, indicate the contrary. Within the circle 
are some smaller stones, scattered irregularly ; and 
near the centre are three larger ones, erroneously 
supposed to have once formed a cromlech. The 
8 width 



DERBYSHIRE. 



width of the ditch which immediately surrounds the 
area on which the stones are placed, is about eigh- 
teen i'eet, and the height of the bank, or vallum, on 
the inside, is from eighteen to twenty-lour feet ; but 
this varies throughout the whole circumference, 
which on the top is full 700 feet. Tho vallum seems 
to have been formed of the earth thrown up from the 
ditch. To the enclosed area are two entrances, each 
of the width of thirty or thirty -six feet ; and open- 
ing on the north and south. On the east side of the 
southern entrance is a large barrow, standing in the 
came line of circumference as the vallum, but wholly 
detached, excepting at the bottom. In this barrow, 
which was opened some years ago, the horns of a 
stag were discovered. Westward, about the dis- 
tance of half a mile from Arbor-low, in another large 
barrow, called End-low, ashes and burnt bones have 
been found. Numerous barrows may be seen from 
this point on the distant eminences ; and in some of 
them, urns, human bones, ashes, &c. have occasion- 
ally been found. The names of several places in 
this neighbourhood are also indicative of antiquity, 
though the places themselves are now of little ac- 
count ; as Aldwark, five miles south of Arbor-low, 
on the Roman road from Buxton to Little Chester ; 
Aldport, on another ancient way leading from Ald- 
wark towards Bakewell, &c. 

Between Arbor-low and Moncyash, about a mile 
and a half from the former, is a huge block of lime- 
atone lying on the heath, and having a circular ca- 
vity on the top. By some, this has been denomi- 
nated a rock-bason. Its diameter is about nine or 
ten inches, and its depth eighteen or twenty. The 
interior is rugged and uneven ; and has somewhat 
of the appearance of a corkscrew ; though the hol- 
lows do not all run into each other- This excava- 
tion is most probably naturaL 

ASHBORNE.] This is a neat market-town, de- 
lightfully situated in a rich valley, on the east side of 
the river Dove, over which it has a stone bridge. 
It is in the Wapentake of Wirksworth, 13| miles 
north-west by west from Derby, and 140 north- west 
by north from London. It has a market on Satur- 
day ; and seven annual fairs as follow : February 
13, for horses and horned cattle ; April 3, May 24, 
and July 5, for horses, horned cattle, and wool ; 
August 16, October 20, and December 29, lor horses 
and horned cattle. 



* The residence of the -Cokaines, at Ashborne, may be 
traced, with certainty, from the time of Henry the Third. 
We find a John Cokaine, who, in tbe reign of Edward the 
1 hird, represented this county in several Parliaments and 
Councils; and another John Coka'me who was knighted by 
Henry the 'Fourth at the 'battle of Shrewsbury, and slain in that 
conflict. The youngest son of the latter was Chief Baron of 
.the Exchequer in the third year of Henry the Fourth; a Jus- 
tice of the Common Pleas in the sixth^of the same rei^n, and in 
the second of Henry the Sixth. He lies buried in the church 
-of Ashborne ; his tomb is adorned with the figures of himself 
and his lady, carved in alabaster. The family of Cokaine, 
(pHudl lately resided at Cokaine Hatlev, in Bedfordshire, was 
.descended from this Judge. Thomas Cokaine, of Ashborne, 



From the descent of the Derby road, the view of 
Ashborne, which presents itself embosomed amongst 
the hills, is beautifully picturesque. The town is 
divided into two parts, by a little rivulet, called the 
Henmore : the more southern part is denominated 
Compton, anciently Campdore. Agriculture, and 
the manufacture of cotton, which has of late years ' 
rapidly extended in this neighbourhood, constitute 
the chief employments of the inhabitants, the num- 
ber of which is about 2,112. 

Ashborne, in the time of William tiic Conqueror, 
was a royal manor, having its church and priest, 
with many dependant villages. It \\;\s granted, by 
King John, to William de Ferrers, Earl of Derby : 
but in the following reign it was seized by the crown, 
on the rebellion of Robert de Ferrers, son of Wil- 
liam. Edward the First bestowed it on his brother, 
Edmund Crouchback, Earl of Lancashire ; and it re- 
mained attached to the Earldom and Duchy of Lan- 
caster till sold, with many other estates belonging to 
the Duchy, by Charles the First. In the reign of 
Charles the Second it was purchased from the Cokes 
of Melbourn, by Sir William Boothby, Knt. and Bart, 
whose lineal descendant, and male heir, Sir Brooke 
Boothby, Bart, the present owner, is well known for 
his classical attainments and poetical talents. 

William Rufus gave the church of Ashborne to 
the church of St. Mary of Lincoln ; and the patron- 
age, with the valuable rectorial tithes and glebe, be- 
long to the Dean of the cathedral of Lincoln. The 
present church is supposed to have been finished iir 
the year 1241 ; as there is a memorial in brass, of its 
dedication to St. Oswald, at that time. It is in the 
form of a cross, with a square tower in the centre, 
terminated by a lofty octagonal spire, enriched with 
ornamental workmanship, and pierced by twenty 
windows. The roof is supported by several pointed 
arches : the interior is spacious, but not commodi- 
I ously disposed, though galleries have been erected 
j for the convenience of the congregation. It contains 
I many monuments of the Cokaines, * Bradburnes, 
: and Boothbys : and in the windows are numerous 
! armorial bearings in stained glass. The tomb which, 
! some years ago, was erected in this church, from the 
[ able chissel of Banks, for the daughter of Sir Brook* 
j Boothby, is well entitled to attention. On the top 
1 is the figure of the deceased, in marble, lying on her 
side ; and around the tomb are memorial inscrip- 



the representative of the eldest branch, was knighted for his 
valour at the battle of Spurs under Henry the Eighth. Sir 
Aston Cokaine, in the reign of Charles the Second, was the 
last of tliis family who resided at Ashborne. He was a consi- 
derable sufferer," for his attachment to the cause of Charles lit* 
First, and gave the last blow to an ancient and venerable in- 
heritance, whose first decline began in the reign of James. 
Sir Aston was a great writer of verses, consisting chiefly 
of genealogical history, a subject but ill according with the 
smooth current of Pierus. Sir William Cokaine, descended 
from a younger branch of this family, was Lord Mayor of 
London in 1619; and bis son Charles," in 164'-', was made an 
Irish Peer, by the title of Viscount Cullen. 

tions. 



DERBYSHIRE. 



21 



t\ons, in English, Latin, Italian, and French. 
first of these is as follows : 



The I 



To PENILOPE, 

Only Child of SIR BROOKE and DAMK SUSANNAH BOOTHBY, 
Bom April XI. 178J. Died March 13, 1791. 
She was in form and intcller t most exquisite. 
The unfortunate parents ventured their all 
. On this trail bark, and the wreck was total. 

Another monument, to the memory of Sir B. 
Boothby, Bart, and Dame Phoebe, his wife, the for- 
mer of whom died in the year 1 781), and the latter in 
1788, presents the following verses : 

Here, bjarneless pair, with mild affections blest, 
Belov'd, respected, much lamented, rest: 
Life's shelter' (I vale secure in peace ye trod ; 
Your practice, virtue ; your reliance, God. 
Long'duys, long loves, indulgent Heav'n beslow'cl, 
And sweet content to gild your calm abode ; 
Friends, who through life their faith utialit-rM kept; 
Children who lov'd, who honor'd, and who wept: 
Heroes and Kings, life's little pageant o'er, 
Might ui^h their trophied marbles were no more. 

At a little distance from the church, is a free 
grammar-school, which was founded, in the time of 
Elizabeth, by the voluntary contributions of Sir 
Thomas Cokaine, Knight, William Bradbume, Esq. 
and other natives of this place and its neighbourhood, 
some of whom wen: at that time wealthy tradesmeli 
iu London. This school is under the patronage and 
direction of three governors and twelve assistants, 
all of whom must be resident householders of Ash- 
borne. The head master is to be of the degree of 
Master of Arts, and has a house and garden for 
himself and family, adjoining to the school, with a 
salary of nearly 100/. a year: the under master has 
a house, and about 30/. per annum : the children in- 
structed here must be those of the town and neigh- 
bourhood. There is another free-school here, for 
educating poor boys and girls, the master and mis- 
tress of which have each 10/. a year. 

A little way from the entrance of the town, from 
Derby, is a neat chapel, and a row of alms-houses, 
for six poor men or women. They were erected 
and endowed in the year 1800, by a native of Ash- 
borne, named Cooper, who, when a boy, followed 
the humble occupation of brick-making ; but, becom- 
ing disgusted with the employment, he wont to the 
metropolis, and, by frugality, had the good fortun 
to acquire considerable property. 

The town has several hospitals, for the reception 
and support of ancient and decayed housekeepers; 
and there is a provision, of a similar nature, for four 
clergymen's widows. 

Ashbernc Hall, the seat of the Boothbys, was, at 
a very early period, -the residence of the Coka'mes, 
who, in the reign of Charles the Second, sold it to 
Sir William Boothby. The mansion is not remark- 
able for architectural beauty ; but, within, every part 
is disposed with taste and elegance. Many of the 
pictures are valuabla; and the library contains a 

VOL. II. - NO. 47. 



choice collection of classic and polite literature. The 
situation is low; but the park and gardens have 
been laid out iu a style of beauty and gracefulness, 
which compensates for the want of scenery, of a more 
picturesque nature. 

ASHFORW.] The village of Ashford, or, as it is 
sometimes called, from the lowness of its situation, 
Ashford-iu-the- Water, is seated on the banks of the 
Wye, two miles north-west by west from Bakewell, 
to which parish it is a chapelry. Edward Planta- 
genet of Woodstock, Earl of Kent, and after him, 
the Hollands, Earls of Kent, and in later times, the 
Nevilles, Earls of Westmoreland, had a residence 
here, of which a moat only remains. Sir William 
Cavendish, the favourite of Cardinal Wolsey, pur- 
chased this estate of -an Earl of Westmoreland, and 
the Duke of Devonshire, descendant of that family, 
still continues the proprietor. The works, in this 
village, for sawing and polishing marble, were the 
first ever established in England. They were con- 
structed originally by Mr. Henry Watson, of Blake- 
well, about seventy or seventy-five years ago; but 
though he obtained a patent to secure the gain aris- 
ing from this invention, the advantages were unequal- 
to his expectations. Mr. John Platt, architect, of 
Rotherham, in Yorkshire, subsequently rented the 
quarries at Ashford, where the black marble is pro- 
cured, of the Duke of Devonshire ; and also those in 
which grey marble is obtained, at Richlow Dale, 
near Moneyash. These are the only quarries of that 
kind now worked in Derbyshire. The machinery is 
similar in construction to that in the marble and spar 
works at Derby ; and, like that, is put in motion by 
water. One part, however, called from its circular 
motion the Sweeping Mill, is> different : by this, a 
floor, of eighty superficial feet of marble slabs, is 
levelled at one time. 

ASHOVEB.] The village of Ashover is in the hun- 
dred of Scarsdalc, six miles and a half north-west 
by north from Alfreton. It is of considerable anti- 
quity, being mentioned in the Domesday Book, as 
having a church and a priest. Iu the church is an 
ancient font, supposed to be Saxon : the base is of 
stone ; the lower part is of an hexagonal form, the 
upper part circular, surrounded with twenty figures 
in devotional attitudes, embossed in lead, in orna- 
mental niches. Some aiu-iont monuments, in memo- 
ry of the Babingtons, who for a long time were 
seated at Dithicke, a chapelry in this parish, are in 
the church. Anthony Babington, of this family, was 
executed for high treason in the reign of Queen Eli- 
zabeth, for having engaged in a conspiracy to de- 
stroy that Princess. On the declivity of a hill on 
Ashover Common, is a rockiiig-stoue, called Robin 
Hood's Mark, which measures about twenty-six feet 
in circumference. From its extraordinary position, 
it appears not only to have been the work of art, but 
to have been placed with great ingenuity. About 
200 yards to the north of this is a singular shaped 
rock, called the Turning Stone, nine teet high : it is 
supposed to have been a rock idol. 

e Overton 



DERBYSHIRE. 



Overtoil Hall, in the -vicinity of this village, is a 
small but pleasant scat belonging to Sir Joseph 
Banks, the President of the Royal Society. 

BAKKWELI,.] The ancient market-town of Bake- 
well, in which the petty sessions for the High Peak 
are holclen, is situated on the western bank of the 
Wye, 26 miles north-north-west from Derby, ami 
152{ north-north-west from London. Tlis regular 
market-day is Monday ; but, oflate years, the mar- 
ket, which has dwindled into insignificance, has been 
kept on Friday. The fairs are on Easter-Monday, 
Whit-Monday, the 29fh of August, the Monday af- 
ter the 10th of October, and the Monday after the 
llth of November. 

Bakewell parish is the most extensive in Derby- 
shire : it contains nine chapels of ease ; its length, 
from north-west to south-east, is more than twenty 
miles, and its breadth upwards of eight. The pas- 
turage in this neighbourhood is remarkably good. 

The town of Bakewell, or Bath-quelle, appears to 
have derived its name from its bath well ; the im- 
mediate site of which has been several years occu- 
pied by a collector of minerals and fossils for private 
cabinets, &c. In the Saxon Chronicle, the town is 
called Badecanwyllan ; a circumstance which in- 
duced Mr. Bray to conjecture that the bath had been 
long in use previously to the year 694, when Ed- 
ward the Elder ordered a town to be built in the 
vicinity, and strongly fortified. From the circum- 
stance of a Roman altar, and other antiquities, hav- 
ing been discovered here, there can be no doubt that 
Bakewell was a place of some note in the time of the 
Romans. 

At the Conquest, Bakewell had two priests and 
a church. The manor then belonged to William 
Peverel, whose son gave two parts of the tithe of his 
demesne of Bakewell to the monastery of Lcnton in 
Nottinghamshire. The remaining part of the tidies, 
with the glebe and patronage of the church, was 
given to the dean and chapter of Litchfield, by John, 
Earl oi Mortaigiie, in whom the estates of the Pcve- 
rels became, vested. The manor afterwards belong- 
ed to the Gernons of Essex, one of whom had a 
grant of a fair to be held here, from Henry the Third, 
lu this family it continued till the reign oi' Henry the 
Seventh, when it was sold to the Vernons, of Mnd- 
don, from whom it descended to the ducal family of 
Rutland, in which it remains. 

Bukewell church is an ancient structure, situated 



* This distinguished character, whose perseverance, and 
admirable inventions, raided him, from one of (he must humble 
occupations in society thut of a barber to affluence and 
honour, was the youngest of thirteen dvldren. He was born 
in the year 1732, al Preston, in Lancashire. A considerable 
manufacture of linen goods, and of linen ami < olton mixed, 
was then carried on in 'hat neighbourhood. Mr. Arkwri^ht 
had an opportunity of becoming intimately acquainted with the 
various operations; and, being a man ot superior powers, he 
directed his thoughts to the improvement of tbe modi; ol spin- 
ning, which had probably beeu conducted for ages without 

. '"' 1 



on an eminence, in the form of a cross, with an octa- 
gonal tower in the centre, from which rises a lofty 
spire. It exhibits the architectural style of three 
different periods. The western part of the nave is 
of plain Saxon architecture ; but the external arch 
of the west doorway is enriched with Saxon orna- 
ments. The greater part of the rest of the church is 
apparently the work of the fifteenth century ; but 
the pillars which support the tower are evidently 
older than that period, though not so ancient as the 
west end of the nave. Amongst the monuments de- 
serving attention in this fabric, is a small but very 
beautiful one to the memory of Sir Godfrey Fol- 
jambe and his Lady, who were the founders of a 
chantry here in the reigu of Edward the Third. The 
arms upon it are evidently those of Foljambe and 
Darley : the colours were, some time ago, traced 
with great care, and restored. Beneath an arch in 
the vestry is the tomb of Sir Thomas de Wednesley, 
who was mortally wounded in the battle of Shrews- 
bury, under Henry the Fourth : his recumbent figure 
on the tomb is dressed in rich armour. In the mid- 
dle of the chancel is a small alabaster tomb, for the 
heir apparent of a Vernon, who died in the reign of 
Edward the Fourth ; and in the Newark (the burial- 
place of the Vernons and Manners) are the tombs of 
Sir George Vernon, of Haddon, and his two ladies ; 
Sir George Manners, the son of Sir John, and his 
lady. Sir George Vernon and his two wives are re- 
presented in recumbent postures: Sir George ap- 
pears in armour, with u sureoat of arms containing 
many quarterings with those of Vernon : his ladies 
are so much alike, that, a trifling variation in their 
dresses excepted, they appear as cast from the same 
mould. The other monuments arc large and costly; 
but there is not any thing particularly excellent in 
the workmanship. In the church-yard is an ancient 
stone cross, supposed to have been conveyed hither 
from some other place. The sides are diversified by 
ornamental sculpture. On the front are several 
rudely carved figures ; the upper compartment ap- 
pears to have represented a crucifixion ; but as the 
top of the cross is broken off, the intention can hardly 
be ascertained. 

Near the entrance of the town, from Ashford, is a 
mill for the carding, roving, doubling, spinning', and 
twisting of cotton, in which some hundreds of per- 
sons of both sexes are employed : the mill was erect- 
ed by the late Sir Richard Arkwright,* the founder 

of 



j thought of change. The first hint respecting the means of 
I effecting this imp'rovemcnt, he said he accidentally received 
from seeing a red hot iron bar elongated by being passed 
j between iron cylinders. The difficulties which he experienced 
i before be could bring bis machine into use, even after its con- 
struction was sufficiently complete to demonstrate its value, 
I would, perhaps, have for ever retarded its completion, had his 
genius and application been less ardent. His pecuniary means 
were not such as to enable him to commence busimsson his 
own account, and few were willing to incur the necessary risk. 
At length, however, Ije sewined the co-operation of some per- 
S ions 



DERBYSHIRE. 



23 



of t!ie cotton-trade in this neighbourhood. The 
number of houses in Bakewell is about 310 ; that of 
inhabitants 11H5. 

BEAUCHIEF ABBEY.] Beauchief Abbey, situated 
in the hundred of Scarsdale, in a beautiful little vale, 
ten miles north-north-west from Chesterfield, is 
extra parochial. The abbey was founded between 
the years 117-2 and 1170, by Robert Fitz-R mulph, 
Lord of Alfreton, for regular canons of the Premon- 
stratensian order. It was 'dedicated to Thomas a 
Becket, and the Virgin Mary ; and from tlie ibriner 
an erroneous supposition was formed that it was 
built to expiate his murder. Only a small part of 
the chapel now remains. According to Dugdale, 
when, in the twenty-sixth of Henry the Eighth, the 
dissolution of this house took place its revenues 
amounted to 126 . Hi. Id. 

BELPER.] Bel per, or Belpar, anciently Beau- 
poire, is situated on the banks of the Dcrwent, in the 
hundred of Appletree, eight miles north by east from 
Derby. It is a chapelry of Duffield ; and, though 
formerly an inconsiderable village, its population 
now exceeds, with the exception of Derby, every 
other town in the county : the number of its inhabi- 
tants amounting to 5778. This great increase of 
extent and population began from three large cot- 
ton mills of Messrs. Strutts, the first of which was 
erected in 177(5. Two of tlem yet remain ; but the 
third was destroyed by fire early in the year 1803. 
The largest of these mills is 200 feet long, 300 feet 
wide, and 6 stories high : it is considered fire proof, 
as the floor is built on brick arches, and paved with 
brick. The two water-wheels, which are employed 
in the machinery in this building, are remarkable for 
magnitude and singularity of construction ; one of 
them being 40 feet long, and 18 in diameter; and 
the other 48 feet long, and 12 feet in diameter. As 
timber could not be procured large enough to form 
the axles of these wheels in the common manner, 
they are constructed circularly and hollow, of a num- 
ber of pieces, and hooped in the manner of a cask. 
One of tht shafts is six feet in diameter, and the 
other nine. The shuttles are constructed in one 

-* In; 

sons who saw the merits of tlie invention, and were willing to 
assist his endeavours, and he obtained his first patent lor spin- 
ning by means of rollers in the year 1769. To avoid the in- 
convenience i>f establishing a manufacture of this kind at tin- 
great seat of the Cotton Manufacture, as it then existed, he 
removed to Nottingham ; where, in conjunction with his part- 
ners, he erected his first mill, which was worked by horses. 
This mode being found too expensive, another mill, on a larger 
scale, was erected at Cromford, the machinery of which was 
put in motion by water. Mr. Arkwright soon effected many 
improvements in the mode of preparing the cotton for spinning, 
and invented a variety Of ingenious machines for that purpose, 
in the most correct and expeditious manner; for all of which 
he obtained a patent in the year 1775 ; and thus completed a 
series of machinery so various and complicated, yet so admirably 
combined, as to excite universal admiration. That all this 
should have been accomplished by the single efforts of a man 
without education, without mechanical knowledge, or even 
mechanical experience, is truly extraordinary ; ancl is, perhaps, 
equal to any known example of the wonderful powers of (be 



piece, so as to support the lateral pressure of the 
water, although it is ten feet deep, by resting one 
upon another. This is different from the usual mode 
of construction, in which they are supported by large 
perpendicular beams at every six or seven feet, in 
order to sustain this lateral pressure. About twelve 
or thirteen hundred people are employed at these 
mills ; and the proprietors have built many houses, 
and a chapel, for their accommodation. Near the 
mills a stone bridge of three arches has been erected 
across the Derwent, at the expence of the county, 
the former one having been washed down, by a 
dreadful Hood, in 1795. At a short distance, lower 
down the river, is a bleaching mill, belonging to the 
same proprietors ; an iron forge, and two cotton 
mills, one of them constructed like that before de- 
scribed. A stone bridge w is also erected here by 
these gentlemen in 1792. These mills afford regu- 
lar employment, to about 000 persons. A Sunday 
school has been established here, and another at Hel- 
per, for the instruction of the children employed at 
the cotton works. 

BENTLEY.] Bentley, or Fenny Reutley, is situat- 
ed in the Wapentuke oi Wirkswortb, two miles and 
a quarter nortii by west from Ashborne. Here is an 
ancient seat of the Berestbrds, of which the Marquis 
ot VVaterlord. in Ireland, is a descendant. Tiie fa- 
mily was seated here in the time of Henry the Sixth, 
in the person of Thomas Beresford, Esq. a younsjer 
son of a family of tnat name residing at Bereslord 
in Staffordshire. It is said traditionally, that he 
formed a troop of horse consisting of his sons, with 
his and their servants, at Chesterfield, for the King's 
service, in his war with France. He died in the 
year 1473. The old manor-house, which, in the 
small part that remains, still preserves a castellated 
appearance, passed, by an heir general, to the family 
oi Cotton, of Beresford; but the heir male of Tho-'- 
mas Beresford is still owner of landed property here. 
Of this family there are several monuments in the 
village church. 

BOLSOYEK.] This is a mean stragling market- 
town, situated in the hundred of Scarsdule, 0-*- miles 

human mind, when steadily directed to one object. However, 
at the same time that he was inventing and improving the 
machinery, he was engaged in other undertakings, which might 
have been thought incompatible with such pursuits. He was 
taking measures to secure to himself a fair proportion of the 
fruits of his industry and ingenuity ; he was greatly extending 
the business ; he was introducing into every department of the 
manufacture, a novel system of industry, oeconomy, order, and 
cleanliness; the whole of which he so effectually accomplished, 
thai his example may be regarded as the origin of almost all 
similar improvement*. During this entire period, he was 
afflicted with a violent asthma, which sometimes threatened the 
immediate termination of his existence; and, for some time 
previously to his dea,th, he was rendered incapable ot continuing 
his usual pursuits, by a complication of diseases, which at length 
deprived him of life, at the Rock House, Cromford, on the 
3d of August, 1792. The honour of knighthood was bestowed 
on him in December, 1786, when he presented an address to 
the King. . 

l\jit 

South ; 



24 



DERBYSHIRE. 



south by east from Chesterfield, and 147* north by ] 
west from London. Friday is the market-day ; and 
it has a fair on Easter-Monday. The town is go- 
verned by two headboroughs ; and a copyhold court, i 
under the Duke of Portland, is holdeu here every 
three weeks. 

This town has been somewhat memorable in his- 
tory, on account of its castle. At the time of the 
Conquest, the manor belonged to William Peverel, 
who is supposed to have built a castle near the spot 
which is .now occupied by a mansion bearing the 
name of Bolsover Castle. The ancient fortress 
passing, with the estate of the Peverels, into the 
possession of John, Earl of Mortaigna, was, in the 
absence of his brother, Richard (he First, committed 
to the custody of Richard del Pec. It is uncertain 
how long it continued in his possession ; but on the 
accession of John, William Briwere, the favourite 
of that Monarch, was appointed governor. It was 
afterwards seized by the disaffected barons, who re- 
tained it till 1215, when, it appears by the Chroni- 
cle ef Dunstaple, it was recovered for the King, by 
William Ferrers, Karl of Derby. In the reign of 
Henry the Third, John Scot, Earl of Chester, re- 
ceived a grant of it; but he dying without issue, the 
manor of Bolsover came, by allotment, to Ada, his 
fourth sister and co heir, who married Henry de 
Hastirp, Lord Abergavenny. It afterwards became 
vested in the crown, by a compulsory exchange. 
In the reign of Henry the Eighth, it was held by 
Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, by the service 
of one knight's fee ; but in the same reign, on the 
attainder of the Duke's son and successor, it es- 
cheated to the crown. In the reign of Edward the 
Sixth, George Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, had a 
grant of this castle in fee-farm. In the reign of 
James the First, the Earl's son-in-law, Sir Charles 
Cavendish, purchased the fee of the crown, and 
building that part which is still standing, upon the 
site of the ruins of the former castle, made it one 
of the places of his residence. William, the son oi' 
Sir Charles, was afterwards Marquis, and Duke of 
Newcastle.* " When Charles the First went into 
Scotland to be crowned," observes the Duchess of 
Newcastle, in the life of the Duke, her husband, 
"he took his way through Nottinghamshire, and 
lying at Worksop manor, hardly two miles distant 
from Welbeck, where the Marquis then was, the 
Marquis invited his Majesty thither to dinner, which 
the King accepted. This entertainment cost between 
4 aud 5000/. and his Majesty liked it so well, that 

* Tliii nobleman, the grandson of Sir William Cavendish, 
usher to Cardinal Wolsey, was born in the year 1 592, James 
I. made him Knight of the Bath, Baron Ogle, and Viscount 
Mansfield. Charles the First created him Ear! of Newcastle, 
and appointed him governor to the Prince of Wales. The Earl 
contributed 10.00Q/. towards the expedition of that monarch 
against the Scotch, besides a troop of horse. He behaved with 
great spirit and loyalty during the civil wars, till the destruction 
of the roval cause obliged him to go abroad. In his exile lie 
wrote a Treatise on Government, and the Interest of Great Bri- 



be sent my Lord word, that the Queen was resolved 
to make a, progress into the northern parts, desiring 
him to prepare the like entertainment for her, as he 
had formerly done for him : which he did with all 
possible care and industry, sparing nothing which 
might add splendour to the feast, which both their 
Majesties were to honour with their presence: Ben 
Jonson he employed in fitting such scenes and 
speeches, as he could best devise ; and sent for all 
the gentry to come and wait on their Majesties, and 
did every thing he could to render it gceat, and 
worthy their acceptance. This he did at Bolsover, 
and resigned Welbeck for their Majesties' lodging. 
It cost him between 14 and 15,000/." It is said, 
that the long building (the shell of which now re- 
mains) along the terrace here, was built on this oc- 
casion. But it is more probable, it was erected after 
the restoration, for the Duchess mentions that the 
Duke then " made some additional building here." 

In the civil wars, his houses were pulled down 
and disfuruished, of which the furniture tiere, and at 
Welbeck, was particularly rich, and one suit of linen 
alone, bought for the King's entertainment here, cost 
ISO/. At this period, Bolsover castle was a garri- 
son, under the command of Colonel Muscamp. The 
following account of its capture, by the Parliamen- 
tary forces, is given in a Parliamentary Chronicle 
published by Vicars, intituled The Burning Bush 
not consumed. " Shortfy after (i. e. after August 
16, 1064,) the noble Major-General having left Ce- 
lonel Bright, a commander of my Lord Fairfaxe's, 
and a party of foot in the castle (Sheffield) by order 
from the most noble Earl of Manchester, advanced 
towards Bowzan, alias Bolsover Castle, about eight 
miles from Sheffield. It being another strong house 
of Marquesse Newcastle's, in Derbyshire, which was 
well manned with soldiers, and strengthened with 
great guns, one whereof carried eighteen pound bul- 
lets, others nine pound, and it had strong works 
about it ; yet this castle also upon summons, was 
soon surrendered up to my Lord's forces, upon faire 
and moderate articles granted to them. It pleased 
God to give us in this castle of Bolsover an hun- 
dred and twenty muskets, besides pikes, halberts, 
&.C. Also one iron drake, some leaden bullets, two 
mortar pieces, some other drakes, nine barrels of 
powder, with a proportion of match, some victuals 
ibr our souldiers, and some plunder." 

Henry, the second Duke of Newcastle, dying 
without male issue, the Bolsover estate became the 
property of Margaret, his sister, who had married 



tain with respect lo the other Powers of Europe. After the 
Restoration he was created Duke of Newcastle. He died in 
1G?(5. His grace wrote several plays aud poems, but his Trea- 
tise 0.11 Horsemanship is the best known of his pieces. His 
second wife wrote a number of volumes and plays, amounting 
to thirteen folio volumes, now sunk into oblivion : she was the 
daughter of Sir Charles Lucas, who suffered death at Colches- 
ter from the rebel?. She died in 1673. The duke's title de- 
scended to his sou Henry, who died without is>iK-, lG9l. 

(W.V . OJ ..j- ' 

John 



DERBYSHIRE. 



25 



John Hollis, Earl of Clare. They had issue, a 
daughter, married to Harley, Earl of Oxford, from 
whom, by a daughter also, Bolsover was carried to 
the Bentincks, Dukes of Portland, in which family 
it remains. 

Bolsover Castle, as it now appears, is of singular 
architecture. " Upon passing through some large 
gates," observes an ingenious writer in the Topo- 
grapher, " we soon enter upon the noble terras, 
(high raised by nature and by art,) that forms the 
western side, and overlooking a pleasing valley, 
commands the park and seat of Sutton, and a rich 
circle of country. Along this terras, stands the 
range of building, now reduced to a shell, built by 
the Duke of Newcastle. Passing this, we come to 
the house, built by his father. Here we ascend by a I 
flight of steps through a largo gateway, on each sido 
of which are porters' lodges, into an high enclosed 
paved court, into which as soon as we are entered, 
we sec a regular front, in the form somewhat of an 
E, viz. two small wings, and a lesser middle ene ; 
in the latter is the porch ornamented above with the 
Cavendish arms and coronet, and through it a pas- 
sage, to the right of which is the way to the hall, not 
large, but perfectly consonant with the building, 
being supported in the middle by two pillars, from 
whence, and from brackets on the side walls, issue 
the ramifications of the ribbed roof. From this, 
through an anti-room, is the entry into the dining- 
room, with a similar ceiling, supported in the middle 
by a circular thick pillar, round which is the dining- 
table : the wainscot richly ornamented in the manner 
of James the First's time ; the views from the win- 
dows extensive and noble ; the size of the room a 
square of about twenty-four feet. The chimney- 
piece of this room is very showy, and expensive, (as 
indeed are those in all the rooms, even the bed- 
chambers,) and as elegant as the ponderous (yet 
surely magnificent) ones in this reign can be. The 
staircase is of stone, somewhat in the castle style, 
though not circular. Above stairs, is a noble room, 
rich in all the ornaments of the day, with painted 
wainscot, a deep cornice adorned with arms, a rich 
chimney-piece, fine old furniture, and numerous 
windows, from whence are varied and almost bound- 
less prospects. The many bed-chambers and other 
apartments are all of the same date and taste, but 
few have any remaining furniture. From houses 
singular like this the mind is furnished with new 
ideas, the imagery of past ages crowds upon the 
fancy, and the most pleasing of our intellectual fa- 
culties are gratified with a delightful exercise." At 
the south end of the garden is a very curious decay- 
ed fountain, standing in an octagon reservoir, six 
feet deep, and ornamented with satyrs, masks, birds, 
and other figures. On the pedestal is an alabaster 
figure of Venus, represented holding wet drapery, 
and in the action of stepping out of a bath. 

Bolsover Church contains nothing remarkable, 
but the monument-room of the Cavendishes. This 
is an addition to the south side. On the outside on 

vot. ii. NO. 47. 



the battlements, in good wrought stone, in capital 
letters, is cut the family motto, CAVENDO TUTUS 
Secure, from caution. On the dexter side are the 
Cavendish arms, three stags heads caboshed, a cre- 
scent for difference. On the other side the arms of 
Ogle a fess between three crescents, and above the 
last, on a wreath, a rose. On the entrance into the 
monument-room, over the door, is the date of the 
year it was built, 16)8 ; and above are the Caven- 
dish arms and crest. The place within is ^bout five 
yards by six, at a yard distance from the monuments, 
secured by bars of iron, and rails with spikes. Above 
all, in height about five feet within, are two fine mo- 
numents of Sir Charles Cavendish and his Lady. 
Under a Grecian arch, in an altar-tomb, is his figure 
recumbent, in armour, his own hair, hands in a 
praying posture, &c. On an altar-tomb lower, 
placed before it, the recumbent figure of his wife, 
in her gown in full proportion, with her hands in a 
praying posture. About these are arms, inscriptions, 
&c. Opposite is a large marble tablet, with a mag- 
nificent pediment, supported by marble pillars and a 
large base, &c. erected by the Countess of Oxford, 
1727, to the memory of her ancestors, viz. Henry 
Cavendish, Duke of Newcastle, and his Duchess , 
his elder brother Charles, Viscount Mansfield; his 
uncle Sir Charles Cavendish ; his daughter Marga- 
ret, married to John Holies, Duke of Newcastle, and 
buried here 1716, &c. Near the altar-piece is some 
carving on a stone formed like a sarcophagus six 
feet by three, representing the Nativity : the Child 
on the Virgin's lap holds a bird. 

BONSAL.] This village is no otherwise remark- 
able than for having a school, which was founded 
by Robert Ferae, Esq. who settled twenty pounds 
per annum on the master, ten pounds per annum to 
put two boys apprentice, and ten pounds per annum 
i'or the repairs of the school-house, the purchase 
of religious books, &c. It is situated about three 
miles from Wirks worth, in the -hundred of that 
name. 

BIIADSALL.] Bradsall, or Brcadsall, is situated 
in the hundred of Appletree, three miles north-east 
by north from Derby. Near this town was a house 
of friars, hermits, which was in being in the reign 
of Henry III. after which it became a small priory, 
of the order of St. Augustine, dedicated to the Holy 
Trinity ; and thus continued till the Dissolution, 
when its annual revenue was valued at no more than 
13/. and 8d. 

BRAILESFORD.] This is a village of scattered 
houses, about seven miles and a quarter north-west 
by west of Derby, built on each side of the road be- 
tween that town and Ashborne. II. dc Brailesford 
was Lord of the Manor in the 25lh of Edward I. : 
in the reign of Edward 111. it was held by Ralph 
Shirley under the Duke of Clarence, of Tuthury, 
whose descendant, Lord Ferrers, conveyed it to Mr. 
Webster of Derby. 

BKAMPTON.] Brampton is in the hundred of 

Scarsdale, three miles west by north from Chester - 

field. 



20 



DERBYSHIRE. 



field. Brampton chapel is supposed, by an inscrip- 
tion on one of the walls, to have existed so early as 
1155. It sceras to Have been rebuilt and consecrat- 
ed 1253, by Brenden, Bishop of Ardfert, suffragan 
to Weser, Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry ; but 
still continued dependant on the rectory of Chester- 
field, which belongs to the Dean of Lincoln, the 
vicarage not being endowed till 1268. The dean 
and the parishioners claimed a right of nomination 
to this chapel, but at Derby assizes 1758, the ver- 
dict went in favour of the dean, and a decree 
issued thereupon in the Court of Exchequer. 

BRETB-Y.] The little hamlet of Bretby is situated 
at the sou them extremity of tlte county, in the hun- 
dred of Rep to u and Gresley, eleven miles and a half 
south-west by south from Derby. A few scattered 
houses are all that remain to lament the former su- 
periority of the place ; for, as is evident from the 
vestiges of walls, foundations, wells, &c. besides a 
castle which was situated near the present chapel, it 
was once a village, or town, of considerable extent 
and note. The castle belonged to Thomas de Bro- 
therton, Earl of Norfolk, and second son to Edward 
I. from whom it descended to the Movvbrays, 
Dukes of Norfolk. The unevenness of the ground 
points out the spot where it stood, but the walls 
have been entirely removed. The estate afterwards 
descended to the Berkleys, from whom, through a 
family named Mee, it passed to the Earls of Ches- 
terfield, its present owners. 

A' magnificent seat, said to have been built by 
Inigo Jones, formerly stood in Bretby Park. The 
present Earl, in la's youth, was persuaded, by an 
artful steward, to pull it down, as in a dangerous 
state of decay ; but it proved to have been very firm 
and substantial. This house consisted of a long but 
narrow body, with wings of similar dimensions ; the 
tops of the latter were circular, but the gables on the 
roof of the former more varied. The court was pro- 
tected by massy iron gates, which led to a portico 
on the ground floor. This was the entrance to a 
hall and large staircase, adorned with many excel- 
lent paintings. The rooms were most of them mag- 
nificent with painted ceilings, rich tapestry, and 
noble paintings. Beyond the right angles with the 
east wing, was an admirable chapel of a much later 
date ; the architecture was Grecian, very light and 
handsouje. Within was a rich lining of cedar*, the 
altar-piece remarkably fine, and there was also an 
organ in the gallery ; at the east end of the chapel 
stood a very large and venerable cedar, which still 
remains. The gardens, which were filled with 
buildings, fountains, leaden images in the shape of 
wild beasts, and all the various appendages of old 
fashioned grandeur, were formed after the plan of the 
famous Versailles. 

The park, though not very extensive, was formed 
by nature with much variety to please ; a deep glen 
divided the eastern side, down which winds a chain 

* Vide Count Hamilton's Memoirs, 
8 



offish-pools ; the swells on every side were clothed 
with fine timber, till the American war caused them 
to be felled. In the other parts the scene was filled 
with long avenues of elms and chesnut trees. To 
the north-east Repton Shrubs, that glorious wood, 
which still retains its greatness, seemed a continu- 
ance of the same park, and highly ennobled the sce- 
nery. A little west of the north rises that charming 
feature Bretby Mount, which is still an object seen 
from most parts of the country. Such is the muti- 
lating power even of a few years, that where we be- 
fore wandered amidst the finest shades, trees are now 
but thinly scattered ; and where we might then be- 
hold a magnificent edifice adorned with noble paint- 
ings and the richest ornaments of the times, now 
scarcely a relic is discovered. This was the celebrat- 
ed scene of Count de Grammont's visits to the 
beautiful Countess of Chesterfield, in the time of 
Charles II.* 

On the opposite side of the road, stands an odd 
semi-circular house with formal plantations, called 
Brislingcote. This plaee, it is believed, was built 
by Sir William Stanhope as an appendage to his 
| noble seat at Bretby. It was afterwards sold, and 
subsequently belonged to a lady of the name of 
Barnes. 

BROUGH.] In this little hamlet, belonging to the 
parish of Hope, in the hundred of High Peak, five 
miles north-north-east from Tideswell, are the re- 
mains of a Roman station. The camp was at a 
place called the Castle, near the junction of two 
small streams, named Nohoe and the Dradvvell Wa- 
ter. Several foundations, &c. have been ploughed 
up here, and Mr. Pegge, in the year 1761, saw a 
rude bust of Apollo, and of another deity in stone, 
which were found in the fields, with a coarse pave- 
inent composed of tile and cement in the lower of the 
two fields called Halsteds. In the other were marks 
of an oblong square building, whose angles were of 
rough grit-stone, and the area covered with bricks 
and tiles. Pieces of swords, spears, bridle-bits, and 
coins, have also been found here ; and some years 
ago, a half length figure of a woman, with her arms 
folded across her breast, cut in a rough grit-stone, 
was turned up by the plough. A gold coin of Ves- 
pasian, in good preservation, was found at Brough 
Mill. 

BUXTON.] The village of Buxton, so celebrated 
for its medicinal springs, is a chapelry in the parish 
of Bakewell, in the hundred of High Peak. It lies 
36 miles north-west by north from Derby, and 160 
north-west by north from Loildon. The surround- 
ing country is mountainous and sterile ; but the 
bowels of the earth are replete with various kinds of 
minerals ; and the smiles of the Goddess of Health, 
who presides here, renders the cheerless spot where 
her favors issue, delightful to the eye and the heart. 
" With joy and gratitude," said the late Mr. Pen- 
nant, as he passed through Buxton, " I this moment 



reflect 



DERBYSHIRE. 



27 



reflect on the efficacious qualities of the waters : 
recollect with rapture the return of spirits, the flight 
of pain, and the re-animation of my long, long crip- 
pled rheumatic limbs." 

It appears from a manuscript of Dr. Gale's, quot- 
ed in Gough's additions to Camden, that that gen- 
tleman placed the Aquis of Ravennas at Buxton ; 
though he had previously conjectured it to be at 
Aiden, in Northumberland. That its warm springs 
were known to the Romans, is evident from various 
concurring circumstances. Several ancient roads 
concentrate at this spot, particularly one called the 
Bath-way, on Bathen-gate, which commences at 
Brougli, the Roman station just mentioned, and was 
traced by the late Mr. Pegge, in his " Kssay on the 
Roman Roads through the Country of the Coritani." 
Another, which came from Manchester, is known in 
different parts of its course, by the appellations of 
High Street, Street Fields, Street Lane, Old Gate, 
&c. Specimens of Roman workmanship have also 
been discovered here at different times. Bishop 
Gibson mentions a well, cemented with Roman 
plaister, close by St. Anne's Well, where are the 
ruins of the ancient bath. This well was taken down 
in 1709, when Sir Thomas Deloes, of Cheshire, iu 
memory of a cure which he had received from the 
waters, erected a small stone alcove over it. 
Some capacious leaden cisterns, and different arti- 
cles apparently Roman, were then found in digging 
the foundation. The shape and dimensions of the 
ancient bath, which was about eighteen feet from tlie 
present bath-room, were discovered when the build- 
ing of the Crescent commenced in the year 1781. 
Its form appeared to have been that of a parallelo- 
gram ; it measured from east to west, thirty feet, 
and fifteen from north to south. The spring was 
situated at the west end ; and at the east might be 
plainly perceived a flood-gate, by means of which 
the water was let out. The wall had been built 
with limestone, covered on the outside with a strong 
cement ; the floor consisted of a composition of lime, 
mixed with coarse sand, saturated with blood. Near 
one end was a cavity in the floor, resembling the 
figure of a boat, extending circularly in length al- 
most from the one side wall to the other ; its breadth 
was about two yards ; and its depth below the level 
of the floor, at the deepest point of curvature, about 
eighteen inches : the water was conveyed into this 
room by a leaden pipe. The remote appropriation 
of the Buxton waters is apparent from these circum- 
stances ; but neither the Saxon nor Monkish anna- 
lists furnish any testimony, as to their having been 
in use in the middle ages ; and, though it seems 
probable, that they were never entirely deserted, we 
have no certain records of their having obtained a 
high degree of reputation till the sixteenth century, 
when Dr. Jones gave them celebrity by a treatise on 
their beneficial qualities. ' The first convenient house 
for the reception of visitants, was erected a short 
time previously to Dr. Jones's publication, by the 
Earl of Shrewsbury, on the site of the building now 



called The Hall, a part of which belonged to the 
old fabric. Dr. Jones described this in the follow- 
ing terms : " Joining the chief spring, between the 
river and the bath, is a very goodly house, four 
square, four stories high, so well compact with houses 
of office beneath, above, and round about, with a 
great chamber and other goodly lodgings, to the 
number of thirty, that it is and will be a beauty to 
behold, and very notable for the right honourable 
and worshipful that shall repair thither, as also for 
others ; yea, and the poor shall have lodgings and 
beds hard by for their uses only." This building 1 
occasioned the waters to be much more resorted to 
than heretofore by all ranks of people. Mary, Queen 
of Scots, being at that time in the custody of the 
Earl of Shrewsbury, was brought along with him, 
and his wife Elizabeth, iu one of his visits to this 
place, on which occasion this heroic and unfortunate 
Princess applied to Buxton, Caesar's Verses on Fel- 
tria, with some alteration : 

Buxtona, qus caliclx celebrabere nomine lymphse, 
Forte milii posthac non adeumla, vale. 

Buxton, whose fame thy milk-warm waters tell, 
Whom I, perhaps, no more shall see, farewell. 

It appears that the number of visitors who sought 
health or recreation at these springs continuing to 
increase, the hall became insufficient for their ac- 
commodation, and most part of it was taken down 
about the year 1670 ; when a new and enlarged edi- 
fice was erected on the spot by William, third Earl 
of Devonshire. This building, having undergone 
various subsequent alterations to render it more 
convenient, is still the principal hotel for the recep- 
tion of company. Within it are the baths, which are 
five in number: they adjoin to each other, but are 
in distinct apartments. The gentlemen's bath is in 
a close room, thirty feet in length, and sixteen wide : 
along one end and side is a stone bench, for the use 
of bathers ; and at each corner are" steps leading 
into the bath. This is twenty-six feet and a half 
long ; twelve feet eight inches broad ; and about 
four feet seven inches deep. On the south-east side 
is a stratum of black limestone, through which the 
two principal springs rise ; but the water also bubr- 
bles up in various smaller springs-, through the 
chinks between the stones with which the bath is 
paved. In the bath for ladies, and in that appro- 
priated to the use of the poor, the water issues^ 
through the crevices of the floor. The two other 
baths are private. It has been calculated, that the 
springs throw up about sixty gallons of water every 
minute. It requires two hours and fifty minutes, to 
fill the baths. The almost invariable temperature of 
the water, as it rises in the baths, is S'^of Faren- 
heit's thermometer ; but sometimes, according to 
t\te observations of Dr. Pearson, it has been one 
quarter of a degree lower. From the analysis made 
by this gentleman, it appears that a gallon of the 
water, wheu evaporated, deposits sixteen grains of 

sediment ; 



DERBYSHIRE. 



sediment ; of this quantity, eleven grains and a half 
-were calcareous earth, two grains and a half vitrio- 
lic selenite, and one grain and three quarters sea- 
Salt. In the analysis made by Dr. Higgins and Dr. 
Percival, the results were rather different : the for- 
mer obtained from twenty-three to twenty-four 
grains of sediment ; the latter, nearly eighteen. 

The salutary effects of Buxton waters are parti- 
cularly evident in the gout, rheumatism, nephritic, 
and bilious disorders, and debility of the stomach 
and intestines. When taken in any considerable 
quantity, it occasions feverish symptoms, and pos- 
sesses an astringent and heating quality. Dr. Den- 
man, in bis Observations on Buxton Water, consi- 
ders it as a more active remedy than is generally 
supposed ; and not only dissuades from its use in 
all inflammatory and feverish complaints, but limits 
the quantity to be taken, in cases where its use is 
efficacious, to a moderate portion. " In common," 
says he, " two glasses, each of the size of the third 
part of a pint, are as much as ought to be drunk be- 
fore breakfast, at the distance of forty minutes be- 
tween each ; and one or two of the same glasses 
between breakfast and dinner will be quite sufficient." 
With respect to the bathing, he recommends for in- 
valids, the time between breakfast and dinner as the 
most proper; and directs that the prescribed, or 
-usual exercise, should be taken before going into the 
bath : the water never to be taken immediately be- 
fore bathing. The water is usually drunk at St. 
Anne's Well, a modern, but elegant little building 
in the antique style. The water is conveyed thither 
into a white marble bason, from the original spring, 
through a narrow grit-stone channel, so nicely ad- 
justed, that its temperature, on issuing into day, is 
never more than three quarters of a degree lower 
than in the baths : its general height is from 81J: to 
81 1 of Farenheit. This well is regarded as one of 
the Seven Wonders of the Peak ; chiefly, from the 
circumstance, that both hot and cold spring water 
may be obtained within twelve inches of each other, 
from a double pump, situated on the opposite 
side of the building to that which contains the 
bason. 

The Crescent is a very magnificent range of build- 
ings, erected by the Duke of Devonshire about thirty 
years ago, IVoin the design, and under the superin- 
tendance of Mr. Carr. It consists of three stories; 
the lowest rustic, forming a beautiful colonnade, ex- 
tending the whole length of the front, seven feet 
wide within the pillars, and eleven feet high. The 
divisions between the windows above, are formed 
by Ionic pilasters, extending to an elegant balus- 
trade which skirts the whole front, the span of which 
is 257 feet. In the centre are the arms of the Ca- 



* The charge for bathing at the public baths, is one shilling 
each time ; at the private ones, three shilling*. The expences 
at the different inns are nearly the same. Dinner.at the ordinary, 
unless recently raised, is two shillings and sixpence ; tea, one 
shilling; breakfast and supper, one shilling and sixpence each. 



vendish family, neatly carved in stone, but sur- 
mounted with a pair of natural stag's antlers. Each 
extremity of the Crescent contains an hotel ; and in 
the intermediate space are several private lodging- 
houses, the lower rooms of which form a series of 
shops. In the larger hotel is the ball-room, an ele- 
gant and well-proportioned apartment, with a rich 
projecting cornice, and various appropriate and 
beautiful ornaments. The length of this room is 
seventy-five feet and a half ; the width thirty feet 
two inches ; and the height thirty feet. The num- 
ber of windows in the whole Crescent is 378. It is 
built with grit-stone obtained near the spot, and 
faced with fine free-stone, procured from a quarry 
about two miles distant. 

At the back of the Crescent, on a rising ground, 
at the distance of a hundred yards, are the Stable*, 
an extensive pile, forming, on the outside, an irre- 
gular polygon, but having a circular area within, 
180 feet in diameter. Round this is a covered gal- 
lery, or ride, where the company exercise on horse- 
back, when the weather renders shelter necessary : 
near the stables, on one side, is a spacious repository 
for carriages. These buildings, as well as the Cre- 
scent, were constructed at (he cliarge of the Duke of 
Devonshire, who is said to have expended on them 
the sum of 120,000/. 

Besides the hall, and the hotels in the Crescent, 
4wo other spacious inns the White Hart, and the 
Eagle and Child are open for the reception of com- 
pany ;* but those persons who reside in the houses 
belonging to the duke, have the privilege of bathing 
first. 

To those who are able to join in society, there is 
something extremely agreeable in the mode of living 
here : no ceremony is necessary farther than to pre- 
serve decent respect ; and the mind may be often 
gratified by the various oharms of conversation. 
Lodgings in private houses, are, however, generally 
indifferent ; and great inconvenience is experienced 
from having no common market here. Fruit and 
provisions, not being the produce of this neighbour- 
hood, but brought from some distance, are conse- 
quently expensive. 

The number of houses in Buxton is about 186, 
chiefly of stone ; that of its inhabitants 934. The 
number of the visitors who assemble here in the 
bathing season is uncertain ; but as the private 
lodgings are able to accommodate about 800 or 900, 
it may be -concluded that upwards of that number 
are annually entertained here ; for of late years many 
of the company have resided in the adjoining vil- 
lages. The principal, and indeed sole depcndance 
of the inhabitants, is on the expenditure of its visi- 
tors. Several shops for the manufacture and sale of 



A single bed-room is half a guinea per week ; a double ditto, 
fourteen shillings ; and a sitting mom, according to its quality, 
ffom twelve to sixteen shillings. The subscription to the ball 
and card-room is one guinea: but if a family, only the two 
first pay a guinea each ; the others, half a guinea each. 

flu or 



DERBYSHIRE. 



29 



fluor and alabaster ornaments, are established. Of 
tlrese the shop of Mr. Samuel Cooper claims a de- 
cided preference, both for its assortment and finish of 
articles of this description. About two miles south- 
west of this village is a waste uneven piece of land, 
called Diamond If ill, from its being the place where 
the crystals, known by the appellation of Buxton 
diamonds, arc found. 

From June to the end of October, the amusements 
of Buxton are generally carried on. In these months 
three assemblies are held weekly, on Monday, Fri- 
day, and Wednesday, the two former for an undress, 
the latter for a dress ball. On Tuesdays, Thurs- 
days, and Saturdays, a small theatre, neatly fitted 
up, is opened, frequented by a respectable company 
of performers. Adjoining the ball-room, is an ele- 
gant card-room open every evening. A pack of 
harriers is also kept here by subscription. The 
country is well adapted for hunting. Gentlemen 
also amuse themselves in shooting moor game and 
grouse, and in fishing for trout and grayling. Those 
who have a taste for botany and mineralogy may, of 
cou-se, meet with abundance of gratification. The 
libraries are small ; but, as dissipation is not preva- 
lent here, they are well attended. 

As the chapel at Buxton is much too small for the 
company, prayers are daily read, during the season, 
in the hall. The minister is paid by subscription. 
Formerly a lecture was delivered after the prayers ; 
but, on account of the objection of the rector, this 
was discontinued ; and, for the better accommoda- 
tion of the visitors, the Duke of Devonshire erected 
a new church at a little distance, in a neighbouring 
parish. 

The poor who resort to Buxton, are permitted to 
partake the benefit of a fund, formed by a collection 
of one shilling from every visitor who resides here 
above a day. This is appropriated to the purchase 
of necessary medicines, and supplying fourteen indi- 
gent persons, who vouch their being proper objects 
of charity, by bringing a certificate from the minister 
of their parish and their medical attendant, with six 
shillings weekly for one month, and permission to 
bathe free of expence. 

Opposite the Crescent is the eminence of Stain, 
or Haiis-clitF, on the top of which is a very pleasant 
walk. " Here," 3Ir. Pilkington observes, " is a 
low, or barrow, of a different shape from any which 
I have seen in Derbyshire. It is long, narrow at 
the top, and slants off at the sides and ends : the 
length at the bottom is about fifteen yards, and the 
breadth six yards ; its height is above two yards. 
This barrow is encompassed by a ditch nearly six 
yards wide ; and has a cavity about six yards in 
diameter, and one in depth, at each end, near the 
south-west and north-west corners." The late 
Rev. Mr. Watson, rector of Stookport, in a letter 
written to Mr. Pegge in the year 178-2, observes, 
that the remains of an ancient settlement, supposed 
by him to be Roman, were here visible. 

CALKE.] The village of Calke is situated iu the 

VOL. n. no. 47. 



hundred of Repton and Gressley, ten.miles south by 
east from Derby. Maud, Countess of Chester, 
founded here a monastery of regular canons of the 
order of St. Austin, dedicated to St. Mary and St. 
Giles, before the year 1161; but she afterwards 
caused most of the canons to be removed to the pri- 
ory of ReptOa, to which the monastery continued a 
cell till the Dissolution. 

In this village is Calke Hall, a spacious and hand- 
some mansion, enclosing a quadrangular court ; but 
being surrounded with rising grounds, it is exclud- 
ed from a view of the neighbouring country. This 
estate is the residence of the ancient family of Har- 
pur, whose pedigree may be traced more than six 
hundred years back, when they were inhabitants of 
Chesterton in Warwickshire : about four hundred 
years ago, they were of Rushull in Staffordshire, and 
about two centuries back of Swarkstone, at which 
time they were very numerous. Sir Henry Harpur, 
Bart, whose ancestor, Henry Harpur, Esq. was 
created a baronet, in the year 1620, is the present 
proprietor of Calke Hall. 

CARLES-WORK.] Carles-Work is situated in a 
desolate moor, called Mill-stone Edge, not far from 
Castleton. To what age or people this fortifica- 
tion should be ascribed is unknown : it is- thus no- 
ticed, however, by Mr. Bray : " It may seem to 
have some resemblance of the huge and shapeless 
structure of stones mentioned by Tacitus to have 
been raised by Caractacus, when he headed the Si- 
lures against the Romans. On its first appearance, 
a stone wall, of eight or nine feet high, seeming to 
be pretty regularly made, is seen crossing a neck of 
land, lying higher than the adjoining part of the 
moor, and which is full of loose stones. On coming: 
to it, the stones which compose the wall are found to 
be very large, but regularly piled, and covered at the 
back with a sloping bank of earth. Keeping to the 
right hand, the ground is of an irregular shape, en- 
closed by a fence of stones rudely placed. Some- 
times a great stone, in its natural position, forms the 
defence; in other places smaller ones are piled, be- 
tween or on large ones. On the side which looks 
towards Chats worth, is an entrance or gateway, 
opening inwards with two flanks." 

CASTLETON.] This place, which takes its name 
from an ancient castle, situated on a steep rock, to 
which there is only one ascent, and that so winding 
that it is nearly two miles to the summit, is in the 
hundred of High Peak, five miles north from Tides- 
well. The immediate approach to Castleton, by the 
road across the mountains, from Chapel-in -the-frith, 
observes Warner, in his " Northern Tour," is by 
" a steep descent, called the Winnets, or Wind- 
gates, from the stream of air that always sweeps 
through the chasms. This road is a mile in length, 
and carried on in a winding direction, in order to 
render the natural declivity of the ground passable 
by carriages. Happy was the imagination that first 
suggested its name, The gates or portals of the 
winds ; since, wild as these sons of the tempests are, 
H. the 



30 



DERBYSHIRE. 



the massive rocks which nature here presents, seem 
to promise a barrier sufficiently strong to controul 
their maddest fury. Precipices 1000 feet in height, 
dark, rugged, and perpendicular, heave their un- 
wieldy forms on each side the road, which makes 
several inflections in its descent, and frequently pre- 
senting themselves in front, threaten opposition to 
all further progress. At one of these sudden turns, 
to the left, n most beautiful view of Castleton Vale 
is unexpectedly thrown upon the eyes, refreshing it 
with a rich picture of beauty, fertility, and variety, 
after the tedious uniformity of rude and hideous 
scenery to which it has so long been confined." 
" This peaceful and luxuriant vale," observes nn- 
other judicious writer, "has a very impressive effect, 
from being contrasted with the bleak and elevated 
tracts that environ it. Its breadth is in many parts 
two miles, its length between five and six, and its 
depth beiow the general level of the surrounding 
country, nearly 1000 feet. Through its bosom flow 
several meandering rivulets ; and from the north and 
south, various lesser dales open into it from differ- 
ent distances. The villages of Hope, Castleton, and 
Erough, are situated within its limits ; and the for- 
mer, with its spire church, forms a very agreeable 
feature in the scenery when viewed from this part of 
the descent. As the road winds along the declivity, 
the traveller obtains a prospect of Castleton, which 
appears clustered near the bottom of the steep emi- 
nence at whose feet the famous cavern discloses it- 
self, and whose summit is occupied by the ruins of 
the ancient Castle that gave name to the place." 

Near the entrance of the village, a bridge has 
been thrown across the stream which issues from the 
cavern. The buildings are chiefly of stone. The 
support of the inhabitants is mostly derived from the 
mining business, and from the expenditure of those 
who are induced to visit the remarkable places in the 
neighbourhood. A ditch and vallum formerly ex- 
tended in a semi-circular course round (lie village, 
from the rock on which the castle stands, and may 
yet be traced in certain directions. The elevated 
situation of the castle, and the almost perpendicular 
chasms that nearly insulate the eminence which it 
occupies, must, prior to the invention of gunpowder, 
have rendered it almost impregnable. The east and 
south sides are bounded by a narrow ravine, called 
the Cave, which ranges between two vast lime-stono 
rocks, and on the east is nearly 200 feet in depth. 
On the west it is skirted by the precipice which 
frowns over the great cavern, and rears its abrupt 
head to the height of -260 feet. The north side is 
the most accessible, yet even here the path has been 
carried in a winding direction, to obviate the steep- 
ness of the ascent. The Castle-yard, an enclosed 
area, extended nearly over the wliole summit of the 
rock. The wall is nearly in ruins to the level of the 
area ; though, in a few places, on the outside, it 
measures twenty feet -high. On the north side stood 
two small towers. The entrance was at the north- 
east corner, as appears by the remaining part of an 



arched-way. Near the north-west angle is the 
Keep. The walls of this building,,on the south and 
west sides, are tolerably entire : at the north-west 
corner they are fifty-five feet high ; but the north 
and east sides are much shattered. On the outside 
it forms a square of thirty-eight feet two .inches ; 
but on the inside it is not equal, being from north to 
south, twenty-one feet four inches ; from east to 
west, nineteen feet three inches. This ^difference 
arises from a difference in the thickness of the walls, 
which are composed of broken masses of lime-stone, 
and mortar of such an excellent temper, that it binds 
the whole together like a rock : the facings, both 
outside and inside, are of hewn gritstone. In the 
wall within is a little herring-bone ornament. The 
inside, now a complete vacuity, anciently consisted 
of two rooms ; one on the ground floor, and one 
above ; over which the roof was raised with a gable- 
end to the north and south, but not. of equal height 
with the miter walls. The ground floor was about 
fourteen feet high, the upper room about sixteen. 
The entrance to the former appears to have been 
through a doorway on the south side of the upper 
room, by a flight of steps, now wholly destroyed : 
the present entrance is through an opening in the 
wall. At the south-east corner is a narrow winding 
staircase, communicating with the roof, but in a ruin- 
ous condition. 

The antiquity of this castle is considerable. Mr. 
King, who has minutely described it in the sixth vo- 
lume of the Archreologia, imagines it to have been 
a fortress, and place of royal residence, in the Saxon 
times ; but other antiquaries suppose it to be a Nor- 
man structure, built by William Peverel, natural son 
of the Conqueror : the traditions of the neighbour- 
hood also ascribe its erection to him ; and its ancient 
appellation of Peverei's Place in the Peke, counte- 
nances the opinion. It is certain, that Peverel pos- 
SQSsed it at the time of the Domesday Survey, by the. 
name of the Castle of Peke, with the honour and 
forest, and thirteen other lordships in this county. 
About this time a tournament is reported to have 
been held here on the following occasion. 

" Pain Peverel (half brother to William) Lord of 
Whittington, in the county of Salop, had two daugh- 
ters ; oue of whom, named Mellet, was no less dis- 
tinguished by a martial spirit than her father. This 
appeared from the declaration she made respecting 
the choice of a husband. She firmly resolved to 
tnarry none but a knight of great prowess ; and her 
father, to confirm her purpose, and to procure and 
encourage a number of visitors, invited all noble 
young men who were inclined to enter the lists, to 
meet at Peverei's Place in the Peke, and there de- 
cide their pretensions Ly the use of arms ; declaring, 
at the same time, that whoever vanquished his com- 
petitors, should receive his daughter, with his castle 
at Whittiugton, as a reward for his skill and valour. 
Guarine de Rlee/, a branch of the house of Lorraine, 
and an ancestor of the Lords Fitz-Warrine, hearing 
this report, repaired to the place above-mentioned, 

and 



DERBYSHIRE. 



31 



and there engaged with a son of the King of Scot- 
laud, and also with a Baron of Burgoyne, and van- 
ipViishing them both, obtained the prize for which he 
fought." 

The Peverels did not enjoy their estates many ge- 
nerations ; for William Peverel, grandson to the 
first possessor, of this name, having poisoned Ra- 
nulph, Earl of Chester, was obliged, to secure his 
safety by an ignominious flight ; and his castles, and 
other possessions, were left at the King's disposal, 
(Henry II.) by whom they were granted to his son 
John, Earl of Mortaigne, who afterwards succeeded 
to the Crown. In 'the sixth year of the reign of 
John, Hugh de Nevil was made governor of the 
Peak Castle ; but within ten years afterwards it is 
said to have been taken from the Barons who united 
to, oppose the tyranny of the monarch, by William 
de Ferrers, Earl of Derby. In the fourth of Ed- 
ward the Second, John, Earl of Warren, obtained 
a grant of the castle and honour of Peak, in Derby- 
shire, with the whole forest of High Peak, in as 
ample manner as it was anciently enjoyed by the 
Peverels. In the forty-sixth of Edward the Third, 
the castle was granted to John of Gaunt, and from 
that time descended in the same manner as the Du- 
jehy of Lancaster. 

This castle, though almost impregnable from its 
situation, was but ill adapted for any continued de- 
fence ; as there is no appearance of any well or re- 
servoir within its limits, from which the garrison 
could be supplied with water. It should be noticed, 
however, that at no great distance from the Keep, 
near the upper part of the Cave-Valley, there is a 
spring, which, by some contrivance, might have an- 
ciently conveyed water into the fortress. At present 
its waters sink between the clefts of the lime-stone, 
and fall in continued drops from the roof of the great 
cavern at the place appropriately named Roger 
Rain's House. 

CHADDESDEN.] At Chaddesden, a little hamlet 
belonging to the parish of Sponden, in the hundred 
of Appletree, two miles east from Derby, is the seat 
of Sir R. Mead Wilmot, Bart, a descendant of the 
ancient family .of Wyllimot, who resided in the ele- 
venth century at Sutton-upon-Soar, in Nottingham- 



* Tlic ancestor of the noble family of Cavendish, Robert de 
Gernon, came from Normandy with William the Conqueror, 
and contributed considerably to his success. In the reign of 
Edward I. Geoffrey de Gernon, one of the descendants of Ro- 
bert, resided at Moor Hall in this county. Roger, his son, 
married the heiress of John Potten, of Cavendish, in Suffolk ; 
and, following the rustom of the age, his children assumed, in 
compliment to tlfeir mother, the name of Cavendish. Roger 
Cavendish, the eldest, was Lord Chief Justice in 1366; but it 
being reported that his son had shin Wat Tyler, the insurgent* 
who arose in Suffolk to revenge the death of that rebel, seized 
and beheaded him. On his son John, now mentioned, the ho- 
nour of knighthood and an annuity of 40/. for himself and his 
heirs for ever.wvere conferred for his activity in suppressing the 
prevalent insurrections. His great grandson, Thomas Caven- 
dish, WHS Clerk of the Pipe in the Exchequer in the reign of 
Henry VJII.: he had four sons ; the second of whom was the ce- 



shire. The mansion is pleasantly situated, and has 
a handsome appearance. The Wilmots arc Lords oT 
the Manor. 

CHAPEL-IN-THE-FRITH.] This is a neat little 
market-town, in the hundred of High Peak, 38{ 
miles north-west by north from Derby, and 167{ 
north-west by north from London. The market, is 
on Thursday ; and it has fairs on the Thursday be- 
fore the 13th of February; March 24 and 29; 
Thursday before Easter ; April 30 ; Holy Thurs- 
day ; July 7 ; Thursday before August 24 ; Thurs- 
day after September 29 ; and Thursday before No- 
vember 11. The inhabitants are chiefly supported 
by the manufacture of cotton. 

This town is situated on the declivity of a high 
hill, which rises in the midst of a spacious valley, 
formed by the mountains at this extremity of the 
county. The church, which was erected at the 
commencement of the 14th century, has a .square 
tower, in which are six bells ; the east end of thi; 
church was lengthened some years ago at the ex- 
pence of a Mrs. Bower, whose daughter bequeathed 
her harpsichord to the church, with a salary of about 
20/. a year for a person to play, and to provide coals 
to air it. 

CHARLESWORTH.] -Ten miles north-north-west 
from Chapel-in-the-Frith, in the same hundred, is 
Charlesworth, a village of considerable extent. It 
is built on the acclivity of Charlesworth Nich, the 
appellation given to a range of the highest hills in 
this part of the county. The size and population of 
this place have been much increased of late years, 
by the spreading of the cotton works. About one 
or two miles south are collieries, which afford fuel to 
the several villages in this neighbourhood. 

CHATS WORTH.] Chatsworth, the r.enowned seat 
of the Duke of Devonshire, is situated in the parish 
of Edensor, of which it is a chapelry, in the hundred 
of High Peak, three miles and a half east-north-east 
from Bakewell. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, 
the manor was purchased, from the ancient family of 
Leeche, by Sir William Cavendish,* husband to 
Elizabeth, afterwards Countess of Shrewsbury,! 
whose sister married Francis Leeche, of Chats worth. 
Sir William, by the persuasion of his lady, com- 
menced 



lebrated Sir William, who married the Countess of Shrews- 
bury. Edensor church contains, besides a tomb for the first 
Earl of Devonshire, a splendid monument for Henry, the eldest 
son of Sir William, who, from his notorious gallantries, was 
called by Sir Sampson Degne, in a letter published in Erd^s- 
wick's Survey of Staffordshire, the Common Bull of Derby- 
shire and Staffordshire. Here is also a Latin epitaph of con- 
siderable length for one of the domestics of the Queen of Scots, 
who died while in her service at Chatsworth. , 

( This lady, who was much celebrated for her beauty and 
accomplishments, and still more for her extraordinary fortune 
in the world, was daughter of John Hardwick, Esq. in this 
county. At the age of fourteen, she was married to Robert 
Barley, Esq. who, in about two years, left her a very rich 
widow. Her next husband was Sir William Cavendish. Her 
third was William St. Lowe, Captain of the Guard to Queen 
Elizabeth ; and her fourth, George Talbot, Earl of Shrews- 
bury. 



32 



DERBYSHIRE. 



menced a noble mansion-house, on the estate, which, 
after his death, in the year 1537, was carried on and 
completed under the direction of his widow. This 
building was taken down at the latter end of the 
seventeenth century, when William, the first Duke 
of Devonshire, began on the site of the more ancient 
fabric, the present magnificent structure, which was 
finished in the year 1702. 

The situation of Chatsworth House, regarded as 
the first wonder of the Peak, is peculiar and strik- 
ing. It may be said, that the very disadvantages of 
the spot contribute to the beauty of the mansion, and 
by the most exquisite management, have been made 
subservient to the builder's design. On the east 
side not far distant, rises a prodigious mountain, 
thickly planted with beautiful trees : upon the top 
of this mountain mill-stones are procured. Here 
begins a vast extended moor, which for fifteen or 
sixteen miles, towards the north, .has neither hedge, 
house, nor tree, and over which, when strangers 
travel, it is impossible to find their way without a 
guide. Nothing can be more surprising of its kind 
to a traveller, approaching from the north, when, 
after a tedious progress through such a dismal de-- 
sert, on a sudden the guide brings him to a preci- 
pice, where he looks down, from a comfortless, bar- 
ren, and as it appeared, an endless moor, into the 
most delightful valley, and sees a beautiful palace, 
adorned with fine gardens. On the plain, which ex- 
tends from the top of this mountain, is a large body 
of water, which occupies nearly eighty acres, and from 
the aseents round it, receives, as into a cistern, all 
the water that falls ; which, through pipes, supplies 
the cascades, water-works, ponds, and canals, in the 
gardens. Before the west front of the house, which 
is the most beautiful, and where the foundress built 
a fine portal, runs the Derwent, which, though not 
many miles here from its source, is a rapid river, - 
when, by hasty rains, or the melting of snows, the 
hills pour down their waters into its channel. Over 
the river is a stately stone bridge of three arches, 
erected by Paine, and ornamented with figures, 
sculptured by Gibber ; and in an island in the river 
is an aucient fabric, built of stone, in imitation of a 
. castle. The front to the garden is a regular piece 
of architecture. The fri/e under the cornice has the 
motto of the family under it in gilt letters, so large 
as to extend along the whole front, though the words 
are only two, Cavendo Tvtvs ; which is no less ap- 
plicable to the situation of the house, than to the 
name and crest of the family. The sashes of the se- 
cond story are seventeen feet high, of the finest plate 
glass, each frame two feet -wide ; and the wood- 
work double giit. A noble piece of iron-woik gates 
and balusters exposes the front of the house and 
court, terminated at the corners next the road with 



bury. Slie built Chatsworth, Hardwirk, and Oldcotes, all 
magnificent seats in this county. She is said to have been jea- 
lous of the unfortunate Mary, whilst she was under her care at . 



two large stone pedestals of attic work, curiously 
adorned with trophies of war, and utensils of all the 
sciences, in basso relievo. The house is built in the 
Ionic order, with a flat roof, surrounded by a neat 
balustrade. Its form is nearly a square of about 190 
feet, enclosing a spacious quadrangular court, hav- 
ing a fountain in the centre, with a statue of Or- 
pheus. The principal entrance on the west is by a 
noble flight of steps to a terrace, the length of the 
whole building. The fronts which form the qua- 
drangle, are decorated with rich sculptures repre- 
senting military trophies. The stone of which this 
edifice is built is of an excellent sort, veined like 
marble : it was hewn out of the neighbouring quar- 
ries. The interior of this mansion, is splendidly de- 
eorated with painted walls and ceilings ; but it ex- 
hibits few of those facilitating efforts of the pencil 
which enrich the apartments of numerous mansions 
of our nobility. It possesses, however, some attrac- 
tions of another kind, which amply repay the visit- 
ant's attention : we mean, the beautiful carved orna- 
ments by Gibbons ; of whom \Valpole observed, that 
he was the first artist, " who gave the wood the 
loose and airy lightness of flowers, and chained to- 
gether the various productions of the elements, with 
a free disorder natural to each species." " At Bur* 
leigh," observes the same writer, " is a noble pro- 
fusion of his carving, in picture frames, chimney- 
pieces, and door-cases, and the Last Supper in alto 
relievo, finely executed. At Chatsworth, where a 
like taste collected ornaments by the most eminent 
living masters, arc many by Gibbons, particularly in 
the chapel ; in the great anti-chamber are several 
dead fowl, over the chimney, finely executed, and 
over a closet- door, a pen not distinguishable from 
real feathers. When Gibbons had finished his works 
in that palace, he presented the Duke with a point 
cravat, a woodcock, and a medal with his own 
head." 

The Hall, sixty feet by twenty-seven, is rather 
dark, but it has an air of considerable grandeur : the 
ceiling, end, and one side, exhibit representations of 
an Assembly of Gods; Julius Ciesar sacrificing; 
and the Assassination of that Hero, in the Capitol. 
These were originally painted by Verrio and La 
Guerre ; but were judiciously touched some years 
ago. From the hall a double flight of steps, and 
a long gallery, lead to the chapel, which is very ele- 
gantly fitted up, and decorated with paintings by 
Verrio, and a variety of exquisite carving by Gib- 
bons. The altar-piece by the former is one of his 
best performances : it represents Christ reproving 
the Incredulity of St. Thomas. The ceiling is co- 
vered with a painting of the Ascension. 

In the Dining-Room, fifty feet by thirty, is a fine 
whole-length portrait, by Sir Godfrey Kueller, of 



This lady, u ho died in February 1607, was ge- 
nerally distinguished by the name of Bess of Hardwick. 

William, 



DERBYSHIRE. 



William, first Duke of Devonshire, " who was dis- | 
tmguished as a wit, a scholar, a soldier, and a gen- j 
tleman."* 

The Dancing-Gallery, a hundred feet by twenty- I 
two, is exceedingly splendid ; the ceiling and pan- j 
nels are elegantly painted, and the cornices gilt : in 
the coves are various statues. Here are the point- 
cravat, woodcock, and medal, hy Gibbons, already 
mentioned: they are preserved in a glass case. In 
the Dressing- Room to the best Bed-Chamber j is a 
small but beautiful collection of fossils belonging to 
the late Duchess of Devonshire. 

The Music-Room is neatly -painted in imitation of 
marble. It contains the portraits of the late Duchess 
of Devonshire,f and her daughter, Lady Georgiana, 
who married Lord Morpeth ; by Sir Joshua Rey- 
nolds. In the Chintz Bed-Chamber is a good pic- 
ture of Raohael, second Duchess of Devonshire, 
daughter of William, Lord Russel, and four of her 
children, three girls and a boy. 

The State Apartments are on the south side of the 
house: in the First Drawing-Room, thirty-six feet 
by thirty, are the following portraits. John, first 
Duke of Rutland ; obiit 1710, setat 72. William, 
first Earl of Devonshire, ascribed to Myteus ; and j 
declared by Mr. Walpole to be one of the finest sin- ' 
gle figures he had ever seen.^ The Duke of Or- 

* This nobleman was born in the year 1640. In 16G1, he 
represented the county of Derby in Parliament, and four years 
afterwards attended the Duke of York as a volunteer asainst 
the Dutch. He distinguished himself in the Ilou^e of C'om- 
mons against the court, and was a witness in favour of Lord 
Kussel ; he offered also to exchange clothes with that nobleman 
to enable him to effect his escape, which he gallantly refused. 
In 1684 he succeeded to the title of Earl of Devonshire, and 
about the same lime was fined 30.000/. and imprisoned in the 
Kind's Bench, for assaulting Colonel Culpepper in the presence 
chamber. He gave bond for the payment of the line, which, 
however, he saved by the arrival of the Prince ol Orange. In 
168!) he was made a Privy Counsellor, and at the coronation he 
served as Lord High Steward. In 1694 he was created Duke 
of Devonshire, and during the King's absence was one of the 
Urgency, after the death of the Queen. He died 1707. He 
wrote an Ode on the Death of Queen Mary ; and an Allusion 
to the Bishop of Cambfay's Supplement to Homer. 

f Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire, eldest daughter of 
Earl Spencer, and Georgiana his Countess, was bom on the 7th 
June, 1757, and married to the Duke of Devonshire, June 6, 
1774. She was educated with great care by her mother, Lady 
Spencer, and on her appearance in public life, attracted ufl 
eyes by the elegance of her person ami deportment. After her 
marriage, the realm of fashion looked to her as its head, and every 
article of dress was recommended by her name being imposed 
on it. On her presentation to court after marriage, she was 
literally loaded with jewels. Several years elapsed without 
any prospect of issue; but in 1782, was born her eldest 
daughter, now Viscountess Morpelh ; and four years after. 
Lady Henrietta Cavendish; and after four years more, in 
1790, William Lord Cavendish, Marquis of Hartington. She 
had the good sense to suckle her own children ; and her memory 
ought to be venerated, for introducing into the female world of 
fashion, a custom the renunciation of which had proved so in- 
jurious to the iiigher rank 6 of life. In the course of the summer 
179'.!, the Duchess visited the Continent in company with her 
declining mother, and her sister, now the Countess of Be-bo- 
rough. In this tour she was attentive to the foreign literati, and 

VOL. II. NO. 48. 



mond ; two fine whole lengths, said to be Earls of 
Pembroke, with pointed beards, whiskers, Vandyke 
sleeves, and slashed hose ; and an Earl of Devon- 
shire, in the costume of the seventeenth century. 

In the Leicester, or Principal Drawing-Room, is 
a valuable piece by Holbein, representing, in black 
chalk, heightened, the figures of Henry the Seventh, 
and Henry the Eighth, as large as life ; and a fine 
painting by Titian, of Our Saviour, and Mary Mag- 
dalen, in the Garden : the expression in the counte- 
nance of the latter is exquisite. The Scarlet-Room 
was so named from containing the bed in which 
George the Second expired, and which, with the 
Coronation chairs of the present King and Queen, 
became the perquisites of the late Duke, as Lord 
Chamberlain ; the chairs are preserved in another 
apartment. 

The stiita of rooms called Mary, Queen of Scots', 
is thought to correspond in situation with those in- 
habited by that beautiful but indiscreet princess, 
when a prisoner in the old house at Chatsworth, un- 
der the care of the Earl of Shrewsbury. Thirteen 
years of her long captivity were passed here ; and 
from this place she wrote her second letter to Pope 
Pius, bearing date the 31st of October, 1570. Her 
bed, of red velvet, richly laced with silver, is still 
preserved. 



visited the most eminent among them. She also composed se- 
I veral pieces with considerable taste. She was, indeed, a pa- 
! troness of the Muses, of their votaries, and of those polite arts 
j which claim alliance with the divinities of Parnassus. It is even 
thought, that her benevolence on such occasions, not unfre- 
j quently suffered imposition from the frauds of the designing; 
and hence, among oilier causes, she experienced inconveniencies 
which should not have attached to her rank. Politics for awhile 
engaged her attention too strongry ; neither her person, her 
manners, nor her rank qualified her for an election canva-ser, 
] nor for that laborious attendance on political debates which oc- 
! casionally tries the utmost powers of a masculine constitution. 
Her dominion was the region of fashion aad taste. When her fa- 
mily increased, she became the attentive nurse, ami the careful 
mother. Benevolent herself, not a;<t to think ill of others, nor 
to anticipate evil ; she was nevertheless, the subject of uneasi- 
ness, and at length was carried off (about Hie latlcr end of 1806 
or the beginning of 1807) by a disorder of which none of the 
physicians who attended her could discover the nature, or the 
origin. They even obtained leave to open the body after her 
decease, yet still remained ignorant of the catut of that event. 
Whatever it might be, or irm whatever source derived, her 
friends of the highest rank, affection itely deplored her loss. 
The truly ingenuous united in tiie same affliction, and the 
public opinion, which censured some parts of her conduit with 
no little severity, subsided into a softened recollection of her 
beaulv, her affability, and her benevolence. 

This nobleman was second son to Sir William Cavendish, 
and the Countess of Shrewsbury, through whose affection ami 
management he became possessed of a larger fortune than Ms 
elder brother. He contributed greatly towards the establish- 
ment of the English Colonies in Virginia and the Ber mufti 
Islands. After the death of his brother, in the year IfiiS, hi 
was created Earl of Devonshire by James the First. He rlie4 
in 1625, and was buried at Edensor, where an elegant L : i 
epitaph, inscribed on his tomb, represents him as a " Maii Been 
to execute every laudable enterprise; anil in the simplicity of 
virtue, rather deserving than courting gtery:" 

i Distant 



84 



DERBYSHIRE. 



Distant about 250 yards from the house, on a 
more elevated spot, are the Great Stables ; the west 
and north fronts of which are somewhat in ore than 
200 feet in length. These are handsome, and we\\- 
dtsposed : they were erected, with the bridge, about 
fifty years ago. 

Chatsworth Park extends over a circumference of 
nine miles, and is beautifully diversified v, ith hill and 
dale, as well as various plantations, which range in 
fine sweeping masses over the inequalities of the 
ground. The prospects from different parts are 
eminently fine ; and one view, looking back from the 
south, possesses extraordinary grandeur. Immedi- 
ately below the eye is the rich vale nnimated by the 
meandering current of the silver Derwent ; more 
distant is the house, with a fine back ground of 
wood, rearing in solemn majesty ; and far beyond, 
the blue hills of Castleton skirting the horizon. 

The Water-Works, which, sixty or seventy years 
ago, gave the gardens of Chatsworth a celebrity not 
yet lost, are situated near the south-east and south 
sides of the house. They are still, we believe, in 
tolerable order ; but they generally fail to interest, 
the taste of the present day regarding them only as for- 
mal puerilities. The great Cascade, consisting of a 
series of steps or stages, extends a considerable dis- 
tance down a steep hill, crowned at the top by a 
temple, which, as already mentioned, is supplied 
with water from a reservoir. Mr. Warren observes, 
that " this fane should certainly be dedicated to 
Mercury, the god of fraud and deceit, as a piece of 
roguery is practised upon the incautious stranger 
within its very sanctuary ; from the floor of which a 
'multitude of little fountains suddenly spout up whilst 
he is admiring the prospect through the portal, and 
quickly wet him to the skin." When the cascade is 
put in motion, the water rushes in vast quantity, and 
with prodigious force, from the domed roof of the 
temple, and from a variety of lions' heads, dolphins, 
sea nymphs, and other figures that ornament it ; and 
falling into a bason in front of the building, from 
which also several fountains issue, it is thence dis- 
charged down the steps, and having reached the 
bottom, disappears by sinking into the earth. Here 
is also a copper free, made to represent a decayed 
willow, the branches of which produce an artificial 
shower ; some sea horses, and a triton, from whose 
heads small streams issue ; and a fountain which 
throws up 'the water to the height of thirty yards. 

On the most lofty part of the eminence which 
rises on the east side of the house, is the Huating 
Tower, a building supposed to have been erected as 
a station where the female visitants at Chatsworth 
could partake in the diversion of stag-hunting with- 
out incurring Its danger; as its height being ninety 
feet enabled them to overlook the neighbouring 
lulls. Its form is square, with a round tower at each 
angle. To the north of the bridge, in a different 
part of the grounds, stands another tower, sur- 
rounded by a moat, called the Bower of Mary, Queen 
ef Scots, from that princess having spent many bourg 



of her confinement, in a garden that was situated on 
its summit. 

CHELMORTON.] The little Tillage of Chelmorton, 
in the hundred of High Peak, four miles and three 
quarters south-west from Tideswell, is seated at the 
foot of a considerable eminence, on the summit of 
which are two extensive barrows, within a short dis- 
tance of each other. The circumference of the 
largest is about 240 feet, and that of the latter about 
200 : each of them has a circular cavity or ba- 
son on the top. In the year 1782, a barrow, about 
the size of the largest of these, and described by Mr. 
Pilkington as situated about a quarter of a mile to 
the north-east of Chelmorton, was opened by some 
labourers, who were searching for stone to erect * 
walled fence in a neighbouring field. " After re- 
moving a covering of moss and soil from the lower 
extremity of the mount or barrow, they discovered a 
kind of breast-work, or regular wall, of single stones 
formed without mortar. Not apprehensive of meet- 
ing with any thing extraordinary beyond this wall, 
tkey proceeded with their work, but were soon -sur- 
prised by the sight of several human bodies. They 
found that the wall was at the end of a cell or coffin, 
iti which the bodies had been deposited. The breadth 
of the cell within was two feet, but its depth was not 
fully ascertained, though supposed to be about a 
yard. The sides consisted of stones about eight 
inches thick, and two feet wide : they were placed on 
their edge, and formed a kind of partition : the stones 
used for the covering were from one to -three inches 
thick, but not larger. 

" Though some of the stones and a small quan- 
tity of the soil had fallen into the vault, yet several 
human bodies or skeletons might be clearly distin- 
guished lying at full length, with their heads towards 
the centre of the mount. The bones had never been 
disturbed, and were apparently united at the differ- 
ent joints, but by the slightest motion were found 
to be entirely loose, and unconnected ; upon exami- 
nation they were discovered to be remarkably strong 
and sound ; the ribs in particular were so little de- 
cayed that they would easily bend without breaking. 
Those who saw the bones thought that they were 
uncommonly large ; and it was imagined that the 
persons to whom they belonged must have been 
when alive at least seven feet high ; the tweth were 
sound and perfect. From the number of bones and 
skulls, and the dimensions of the vault, it was s\Vp- 
posed that it contained about four or five human 
bodies, and though only one vault was opened, it 
was presumed that others were carried throughout 
the whole circumference of the mount, and might be 
about, twenty in number." 

CHESTER, LITTLE.] Little Chester, the Dcrveu- 
tio of the Itinerary, is situated in the hundred of 
Morleston and Litchurch, one mile north-east from 
Derby. It derived its Roman name from its situa- 
tion on the bank of the Derwent. Very few vestiges 
of the ancient station are now to be seen, though 
Dr. JStukeley traced the track of the wall quite 



DERBYSHIRE. 



round ; and in some places saw, under ground, the 
foundation of it in the pastures. Within the walls 
were the foundations of houses ; and in the fields 
round what is called the Castle, the track of the 
streets, laid with gravel, might be seen ; particularly 
in a dry summer, when the superincumbent grass 
was bare. Several wells have been found, some of 
which are square, and curbed with good stone. 
Abundance of Roman coins of gold, silver, and 
brass, have been dug up here ; and earthen pipes, 
the remains of aqueducts, ami various other anti- 
quities, have been discovered. Towards the river 
human bones, brass rings, &c. have also been 
found.* 

CHESTERFIELD.] Chesterfield is a large, but ir- 
regularly built market-town, situated in the hundred 
of Scarsdale, 25 miles north by east from Derby, 
and 151 1 north-north-west from London. It lies 
between two rivulets, the Hyper and Rothcr, in the 
beautiful and fertile vale of Scarsdale, and is the se- 
cond considerable town in the county. The Saxon 
name of Chester proves it to be a place of great an- 
tiquity, and the Rev. Mr. Pegge imagines it to have 
originated in a Roman station, on the road from 
Derby to York, which he supposes to have been 
fixed on an eminence, called Tapton, or Topton, at 
the point named Windmill Hill, but distinguished in 
several ancient writings by the appellation of Castle 
Hill. As to the site of Chesterfield," says lie, 
" it lies so under the Castle Hill at Topton, or Tap- 
ton, that when it became a place of note, it would 
rationally be called The field of the Chester, or Cas- 
tle." However, at the time of the Norman Survey, 
it appears to have been of such little importance as 
to be noticed in the Domesday Book only as a baili- 
wick, belonging to Nowbold, now a small hamlet at 
a short distance to the north. Subsequently to this 
period, its size and popularity more rapidly increas- 
ed : a church, erected towards the conclusion of the 
leventh century, was granted ivy William Rufus to 
the cathedral ot Lincoln. In the reign of John, the 
manor was granted to William de Bruere, his par- 
ticular favorite, through whose influence the town 
was incorporated, and an annual fair of eight days 
continuance, with two weekly markets obtained. 
The present market-day is Saturday ; and the fairs 
are en the 27th of January, tiie 28th of February, 
the first Saturday in April, the 4th of May, the 
'4th of July, the 25th of September, and the last Sa- 
turday in November. The charter, granted by King 
John, lias been confirmed and enlarged by several 
succeeding Sovereigns. The government of the 



* The late eminent antiquary, Mr. 'Pegge, in his investiga- 
tion of (he courses of Hie Konian roads in liiis county, slates, 
that there was one which led from this station to Chesterfield ; 
and he particularly describes several places where it was visible 
in the year 1700, for a considerable length together, between 
Little Chester and Tuplon Moor, from which place it pointed 
directly towards Chesterfield, liut could not be traced any 
further, through the connlry having been long in tillage. 



town appears to have been exercised by an alder- 
man and twelve brethren -till the reign of Elifcabeth ; 
but the charter of the corporation granted by her, 
vests it in a mayor, six aldermen, a town clerk, and 
a common council of twenty-four of the jjrincipal 
inhabitants. The petty sessions for the hundred arc 
holden here. 

From the De Brueres, the manor of Chesterfield 
passed in marriage to the family of Wake, and after- 
wards (also by marriage) to Edward Plantagenet, 
Karl of Kent, whose descendants held it for several 
generations. In the 20th of Edward HI. it was 
held by John, second son of Edmund of Woodstock ; 
and in the year 13SO, by Sir Thomas Holland, from 
whom it passed to the Nevilles. In the reign of. 
Queen Elizabeth, it belonged to George, Earl of 
Shrewsbury ; and afterwards it became the property 
of the Cavendishes, by purchase, from whom it de- 
scended to the late Duke of Portland ; but it has 
since passed, in exchange, to the Duke of Devon- 
shire. 

This town is memorable in history, from a 
battle fought here in the year 12(16, between Henry, 
nephew of Henry III. and Robert de Ferrers, the 
last Earl of Derby. After the discomfiture of the 
Barons at Eversham, this Earl bouud himself by an 
oath, to a forfeiture of his estate and honours, if ever 
he joined their party again ; but after some proceed- 
ings in the Parliament, held at Northampton in 1205, 
which were particularly obnoxious to the Barons, 
he, in the spring of the ensuing year, again assem- 
bled his followers in his castle at Dufiield, and, being 
supported by several disaffected nobles, took his 
station at Chesterfield. In this place, being some- 
what surprised by the forces of Henry, he was de- 
feated after a severe conflict. He fle'd, and conceal- 
ed himself beneath some sacks of wool, in the church. 
His enemies being informed of the place of his re- 
'trcat by the treachery of a woman, he was seized 
and carried in irons to Windsor ; but, after an im- 
prisonment of three years, set at liberty, on certain 
conditions, which being unable to perform he was 
deprived of his estates and earldom. The King 
granted these immense possessions to his son Edmund 
Crouchback, from whom they were conveyed by 
marriage to John of Gaunt, and thus became part 
of the Duchy of Lancaster. In the civil wars the 
Earl of Newcastle defeated some troops of the Par- 
liament in this place. 

Chesterfield, as appears from the parish register, 
has been more than once visited by that dreadful 
calamity the plague : that which begau in Octo- 



He observe 1 !, that this road cnme out of Staffordshire, over 
Blgttgtal Heath, by Little. Over, Nun's Green, and down 
Darky Slade, to the river, where it crossed the bridge to Lit- 
tle Chester. Hence he traces it over Morley Moor by Hors- 
ley Park, near a Roman camp on Pentrich Common to Oker- 
tliorp ; then by Alfreton, Shirland Hall, and Higham, through 
Strelton, Clay Cross, and Eg-stow Farm, to Tuptou Moor. 

ber, 



DERBYSHIRE. 



her, 1586, has been called the great plague, to dis- 
tinguish it from a less fatal infection, which broke 
out iti the year 1608-9. 

Previously to the tenth of Richard I. an hospital 
for lepers was founded in this town, and continued 
till the time of Henry VIII. Here was also a guild, 
dedicated to St. Mary and the Holy Cross, which 
had its origin in the reign of Henry II. who^main- 
tained two or three priests in the church. Several 
other guilds are mentioned in ancient writings be- 
longing to the corporation ; and from the chapel of 
one of them called St. Helen's, the grammar-school 
is supposed to have received the name Chapel- 
School, by which it is generally distinguished. This 
school was founded in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, 
and was formerly the largest in the north of Eng- 
land : both the master and usher are clergymen. 
The present school-house was erected in the year 
1710. There are several almshouses in different parts 
of the town. 

In the year 1787, Chesterfield was found to con- 
tain 801 houses, and 3626 inhabitants ; in 1801, the 
number of the former was 9-20, of the latter 4267 ; 
and, according to the Population Returns of 1811, 
the number of houses was 979, that of inhabitants 
4476 ; of which 2025 were males, and 2451 females. 
The inhabitants chiefly derive their support from the 
iron works in the town and neighbourhood. Here 
are also three potteries for the manufacture of coarse 
earthenware ; and carpets, stockings, and shoes, 
for the London market, are made here in large 
quantities. 

Some years ago an elegant assembly room was 
built at the Castle Inn, for the accommodation of the 
more respectable inhabitants. 

Some years ago, also, a neat town-hall was built, 
in the market place, under the direction of Mr.Carr, 
of York ; on the ground-floor of which is a goal 
for debtors, and u residence for a goaler ; and on 
the second floor, a large room for holding the ses- 
sions, &c. 

From this town, the Stanhopes, Earls of Chester- 
field, take their title. 

The church, dedicated to All Saints, is a spacious 
and handsome building ; but it is particularly re- 
markable for the appearance of its spire, which rises 
to the height of 230 feet ; and is so singularly twist- 
ed, and distorted, that it seems to lean in whatever 
direction it may be approached. The church is said 
to have been dedicated in the year 1232 : it is built 
in the form of a cross. In the chancel is the burial- 
place of the respectable family of the Foljambes, 
whose ancient seat was at the hainlet of Walton, in 
this parish. On the floor are two beautiful brasses 
of Godfrey Foljambe and Catherine his wife. There 
are also two very ancient tombs, with Latin in- 
scriptions, of which the following are transla- 
tions : 

" Here lies Mr. John Pypys, chaplain to Hie guild 
of the Holy Cross, who died the eighth day of the 



month of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand 
four hundred nd two; lo whose soul may Almighty 
God be merciful, Amen." 

" Underneath is deposited the body of John Ver- 
dou, formerly rector of Lyndelby, in the county of 
Nottingham, in the diocese of York, and chaplain of 
the Chantry of St. Michael the Archangel, in the pa- 
rish ot AH Saints, in Chesterfield, who d:ed tlie second 
day of the month of May, in the year of our Lord 
1JOO. I desire you to pray for his soul, as you would 
pray for your own soul." 

On a handsome marble mural monument, in the 
chancel, is the following memorial for the ancestor 
of the Heathcotes, whose large wealth, originally 
acquired by lead merchandise in this town, has been 
diffused through several very opulent branches : 

" At the foot of this lyeth in hopes of a blessed re- 
surrection, the body of Gilbert Heathcote, late ot this 
towne, Gentleman, who departed this life tiie 24th 
April, 1690, in the G5lh year of his age. By his wife, 
Ann, the daughter of Mr. George Dickens of this 
towne, he had 8 sons and 1 daughter, viz. Gilbert, 
John, Samuel, Elizabeth, Josiah, William, Caleb, 
George, and Thomas, of which \L\\i. and Thomas 
dyed in their infancy, but he had the particular blc-ss- 
ing to see all the rest Merchant Adventurers either in 
England, or foreign parts." 

In the transept is a record of a legacy of 1300/. 
bequeathed for putting out boys to trade, or to the 
sea-service ; but limited to those only who reside in 
the borough, and do not receive alms. 

CODNOR.] This is a little hamlet in the parish of 
Hcanor, in the hundred of Morleston and Litchurch, 
four miles and a quarter south-south-east from Al- 
frcton. Here, on an elevated site, are the remains 
of a castle, which, in the reign of Henry the Third, 
was the chief seat of Richard de Grey, whose de- 
scendants, the Barons Grey of Codnor, possessed it 
till the eleventh of Henry the Seventh, when it pass- 
ed to Sir John Zouch. John Zouch, Esq. sold the 
estate upwards of a century ago. It afterwards be- 
came the property of the Masters, one of whom in- 
habited the castle in the year 1712. The remains 
standing, indicate its having been a place of consi- 
derable extent : in the walls are some singular re- 
cesses ; and on the east side was a deep ditch. 

CROMFORD.] The village of Cromiord, situated 
on the banks of the Derwent, is in the Wapentake 
of Wirksworth, two miles north-north-east from 
that town. It was here that Sir Richard Arkwright 
erected his first, cotton mill, on improved principles. 
Here are now two, which, with a third at Masson, 
also built by Sir Richard, employ about an hundred 
and fifty men, three hundred women, and seven 
hundred children. In these mills, proper attention 
is paid to the health and morals of the children, who 
are kept some time at school previously to their ad- 
mission ; and they afterwards continue to be instruct- 
ed at Sunday schools. The mills are never work- 
ed by night, and are always kept particularly clean. 
Both the mills at Cromford are worked by the. water 
2 flowing 



DERBYSHIRE. 



flowing from Oomford south', the fall from the 
mouth of which to the Dei-went is nearly five-and- 
fofty feet ; this sough throws out from forty to fifty 
tons of water per minute, and being partly supplied 
from the warm springs, the most severe frosts never 
interrupt the working of the mills. 

The establishment of the first of these mills at 
Cromford proved a source of much legal conten- 
tion ; for the manufacturers of Lancashire, appre- 
hensive that it would supersede the use of hand ma- 
chines, which has actually been the result, formed a 
combination to impede its success, and, by contest- 
ing the originality of the invention, to destroy the 
validity of the patent. In two instances, from par- 
ticular circumstances, they obtained a favourable 
verdict, and lost it in a third. No doubt can exist 
but that every really essential part of the machinery 
was constructed by the genius of Sir Richard Ark- 
wright. * Since this invention was perfected, the 
goods manufactured by the cotton from these mills, 
are superior in quality, and made with much less ex- 
pence. Hosiers use a great quantity of the cotton 
spun by this machinery, as they find it more suitable 
to their purpose than any other. 

Cromford manor was purchased by Sir Richard 
Arkwright, of Sir Peter Nightingale, in the year 
1789 ; since which period, from the establishment of 
the cotton trade, its population has greatly increas- 
ed. In the year 1801, it had 208 houses, and 1115 
inhabitants: in 18 11, it had 239 houses, and 1259 in- 
habitants. 

This village has a small but very neat chapel, 
built of hewn stone, begun by Sir Richard Arkwright, 
and completed, since his decease, by his sou. The 

* The machinery by which the cotton is manufactured, is 
so complicated, that a clear conception of its nature can be 
obtained only from a minute inspection of all its parts, in a 
state of rest, and also in motion. A description of the process 
by which the raw cotton is prepared for use, will, however, 
convey some idea of the ingenious mechanical contrivances 
which are employed to facilitate the production of the thread. 
When the cotton is sufficiently picked and cleaned (an opera- 
tion performed by the women) it is carefully spread upon a 
cloth, in which it is afterwards rolled up in order to be carded. 
To the carding machine belong two cylinders of different dia- 
meters ; the larger of which is covered with cards of fine wire ; 
and over, and in contact with it, are fixed a number of sta- 
tionary cards, which, in conjunction with the revolving cylin- 
ders, perform the operation of carding. The smaller cylinder 
is encompassed by fillet cards, fixed in a spiral form ; and is 
also provided with an ingenious piece of machinery, called a 
crank. The spiral roll of cloth before mentioned being applied 
to the machine, is made to unroll very slowly, by means of 
rollers, so that it may continually feed the larger cylinder wilh 
its contents: when carded, the cotton passes from this to the 
smaller cylinder, which revolves in contact with the other, 
and is thence stripped off by the motion of the crank ; not in 
short lengths, but in continuation ; and having the appearance 
of a very thin fleece, which, if not intended to pass a second 
time through the curding machine, is immediately contracted, 
by passing between a pair of rollers, into what is calltd a 
" row," or lenefh. The next part of the process is that of siz- 
ing The machine by which this is performed has two pairs of 
rollers, which are placed at a proper distance from each other, 
and revolve with different velocities. When the lengths of 
VOL. II. KO. 48. 



first opening was on the 1th of June 1797", and it* 
consecration in the following September. It con- 
tains a handsome marble font, an organ, and two 
| small galleries for the children of the Sunday- 
i school. 

At Cromford, the owners of cows have instituted 
a society to insure against the losses incident to that 
kind of property. The cows are valued twice a 
year, and each member pays monthly, according to 
the value of his stock, and at the rate of one penny 
per pound. When the fund amounts to 40/. the 
payments are discontinued, till it is reduced below 
that sum ; and when any member's cow dies, he re- 
ceives the full extent of its worth. 

From one to four hundred tons of calamine, are 
prepared annually in this village by a Birmingham 
company. This ore is obtained on the estate of Mr. 
Arkwright. 

On the left of the road leading towards Wirks- 
worth, stands an alms-house, or, as it is called, a 
Bead House, built by Dame Mary Talbot, for six 
poor women, in the year 1051. This lady was the 
widow of Sir William Armyne, Hart, and daughter 
and co-heir of Henry Talbot, Ksq. fourth son of 
George, Karl of Shrewsbury. 

At a perforated rock near Cromford, called Scar- 
thin Nick, about 200 Roman coins were found some 
years ago ; they were copper, and chielly of the lower 
empire. 

DALE ABBEY.] Dale Abbey, or DC Parco Stan- 
ley, is a liberty in the hundred of Morleston and 
Litchurch, seven miles east-north-east from Derby. 
" Serlo de Grendon," says Tanner, "temp. Hen. II. 
first placed a prior and convent of black canons here 

cotton are brought from the carding machine, several of them 
together are applied to these rollers ; and the effect produced, 
is not only that the lengths, thus applied in conjunction, 
coalesce, and come out singly, hut also that the fibres of the 
cotton are drawn out longitudinally, by the different velocities 
and pressure of the rollers: hence the cotton is termed a 
" drawing." This process is several times repented, anil seve- 
ral drawings are each time united, by passing together between 
the rollers ; the number introduced being so varied, that the 
last drawing may be of a size proportioned to the fineness of 
the thread into which it is intended, to be spun. The cotton is ' 
now in a fit state for " roving." This operation is performed 
by passing the last mentioned drawing between two pairs of 
rollers, as in the former machine. It is then received into a 
round conical " can," revolving with considerable swiftness. 
This gives the drawing a slight twisting, and prepares it for 
winding, which is done by hand, upon large bobbins, by the 
smaller children. In this stale, the cotton is applied to the 
spinning machine. Here it is passed between rollers, whi< h 
draw it out, and reduce it to a proper degree of tenuity : at the 
same time, it is sufficiently twisted by the revolving of spindles 
upon which bobbins are placed; and the yarn thus twisted is 
caused to wind on the bobbins, by the friction of their ends 
upon laths placed horizontally. These laths have another very 
essential office to perform, which is that of raising and falling 
the bobbins, so that the yarn may be spread over their who!e 
length ; otherwise the thread would require (o be moved very 
frequently, as is the case in the common spinning wheel. When 
thus wound upon the bobbins, the cotton is regarded as ready 
for use. 



DERBYSHIRE. 



in Depedmle, from the monastery of Calke, but they 
continued not long, and were . ucceeded by two acts 
of Premonstratensians, one from Tupholm, the other 
from Welbeck, but these also forsaking the old place, 
upon part of the neighbouring park at Stanley Wil- 
liam Fitz Rauf, Seneschul of Normandy, and Jef- 
fery de Salicosa Mara, who married Maud his daugh- 
ter, founded A. D. 1204, an Abbey of the Premon- 
stratensian Order, from Nevvhouse, to the honour of 
the Blessed Virgin Mary. It was endowed with 
estates to the yearly value of 144/. 12s. (W. at the 
Dissolution, when Gervas Kingston, Esq. was the 
reputed patron ; the site was afterwards, 35 Hen. 
VIII. granted to Francis Poole." Mr. Pilkington, 
in his View of Derbyshire, furnishes the following 
amusing and interesting particulars relating to 
Dale Abbey : *' This abbey was a religious house 
of the Premoiistratcusian Order, and dedicated to 
the Virgin Mary. A monk, who belonged to it, has 
left in manuscript a history of its foundation, as re- 
lated by Maud de Salicosamara, who built the 
church belonging to the abbey. The'principal facts 
and circumstances recorded in this history are 
these. 

" There once lived in the street of St. Mary in 
Derby, a bsike.r, who was particularly distinguished 
by his great charity and devotion. Alter having 
spent many years in acts of benevolence and piety, 
he was in a dream called to give a very trying proof 
of his good principles ; he was required by the Vir- 
gin Mary to relinquish all his worldly substance, to 
go to Depe Dale, and .to lead a solitary life in the 
service of her son and herself. He accordingly lei't 
all his possessions, and departed entirely ignorant 
of the place to which he should go. However, di- 
recting his course towards the east, and passing 
through the village of Stanley, he heard a woman 
saying to a girl : ' Take with thee our calves, and 
drive them to Depe Dale, and return immediately.' 
R-garding this event as a particular interposition of 
Divine Providence, he was overwhelmed with asto- 
nishment, and drawing near, he snid, " Tell me, 
good woman, where is Depe Dale?" when he re- 
ceived this answer, ' Go with the girl, and she if you 
please will shew you the place.' Upon his arrival he 
(bun I it a very marshy land, and very distant from 
all human habitation. Proceeding from hence to the 
east he came to a rising ground, and under the side 
of the hill cut in the rock a small dwelling, and built 
an altar towards the south, and there spent day and 
night in the divine service, with hunger, thirst, cold, 
.an c I want. 

" It happened that one day a person of great 
onsequence, by name Ralph, the son of Jeremund, 
came in pursuit of the diversion of hunting, into 
his woods at Ockbrook, and when he approached 
the place where his hermit lived, and saw the smoke 
rising from his cave, he was filled with indignation 
and astonishment that any one should have the rash- 
ness and effrontery to make for himself a dwelling 
in his woods wituout his permission. Going then to 



the place, he found a man clothed with old rags and 
skins ; and inquiring into the cause and circum- 
stances of his case, his anger gave way to the emo- 
tions of pity, and to express his compassion he 
granted him the ground where his hermitage was 
situated, and tithe of his mill at Burgh, now Burrow- 
ash, for his support. 

" It is related that the old enemy of the human 
race then endeavoured to render him dissatisfied 
with his condition, but thal^e resolutely endured 
all the calamities of his situation. One of the" 
greatest evils which he suffered was from want of 
water ; but from this he was relieved by discover- 
ing a spring in the western part of the valley. Near 
this he built a cottage, and an oratory in honour of 
the blessed Virgin, and ended his days in the service 
of God. 

" Serto de Grendon, Lord of Badely, a knight of 
eminent valour, great wealth, and distinguished 
birth, who married first Margery, the daughter of 
the above Ralph, and afterwards Maud, Lady of 
Celston, gave (1st of Henry II.) to his godmother, 
during her life, the place of Depe Dale, with iU 
appurtenances, and some other land in the neigh- 
bourhood. She had a son whom she educated tor 
holy orders, that he might perform divine service in 
her chapel at Depe Dale, and herself resided at a 
small distance southward of this situation. But in 
a short time afterwards, with the consent and appro- 
bation of this venerable matron, the above Serto de 
Grendon invited canons from Calke, and gave them 
the place at Depe Dale. 

" When these canons were settled here, they, with 
immense labour and expence, built a church and 
other offices. Their prior also went to the court of 
Rome, and obtained several important privileges for 
them ; and the place was much frequented by per- 
sons of all ranks, some of whom were large bene- 
factors to this establishment. 

" However, in process of time, when the canons 
already mentioned had been long separated from 
the social conversation of men, and became corrupt- 
ed by the prosperity of their situation, they began to 
grow negligent of the divine service. They fre- 
quented the forest more than the church, and were 
r.iore intent upon hunting than prayer and medita- 
tion. But the King, hearing of their insolent con- 
duct, commanded them to resign every thing into 
the h nds of their patron, and to return to the 
place from whence they came." 

These canons were, however, soon afterwards 
Succeeded by six white canons of the Premonstra- 
tensian Order, to whom the Park of Stanley was 
given, but how or by whom the writer of the history 
acknowledges himself i : norant. " But I nope (con- 
tinues Mr. Pilkiugton) I shall be able to throw some 
light upon the doubtful point, by means of the 
obliging information of the Rev. Robert Wilmot, of 
Morley. 

" One of the windows of the church at Morley 

consists of painted glass, with inscriptions, which 

7 are 



DERBYSHIRE. 



are plainly designed to record some remarkable 
events. The glass was brought from Dale Abbey, 
vrheii it was dissolved, and was intended to convey 
an idea of the following circumstances. 

" According to tradition the keepers of the Park 
or Forest, being disturbed by the encroachments of 
the monks, carried their complaints to the King ; 
and with a view of representing this fact, they are 
painted upon tlio i _,ivt'ii habits, standing be- 

fore him with tlii n, Whereof we com- 

plain unto the Kin- ,' Jrthey receive this answer, 

Go and tell him to comfe to me.' In another part 
of the window the person against whom the com- 
plaint is lodged, appears kneeling before the King. 
With a view of adjusting the dispute, and giving 
satisfaction to both parties, the King it is said grant- 
ed to the canons at Depe Dale as much land as be- 
twixt two suns could be encircled with a plough 
drawn by deer, which were to be caught from the fo- 
rest. This is expressed by two other inscriptions : 

* Go take them, and tame them.* ' Go take ground 
with the plough.' We find that this determination 
of the King was carried into execution : for upon 
the glass is painted a man with a plough drawn by 
deer, with these words underneath : ' Here Sir Ro- 
bert plougheth with them.' What extent of ground 
was encompassed in this way cannot now be ascer- 
tained. But it is probable that it comprehended 
the precincts of the abbey, or the whole liberty f 
Dale. 

" The canons, in whose favour this grant was made, 
experienced many difficulties and distresses in their 
new situation. Having passed six years in exces- 
sive poverty, they cut the tops of the oaks in the 
Parks, sold them, and returned to Tupholme. To 
supply this loss of worshippers, William de Grendon 
sent for and procured five canons of the Premonstra- 
tensian Order from Welbeck ; but they experienced 
no less grievous sufferings than their predecessors, 
and were soon recalled by the abbot. 

" Though every attempt which had yet been 
made to establish a religious house at Depe Dale 
proved unsuccessful, effectual steps were at length 
taken for the execution of that purpose, through 
tin 1 concurrence and pious zeal of several different 
persons. 

" Geoffry de SalicoSamara or Sauceinere, who had 
married Maud, the grand-daughter of William Jere- 
niiiiul, was promised the village of Stanley as part 
of his wife's dower ; but having no children, this 
pair earnestly entreated their father to offer it to 
God, and to build a religious house in the Park of 
the same village. This request was readily grant- 
ed, and to carry their designs more effectually into 
execution the father sent for William de Grendon, 
his sister's son, who was Lord of Ockbrook, and 
requested him to contribute towards the accomplish- 
ment of their pious intentions. He told his nephew 
that as he was patron of the ancient place of Depe 
Dale, where several different congregations of reli- 
gious men had successively resided, but had been 



driven away by extreme poverty, he wished him to 
resign it for the plantation of a new society, and to 
join with him in providing for its support, out of the 
lands, possessions, and goods which God had grant- 
ed them. 

" This proposal was immediately complied with ; 
the nephew consenting to resign the house with all 
its appurtenances, on condition that divine service 
should be celebrated every day by a priest in the 
chapel of Depe Dale, for his own soul and the souls 
of his ancestors and posterity, and for the souls 
of all those who rested iu Christ there ; and that in 
an inn there, should be placed, on a large tabl;, a 
daily supply from the convent of bread and beer, 
and distributed among the poor of the neighbouring 
forest. 

" The grant, under these conditions, was grate- 
fully accepted by his uncle ; and the execution of 
the whole business was committed to Geoffry and 
Maud Saucemere, nor did they delay a single mo- 
ment the accomplishment of a design which they 
had themselves originally suggested. Having re- 
ceived charters and other instruments necessary for 
the foundation of a religious house, they went to 
New-house in Lincolnshire, and brought from 
thence nine canons, who were admitted into the 
Premonstrateusian Order already established at Depe 
Dale." 

According to tradition, the church belonging to 
the abbey was a very grand and magnificent struc- 
ture ; but scarcely any part of it is now standing, 
except the arch of the east window, which is par- 
tially covered with ivy, and forms a pleasing object. 
The chapel, built by the godmother of Serlo de 
Grendon, stands at a little distance from the abbey 
ruins, and divine service is, we believe, yet regu- 
larly performed in it. Beyond, on a pleasant wood- 
ed hill, is the hermitage, or cave, cut in the rock by 
the poor Baker. This is overhung with trees ; it 
bad originally a window on each side of the door- 
way ; but these have been bricked up, many years. 
The abbey buildings appear to have been of consi- 
derable extent, various parts having been converted 
into dwelling-houses and barns, which yet remain. 
Some of the windows of these houses contain paint- 
ed glass with inscriptions, which sufficiently mark 
their origins. 

DARLEY.] This is a pleasant little village seated 
on the banks of the Derwent, in the beautiful vale 
which extends to Matlock : it is three miles and a 
quarter north-west from that town, in the hundred 
ofHighPeaJc. In the church-yard is a remarkable 
yew-tree, thirty-three feet in girth, which, though it 
has lost many of its branches, is an extraordinary 
specimen of luxurious vegetation. 

DARLEY ABBEY.] Darley Abbey, or Little Der- 
by, is situated in the hundred of Morleston and Lit- 
church, one mile and a quarter north from Derby. 
The origin of this village is connected with the 
establishment of a priory of Austin Canons, which 
was translated hither, from St. Helen's, in Derby, 

in 



DERBYSHIRE. 



in the reign of Henry II. Previously to this, the 
land belonged to Hugh, Dean of Derby, who gave 
it to Albums, Abbot of St. Helen's, for the erection 
of a church, and house for him and his canons. He 
also endowed a new foundation with his patrimonial 
estate in Derby, and witli the patronage of the 
church of St. Peter, and all its appurtenances. The 
possessions and privileges of this establishment con- 
tinued to increase till the period of the Dissolution, 
when its various endowments were valued, accord- 
ing to Dugdale, at 258/. 13*. 5il. The abbey lands 
were exempted from tithe ; anil the abbot was em- 
powered to hold a chapter of the secular clergy, and, 
in conjunction with them, to determine all matters 
which appertained to the office of dean, so far as 
concerned the aftkirs of the different churches in 
Derbyshire presented to the abbey. On these occa- 
sions the interference of the Bishop of the diocese 
only, was allowed. The site of the abbey was 
granted to Sir William West, in the thirty-second 
year of Henry the Eighth. In 1510, the church and 
tombs were sold for 20/. the cloisters for 10/. and 
the chapter-house for twenty shillings. Thus the 
principal buildings were destroyed ; but a few 
walls, and some out-houses, which have been con- 
verted into cottages, still point out the situation of 
the abbey. 

By the erection of a cotton mill, paper mill, &c. 
this village appears to be rising in importance. In 
the year 1801, the population was 615 ; and in 1811, 
it had increased to 790. 

Darley Hall, the seat of Robert Holden, Esq. is 
situated near this village, in the beautiful dale which 
skirts the Derwent. To the east and west, the 
views from this house are confined, by the elevation 
of the adjacent lands ; but, from the north and south, 
they are very fine. 

DERBY.] Derby, the county town, sending two 
members to Parliament, is situated in the hundred 
of Morleston and Litehurch, J26| miles north-west 
by north from London. Its population, in 1801, 
was 10,832 ; in 1811, it had increased to 13,043. 

The origin of this town called Northworthig by 
the Saxons, and Deoraby by the Danes is unknown. 
It is supposed to have been a settlement of the Bri- 
tons ; and, that it was occupied by the Romans, | 
there can be little doubt ; but its earliest period of I 
historical notice is in the ninth century. It was al- i 
ternately held by the Danes and the Saxons, during ! 
the destructive conflicts so long maintained between i 
those nations. In the year 874, it was occupied by i 
the forces of Halfden, a Danish chief, whose head- 

yuarters were then at Reppendune, now Repton. 
u 018, the Danes, who were still its masters, were 
surprised, and completely routed by the heroic 
Ethelfleda, daughter to King Alfred, and princess 
of the Mercians. After a short period, it was reco- 
vered by the Danes, who, in the year 942, were 
again dispossessed by King Edmund, and about the 
same time driven out of all the principal towns in 
the neighbouring couuties. 



| The Domesday Book mentions Derby as a royal 

. borough of Edward the Conftssor's ; observing that 

it contained fourteen mills for grinding corn, and 

243 burgesses, forty-one of whom held twenty-iour 

plough-gates of taxed land. The annual rent then 

paid was 24/. two parts of which belonged to the 

King, and the third to the Earl of Mercia : tolls, 

forfeitures and customs,, were divided in the same 

manner. The death of Edward, and the accession 

of Harold to the throne, proved a source oi much 

calamity to Derby ; for when Hardrada, King of 

i Norway, invaded Northumberland in the year 1066, 

and was joined by Earl Tostig, Harold's brother, 

many of its inhabitants, being the vassals of Edwiue, 

Earl of Mercia, were drawn out to oppose them. 

The forces of this nobleman were united to those 

commanded by Morcar, Earl of Northumberland, 

; but the army was too weak to wrest the palm of 

victory from the contending foe. The Norwegian 

; monarch defeated them with great slaughter ; but 

: within four days he was himself defeated and slain 

by Harold, who had hastily marched from the 

southern coast, where his troops had been previously 

stationed to oppose the threatened invasion of the 

i Norman. 

William's landing at Pevensey, three days after 
the fall of the King of Norway, occasioned the re- 
turn of Harold to the coast of Sussex. He had been 
joined by the scattered forces of Edwine, who pass- 
ing through Derby, again drained its inhabitants to 
recruit his ranks. In the battle of Hastings many 
of them fell, and so slowly was the loss recovered, 
that at the time of the Noruaan Survey, only 140 
burgesses were remaining, of whom forty were mi- 
nors : the number of corn-mills also was reduced to 
ten. When the property of the disinherited English 
was distributed by the Conqueror, Derby, with a 
prodigious rent-roll, was given to his illegitimate 
son William Peverel, with nearly the same emolu- 
ments as had been enjoyed by the Mercian Earls ; 
but as empty houses, and neglected lands, were ill 
adapted to pay levies, encouragement was given to 
population and industry by an augmentation of pri- 
vileges. The annual rent, however, was raised to 
30/. and twelve thraves of corn, about eighteen 
strikes ; and to balance the surcharge, the village of 
Litchurch was added to the town. 

Henry the First bestowed Derby on the Earl of 
Chester, and made it a corporate town. It obtained 
various privileges in the reigns of Henry I. and II. 
Richard I. and King John ; in whose time the bur- 
gesses were returned into the Exchequer, as being 
indebted fifty-six marks for the confirmation of their 
liberties. In the same reign, they were also return- 
ed debtors in sixty marks and two palfreys, for 
holding the town of Derby at the usual fee farm ; 
and 10?. increase for all services, and having such a 
charter as the burgesses of Nottingham have. In 
the twelfth year of the same reign, the burgesses of 
Derby were charged 407. for the fee-farm o! th j 
town, lu the reign of Richard I. a grant was made 

to 



DERBYSHIRE. 



to the burgesses and their heirs, strongly marking 
the iiliberality of that age against the Jews ; none of 
wbom, by this act, were permitted to reside in the 
town. In tiie reign of Edward III. the corporation 
was deprived of its liberties, and summoned into one 
01 the King's courts, to answer " By what authority 
they demanded toll, yej, paid none? Why they 
claimed the exclusive | "ivilege of dying cloth, and 
prohibiting it to be oyfrii in every other plaoe within 
ten leagues, except Nottingham ? They were also to 
declare hy what right they chose a bailiff yearly, and 
why they kept a i'air on Thursday and Friday in 
Whitsun week ; and another oi' seventeen days, at 
the time of the festival of St. James : to explain by 
what authority they had a coroner ; why the bur- 
gesses should not be sued out of their own borough ; 
and wherefore they held weekly markets on Sunday, 
Holiday, Wednesday, and Friday ?" In answer to 
these interrogatories, some mutilated charters were 
produced : but the liberties of the town were not re- 
stored till the inhabitants had paid a fine of forty 
marks, and consented to an increase of rent, -which 
augmented the annual payment of 46/. 16*. James 
I. in the year 1611, granted a charter, which con- 
firmed various privileges bestowed in former reigns, 
and invested the corporation with some additional 
liberties. By this charter, the bailiffs, recorder, and 
town-clerk, or any three of them, were privileged to 
hold a court of record on every second Tuesday ; 
to have the sole return of writs, keep a quarterly 
sessions, two eourts-leet, and six annual fairs ; to be 
toll free throughout the kingdom ; and receive toll 
from all, but the Duchy of Lancaster, which was to 
pay only half the sums charged on the inhabitants 
of other places. In the year 1638, it was determin- 
ed, that the authority of the two bailiffs should, in 
future, be vested in one person, who was to be 
chosen annually, and called Mayor. In 1680, the 
ancient charter was surrendered to Charles the Se- 
cond, and the present charter was obtained at the 
expence of nearly 400/. At this time the corpora- 
tion consists of a mayor, nine aldermen, fourteen 
brethren (from whom the aldermen are elected,) 
fourteen commou-councilmen, a recorder, a high 
steward, and a town-clerk. The privilege of re- 
turning the members to Parliament is possessed by 
the freemen and sworn burgesses, who are about 
700 in number. The assizes are always holden 
here ; and also the petty sessions for the hundred. 
The market day is Friday ; and the fairs are as fol- 
low : January 25; March 21 and 22; Friday in 
Easter week ; Friday after May-day ; Friday in 
Whitsun week ; July 25 ; September 27, 28, and 
29 ; and the Friday betore Old Michaelmas. 

The rage for religious persecution, which distin- 
guished the reign of Mary, was exercised in this 
town on the person of a poor blind woman, named 
Joan Waste, who was burnt for maintaining that 
the sacrament was only a memorial or representa- 
tion ol' the body of Christ; and that the elements 
employed in the ordinance, were merely bread a^d 
VOL. n. NO. 48, 



wine. She was the daughter of a rope-maker, and 
assisted her father in his business ; but being accus- 
ed for heretical opinions, was summoned before the- 
Bishop of the Diocese, whose arguments to induce 
her to avow a belief in the real presence proving in- 
effectual, she was condemned to the flames ; and 
suffered, with exemplary fortitude, at the age of 
twenty-two. She was burnt on the first of August, 
in a deep excavation, called Windmill-pit, near the 
turnpike, on the road leading to Buxtou. 

Derby has been visited by the plague several 
times, and in the year 1592 and 1593, several hun- 
dred inhabitants fell victims to its ravages. In the 
register of All Saints parish it is thus noticed : 
" October, 1592. The plague began in Derby, in 
the house of William Sowter, Bookseller, or 
in the parish of All Saints, in Derby, &c. , and it . 
continued in the town, the space of twelve months 
at the worst, as by the register may appear. "- 
" October, 1593. About this tyme the plague of 
pestilence, by the great mercy and goodness of Al- 
mighty God, stayed, past all expectation of man, for 
it rested upon assudayne at what tyme it was dis- 
persed in every corner of this whole parishe : thir 
was not two houses together fric from it, and yet the 
Lord bad the angell stey, as in Davide's tyme ! His 
name be blessed for ytt." In 1665, when London 
was depopulated by the same dreadful calamity, the 
plague again broke out at Derby, and proved so fa- 
tal, that the country people refused to bring their 
commodities to the market-place. To prevent a fa- 
mine, the inhabitants raised a pile of stones in an 
open space on the west side of the town, near the 
buildings now called Friar-Gate : it received the 
name of Headless Cross, and consisted of four or 
five quadrangular steps, with one large stone cover- 
ing the centre. Hither, after precautionary mea- 
sures to prevent infection, the market people resort- 
ed, and placing their provisions on the ground, re- 
tired to a distance, till the buyer, who was not per- 
mitted to toucli any article before purchased, had 
concluded his agreement, and deposited the money, 
in a vessel filled with vinegar. The plague is s;.id 
to have never infected the premises of a tobacconist,' 
a tanner, or a shoe-maker. 

In the Scotch Rebellion of 1745, Derby was the 
furthest place in England reached by the army of 
the Pretender. With a handful of adventurers, de- 
ceived by the expectation of a mure general rising 
in his favour, this misguided wanderer left Scotland, 
on his march to the metropolis, and arrived in Der- 
by on the 4th of December in that year. His ap- 
pearance was not unexpected, and measures had 
been taken to provide for the safety of the inhabi- 
tants. Nearly 600 men had been raised by a sub- 
scription of the gentlemen of the town and county, 
besides 156 levied and maintained tit the sole ex- 
pence of the Duke of Devonshire. The day previ- 
ously to the arrival of the Scotch army, these forces 
were reviewed, and went through their exercise so 
much to the general satisfaction, that the inhabitants 
L were 



4*2 



DERBYSHIRE. 



were in high spirits. Their terror, however, revived, 
on hearing that the van-guard of the rebels was ad- 
vancing towards Ashborne ; and the confusion was 
greatly increased, by the orders which were given to 
the soldiers to leave the town, and march tor Not- 
tingham. Several of the principal gentlemen and 
tradesmen, conveyed away, or secreted, their most 
valuable effects, and precipitately departed with their 
wives and families. 

About eleven o'clock on the fourth, two of the 
van-guard of the enemy entered the town, proceeded 
to the George Inn, and demanded billets for 9000 
.men. Being informed that the magistrates had left 
the place, they appeared satisfied ; but afterwards 
meeting with ;m alderman, whose lameness had pre- 
vented his flight, they obliged him to proclaim the 
Prince. In a short time, thirty more of their com- 
panions arrived, under the command of JLord Bal- 
merino, and were drawn up in the market-place, 
where they remained till near three, when they were 
joined by Lord Elcho, with the remainder of the 
corps, which constituted the Pretender's life-g-uard ; 
and being composed of the flower of his army, made 
a fine appearance. Soon afterwards, the main body 
marched into the town in tolerable order, six or 
eight a-breast, hut apparently much fatigued, and 
faint with inanition. This part of the army seemed 
a mixture of every rank, from boyhood to old age ; 
they carried eight white standards, with red crosses. 
About dusk, the Prince himself entered the town on 
foot, wearing a green bonnet, laced with gold, a 
white bob-wig, a Highland -plaid, and broad-sword. 
Fie was attended by a considerable body of troops, 
who conducted him to the house of Lord Exeter, in 
Ifull Street, which became his head-quarters. The 
Dukes of Athol and Perth, Lord George Murray, 
Lord Balmerino, Lord Pitslego, with other persons 
of distinction who accompanied him, and his princi- 
pal officers, took possession of the best houses in the 
town, whilst their followers were distributed in those 
of a secondary or inferior order. Many of the inha- 
bitants had forty or fifty men of various ranks quar- 
tered upon them ; and some of the more respectable 
gentlemen, nearly a hundred. In the evening, the 
chiefs of the Pretender's army held a council of war ; 
but the only resolution they appear to have formed, 
was that of levying a contribution ; and every per- 
son in Derby, who had subscribed for the defence of 
the government, was obliged to pay a similar sum to 
the rebels. "The total amount of the money they col- 
lected in various ways, was between two and three 
thousand pounds. Great pains were taken to sup- 
ply these unwelcome visitors with every necessary 
article of food, and every expedient was employed 
to prevent insult and depredation ; but all efforts for 
this purpose proved ineffectual ; for on the second 
day they seized every sort of property, and behaved 
with so much violence, that several gentlemen 
thought it prudent to conceal themselves. They 
also beat up for volunteers, but with very little suc- 
cess, as they were joined by only three idle aud un- 



principled fellows of the lowest class of people ! Oft 
the evening of the second day was held another great 
council, at which their debates grew so very warm, 
that they were overheard by Mr. Alderman Eaton, 
who constantly attended the Duke of Perth, and was 
waiting for him near the Prince's lodgings. The 
final result of their deliberations was to return to the 
north. The principal causes of this resolution were 
supposed to be the very small encouragement they 
had met with on the road, and the great strength 
and quick approaches of the army under the com- 
mand of the Duke of Cumberland. Another cir- 
cumstance is mentioned at Derby, as having had 
some influence on their determination : it is said, 
that when the standard of their Prince was taken 
into his lodg-ings, it was broken at the entrance into 
the door. This incident was considered as ominous 
of their future fate, and the minds of some of their 
chiefs were a good deal affected by it ! Early in the 
morning of the sixth, their drums beat to arms, and 
it was supposed the army was preparing to march 
towards London, as the advanced guard had secured 
the pass at Swarkston Bridge. But about seven 
o'clock they commenced a precipitate retreat upon 
the Ashborne road ; their hussars riding into the 
neighbouring villages, and plundering the inhabitants 
of horses, and whatever other property they imagin- 
ed would be of service. After the whole of these 
unwelcome intruders had quitted Derby, the magis- 
trates ordered a return to be made of the numbers 
quartered in every house during both nights ; when 
the aggregate on the first night, appeared to be 
7008; and on the second, 7148 ; exclusive of wo- 
men and children. The entire number of effective 
men, including the Prince's guard, the guard'of the 
artillery, which consisted of thirteen pieces, station- 
ed on Nun's Green, and the various patroles and 
Gentries, could not be more than about 8000. 

Before we proceed to the description of the build- 
ings in Derby, we shall just pause, to remark, that 
some faint vestiges of an ancient castle may be yet 
traced on the elevated ground at the south-east cor- 
ner of the town, near the inclosure called Castle- 
field. History is silent both as to the time of its 
erection and demolition ; but evidence, as to there 
having been a fortress here, may be found in several 
ancient deeds, which describe a road near the spot 
by the name of Castle-gate. 

All Saints Church is the principal ornament to 
the town ; but it displays a remarkable instance of 
architectural incongruity. The tower was erected 
in the reign of Henry the Eighth, and its upper part 
is richly ornamented with tracery, crockets, high 
pinnacles, and battlements ; but the body is Grecian, 
of chaste proportion, and most classical design. 
The interior is particularly light, elegant, and spa- 
cious. The roof is supported by five columns on 
each side : the windows are large and handsome; 
and the symmetry and hamonious proportions of 
the building aave a very pleasing effect. At the 
west end is a spacious organ-gallery, furnished with 

a good 



DERBYSHIRE. 



a good orgafl : the east end is separated from the 
part of the structure appropriated to public worship, 
by* a rich open screen-work of iron. The portion 
thus cut off from the body of the church is divided 
into three parts. On the northern side is the vestry, 
and east entrance to the church ; the centre is an 
elegant chancel ; the southernmost is the monuinent- 
roorn of the Cavendishes, and many of that illustri- 
ous family are buried in the vault beneath. A splen- 
did mural monument on the south side of this repo- 
sitory, to the memory of the celebrated Countess of 
Shrewsbury, was constructed during her life-time, 
under her own inspection. In a recess in the lower 
part, is the figure of the Countess, arrayed in the 
habit of the times, with her head lying on a cushion, 
and her hands uplifted in the attitude of prayer. 
Beneath is a long genealogical inscription, the bio- 
graphical information of which has been given in a 
note, appending to- the account of Chatsworth, in a 
preceding page. Amongst the other monuments de- 
serving of notice in tins division of the church, is 
one nearly of the height of twelve feet, which stands 
near the centre, and was erected to the memory of 
William, Earl of Devonshire, who died on the -20th 
of June, 1628 ; and Christian, his Countess, the only 
daughter of Lord Bruce, of Kinloss, in Scotland. 
Each side of the monument is open ; and in the 
middle, under a dome, are whole length figures, in 
white marble, of the Earl and his Lady, standing 
upright. The angles on the outside are ornamented 
with busts of their four children ; William, the eldest, 
successor to the Earl ; Charles, Lieutenant-General 
of Horse in the Civil Wars ; Henry, who died 
young ; and Anne, married to Robert, Lord Rich, 
son and heir to Robert, Earl of Warwick. On a 
mural monument, by Rysbrach, to the memory of 
Caroline, Countess of Besborougli, who died in 1760, 
in her forty-first year, is a well-executed figure of 
the Countess, reclining and leaning on a cushion, 
with a book in her hand. Another neat monument,by 
Nollekins,displays the medallion and arms of William 
Ponsonby, Earl of Besborougli, and husband to the 
above lady, who died in the year 1793. Against the 
wall, on the north side of the church, is a curious 
old memorial, in honour of Richard Croshaw, the 
on of a poor nailor in this town, who went to Lon- 
don in a leathern doublet to seek his fortune. Hav- 
ing attained considerable affluence, he bequeathed 
upwards of 4000/. to the corporation of Derby, for 



* ** Dr. Hutchmson," observes Mr. Hutton, " not only 
robscrifced 40/. but, being a man of genteel address, charged 
himself with raising the whole money, and executing a masterly 
work, without a shilliug expence to Ihepansh. He was a com- 
plete master of the art of begging. The people to whom he 
applied were not able to keep their money ; it passed from 
their pockets to his own as if by magic. Wherever he could 
recollect a person likely to contribute to this desirable work, he 
made no scruple to visit him, at his own expence. He took a 
journey to London, to solicit the benefaction of Thomas Cham- 
bers, V.~t\. ancestor to the Earl of Exeter, who gave him 100/. 
If a stranger passed through Derby, the doctor's bow and his 



the maintenance of lecturers, relief of the poor, &c. 
It appears by the inscription, that he was Master f 
the Goldsmith's Company, and Deputy of Broad- 
Street Ward ; and that in the great plague in 1025, 
he remained in the city to provide assistance for the 
poor, though his own safety was by that means en- 
dangered : he died in July, 1831. The donation 
called Croshaw's Dole, is the distribution in this 
church, of twenty-one pence and seven sixpenny 
loaves every Sunday morning, to seven poor persons, 
selected alternately from the five parishes of which 
the town is composed. 

It is believed, that this church lias been twice re- 
built. In ancient writings it is called All-hallows ; 
a name which it still retains amongst the common 
people. In the reign of Edward the First, it was 
exempted from all ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but 
that of the Pupal ! jee, and is now completely inde- 
pendent. It was formerly collegiate, and had a 
master and seven prebendaries, whose income, at the 
period of the Dissolution, amounted to 39/. 12s. 
The house in which the collegians resided, is proba- 
bly that which yet bears the name of the College, 
near the north side of the church. There is a tradi- 
tion, that the tower of All Saints Church was erect- 
ed at the expence of the young unmarried inhabi- 
tants of the town, and an inscription on the north 
and south sides of the i'abric is given in corrobora- 
tion of the tale. The words are, " yeung men and 
maids ;" but the characters are nearly obliterated. 
The height of the tower is upwards of 170 feet. 
The design for the body of the church was executed 
by Gibbs, the ingenious architect of St. Martin's in 
the Kields, London. The money for building it was 
chiefly procured through the indefatigable industry 
of the minister, whose exertions and success are 
thus particularized on a tablet to his memory, placed 
against the interior of the south wall : 



Of y 



In memory 

EVI!" MICHAEL HUTCHINSOV. D. D. 
Late Minister ot (his Church ; 
Who from a pious zeal, anil unwearied implication, 

Obtained Subscriptions) 

And afterwards collected and paid 

Three thousand, two hundred, and fortv-nine pounds, 

And upwards, for y* Rebuilding of this Church: 

He died yc tenth day of June, 

In the vear of our Lord God 

KlDCCXXX.* 



There 



rhetoric were employed in the service ot the church. His an- 
xiety was urgent, and his powers so prevailing that he seldom 
tailed of success. When -the waites fiddled at his door for a- 
Christmas box, instead of sending them away with a solitanr 
shilling, he invited them in, treated them with a tankard of ale, 
and persuaded them out of a guinea. I have seen his list of 
subscribers, which are 589 ; and the sum 3,249V. 1 1*. 6d. But 
it appears, he could procure a man's name by his eloquence 
easier than his money ; for 52 of his subscribers never paid 
their sums, amounting to 137/. Ids. 6d. The remaining 3, II I/. 
15s. being defective, he procured a brief, which added 59S/. 
5s. Gd. more. Still, though assiduity was not wanting, money 

was; 



44 



DERBYSHIRE. 



There are four other churcliss in Derby, respec- 
tively dedicated to St. Alkraund, St. Peter, St. Wer- 
burgh, and St. Michael. The first of these is sup- 
posed to have been founded as early as the begin- 
ning of the ninth century, in honour of Alkmund, 
son of Alured, the deposed King of Northumber- 
land, who was slain in battle, whilst endeavouring 
to reinstate his father. He was first interred at Lit- 
tleshull, in Shropshire ; but his credulous adherents 
having attributed the power of working miracles to 
his remains, he was afterwards removed to Derby, 
and interred in the church which now bears his name. 
His shrine was frequently visited by his country- 
men ; and, previously to the Reformation, many pil- 
grimages were made to his tomb. The age of the 
present church is considerably posterior to the 
Saxon times ; but it is ancient, and exhibits a num- 
ber of rude heads, and other sculptures, as orna- 
ments. 

St. Peter's Church had a chapel founded within 
it, about the year 1530, by Robert Lyversage, a 
dyer of this town. He endowed it for the perpetual 
support of a priest, who was to celebrate divine ser- 
vice every Friday, and afterwards distribute a silver 
penny to thirteen indigent persons of his congrega- 
tion, either men or women. In this church was 
also a ebantry, founded in honour of the Blessed 
Mary. 

St. Werburgh's Church, like All Saints, has a 
tower and body of different orders : both, however, 
appear to have been erected during the seventeenth 
century. The ancient church on this sp'ot was pro- 
bably built before the Conquest ; hut, from being 
situated near the Markeaton brook, its foundation 
was sapped by floods, and in 1601 the tower fell to 
the ground. To prevent a similar accident, a new 
one was built on a more firm basis, but on the east 
side of the body of (he church : the latter suffered 
by another Hood, and fell in the year 1698. The 
interior of the present fabric is light, and hand- 
some. 

St. Michael's Church is a small edifice, present- 
ing nothing remarkable. 

The four last named churches formed part of the 
possessions of the Abbey of Darley ; but having 
been seized by the Crown in the time of Henry the 
Eighth, were afterwards granted to the corporation 
of Derby by Queen Mary, together with the church 
of All Saints. 

Derby contains several meeting-houses for the re- 
spective sects of Presbyterians, Independents, Me- 
tiiodists, Quakers, &.c. 

St. Helen's monastery, which we have before had 
occasion to mention, was situated near the upper 

was; ho therefore sold six burying places in the vault for six 
guiiuMs; and twelve of the principal seats in the church by 
inch of candle, for 475/. \3s which were purchased as free- 
holds by the first inhabitants. Pride influences our actions ; 
nor will it bear contradiction. As the doctor raised the money, 
he justly expected to have the disposal ; but the parish consi- 
dered themselves neglected, and repeatedly thwarted his mea- 



end of Bridge-Gate, on the road leading to Kedle- 
ston. In lowering the ground, in its vicinity, about 
fourteen or fifteen years ago, the workmen discover- 
ed a great number of skulls, and human bones, as 
well as several skeletons. Two of the coffins were 
formed of tbin Hag stones, placecf edgewise in the 
earth, the natural soil serving for the bottoms. The 
covers were also composed of flags placed close to- 
gether, but not jointed. Most of the other bones 
were lying in confusion, without presenting any 
marks of a particular mode of interment, and scarce- 
ly more than a foot and a half or two feet, in the 
earth. It is probable, that this spot was the ceme- 
tery of the monastery, particularly as human bones 
were found through the. space of thirty or forty 
yards. In the skull of an, adult, met with on this 
spot, the teeth of both jaws were complete, and per- 
fectly sound ; though, judging from circumstances, 
it must have been interred several centuries ago ; 
for the monastery, which had originally been found- 
ed for Austin Canons, by Robert de Ferrariis, se- 
cond Earl of Derby, some time between the years 
1 134 and 1153, was, early in the reign of Henry the 
Second, removed to Darley. 

Some of the other religious houses, established in 
this town, continued till the reign' of Henry the 
Eighth ; but others had previously decayed. On 
the north-west side of Nun's Green, anciently called 
King's Mead, was a small nunnery of Benedictines, 
founded about the year 1160, by an abbot of Darley, 
to whom the Bishop of Coventry granted permission 
to consecrate the virgins received into it. This esta- 
blishment was dedicated to St. Mary De. Pratis : its 
endowments were increased both by Henry, the Third 
and Fourth, the former of whom ordered five pounds 
to be paid yearly by the bailiffs, out of the fee-farm 
of Nottingham, that the prayers of the convent might 
j be offered up at the throne of Divine Grace, for the 
| salvation of his father King John. The ancient mil!, 
situated on the Markeaton Brook, on Nun's Green, 
belonged to this foundation, as well as the Green it- 
self, where some vestiges of the nunnery yet remain. 
At the Dissolution its revenues were valued at 18/. 
6s. 8i/. The priory of Dominicans, or Black Friars. 
i which stood near the spot now occupied by a re- 
' spec-table mansion built by Samuel Crompton, Esq. 
in tiie Friar-Gate, was founded previously to the 
twenty-first of Edward the First ; but the exact 
time is uncertain. At the Dissolution its income 
was estimated at 18'. 6?. 2rf. and the site of the 
priory was then granted to John Hynde ; but it was 
I purchased nearly a century ago by the grandfather 
of Mr. Crompton. The present garden is thought 
to have been the friar's cemetery ; as human bones 

sures till, provoked by reiterated insults, he threw up the ma- 
nagement, and left them in a iabuinth of their own creating. 
The re-ult was a considerable expence upon themselves. 
Some things he intended were never limshed ; and sonic 
never begun. He pieached the first sermon, November 25/ 
1725." 

were 



DERBYSHIRE. 



4, 



were discovered there at the time of building the 
house, the foundations of which were laid with 
stones collected from the conventual buildings. A 
cell of Cluniac monks, founded here by Waltheof, a 
Saxon nobleman, and dedicated to St. James, was 
given to the abbey of Bermondsey, in Southwark, 
some time before the year 1140. It stood near the 
brook on the north of St. James's-Lane ; and though 
reckoned among the alien priories in the reign of 
Edward the First, it escaped suppression, through 
having been protected as a poor hospital by Henry 
the Third. It was valued at the Dissolution at 
about JO/. An hospital, dedicated to St. Leonard, 
and a Maison-Dieu, both instituted for the recep- 
tion of lepers, were amongst the re-ligious houses 
founded in Derby. 

At different times, there have been many small 
bequests, for the relief of the poor of the town. One 
of the most considerable charities, is the Devonshire 
alms-house, whi -h the famous Countess of Shrews- 
bury i'ounded, near All Saints Church, in the reign 
of Queen Elizabeth. In this asylum eight men and 
four womeu an: supported ; each being allowed t\vo 
rooms, and hait-a-crown weekly, besides coals. The 
statutes made .'or their government, denounce the j 
penalty of expulsion against all who either get in- 
toxicated, or married. The old alms-house was 
taken down about fivc-and-tliirty years ago, and 
the present building was erected from an original 
plan, at the expence of the Duke of Devonshire. 
The design of the front, however, but ill accords 
with the nature of the establishment, as the simpli- 
city and modest plainness which should exist in a 
structure devoted to the purposes of charity, arc 
sacrificed to a style of architecture, more suitable, 
in the entrance to a nobleman's park, or pleasure 
grounds. Another alms-house, for the widows of 
five clergymen, was endowed by Edward Large, of 
Derby, about the year 1716. Each of the residents 
is allowed about seventeen pounds per annum. 

In this town, the education of the children of ttie 
poor is provided for by a free grammar-school, 
which originally belonged to Darley Abbey, but was 
granted to the corporation by Queen Mary. Here, 
also, are several extensive Sunday-schools. 

Amongst the public buildings in this town, are a 
County and a Town Hall, a County Goal, an ele- 
gant Assembly- Room, and a Theatre. The first of 
these is a large, but heavy building of free-stone, 
situated in St. Mary's Gate : it was finished in the 
year 1660. The town hall, built -by the corporation 
about, the year 1730, is a handsome structure, stand- 
ing on the site of a more ancient one of wood and 
plaster, on the south-east side of the market-place. 
The county goal, situated on the east side of the 
town, near the upper end of Friar Gate, was erected 
abour the year 1756, at the expence of the county, 
aided by a donation of 400/. from the Duke of De- 
vonshire. It is a very respectable building, well 
adapted for the purpose of its destination. The 
front is from an excellent design, displaying solidity 

VOL. ii. NO. 48. 



and strength, without the feast affectation of incon- 
gruous ornament. The foundation of the assembly- 
room was laid in <he spring of 1763 ; but it was not 
completed till the year 1774. It is of stone, and is 
situated at the north-east side of the market-place. 
The charges of erecting it were defrayed by sub- 
scriptions of the nobility and gentry of the county. 
On the pediment are sculptured a variety of musical 
instruments, figurative of the design of the building. 
The theatre, standing in Bold-Lane, is of briek, and 
was erected at the expence of Mr. James Whitley, la- 
the year 1773 : the interior is neat and commodious. 

Amongst the more recent improvements at Derby, 
should be mentioned the lighting and paving of the 
streets, and the removal of such obstructions as pre- 
vented a free passage. These purposes were effect- 
ed under the clauses of an act made in the year 1792, 
which appointed certain commissioners with full 
power to levy a small rate on the inhabitants, and 
also to sell all the common land belonging to Nun's 
Green ; the sums thus produced to be applied ia 
dof raying the necessary charges. Several of the 
bridges across the Markeaton Brook, which flows 
through a considerable part of the town, have since 
been removed ; and three new ones, of stone, erect- 
ed by a general subscription. A new and elegant 
bridge of three arches has also been built over the 
Derwent ; and, with the silk-mill, the weirs, and 
the broad expance of the river, it forms a very pleas- 
ing prospect on entering the town from the Notting- 
ham road. 

Science and literature meet with great encourage- 
ment here. This, probably, may be ascribed to ^ 
Philosophical Society, established in Derby about 
forty years ago, under the patronage of the late 
Richard French, Esq. and Dr. Darwin. Several 
book societies have also been instituted. 

In the vicinity of this town are numerous pleasing 
walks, and much delightful scenery. On WindmiM 
Hill, at a short, distance, a neat prospect-house was 
erected, some years ago, by a Mr. Robinson, from 
which the views over the adjacent county are very 
extensive and delightful. 

Situated on the banks of the Derwent, Derby 
constitutes a spot eminently favourable for the in- 
stitution, and carrying on, of manufactures which 
require the aid of water ; and various works have 
consequently been established, either in the town, or 
its immediate vicinity. Their success, (oo, has been 
surprisingly promoted by the judicious application 
of machinery ; and mills on the most improved conr 
struction have been erected here for a variety of pur- 
poses. Those for the manufacture of cotton, are 
particularly ingenious ; and the facility attained by 
them in working stockings, figured pieces for waist- 
coats, and many other articles, have greatly contri- 
buted to the extension of this branch of business. 
One of these floors being all constructed on brick 
arches, and paved with brick, by which means it is 
rendered absolutely indestructible by fire. This 
building is 6 stories high, 1 15 feet long, and 30 feet 
M wide ; 



DERBYSHIRE. 



wide ; it was erected in the year 1703, and was the 
first fire-proof mill ever built. 



* The manufacture of silk, at Derby, is said to afford em- 
ployment to upwards of 1000 persons, including children and 
women. The work is chiefly performed by machines, or mills, 
various in size, and somewhat different in construction. The 
original mill, called the Silk Mill, to denote its pre-eminence, 
being the first and largest of its kind ever erected in England, 
stands upon an island in the river Derwent. Its history is re- 
markable, as it displays the power of genius, and the vast influ- 
ence which even the enterprises of an individual have on ll.e 
commerce of a country. The Italians are known to have been 
Jong in exclusive possession oi the art of silk-throwing, and the 
merchants of other nations were consequently dependant on 
them for their participation in a very lucrative article ot trade, 
and were frequently deprived of their fair profits, by the exor- 
bitant prices charged for the original material. At the com- 
mencement of the last century, a person, named Crocket, 
erected a small mill, near the present works, with an intention 
of introducing the silk manufacture into England ; but his ma- 
chinery being inadequate to the purpose, he became insolvent, 
and the design was for some time abandoned. About the year 
1715, a similar idea began to expand in the mind of an excellent 
mechanic and draughtsman, named John Lomhe, who, though 
young, resolved on the perilous task of travelling into Italy, to 
procure drawings, or models, of the machines nece-sary for the 
undertaking. In that country he remained some time; but as 
admission to the silk- works was prohibited, he could only obtain 
access by corrupting two workmen, through whose assistance he 
inspected the machinery iu private ; and whatever parts he ob- 
tained a knowledge of during these visits, he recorded on paper 
before he slept. He thus made himself acquainted with the 
whole; and had just completed his plan, when his intention 
was discovered, and his life being in extreme hazard, he (lew 
with precipitation, and took refuge on ship board. The two 
Italians who had favoured his scheme, and whose lives were in 
qual danger with h:s own, accompanied him, and they ail soon 
landed with safety in Kngland, about the year 1/17. Fixing on 
Derby as a proper place for his purpose, Lombe agreed with 
the corporation for an island, or swamp, in the river, 500 feet 
long, and 52 wide, at a yearly rent somewhat belojv eight 
pounds. Here he established his silk mill ; but during the time 
employed in its construction, he erected temporary machines in 
the Town Hall, and various other places; by which means he 
not only reduced the price of silk far below that of the Italians, 
but was enabled to proceed with his greater undertaking, though 
the charge amounted to nearly 30.000/. In the year 1718, he 
procured a (latent to enable him to secure the profits, thus aris- 
ing from his address and ingenuity, for the term of fourteen 
years; but his days verged to a close, and, before half that pe- 
riod had elapsed, treachery and poison had brought him to the 
grave. The Italians, whose trade rapidly decreased, from the 
success of the new establishment, were exasperated to venge- 
ance, and vowed the destruction of the man whose ingenuity 
had thus turned the current of their business into another chan- 
nel. An artful woman was sent from Italy in the character of 
a friend ; she assciated with the parties, and was permitted to 
assist in the preparation of the silk. Her influence, it appears, 
was privately exerted on the persons who had fled with Mr. 
Lombe from Italy, and, succeeding with one, she prepared to 
execute the long meditated plan of death. Her victim lingered 
in agony two or three years, when he breathed his last. Slow 
poison is supposed to nave been the means employed to de- 
prive him of existence; and though suspicion was almost 
strengthened into certainty, by the circumstance which trans- 
pired on the examination of the woman, the evidence was not 
decisive, and she was discharged. Her associate had previously 
escaped to his own country. The other Italian, whose name 
was Gartrevalli, continued in Derby, and afterwards worked at 
the silk mill erected at Stockport, in Cheshire; but died in 
poverty. The funeral of John Lombe was celebrated in a style 



Silk,* as well as cotton, is manufactured in Der- 
by to great extent. Here is also a Porcelain manu- 
facture, 



of considerable magnificence. His death did not, as the Ita- 
lians hoped, prove fatal to his scheme, for the machinery was 
in full action, and the business becoming more successful, gave 
employment to about 300 people. John Lombe was succeed- 
ed by his brother William, whose melancholy disposition led 
him to commit suicide; on which the property descended to 
his cousin, Sir Thomas Lombe. Shortly afterwards, on August 
tlie 29th, 1724, the lease of the ground was signed by the cor- 
poration ; for, though the building had been long completed, 
the deeds had not hitherto been exchanged. Previously to the 
expiration of the patent, Sir Thomas petiti lied Parliament for 
a renewal, pleading, "That the works had taken -,o long a time 
in perfecting, and the people in teaching, that there had been 
none to acquire emolument from the patent." 1 his statement 
wasjiot correct; for it appears that the petitioner had already 
accumulated upwards of 80.000/. The application, howrver, 
was not altogether unsuccessful; for government, willing to 
reward the promoters of national benefit, and at the same time 
to spread the know ledge of such a useful invention, granted him 
14.000/. in lieu of a new [latent, and on condition that he should 
suffer a complete model of the works to be taken: this was ac- 
cordingly executed, and afterwards deposited in the Tower for 
public' inspection. Sir Thomas Lombe dy ng on the 3d of 
February, 1738, the silk mill became the properly ot his lady. 
It was twice advertised for public sale; but me trade being 
greatly decayed, through the erection of mills in other places, 
no bidders could be found, though the second time the works 
were put up at as low a sum as 1000/. In the following year, 
the lease was assigned from Lady Lombe to Richard Wilson, 
Esq. and the property transferred to the latter, for a turn not 
exceeding 4000/. The premises were occupied many years by 
a Mr. Swift, who made various important additions to the ma- 
chinery, and employed about 240 hands, (principally women 
and children ;) but die lease continued in the possession of the 
Wilson family, till its expiration, in the year 1803. The ex- 
tensive fabric* containing the machinery, was raised upon huge 
piles of oak, doubly planked, and covered with stone-work, on 
which were turned thirteen stone arches, sustaining the walls. 
Its whole length was 110 feet ; its breadth, 39; and its height, 
55 feet 6 inches. It contained five stories, beside (he under 
works, and was lighted by 468 windows. In the three upper 
stories were the Italian winding engines, placed in a regular 
manner across the apartments, and furnished with many thou- 
sand swifts and spindles, and engines tor working them. In the 
two lower rooms were the spinning and twist mills, all of a cir- 
cular form, turned by vertical shafts passing through their 
centres, and communicating with shafts from the water-wheel. 
Their diameter was between twelve and thirteen feet ; and their 
height, nineteen feet eight inches. The spinning mills, eight 
in number, gave motion to upwards of 25,000 reel bobbins, and 
nearly 3000 star-wheels belonging to the reels. Each of the 
four twist mills continued four rounds of spindles, about 389 of 
which were connected with each mill, as well as numerous reels, 
bobbins, star-wheels, &c. The whole of this elaborate machine, 
though distributed through five large apartments, was put in 
motion by a single water-wheel, twenty-three feet in diameter, 
situated on the west side of (he building. In a mill upon this 
principle, all is whirling, and in motion, and appears as though 
directed and animated by some invisible power ; yet mutually 
dependent as every part is, any one of them may be stopped 
and separated at pleasure. This arises from every movement 
being performed by two wheels, one of which is turned by the 
other ; but when separated, the latter preserves its rotorary mo- 
tion, while the other stops as the impelling power no longer 
operates. The whole number of wheels is about 14,000. All 
the operations are performed here, from winding the raw silk, 
to organizing or preparing it for the weavers. The raw silk is 
chiefly brought in skains, or hanks, from China and Piedmont. 
The skain is first placed on a hexagonal wheel or swift ; and 

the 



DERBYSHIRE. 



47 



ftictnre, which was established about the year 1750, 
h-y the late Mr. Duesburg ;* and a manufacture of 
Derbyshire marble an:l spar ornaments. f Of more 
recent origin, in this town, or its immediate vicinity, 
are the following concerns : a mill, for the manu- 
facture oi' tinned plates ; a furnace for the smelting 
of copper into ore, with a machine for converting the 



the filaments which compose it are regularly wound off upon a 
cylindrical block of wood, or bobbin. To wind a single skain 
is the work of five or six days, though the machine is kept in 
motion ten hours daily. In this part of the process many chil- 
dren are employed, whose nimble tinkers are kept in continual 
exercise b) tying; the thread which break, and removing the 
burs and uneven parts. The silk thus wound upon the bobbins, 
is afterwards twisted by other parts of (lie machinery, and is 
then sent to the doublet's, who are chiefly women, stationed in 
a detached building, which stands on the same island, on piles 
like the silk mill ; and though not^h.ilf so broad, is nearly thirty 
feet longer. II ere four, seven, or ten, of the 'breads are united 
into one, according to the uses for which they are designed; 
the fine kind going to the stocking-weaver ; the others to the 
manufacturer of waistcoat-pieces, &c. It has frequently been 
saul, that when the machine "is completely in motion, it works 
73,726 yards of organzine silk thread by every revolution of the 
waler-wneel, which turns once round every nineteen seconds ; 
but the most cursory inspection ot the inachine is sufficient to 
convince any person, that the number of yards wound every 
circuit of the wheel cannot be known ; lor the threads are so 
frequently breaking not to mention other difficulties which 
render the attempt insuperable that the power of arithmetic 
must ever be inadequate to ascertain the number. 

* The most considerable improvements have been effected 
in the manufacture since the decease of Mr. Duesbury, through 
the judicious methods employed in preparing the paste, and in- 
creasing the beauty of the "decorations. The texture of the 
ware is not of equal fineness with the French and Saxon ; its 
workmanship, and ornaments, are far superior. The paintings 
are, in general, rich, and well executed ; and the gilding and 
burnishing exceedingly beautiful. The body of the ware, 
called porcelain, is line white clay, combined with different 
proportions of fluxing matter. The best kind is absolutely in- 
fusible, and takes for its glaze a vitreous substance, without a 
particle of lead. When the paste is duly prepared, by grind- 
ing, and other operations, it is consigned to the workmen, whose 
dexterity converts it into a variety of beautiful forms. Round 
vessels are- usually made by a man called a thrower, who works 
them on a circular block, which moves horizontally, on a verti- 
cal spindle. From him they pass to the lathe, and are reduced 
to their proper thickness and form at the end of an horizontal 
spindle. Afterwards they are finished, and handled if neces- 
sary, by othi r persons, and are then conveyed to a sto* e, where 
they remain till the moisture is entirely evaporated, when they 
become fit for baking. Oval vessels, such as tureens, teapots', 
&c. acquire their form by being pressed into moulds of plaster, 
or gypsum, by hand. The saggars, or cases, in which the arti- 
cles are burnt, are set in the kiln, or oven, one upon the other, 
and %vhen piled up nearly to the top, have somewhat the ap- 
pearance of piles of cheese. When the kiln is full, it js care- 
fully closed, and the ware baked by the admission of heat 
through horizontal and vertical flues; this is the first baking; 
and the porcelain in this state is technically called biscuit. It 
is then dipped in glaze of about the consistence of cream, and 
carried to the glaze kiln, where it is again baked, but in a less 
intense degree of heat than before. The ware is now delivered 
to the painters, who, with colour prepared from mineral bodies, 
ornament it with landscapes or.figtires, as required. After this 
process, it is again conveyed to the kiln, and the colours vitri- 
fied, in order to fix, and give them a proper degree of lustre. 
Every coat, or layer of colouring, requires a fresh burning : 
once or twice is sufficient for the ornaments of the common 



copper into sheets ; a mill, for the slitting and roll- 
ing of iron, for various purposes, &c. A tew years 
ago, a bleaching ground was opened on Nun's 
Green, where the different processes are performed 
according to the new chemical improvements. 

Amgngst the distinguished persons to which thn 
town of Derby has had the honour of giving birth 

to 



porcelain ; but the more elaborate decorations render it neces- 
sary lor the colours to be laid on, and undergo the action of lire 
several times, before they obtain their full effect and beauty. 
This completes the process of those articles whu.h have no guld 
in their pattern ; but where this addition is wanted, they are 
pencilled with a mixture of oil and gold dissolved, or "thrown 
down," by quicksilver, aidtd by heat; and once more com- 
mitted to the kiln : here the gold re assumes soliditv, but conies 
out with a dull surface, which is rendered brilliant by rubbirg 
with blood-stones, and other polishing substances. The porce- 
lain is now ready for use. The highest finished ware in this 
mtluiifactory is frequently returned to the enamel kiln, where 
the colours are fluxed six or seven times: the best only is here 
finished for sale. Table services, &c. are made here, which, 
from the exquisite beauty of their pictorial decorations, cost at 
the rate of ten guineas each plate. The making of biscuit figures, 
or white ware, is pi'tuliar to this manufactory; and they are 
supposed to be equal in beauty and delicacy, to any that are 
made in Europe. Here the lathe is of no use, the figures bein^ 
all cast in moulds of plaster or gypsum, into which the materials 
are poured, having previously been reduced to a liquid of the 
con-istence and appearance of thick cream. The water COH- 
tained in the mixture is quickly absorbed by the plaster, and 
the paste becomes sufficiently hard and (enatious to part Ircelv 
from the mould. The various parts of the figures, as the head, 
arms, legs, &c. are cast in separate moulds, and when dried and 
repaired, are joined by a paste of the same kind, but thinner 
than the former. The articles are then sent to the kiln, and, 
after undergoing a regular and continued heat, come out ex- 
tremely white and delicate. The manufactory, though of five 
times the extent of the original building, was found insufficient 
some years ago tor the number of workmen wanted. Addi- 
tional buildings have consequently been erected, upon a grand 
and comprehensive plan. The manufactory now occupies an 
area equal to 6000 square yards, and affords sufficient room for 
the employment of between 300 and 400 workmen; the front 
extends nearly 170 feet. 

f The manufactory for cutting and polishing marble, and 
manufacturing the Derbyshire fluor spar, or liiue John, and 
gypsum, into a variety of beautiful ornaments, as urns, vases, 
columns, obelisks, &c. was formerly carried on in the building 
which was erected by Mr. Crocket for the original silk mill. 
The machinery applied to execute the present purposes, is of 
very ingenious construction. When the Blue John is to be 
converted into a vase, or any other ornamental form which 
renders the use of the lathe necessary, it is carved with a mallet 
and chissel, into a rude resemblance of the object intended to 
be produced and being afterwards strongly cemented to a plug 
or chock, is screwed upon the lathe. A slow motion is then 
given to the work ; and a bar of steel, about two feet long, and 
half an inch square, properly tempered, and pointed at each 
end, is applied t the lluor, on which water is continually drop- 
ping, to keep the tool cold, preserve it from friction, and enable 
it more readily to reduce the substance upon which it acts. As 
the surface becomes smoother, the tool is applied with more 
freedom, and the motion of the lathe accellerated, till the floor 
has assumed its required elegance of form. When the turning 
is completed, pieces of grit-stone, ot different degrees of fine- 
ness, are applied with water to bring the article to a proper 
ground for polishing with fine emery, tripoli, and putty, or calx 
of tin. These means are continued till the fluor is incapable of 
receiving a higher degree ol polish ; which is known when water 
throws on it will no longer increase its lustre. The same wheel 

whiftfc 



48 



DERBYSHIRE. 



to Flamstead, the astronomer,* and Wright, the 
j>a'nter,t are particularly entitled to notice. J 



which gives motion to the lathes for manufacturing the fluor 
spar, &c. is applied to work the machinery for sawing and po- 
lishing marble, and other purposes. On the vibrating poles to 
which the cranks are fixed arc sliding boxes, containing sets of 
saws, which are nothing more than thin plates of soft iron, which 
sink as they cut the marble. These are supplied with sand and 
water; aim being moveable with screws, may be arranged at 
different distances, so that the slabs may be cut of any thickness. 
A set of saws consists of a different number of plates, so that the 
block to which they are applied, may be separated at one pro- 
cess into as many slabs as may be thought necessary. The slabs 
thus sawn are taken to the polishing bed, which has four wheels, 
that move on a gangway with a very slow motion, given by a 
worm and crank. One of the slabs being fixed on this bed, an- 
other is fastened above it to an arm attached to a vibrating pole, 
which works with a quick motion in a transverse direction. 
The slabs thus moving in contact with each other, and being 
supplied with sand and water, soon acquire a level surface, when 
finer materials are employed, as in the working of the fluor spar, 
to increase their smoothness, and give them a high and beautiful 
polish. As the ground on which this manufactory stood belong- 
ed to the corporation, and the lease expired at the same period 
as that of the silk mill, the proprietors purchased an extensive 
piece ofland, which formerly belonged to Si. Helen's Monas- 
tery, on the road leading to Kedleston. There they erected 
some very spacious work-shops, and a steam-engine of a six- 
horse power, to give motion to the ingenious machinery which 
they employ. 

* John 1'lainstead, or Flamsteec!, was born at Derby, in the 
year 1646. His early education was at the free-school ; but 
the prosecution of his studies being prevented by sickness, he 
was taken home, where the accidental perusal of John deSacro- 
bosco's book, " De Sphxra," gave him that taste for astrono- ' 
jnical science which terminated only with his life. His first 
attempts in astronomy were calculations of the places of the 
planets, and of an eclipse of the sun by the Caroline Tables. 
The latter procured him the acquaintance of Mr. Emanuel Hal- 
ton, a mathematician of some eminence, who re/ided at Wing- 
field Manor. Finding that young Flamstead was retarded in 
his pursuits by the want of books, that gentleman supplied him 
with the best astronomical works then extant. From this time 
he proceeded with great success; and having, in 1669, calculat- 
ed some remarkable eclipses of the fixed stars, which occurred 
the year following, he obtained the thanks of the Royal Society, 
and the correspondence of several of its members. To increase 
liis knowledge, and to preserve the reputation which he had 
thus acquired, lie entered himself a student of Jesus College, 
Cambridge. In his way to the university, in 1674, he was 
informed by Sir Jonas Moore, that a true account of the tides 
would be acceptable to the King: he therefore embraced the 
opportunity of recommending himself to royal favour, by com- 
posing a small ephemeris for his Majesty's use ; in the course of 
which, he pointed out the falseness of astrology, and the igno- 
rance of those who pretend to it. In the following year he had 
the honour of being appointed astronomer to the King, with the 
salary of 100/. annually. The foundation of the royal observa- 
tory at Greenwich was then laid, and he was Ihe first resident 
and astronomer royal : it was called Flamstead House, by which 
name it continues to be known. Soon after his appointment, 
he entered into orders ; and, in the year 1684, he was presented 
with the living of Bu.stow, in Surrey, which he held to the time 
of his death, on th last day of December, 1719. Various 
discoveries in astronomy and various improved instruments for 
making observations, rewarded the perseverance with which this 
ardent lover of science pursued his studies. For " more than 
forty years," says Dr. Keil, " with indefatigable pains, Mr. 
Flamstead has watched the motions of the fixed stars, and has 
given us instruments exactly divided by exquisite art, and fitted 
with tcli^copical sights," &c. The bfitish catalogue of the 



DEVIL'S CAVE.] The Devil's Cave, or, as some 
call it, the Peak Cavern, one of the wonders of the 

Peak, 



fixed stars which he composed, contains about 3000, being twice 
the number of those given in the catalogue of Hevelius. This 
catalogue, intituled " Historia Ccclestis Britannica," was pub- 
lished, at the expence of George, Prince of Denmark, in three 
splendid volumes (olio. In the Philosophical Transactions are 
many of Mr. Flamstead's. papers ; and in Sir Jon;is Moore's 
System of Mathematics is a tract by him on the Doctrine of the 
Sphere. 

f Joseph Wright, generally distinguished by the appellation 
of " Wright of Derby," was born on the 3d of September, 
1734, He w-as son of a" respectable attorney. During his youth, 
he displayed a great fondness for mathematical employments. 
This attachment was succeeded by a taste for drawing; and his 
early merit in taking likenesses, occasioned him to be sent to 
London in the year 1751, and placed under a portrait painter 
named Hudson, who, though not a person of extraordinary 
talents, had the honour of instructing three of the most eminent 
painters of the age; Sir Joshua Reynolds, Mortimer, and 
Wright. With him he continued two years ; when he returned 
to Derby, and practised in the portrait line ; but not being 
satisfied "with his own performances, lie went back to London, 
in 1756, and continued fifteen months longer with Hudson. 
On his second return to Derby, he executed several portraits in 
a superior style ; and soon alter the year 1760, he produced a 
set of Historical pictures, which deservedly rank amongst the 
earliest valuable productions of the English school. The prin- 
cipal of these were the Gladiator, Orrery, Air-pump, Hermit, 
and Blacksmith's Forge ; paintings which determined his repu- 
tation as an artist, long prior to the establishment of the Royal 
Academy. The jealousy, however, of some of the members 
prevented his being elected an R. A. a distinction that was 
afterwards gratuitously offered by the hands of their secretary, 
Newton, who was deputed to visit him at Derby, and solicit his 
acceptance of a diploma, which he then indignantly rejected. 
At a mature age, Mr. Wright visited Italy, where he remained 
two years, studying the works of the first masters, especially 
those of Michael Angelo in the Capella Sistina of the Vatican ; 
of many of which he made accurate drawings. During his stay 
in Italy, he had an opportunity of seeing a memorable eruption 
of Vesuvius, which increased his passion for representing extra- 
ordinary effects of light, and his respective paintings of this 
sublime event are deservedly ranked as chef d'oeuvres in that 
line. His moon-lights are also particularly beautiful ; and his 
mountain and lake scenery superior to most similar productions. 
On such subjects his pencil was last employed ; and his views 
of Ullswater Lake, from Lyulph's Tower, has been considered 
as the finest of all his landscapes, and a work which alone would 
place his reputation on a level with that of the most eminent 
masters. He died on the 29th of August, 1797, esteemed and 
lamented by all who were honoured with his friendship ; though 
the time he devoted to his professional studies, prevented the 
circle of his acquaintance from becoming extensive. " It is 
pleasing to record," observes Dr. Gisborne, his biographer in 
the Monthly Magazine for 1797, " that in his works the atten- 
tion is ever directed to the cause of virtue ; that his eai ly histo- 
rical pictures consist of subjects either of rational or moral im- 
provement ; and he has succeeded admirably in arresting the 
gentler feelings of humanity ; for what eye or heart ever re- 
mained unmoved at the sight of Maria, Sterne's Captive, or the 
Dead Soldier ! In his works, not ' one immoral, one corrupted 
thought,' occurs to wound the eye of delicacy, or induce a wish 
that so exquisite a pencil had not found employment on more 
worthy subjects." 

I Another gentleman though we are not certain whether he 
were born in Derby here also strongly claims our attention. 
On the 24th of February, 1810, died Mr. Henry Cavendish, 
son of the late Lord Charles Cavendish, great uncle to the 
present Duke of Devonshire. His remains were removed 
from his house at Clapham, to be privately interred in the 

family 



DERBYSHIRE. 



Peak, is situated beneath the hill of Castleton. The 
entrance to this wonderful cavern is extraordinarily 
magnificent ; being in a (lark and gloomy recess, 
formed by a chasm in the rocks, which range per- 
pendicularly on each side to a considerable height. 
On the steep side of the mountain is a large opening, 
almost in the form of an old Gothic arch, extending 
in width 120 feet, and in height 4$. This arch, 
formed by nature at the bottom of a rock, whose ' 
height is 87 yards, is chequered with a diversity of j 
coloured stones, from which continually drops a ; 
sparry water that petrifies. Immediately within the ) 
urch is a cavern nearly of the same height and width, | 
and in receding depth about 90 feet ; the roof, which j 
is of solid rock, is flat, and. wears an appalling ap- j 
pcarance, having nothing but the side wails to sup- | 
port it. Within the gulph some twine-makers have 
established their manufactory and residence, and the 
combination of their machines and rude dwellings, 
with the sublime features of the natural scenery, has 
a very singular effect. Towards the farther end, from 
the entrance, the roof comes down with a gradual 
slope to about two feet from the surface of the water, 
fourteen yards over, the rock in that place forming 
a kind of arch, under which the visitant is conveyed 
in a small boat ; beyond this stream is a spacious 
vacuity, opening in the bosom of the rocks ; and iu 
% passage at the inner extremity of this vast cavern, 
the stream which (lows through the bottom spreads 
into what is called the second \vator ; but this can 
generally be passed on foot, though at other times 
the assistance of the guide is requisite ; at a short 
distance farther is a third water, where the rock, 
sloping as it were, almost down to the surface of the 
water, puts an end to the traveller's search. Some 
years ago, a Mr. Ferguson made, and published a 



family vault, in All Sairtts Church, Derby. This gentleman 
had tendered himself familiarly conversant with every partot Sir 
Isaac Newton's philosophy, the principles of which he applied, 
nearly forty years ago, to an investigation of the laws on which the 
phenomena of electricity depend. Pursuing the same science, on 
the occasion of Mr. Walsh's experiment with the torpedo, he 
gave a satisfactory explanation of. the remarkable powers of elec- 
trical fishes; pointing out that distinction between common and 
apinial electricity, which has since been amply confirmed by the 
brilliant discoveries in Galvinism. Having aimed his attention 
very early to pneumatic chemistry, he ascertained, in 1766, the 
extreme levity of inflammable air, now called hydrogen gas. 
On this discovery, many curious experiments, and particularly 
I hat of aerial navigation, have been founded. In the same path 
of science, he made the important discovery of the composition 
of water by the union of two airs ; and thus laid the foundation 
of the modern system of chemistry, which rests principally on 
Ibis fact, nnd that of the decomposition of water, announced, soon 
afterwards, by M. Lavoisier. As the purity of atmospherical 
air had been a subject of controversy, Mr. C. contrived essen- 
tial improvements in the method of performing experiments 
with an eudiometer; by meaiis of which he was the first who 
shewed that the proportion of pure air in the atmosphere is 
nearly the same in all open places. The other, and much larger, 
portion of our atmosphere, lie sagaciously conjectured to be the 
basis of tin- acid of nitre; an opinion that lie soon brought to 
the test by an ingenious and laborious experiment, which com- 
pletely proved (s truth; whence this air hasnow very generally 
VOL. n. j,'o. 49. 



particular survey of this cnvern. After describing 
the entrance, and kis arrival at the first water, (hi* 
gentleman proceeds as follo\j, in his narrative : 

" The rock, .in this place form's a kind of arch, 
under which 1 was pushed by my guide across the 
water in a long oval tub, _as I lay on ray back iu 
straw, with a candle in my hand, and was for the 
greatest part on the river so Hear the arched roof, 
that it touched my hat if I raised my head but two 
inches from the ^traw on which I lay in the tub 
(called the boat), which I believe was not above a 
foot iu depth. When landed on the farther side of 
this water, and helped out of the boat by my guide, 
1 was conducted through a low place into a cavern 
seventy yards wide, and forty yards high, in the top 
of which are several openings upwards, reaching so 
high that Fcould not see their tops. On one side of 
tliis place 1 saw several young lads, with candles in 
their hands, clambering up a very rough stony ascent, 
and they disappeared when about half way up. 1 
asked my guide who they were, and he told me they 
were the singers, and that I should soon see them 
again, for that they were going through an opening 
that led into the next cavern. At 87 yards from the 
first water I came to a second, nine yards and a half 
broad, over which my guide carried me on his back. 
I then went under three natural arches, at some dis- 
tance from one another,- and all of them pretty regu- 
lar ; then entered a third cavern, called Roger Rain's 
House, because there is a continual dropping on on* 
side of it, like a moderate rain. I no sooner entered 
this cavern than 1 was agreeably surprised by a me- 
lodious singing, which seemed to echo on all sides ; 
and on looking back, I saw the above-mentioned 
lads, in a large round opening called the chancel, 
19 yards above the bottom where 1 stood : they sing 



obtained the name of nitrogen. So many and such great dis- 
coveries, spread his fame throughout Europe, and he was uni- 
vcrsally considered as one of the first philosophers of the age. 
Among the labours of luj later days, is the nice and difficult 
experiment by which <ff determined the mean density of the 
earth ; an element of consequence in delicate calculation of 
astronomy, as well as in geological inquiries. Kven in the last 
year of his lile, at the advanced age of seventy-seven, he pro- 
posed and described improvements in the manner of dividing 
large astronomical instruments ; which, though not yet executed, 
promise very great advantages. These pursuits, together with 
reading of various kinds, by which lie acquired a deep insight 
into almost every topic of general knowledge, formed the whole 
occupation of liis life, and were, in fact, his sole amusement.- 
The love of truth was sufficient to fill his miud. From his 
attachment to such occupations,, and the constant resource lie 
found in them, togethei with a shyness and diffidence natural 
to his disposition, his early habits had been secluded. His 
manners were mild, his mind firm, his nature benevolent and 
complacent. He was liberal without being profuse; and 
cluntiiblr, without ostentation. He possessed great affluence, 
which was to him rather matter of embarrassment than of 
gratification; but, howevep'careless about its improvement, 
he was regular in its management and direction. He was 
born October 10, 1731. The stamp duty uppn Mr. Caven- 
dish's will, amounted to 42,000/. 



DERBYSHIRE. 



for what visitors please to give them as they return. 
The effect of slow solemn music 1 in this situation is 
wonderful it is impossible to describe it. The 
lights, dispersed in various parts of the gloomy ca- 
vern, appearing like stars, the stillness of the scene, 
save the patterings of the water in the rainy cell, 
form an uncommon admixture of the sublime and 
beautiful, and conspire, with the solemnity of the 
airs they sing 1 , to turn the mind to meditation ; na- 
ture appears in awful majesty before you, and you 
may easily fancy yourself transported into another 
world. At the top of a steep, rugged, stony, ascent, 
on one side of this cavern, I saw a small irregular 
hole, and asked my guide whether there was another 
cavern beyond it. He told me there was ; but that 
yery few people ventured to go through into it, on 
account of the frightful appearance at the' top of the 
hole, where the stones seemed to be almost loose, as 
if ready to fall, and close up the passage. I told 
him, that, it' he would venture through, I would fol- 
low him : so I did, creeping flat, the place being 
rather too low to go on all fours : we then got into 
long, narrow, irregular, and very high cavern, 
which has surprising openings, of various shapes, at 
top, too high to see how far they reach. We re- 
turned through the hole into Roger Rain's House 
again, and from thence went down 50 yards lower, 
on wet sand, wherein steps are made for conveni- 
ence ; at the bottom of which we entered into a ca- 
Tern called the Devil's Cellar, in which my guide 
told me there had been many bowls of good rum- 
punch made and drunk, the water having been heat- 
ed by a (ire occasionally made for that purpose. In 
the roof of this cellar is a large opening, through 
which the smoke of the fire ascends, and has been 
seen by many people above-ground to go out at the 
top of the rock ; but this opening is so irregular and 
crooked, that no stone let down from the top was 
ever known to fall quite through into the cavern. 
From this place I was conducted a good way on- 
ward, under a roof too low to let one walk upright, 
and then entered a cavern called the Bell, because 
the top of it is shaped something like the inside of a 
bell ; hence I was conducted through a very low , 
place into a higher, in the bottom of which runs a ! 
third water ; here you are shewn a line, about the 
height of your shoulders, at which the water arrives 
in the time of heavy rains. The roof of that place i 
slopes gradually downward till it comes within five : 
inches of the surface of the running water under it. ; 
My guide then told me, that I was just 207 yards : 
below the surface of the ground, and 750 yards from : 
the first entrance into the rock, and that there was 
no going any farther. This however is not supposed 
to be the end of the cavern, and, as a considerable 
stream of water runs through a small opening at the j 
extremity, many people think it continues farther. ' 
Some few years ago, a gentleman was determined 
to try if ho could not dive under the rock, and rise 
iu the cavern which is supposed to be still beyond i 
it ; he. plunged in, but struck his head against the j 



rock, and fell motionless to the bottom, from which 
the attendants with difficulty dragged him out. 
They hav.e lately been at the trouble and expence of 
blowing up a part of the rock at this extremity, t 
try if they could discover any landing-place beyond 
it ; but to no purpose the water is seven feet deep 
where the rock closes again. Before I quit this 
spot, I must not omit mentioning the staggering 
effect of a blast, as they style it, occasioned by a small 
quantity of gunpowder crammed into a rock, and 
set fire to. The explosion is wonderfully grand ; 
heaven and earth seem coming together. All visi- 
tors are treated with this salute, and we, of course, 
had our share of it. Throughout the whole I found 
the air very agreeable, and warm enough to bring 
on a moderate perspiration, although, less than a 
fortnight before (this was in the month of October) 
all the caverns beyond the first river, where I was 
ferried under the low arch, had been filled to a con- 
siderable height with water during a flood occasioned 
by great and long-continued rain." 

It has been remarked, that " the effect of light, 
when returning from the recesses of the cavern is 
particularly impressive ; and the eye, unaccustomed 
to the contrast, never beholds it without lively 
emotions of pleasure. The gradual illumination of 
the rocks, which become brighter as they approach 
the entrance, and the chastened blaze of day, that, 
' shorn of its beams,' arrays the distance to morn- 
ing serenity, is perhaps, one of the most beautiful 
scenes that the pencil could be employed to ex- 
hibit." 

A Mr. Sullivan thus relates the particulars of a 
descent, which appears to have been far more dan- 
gerous than that described by Mr. Ferguson : 

" The spirit of curiosity had so warped our ra- 
tional faculties, and danger was become so familiar 
to us, that we determined upon a plan that wiser 
men would have shuddered at the idea of. This 
was no other than exploring a prodigious cavern, 
said to be three miles in length, and strongly sup- 
posed by the miners to have a communication with 
the Priak Cavern, as they insist upon it the same 
river runs through both. Summoning therefore a 
posse comitatus of the miners about Castleton, we 
in brief told them our intention. Astonishment at 
first prevented them from thinking us serious ; none 
but two or three had ever ventured upon a trial ; and 
even custom had not reconciled the others to so ha- 
zardous an enterpri/e. A promise of reward, how- 
ever, prevailed upon the whole, and they agreed to 
attend us in the morning. In the meantime a mes- 
senger being dispatched to Sheffield for torches, we 
began, with all due form, to prepare for our descent : 
this was soon accomplished. A paper of memoran- 
dums, and a card, in case of an accident, telling who 
our friends were, and where they were to he found, 
were left upon our table in the inn. Thus guarding 
against the worst that could befal us, at least so tar 
as it respected matters wtrch we should no longer 
have any concern in, we early the next morning, 



DERBYSHIRE. 



accompanied by a chosen set of our guides, repaired 
to the top of the mountain, where the seissure opeus 
itself about three feet in diameter. Provided by the 
miners with proper dresses, we then stripped our- 
selves of our own outward apparel, and putting' on 
euch a pair of canvas trowsers, it flannel jacket, and 
over that a canvas frock, with a handkerchief round 
our heads, and a miner's cap, we proceeded one by 
one down this dreadful abyss, for the distance of 
about 120 feet perpendicular. Imagination can 
scarcely form a descent more perilous. The only 
steps or things to hold by are bits of oak stuck into 
the sides, inhabitants of the place since it was first 
discovered, and which, from want of use, it was na- 
tural might have either rotted or loosened themselves 
in the earth ; moreover, a false step hurled one in- 
evitably to destruction : fortunately all was firm, aud 
we arrived at the bottom unhurt. Here ranging 
ourselves in order, with a large bundle of candles 
and torches, independent of the candles which each 
of us carried, we proceeded with tolerable facility 
through two or three lofty aud most beautifully en- 
amelled caverns of spar. This was conceived an 
earnest of future delight, and the tablets were ac- 
cordingly set at work ; but, alas, how great was our 
mistake ! Here our difficulties were to commence. 
Following the guide, who, besides another who 
was with us, was the only one of the party who had 
ever penetrated bafore, we forced our way, with in- 
finite struggles, through a narrow space, between 
rocks, and thence getting on our hands and knees, 
were, for the full distance of a mile, obliged to crawl, 
without ever daring to lift up our heads, the passage 
being both low and craggy ; and, as it was likewise 
filled with mud, dirt, and a multitude of bits of rock, 
our progress was painful indeed : we still, however, 
hoped for something better. On we accordingly 
proceeded, till a dreadful noise, rumbling along the 
horrible crevices of the cave, gave us to understand 
we were near a river : to this then we, as fast as we 
were able, hurried. But description is inadequate 
to any thing like a representation of the scene. A 
vast ocean seemed roaring in upon us ; in some 
places bursting with inconceivable impetuosity, aud 
at others falling through dreadful chasms, burst into 
shaggy forms to give vent : through this our journey 
was to continue. A cry of light, however, alarmed 
us ; the confinement of the air, and the narrowness 
of our track, had extinguished all our torches ; the 
candles too, all but one small end, were totally ex- 
pended. We knew not what to do. In vain the 
miners halloo'd for the supply which was to have 
eome behind ; no answer was to be heard. Our fate 
seemed inevitable ; but the principals of the party 
fortunately expressed no fear. In this extremity, a 
gallant fellow, who yet was ignorant of the place, 
but Irom experience knew the danger we were in, 
suddenly disappeared, and, after groping for a con- 
siderable time iu the dark and dismal horrors of the 
place, at length returned to us with a supply of can- 
dles, having discovered his companions, unto whom i 



they were given in charge, almost petrified with fear, 
and unable to follow us from apprehension. Re- 
prieved in this manner from a death which seemed to 
wait us, in its most horrid form, we proceeded on- 
ward wit'i a fresh recruit of spirits ; and plunging 
into the river above our waists, scarce tenable from 
the impetuosity of the torrent, cautiously picked 
our steps, and, at length, after four hours most un- 
speakable fatigue, arrived at about 300 yards be- 
yond thu spot where the subterranean passage we 
had the day before explored was expected to find 
an entrance into this dreadful place. Here we were 
obliged to stop. A passage still continued, but so 
filled with water, and so full of peril, that the mi- 
ners themselves were averse to farther travel. All 
together, the depth we had descended was about 
110 fathoms, or 980 feet, and the length about three 
miles. We had the happiness to return without any 
injury." 

Dovr, DALE.] Dove Dale, in the neighbourhood 1 
of Ashborne, is a romantic and rocky chasm, through 
which the river Dove pursues its wiuding ourse r 
and gives life and animation to the scenery, by dash- 
ing over rude masses which have fallen into its 
stream from the adjoining cliti's. " On entering th 
Dale," observes a modern writer, " the mind regards 
it as a sequestered solitude, where contemplation 
might take her seat, and extend her musings through 
the wide range of existence, neither interrupted by 
jarring sounds, nor distracted by discordant images. 
As the road proceeds, however, the scenery becomes 
too romantic, and impressive from its singularity, to 
permit the attention to engage itself on other objects. 
The valley contracts ; aud on each side, rocks of 
grey lime-stone, abrupt and vast, rear their grotesque 
forms, covered with moss, lichens, yew-trees, and 
mountain-ash. A narrow and broken path winds 
along the margin of the river, which in some parts 
so nearly fills the bosom of the dale, that even tha 
foot passenger cannot pursue his cautious way, with- 
out the hazard of being precipitated from the slippery 
craggs into the stream." 

In length, this dale is rather more than two miles ; 
but, from the sinuosity of its course, and its project- 
ing precipices, which in some places seem to fold 
into each other, and preclude every appearance of 
further access, the views are morn limited. On the 
right, or Derbyshire border, the rocks are more bare 
of vegetation than on the left, or Staffordshire side, 
where they are partially covered with fine hanging 
wood, which, from its various combinations with the 
surrounding objects, presents a succession of beau- 
tifully picturesque and romantic views. The cha- 
racter of the scenery, however, is greatly diversified 
by the varying forms of the rocks^ and the winding' 
current of the Dove, the motion and appearance of 
which are perpetually changing. Whatcly, in bis 
" Observations on Modern Gardening," remarks, 
that " it is never less than ten, nor so much as 
twenty, yards wide, and generally from three to four 
feet deep ; and transparent to the bottom, except 

when 



DERBYSHIRE. 



when it is covered with a loam of the purest white, 
under water-falls which are perfectly lucid. These 
are very numerous, but very different : in some 
places they stretch across, or aslant, the stream ; in 
others, they arc only partial, and the water either 
dashes against the stones, and leaps over them, or, 
pouring along a steep, rebounds upon those below ; 
sometimes it rushes through the several openings 
between them, and at other times it is driven back 
"hy the obstruction, and turns into an eddy. In one 
particular spot, the valley, almost closing, leaves 
hardly a passage for the river, which, pent up, and 
struggling for a vent, rages, and roars, and foams, 
till it has extricated itself from the confinement. In 
other parts, the stream, though never languid, is of- 
ten gentle, flows round a little desert island, glides 
between aits and bulrushes, disperses itself among 
tufts of grass and moss, bubbles about a water-dock, 
or plays with the tender threads of aquatic plants 
which float upon the surface." Tlr 1 , rugged, dissi- 
milar, nnd frequently grotesque and fanciful appear- 
ance of the rocks, distinguish the scenery of this 
valley from, perhaps, every other in the kingdom. 
In some places they shoot up in detached masses, in 
the form of spires, or conical pyramids, to the height 
of thirty or forty yards, and are ornamented with 
festoons and net-work of ivy : in others their scat- 
tered and uncovered heads hang over the river in 
terrific masses, upheld by fragments apparently 
unequal to the weight they sustain. Some are firm 
and solid throughout ; others are split and dislocat- 
ed, and appear ready to be scattered into atoms by 
the first tempest that may sweep the dale. About a 
mile from the entrance, in a vast mural mass of de- 
tached rock, which extends along, the edge of the 
precipice on the right, nearly half way up the side of 
the dale, is a magnificent arch, called Reynard's 
Hole. 

Near this spot, some years ago, a dreadful acci- 
dent occurred. A Mr. Langton, Dean of Clogher, 
was on a visit at a family's in the neighbourhood : 
during his stay a party was formed for an excursion 
to Dove Dale. As they proceeded in the valley, 
Mr. Langton proposed to ascend a precipice near 
Reynard's Hole, apparently near four hundred feet 
high ; and prevailed on a young lady of the party, 
a Miss La Roche, to accompany him on the same 
horse. Riding on the summit near the margin, they 
mistook a sheep's path for the road, and in endea- 
vouring to turn the horse hastily, they both fell : 
Mr. Lnngton was precipitated to the bottom, and so 
bruised by the fall that he expired in a few days. 
Miss La Roche was entangled by her hair in a 
bramble bush, and fortunately received no material 
injury. The horse was found upon the summit un- 
injured. 1 

The shape of Reynard's Hole nearly approaches 
to the sharply-pointed Gothic : its height is about 
forty feet, and its width eighteen. Through this, in 
the hody of the rock, the eye distinguishes the mouth 
of a cavern, which, from its situation so immediate! v 



above the opening of the arch, excites an idea, that 
the latter must have been formed by some tremend- 
ous burst of water, discharged through that aper- 
ture, from the interior of the mountain. On scram- 
bling beneath the arch, however, up the steep path 
to the cavern itself, this idea is not strengthened ; 
for the extent of the excavation is little more than 
forty feet, and its height about fifteen. The beau- 
tiful view from the entrance fully repays the fatigue 
of ascending. A mass of hanging wood covers the 
opposite side of the dale, from which a large craggy 
detached rock starting out forms a grand charac- 
teristic feature of the scene. This rock is called 
Dove Dale Church ; the cavern Reynard's Hall ; 
and another opening in the rock Reynard's Kitchen. 
The same variety of wild romantic scenes which 
distinguish the beginning of the dale, extends to its 
northern termination : here two large rocks rise 
prominent, one on each side of the river, and form 
the portals to this surprising valley. The grand 
and picturesque are now seen no more ; the bottom 
becomes gradually flat, the rocks sink into small 
hills of stone, with a craggy fragment occasionally 
appearing after the discontinuation of the chain. 
Near this extremity of the dale is another large ca- 
vern, called Fox-holes, with some of inferior size. 
A path to the right of the Dove leads from a i'arm- 
house, called Hanson Grange, to the turnpike road 
proceeding to Ashborne. 

DRONFIELD.] The neat little market-town of 
Dronfield is pleasantly situated in a salubrious vale, 
in the hundred of Scarsdale, 6 miles north-north- 
west from Chesterfield, and 155 north-north-west 
from London. The market day is Thursday. The 
inhabitants of Dronfield about 1343 in number are 
remarkable for longevity. In the reign of Queen 
Elizabeth, Henry Fanshawe, Esq. founded an ex* 
ccllent free-school here. 

Dronfield Church js a handsome building, 132 
feet in length, having a tower at the west end, ter- 
minated by a spire. From a joint in the north side 
of the chancel, six yards from the ground, springs a 
small elm-tree, about five feet in height, a stone 
towards the west corner appearing to have given 
way to it. Opposite the west end of the church. 
was formerly a chantry, now the Dragon public- 
house. 

DUFFIELD.] Duffield is an exceedingly pleasant 
village, situated on each side of the old road to Mat- 
lock, in the hundred of Appletreo, four miles and a 
quarter north from Derby. There is said to have 
been a large forest here ; tithe of all pannage, veni- 
son, coney, and rent, arising from which, was given 
to the monks of Tutbury, by William de Ferrers, in 
the reign of Henry III. that their prayers might be 
offered for the soul of his wife Agnes, and lor the 
souls of his ancestors.. 

At the north-Avest end of the village, on a rising 
ground, formerly stood a castle, which in the four- 
teenth ceutury belonged to the Ferrers, Earls of 
Derby. " Robert de Ferrers, the second Earl, in. 
6 thti 



DERBYSHIRE. 



the nineteenth fear of the reign of Henry II. hear- 
hig that the territories of the King of France were 
invaded by the adherents of young Henry, whom his 
father caused to be crowned during his own life, 
joined in rebellion against his sovereign, and garri- 
soned his castle at Uuffield. However, some time 
afterwards, to obtain pardon and i'avour, he surren- 
dered his fortress to the King, who commanded it to 
be immediately demolished, which was effected in 
August, 1325." 

EDALE.] The village of Edale is situated in the 
hundred of High Peak, five miles and three quarters 
north-east by east from Chapel-in-the Frith. 

" Amongst the sequestered vallies in this quarter 
of the county," observes a modern writer, " is the 
pleasant Edale, where, secluded in the bosom of (he 
mountains from the bustle of the world, the inhabi- 
tants appear to enjoy all the quiet and security which 
pervaded the happy valley of Rasselas. The dale 
is wide and fertile, and better cultivated than most 
others in the regions of the Peak : the bottom is en- 
liveu'ed by a little rivulet, which flows near the vil- 
lage of Edale, and aids, by its motion, the opera- 
tions of a cotton factory, established at a little dis- 
tance. Various other dales branch off from this to 
an extensive tract, called the Woodlands of Derby- 
shire, the upper parts of which display some fine 
oak, fir, and larch-trees. The ground of the Wood- 
lands mostly belongs to the Duke of Devonshire, 
by whose direction the plough has been introduced, 
and many acres brought into cultivation." 

In Mr. Bray's description of this neighbourhood, 
in his Tour through Derbyshire, he mentions that a 
large stone, lying on the side of a hill to the right of 
this village, was removed some years ago, and that 
under it, fifteen or sixteen beads were found, of a 
large size and various colours, which he conjectures 
to have been Druidical amulets. This gentleman 
mentions also a pile of unhewn masses of stone call- 
ed a Druid's Altar, standing in a rough pasture, on 
the summit of a hill, which was destroyed for the 
ake of the stone. - " The altar was circular, about 
sixty feet diameter, composed of rough stones of va- 
rious sizes, rudely piled together, without mortar or 
cement, in the form of a haycock, about eighteen 

* Jedediah Biwton was born about the year 1704; but, al- 
though the son of a school master, he could neither read nor 
write Notwithstanding this lie attained a power of calculation 
almost incredible. Kven mixed company, conversation, and 
confused noises could not distract his mind when intent on a 
problem. A person once proposed to him this question: In a 
body the three sides ot which are 23,145,789 yards, 5,642,732 
yards, and 54,965 yards, how many cubic eighths of an inch ? 
In about five hours Jedediah accurately solved this intricate 
problem, though in the midst of business, and surrounded by 
more than a hundred labourers. He would measure a piece 
of land by walking over it, as exactly as another could do wilh 
a chain. In 1754 lie walked to Lomlon to see the Royal Fa- 
mily, but returned disappointed. Whilst in town he was in- 
troduced to the Hoyal Society,' and answered a number of dit- 
ftcu It arithmetical questions so satisfactorily, that his dismissal 
was accompanied with a handsome gratuity. He was also 
taken to Drury-Lane, wliuo, instead of minding the play or 



feet perpendicular height. .The top v.v.s hollow, in 
the form of a bason, about lour feet deep, and six 
feet in diameter : the stone on the inside of tjiis ba- 
son was black, and much burned, as if large lires 
had been often made in it." Mr. Pilkington, com- 
menting on this passage, observes, that on Stauwich 
Top there are at least thfee masses of stoue of this 
kind, and that they are much too numerous in this 
part of the count) to be supposed Druidical 
altars. 

EGGINTON.] This i a small but pleasant village 
near the banks of the Dove, in the hundred of Slor- 
leston and Litehurch, eight miles south-west from 
Derbyi Here is the seat of the Every family, which 
came from Somersetshire. The greater part of the 
old mansion having been destroyed by fire in the 
year 1736, the present house was erected on its 
site. 

ELMTON.] This little village, situated in the 
hundred of Scarsdale, nine miles east by north from 
Chesterfield, is chiefly remarkable for having been 
the birth-place of Jedediah Buxton, a poor day- 
labourer, gifted, in an extraordinary manner, with 
the power of making arithmetical calculations.* 

ELDEN HOLE.] This famous perpendicular 
chasm, which is generally regarded as the third 
wonder of the Peak,t is situated on the south side 
of a hill, about three miles west from Castleton. It 
is thus ludicrously described by Cotton : 

Betwixt a verdant mountain's falling flanks, 

And within bounds of easy swelling banks, 

That hem the wonder in on every side, 

A formidable fissure gapes so wide ; 

Steep, black, and full of horror, that who dare 

Look down into the chasm, and keep his hair 

From lifting off his hat, cither has none, 

Or for more modish curls cashires his own. 

The yawning mouth is thirty paces long, 

Scarce half so wide, within lin'd thro' with strong 

Continuous walls of solid perpend stone ; 

A gulph, wide, steep, black, and dreadful one; 

Which few that come to see it dare come near ; 

And the more daring 6till approach with fear. 

Respecting this chasm the wildest reports, th 
most exaggerated descriptions, have been propagat- 
ed. It has been represented as perfectly unfathom- 

gazing with wonder, lie employed himself in counting the words 
uttered by Mr. Garrick. flis portrait was taken by Miss 
Hartley in 1764, at which period, according to his own calcu- 
lation, "he had existed 1,792,230,823 seconds. lie lived to be 
above 70, and had several children. 

f The seven wonders of the Peak are thus comprised, by 
Hobbes, in one line: 

" ;Edes, mons, barathrum, binus fons, antraque bina." 

(Translation.) 
House, mountain, pit, two fountains, and two caves. 

These wonders are generally enumerated in the following 
order: Chatwbrth House; Mam Tor; Elden Hole; Bux- 
ton Wells ; Tideswell ; Pool's Hole ; and the Devil's Cave. 



64 



DERBYSHIRE. 



able, and as teeming, at a certain depth, with such 
impure air that no animal could respire it without 
certain destruction. In proof of the latter part of 
this opinion, it is recorded, that the Earl ot Leices- 
ter, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, hired a black 
man to go down, in a basket of stones, who having 
descended 300 ells, and being pulled up was both 
speechless and senseless, and died within eight days 
of a phmisy. Mr. Cotton, also, from whom we 
liave already quoted, furnishes the following account 
of an experiment which he made himself : 

How deep tlvs gulpli does travel tinder ground, 
Though there has been attempts was never found ; 
But I myself with the Peak surrounded, 
Eight hundred four sore and lour yards have sounded ; 
And though ol th^e four score rehirn'd bark wet, 
The plummet drew, and found no bottom yet. 

The depth here mentioned is four yards above 
half a mile. A gentleman whose account was quot- 
ed in Calcott's Treatise on the Deluge, from the 
second number of the Philosophical Transactions, 
has asserted, t-'.tt he let down a line 933 yards, 
without meeting with a bottom ; and the credulity 
of a modern traveller has been so grossly imposed 
OP, that he has stated the known profundity of this 
abyss at upwards of 770 yards ; yet even to that 
depth, he observes, the line was let down without 
finding a bottom. 

Before we proceed to offer such evidence as tends 
to invalidate the assertion, that Elden Hole is unfa- 
thomable, it may be proper to remark that, many 
years ago, the owner of the pasture in which this 
chasm is situated, having lost several cattle, agreed 
with two men to fill it up. These men spent somo 
days in throwing down many loads of stones ; but 
seeing no effect from their labour, they ventured 
down the fissure themselves, and found at the bottom 
a vast cavern ; upon which, despairing to procure a 
quantity of stones sufficient to fill it up, they desisted 
from their work. Since this period, the chasm has 
been surrounded by a high wall, having an entrance 
door at the end, the key of which is kept at an ad- 
jacent village, and is not to be obtaiuedwitbout some 
pecuniary reeompence. The less, therefore, the 
depth of this abyss is known, the more productive, 
of course, it becomes ; as the number who desire to 
look down its dark recesses is by that means ren- 
dered greater. 

A Mr. Lloyd, having received the account of the 
fruitless attempt to fill up the cavern with stones 
and rubbish, from one of the men who had been em- 
ployed on the occasion, and being assured there 
were no damps at the bottom, formed the determi- 
nation of going down himself. The particulars of 
his descent (of which the following is an abstract) 
ar recorded in the sixty-first volume of the Philo-- 
sop ilual Transactions. He was let down by two 
ropes about forty fathoms long ; for the first twenty 
yards, though he descended obliquely, he could as- 
sist himself with his hands and his feet ; but below 



this, the rock projecting in large irregular 
he found it very difficult to pass ; and on descend- 
ing ten yards more he perceived that the rope by 
which he was suspended was at least six yards from 
the perpendicular ; from hence, the breadth ot the 
chink was about three yards, and the length about 
six ; the sides were very irregular, and the craggs 
were covered with moss, being besides wet and 
dirty ; within fourteen yards of the bottom, the rock 
opened on the east side, and he swung till he reach- 
ed the floor of the cavern, which was at the depth of 
sixty-two yards from the mouth ; the light, however, 
which came from above, was sufficient to read any 
print. Here he found the cavern to consist of two 
parts : that in which he alighted was like an oven ; 
the other where he first began to swing, was a vast 
dome, shaped like the inside of a glass-nouse, and a 
small arched passage formed a communication be- 
tween them ; in this passage, the stones which had 
teen thrown in at the top formed a slope, extending 
from the wall at the west side of the first dome al- 
most to the bottom of the second cave or oven, so 
that the farther end of the cave was lower by twenty- 
five yards than where he alighted. The diameter of 
this cavern he judged to be about fifty yards ; the 
to]) he could not trace with his eye, but had reason 
to believe that it extended to a prodigious height ; 
for, when he was nearly at the top of one of the en- 
crusted rocks, which was an elevation of at least 
twenty yards, he could then see no enclosure of the 
dome, though of course he saw much farther than 
when he stood at the bottom. After climbing up a 
few loose stones, on the south side of the second ca- 
vern, he descended again, through a small aperture* 
into a little cave about four yards long, and two 
yards high, which was lined throughout with a kind 
of sparkling stalactites of a very fine deep yellow, 
with some small stalactical drops hanging from the 
roof. He found a noble column, of about ninety 
feet in height, of the same kind of encrustation, fac- 
ing the first entrance ; as he proceeded to the north, 
he came to a large stone, that was covered with the 
same substance, and under it he found a note two 
yards deep, that was uniformly lined with it. From 
the edge of this hole sprung a rocky ascent, sloping 
like a buttress against the side of the cavern, and 
consisting of vast solid rouml masses, of the same 
substance and colour ; he climbed ip this ascent to 
the height of about sixty ieet, and got some fine 
pieces ol the stalactites, which hung from the craggy 
sides of the cavern which joined the projection he 
had ascended. Having get down, which was not 
effected without considerable difficulty and danger, 
he proceeded in the same direction, and soon came 
to another pile of cncimstatioiis of a different kind 
and colour j those being much rougher, and not 
tinged with yvllow, but brown. At the top of this 
he found a small cavern, opening into the side of the 
vault, which he entered, and where he saw vast 
drops of the stalactites, hanging l.ke icicles from 
every part of the roof, some of which were four or 

I ; * -- XI I V 



DERBYSHIRE. 



fire feet long, and as thick as a man's body. The 
greater part of the walls of the large cavern, or 
vault, was lined with encrustations of three kinds : 
the first was the deep yellow stalactites ; the second 
was a thin coating, resembling a light-coloured var- 
nish (this covered the lime-stone, and reflected the 
light of the caudles with great splendour ;) the third 
sort was a rough efflorescent, every shoot of which 
resembled a kind of rose flower. He now returned 
through the arch which separates the two vaults, re- 
ascending the slope of loose stones, which greatly 
lessened the magnificence of the entrance into the 
inner cavern. When he had again fastened the rope 
to his body, he gave the signal to be drawn up, 
which he found much more dangerous and difficult 
than being let down ; on account of his weight 
drawing the rope between the fragments of the rocks, 
to which he adhered, and his body jarring against 
the sides, notwithstanding the defence he made with 
his hands ; the rope also loosened the stones over 
his head, the fall of which he dreaded every moment, 
and if any of them had fallen he must inevitably 
have perished. Being obliged to ascend with his 
face towards the wall, he could not make any par- 
ticular observations on the rocks that were behind 
or on each side of him ; he saw, however, under 
the projection of the rock where the passage first 
became narrow, the entrance of a cavern which 
seemed to penetrate a great way, but he could not 
get int it." 

The most recent attempt to explore the depth of 
this chasm, appears to have been that of the Editors 
of the Beauties of England and Wales, about the 
year 1802, who have furnished us with the following 
particulars : 

" The mouth of the chasm opens longitudinally, 
in a direction from south to north. Its shape is 
nearly that of an irregular ellipsis, about thirty yards 
in length, and nine broad in the widest part. The 
northern end is fringed with small trees ; and moss 
and underwood grow out of the crevices on each 
side to the depth of forty or fifty feet. As the fis- 
sures recede from the surface, it gradually con- 
tracts ; and, at the depth of twenty, or twenty-five 
yards, hades considerably to the west, so that the 
eye can no longer trace its course. The bushes, 
and projecting masses of stone, are, excepting in 
one point on the west side, extremely unfavourable 
to plumbing it with accuracy. From this point, a 
weight was carefully let down, and, in the opinion 
of several persons by whom the line was repeatedly 
felt, was adjudged to have reached the bottom. The 
line had been previously measured, and the depth to 
which the weight descended was found to be no 
more than sixty-seven yards and one foot ! That 



this is the real depth of the chasm, or as near as it 
can be ascertained, the assertions of three miners, 
questioned separately, who have been let down into 
it, at different periods within the last thirty-five or 
thirty-six years, abundantly corroborates. 

" Two of them imagined its depth to be about 
sixty-eight, or seventy yards ; but as many years 
had elapsed since the time of their subterraneous ex- 
pedition, they would not speak to a fathom or two. 
The third, whose descent into the cavern had been 
more recent, affirmed,* that the length of the rope 
which enabled him to reach the bottom, was thirty- 
three fathoms, and a trifle more. So nearly do these 
different relations correspond, that we can hardly 
suppose the depth of Elden Hole will again be made 
a question. It should be remarked, that the rise of 
the hill in the vicinity of the chasm, is about on loot 
in six ; and, consequently, that the variation of a few 
yards in divers admeasurements, may at once be re- 
conciled, by supposing the stations to have becu 
different," 

To this statement, it is proper to add, that a gen- 
tleman, who lived on the spot, told Mr. Lloyd, after 
his return from this subterranean expedition, that 
there was formerly, in the floor of the great cavern, 
somewhere near the large heap of stones, the mouth 
ot a second shaft, which had been covered by the 
miners, and was said to have gone down a vast 
depth, and to have had water at the bottom. This 
it seems probable, might be the direction which the 
plummet took, which was let down by Mr. Cotton. 
It is believed by some, that this water is a continua- 
tion of the subterraneous stream in the great cavern 
at Castleton, as a large quantity of grit-stone is ob- 
served to grow near Elden Hole, and none near 
Castleton ; and yet, on high floods, the river at the 
latter place washes great quantities of that sort of 
grit-stone, in fragments out of the mouth of the ca- 
vern there. There is also a commonly-received tra- 
dition at this place, that a goose, which was lost 
down Elden Hole^ was afterwards seen at the mouth 
ef the cavern, at Castleton. 

ELVASTON.] Elvaston, formerly Aylewaston, is 
situated in the hundred of Morleston and Litchurch, 
four miles south-east by east from Derby. It is the 
seat of the Stanhopes, Earls of Harrington, and has. 
long been the residence of that family. The grounds, 
which are by no means remarkable for their beauty, 
have been laid out in the ancient manner ; but some 
of the apartments of the mansion have been fitted up 
in conformity with modem taste. Here are several, 
family portraits, and some other paintings of value. 
Walter Blunt, Baron of Mountjoy, whose family 
possessed this estate in the time of Edward IV. was 
a native of Elvaston. From the Blunts, the manor 



* " Not more, indeed, than five years ago. The occasion 
of his undertaking it, was a supposition tliat a gentleman had 
been murdered, and thrown down the fissure in the niglit, as 
the doer of the surrounding wall had been removed, and a 



strange horse, saddled and bridled, hot without a rider, had beert 
found loose on the Peak Forest. Nothing was discovered to, 
justify the report of the murder," 

passed 



DERBYSHIRE. 



passed to the Poles, of Hadburne ; and, about the 
middle of the 16th century, it came into the posses- 
sion of the Stanhopes.* 

ETWALL.] Etwall is situated in the hundred of 
Appletree, six miles west-south-west from Derby. 
li has a free-school, and an hospital, which, subse- 
quently to the Dissolution, were founded and en- 
dowed by t*\r John Port. 

EYAM.] The village of Eyam, situated in the 
hundred of High Peak, a mile and a half north from 
Stoney Middletou, has been chiefly noted, of late 
years, as the birth-place of Miss Seward, a lady 
much distinguished .by her poetical productions. f 
Dr. Mead, in his tract upon the Great Plague of 
London, mentions this village, on account of the re- 
markable circumstance of that dreadful disease hav- 
ing been communicated by a box of materials sent 

* William Stanhope, the lirst Earl of Harrington, was the 
possessor of eminent talents ; and early in life, was sent as envoy 
extraordinary to the court of Spain. On the accession ot 
George the First, he was made colonel of a regiment of dragoons; 
and his bravery appeared as conspicuous as his diplomatic ta- 
lents. In 1719, lie commanded a detachment sent to assist the 
attack made by the English squadron on the enemy's ships in 
Port St. Anthony. To his conduct the success of the expedi- 
tion was in a great measure owing; for the destruction of three 
men of war,' and a considerable quantity of naval stores, was 
effected chiefly by his skill and courage. He was ambassador 
and plenipotentiary to the congress at Soissons under George 
the Second ; and was made a British peer in 1729. "In 1742 
he was created Viscount Petersham, and.Earl of Harrington. 
In 1746 he was made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. He died in 
1756. The life of William, the second Earl, presents nothing 
remarkable. That of Charles, the present Earl, abounds with 
various and splendid actions, with which some future biographer 
will eagerly till a number of his pages. 

\ Anna Seward, distinguished in the literary world as a poet 
and biographer, and for her epistolary talents, was the daughter 
of the Rev. Thomas Seward, Rector of Eyam, prebendary of 
Salisbury, and canon residentiary of I.itchtield. Mr. Seward 
was a man of considerable learning and taste; in 1750 he pub- 
lished an edition of the Plays of Beaumont and Fletcher; he 
vas also the author of an ingenious tract on the conformity be- 
tween pagani.-m and popery; and in the second volume of 
Dodsley's Collection he published a few elegant little poems. 
Mr. Seward married in 1745, and settled at Eyam, at which 
place, in the second year of his marriage, Miss Seward was 
born. She had several sisters and one brother, but all died in 
their infancy except the second daughter, who lived till the age 
of nineteen. In her seventh year Miss Seward's family removed 
to Litchfield, and in her thirteenth to Bishop's Pala'ce, which 
continued lobe her residence during life. Miss Seward was 
distinguished for precocity of talents, and her father, imagin- 
ing he s:uv the dawning of a poetic genius, amused himself with 
fostering it. At the age of three, before she could read, he had 
taught her to lisp the Allegro and Penseroso of Milion, and in 
her ninth year she was enabled to speak by rote, with varied 
melody and correct accent, the first three books of the Paradise 
Lost. The mother of Miss Seward died in the year 1780 : she 
was a woman of strong sense, but being without any tate for 
literary pursuits herself, she gave no encouragement to her 
daughter'; and even her father, as she advanced to womanhood, 
withdrew that animating welcome which he had given to the 
earlier attempts of her muse. Miss Si-ward's productions were 
confined to the perusal of her more intimate friends, till she be- 
came acquainted with Lady Miller, of Bath East on, who en- 
tn-ated her to write for the poetic institution of that villa, and to 
become a candidate for its myrtle wreath: this she repeatedly 
obtained. The prize poems were published in the Bath Easton 



to a taylor who resided here. The servant, on open- 
ing the box, observed the goods were damp, and 
being desired to dry them by the fire, was seized 
with the plague and expired ; the whole family were 
taken in the same, manner and all but one person 
perished. The distemper spread through the parish 
and 259 persons became its victims. The Reverend 
William Mompesson, by his prudent exertions, pre- 
vented the contagion from extending to .the neigh- 
bouring villages ; by his advice the sick were re- 
moved into huts, built upon the common, and pro- 
visions were furnished them by the Earl of Devon- 
shire. 

The horrible earthquake which destroyed Lisbon, 
in 1755, was clearly felt by the men working in the 
mines at Eyam Edge ; fragments fell from the .fis- 
sures of the rock, and violent explosions, as of a can- 



volume, and from them into other public prints ; her name was 
added, and Miss Seward thus became known. In the begin- 
ning of the year 1780, appeared her Elegy on the Death of 
Captain Cook. This was followed by another Elegy on her 
gallant and amiable friend Major Andre. In 1782 she pub- 
lished her poem to the memory of Lady Millar ; in 1784, her 
poetical novel " Louisa;" in 1787, her " Epic Ode on the 
return of General Elliott from Gibraltar;" in 1790, " Llan- 
gollen Vale" and other poems; and in 1806, her " Life of 
Darwin." She was also a contributor to the Gentleman's Ma- 
gazine, and other periodical publications. The death of Miss 
Seward took place on Lady t)ay, 1809: since that event a col- 
lection of her poems has been published in three volumes, by- 
Walter Sco't ; and her literary correspondence by Mr. Consta- 
ble. In private life Miss Seward was highly respected, and 
her acquaintance was very numerous. As an author, she was 
free from that narrow envy which detracts from contemporary 
merit ; and as a friend and daughter, kind even to enthusiasm. 
The instance recorded in her Memoirs of Dr. Darwin, of her 
offer to suffer blood to be drawn from her own veins for the 
purpose of transfusion into those of Lady Northesk, on whom 
Dr. Darwin entertained thoughts of trying the extraordinary 
experiment, satisfactorily demonstrates the strength of her friend- 
ship. Her Life of Dr. Darwin cannot but be accurate from her 
intimacy with that gentleman, but the style of that, as well as of 
her general prose composition, is disfigured by the use of fre- 
quent inversions, compounded epithets, and surprising devia- 
tions from grammatical accuracy. As a poet, Miss Seward pos- 
sessed no small share of genius, a fertile imagination, a correct 
taste, and great power of language. " Miss Seward," says the 
editor of her poetical works, " was in practice trained and at- 
tached to that school of picturesque and florid description, of 
lefty and bold personification, of a diction which inversion and 
the use of compound epithets rendered as remote as possible 
from the tone of ordinary language, which was introduced, 
or at least rendered fashionable by Dr. Darwin; but which was 
too remote from common life and natural expression, to retain 
its popularity. Yet her tasle, though, perhaps, over dazzled 
by the splendour which she adopted in her own compositions, 
readily admitted the claims of Pope, Collins, Gray, Mason, and 
ol all those bards who have condescended to add the graces of 
style and expression to poetical thought and imagery. But she 
particularly demanded beauty, elegance, or splendour of lan- 
guage ; and was unwilling to allow that sublimity or truth of 
conception could atone for poverty, rudeness,' or even simpl - 
city of expression. To Spencer, and the poets of his school, 
she lent a very unwilling ear; and what will, perhaps, best ex- 
plain my meaning, she greatly preferred the (lowing numbers 
and expanded descriptions of Pope's Iliad to Cowper's trans- 
lation, which approaches nearer to the simple dignity of 
Bonier." 



uon, 



DERBYSHIRE. 



non, were distinctly heard. In a drift, 120 yards in 
depth, and about 50 yards in length, several shocks 
"Were 1'clt and n loud rumbling noise was heard. The 
second shock was so violent as to cause the rocks 
to grind each other. Apparently about four or five 
minutes elapsed between each shock. 

FOREMARK.] The little village of Foremark, 
pleasantly situated on the Trent, in the hundred of 
Repton and Gresley, seven miles south-south-west 
from Derby, is distinguished by the seat of Sir 
Francis Burdett, Bart, one of the present represen- 
tatives in Parliament of the City of Westminster.* 
The manor, and the estates connected with it, were 
formerly the possession of the Frauneys, who con- 
veyed them to the Burdetts, by the marriage of au 
heiress with Sir R. Burdett, of Bramcote, in War- 
wickshire, about the year 1607. 

The family mansion was built, about half a cen- 
tury ago, by the late Sir Robert Burdett, upon the 
ite of a very ancient house ; but neither so elegant, 
nor so commodious, as the present. This is a 
handsome stone building, with a portico projecting 
from the north front, which is otherwise uniform 
with the south, aud, like that, consists of a square 
centre, flanked with bows, terminating in dome roofs, 
which have a peculiar, but somewhat heavy, appear- 
ance. Each front has a handsome double flight of 
steps. The offices are connected with the east end 
of the mansion by a covered walk, leading through 
an enclosed court. A spacious and handsome hall 
(forty-seven feet long, by thirty broad) extends 
through the centre of the edifice, from north to south, 
having an entrance at each end, opening upon the 
respective flights of steps. The spaces on each side 
of the hall are occupied by various convenient apart- 
ments, and a staircase of oak, very wide and hand- 
some, leading to the bed-chnmbers and dressing- 
rooms ; over which is an attic story. All the floors 
and doors are of the best oak, admirably fitted. The 
rooms contain some good family portraits ; but none 
of partieular celebrity. On a rising ground, near 
the west end of the house, which is ornamented with 
a small lawn, shaded by a grove of young oaks, 
stands the village church, a plain, humble fabric, 
with a low tower, yet forming a pleasing object, iu 
connection with the contiguous scenery, from seve- 
ral points of view. The old parish church, or cha- 
pel, which was an appendage to the priory at Rep- 
ton, stood in the hamlet of Ingleby, on the banks of 
the Trent, about a mile to the east. When that fell 
into decay, the present edifice was erected by the 
Lord of the Manor, and consecrated by Bishop Has- 
kett, in the year 1662. A pleasant secluded walk, 
between two rows of aged oaks, runs from the end 

* Sir Francis Burdett is descended from a very ancient 
family, one of whom, named Hugh Burdett, came into England 
with ihe Conqueror. His descendant, William Burdett, Xord 
of Louseby, in Leicestershire, who lived in the time of Henry 
the Second, founded the Priory of Aucote, in Warwickshire, 
to expiate the murder of hin wife, whom he had slain oil 

voi. it. Ko. 40. 



of the house, and is skirted on the north side by a 
close thicket of underwood, interspersed with wil- 
lows, ash, and oak-trees, through the intervals of 
which the prospect of an irregularly rising lawn is 
admitted, pleasingly varied by scattered oaks, thorn?, 
and beeches, and bounded by plantations. The 
most striking ornament of (he grounds, however, is 
a grove of majestic oaks, extending from the vicinity 
of the house to a piece of water at some distance, 
opposite the north front. Beyond the grove, the 
land declines northward to the rich meadows water*- 
ed by the Trent. Opposite the house, on the south,, 
the ground gently swells into a hill, ascending which, 
and proceeding in a southerly direction, the road 
leads to Foremark Park, where the country assumes 
a down- like appearance, consisting of green swell- 
ing eminences, which agreeably contrast with the 
flat ir.eadows enlivened with the meandering Trent 
on tl.e north. These rising grounds, formerly dis- 
posed in a spacious park, are now enclosed. Bur- 
ton, in' his " Anatomy of Melancholy," justly no- 
tices Foremark as particularly pleasant, wholesome, 
and eligible ; for, besides the agreeable disposition 
of the scenery, the soil is dry and fertile, lying 1 near 
a stratum of gravel. It is also very iarourable to 
the production of game, particularly pheasants ; 
though, of late, from the depredations of poachers, 
their numbers have not been abundant. 

Somewhat more than a quarter of a mile from 
Foremark, stands a rocky bank, terminating abrupt- 
ly beyond the meadows on the border of tin 1 Trent. 
Its summit is merely a continuation of the high 
grounds of Foremark ; but its rude break, strange- 
ness of form, and attendant objects, when viewed 
from the grounds at its foot, form a singular scene. 
The centre, which is most naked, and from which the 
rock projects, resembles a Gothic ruin ; the open- 
ings for the light, and the rudely fashioned door- 
way, leading into cells dug in the rock, give probabi- 
lity to the tradition which states it to have been the re- 
sidence of an Anchorite. The bank is formed of rough 
grit-stone, with a mass of sand and pebble collected 
by the river, which, though now flowing at a short 
distance, formerly ran at the base of the rock. Oak. 
and fir-trees, with abrupt prominences mantled over 
with bush-wood and ivy, give a highly picturesque 
appearance to the summit of the rock. Near this 
spot human bones have been dug up ; and beneath 
the rock the resemblance of a sepulchral figure may 
be discerned. 

FOSTON.] The village of Foston, situated in the 
parish of Scropton-upon-Dove, in the hundred of 
Appletree, eleven miles and a half west by south 
from Derby, is entitled to notice chiefly on account 

returning from the Holy Land. Nicholas Burdett, Knight, 
served in the wars ot Henry the Fifth and Sixth, and was slain 
at Pontoise. Thomas, his heir, a person of considerable ability, 
having incurred the displeasure of Edward the Fourth, by hit 
attachment to the Duke of Clarence, and utterance of some 
rash words, was beheaded as a trailer. 



DERBYSHIRE. 



of the following curious statement, given by Cough* 
in his Additions to Caraden. " At Foston," says 
he, " was horn, 1540, Arthur Agard, 45 years de- 
puty chamberlain of the Exchequer, who died in 
165 J. Mr. Camden calls him Antiquarius insignis. 
Walter Achard, or Agard, claimed to hold by inhe- 
ritance the office of Escheator, and coroner of the 
whole honour of Tuthury, in the county of Stafford, 
and of the baillhvick of Leyke, for which he pro- 
duced no other evidence than a white hunting-horn, 
adorned with silver gilt in the middle, and at each 
end with a belt of black silk, set with silver gilt 
buckles, and the arms of Edmund, second son of 
Henry the Third. This horn is now in the posses- 
sion of Mr. Foxlowe, of Staveley, in this county, 
who enjoys the posts of Feodary, or Bailiff in Fee, 
Escheator, Coroner, and Clerk of the Market of 
Tutbury Honor, by this Tenure, and by virtue of his 
being in possession of this horn, which he purchased 
of Christopher Stanhope, of Elvaston, Esq. in whose 
family it came by a marriage with the heiress of 
Agard. The arms, as represented by Mr. Pegge, 
are really those of the house of Lancaster, impaling 
Ferrars of Tamworth, who probably held those of- 
fices of Agard ; for Nicholas Agard of Tutbury, 
who was living in 1560, married Elizabeth, daugh- 
ter and co-heir of Roger Ferrars, eleventh son of 
Sir Thomas Ferrars, of Tamworth. Foston is now 
the seat of Mr. Bate." 

GLOSSOP.] Glossop is an extensive parisli in the 
hundred of High Peak, ten miles north by west from 
Chapel-in-the-Frith. The village is seated on an 
eminence, in one of the deepest valleys in the Peak. 
The inhabitants are employed chiefly in spinning 
and wearing cotton, of which there are several fac- 
tories in the neighbourhood. The church, vvhioh is 
an ancient building, contains a neat marble tablet, 
with an inscription to the memory of Joseph Hague, 
Esq. of Park Hall, near Hayfield, who acquired 
considerable property by persevering industry ; and 
bequeathed the annual interest of 10QO/. for ever, 
towards clothing twenty-four poor men and women, 
out of the eight townships of Glossop-Daie (Glossop, 
Charlesworth, Chunnd, Dinting, Hadfield, Pad- 
field, Simondley, and Whitfiplcl) : above the tablet, 
is a fine marble bust of Mr. Hague, by Bacon. 

GODBF.HERE'S FOUNDER.] Godber's, or Godbe- 
here's Founder, is a mine, near the road leading 
from Cromfbrd to Wirksworth, in which, as we 
learn, from a late writer, the following remarkable 
event occurred, at the commencement of the year 
1797. 

" Two miners, named Job Boden and Anthony 
Pearson, went into the mine on the morning of the 
13th of January, and while they were at work, 
Pearson at the depth of forty-four yards, and Boden 
at the depth of twenty, the earth above them, toge- 
ther with a quantity of water, suddenly rushed in 
and filled the mine to the depth of- about forty-four 
yards. The ether miners immediately began to 



draw out the rubbish in search of their lost compa- 
nions, and on the third day after, Pearson was dis- 
covered dead, in an upright posture. The miners 
would now have discontinued their exertions, us 
here seemed little probability of their labours being 
of any avail ; but. being encouraged to proceed, 
[chiefly by the influence and persuasions of Charles 
llurt, Esq. of Wirksworth,) they at length disco- 
vered Boden, about three o'clock in the morning of 
the twentieth ; and though he had not received any 
kind of nourishment the eight days of his confine- 
ment, he was still living, but greatly emaciated. On 
being taken out, and treated with proper care, he so 
far recovered, as to be able to return to his work in 
the space, of fourteen weeks, and is now (1802) alive 
and well, having several children, one of who_m 
was born within a tvvelremonth after tha acci- 
dent. 

" To render the particulars of this extraordinary 
escape more intelligible, it should be observed, that 
the entrance of the mine is a perpendicular shaft, 
forty-four yards deep, from the bottom of which ex- 
tends a gait, or drift, (a passage in an horizontal 
direction,) eight yards in length, at the end of which 
descends a second shaft, (or, as the miners term it, 
a turn,) to the depth of sixteen yards. At the bot- 
tom of this is another gait, about twelve yards iu 
length, from the extremity of which another shaft 
extends to the depth of nearly twenty-four yards. 
At the top of every shaft a windlass was plac- 
ed, for the purpose of drawing up whatever 
might be extracted from the mine ; and Pearson'* 
employment was to draw up to the top of the second, 
shaft, the ore, &c. that was obtained by Boden at 
the bottom. 

" At the distance of seventy yards from the en- 
trance to the mine was a pool of water, which, though 
generally containing but a small quantity, had, at 
the time of the accident, been much increased 
through wet weather. The ground between the 
mine and the pool, had been undermined in search- 
ing for lead ore ; and it is supposed that the addi- 
tional weight of water over the vacuity, had forced 
down the earth, which filled the mine to the depth of 
ten yards in the second shaft. As the earth that 
rushed in descended below Pearson's s-tation at th 
mouth of this shaft, he w;\s consequently jammed in. 
there, and was discovered dead, as already mention- 
ed. The remarkable circumstance, that the rubbish, 
did not sink into the mine so low as to reach Boden, 
but stopped in its descent a few yards above him, 
may in some measure be accounted for, by observ- 
ing, that the part of the mine where its fall ended, 
was somewhat straitened by the projection of a large 
stone, an obstacle which Boden had often ineffectual- 
ally attempted to remove. 

" It appears, from a conversation lately held with 
the man thus strangely preserved from death, that, 
after contemplating his horrid situation awhile, dur- 
ing the first hours of his imprisonment, he Jay down 

and 



DERBYSHIRE. 



and slept. On awaking, the idea of perishing for 
\%a.nt of food rushed upon his mind, 'and he recollect - 
eci that he had four pounds of caudles with him in 
the mine : with these, when pressed by hunger, he 
endeavoured to appease his appetite ; but after two 
or three vain attempts to swallow such loathsome 
food, he desisted ; and the candles were found after 
his release : his thirst, which he had no means of 
alleviating', was excessive. Feeling extremely cold, 
he tried to remove this inconvenience by exercising 
himself in turning the windlass at the further end 
of the drift ; but having the misfortune to let the 
handle fall into the shaft below, he was deprived of 
this resource. 

" After the space of three or four days, as he 
imagines, being almost in a state of distraction, he 
ascended, by means of a rope that hung down, to 
that part of the mine where the rubbish had stopped 
in its descent, and, by labouring hard, caused a large 
quantity of it to fall to the bottom of the shaft. He 
was employed in this manner, when, at length, he 
beard the miners at work above him, and, by the ex- 
pedient of knocking with a stone, contrived to ap- 
prise them that he was still alive. Though it is 
evident, from this circumstance, that he retained his 
senses, he can hardly be persuaded that he was not 
deprived of them, and fancies that he was prompted 
to make the signals by some friendly voice, receiving 
from it an assurance, that if he did so, he should be 
rescued from his dreadful prison. 

" The signals which he made were heard by the 
miners about eight hours before they reached him ; 
and he describes himself as so much terrified by their 
noise, and by apprehensions that persons were com- 
ing to murder him, that he should certainly have 
destroyed himself, if he had not been closely confined 
by the earth which he had drawn down, and which 
so filled the lower part of the shaft, that he was al- 
most prevented from moving. In the midst of the 
panic that agitated him, he swallowed a considerable 
quantity of earth, which was afterwards expelled by 
proper remedies. He complained most that his legs 
were benumbed ami dead ; but their natural heat 
being restored by friction, no bad consequence en- 
sued. When the accident happened, he was forty- 
nine years of age, and then weighed upwards of 
twelve stone ; but imagines that he was reduced to 
half that weight by his confinement in the mine ; yet, 
as he was not weighed, this cannot be affirmed with 
certainty." 

GRESLEY.] Gresley, or Church Gresley, so called 
t.j distinguish it from Castle Gresley, a hamlet of 
the same parish, is situated in the hundred of Rep- 
ton and Gresley, fourteen miles south-west by south 

' The pedigree of the Gresleys is derived from Mahahulcius, 
whose brother was an ancestor of William the Conqueror. 
From him was descended Roger de Toeni, standard bearer of 
Normandy; whose two sons, Robert and Nigel, accompanied 
the Conqueror into England ; and it appears from the General 
Survey made in the year 1079, that the former thc-n possessed 
cearly ISO. lordships, of which Stafford, tlie place of his re^i- 



from Derby. " The situation of Gresley," observes 
a writer in the Topographer, " is upon a woody 
ridge, that affords pleasant views. The land itself 
is not of the richest quality, but of a cold and clay- 
like nature, having that extensive tract of unculti- 
vated land, named Ashby Woulds, close behind it, 
which, together with the surrounding country, 
abounds with coal. An enclosure of the Wonlds, 
which has long been talked of, would be a beneficial 
and comfortable event to the neighbourhood. The 
land descends gradually from Gresley near three 
miles to Drakelow, which, though fiat and confined 
in prospect, is well recompensed by the fertile mea- 
dows, through which the river Trent takes its wind- 
ing course." 

In the reign of Henry the First, a priory of the 
order of St. Austin, was founded here by William, 
son of Nigel de Gresley, and dedicated to St. Mary 
and St. George. At the Dissolution, its revenues ' 
were estimated at 81 /. Os. A small part of its ruins 
was visible not many years ago. 

Castle Gresley, a hamlet of this parish, mentioned 
above, derived its name from a fortress erected here 
by the Lords of Gresley,* but now completely demo- 
lished, the irregularity of the ground alone marking 1 
out the spot which it occupied. 

Sir Nigel Bovvyer Gresley, Bart, the present head 
of this family, resides at Drakelow, a low, but plea- 
sant situation, among the luxuriant meadows bor- 
dering the Trent opposite Staffordshire. " The 
house, which stands in the midst of a small park of 
deer," observes the writer in the Topographer, from 
whom we have before quoted, " is a large irregular 
pile of brick building whitened over, which affords a 
respectable appearance to travellers on the opposite 
side of the river. The objects it has to delight in, 
besides those before mentioned, are the neat town of 
Burton, and its adjacent, hills to the right,' while ia 
front are Sinai Park (so called by the Abbots of Bur- 
ton) and the other bold features on the edge of Need- 
wood Forest." 

Gresley Church, which is very ancient, and 
greatly decayed, formerly abounded in memorials of 
the Gresley family, most of which have been swept" 
away by the dilapidating hand of time. Amongst 
those which yet remain is one to the memory of Sir 
Thomas Gresley, who was sheriff of thia county in- 
the year 1602 : he died in IbOO ; and is represented 
on the tomb, kneeling, in the dress of the times. 
Another monument records the memory f the Al- 
leynes (several of whom possessed a part of the ma- 
nor, and were buried in this church) by a long in- 
scription, containing a genealogical account of the 
family from the time of Henry the Eighth, to the 



dence, was one. In the Domesday Book, Drakelow is record- 
ed as belonging to Nigel de Stafford. When the family assumed 
the name of Gresley is uncertain, yet it must have been prior 
to the year 1200, for William de Gresley then held the manor 
of Drakelow in capite, by the service ot finding a bow, without 
a string, a quiver, and thirteen arrows, twelve ilcdged, 01 
leathered, and one unit-inhere I. 

O ' K-> ' *n 



60 



DERBYSHIRE. 



beginning' of the last century. By this it appears 
that the Alleyues of Gresley were descended from 
Sir John AUeyne, Knight, who was twice Lord 
Mayor of London, &c. in the reign of the ahove 
Monarch. 

HADUON.] Haddon, or Upper Haddon, in the 
hundred of High Peak, two miles south-east from 
Bakewell, of which parish it is a township, is distin- 
guished as the seat, and ancient residence of the 
Ducal family of Rutland. Soon after the Conquest 
the manor was in possession of the Avenells, whose 
co-heirs married to Vernon and Basset, in the time 
of Richard 1. The Bassets remained possessors of 
half the estates in the reign of Edward III. The 
heiress of Vernon was united to Franceys, who took 
the name of Vernon. In the reign of Henry VI. the 
whole estate was possessed by Sir Richard Vernon, 
who was Speaker of the Parliament held at Leices- 
ter in 1425 ; he was afterwards Governor of Calais, 
to which oilice his son, who was the last Constable 
of England, succeeded. Sir Henry Vernon, his son, 
was Governor of Prince Arthur, heir apparent to 
Henry VII. who, it is said, frequently visited at 
Haddon. On the death of Sir George Vernon, de- 
nominated, for his splendid style of living, King of 
the Peak, the estate descended to his daughters, 
Margaret and Dorothy : the former married to Sir 
Thomas Hanjey, second son of the Earl of Derby ; 
and the latter, to Sir John Manners, second son of 
the first Earl of Rutland of that name. From this 
period, Haddon and the other estates belonging to 
the Vernons have regularly continued in the Rutland 
family. 

The mansion, termed Haddon Hall, or Haddon 
Grange, is seated on a bold eminence of lime-stone, 
which rises on the east side of the river Wye, and 
overlooks the delightful vale of Haddon. It is con- 
sidered as the most complete of our ancient baronial 
residences now remaining ; and, though uninhabited, 
and in bad repair, it is highly interesting to the an- 
tiquary, from the many indications it exhibits of the 
festive manners and hospitality of our ancestors, and 
of the inconvenient though social arrangement by 
which their mode of life was regulated. This man- 
sion continued to be the principal residence of the 
Rutland family till the beginning of the last century, 
when it was quitted for Belvoir Castle, iu Lincoln- 
shire. In the time of the first Duke (so created by 
Queen Anne,) one hundred and forty servants were 
maintained here, and the house was kept open, in 
the true style of Old English hospitality, for twelve 
days after Christmas. Since that time' it has occa- 
sionally been the scene of mirth and revelry ; and 
the cheerful welcome of ages long past, so far as the 
despoiled state of the mansion would permit, has not 
been wanting to increase the pleasures of the guests. 
The last time its festive board was spread, was 
shortly after the conclusion of the American war, 
when nearly two hundred couple danced in the Long 
Gallery. " 

The high turrets and embattlements of Haddon 



Hall, when seen from a distance, give it the sem- 
blance of a strong fortress ; and even on a nearer 
approach, the illusion is preserved. Though thus 
castellated, however, it was never furnished with the 
means of effectual resistance. It consists of numer- 
ous apartments and offices, erected at different pe- 
riods, and surrounding two paved quadrangular 
courts. The most ancient part is the tower over the 
gateway, on the east side of the upper quadrangle, 
supposed to have been built about the reign of Kd- 
ward the Third. The chapel is of Henry the Sixth's 
time ; and the tower at the north-west corner, on 
which are the arms of the Vernons, Pipes, &c. is 
nearly of the same period. The Gallery was erect- 
ed in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, after the death 
of Sir George Vernon : some of the offices are more 
modern ; but not any portion of the building is of a 
date subsequent to the seventeenth century. The 
chief entrance at the north-west angle, is under a 
high tower, through a large arched gateway, which 
leads, by a flight of angular steps, into the great 
court. Near the middle of the latter is a second 
flight of steps, communicating with the great porch, 
over the door of which are two shields of arms carv- 
ed in stone ; the one containing those of Vernon, 
and the other, of Fulco de Pembridgc, Lord of 
Tong, in Shropshire, whose daughter and heiress, 
Isabella, married Sir Richard Vernon, and consi- 
derably increased the family estate by her ewn pos- 
sessions. On the right of the passage leading from 
the porch, is the Great Hall, having a communica- 
tion with the grand staircase and state apartments ; 
and on the left, ranging in a line, are four large 
doorways, with large pointed stone arches, which 
connect with the kitchen, buttery, wine-cellar, and 
numerous small upper apartments, which appear to 
have been used as lodging-rooms for the guests and 
their retainers. In the kitchen are two vast fire- 
places, with irons for a prodigious number of spits ; 
various stoves, great double ranges of dressers, an 
enormous chopping-block, &c. Adjoining the kit- 
chen are several smaller rooms, for larders and other 
purposes. 

Tb,e Hall must have been the great public din- 
ing-room, for no other apartment is sufficiently spa- 
cious for the purpose. At the upper end is a raised 
floor, where the table for the Lord and his principal 
guests was spread ; and on two sides is a gallery, 
supported on pillars. From the south-east corner, 
is a passage leading to the great staircase, formed 
of huge blocks of stoue, rudely jointed ; ai the top 
of which, on the right, is a large apartment, hung 
with arras, and behind it, a little door, opening into 
the hall-gallery, On the left of the passage, at the 
head of the great stairs, are five or six very large 
semicircular steps, of solid timber, which lead into 
the Long Gallery, that occupies the whole south 
side of the second court, and is 110 feet in length, 
and 17 wide. The flooring is of oak planks, affirm- 
ed by tradition to have been cut out of a single tree 
which grew iu the garden. The wainscotting, also 

of 



DERBYSHIRE. 



Bi 



of oak, is curiously ornamented : on the frieze are 
eorvings of boars' heads, thistles, and roses : these, 
with the arms, &c. support the opinion, that it was 
put up after the house came into the possession of 
Sir John Manners, yet before the title of Earl of 
Rutland descended to that branch of the family. In 
the middle of the gallery is a large square recess, 
besides several bow-windows, in one of which are 
the arms of the Earl of Rutland, impaling Vernon, 
with its quarterings, and circled with the garter, 
&c. and in another, the arms of England, similarly 
encircled, and surmounted with a crown. Near the 
end of the gallery is a short passage, which opens 
into a room having a frieze and cornice of rough 
plaster, adorned with peacocks and boars' heads,* 
in alternate succession : an adjoining apartment is 
ornamented in the same manner ; and over the chim- 
ney is a very large bas-relief of Orpheus charming 
the Beasts, of similar composition. 

All the principal rooms, except the gallery, (says 
Mr. King, in his Observations on Ancient Castle---, 
in the sixth volume of the Archaeologia) " were 
hung with loose arras, a great part of which still 
remains ; and the doors were concealed every where 
behind the hangings, so that the tapestry was to be 
lifted up to pass in and out ; only for convenience, 
there were great iron hooks, (many of which are still 
in their places,) by means whereof it might occa- 
sionally be hefd back. The doors being thus con- 
cealed, nothing can be conceived more ill-fashioned 
than their workmanship ; few of these fit at all 
close ; and wooden bolts, rude bars, and iron hasps, 
are in general their best and only fastenings." The 
Chapel is in the south-west angle of the great court ; 
from which (he entrance leads under a low sharp- 
poiuted arch. It has a body and two aisles, divided 
from the former by pillars and pointed arches. In 
the windows are some good remains of painted 
glass ; ami the date Millesimo CCCCXXV1I. By 
the side of the altar is a niche and bason for holy 
water ; and an ancient stone ibnt is also preserved 
here. Near the entrance into the chapel stands a 
Roman altar, about three feet high, said to have been 
dug up near Bakewell. 

Haddon Park was ploughed up, and laid under 
cultivation, nearly half a century ago. The gardens 
consist entirely of terraces, ranged one above an- 

* A hoar's head is the Vernon c'rest ; and, in this mansion, 
it wa* tormcrly the custom, ever) Christmas, to serve up a 
boar's head, with a song. The following " Ancient \ 7 erses, 
by Allcyn Suttnn, concerning all the noble name of the Ver- 
nons, Knights," are supposed to have constituted one of these 
songs : 

A grislie bore, ss raven's feather black, 

l?r d in that land Rollo had by his wife, 
Paste th' ocean >ea, the bastard's part to take, 

That Harroid refte, of Kingdome and of lyfs. 



>.. n. NO. 60. 



other; each having a sort of stone ballustratte. 
prospects from one or two situations are exceed- 
ingly fine; and in the vicinity of the house is a, 
luxuriant group of trees, the birth of an earlier 
age. 

HARDWICK HALL.] Hardwick Hall, in the hun- 
dred of Scarsdale, has long been celebrated as on 
of the seats of the Duke of Devonshire. The man- 
sion is situated on a ridge of elevated ground, in a 
fine park, well furnished with majestic oaks, from 
amidst which the towers of the edifice emerge, their 
summits appearing covered with the lightly shivered 
fragments of battlements. These, however, are soon 
perceived to be carved open-work, in which the let- 
ters E.'S. frequently occur under a coronet, the ini- 
tials and memorials of the vanity of Elizabeth, 
Countess of Shrewsbury, by whom this edifice wat 
erected. The house is built with stone, and has a 
lofty tower at each corner, with a spacious court in 
front, surrounded by a high wall. Walpole, allud- 
ing to the taste of the Elizabethan age, of which 
Hardwick Hall is a specimen, happily observes, that 
" space and vastness seem to have made their v.liola 
ifleas of grandeur. The palaces of the memorable 
Countess of Shrewsbury are exactly in this style. 
The apartments are lofty and enormous, and they 
knew not how to furnish them. Pictures, had they 
had good ones, would have been lost in chambers of 
such height : tapestry, their chief moveable, was not 
commonly perfect enough to be real magnificence. 
Fretted ceilings, graceful mouldings of windows, 
and painted glass, the ornaments of the preceding 
age, were fallen into disuse. Immense lights com- 
posed of bad glass, in diamond panes, cast an air of 
poverty over their most costly apartments. That at 
Hardwick, still preserved as it was furnished for the 
reception and imprisonment of the Queen of Scots, 
is a curious picture of that age and style. Nothing 
can exceed the expence' in the bed of state, in the 
hangings in the same chamber, a!nd of the coverings 
for the tables. The first is cloth of gold, cloth of 
silver, velvets of different colours, lace fringes, and 
embroidery. The hangings consist of figures, rarge 
as life, representing the virtues and vices, embroider- 
ed on grounds of white and black velvet. The 
cloths cast over the tables, are embroidered, and 
embossed with gold on velvets and damasks. The 

Whose of-springe synce, ranginge the Peakishe hills, 
On ragged rocks a warlike forte dyd fynde, 

And malchte with Vernoyls, welder yt at their will, 
Where gentyll deeds approve their gentill kynd. 

There Denne both arte and nature stronge hath made, 
A lyvely sireame benethe yt runneth cleare, 

The myghty oakes above cast pleasant shade, 
Healthful! the ayre, all nedefuil things are neare. 

Off which Denne hath the greatest tusked swyne, 

A tygerebs hath taken to hjr ffare, 
OH' Rewbie hewe, issude ol famous lyne ; 

fn these conjoyn'd, rare verities doappeare: 
Olf iheme 1 wyshe such orlspringe to proceide, 
As may them both in worthy ness excede. 
|, only 



DERBYSHIRE. 



only moveables of any taste, arc the cabinets,, and 
tables themselves, carved iu oak. The chimneys are 
wide enough for a hall, or kitchen ; and over the 
arras are freeze of many feet deep, with miserable 
relievos in stucco, representing hunting. Here, and 
in all the great mansions of that age, is a gallery re- 
markable only for its extent." 

A considerable portion of the captivity of the 
Queen of Scots was passed at Hard wick Hall, and 
several of the apartments derive great interest from 
the furniture, and other articles preserved in remem- 
brance of that injured Princess. From the hall, 
which is hung with tapestry, and which has a pair 
of gigantic elk's horns flourishing between the win- 
dows opposite to the entrance, is a stone staircase, 
leading through the gallery of a small chapel, where 
the chairs and cushions used by Mary still remain, 
to the first story. Here, one apartment bears me- 
morials of her imprisonment ; the bed, hangings, 
and chairs, liaving been provided for her use: on 
the hangings is a figure adorning the cross, and va- 
rious other figures, allusive to virtue, chastity, libe- 
rality, perseverance, patience, &c. these have been 
kept with great care, and are still iu fine preserva- 
tion. In the Dining-Room on this Moor, are the 
following portraits : Elizabeth, Countess of Shrews- 
bury, represented in a close black dress, a double 
rulf, long chain of five rows of pearls, reaching be- 
low her waist, sleeves down to her wrists, turned up 
with small pointed white cuft's, a fan in her left hand, 
and brown hair. Walpole records a tradition, that 
this lady was told by a fortune-teller, that her d^eath 
should not happen while she continued building. 
She consequently employed much wealth in that 
way, yet died in a hard frost, when the workmen 
could not labour. Sir William Cavendish, husband 
to the Countess, set. 42 ; dressed in a fur gown, 
with a small flat cap, a glove in his left hand, a long 
pointed beard, and whiskers : William, the first 
Duke of Devonshire, in armour ; Charles Caven- 
dish, his brother, taken when asleep ; John, Lord 
Burleigh, son to Ann, Countess of Exeter ; Robert 
Cecil, third sou to William, second Earl of Salis- 
bury ; the Lord Treasurer Burleigh ; and a picture 
called Erasmus, but having the Cavendish and other 
arms of the Countess of Shrewsbury, in a lozenge, 
with the inscription, " The conclusion of all things, 
is to fear God, and keep his Commandments ; E. S. 
1597;" written beneath. In the Drawing- Room is 
another picture ef the Countess of Shrewsbury, 
wherein she is pourtrayed of a more advanced age 
than in the former : the dress is black, the same 

* Translation. The stag is noble from his blood, his horn, 
his heart, and his eye ; but more noble from his beautiful bur- 
then. Or it may be thus poetically turned: 

The stag from blood, from horn, from ear, 

Much nobleness may claim; 
But the proud weight lie's doojn'd to bear, 

Confers superior tame. 



chain of pearls, a large ruff with hollow plaits, and 
over her hair a kind of figured gauze veil, brought 
to the forehead in the middle, but leaving the sides 
uncovered. Over the chimney, underneath the arms 
of the Countess, which are here supported by two 
stags, are these lines : 

SANGUINE CORNU CORDE OCULO PEDE 
CERVUS ET AURE NOB1LIS AT CLARO 
PONDERE NOB1L10R.* 

" The second floor," observes Mrs. RadcIifFe, 'in 
her Tour to the Lakes> " is that which gives its 
chief interest to the edifice, as nearly all the apart- 
ments were allotted to Mary, (some of them for state 
purposes ;) and the furniture is known by other 
proofs than its appearance to remain as she left it. 
The chief room, or that of audience, is of uncommon 
loftiness, and strikes by its grandeur, before the ve- 
neration and tenderness arise, which its antiquities, 
and the plain told tale of the sufferings they wit- 
nessed, excite. The walls, which are covered to a 
considerable height with tapestry, are painted above 
with historical groups. The chairs are of black 
velvet, which is nearly concealed by a raised needle- 
work of gold, silver, and colours, that mingle with 
surprising richness, and remain in fresh preserva- 
tion. The upper end of the room is distinguished 
by a lofty canopy of the same materials, and by steps 
which support two chairs. f In front of the canopy 
is a carpeted table ; below which, the room breaks 
into a spacious recess, where a few articles of furni- 
ture are deposited used by Mary : the curtains are 
of gold tissue, but in so tattered a condition, that its 
original texture can hardly be perceived : this, and 
the chairs which accompany it, are supposed to be 
much earlier than Mary's time. A short passage 
leads from the state apartment to her own chamber, 
a small room, overlooked from the passage by a 
window, which enabled her attendants to know that 
she was contriving no means of escape through the 
others into the court. The bed and chairs of this 
room are of black velvet, embroidered by herself; 
the toilet of gold tissue; all more decayed than 
worn, and probably used only towards the conclu- 
sion of her imprisonment here, when she was remov- 
ed from some better apartment, in which the ancient 
bed, now in the state room, had been placed." 
Along the east front runs a gallery, 195 feet in 
length, lighted from windows in deep square re- 
cesses, which project beyond the wall. In this 
apartment are many portraits of illustrious charac- 
ters ; but several of them are defaced, and otherwise 



f Gray, the poet, in one of his letters, dated 1762, observes 
" Of all the places which I saw, Harclwicke pleases me the 
most. One would think that Mary, Queen of bcots, was but 
just walked down into the park tor half an hour; her gallery, 
her room of audience, her antichamber, with the very canopies, 
chairs of state, footstool, lit de repos, oratory, carpets, and 
hangings just as she left them : a little tattered indeed, but the 
more venerable; and all preserved with religious care, and 
papered up iu winter." 

greatly 



DERBYSHIRE. 



greatly injured by the damp. The following are the 
-principal: Queen Elizabeth, in a gown painted 
with serpents, birds, a sea-horse, swan, ostrich, &c. 
the four golden. Sir Thomas More, in a fur gown, 
and black cap. 'Lady Jane Grey, seated before n 
harpsichord, on which a Psalm-book is opened. On 
this picture is inscribed Mors potius qnam dedecus, 
1591, astatis 19. James the Fifth, of Scotland, aet. 
23 ; and his Queen, Mary, of Lorraine, tet. 24 ; iu 
rich dresses, with long thin faces, and yellow hair. 
Mary, Queen of Scots, in black, taken in the tenth 
year of her captivity ; u her countenance much fad- 
ed, deeply marked by indignation and grief, and re- 
duced as to the spectre of herself, frowning with 
suspicion upon all who approached it ; the black 
eyes looking out from their corners, thin lips, some- 
what aquiline nose, and beautiful chin." Thomas 
Hobbes, set. 89 : the celebrated philosopher of Malms- 
bury, who lies buried in the neighbouring church of 
Hault-Huckiu-ll. He died in 1679, in the ninety- 
first year of his age. Here are also portraits of 
Lord Darnley, Sir Thomas Wyat, and Richard the 
Third ; but all of them much injured. 

The flights of steps which lead from the second 
story to the roof, are of solid oak. From the leads, 
in a clear day, the cathedrals of York and Lincoln 
may be seen. 

Upwards of two hundred yards from the present 
residence, are the dilapidated remains of a more an- 
cient one. A few apartments, though approached 
with difficulty through the fragments of others, are 

?et entire : one of them, named the Giant's Cham- 
er, has been remarked for the beauty of its pro- 
portions ; and is said, by Ken.net, in his Memoirs of 
the Family of Cavendish, to hare been " thought 
fit for a pattern of measure and contrivance of a 
room at Blenheim." At what period this was built 
is uncertain ; but it is known to have been the resi- 
dence of the Hardwicks about the close of the fif- 
teenth century. 

HARTIIIJGTON.] The village of Hartington is si- 
tuated in the Wapentake of Wirks worth, eight miles 
and a half south-west from Bakewell. Hartington 
parish extends along the western boundary of the 
county, about twelve miles, and comprehends all the 
tract of land which lies between the two manors of 
Buxtou and Thorpe. It is divided into Hartington 
Town Quarter, the Lower Quarter, the Middle 
Quarter, and the Upper Quarter. Altogether, this 
parish comprises a population of about 2000 ; but 
the village, or what is termed the Town Quarter, 
contains only about 74 houses, and 477 persons. 

Some interesting rocky scenery presents itself 
near the entrance of the village. Hartington for- 
merly had a castle ; and some ancient remains are 
ye( visible in many parts of the neighbourhood. 

Hartington manor, which gives the title of Mar- 
quis to the Dukes of Devonshire, comprises the 
whole of the parish. It anciently belonged to the 
Ferrers family, and afterwards to the Duchy of Lan- 
caster ; iu the time of Charles I. it became the pro- 



perty of Villie.rs, Duke of Buckingham ; but, in the 
reign of Charles 11. it came to the Cavendishes, ia 
whom it has ever since remained. 

According to tradition, several battles have been 
fought in this neighbourhood. On Hartington Com- 
mon the Britons are reported to have had a sharp 
conflict with the Roman General, Agricola ; and on 
the hills near the village, the Republicans and Roy- 
alists are asserted to have engaged severely during 
the Civil Wars. The latter account has been cor- 
roborated by the finding of many musket balls, which 
have been washed down with the soil from the high 
grounds after heavy rains. About a mile and a 
half south-east of th village is a high eminence, 
called Wolf's-Cote Hill, on the summit of which is 
a barrow or low. This ancient remain is a large 
heap of stones of various sizes ; the smallest are the 
most outward, and over them is a thin covering of 
moss or grass. It rises about three yards above the 
common surface of the ground about it, and is ex- 
actly circular. The circumference at the base is 
nearly seventy yards : at the top, the diameter is 
about ten yards ; and in the middle is a cavity one 
yard deep, and three wide. The internal structure 
of this barrow is said greatly to resemble that at 
Chelmorton. 

The scenery on the banks of the Dove, in this 
part of the county, assumes much of the romantic 
character of Dove Dale ; for though the rocks arc 
less elevated, the singular and rude forms into which 
they are broken, produce a striking effect ; and the 
frequent changes in their appearance, are particu- 
larly interesting. One rock, distinguished by the 
name of the Pike, from its spiry form, and situation 
in the midst of the stream, was noticed in the second 
part of the Complete Angler, by Charles Cotton, 
Esq. who resided at Beresford Hall, an ancient, but 
extremely pleasant mansion, on the Staffordshire 
side of the river. 

Below this, the stream flows in a rapid current 
between the craggy steeps .which form its boundaries, 
for some distance ; when it loses itself underground, 
and, after a mile's concealment, appears again with 
more glory and beauty than before, running through 
the most pleasant vallies, and most fruitful meadows. 
The grounds at Beresford Hall are not extensive, 
but they possess great variety ; in some parts gra- 
dually sloping to the water's edge ; and in others 
skirting the wild precipices which hang over the 
river. Formerly they were kept in excellent order. 
The small fishing-house, mentioned iu the Complete 
Angler, remains ; and the words Piscatoribus Sa- 
crum are yet visible over the door ; but the roof is 
nearly destroyed ; and the furniture, and embellish- 
ments, of the interior, have been long demolished. 
In one of the rocks which impend over the river, is 
a small cavity, only to be approached by an intricate 
and arduous path, in which Mr. Cotton is said to 
have eluded the pursuit of the officers of justice after 
some offence of which he had been guilty. The 
depth of it is about forty-five feet ; but evcii in thii 



64 



DERBYSHIRE. 



small space arc several windings, which render it of 
difficult access. 

At a place called Pilsbury, in this parish, in a 
deep valley on the banks of the Dove, in a field, 
named Castle-Hills, are some ancient remains de- 
serving of notice. On the east side is a sharp natu- 
ral ridge of rocks, which in one part rises to the 
height of twenty or five-and~twenty feet, bearing 
some resemblance to a sugar loaf. Adjoining to 
this is a raised bank, enclosing an area of about 180 
feet from north to south, and 120 from east to west ; 
and having a barrow near its western side, about 
120 feet in diameter. Southward of the barrow is a 
second bank*, forming a square of nearly 00 feet in 
each direction. 

HASELBERGE.] This is a hill, near the Peak ; re- 
specting which the country people entertain an 
opinion, that the hair of such cattle as feed on it 
is changed, in the course of three years, to a 
grey colour. 

HATHERSAGE.] The little village of Hathersage 
is situated in the hundred of High Peak, five miles 
and a quarter north by east from Stoney Middleton. 
It stands on the sharp descent of a hill, and is sur- 
rounded by mountainous tracts, whose barren sum- 
mits, and dark declivities agreeably contrast with 
the verdure of the smiling vale which they enve- 
lope. Here is a small manufacture of metal but- 
tons. 

Hathersage Church has a spire ; and is, on the 
whole, rather a handsome building. According to 
the following statement, which presents itself in a, 
contemporary work, the earth, at this place, pos- 
sesses an extraordinary property. " On opening a 
grave for the interment of a female, on the 31st of 
May, 1781, the body of a Mr. Benjamin Ashton, 
who was buried on the 29th of December, 17-2-5, was 
taken up, congealed as hard as flint. His breast, 
belly, and face were swarthy ; but when turned 
over, his back, and all the parts that lay under, were 
nearly the same colour as when put into the coffin. 
The coffin was of oak board, an inch and a half thick, 
and as sound as when first deposited iu the grave, 
which was so extremely wet that men were employ- 
ed to lade out the water, that the coffin might be 
kept from floating till the body was returned to it. 
The face was partly decayed, conveying the idea, 
that the putrefactive process had commenced pre- 
viously to that which had hardened the flesh into 
stone. The head was broke off in removing the 
body from the coffin ; but was replaced in its first 
position when again interred. Mr. Ashton was a 
very corpulent man, and died in the 1-2A year of his 
age." 

In the church-yard are two stones, which, accord- 
ing to tradition, mark the spot where Little John, 
the friend of Robin Hood, lies buried. They are 
thirteen feet four inches distance, which is here said 
to have been the height of this adventurer. Pilking- 
ton states, that a thigh-bone, measuring twenty-nine 
inches and a half, was found in -this grave, at the 



depth of six feet* Above the church is n plae*, 
called Camp Green, a high large circular mound of 
earth, enclosed by a deep ditch. 

A paper of llayman Rooke's, in the 8th volume 
of the Archseologia, contains an-- account of some 
ancient remains on Hathersage Moor, particularly 
of a Rocking-stone, twenty-nine feet iu circumfer- 
ence ; and near it, a large stone, with a rock-bason, 
and many tumuli, in which urns, beads, and rings, 
have been found. At a little distance was- another 
remarkable stone, thirteen feet six inches in length, 
which appeared to have been placed by art on the 
brow of a precipice, and supported by two small 
stones. On the top is a large rock-bason, four feet- 
three inches in diameter ; and close to this, on the 
south side, a hollow, cut like a chair, with a step to 
rest the feet upon. This, in the tradition of the 
country, is called Cair's Chair. Not far from this 
spot are some other Rocking-stones. 

HAVFIELD.] The long, straggling village of 
Hayficld, divided by a fine stream of water, is situ- 
ated in the hundred of High Peak, four miles and a 
half north by west from Chapel-in-the-Frith. The 
inhabitants are chiefly clothiers and cotton manufac- 
turers. 

HOPE.] The pleasant little village of Hope, ia 
the hundred of High Peak, lies six miles north by 
east from Tides well. It had a priest and a church, 
as far hack as the time of Edward the Confessor ; 
and, in the reign of Edward I. it had also to boast 
of a castle. Formerly, it was a market-town. 

Gongh, in his Additions to Camden, furnishes the 
following curious statement, connected with the his- 
tory of this village. "The moors of Hope parish 
afford an extraordinary instance of the preservation of 
human bodies interred in them. One Barber, a gra- 
sier, and his maid servant, going to Ireland in th 
year 1674, were lost in the snow, and remained co- 
vered with it from January to May, when they were 
so offensive, that the coroner ordered them to be 
buried on the spot. About twenty-nine years after- 
wards, some countrymen, probably having observed 
the extraordinary property of this soil in preserving; 
dead bodies, had the curiosity to open the ground, 
and found them no way altered ; the colour of the 
skin being fair and natural, and their flesh as soft as 
that of persons newly dead. They were exposed 
for a sight during the course of twenty years follow- 
ing, though they were much changed in that time by 
beingso often uncovered. In 1716, Dr. Henry Bourn, 
M. B. of Chesterfield, saw the man perfect, his heard 
strong, and about a quarter of an inch long : the 
hair of his head short; his skin hard, and of 'a tan- 
ned leather colour, pretty much the same as the 
liquor and earth they lay in : he had on a broad 
cloth, which the doctor in vain tried to tear off a 
skirt. The woman was more decayed, having been 
taken out of the ground, and rudelv handled ; her 
flesh particularly decayed, her hair long -ind springy, 
like that of a 'living person. Mr. liarber of Ro- 
theram, the man's grandson, had both bodies buried 

ia 



DERBYSHIRE. 



in Hope Church, and, upon looking into the grave 
uome time afterwards, it was found they were en- 
tirely consumed. Mr. Wermald, the minister of 
Hope, was present at their removal : he observed, 
that they lay about a yard deep, in moist soil, or 
moss, but no water stood in the place. He saw 
their stockings drawn off, and the man's legs, which 
had never been uncovered before, were quite fair : 
the flesh, when pressed by his finger, pitted a little ; 
and the joints played freely ? without the least stiff- 
ness : the other parts were much decayed. What 
was left of their cloaths, not cut off for curio- 
sity, was firm and good ; and the woman had on 
a piece of new serge, which seemed never the 
worse." 

HOPTON.] Hopton, in the parish of Wirksworth, 
is situated two miles west by south from the town 
of that name. The Gell family has had a seat here, 
ever since the reign of Queen Elizabeth.* The old 
mansion was pulled down some years ago, and a 
new one erected. The grounds have also been 
much improved ; and a new road, distinguished by 
the appellation of the Via Gellia, has been carried 
towards Matlock through a romantic valley, which 
affords several very beautiful views. In forming 
this road, an iron dagger, and some iron heads of 
spears, were found, covered to the depth of three 
feet beneath the surface by a small stone. About a 
mile south from the valley, on a rising ground, is a 
large barrow, 196 feet in circumference, in which an 
uru of coarse baked earth, full of bones and ashes, 
was discovered by some labourers who were prepar- 
ing the ground for a plantation. The urn, which 
fell to pieces on endeavouring to take it up, was 
covered with a piece of yellowish free-stone, much 
corroded, on which part of a Roman inscription was 
apparent. 

KEDLESTON.] Kedleston, the Chetelestune of 
Domesday, is situated in the hundred of Appletree, 
four miles north-west by north from Derby. It is 
much celebrated as the seat of Nathaniel Curzon, 



* John Cell, Sheriff of Derbyshire in the year 1034, and in 
1043 was created a baronet by Charles the First, was an ac- 
tive partizan in the cause of the Parliament during the Civil 
War, and performed several spirited actions in its service. 
His conduct, however, was not always satisfactory ; for, having 
heen appointed receiver of the money arising from the seques- 
trations of the effects of those persons within the county who 
were suspected of being friendly to the King, an order was 
issued to enforce the payment of 6000/. which remained unac- 
counted for in his hands. He was afterwards tried for mispri- 
aion of treason, and sentenced to forfeit his estate, and be im- 
prisoned for life; but within two years he received a pardon. 
Admiral John Gell, who died in the month of October, 1802, 
was of this family. 

f Giraline de Curson, or Curzon, Lord Scarsdale's ancestor, 
was an attendant on William the Conqueror, when he reduced 
this country under the Norman yoke. He appears to have 
t>een an officer of sonic rank, as he had divers lands assigned to 
him in the counties of Oxford, Berks, and Devon. Richard, 
his second son, was, in the reign of Henry the First, possessed 
in this county of a considerable estate, in which Kedlestou was 
Included, aiid from him it has descended to his preseat lord 
. II. NO. 50. 



Lord Scarsdale, whose father, the late Lord, erected 
an inn at the verge of Kedleston Park, for the ac-. 
commodation of company resorting to the mineral 
springs in the neighbourhood, and of those who, 
from motives of curiosity, might be induced to vi- 
sit his mansion an edifice eminently entitled to 
notice. t 

Kedleston Park, which is about five miles in cir- 
cumference, contains some flourishing plantations, 
with a grove of venerable oaks, some of them 24 feet 
in girth, and 118 in height. Through the grove a 
road leads over an ciegant stone bridge of three 
arches, across a fine sheet of water, which has been 
amplified by cutting away the banks of an insigni- 
ficant brook, which formerly meandered unnoticed 
through the park. Several cascades and islands 
have been formed above the bridge, which agree- 
ably diversify the scenery. From the bridge a gen- 
tle ascent of several hundred yards loads to the 
house, a grand and elegant building, three hundred 
and sixty feet in extent, consisting of a centre, a:id 
two pavilions connected with the main building by 
corridors of the Doric order : that to the right com- 
prises the kitchen .and other oilices ; that to the left 
consists of the private apartments of the family. 
In the centre of the north front, approached from the 
bridge, is a double flight of steps leading to a grand 
portico, whose pediment is supported by six co- 
lumns of the Corinthian order, proportioned from, 
those of the Pantheon at Rome. They are thirty 
feet high, and three feet in diameter ; several of them 
are of a single stone. Over the pediment are statues of 
Venus, Bacchus, and Ceres ; and within the por- 
tico, are those of a Bacchante, two Muses, and a 
Vestal, besides several medallions in basso-relievo. 
Beneath the portico, at the basement or rustic story, 
is the general entrance, which opens into a spacious 
but low room, called Caesar's Hall, from the busts 
of the Caesars, with which it is adorned. Hence 
through the tetrastyle, which is furnished with busts 
of Alexander, Marcellus, Antoninus, &c. the stran- 



ship, whose father was created a peer on the 9th of April, ; 
the year 1761 : so that the family has been in the possession of 
this manor about 700 years. The late Right Hon. Lord Scars- 
dale, (a Baronet, LL. D. and Vice-President of the Middlesex 
Hospital) was the eldest son of (lie l;ite Nathaniel Ciirzon, Birr. 
His lordship died in the month of December, (804, in the 78th 
year of his age, and was succeeded in his titles and estates by 
his eldest sou, the Hon. Nathaniel Curzon, now Lord Scars- 
dale, who had represented the county of Derby in tsvo succes- 
sive Parliaments. This family first represented the county of 
Derby in Parliament in the second year of Richard II. and 
continued to do so, with some intervals, until the I2lh of Wil- 
liam III. from which period the family uninterruptedly repre- 
sented the county in Parliament, until the year 1761, when his 
present Majesty was pleased to call the kite .Lord to the House of 
Peers. His lordship's private worth will long be in remembrance, 
and the poor of the surrounding villages will recollect with 
gratitude his continued benevolence. That his Lordship had 
an exquisite taste for the fine arts, is universally known and 
acknowledged by those of the present age, and his noble man- 
sion of Kedleston will remain a monument of it to posterity. 

R ger 



DERBYSHIRE. 



ger is conducted into the Hall, an exceedingly mag- 
nificent apartment, planned after the Greek Hall of 
the ancients, and measuring sixty-seven feet three 
inches, by forty -two feet. The coiling, which rises 
to the top of the house, is illuminated by three sky- 
lights, and supported by twenty-two columns of ala- 
baster, beautifully variegated with red, and having 
rich capitals of white marble : the columns are 
twenty-five feet high. Behind the columns are 
twelve niches, each containing a good cast from the 
antique, and above them a series of paintings in 
Chiaro Oscuro, from Homer. The grates in this 
apartment are designed after antique tripods, and 
the seats from the ancient sarcophagus. Almost 
every room is decorated with paintings. 

In the Music-Room, 30 feet by 24, and 22 high, 
are the following: Bacchus and Ariadne ; Guido.- 
Two beautiful Flower Pieces ; Baptisle. The Tri- 
umph of Bacchus ; Luca Giordano : 13 feet 10 by 
8 feet 4 : a fine picture. An Old Man's Head ; 
Rembrandt. A Thunder Storm, with an Arm of the 
Sea ; Tempesta. 

The Drawing-Room, 44 feet by 28, and 23 high, 
lias a covered ceiling after the antique, a Venetian 
window, and portals finished with Corinthian co- 
lumns of Derbyshire alabaster. The chimney-piece, 
of Italian marble, is remarkably fine. In this apart- 
ment are the following well executed performances : 
-Orlando and Olympia ; Ann. Caracci. Alexander 
in the Tent oi' Darius : and Alexander weeping over 
the dead Body of Clytus : P. Veronese. Land- 
scape ; Cuyp : 6 feet by 4 : a very beautiful paint- 
ing, and richly coloured. Landscape, with the 
Story of Naaman ; the joint composition of Mom- 
pert, Brughel, Teniers, and old Franks. This is 
considered to be a very curious painting ; but the 
manner of the different artists does not assimilate, 
and the colouring is harsh. A small cabinet picture 
of the Salutation ; Andrea Del Sarto. Christ and 
the Woman with the Box of Ointment ; Benedetto 
De Lutti. Landscape ; Claude Lorraine : 3 feet 4, 
by 2 feet 6. The aerial perspective extremely fine ; 
and the composition judicious. Cain and Abel ; 
Benedetto De Lutti. In this masterly performance, 
the horror and remorse of Cain after the murder of 
his brother are extremely well depicted. The ma- 
nagement of the light and shade is singular; but, 
n the whole, the tints are rather of too sombre a 
cast. A Sleeping Cupid ; Guido : 3 feet 10, by 
2 feet 10 : an admirable figure. The Virgin and 
Child : Parmegiauo. 

The Library, 36 feet by 21, and 22 high, is finish- 
ed with stucco ornaments, Doric entablature, and 



* This Lady was the natural daughter of Mrs. Hughes, an 
actress. 

-] This nobleman was an active pnrtizan in the cause of 
CliarK-s the Fiist, by \vhoTi he was nominated Lord Lieutenan' 
of Ireland ; a situation to which he wa&a second time appointed 
aft'T the Restoration. 

J "Of the many," remarks Mr. Warner, " who evinced 



Mosaic ceiling. On the top of the mahogany book- 
cases are the busts of Homer, Sappho, Socrates, 
Virgil, Anacreon, Pindar, and Horace. The chief 
paintings are : Diogenes; Luca Giordano. Adam 
and Eve : and Lot and his Daughters : Carlo Loiti. 
Daniel interpreting Belshazzar's Dream ; Rem- 
brandt : 5 feet 6 inches square. This is an exqui- 
site performance ; but the ill-judged style iu which 
the artist has decorated the head of Daniel, fre- 
quently excites laughter : it appears covered with 
an immense peruke. Shakespeare ; a fine copy by 
Vandyck. An Old Man's Head ; Salvator Rosa : 
executed with extraordinary spirit and animation. 
Winter, represented as an aged Man ; Andrea Sac- 
ehi. Rinaldo and 'Armida, from Tasso ; Nic. Pos- 
sin. 

The Saloon is acknowledged to be one of tha 
most beautiful apartments of its kind in Europe. Ita 
form is circular, crowned with a dome, orna- 
mented with rich stux-eo-work, finished in octagon 
compartments with roses : its dimensions arc, 42 
feet in diameter, 24 feet to the cornice, (which is 
extremely rich,) 55 feet to the top of the cupola, and 
62 to the extremity of the sky-light. Beneath, th 
saloon is divided into four recesses, or alcoves, hay- 
ing fire-places, representing altars, adorned with; 
classical figures in bass relief: it has also four doors ; 
the whole painted and ornamented with white and 
gold. Over the doors are paintings of Ruins by 
Hamilton ; and above the recesses are delineations 
in Chiaro Oscuro by Rebecca ; the subjects from. 
English History. The pilasters are of Scagliola 
marble, in imitation of verd antique, by Bartoli. A 
chandelier, branches, and exquisite stucco-work, by 
Rose, complete the decorations of the room, which 
presents a singularly graceful combination of ele- 
gance and splendour. 

In the Anti-Chamber, 24 feet by 12, and 20 high, 
are two Landscapes by Heusch ; a St. John, by 
Carlo Maratti ; and a pair of beautiful pieces, in 
Chiaro Oscuro, in imitation of ivory. These were 
sent from Germany, some years ago, by one of the- 
late Lord Scarsdale's sons. The subjects are, Cu- 
pid in a Car drawn by Cupids ; and Cupid carried 
on the Shoulders of the Loves. 

The Principal Drawing- Room, 24 feet by 24, and 
20 high, contains portraiis of the late Lord and Lady 
Scarsdale ; by Hone. A Blind Beggar, fcc. by Jan. 
Stein. Ruperta;* Sir Godfrey Kneller. James, 
Duke of Ormond ;f Sir Peter Lely. Landscape 
and Figures ; Bergham. View of Matlock, east 
end ; Zuccarelli. Banditti ; Loutherbourg. Henry 
Jermyn, Earl of St. Albans ;% Sir Peter Lcly. 

The 



their attachment to the unfortunate Charles, no one appears to 
have more readily risqued his life and fortune than this person- 
;ape ; whose zeal has, indeed, been construed into something 
more than mere loyalty, as he is reported to have been early 
favoured by, and finally married to, Queen Henrietta Maria; 
on whom, during the troubles of her husband, he faithfully and 
diligently attended, through great perils and dangers ; for which 



DERBYSHIRE. 



The Principal Bed-Chamber is 30 feet by 22, and 
30 feet high. The chimney-piece is of statuary 
murble ; with an oval tablet, containing a fine ape- j 
cimen of Derbyshire Blue John. Here are Two 
Views of Cumberland ; Barret. Two Landscapes, 
with figures ; Zuccarelli. The Duchess of Ports- 
mouth ; Vandyck. The Duchess of York ; Sir 
Peter Lely. The Countess of Dorset ; a fine copy 
by Hamilton from Mytcns. This lady was daugh- 
ter of Sir George Curzon, and Governess to the 
Princess Mary, and the Duke of York. Her dress 
is extremely singular, being curiously worked, and 
put on over an immense hoop ; the waist contracted 
by a close boddice ; and her neck encircled with a 
large ruff. 

In the Wardrobe, 22 feet by 14, and 20 high, are 
thirty-six small pieces of enamel, after Albert Dtirer, 
representing a series of events in the liie of Our Sa- 
viour. A fine painting of Turkies, &c. Van Utrecht. 
Catherine, Countess of Dorchester ;* Sir Godfrey 
Kiiellcr. Sir Paul Rycaut ;t Vandyck. Two 
beautiful cabinet pieces, the Nativity, and the Re- 
surrection, by Murillo. Prince Henry, the amiable 
son of James the First; Cornelius Jansen. Qtiin- 
tin Matsys, his Wife, and Child ; by himself. 

The Dining-Room, 30 feet by 24, and 20 high, is 
neatly finished with stucco, and has a painted ceil- 
ing by Zucchi. In the centre is represented Love 
embracing Fortune ; the circles display the Four 
Quarters of the Globe, and the obloag squares con- . 
tain allegorical delineations of the Seasons. The 
chief pictures are two Landscapes from Milton's 
L' Allegro, by Zuccarelli. Two line pieces by Sny- 
ders : one representing Dead Game ; the other, 
Ducks and Hawks : these are 7 feet 4, by 5 feet 3 ; 
and a Landscape by Claude Lorraine. The above 
apartments are shown to visitors with the western 
Pavilions, iti which is a noble Kitchen, 48 feet by 24, 
viewed from a gallery connected with the corri- 
dor. Over the chimney is the motto, " Waste not ; 
Want not." 

The East, or Family Pavilion, contains some 
good paintings. In Lady Scarsdale's Dressing- 
Room, are Landscapes by Claude Lorraine, Wooton, 
Caspar Poussin, Breughel, and Bergham ; St. 
Christiana, by Carlo Dolci ; and a Nativity, by Jan. 
Bassau. In Lord Scarsdale's Dressing-Room is a 
cartoon of Venus and Cupids, by Carlo Maratti ; a 
Badger and Fruit, by Snyders ; and Christ deliver - 

he was rewarded with the title of Lord Jermyn ; and was, for 
continued services to the family previous to the Restoration, 
created Earl of St. Albans !>y Charles the Second, to whom he 
was appointed Chamberlain." 

* This beautiful female was daughter of Sir Charles Sedley, 
and mistress to James the Second, by whom she was raised to 
the rank of a Countess ; a situation which her father erer con- 
sidered as asplendid indignity offered to his family. An injury 
so sensible, could scarcely be forgotten, or remain unrcsented, 
when opportunity offered. On the first agitation of the ques- 
tion which brought about the Revolution, Sir Charles was a 
distinguished partizan, and at once indulged the parent's resent- 



ing the Keys to St. Peter, by Old Pahna, the Mag- 
dalen by Corregio. 

It is said that the idea of the South, or Garden 
Front, of this superb mansion, was formed from the 
Arch of Constantine at Rome ; the entablature is 
supported by four Corinthian pillars, and the portico 
is ornamented by med tllions, vases, and statues. 

KING'S MEAD.] St. Mary de Pratis, or St. Mary 
of the Meadows also called King's Mead, and the 
Spaw is a village, in the parish of St. Werburgb, 
in the hundred of Morleston and Litchnroh. About 
the year 1160, the Abbot of Durnley founded here a 
priory of Benedictine nuns. King Henry II. grant- 
ed and confirmed to the nans, twenty-seven acres of 
land, in his forest oi tiie Peak, with large common- 
age in that forest ; and King Henry 111. granted to- 
the prioress and nuns, an augmentation of one hun- 
dred shillings per annum, to be paid by the bailiffs 
of Nottingham. This nunnery, at the suppression, 
was valued at AIS/. lt>. '2/1. per annum. 

KNO-VVI.E MILLS.] This is a beautiful retired spot, 
surrounded by fine woods and plantations, rather 
more than a mile to the eastward of Foremark, the 
scat of Sir Francis Burdett. Here, in the mouth of 
a narrow dell, formerly stood a singular but plea- 
sant house, climbing, as it were, irregularly from 
the bottom of the dell to the summit of its western 
bank. It was built by Sir Walter Burdett, younger 
son to the first possessor of Foremark, of this family. 
Having disagreed with his relations, he disposed of 
this estate to a gentleman named llurdiuge, who in- 
habited the mansion for some years. It was re- 
purchased by the late Sir Robert Burdett, who made 
it his residence while the Hall at Foremark was re- 
building, and afterwards dismantled it. To a rem- 
nant of the upper part of the house that was- left 
standing, a neat little room was subsequently attach- 
ed, with ornamental doors and \,indows opening 
upon a small grass-plat, or terrace. The prospect 
of the scenery from this spot is particularly attrac- 
tive. 

LOCKHAY.]- Lockhay, orLocko, is situated in the 
hundred of Apple tree, four miles and a half east- 
north-east from Derby. Here was formerly a pre- 
ceptory or hospital, said to be of the order of St. 
Lazarus of Jerusalem, and subject to a foreign house 
in France, to which was annually paid from hence 
a rent of 20/. but, on a war Vith France, it was 
seized by the Crown of England, and given by Ed- 

ment, and the wit's spleen, when he said, " The King did me 
the honour to make my daughter a Countess ; and 1 should be 
ungrateful, indeed, not to assist in making his daughter (M;iry> 
Princess of Orange) a Queen." When the remonstrance' of 
his Confessors had induced James to break olf the connection 
with the Countess, she married David, Earl of Portmore, and 
died in 1717. 

f The diplomatic talents of Ryraut occasioned him to be 
employed as a negociator by Charles the Second ; his succes- 
sor, James; and King William. He was also eminent as an 
historian ; and his History of the Ottoman Empire was spoken 
of by Dr. Johnson in high terms of praise. 

2- ward 



DERBYSHIRE. 



ward the Third to King's Hall, in the University of 
Cambridge. 

Lockhay Park, the seat of William Drury Lovre, 
Esq. and anciently of the Gilberts and Coopers, 
consists of agreeable slopes, and pleasant inequali- 
ties of ground, enlivened by a good artificial lake. 
The style of planting of the last century is, however, 
too apparent ; the rows of trees in some places form- 
ing right angled triangles, and the clumps appear- 
ing tasteless and formal. Through the park is a 
road leading to Dale Abbey, already described. 

LONGFORD.] Longford is situated in the hundred 
of Appletree, five miles and a half south by east from 
.Derby. Longford Hall, the soat of W. Coke, Esq. 
is a spacious fabric, with wings apparently more 
modern than the body of the house. The grounds 
are pleasant ; and the surrounding country furnishes 
a. variety of pleasing views. 

MACKWORTII.] Mack worth lies in the hundred 
of Morleston and Litchurch, two miles and three 
quarters west-north-west from Derby. Here was 
formerly a castle, the site of which is the property of 
Lord Scarsdale. Tradition states, that it was de- 
molished in the Civil Wars ; and some high ground 
in the neighbourhood is yet called Cannon Hills, 
from the belief that the ordnance were there planted 
when the castle was destroyed. 

MAM TOR.] Mam Tor, or the Shivering Moun- 
tain, stands about a mile and a half north-cast from 
Eldcn Hole. It is composed of shale and micace- 
ous grit in alternate stratification ; the former being 
highly impregnated with vitriol of iron. Its name, 
Mam Tor, is an ancient British appellation, signify- 
ing the Mother Mountain ; but the Shivering Moun- 
tain is a more modern title, received from the cir- 
cumstance of the shale continually decomposing 
under the action of the atmosphere, and falling in 
large quantities &own the face of the precipice into 
the valley below. The vulgar error, that Mam Tor 
has suffered no diminution in bulk, though the shale 
and grit have been shivering from its face for ages, 
requires no confutation ; for the valley below is 
overwhelmed with its ruins, to the extent of half a 
mile; and the lines of ancient encampment, which 
occupied the summit, have been destroyed for a 
number of yards by the crumbling of the substance. 
At some distance to the north-west, is another break 
in the mountain, called Little Mam Tor, from which 
the shale and grit frequently shiver, but not in so 
great a degree as at the former, where the rushing 
noise of the descending riass is sometimes so loud 
as to be heard at Castleton. The summit of this 
mountain was extremely well adapted far a military 
station, as the ascent on every side, excepting the 
north-east, is very steep; and the height of the 
mountain is nearly 1300 feet above the lovel of the 
valley. The camp was surrounded by a double 
trench, the greater part of which is still in excellent 
preservation. It extended from the north-east to 
the south-west, along the ridge of the eminence, 
occupying somewhat more than sixteen acres of 



ground, the circumference being nearly 1200 yards. 
The enclosed area is very irregular, but approaches 
to the oblong form. The principal entrance was 
from the west. At the north-east corner is a peren- 
nial spring; and near the south-west are two bar- 
rows, in one of which, opened a few years ago, a 
brass cell, and some fragments of an unbaked uru 
were discovered. 

MARK-EATON.] Mark-Eaton, or Marketon, is in 
the hundred of Morleston and Litchurch, a mile and 
three quarters west-north-west from Derby. At 
the Conquest, the manor belonged to the Earl of 
Chester. Soon afterwards it became the property 
! of the Touchets, one of whom married the heiress of 
Lori Audley, and acquired that title. In the reign 
of Henry VIII. it was sold by Lord Audley to Sir 
John Mundy, Knt. Lord Mayor of London, the di- 
rect lineal ancestor of the present owner, F. N. C. 
Mundy, Esq. 

MARVEL ATONES.] This natural curiosity is situ- 
ated about three miles from Buxton, ana two from 
Chapel- in-the- Frith, in a pasture on the right of the 
road. " It is a rock," says Mr. Bray in his Tour 
into Derbyshire, " of about 280 feet long, and 80 
broad at the widest part ; but does not any where 
rise more than three feet above the surface of the 
ground. The face of it is deeply indented with in- 
numerable channels, or gutters, of various length, 
breadth, shape, and depth ; from nine inches to 
thirty feet long; and from five inches to five feet 
wide. There are also a great number of holes ; 
some round, some of an irregular shape, from the 
size of a small bason to that of a large kettle. The 
channels, or gutters, generally run north and south ; 
but none of them go quite across the stone ; there is 
always some seam or ridge in the rock, terminating 
the channel ; and in a few inches another channel 
commences, which is also crossed by another seam 
or ridge. These seams, or ridges, are from four 
inches to four feet broad ; but there can hardly b 
found four feet square, without a hole or a channel. 
The stone is not jointed, or of a loose kind, but one 
hard, firm rock. At the east and west ends are a 
great number of irregularly shaped stones, standing 
i a few inches from each other ; the interspaces filled 
j with earth : perhaps, if the earth was removed, it 
i would be found, that these are parts of the same 
rock. The whole is certainly the work of nature." 

MATI.OCK.] This celebrated village lies in the 
Wapentake of Wirksworth, 17 miles north by west 
from Derby, and 143i north-north-west from Lon- 
don. It has been thus immortalized by Darwin, in 
his Loves of the Plants : 

When: as proud MASSON rises rude and bleak, 
Ami with mishapen turrets crests the Peak, 
Old MATLOCK japes, will) marble jaws, bi'iieath, 
And o'er scar'd DERVVENT bends his flinty teetii ; 
Deep in wide caves btrlow the danf>erous soil 
Blue sulphurs flami-, imprison'd waters boil. 
I nipi'tuoiis streams in spiral columns. rise 
Through rifted rocks, imrjatirnt for the skies; 
Or, o'er bright seas of babbling lavas blow, 
As heave and less the billowy fires below ; 

Condeiii'd 



DERBYSHIRE. 



Conclens'd on high, in wandering rills they glide 
_ From MASSON'S dome, and burst his sparry side ; 
Round his grey towers, and down his fringed walls. 
From cliff to cliff the liquid treasure falls ; 
In beds of stalactite, bright ores among, 
O'er corals, shells, and chryslals, winds along ; 
Crusts the green mosses, and the tangled wood, 
And sparkling plunges to its parent flood. 

It should be observed, that the general name, 
Matlock, comprises both the village and the bath. 
The former is at least as ancient as the Conquest, 
tnd is chiefly situated on the eastern banks of the 
river ; the latter is considerably more recent in its 
origin, and stands on the western margin. " At the 
time of compiling the Domesday Book," observes 
the author of the Description of Matlock Bath, 
" Matlock appears to have been a hamlet of the 
manor of Meteslbrd (the situation of which is now 
unknown), which was part of the demesnes ot the 
crown. It afterwards became a part of the estate of 
William de Ferrers, Earl of Derby, who had a char- 
ter of free warren for his demesne lands here. On 
the attainder of his son Robert de Ferrers, for 
espousing the cause of Simon de Montford, Earl of 
Leicester, Matlock, then become a manor, reverted 
to the crown ; and was granted, in the 7th of Ed- 
ward I. to Edmund, Earl of Lancaster, and conti- 
nued a part of the possessions of the Earldom and 
Duchy of Lancaster, till the fourth of Charles I. 
when it was granted by that King, along with a 
great number of other manors and estates, to Ed- 
ward Ditchfield, and the other trustees, to the copy- 
holders of the manor of Matlock, and is now divided 
into several small shares." 

The inhabitants of the village about 2400 in 
number are chiefly employed in the manufacture of 
cotton, and in the neighbouring lead mines. The 
houses are mostly built of stone, and at the entrance 
of the village is a neat bridge of the same material. 
The church stands on the verge of a romantic rock 
at some distance from the bridge : it contains a 
nave, side aisles, and a small chancel ; having on 
the outside an ancient tower with pinnacles, and 
spouts formed in the shape of grotesque animals. 
Above the. church, on an eminence called RiberHill, 
are the remains of what has been supposed a Druid- 
ieal altar, but which more resemble a cromlech ; 
though probably it was only intended for a signal 
point. It is called the Hirst Stones, and consists of 
four rude masses of grit-stone, the smallest of which 
is placed on the others, and supposed to weigh 
about two tons. On the upper stone is a circular 
hole, six inches deep, and nine wide, in which, 
about sixty 'years ago, a stone pillar was standing. 

The Bath is situated about a mile and a half from 
the village ; and though few situations can be more 
beautiful, it was occupied only by some rude cot- 
tages, iunabited by miners, till about the year 1698, 



at which time its warm springs began to attract no- 
tice, for their medicinal qualities. About this period 
the original bath, as we learn from Dr. Short's His- 
tory of Mineral Waters, " was built and paved by 
the Rev. Mr. Fern, of Matlock, and Mr, Howard, 
of Cromford; and put into the hands of George 
Wragg, who, to confirm his title, took a lease from 
the several Lords of the Manor, for ninety-nine * 
years, paying them a fine of 150/. and the yearly 
rent or acknowledgment of sixpence each. He then 
built a few small rooms adjoining to the bath, which 
were but a poor accommodation for strangers. The 
lease and property of Mr. Wragg were afterwards 
purchased for about 1000/. by Messrs. Smith and 
Fennel, of Nottingham, who erected two large com- 
modious buildings, with stables and other conveni- 
encies ; made a coach road along the river side from 
Cromford, and improved the horse-way from Mat- 
lock Bridge. The whole estate afterwards became 
the property of Mr. Fennel by purchase ; and on his 
death, about the year 1733, descended to his daugh- 
ter, and her husband :" it is now the joint property 
of several persons. The means thus employed to 
render the accommodation attractive, and the in- 
creasing celebrity of the waters, occasioned a greater 
influx of visitors ; and a second spring having been 
discovered within the distance of about a quarter of 
a mile, a new bath was formed, and another lodging- 
house erected, for the reception of company. At a 
more recent period, a third spring was met with, 
three or four hundred yards eastward of that which 
was first noticed ; but its temperature being some de- 
grees lower than either of the other springs, it was 
iiot brought into use till a level had been made in 
the hill, and carried beyond the point where its wa- 
ters had intermingled with those of the cold spring. 
Another bath and" lodging- house were then erected ; 
and the latter, by various subsequent alterations, is 
become one of the most commodious hotels in En- 
gland. These buildings are of stone, and are respec- 
tively named, the Old Bath, the New Bath, and Uw 
Hotel. The recent general terms of accommodation, 
at these houses, were as follow : a bed-chamber 
five shillings per week ; a private parlour from four- 
teen shillings to a guinea ; breakfast, one shilling 
and three-pence ; dinner at the public table, two 
shillings ; tea, optional, but when taken, one shil- 
ling ; supper, one shilling and sixpence ; bathing, 
sixpence each time. The number of persons that 
may be thus accommodated, and at the private 
lodging-houses, is between four and five hundred. 
Boarding and lodging may generally be obtained 
on moderate terms : provisions of all kinds ar 
plentifully supplied from the neighbouring markets. 
Glandular affections, rheumatism, and its conse- 
quent debility, obstructions from biliary concretions, 
gravel, consumption in its first stages, hamioptoe, 
and generally, all those complaints that are promot- 



* It should be, we conceive, nine hundred afd ninety- 
nine. 

VOL. II. NO. 50. 



70 



DERBYSHIRE. 



ed or increased by a relaxed state of the muscular 
fibres, are likely to derive advantage from the Mat- 
lock waters. All the warm springs issue from be- 
tween fifteen and thirty yards above the level of the 
river : higher or lower, the springs are cold, and 
only common water. The temperature of the for- 
mer, as given by Dr. Pearson and others, is 68 of 
Farenheit's thermometer ; but Dr. Elliot, and Dr. 
Pennington, have stated it at 69. Dr. Percival re- 
marks in his " Medical and Experimental Essays," 
that the Matlock waters resemble those of Bristol, 
both in their chemical and medical qualities ; but 
that the Matlock water exhibits no proof of a mine- 
ral spirit, either by the taste, or the test of syrup of 
violets. He adds, " that it is very slightly impreg- 
nated with selenite, or earthy salts, which is proved 
by its comparative levity, it weighing only four 
grains in a pint heavier than distilled water : and 
that a grey precipitate, occasioned by adding a solu- 
tion of silver and aqua-fortis, renders it probable 
that a small portion of sea salt is contained in it." 
In Dr. Pennington's experiments it was found that 
alkalies made the water cloudy and milky : and that 
when a gallon was evaporated, thirty-seven or thirty- 
eight grains of sediment were deposited ; of this 
about twelve or thirteen were saline matter, com- 
posed of calcareous nitre, (vitriolated magnesia,) 
and twenty-four or twenty-five grains, calcareous 
earth. 

The Matlock season commences the latter end of 
April, and continues till November. In such a se- 
questered spot, amusements cannot be expected to 
be much diversified, but what the place admits of are 
innocent and cheap. Besides the bowling green, 
each of the inns has a billiard table. Balls are oc- 
casionally held here ; but it depends on the pleasure 
of the company when, and a feed master of the ce- 
remonies, it is probable, will never be required here. 

It has been justly observed, by a modern writer, 
that " the unparalleled grandeur of the scenery 
round Matlock, renders every attempt to delineate 
its varied characteristics by words, at least, hopeless, 
if not altogether impossible. The bold and romantic 
steeps, skirted by a gorgeous covering wood, and 
rising from the margin of the Derwent, whose waters 
sometimes glide majestically along, and sometimes 
flow in a rapid stream over ledges and broken masses 
of stone ; the frequent changes of scene, occasioned 
by the winding of the dale, which at every step 
varies the prospect, by introducing new objects ; the 
huge rocks, in some places bare of vegetation, in 
others covered with luxuriant foliage, here piled 
upon each other in immense masses, there, display- 
ing their enormous fruits in one unbroken perpendi- 
cular mass ; and the sublimity 1 , and picturesque 
beauty, exhibited by the manifold combinations of 
the interesting forms congregated near this enchant- 
ing spot, can never be adequately depicted by the 
powers of language. The creations of the pencil 
alone, are commensurate to the excitations in the 
Blind, of correspondent images." , The exquisite 



scenery of Matlock Dale, howevsr, appears to moat 
advantage when approached from the bridge near its 
northern termination ; its beauties then succeeding 
each other in a gradation which renders them more 
impressive. A rampart of lime-stouo rock, covered 
with yew-trees, elms, and limes, first attracts the at- 
tention ; from the midst of which peeps the humble 
church of Matlock. The interest of the scenery now 
increases ; and the appearance of the High Tor, 
rising to the height of 350 feet on the left of 
the river, is extremely grand. The upper part 
of this stupendous rock is naked, but the bottom 
is covered with underwood of various foliage. At 
the bottom of this eminence flows the river, the bed of 
which has been formed by fragments that have 
fallen from the rock ; a bed so broken that the wa- 
ters roar over the masses which obstruct them with 
surprising noise and rapidity. Heavy rains increase 
the impetuosity of the current, and add to the sub- 
limity of the view. Opposite the High Tor, at a 
greater elevation, though with an ascent less steep, 
stands Masson Hill, which appears like a pile of 
immense craggs 

" Another Pelion on another Ossa hurl'd." 

The summit of Masson Hill has been named the 
Heights of Abraham probably, froni its similarity 
to the Heights of Abraham, near Quebec, rendered 
memorable by the enterprise of the gallant Wolfe, 
in the year 1759. Besides commanding a beautiful 
bird's-eye view of nearly the whole dale, it overlooks 
the country to a vast extent. Frem this point, even 
the High Tor loses its sublimity. This, however, is 
fully compensated by the variety of interesting ob- 
jects included in the prospect. The height of this 
eminence is about 750 feet ; the path to its summit 
has been carried in a winding, or rather zigzag 
direction, and in various places on each side has 
been planted with rows of firs, which opening at 
convenient distances, admit the eye to range over 
the beautiful scenery beneath, from different points 
of view. The romantic cliff' which forms the eastern 
boundary of the dale, is seen to much advantage 
from the Old Bath, where the river, receding in a 
curve from the road, and a little strip of meadow, 
rendered picturesque by three small buildings in the 
cottage style, compose the fore-ground. This is 
finely opposed and backed by a line of rock and 
wood, a mass of trees rising to the right, and shut- 
ting out for a short time all other features of the 
scenery. On crossing the river near this spot, it 
will be observed, that the natural beauties of the 
place have received some improvements from art. 
" Three paths are seen pointing through the wood 
in different directions : one of them, called the 
Lovers' Walk, has been carried along the margin of 
the river, and is arched by the intermingled branches 
of the trees which enclose it. The other pursues a 
winding course to the summit of the rock, which is 
attained with little difficulty, through the judicious 
mode observed in forming the slopes, and placing 
8 the 



* 



DERBYSHIRE. 



of hedges, Ihe boundaries are all stone walls, from 
three to five feet in height, formed of broken masses 
of lime-stone, rudely piled upon each other -without 
mortar, or any cementing materials. Near the inn, 
a plantation of firs, and other hardy trees, has been 
made. An annual fair is also held here for the sale 
of cattle, horses, &c. and is very numerously at- 
tended. At a little distance is a lead-mine, now 
neglected, wherein rich specimens of wheat-stone, 
or white ore of lead, have been frequently found. 

NORBUIV*.] Norbm-y is situated in the hundred 
of Applctree, five miles south-west by west from 
Ashbornc. This manor was given to the ancient 
family of the Fitx-Herberts, in the year 1125, by 
William de Ferrers, Prior of Tutbury ; and has 
continued iu their descendants to the present time.* 
The last possessor of this estate was William Fit/- 
Herbert, Esq. whose death was occasioned by im- 
prudently venturing into a cold bath, after walking 
from London to his residence at Norbury. The ce- 
lebrated Mrs. Fitzherbert is the widow of this gen- 
tleman. Amongst numerous memorials of the Fitz- 
Herbert family, in the church, the following epitaphs 
were formerly visible : 

" An. CCCC seventy ami three 
Yeres of our Lord passed in degree 
The body tliat buried is under this stone 
Of Nicliol Fitzherbert Lord and Patrone 
Of Norbury with Alis the daughter of Henry Bothe 
Eight sonnes and five daughters he had in sothe ; 
Two sons and two daughters by Isabel his wife 
So seventeen children he had in his life. 
This church he made of his own expenca 
In the joy of heaven be his recompence 
And in inoone of November the nineteenth dey, 
He bequeathed his soule to ererlasting jey." 

" The dart of death that no man flee 
Nay the common lawe of mortallitie 
Hath demaurided to be buried here 
The body of Raffi Fitzharbert, Squiere 
Patrone of this church and of this tower Lord 
The which deceased y cares of our Lord 
14831. 

Of March the second dey thus parted hee* 
With him is layd upon this sepulture 
F.lsabeth his wyfe bcgoii in sure 
Daughter of John Marshall 
Esq. Lord of Upton and of Sedfall. 



* Several individuals of this family have been much cele- 
brated for their learning, but none more so, than Sir Anthony 
Fitzherbcrt, who presided as Judge in the Court of Common 
Pleas in the reign of Henry the Eighth, and is reported to have 
opposed Cardinal Wolsey in the plenitude of his power. He 
was the author of various works, of which his Grand Abridge- 
ment of the English Common Law, and New Natura Brevium, 
are still in repute among the students in his profession. He 
died in the year 153S, and was buried in Norbury Church. 

f This person was born in the year 1726. His father (a far- 
mer and maltster) was a severe man, who took little interest in 
the welfare pf his children, consisting of three sons; neither 
educating them, nor promoting their establishment in society. 
They were, however, all prosperous. Jeclwliah, the second, 
inamfes ed a strong passion for improvement, and, under every 
possible disadvantage, acquired an eminent knowledge of science 

\8)L, II. NO. 50. 



Seven sonnes and eight daughters they had in fere 
In this lyfe together whilst that they were, 
Merciful Je.su that pitiest mankind, 
In thy blysse graunt them a place to fync'e. 

Prestes ambobus requiem Deus." . <. 

NOIIMANTON.] This little village, situated in the 
hundred of Repton and Gresley, two miles and a 
half south from Derby, is entitled to notice, chiefly 
as the birth-place of Jedediah Strutt, the ingenious 
inventor of the machine for making ribbed stock- 
ings, t 

ODIN.] On the south of Mam Tor, and near the 
bottom, is the ancient mine of Odin, which has pro- 
bably been worked from the time of the Saxons, and 
still employs nearly 140 persons. It consists of two 
lovels : the upper a carl-gate, by which the ore is 
conveyed from the mine ; the lower one, a water 
level to drain the works. The thickness of the vein 
of ore is various : it runs from ea*t to west, hading 
to the south. In some places it has been found 
sixty yards below the entrance, and in others as 
much above. The quality of the ore varies in dif- 
ferent parts of the mine : the best yields about three 
ounces of silver to a ton of lead. The elastic bitu- 
men, already mentioned, is obtained in this mine, 
with blende, barytes, manganese, sulpmirct of iron, 
fluor spar^aud a number of other minerals. Though 
the level at the entrance of Odin mine is not more 
than seven or eight feet from the surface of the 
earth, it is said to be nearly 150 feet below it, at the 
further extremity ; and it extends into the mountain 
when; the Blue John is found. The two mines in 
which that beautiful substance is procured, are nam- 
ed the Tre-cliff and the Water-hull. The entrance 
to the former is by an arched descent, conducted by 
numerous steps to the depth of about 180 feet, where 
the steps terminate ; but a confined, yet tolerably 
easy path, leads into a opening about 90 feet 
deeper. This forms the commencement of a range 
of natural caverns, or fissures, in the bowels of the 
mountain, the termination of which is unknown, 
though they have been followed to an extent of 
nearly three miles. Some beautiful snow-white sta- 
lactite decorates several parts of these subterraneous 
passages ; and beds of a very rich kind of red ochre, 
are found amongst the productions of this singular 
mountain. 



and literature. In the year 1754, he took a farm at Blackwell, 
near Nonnanton, and married. Learning from his wife's brother, 
who was a hosier, and well acquainted with the stocking frame, 
that some unsuccessful attempts had been made to manufacture 
ribbed stockings upon it, his curiosity induced him to investi- 
gate the operations of that machine, witn a view to effect what 
others had vainly attempted. After the sacrilice of much time, 
labour, and expence, he succeeded ; and, in conjunction with 
his brother-in-law, obtained a patenl for (he invention, and re- 
moved to Derby, where lit- established an extensive manufac- 
ture of ribbed stockings, which has been carried on by himself 
and partners, and by his sons, to the present time. Soon ;;fter 
Mr. Strult's patent was obtained, another waa granted to Messrs. 
Morris of Nottingham, for a machiHe on the same principle, 
but applied to the making of silk-lace ; by which they acquired 
a considerable fortune j and that business is now carried on to 
T a very 



7-2 



DERBYSHIRE. 






arc chiefly employed in combing and spinning jer- 
gey, and working upon the stocking frames, near a 
hundred of which machines are used in the parish. 
A small manufactory of scythe stones is also carried 
on here. The number of religious sects in this place 
is remarkable ; and there are separate places of wor- 
ship for Presbyterians, Calvinists, Baptists, and 
Quakers. 

MIDDI.ETON, STONEY.] This little village, hewn 
out of the grey rocks which impended over it, and 
scarcely distinguishable from them, is worth notice, 
for its very neat octagon church, built partly by 
brief, and partly by donation from the late Duke of 
Devonshire. It is situated in the hundred of High 
Peak, thirty miles north by west from Derby. 

The inhabitants of Stoncy Middleton are chiefly 
limestone-workers and miners. The valley, or ra- 
ther chasm, near the entrance of which the village 
stands, is called Middleton Dale, and continues in a 
winding direction nearly two miles. Mr. Warner 
observes, that the surrounding scenery is undeserv- 
ing the distinction it has received, from a total ab- 
sence both of beauty and sublimity. " Rocks un- 
adorned with trees, or other verdant covering, ex- 
clude the picturesque ; whilst their clumsy, heavy, 
round forms, preclude the idea of grandeur. A 
lively fancy may, indeed, paint to itself something 
resembling castellated buildings, or rude fortresses, 
in the perpendicular crags, which in some places, 
rise to the height of four hundred feet ; and th; 
turnings of the dale are so sharp, as occasionally to 

five the idea of all further progress being prevented 
y the opposition of an insurmountable barrier of 
precipitous rock. Its character, therefore, is rather 
singularity, than magnificence or loveliness." It 
has been supposed, that some convulsion of nature 
rent these rocks asunder ; and this idea is somewhat 
confirmed as the veins of lead ore correspond on each 
side. The surrounding country is barren, wild, and 
dreary. 

MONEYASH.] Moneyash, formerly Mqniax, is a 
chapelry to Bakewell, five miles west by south from 
that town. William de Lynford, who held the ma- 
nor in the reign of Edward III. had a grant of a 
market and fair, in reward for the good services he 
had performed for the King in Scotland ; but the 
place is now very poor, and the market and fair 
have been long discontinued. At the distance of a 
mile and a half, in a narrow dale, which presents 
some pleasant scenery, are the quarries where much 
of the Derbyshire marble is obtained. 

MONSAL DALE.] The scenery of Monsal Dale, a 
sequestered retreat in the vicinity of Tideswell, is 
eminently interesting. In some places it is delight- 
fully romantic ; hut its general character is pictu- 
resque beauty. At the entrance of the dale the 
Wye plays round the feet of high and jutting rocks, 
the appearance of which at a distance is that oi 
strong and lofty towers. Lower down, the dale ex- 
pands, and the eye. is delighted with the rich and 
yerdant prospects which presents itself. The banks 



>n each side are diversified with woods, which ex- 
end down in many places to the margin of the 
iver. In other parts the grey colour of the rocks 
ppear, but delightfully harmonised by the various 
shades of shrubs, underwood, and green turf. Fur- 
her on, the dale spreads wider ; the stream winds 
gently through fertile fields, ornamented by farms, 
)icturesque cottages, wood, bridges, and projecting 
oeks. A steep precipice, partially covered with 
H'ushwood and herbage, forms a noble back-ground, 
he continuity of whose surface is broken by num- 
jerless bold fragments. The view which meets the 
sight from the eminence, when looking back upon 
the dale, is one of the most beautiful in nature. 
Wood, water, and rock are so happily united ; while 
the luxuriant meadows directly below the eye, are 
contrasted with the barren heights on each side, 
that imagination can scarcely pourtray a scene more 
lovely. At some little distance from the point 
where the course of the river is concealed by a pro- 
jecting hill, its waters form a natural and agreeable 
cascade. 

The " Great Finn," as it is called, situated on 
the summit of the eminence which overlooks Monsal 
Dale, was a large barrow, about thirty yards in cir- 
cumference, chiefly composed of broken masses of 
lime-stone, to obtain which, twenty years ago, the 
barrow was destroyed. Various skeletons were dis- 
covered therein, as well as several urns of coarse 
clay, slightly baked, containing burnt bones, ashes, 
beaks of birds, &c. Two of the skeletons were of 
gigantic size, and lay in opposite directions, with 
their feet pointing to an urn placed between them. 
In one part, at the bottom, was a cavity cut in the 
solid rook, (thirty-three inches broad, and twenty- 
five in depth,) wherein lay the bones of a skeleton 
with the face downward ; and on the top of the 
skull, where it appeared to have been fixed by a 
strong cement, a piece of black Derbyshire marble, 
dressed, two feet in length, nine inches broad, and 
six inches thich : under the head were two small 
arrow-heads of flint. In another cavity formed in 
the soil, with flat stones at the sides and bottom, 
were ashes and burnt bones. A^ spear-head, and 
some other memorials of ancient customs, were also 
found here. Excepting on the side next the preci- 
pice, the summit of the Great Finn is surrounded 
by a double ditch. Mr. Hayman Rooke imagines 
this barrow to have been of very remote antiquity ; 
arrow-heads of flint, being evidences of the people 
not in the use of malleable metal. 

NEWHAVEN.] On the turnpike-road, nine miles 
north by west from Ashborne, on the way to Buxton, 
stands Newhaven, a large, handsome, and commo- 
dious inn, which was erected by the Duke of De- 
vonshire, about twenty years ago. The country is 
very bleak and open, and was formerly a barren 
waste ; but a recent bill of enclosure has effected 
great improvement. Several hundred acres are now 
in cultivation. The enclosures have a strange ap- 
pearance to a stranger from the south, as, instead 

of 



DERBYSHIRE. 



of hedges, ihe boundaries arc all stone walls, from 
three to five feet in height, formed of broken masses 
01 lime-stone, rudely piled upon each other without 
mortar, or any cementing materials. Near the inn, 
a plantation of firs, and other hardy trees, has been 
made. An annual fair is also held here for the sale 
of cattle, horses, &c. and is very numerously at- 
tended. At a little distance is a lead-mine, now 
neglected, wherein rich specimens of wheat-stone, 
or white ore of lead, have been frequently found. 

NOIIBURY.] Norbni-y is situated in the hundred 
of Appletree, five miles south-west by west from 
Ashhonie. This manor was given to the ancient 
family of the Fitx-Herberts, in the year 1125, by 
William de Ferrers, Prior of Tutbury ; and has 
continued in their descendants to the present time.* 
The last possessor of this estate was William Fitz- 
Herbert, Esq. whose death was occasioned by im- 
prudently venturing into a cold bath, after walking 
from London to his residence at Norbury. The ce- 
lebrated Mrs. Fitzherbert is the widow of this gen- 
tleman. Amongst numerous memorials of the Fitz- 
Herbert family, in the church, the following epitaphs 
were formerly visible : 

" An. CCCC seventy and three 
Yeres of our Lord pasted in degree 
The body that buried is under this stone 
Of Nichol Fitisherbert Lord and Patrone 
Of Norbury with Alis the daughter of Henry Bothe 
Eight sonnes and five daughters he had in sothe ; 
Two sons and two daughters by Isabel his wife 
So seventeen children he had in liis life. 
1 his church he made of his own expence 
Jn the joy of heaven be his recompence 
And in inoone of November the nineteenth dey, 
He bequeathed his soute to everlasting jey." 

" The dart of death that no man flee 
Nay the common lawe of mortallitie 
Hath demaunded to be buried here 
The body of Rafc Fitzharbert, Squiere 
Patrone of this church and of this tower Lord 
The, which deceased yeares of our Lord 



Of March the second dey thus parted lice* 
VV ith him is layd upon this sepulture 
Elsabetb his wyfe begoii in sure 
Daughter of John Marshall 
Esq. Lord of Upton and of Sedfall. 



* Several individuals of this family have been much cele 
orated for their learning, but none more so, than Sir Anthony 
JMtzherbert, who presided as Judge in the Court of Common 
rieas in the reign of Henry the Eighth, and is reported to have 
opposed Cardinal Wolsey in the plenitude of his power. He 
was the author of various works, of which his Grand Abridge- 
ment ol the English Common Law, and New Natura Brevium 
are still in repute among the students in his profession. lie 
died m the year 1533, and was buried in Norbury Church. 

I his person was born in the year 1726. His father (a far- 
ner and maltster) was a severe man, who took little interest in 
the welfare of his children, consisting of three sons; neither 
educating ihem, nor promoting their establishment in societv 
They were, however, all prosperous. Jedt-diah, the second' 
jnamtes ed a strong passion for improvement, and, under every 

possible disadvantage, acquired an eminent knowledge of science 
\&L. II. NO. 50. 



Seven sonnes aiid eight daughters they had in fere 
In thii lyfe together whilst that they were, 
Merciful Jesu that pitiest mankind, 
In thy blysse graunt them a place to fynde. 
Prestes ambobus requiem Deus." 

NOBMANTON.] This little village, situated in the 
hundred of Reptou and Gresley, two miles and a 
half south from Derby, is entitled to notice, chiefly 
as the birth-place of Jedediah 8trutt, the ingenious 
inventor of the machine for making ribbed stock- 
ings, f 

ODIN.] On the south of Mam Tor, and near the 
bottom, is the ancient mine of Odin, which lias pro- 
bably been worked from the time of the Saxons, and 
still employs nearly 140 persons. It consists of two 
levels : the upper a carl-gate, by which the ore is 
conveyed from the mine; the lower one, a water 
level to drain the works. The thickness of the vein 
of ore is various : it runs from east to west, hading 
to the south. In some places it has been found 
sixty yards below the entrance, and in others as 
much above. The quality of the ore varies in dif- 
ferent parts of the mine : the best yields about three 
ounces of silver to a ton of lead. Tha clastic bitu- 
men, already mentioned, is obtained in tins mine, 
with blende, barytes, manganese, sulphuret of iron, 
fluor spar^and a numbor of other minerals. Though 
the level at the entrance of Odin mine is not more 
than seven or eight feet from the surface of the 
earth, it is said to be nearly -150 feet below it, at the 
further extremity ; and it extends into the mountain 
where; the Blue John is found. The two mines in 
which that beautiful substance is procured, are nam- 
ed the Tre-cliff and the Water-hull. The entrance 
to the former is by an arched descent, conducted by 
numerous steps to the depth of about 180 feet, where 
the steps terminate ; but a confined, yet tolerably 
easy path, leads into an opening about 90 feet 
deeper. This forms the commencement of a range 
of natural caverns, or fissures, in the bowels of the 
mountain, the termination of which is unknown, 
though they have been followed to an extent of 
nearly three miles. Home beautiful snow-white sta- 
lactite decorates several parts of these subterraneous 
passages ; and beds of a very rich kind of red ochre, 
are found amongst the productions of this singular 
mountain. 



and literature. In the year 1754, he took a farm at Blackwell, 
near Normanton, and married. Learning from his wife's brother, 
who v.as a hosier, and well acquainted with the stocking frame, 
that some unsuccessful attempts had been made to manufacture 
ribbed stockings upon it, his curiosity induced him to investi- 
gate the operations of that machine, "with a view to effect what 
others had vainly attempted. After the sacriiice of much time, 
labour, and expence, he succeeded ; and, in conjunction with 
his brother-in-law, obtained a patent for ihe invention, and re- 
moved to Derby, where he- established an extensive manufac- 
ture of ribbed stockings, which has been carried on by himself' 
and (Winers, and by his sons, to the pit-sent time. Soon after 
Mr. btrult's patent was obtained, another was granted to Messrs. 
Morris of Nottingham, for a machine on the same principle' 
but applied to Ihe making of silk-lace ; by which they acquired 
a considerable fortune ; and that business is now carried on to 
"f a very 



74 



DERBYSHIRE. 






OSMASTON.] At the -village of Osmaston, situat- 
ed in the hundred of Reptou and Gresley, two miles 
and a half south-east from Derby, is the seat of Sir 
Robert Wilmot, the descendant of a younger branch 
of the Wilmots of Chaddesden. The estate has 
teen in the possession of this family about two hun- 
dred years. The house was erected in the year 
1696, partly of brick, and partly stone ; but the 
brick-work has since been stuccoed. It has two 
fronts : that to the south measures 192 feet in 
length ; that to the north 217 : the latter has a very 
handsome appearance when seen from the London 
road, which passes within half a mile of the man- 
sion. This building is furnished with a well-chosen 
library, and is decorated with a variety of paint- 
ings. 

In the Hall are original whole length portraits, 
but coloured in a hard, dry style, of Philip the Se- 
cond, of Spain, with a distant view of the Escurial 
in the back-ground ; Christian the Fourth, King of 
Denmark ; Amedius, Duke of Savoy ; and Mon- 
seigneur de Soubizc. 

In the Library is an extremely fine painting of 
the meeting of Hector and Andromache at the Sccean 
Gate, by Cignaroti ; nine feet in length, by seven 
feet high, designed from the following description 
in the Iliad : 

With haste to meet him, sprung the joyful fair, 
His blameless wife, Action's worthy heir: 
The nurse stood near, in whose embraces prest, 
His only hope hung smiling at her breast, 
Whom each soft charm, and early grace adorn, 
Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn. 

Silent the warrior smil'd, and pleas'd resign' d 
To tender pussions all his mighty mind. 
His beauteous princess cast a mournful look, 
Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke; 
Her bosom labor 1 cl with a boding sigh, 
And the big tear stood trembling in her eye. 

Ferdinand the Second, Grand Duke of Etruria, 
and the Princess Urbini, his Duchess ; original half 
lengths : artists unknown. Charles the First ; old 
Stone ; half length. Lady Wilmot ; half length. 
Maurice, Prince of Orange ; Vandyck : whole 
length. This is an exceedingly beautiful portrait ; 
the relief obtained by the colouring almost war- 
ranting the use of the word magical in describ- 
ing it. 



a very great extent. The principle of the invention has also 
been applied to a variety of work of different kinds. About 
the year 1771, Mr. Strutt entered into partnership with Sir 
Richard Arkwright, wlio was then engaged in the invention of 
his incomparable machinery for spinning, and which was soon 
afler completed. But though the most excellent yarn, or twist, 
was produced, the manufacturers could not be prevailed upon 
to weave it into callicoes. Mr. Strutt, therefore, in conjunc- 
tion with Mr. Samuel Xeed, another partner, attempted the 
manufacture of this article in the year 1773, and proved suc- 
cessful. However, after a large quantity of callicoes had been 
made, it was discovered, that they were subject to double the 
duty (viz. sixpence per yard) of cottons with linen warp, and 



The following paintings, with several others, a* 
in the south Drawing-Room. The Adoration of th* 
Magi, by Bassano ; in which original portraits of 
Henry the Fourth of France, and his Minister the 

j Duke de Sully are introduced, by Giacomo Bassan. 
The Repose; by Julio Romano. The Incredulity 
of St. Thomas ; Andrea Del Sarto. Rubens' Wife ; 
Rubens. A Vintage ; T. Bassan. The Finding of 
Moses ; Paolo Veronese. A Female Peasant ; Hon- 
thurst. A Prize Landscape ; Smith of Chichester. 
View of Vesuvius, and a Morning Scene ; Wright. 
A small Autumnal Scene ; Turner. Sketch of a 

i Lion-Hunting ; Rubens. 

I In the Tapestry-Room is a Cleopatra, with an 
attendant holding a vase supposed to contain the 

i asp ; by Ludivico Caracci ; and an original half- 
length of Cecil, Lord Wimbolton. 

In the north Drawing-Room is a piece, contain- 
ing whole length figures of Charles the First, his 

i Queen, and their sons, the Dukes of York, and 

| Gloucester ; Vandyck. A small original portrait of 
Louis the Fourteenth when an infant, closely en- 
wrapped in swaddling clothes. The Duchess of 
Braganza, sister to Maurice, Prince of Orange ; 
Vandyck. The Birth of Venus ; Paduanino ; and 
its companion, an Emblematical Picture of the Four 
Elements ; Cav. Lebiri. Soldiers playing with Dice 
in a Guard-Room ; Ann. Caracci. A Sea Piece, 
painted for Charles the First ; VV. Vandervelt. 

The grounds of this estate were laid out by Ernes ; 
and though not remarkably beautiful, are very plea- 
sant. The estate is tolerably well wooded ; and the 
vicinity of the house has been improved by an orna- 
mental fish-pond, and pleasure ground. 

PARWICH.]- Parwich lies in the Wapentake of 
Wirksworth, six miles north by cast from Ashborne. 
At the Conquest, it was a royal manor ; and it pass- 
ed with Wirksworth, till the time of Charles the 
First. Here was a subordinate, but more valuable 
manor, which belonged to the Fitz-Herberts of Nor- 
bury, and afterwards to the Cokaines of Ashborne. 
In the reign of James the First, it was purchased 
by the family of Levinge, in which, we believe, it 
still remains. 

At Lombard's Green, a place about half a mile 
north-east of Parwich, are some vestiges of an an- 
cient encampment, which occupied a level piece of 
ground near the summit of a lofty eminence. It is 
supposed to have been a Roman camp. Some years 

when printed, were prohibited. They had, therefore, no re- 
source but to ask relief of the legislature, which after 
great expence, and a strong opposition of the Lancashire ma- 
nufacturers, they succeeded in obtaining. This manufacture 
lias also been continued by Mr. Strutt and his family to the 
present period, and is now one of the most important in the 
kingdom. In the year 1775 he began to erect the cotton works 
at Belpar and Milltord ; but his health declining, he removed 
to Derby, where he died surrounded by his family, in the year 
1797. At Thurlston Grange, the residence of Samuel Fox, 
Es<[. is a fine portrait, by VV right, of this eminent Mechanic, 
whose daughter that gentleman married. 

* go, 



DERBYSHIRE. 



ago, at the depth of two feet and a half, was founc 
iwm litary weapon, a considerable number of coins 
and an urn of great thickness, in which the coin! 
had probably been deposited. 

POOLE'S HOLE.] About a mile westward of Bux- 
ton, at the foot of the lime-stone hills termed Coy 
Mosse, is a fissure, or cavern, called Poole's Hole 
from an ancient tradition, that an outlaw, named 
Poole, once made it his residence. It opens with a 
crevice so low and contracted, that the visitant is 
obliged to proceed with caution in a stooping pos- 
ture between 70 and 80 feet, when, says Warner, 
the passage widens into a spacious vacuity, " from 
whose roof depends a quantity of stalactite, pro- 
duced by the droppings of water laden with calca- 
reous matter. Part of this substance adheres to the 
roof, and forms gradually those pendant spiral 
masses called stalactites, or (locally) water-icles : 
another portion drops with the water to the ground, 
and attaching itselt to the floor, is there deposited, 
and becomes the stalagmite, a lumpy mass of the 
same matter. One of the former, of immense side, 
called the Flitch of Bacon, occurs about the middle 
of the cavern, which here becomes very narrow ; but, 
after a short space, spreads again to a greater width, 
and continues large and lofty till we reach another 
surprisingly large mass of stalactite, to which the 
name of Mary Queen of Scots' Pillar, is attached, 
from the tradition of that Queen having made a visit 
to the cavern, and advanced thus far into its re- 
cesses." As this pillar cannot be passed without 
some difficulty, few people venture beyond it : in- 
deed, the remaining part of the cavern offers little to 
repay the fatigue of exploring it. The passage con- 
tracts, and for some, yards it is necessary to descend 
by very slippery and craggy steps. Having passed 
these, the path continues nearly on a level for 50 or 
60 feet, when an almost perpendicular ascent com- 
mences, which leads to the extremity of the fissure, 
through the Eye of St. Anthony's Needle, a narrow 
strait, beyond which, the steepness of the way is 
only to be surmounted by clambering over irregular 
masses of rock. "The cavern terminates at about 
280 feet beyond the Queen of Scots' Pillar : near 
the end is an aperture through a projection of the 
rock, behind which a candle is generally placed 
when any person has ventured to the extremity : 
when seen from the bottom of the cavern, this as- 
sumes the appearance of a star. On returning, the 
stranger is conducted by a way that passes beneath 
a considerable portion of the road by which he en- 
tered. In one part of this passage is a fine spring 
of transparent water. The various masses of sta- 
lactitic matter that are met with in this excavation, 
are distinguished by different names, according to 
the objects which they are supposed to resemble. 
Poole's Saddle, his Turtle, and his Woolsack, the 
Lion, the Lady's Toilet, Pillion, and Curtain, and 

* The forms of these masses are continually varying from 



a variety of others, with appellations bestowed from 
a real or fancied likeness to the things themselves, 
are all pointed out by the guides.* 

The money given by visitants is divided among 
ten aged women, who reside here, and act as guides 
by the permission of the Duke of Devonshire.. The 
extent of the cavern is about 300 yards. The lime- 
stone in this neighbourhood is of several kinds, 
though chiefly applied to the making of lime, many 
hundred tons of which are here burnt annually. The 
workmen and their families, reside in caves, scooped 
out of the hillocks, formed with the Muse from the 
lime-kilns. The crust of these heaps of rubbish, 
consolidated by time and the weather, is impervious 
to the rain, and forms a substantial roof. Each ha- 
bitation contains two or three rooms ; but few have 
any other light than is admitted through the chim- 
ney and door-way. These humble residences of men. 
are denominated the " Ass-Hillocks." 

RADBOURN.] The village of Radhoiirn is situated 
in the hundred of Appletree, four miles and a half 
west from Derby. It has been the seat of several 
wealthy and respectable families ; and appears to 
have descended, by marriage, from that of Chandos 
to Pole, its present possessors. The ancient man- 
sion, which stood near the church, is now in ruins ; 
the present house was built by German Pole, Esq. 
about 00 or 70 years ago, and stands on a pleasant 
and elevated situation, commanding some fine pros- 
pects. 

REPTON.] Rcpton, a village celebrated by anti- 
quaries as the head of th Saxon kingdom of Mer- 
cia, and the burial-place of several of the Sovereigns, 
s situated on the declivity of a hill, in the hundred 
of Repton and Gresley, seven miles south-west by 
south from Derby. The prospects which it com- 
mands are animated by the beautiful meanderings of 
the river Trent. Repton is said to have been an 
ancient colony of the Romans, called Repandunum ; 
>ut, though its origin is unquestionably remote, there 
are no memorials to prove that it was founded by 
hat people. By the Saxons it was named Hreopan-r 
dune ; and, in ancient deeds, it has also been called 
Heppendune, Rapandon, Repindon, &c. A noble 
monastery for religious men and women, under the 
government of an abbess, appears to have been esta- 
)lished here previously -to the year 660. It was af- 
erwards destroyed by the Danes ; but, having been 
refonnded in 117-2, by Matilda, widow of Ranulph, 
second Earl of Chester, it continued till the Disso- 
ution. Amongst the Kings of Mercia recorded to 
jave been interred in the original structure, were 
VIeruwala, and Ethelbald the First: the latter was 
slain by ne of his own chieftains, after an attempt 
o march into Wessex, in which he was opposed by 
2uthred, with all his forces, and drived back to 
Sceaduue, near Tamworth, where the Mercians were 
outed, after a. decisive battle. Kyuechardus, bro- 



lie depositions left by the water, which constantly percolates 
lirough the roo, and sides of the lock. 

tlier 



7(5 



DERBYSHIRE. 



thrr to Sigebert, 'Kuig of the West Saxons, was also 
buried here. Burthfcd, the las King- of the Mer- 
cians, who purchased an iusfoarc peace of the Danes, 
by solicitations and bribery", was here, at length, ex- 
pelled froiii his throne, after a troublesome reign of 
twenty-two years. His kingdom was then ravaged; 
and Repton, with its palace and priory, was laid in 
ruins ; in which state it probably remained till the 
time of the Domesday Survey, when the manor was 
part of the King's lands. Soon afterwards, it be- 
longed to the Earls of Chester. On the renewal of 
the priory by Matilda, she dedicated it to the honour 
of God, the Blessed Mary, and the Holy Trinity, and 
translated hither the black canons who had been pre- 
viously settled at Calke. She endowed it with the 
tythe'S of Repton, and of its hamlets, Newton, Mil- 
ton, Foremark, Ingleby, Tykeuhall, Smythesby, and 
Meysham, and with other lands in the parish to a 
great extent ; to which were added Batlow, in Es- 
ex, and some lands at Gransden, in Huntingdon- 
shire. At the Dissolution, its revenues were esti- 
. mated at 167/. 18s. 2^7. In the thirty-second of 
Henry the Eighth, the priory, and its possessions at 
Repton, were vested in Thomas Thacker, Esq. ser- 
vant to that Monarch ; in whose family it continued 
till the reign of Anne, when the property was divided 
between two co-heiresses ; the elder of whom con- 
veyed her share to the Stanhopes of Elvaston ; but 
the younger, at her death, in 1728, devised her part 
to Sir Robert Burdett, Bart, of Foremark, whose 
grandson, Sir Francis, is now the proprietor. The 
site of the priory, and the mansion now occupied as 
the house of the head master of Repton school, are 
included in the possessions of the latter. 

This village is composed principally of one street 
of scattered houses, extending from north to south, 
about a mile in length : it has a brisk trout stream 
running by it, which flows into the Trent. At the 
lower part of the village, pleasantly elevated above 
the meadows, stands the church, a large handsome 
structure, ornamented with an elegant and lofty 
spire, which forms a very beautiful and distinguished 
object. This is said to be the third church that has 
stood uj)on this spot. It has evidently been erected 
at two different periods : by the style of the windows 
and arches, the nave and side aisles appear to be of 
the reign of Edward the Third ; but the chancel is 
certainly more ancient. The arches which divide 
the nave from the aisles are pointed, excepting the 
two that adjoin the chancel, which are circular. 
Beneath the chancel is an ancient crypt, supported 
by two rows of round Saxon wreathed pillars, with 
passages at each corner of the west end, leading into 
the church, and another on the north. It resembles 
the crypt under the church of St. Peter's in the East, 
mt Oxford, which was supposed to have been erected 
by Grymbald, one of the first professors at Oxford, 
in Alfred's reign ; and, as Grymbald's crypt, arid 

* Sfime particulars of this ctisr jvery were published by Dr. 
S. P^ggCj in tiie Philosoplrcal Transactions for the jeur 1734. 



that under Canterbury Cathedral, resemble this, it 
may be deemed of the same antiquity. About thirty 
years ago, the interior of the church underwent u 
thorough repair. It contains a few handsome mo- 
numents ; and several belonging t the Thacker fa- 
mily, in a tolerably good state. 

Not far from the church-yard, may be traced 
many foundations of buildings leading to the north 
end, and joining the priory ; and in a close near the 
church, in the reign of William and Mary, a la- 
bourer discovered a cemetery, containing, amongst 
many other human skeletons, one of an extraordinary 
size, measuring nine feet.* In the area before the 
church is an old stone cross, consisting of eight oc- 
tagonal steps, terminating in a column ; and a large 
plain pointed arch, or gateway, leading into the 
priory, or school-yard. On the east side of this 
enclosure are the remains of the priory, which have 
been converted into a school, with habitations at 
each end, for the upper master and first usher. The 
school was founded in pursuance of the will of Sir 
John Port, of Etwell, Knight, who, by grant of 
Henry the Eighth, was possessed of several estates 
belonging to the priory, and in 1556 devised certain, 
lands and tenements for the foundation of a gram- 
mar-school at Repton, and hospital at Etwell. His 
executors purchased of Gilbert Thacker, Esq. part 
of the priory, and fitted it up for the reception of the 
scholars, and residence of a master and usher. By 
James the First, the master and poor men of Etwell 
hospital, with the school-master, ushers, and poor 
scholars of Repton, were incorporated : and the ap- 
pointments, and hereditary government of these 
foundations, vested in the families of the Earls 

Chesterfield and Moira, and Gerrard, Bart. 

The school-room, as appears from the windows, and 
other traces, was the refectory or hall of the priory. 
It is supported by a row of strong round Saxon 
pillars, evidently of ancient date, which formerly 
extended to the end of the priory ; but several wer 
removed a few years ago, when some alterations 
were made in the house of the first usher. The 
dormitory was at the north end of the hall ; and OH 
the east side was situated the cloisters, the area of 
which has been converted into a garden for the mas- 
ter. Adjoining to the cloisters stood the priory 
church, which, from the remains that have been oc- 
casionally laid open, appears to have been an elegant 
fabric, supported by pillars of alabaster, extending 
180 feet and upwards from the school building-. 
This structure was demolished in the beginning of 
Queen Mary's reign : its destruction is thus related 
in Fuller's Church History : " I must not forget 
how oue Thacker, being possessed of Repingdon 
Abbey, alarmed with the news that Queen Mary had 
set up the abbies again (and fearing how large a 
reach such a precedent might have) upon a Sunday, 
(belike the better day, the better deed,) called toge- 



ther 



DERBYSHIRE. 



.* 



the carpenters and masons of that county, and 
plucked down in one day (church work is a cripple 
in going up, but rides post in coming down) a most 
beautiful church belonging thereunto, saying, " He 
would destroy the nest, for fear the birds should 
build there again." In the adjoining orchard, are 
the foundations of the other buildings of the priory, 
which may he plainly traced in various directions. 
At the north end of the priory-yard, on the bank of 
a piece of water called the Old Trent, is a mansion 
that was built by the Thackers about a century ago, 
upon the foundations of the Prior's lodgings, and 
which, for some years past, has been appropriated 
for the residence of the head master. This house 
exhibits, towards the water, a curious brick tower, 
with battlements, and an ornamental cornice, of the 
date of Henry the Sixth. The population of Rep- 
ton, as returned under the Act of 181], was 
1618. 

RISLEY.] This village is situated in the hundred 
of Morleston and Litchurch, seven miles and a half 
east by south from Derby. The manor was grant- 
ed, in the reign of Edward the Third, to Geffrey, 
son of Roger Mortimer, Earl of March : it was af- 
terwards the property of the Lords Sheffield, an- 
cestors <o the Duke of Buckingham ; and of them it 
was purchased by the Willoughbys of Risley in the 
year 1587. Of this family (now extinct) was the 
celebrated navigator Sir Hugh Willoughby, whose 
melancholy fate, whilst seeking for a north-east 
passage, in the reign of Elizabeth, is pathetically 
described in Thomson's Seasons.* Near the site of 
the ancient house, in Risley Park, a large silver 
dish, or salver, of antique basso relievo, and of Ro- 
man workmanship, was found in the year 17-29. It 

* " Here Winter holds his unrejoicing court ; 
And through his airy hall, the loud misrule 
Of driving tempest is for ever heard : 
Here the grim tyrant meditates his wrath ; 
Here arms his winds with all subduing frost ; 
Moulds his fierce hail, and treasures up his snows. 
With which he now oppresses half the globe." 

" Miserable they 

Who here, entangled in the gath'ring ice, 
Take their last look at the descending sun : 
While full of death, and fierce with ton-fold frost, 
The long, long night, incumbent o'er their heads, 
Falls horrible. Such was the Briton's fate 
As with first prow (what have not Britons dar'd ?) 
He for the passage sought, attempted since 
So much in vain, and seeming to be 
By jealous nature with eternal bars. 
In these lell regrtms, in Arzina caught, 
And to the stony deep, his idle ship 
Immediately seal'd, he, with his hapless crew. 
Each full exerted to his sev'ral ta-k, 
Froze in'o statues ; to the cordage glu'd 
The sailor, and the pilot to the helm." 

Tn the year 1553, Sir Hugh Willoughby was appointed com- 
mander of a squadron of three ship?, lilted out for discoveries 
in the Northern Part of the World, by a company of British 
Merchants. The next in command was Kichard Chancelar, a 
man of considerable ab'.i.iies. Previously to their sailing, 

VOL. II. KO. 51. 



was twenty inclies long, fifteen^broad; and weighed 
seven pounds? Upon the face were various .figures, 
representing rural sportSj employments, and -reli- 
gious rites. It stood upp'fi asqtiare basis, or foot ; 
and round the bottom, and on the outside, this in- 
scription was rudely cut in Roman characters #f the 
fourth century : " Exsvperivs episcopvs ecclesiaj 
Bogiensi dedit." Intimating, that it had been " gi- 
ven by Epicurius, Bishop of Bayeux and Toulouse 
in the year 405, to the church of Bouges." A bat- 
tle was fought near Bouges, in 1 121, between the 
Scots, under the Duke d'Alenson, who was quarter- 
ed in the church, and the English", under Thomas, 
Duke of Clarence, brother to Henry the Fifth, who 
was slain there. At this time the salver is supposed 
to have been brought from the church as a trophy, 
and given to Dale Abbey. 

About four miles south of this village is Caven- 
dish Bridge, named from the Devonshire family, who 
substituted it for an inconvenient ferry over the 
Trent near this spot. It is a handsome structure of 
three arches, composed of free-stone : it unites thcr 
counties of Leicester and Derby. The great Staf- 
fordshire navigation, or Grand Turk Canal, falls 
into the Trent near this bridge, and, by its various 
connecting branches, facilitates the mnoval of goods 
to almost every part of the kingdom. Some good 
houses have been erected here by the gentlemen- 
having the direction of the wharf, which, with other 
buildings raised near them, pass under the general 
name of Cavendish Bridge. 

SHIPLEY.] Shipley, in the hundred of Morleston 
and Litchurch, nine miles and a half north-east by- 
cast from Derby, was the seat of the Vavasours, and 
afterwards of the Strclleys, one of whom was uiar- 

whirli took place about the latter end of May, Sir Hugh pro- 
posed that it by any accident they should be separated, every 
ship should make for the harbour of Warehouse in Norway. 
They had proceeded but a little way in their vo\age, when so 
sudden anil violent a tempest occurred as prevented the vessels 
Irom keeping their intended course, and tile Admiral was sepa- 
rated from the ship which Chancelar commanded. Sir Hugh 
Willoughby then attempted to sail for Wardhouse, but was 
driven by the tempest to a considerable distance towards the 
north. I' rom the 8th of August to the 16th of September, they 
were tossed up and down, the spoil of winds and waves, with- 
out being able to discover hind, but on.the 17lh they anchored 
in an excellent harbour. From this place they Dispatched men 
in different directions to discover the inhabitants but they ic- 
tunu'd unsuccessful, the only possessors of the country being 
bears, fleer, foxes, and a number of other animals. Not daring 
to venture out, the Admiral determined to winter in this har- 
bour: how long he and his crew continued alive is uncertain ; 
hut, in the succeeding summer, they were discovered, by some 
Russian fishermen, all frozen to death. The place when this 
calamitous event occurred is near Reger, in Lapland. The 
voyage of Chancelar was more fortunate. On finding himse f 
separated from the other ships, he proceeded, according to the 
arrangement, to Wardhouse, where he waited some day* in 
expectation of the arrival of the commander, but us he dil not 
appear, Chancelar continued his course eastward, and at last 
reached Muscovy ; hence he relumed bringing presents from 
the Emperor of Russia to Edward VI. 

v ried 



78 



DERBYSHIRE. 



ried to the heiress of Vavasour. In the time of 
Charles II. it was possessed by Sir Edward Locke, 
Kut. Master in Chancery, whose heiress married to 
Miller, and the heiress of Miller to Edward Mundy, 
Esq. (a younger branch of the Mundys of Mark- 
eaton) in whose family it remains. 

SHIRLAND.] Shirland, in the hundred of Scars- 
dale, two miles and a half north by west from All're- 
ton, is an old residence of the Lords Grey de Wil- 
ton. It was sold to Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, 
about Edward the Fourth's time ; and upwards of a 
century afterwards, it was divided amongst the heirs 
general of that family. In the church is a monu- 
ment of the Lords Cirey, of the time of Edward the 
Third. * 

SHIRLEY.] Shirley, in the hundred of Applet ree, 
four miles and a half south-east by south from Ash- 
borne, was the residence of the Etendon family, who 
assumed the name of Shirley in the reign of Henry 
the Third, when James Shirley had free warren 
granted him in all his demesne lands in this place. 
The manor subsequently passed to the late Earl 
Ferrers, who disposed of the farms, of which it con- 
sisted, to separate purchasers. 

SNITTERTON.] In this village, situated in the 
Wapentake of Wirksworth, two miles west by north 
from Matlock, stands Snitterton Hall, a curious old 
mansion, of stone, formerly the property of the Sa- 
chcverels. It stands near the summit of a hill, west 
of the Derwent. The front has two projecting 
wings, with pointed gables, embattled sides, and 
square bayed windows. The entrance is on one 
side of the building-, which is wholly enclosed within 
high walls. 

SPEEDWELL LEVEL.} -"-Speedwell Level, or Navi- 
gation Mine, which strongly claims the notice of vi- 
sitors, is situated near the foot of the Winnets, in 
the mountainous range called the Long Cliff. This 
level was originally driven in search of lead ore, by 
a company of adventurers from Staffordshire, who 
commenced their undertaking about forty years ago, 
but with such little success, that, after an expendi- 
ture of 14,000/. and eleven years unremitting but 
fruitless labour, the works were obliged to be aban- 
doned. The descent is beneath an arched vault, by 
a flight of 100 steps, which leads to the sough, or 
level, where a boat is ready for the reception of the 
visitor, who is impelled along the stream by the mo- 
tion communicated to the boat by the guide. The 
depth of the water is about three feet : the channel 
through which it proceeds was blasted through the 
heart of the rock, which was found of such solidity 
and hardness, that implements of sufficient temper 
could hardly be obtained to penetrate it. As the 
boat proceeds, several veins of lead ore may be ob-> 
served in the rock, but of insufficient value to defray 
the expence of working them. 

At the distance ot"650 yards from the entrance, 
the level bursts into a tremendous gulph, whose 
roof and bottom are completely visible ; but across 
which the navigation has been carried, by throwing 



a strong arch over a part of the fissure where the 
rocks are least separated. Leaving the boat, and 
ascending a stage erected above the level, the atten- 
tion of the visitor is here directed to the dark recesses 
of the abyss beneath his feet ; and firm, indeed, must 
be his resolution, if he can contemplate its depths 
unmoved. To the depth of ninety feet, all is vacuity 
and gloom ; but beyond that commences a pool of 
Stygian waters, named the Bottdmless Pit : its pro- 
digious range may in 'some measure be conceived, 
i from the circumstance of its having swallowed up 
more than 40,000 tons of rubbish made in blasting 
the rock, without any apparent diminution either in, 
i its depth, or extent. Its actual depth in standing 
I water is about 320 feet. This abyss is thought to com- 
| municate with others, more deeply situated in the 
; bowels of the mountain, into which the precipitated 
| rubbish has found a passage. The superfluous wa- 
| ter of the level falls through a water-gate into this 
j profound cauldron, with a_noise like a rushing tor- 
rent. This fissure is calculated at being nearly 280 
yards below the surface of the mountain ; and so 
great is its reach upwards, that rodkets of sufficient 
strength to ascend 450 feet, have been fired without 
rendering .the roof visible. The effect of a Bengal 
light, exploded in this stupendous cavity, is exceed- 
ingly magnificent and interesting. Beyond the fis- 
sure, the level has been driven to a similar length to 
that part which precedes it ; but in this division of 
its course, little occurs to excite attention. 

STADEN-LOW.] This is a little hill, situated 
about a mile from Buxton, between that town and 
Chelmorton. Near this spot are the remains of 
some ancient earth-works, which Dr. Stukeley has 
noticed in the second volume of his Itinerary. Since 
his time the ground has been enclosed and cultivat- 
ed, but sufficient vestiges may be distinguished to 
ascertain the form of these memorials of antiquity. 
They consist of two divisions ; one of which is sup- 
posed to have been the place for shows. On the 
north side of Staden-low is a romantic and beautiful 
dale, between two and three miles in length, through 
which flows the river Wye, bounded on each side by 
elevated rocks, so near together, that, for a consi- 
derable space, there is scarcely more room than for 
the passage of the water ; some of them are perpen- 
dicular, and completely bare of vegetation ; others 
are covered with ivy, yew, and ash-wood, but have 
a craggy steep occasionally starting through the 
Verdure. The whole dale bears the name of The 
Lover's Leap, from a vast precipice which forms 
one side of a narrow chasm, broken from the main 
rift nearly at right angles ; and from the summit of 
which a love-lorn female is reported to have thrown 
herself. At the- southern extremity the scenery as- 
sumes a milder character ; and the hollow takes the 
appellation of Mill-Dale, from a mill which is turned 
by the stream, and, in conjunction with a rude 
bridge, a mountain path, and other accompaniments, 
composes a very picturesque view. Another fine 
scene is formed by a lofty rock, called Swallow Tor, 
8 ' which 



DERBYSHIRE. 



79 



which soars over a mass of wood, and has the river 
roaring at its base over broken masses of lime-stone 
rock. 

STANHOPE-LOW.] This is another hill, situated 
near Brassington, on the right of the road leading 
to Buxton. Here is a lar;e harrow, in which hu- 
man remains have been found, protected by chests 
or coffins, formed of four separate stones, a fifth 
constituting the lid. 

STANTON.] Tin's village is situated in the hun- 
dred of High Peak, three miles and a half sotith- 
soirth-east from Bakewoll.* The manor is the joint 
property of the Duke of Rutland and Bache Thorn- 
hill, Ksq. the latter of vviiom has a residence here, 
on a demesne which has been the property of him- 
self and his ancestors, for more than two hundred 
years. Stanton manor, with some others in the 
neighbourhood, formerly belonged to the Foljambe 
family. 

AtScantonMoor,a rocky, uncultivated waste, about 
two miles in length, and nearly as broad, are numer- 
ous rocking-stones, harrows, rock-basons, circles of 
erect stores, &c. which have generally been sup- 
posed o/ Druidical origin. At the south end of the 
moor, is a remarkable assemblage of grit-stone 
rocks, extending in length upwards of 200 feet, and 
rising to the height of about 130 or 140. This pile 
is distinguished by the name of the Router, or Roo- 
tor-rocks ; an appellation which appears to have 
been derived from the various rocking-stones near 
the summit : as it is a common expression in the 
provincial dialect, that a thing " roos" backward 
and forward. Its general position is undoubtedly 
natural, and was probably occasioned by the sinking 
of the surrounding strata ; but the forms and ar- 
rangements of many stones on the upper part, evince 
traces of design. Near the east' end is a vast block 
of an irregular shape, estimated to weigh about fifty 
tons, which was formerly a rocking-stone, that could 
be shaken by the hand : it is now immoveable, hav- 
ing been forced from its equilibrium by the silly ef- 
forts of fourteen young men, who assembled for the 
purpose on Whit-Sunday, in the year 1799. A lit- 
tle to the north, is a second rocking-stone, similar 
in shape to an egg, which may be moved by a single 
finger, though four yards in length, and nearly five 
ia girth. Directly north, is a third rocking-stone, 
resembling the second both in figure and facility of 
motion ; and at the west end, are seven stones piled 
on each other, various in size and form, hut two or 
three very large ; all of which may be shaken by the 
pressure of one hand. 

The huge masses which occupy the summit of the 
Router rocks, range from east to west along the 
middle of the hill, and have had a narrow passage, 
and two chambers, or caves, cut within them. The 
largest cave, having a rcmarkible sound, Iras been 



* There is also Stanton, in the hundred of Repton and 
Gresley, twelve miles and a halt' south-west by south from 
Derby ; Stanton-by-Biidge, also in the hundred of Repton and 



named the Echo ; its length is five yards, its width 
four, and its height about three. The origin of these 
excavations cannot have be.^n very remote, as the 
marks of the pick on the sides are visible and fresh. 
They were probably formed about the same period 
as an elbow-chair near the west end on the north 
side, which has been rudely shaped on the face of a 
large mass of stone, and has a seat for one person 
on each side of it. This is said to have been exe- 
cuted by the direction of Mr. Thomas Eyre, who in- 
habited the ancient manor-house, called Router Hall, 
near the foot of the hill on the south, about sixty 
years ago, and used frequently to entertain company 
on this elevated spot. A hollow, in the stone which 
forms the highest point of these rocks, Mr. Rooke 
supposes to have been a rock-bason ; he also men- 
tions a second rock-bason on the north-west side. 
Nearly a quarter of a mile west of Router is another 
assemblage of large rocks, forming a similar kind of 
hill, called Bradley Tor ; on the upper part of which 
is a rockipg stone nearly eleven yards in circumfer- 
ence, of an orbicular shape, and- raised above the 
ground by two stones, having a passage- between, 
them. Its conformity to the description of the Tol- 
men given by Dr. Borlase in his Antiquities of Corn- 
wall, has induced an opinion of its having been a 
rock idol. 

Near the south-west side of Stanton Moor is an 
elevated ridge, rising into three craggy eminences, 
respectively named Cardiff Rocks, (Jraned Tor, and 
Durwood Tor. On the top of the former are several- 
rock-basons, varying in diameter from two to three 
feet ; and near the bottom, towards the west, is a 
stnall cave, called the Hermitage, at the east end of 
which is a rude figure of a crucifix, between three 
and four feet high, sculptured in alto-relievo on the 
solid rock. In the inner part is a seat, and a recess, 
apparently intended for a sleeping-place. Graucd 
Tor, called also Robin Hood's Stride and Mock 
Beggar's Hall, is a singular heap of rocks, which 
Mr. Rooke supposes to have been anciently a group 
of Druidical monuments. On one rock, which seems 
to have fallen from the top, and is ten yards in cir- 
cumference, arc four rock-basons ; and at the bot- 
tom of another, a rock-bason of an oval form, four 
feet in length, and two feet ten inches wide, which 
appears to have been cut with a tool. This bason 
is sheltered by a massive stone, placed in a sloping 
direction against the rock. The uppermost points 
of this Tor are two vast stones, standing upright, 
eah six yards high, and about twenty-two apart, at 
a distance resembling the chimnies of an ancient 
mansion-house, from which circumstance the pile 
obtained its appellation of Mock Beggar's Hall. 
Round the bottom of the hill there seems to have 
been a fence of broken masses of stone. On the top 
of Durwood Tor are three rock-basons, artificially 

Greiley, six miles and a quarter south by east from Derby ; 
and Stanton-lu-Uale, in the hundred of Morlestnn and Lit- 
church, eight miles and a half east by north from Derby. 

formed j 



DERBYSHIRE. 



formed ; anil an impending crag, or rock-canopy, 
which overhangs what has been denominated an 
" augurial seat." At Durwood, on removing a 
large stone, an urn was discovered half lull of burnt 
bones ; and near it two ancient Querns, or hand- 
mill-stones,* 

In a field north of Grancd Tor, called Nine-Stone 
Close, are the remains of a Dfuidical Circle, about 
forty feet in diameter, now consisting of seven rude 
stones, of various dimensions ; one Of them about 
eight feet iu height, and nine in circumference. 
About 230 feet to the south, are two other stones, of 
similar dimensions, erect. About a quarter of a mile 
west of the little valley which separates HartleMoor 
from Stanton Moor, is an ancient elliptical work, 
called Castle Ring, which Mr. Rooke supposes to 
Lave been a British encampment. Its diameter, 
from south-east to north-west, is fifty-five yards ; 
its length, from north-east to south-west, eighty. 
It was encompassed by a deep ditch and double val- 
lum, but part of the latter has been levelled by the 
plough. In a small enclosure, adjoining the north- 
west end of Stanton Moor, are some remarkably 
situated rocks ; on two of which are the following 
inscriptions, cut in Roman capitals about 180 
years ago, by an ancestor of the Gallon family, who 
possessed the estate. " Res rustica qua? sine dubi- 
tatione proxima et quasi consanguinea sapientise est, 
tarn discentibus eget quam magistris."t "Nihil est 
homini libero dignius, et quod mihi ad sapientis vi- 
tam proximo videtur accedere."J 

About half a mile north-east from the Router 
Rocks, is a Druidical Circle, thirty-three feet in 
diameter, called The Nine Ladies, composed of the 
same number of rude stones, from three to four feet 
in height each. A single stone, termed the King, 
stands at the distance of a hundred feet. Near this 
circle, are several cairns and barrows ; most of which 
have been opened, and various remains of ancient 
customs discovered in them. On the east side of 
the moor, near the edge of a declivity overlooking 
Darley-Dale, are three remarkable stones, standing 
about a quarter of a mile from each other in a north 
and south direction. One of these, called Cats' 
Stone, is on the verge of a precipice, and has a road 
leading to it, cut through a surface of loose stones 
and rock : the second is named Gorse Stone : and 
the third, which is the largest, is called Heart Stone, 
ajid measures twenty-seven yards in circumference. 
Several other stones of singular forms may be ob- 
served on different parts of the moor ; and particu- 
larly one called the Andle Stone, about a quarter of 

* Similar stones have been found in Yorkshire and Wilt- 
shire ; and are yet in common use in the Hebrides. 

f Translation. Rural employment, which unquestionably 
approaches the nearest, and is as it were related to wisdom, re- 
quires both learning and philosophy. 

J Translation. There is nothing more becoming a noble 
person, or which appears to approach nearer to the life 
of a wise man. 



a mile eastward of the Router Rocks : this is about 
five yards high, and appears to have been formed 
by art. 

SUDBURY.] Sudbury, where the petty sessions 
for the hundred of Appletree are holden, lies four- 
teen miles west by south from Derby. In the reiga 
of Edward II. the manor was a possession of th 
Montgomery family, who held it till the reign of 
Henry VIII. when the youngest daughter and co- 
heiress of Sir John Montgomery, conveyed it, by 
marriage, to Sir John Veruon, whose descendant, 
Lord Veruon, is now the proprietor. The family man- 
sion was built about the commencement of the seven- 
teenth century, by Mary, widow of John Vernon, 
Esq. grandson to Sir John. Several of the apart- 
ments are fitted up iu an elegant manner, and a good 
gallery runs through the house ; in which are por- 
traits of the Lords Cromwell and Stafford, and Sir 
John Vernon, three of the favourites of Charles the 
First ; with other paintings. 

The church is an ancient fabric, standing in the 
garden near the house ; and being luxuriantly co- 
vered with ivy, it forms a picturesque object. Here 
the ancestors 'of the family for upwards of two cen- 
turies have been deposited, and various monuments 
to their memory have been erected. The following 
inscription, on a neat mural monument) in comme- 
moration of Catherine, daughter of the late Lord 
Vernon, who died at the age of twenty-five, was 
written by Whitehead, the Laureat : 

Mild as the opening morn's serenesl ray, 

Mild as the close ot Summer's softest day ; 

Her form, her virtues, (form'd alike to please 

With artless charms, and unassuming ease ;) 

On every breast their mingling influence stole, 

And in sweet union breath'd one beauteous whole* 

This fair example to the world was lent 

As the short lesson of a life well spent : 

Alas, too short '.but bounteous Heaven best knows 

When to reclaim the blessings it bestows. 

SBTTON,] Sutton, or Sutton-in-the-Dale, is si- 
tuated in the hundred of Scarsdale, four miles east- 
south-east from Chesterfield, The manor, which, at 
the Conquest, belonged to Roger Poitou, and was 
subsequently in the Harstones, Greys, Leakes, &c. 
is now, or was lately, the property and residence of 
Thomas Kinnersley, Esq. who succeeded ^o the 
estate, under the will of Godfrey Bagnall Clarke, 
Esq. Sutton Hall is an ancient and spacious build- 
ing, standing on elevated ground, and commanding 
some fine views over the adjacent country. 

SWARKESTON.] The village of Swarkeston is si- 



The Vernon family is of great antiquity. They are de- 
scended from the Lords of Vernon in Normandy ; one of whom, 
Richard de Vernon, accompanied William the Conqueror to 
England, and was one of the seven Barons created by Hugli 
Lupus, the great Earl of Chester. Sir Ralph de Vernon, who 
was alive in the reign of Edward the Second, was styled the 
Long- Liver, from his great age, which is said to have been 150 
years. The first of this family invested with a -peerage, was 
George Venables Vernon, created in 1762. 

tuated 



DERBYSHIRE. 



tuated in the hundred of Repton and Gresley, six 
jniles south by east from Derby. At this place is 
Swarkeston Bridge, said to be the longest bridge in 
Europe, which crosses the Trent, and low meadows 
subject to be overflowed by that river. It was ori- 
ginally constructed, several centuries ago, at the ex- 
j>ence, according to tradition, of two maiden sisters. 
When the great length of the bridge, however, 
which extends to the distance of three quarters of a 
mile, is considered, it renders the tradition impro- 
bable, as the expence of such an undertaking must, 
in former age*, have exceeded the ability of private 
individuals. The number of arches is about twenty- 
nine. Part of the fabric was rebuilt, some years 
ago. 

THORP CLOUD.] This is an immense hill, in the 
neighbourhood of Ashtarne, rising to a great height, 
in the form of a triucated cone. Near this is a to- 
lerably good descent into a deep hollow, called 
Bunster-Dale ; one side of which is bounded by a 
steep acclivity, finely covered with wood ; and the 
other, by a range of lofty crags, of wild, uncouth 
appearance. This ravine extends above half a mile, 
when, by a sudden turn, it unites with the southern 
extremity of Dove Dale. 

TIDESWELL.] This little market-town is situated 
in the hundred of High Peak, 32 miles north-north- 
west from Derby, and 160f north-west by north 
from London. It is understood to have received its 
name from an ebbing and flowing well, which was 
formerly regarded as one of the wonders of the 
Peak ; but the phenomenon has long ceased.* The 
town 'is seated amongst moors, and is surrounded 
by bleak hills. Its buildings are scattered on the 
opposite sides of a clear rivulet. Wednesday is the 
market day ; and the fairs are on the 3d of May, 



* There is another ebbing and flowing well, situated nearly 
midway between Chapel-in-the- Frith and Tideswell, close to 
the souili side of the turnpike road, and immediately under a 
steep hill, which rises to the height ol more than 100 feet. This 
well, observe the Editors of the Beauties of England and Wales, 
" is merely a small pool, of an irregular form, but nearly ap- 
proaching to a square, from two to three feet deep, and about 
six or seven yards iu width. The motion of the water from 
which it has obtained its name, is by no means regular, hut seems 
lo depend on the quantity of rain which falls in the different 
seasons of the year. In very dry seasons, it has sometimes 
ceased to flow for two, three, or four weeks toadher ; and 
several instances of this kind have, been observed within the last 
thirty or forty years. Sometimes it flows only once in twelve 
hours: but at others, every hour ; and in very wet weather, 
perhaps twice or thrice within that time. When' it first begins 
to rise, the current can only be perceived by the slow movement 
of the blades of grass, or other light bodies that float upon the 
surface : yet, before the expiration of a minute, the water issues 
in considerable quantity, with a guggling noise, from several 
small apertures on the south and west sides. The interval of 
time between the ebbing and flowing is not always the same ; 
and, of course, the quantity of water it discharges at different 
periods must also vary. In October, 1 802, after a few showery 
days, it flowed and ebbed once in about three quarters of an 
hour ; the whole time it continued to flow was four minutes and 
a half. In this space it rose more than five inches ; and would 
probably have been three times that height, if the water had 

VOL. II. NO. 51. 



the second Wednesday in September, and the 29th 
of October. The population, which is supported 
chiefly by the mining business, was, according to the 
last returns, 1219. 

The manor of Tideswell anciently belonged to 
William Peverel, and being afterwards vested in,- 
King John, was given by him to his esquire ; a fe- 
male descendant from whom, in Richard the Se- 
cond's time, being married to a Stafford, had with 
her husband a grant of a weekly market and yearly 
fair there. It afterwards came to the Meurrills, or 
Meverills, of Throwley, in Staffordshire ; and was 
conveyed by the marriage of an heiress to Lord 
Cromwell, of Oakham, in Rutlandshire, one of whose 
descendants sold it to the Eyres, of Highlow. Sub- 
sequently to the death of the last male heir of that 
family, the manor was sold, under the Court of 
Chancery, to the late Duke of Devonshire. 

Tideswell Church is a handsome building of the 
conventual form, with a neat tower at the west end, 
terminated by eight pinnacles. In the chancel is a- 
flat stone inscribed to the memory of John, son of 
Thomas Foljambe, who died in the year 1358, and 
is said to have contributed towards the building of 
the church. Here is also a curious table monument 
inscribed to Sampson Meverill, who was born in the 
year 1388, and died in lMr2. From the inscription, 
it appears that, within two years, he was in eleven 
battles in France, where he served under the com- 
mand of the great Duke of Bedford, who knighted 
him at St. Luce, and made him Knight Constable 
of England, &c. On this tomb, bread is given 
away every Sunday to the parochial poor. Another 
monument records the memory of a native of Tides- 
well, named Robert Pursglovo, described as a Prior 
of (JisWrn Abbey, Prebend of Hotherham, and Bt- 



been confined ; but as one side of the pool is lower than the 
other, the water falls into a ditch that skirts the road. Having 
j ceased to flow, it remained a few seconds stationary, and then 
began to run back. The retrograde motion continued nearly 
three minutes, when the well assumed its former quiescent stale. 
This curious phenomenon does not appear to have been satis- 
factorily explained, as the principle on which the syphon acts, 
will only account for the intermittent flowing of the water; the 
cause of its ebbing being still unresolved. The opinion of a 
! second syphon, as ingeniously advanced by a modern traveller, 
j which begins to act only when the water rises, or is near its 
height, seems inconsistent with the. appearance of the well ; as 
water continues to ebb for sixty or eighty seconds after its de- 
crease has left a sufficient opening for the admission of the air 
into the supposed reservoir in the hill. Admitting the existence 
of one natural syphon, may we not account for the return of 
the water, by supposing an interior cavity on a level somewhat 
lower than the passages which communicate with the well, 
having a distinct outlet, but too contracted to give issue to all 
the water that flows from the siphon. The overplus will, in 
consequence, be discharged iuio the well, where it finds rent, 
and flows out till the syphon has ceased to act. When this 
happens, the interior cavity, no longer receiving more water 
than its distinct aperture can carry off, begins to empty, and 
receiving back that portion of the water from the well which 
lies above the level of the communicating passages, discharges 
it by its own outlet.'.' 

x> shop 



DERBYSHIRE. 



shop of Hull, who died in the year 1579. Henry 
the Eighth allowed him a pension ; his conduct 
having been so obsequious, that, after he had effect- 
ed the surrender of his own house, he was employed 
as a commissioner to persuade others to do the like. 
At the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, he was 
made Archdeacon of Nottingham, Suffragan Bishop 
of Hull, &c. but refusing to take the oath of supre- 

. macy to Queen Elizabeth, he was deprived of his 
archdeaconry, and other spiritualities, in the year 
1-560. He afterwards retired to this town, and 
founded a grammar-school, which adjoins the 
hurch-yard ; and an hospital for twelve poor peo- 
ple. In the south transept is a tomb, with whole 

'length figures of a man and a woman, of whom no- 
thing is with certainty known ; but tradition repre- 
sents them as the effigies of Thurstan de Bower 



* William Fitzherbert, Esq. of this place, who died in the 
year 1772, had two surviving sons, William and Alleyne. Wil- 
liam, the eldest, was created a Baronet in 1783, and died in 
1791 : his youngest son, Henry, is now the possessor of the 
estate and title. Alleyne, the younger brother of Sir William, 
has attained some diplomatic eminence. He has been Minister 
at Brussels, St. Petersburg!), and Madrid ; Secretary to a Lord 
Lieutenant of Ireland; and in 1782 he negoriated the peace of 
which preliminaries were signed at Paris in the January of the 
year following. He was raised to an Irish Peerage in 1791 ; 
and to a Peerage of Great Britain and Ireland in 1801, by the 
title of Baron St. Helen's. 

}- The poems of Sir Aston Cokayne, of this family, whom 

we have mentioned in a preceding note, were published in the 

year 1658. Amidst much doggrel, they occasionally present 

.; features of no slight merit. This will be evident from the fol- 

' 'lowing stanzas, intituled, " Of Women," which have been 

made very free with by Anacreon Moore, in one of his most 

beautiful songs, on the same subject. 

I wonder why by foul-mouth'd me 

Women so slander'd be, 
Since it so easily doth appear 

They're better far than we. 

Why are the Graces every one 

Pictur'd as women be, 
If not to shew that they in grace 

Do more excell than we ? 

Why are the liberal Sciences 

Pictur'd as women be, 
But t' shew if they would study them 

They'd more excell than we. 

And yet the Senses every one 

As men should piclur'd be, 
To make it known that women are 

Less sensual than we. 

Why are the Virtues every one 
^. Pictur'd as women be ; 
w If not to shew that they in them 
Do more excell than we? 

Since women are so full of worth, 

Lrt them all praised be ; 
For commendations they deserve. 

In ampler wise than we. 



and his wife, who are said to have built the tran- 
sept. 

TIBSJNGTON.] The village of Tissington is situ- 
ated in the Wapentake of Wirksworth, four miles 
and a half north from Ashborne. Tissington Hall, 
the original sec.t of the Fitzherbert family in this 
county,* formerly belonged to the Savages, and 
from them descended, through the Herthulls, Mey- 
uells, Clintons, Fraunceys, and Cokaines.f 

TUNSTED.] Tunsted, the birth-place of the cele- 
brated James lirindley, whose superior judgment in 
planning canals, and ability in overcoming every 
difficulty which occurred to impede their progress, 
will ever retain a distinguished place in the annals 
*f inland navigation, % is a hamlet to the parish of 
Tideswell, from which town it is distant three miles 
and a quarter west by south. 

WHETTON. 



J James Brindley was born in the year 1716. His father 
possessed a small freehold ; but a destructive partiality for field 
amusements haviug obliged him to alienate his property, hi* 
son's education was neglected, and he was obliged to < ontribute 
to support the family by the lowest occupations of rustic labour. 
At the age of seventeen, he apprenticed himself to a mill- 
wright, named Bennet, who resided at Macclesfie Id, in Cheshire. 
Here his mechanical genius began to display itself, and he exe- 
cuted several ingenious pieces of work without hnving had any 
previous instruction. His knowledge of the principles of me- 
chanism continuing to increase, he introduced several improve- 
ments into his business : these performances obtained him cele- 
brity ; and on the expiration ef his servitude, his master en- 
trusted to him the management of his t>ade. Sorm- years after- 
wards, he commenced business for himself, and by various new 
and ingenious contrivances, greally extended his reprtution. 
In 1752 he was employed to erect a water-engine of extraordi- 
nary powers, for the purpose of draining some coal mines in the 
neighbourhood of C'lifton, in Lancashire. In the progress of 
this undertaking, he evinced the possession of those peculiar 
abilities through which he ultimately became eminent, by driv- 
ing a tunnel through the rock nearly 600 yards in length, to 
convey a stream of water from the river Irwell, for the purpose 
of turning a wheel fixed thirty feet beneath the surface of the 
earth. In 1755 he was employed to execute the larger wheels 
for a silk-mill at Congleton; and a person who was engaged to 
make other parts of the machinery, and to superintend the whole, 
proving incapable of completing the work, the business was 
entirely committed to Brindley ; who not only executed the 
original plan in a masterly manner, but made many curious 
and valuable improvements, as well in the construction of the 
engine itself, as in the making the wheels and pinions belonging 
to it. About this time, also, the mills for grinding flints in the 
Staffordshire potteries received several improvements from his 
ingenuity. In the year 1756, he undertook to erect a steam- 
engine, upon a new plan at Newcastle under Line ; and was for 
a time very intent upon a variety of contrivances for improving 
this useful piece of mechanism. But, from these designs he 
was, happily for the public, called away, to take the lead in 
what the event has proved to be a national concern of high 
importance the projecting of the system of Canal Navigation. 
The Duke of Bridgewater had formed a design of carrying a 
canal from his coal works at Worsley, to Manchester, and was 
induced, by the reputation of Mr. Brindley, to consult him, as 
to the most judicious mode of executing it; and having the 
sagacity to perceive, and strength of mind to confide in, the 
original and commanding abilities of this self-taught genius, he 
committed to him the management of the arduous undertaking. 
In the progress of this enterprize, which was attended with 
complete success, Mr. Brindley projected, and adopted the 

leading 



DERBYSHIRE. 



WHETTON.] At a short distance from this Til- 
lage, and about two miles from Dove Dale, is an 
ascent of the mountain called Thor's House, in the 
centre of which is a large cavern. In an extensive 
common below, the rivers Haraps and Manifold sink 
into the earth, but re-appear about three miles fur- 
ther at Ham Gardens, the seat of John Port, Esq. 
The Druids are recorded to have offered human sa- 
crifices to Thor enclosed in wicker-idols, a circum- 
stance on which Dr. Darwin poetically enlarges 
while he paints the scenery of the place : 

" Where Hampsand Manifold, their cliffs among, 
Each in the flinty channel winds along, 
With lucid lines the dusky moor divides. 
Hurrying to intermix their sister tides; 
Where still their silver-bosom 'd nymphs abhor 
The blood-smear'd mansion of gigantic THOR 



leading principles for the execution of these kind of works, 
which he ever afterwards adhered to, and in which he has been 
imitated by all succeeding artists. To preserve, as much as 
possible, the level of his cauals, and to avoid the mixture and 
interference of all natural streams, were objects at which he 
constantly aimed. To accomplish these, neither labour nor e.v 
pence was spared ; and his genius seemed to delight in 1 over- 
coming difficulties. The most experienced engineers, upon 
former systems, were amazed and confounded at his project of 
aqueduct bridges over navigable rivers, moulds across deep 
vallies, and subterraneous tunnels ; nor could they believe in 
the practicability of some of these schemes, till they saw them 
effected. In the execution, the ideas he followed were all his 
own; the minutest, as well as the greatest of the expedients he 
employed, bore the stamp of originality. Every man of genius 
is an enthusiast : Mr. Brindley was an enthusiast in favour of 
the superiority of canal navigations above those of rivers; and 
this triumph of art over nature, led him to view, with a sort of 
contempt, the winding stream in which the lover of rural beauty 
so much delights. This sentiment he is said to have expressed 
in a striking manner at an examination before a Committee of 
the House of Commons, when, on being asked, after he had 
made some contemptuous remarks relative to rivers, what he 
conceived they were created for ? he answered, " To feed na- 
vigable canals." After the successful execution of the Duk? of 
Bridgewater's canal to the Mersey, Mr. Brindley was employed 
in the revived design of carry ing' a canal from that river to the 
Trent through the counties of Chester and Stafford. This un- 
dertaking \yas commenced in the year 1766; and, from the 
great ideas it opened in the mind of Us conductor, of a scheme 
of inland navigation, which should connect all the internal parts 
of England with each other, and with the principal sea-ports, by 
means of branches from this main stem, he gave it the emphati- 
cal name of the Grand Trunk. In executing this, he was called 
upon to employ all the resources of his invention, on account of 
the inequality and various nature of the ground to be cut 
through : in particular, the hill of Hare Castle (which was only 
to be passed by a tunnel of great length, bored through strata of 
different consistency, and some of them mere quicksand) proved 
to be a most difficult and expensive obstacle, which, howerer, 
he completely surmounted. While this was carrying on, a 
branch from the Grand Trunk, to join the Severn near Bewdlev, 
was committed to his management, and finished in 1772. He 
was also concerned in the projection and execution of many 
others ; and, indeed, there was scarcely any design of canal 
navigation set on foot in this kingdom during the latter years of 
his life, in which he was not consulted, and the plan of which 
he did not either entirely form, or revise and improve. The 
attention and application which all his various and complicated 
employments required, probably shortened his days ; as the 
number of his undertakings, in some degree, impaired his con- 
etitution. He fell into a kind of chronic fever, which, after con- 
tinuing some years with but little intermission, at length wore 



Erst fires volcanic in the marble womb 
Of clond-wrapp'd WHETTON raised the massy dome; 
Rocks rear'd on rocks, in huge disjointed piles, 
Form the tall turrets, and the lengthen'd aisles ; 
Bro;id pond'rous pier? sustain the roof, and wide 
Branch the wide rainbow ribs from side to side. 
While from above descends, in milky streams, 
One scanty pencil of illusive beams, 
Suspended crags, and gaping gulphs illume, 
And gild (he horrors of the deepen' d gloom. 
' Here oft the Naiads, as they chance to stray 
Near the dread Fane, on Thor's returning day, 
Saw, from red altars, streams of guiltless blood . 
Stain their green reed-beds, and pollute their flood ; . 
Heard dying babes in wicker prisons wail, 
And sbrieks of matrons thrill the affrighted gale ; 
Which from dark caves infernal echoes mock, 
And fiends triumphant shout from ev'ry rock !" 

WIIITTINGTON.] The little, but interesting- vil 

out his frame, and put a period to his life on September the 
twenty-seventh, 1772, in the fifty-sixth year of his age. He was 
buried at New Chapel, in Staffordshire. In appearance and 
mammrs, as well as acquirements, Mr. Brindley was a mere 
peasant. Unlettered, and rude in speech, it was easier for him 
to devise means for executing a design, than to communicate 
his ideas concerning it to others. Formed by nature for the 
profession he assumed, it was there alone that he was in his pro- 
per element; and so occupied was his mind with his business, 
that he was incapable of relaxing in any of the common amuse- 
ments of life. As he had not the ideas of other men to assist 
him, whenever a point of difficulty in contrivance occurred, it 
was his custom to retire to his bed, where, in perfect solitude, 
he would lie one, two, of three days, pondering the subject in 
hi-> mind, till the requisite expedient had presented itself. This 
is that true inspiration which poels have almost exclusively ar- 
rogated to themselves, but which men of original genius, in every 
walk, are actuated by, when, from the operation of the miud, 
acting upon itself, without the intrusion of foreign notions, they 
create and invent. A remarkably retentive memory was one of 
the essential qualities which Mr. Brindley brought to his mental 
operations. This enabled him to execute all the parts of the 
most complex machine in due order, without any help of models 
or drawings, provided he had ence settled the whole plan in his 
mind. In his calculations of the powers of machines, he follow- 
ed a plan peculiar to himself; but, indeed, the only one, he 
couid follow without instruction in the rules of art. He would 
work the question some time in his head, and then set down the 
result in figures : then taking it up in this stage, he would pro- 
ceed by a mental operation to another result ; and thus he would 
go on by stages, till the whole was finished ; making use of 
figures only to mark the several results of his operations, l't>t 
though, by the wonderful powers of his native genius, he was 
thus enabled to get over his want of artificial method to a cer- 
tain degree, yet there is no doubt thai, when his concerns be- 
came extremely complicated, with accounts of various kinds to 
keep, and calculations of all sorts to form, he could not avoid 
that perplexity and embarrassment which a readiness iu the 
process carried on by pen and paper can alone obviate. Ills 
estimates of expence have generally proved wide of reality ; 
and ha seems to have been better qualified to be ihe 
contriver than the manager of a great design. His moral qua- 
lities were highly respectable, lie was far above envy and 
jealousy, and freely communicated his improvements to persons 
capable of receiving and executing them ; taking a liberal 
satisfaction in forming a new generation of engineers, ableJfc 
proceed with the great plans in the success of which he was so 
deeply interested. His integrity, and regard to the advantage 
of his employers, were unimpeachable. In fine, the name of 
Brindley will ever keep a place among that small number of 
mortals, who form eras in tin- art or science to which they de- 
vote themselves, by a large and durable extension of its limits. 

lag* 



DERBYSHIRE. 



lage of Whittington is situated in the hundred of 
Scarsdale, two miles north from Chesterfield. It 
derives its celebrity from having been the p*lace 
where the Earl of Danby, (afterwards Duke of 
Leeds,) the Duke of Devonshire, and Sir John 
D'Arcy, assembled to concert measures for effecting 
the Revolution of 1688. According- to tradition, the 
spot appointed for their deliberations was Whitting- 
tonMoof, at a middle place between Kniveton, Chats- 
worth, and Aston ; a shower of rain happening to 
fall, they removed to the village for shelter, and 
finished their conversation at a public-house there, 
the sign of the Cock and Pynot.* The cottage 
thus distinguished, stands at a point where the road 
from Chesterfield branches off to Sheffield and Ro- 
therham, and has ever since been called the Revolu- 
tion-House. The small apartment within, where 
the noblemen sat, was named the Plotting Chamber; 
but this appellation being thought opprobrious, it 
was changed to the Revolution Parlour. An ancient 
chair is preserved here, in which the Duke of De- 
vonshire is believed to have been seated. On the 
5th of November, 1788, the centenary commemora- 
tion of the Re volution was celebrated in this village, 
and at Chesterfield, with great eclat. The descend- 
ants of many illustrious families who were concern- 
ed in effecting that important event, were present, 
and great numbers of other persons. On the day 
before the. jubilee, the committee appointed to con- 
duct the proceedings, dined at the Revolution- 
House ; and a considerable sum was afterwards 
subscribed for defraying the expences of a monu- 
mental column, proposed to be erected on the spot, 
as a memorial of the measures by which the liberties 
of the kingdom were so happily preserved. The 
subscription^remained open several months ; but the 
bursting forth of the French Revolution occasioned 
the erection of the column to be deferred. The 
learned antiquary, the Rev. Mr. Pegge, was forty 
years rector of Whittington. 

'WiLLEnsLEY CASTLE.] Willersley Castle, the 
elegant residence of Richard Arkwright, Esq. stands 
on the south side of an eminence which runs 
from west to east, and terminates the extensive 
range of rocks forming the eastern boundary of the 
Derwent, in its progress through Matlock Dale. 
The river flows for some distance to the east at the 
foot of the hill, but afterwards resumes its direction 
to the south, and flows through a country more 
open. At this point the features of the valley ap- 
pear less picturesque, but soft landscape scenery, 
the village, the chapel, the bridge, and the meadows 
supply their place. Directly opposite the front of 
the castle, a vast perpendicular rock rises, which 
forms the western barrier of the Dale : through this a 
passage has been blasted to admit the entrance of 
the road to the south. From this spot the view of 
the building is highly impressive : its castellated 



Pye, or Magpye. 



appearance, judicious proportions, exact symmetry, 
and beautiful surrounding scenery, forming a coup 
d'oeil that is but seldom witnessed. 

The castle consists of 9, body, in the form of a pa- 
rallelogram ; having a circular tower rising from the 
centre of the roof, and a semicircular tower projectr 
ing from the front on each side the entrance. It has 
also two wings, with a round tower at each angle : 
the whole structure, formed of white free-stone, is 
embattled. The site was originally occupied by a 
large rock, in the removal of which about 3000/. 
were expended by the late Sir Richard Arkwright, 
who purchased the estate of Thomas Ilallett Hodges, 
Esq. in the year 1782. This edifice was covered in 
1788 ; but, in August, 1701, before it was inhabited, 
it was set on fire by a stove which had been over- 
heated, and all that was combustible in it was con- 
sumed. The interior of this mansion, furnished 
with great taste and neatness, contains several ex- 
cellent family portraits by Wright, of Derby ; par- 
ticularly a whole-length of Sir Richard Arkwright ; 
and some smaller pieces by thn same ingenious artist, 
as well as his sublime view of Ulls water Lake, 
which was purchased by Mr. Arkwright for 300 
guineas. The portrait of Sir Richard Arkwright is 
esteemed a very characteristic and striking likeness. 
He is represented sitting in his study, with one 
hand resting on a table, on which appears a set of 
rollers for spinning cotton, allusive to the most im- 
portant part of his wonderful machinery. 

Great variety and beauty are displayed in the 
grounds belonging to this mansion. Between the 
castle and the river is a beautiful lawn, sloping some- 
what precipitously at first, but afterwards inclining 
more gently. The lawn, on the eastern side, 
extends to Cromfbrd Bridge, which stands about a 
quarter of a mile from the castle, and at the en- 
trance of the grounds, near a small but very neat 
lodge. The summit of Cromford Rock has been 
noticed as rising immediately in front of Willersley ; 
but this, though towering to so great a height, does 
not terminate the prospect from the castle, whose 
elevation is so considerable as to command a view 
of the hill that rises beyond it above vhe village of 
Cromford. Near the summit of the latter are seve- 
ral rude masses of grit-stone, which are piled upon 
each other in such a manner as to present a very 
singular appearance. The adjacent parts were for- 
merly moorish, and the view naked and uncheerful, 
but these are now planted with trees, which will 
greatly improve the scenery when arrived at matu- 
rity. Towards the west the prospect includes the 
river, a beautiful eminence, and a sharp indented 
ridge of rocks ; with here and there a cottage on the 
summit of a cliff, half hidden in a deep recess, or 
emerging from a thicket. 

The hill behind the castle rises to a considerable 
height, and is covered with wood to its summit, as 



DERBYSHIRE. 



n also that portion of it which extends eastwardly. 
The coach-house, stables, bath, &c. which stand 
nt>ar the mansion on this side, are almost concealed 
by the trees. In the midst of the wood are several 
romantic rocks, round which, and on the acclivity of 
the hill, the principal walk winds in a circuit of 
nearly a mile. The walk lending from the castle on 
the west gradually turns to the north, taking a direc- 
tion parallel to the course of the river, and passes 
under some perpendicular rocks, elevated to a grent 
height above the stream. The rocks are in some 
parts bare of vegetation, but are occasionally fringed 
to their tops with trees, particularly the yew and 
ash, the roots of which insinuate themselves into the 
clefts and fissures in a remarkable manner. " Ad- 
vancing up the walk, towards the point called Wild 
Cat Tor, the eye is delighted by one of the finest 
scenes that nature ever produced. It consists of the 
long rampart of rocks opposite Matlock ; the wood 
that clothes the declivity from their bases to the 
river ; and the tall trees on the opposite side, that 
stretch their branches down to the water, which ap- 
pear dark, gloomy, and almost motionless, till it 
reaches a weir, down which it rushes in an impetuous 
torrent, almost immediately under the feet of the 
spectator, by. whom it cannot be contemplated with- 
out some degree of terror as well as. admiration." 
The Baths, the Heights of Abraham, the body of 
Masson Hill, and the summit of High Tor, are also 
seen from this part of the grounds ; through which 
various other walks extend in different directions, 
and lead to a diversity of scenery, hardly to be pa- 
ralleled. The green-house, gardens, and hot-houses, 
are all worthy of notice : the latter are plentifully 
stocked with ananas, and a great variety of excellent 
vines. The average number of trees, planted by 
Mr. Arkwright, during seven years, was fifty thou- 
sand. 

WINGERWORTH.] Wingerworth is situated in the 
hundred of Scarsdale, two miles and three quarters 
south by west from Chesterfield. Wingerworth 
Hall, the residence of Sir Henry Hunloke, Bart, is 
a spacious building, on an elevated site, which com- 
mands several extensive prospects. The estate, an- 
ciently the property of the Brailsfords, descended 
from them to the Cur/ons of Kedleston, who sold it, 
to the Hunlokes, one of whom was created a baronet 
by Charles the First. From that period the family 
have constantly resided here. Sir Thomas Windsor 
Hunloke built the present mansion about the year 
1730. On Stainedge Cliff, which forms part of the 
Hunloke estate, are several rock-basons, and two 
seats, supposed, by Mr. Rooke, to have been 
augurial. 

WINGFIELD.] North Wingfield is situated in the 
hundred of Scarsdale, four miles and a half south- 
south-east from Chesterfield. 

South Wingfield lies in the same hundred, two 
miles and a quarter west from Alfreton. Anciently, 
the manor-house was (with the exception of castles) 
the noblest residence in the county. At the time of 

VOL. n. NO. 51. 



I the Domesday Survey, it was held by William Pe- 

| verel, under Earl Alan, who commanded the rear of 
the Conqueror's army in the battle of Hastings. 
About the eighth of Henry the Sixth, it came into 
the possession of Ralph, Lord Cromwell; and it 

' was afterwards in the Shrewsbury family, in which 
it continued till the decease of Gilbert, the seventh 
Earl, in the year 1616, and then became the joint 
property of William, Lord Herbert, Earl of Pem- 

; broke ; Henry Grey, Earl of Kent ; and Thomas 
Howard, Earl of Aruudel and Surrey ; who had 
married the three daughters, and co-heirs, of Earl 
Gilbert. The manor became still further divided in 
succeeding years, and now belongs to several per- 
sons ; but the greatest share is the property of 
Wingfield Halton, Esq. by whose ancestors it was 
purchased in the reign of Charles the Second. Ima- 
nuel Halton, the first of the family who resided at 
Wingfield, was an eminent mathematician, and in 
the Philosophical Transactions for 1676, is an ac- 
count of an eclipse of the Sun observed here by him. 
Some other pieces of his composition were published 
in the Appendix to Foster's Mathematical Miscel- 
lanies ; but the chief of his manuscripts were de- 
stroyed through negligence. In the church is a 
mural monument to his memory, with the following 
inscription : 

" To Hie memory of Mr. Immanue! Halton is this 
monument erected. He was born at Graystoke Co. 
Cumberlandj a "d ' lac ' Ins first education at'the Gram- 
mar School of Blencowe, in that county, and was 
afterwards a student at Gray's Inn, from whence he 
was called into the service of the most noble Henry, 
Duke of Norfolk, by whom he was sent over into 
Holland, and employed there as an Agent upon his 
importunate affairs, and at his return served that noble 
person in his station of an Auditor above twenlv 
years. 

" He was a person much employed in Commissions, 
and Arbitrations, where disputes of great difficulty 
and consequence attended. 

" The last years of his life were chiefly spent in the- 
Studies of Musick, and the Mathematics, in which 
noble sciences he afterwards attained a great perfec- 
tion. 

" He married Mary, the daughter of Mr. John 
Newton, ol Oukerthorpe, a person of exemplary piety, 
humanity, and other Christian graces, by whom he 
had issue six sons and four daughters. 

" He died at Ifingjield Manner (sienerally lament- 
ed) Oct. SI. A. D. C1 DCXCIX, set. 72". Vint 
post funera virtus." 

The mansion, which, even in its present ruinous 
condition, exhibits many specimens of its original 
magnificence, was erected by Ralph, Lord Cromwell, 
in the time of Henry the Sixth. It was one of the 
earliest instances of those noble quadrangular man- 
sions which succeeded the irregular piles of mixed 
building that were the first deviations from the 
gloomy nnconitortableness of castles ; ami which 
afterwards became characteristic of the style of 
building employed in the residence of the nobility 
during the reigns of Henry the Seventh and Eighth. 
Its situation is on a commanding eminence, having 
v a steep 



DERBYSHIRE. 



a steep ascent on every side but the north, where it 
appears to lia^e been strengthened by a deep moat, 
carried nearly across the hill. " The building," as 
described by Mr. Blore, in his History of the Manor, 
&c. of South Wingfield, " consists of two square 
courts ; one of which, to the north, has been built 
on all sides, and the south side of it forms the north 
side of the south court, which has also ranges of 
building on the east and west sides, and on part of 
the south : the latter court seems principally to have 
consisted of offices. The first entrance is under an 
arched gateway on the east side of the south court ; 
hence the communication with the inner court is un- 
der an arched gateway in the middle of the north 
side of the south court." 

This mansion was castellated and embattled, hav- 
ing a tewer at each angle of the principal court : 
that, nt the south-west rises higher than the others, 
nnd commands a very extensive prospect. Many of 
the windows are pointed, and under the battlements 
nre open-work ornaments. The Great Hall, mea- 
suring seventy-two feet by thirty-six, is greatly ex- 
posed to the weather ; and various other parts of 
the building are also much dilapidated! Beneath 
the hall is a vault of nearly the same dimensions, 
arched with stone, and having a double row of pillars 
running up the middle. 

" In the reign of Elizabeth," observes Mr. Blore, 
" Wingfield was at times made the place of con- 
finement of Mary, Queen of Scots, under the Earl 
of Shrewsbury. Her suite of apartments, tradition 
informs us, was on the west side of the north court. 
This, in the memory of persons now living, was the 
most beautiful part of the building : it communicated 
with the great tower ; from whence, there is also a 
tradition, that she had sometimes an opportunity of 
seeing the friends approach with whom she held a 
secret correspondence. Her confinement here pro- 
bably commenced in 1569 ; in which year an attempt 
was made, by Leonard Dacrc, to liberate her from 
her confinement at Wingfield ; after which, Eliza- 
beth becoming suspicious of the Earl of Shrewsbury, 
under pretence of Shrewsbury's being in an ill state 
of health, gave directions to the Earl of Huntingdon 
to take the care of the Queen of Scots in Shrews- 
bury's house ; and her train was reduced to thirty 
persons." 

The first injury which this edifice sustained was 
during the Civil Wars, when it appeared to have 
been garrisoned for the Parliament, and was taken 
by storm in November, 1643, by a party of Royalists, 
under the command of the Alarquis of Newcastle. 
It was afterwards retaken by Sir John Gell, of Hop- 
ton : the assault was begun on the east side with 
cannon planted on Pontridgc Common ; and a half 
moon battery, raised for its dffen;:o in that quarter, 
was soon carried : but a breach being found imprac- 
ticable, the cannon were removed to a wood on the 
opposite side. From hence they had a more power- 
ful effect ; and made such an impression, that a 
breueii was soon opened, and the besieged immedi- 



ately obliged to surrender. Colonel Dalby, th 
Governor, was killed during the siege. The build- 
ing was afterwards dismantled by an order of Par- 
liament, dated June the 23d, 1045. From this time 
for many years it was much neglected ; and it would 
have " been fortunate," remarks Mr. Blore, " for 
the admirers of so venerable an edifice, had that 
negligence been uniform to the present time ; but a 
small part of it having been occupied by the family 
of Halton, and a partition of the estate taking place 
under a decree of the Court of Chancery, the man- 
sion was allotted to the late Mr. Haltou, who began 
to build a house at the foot of the hill near to the 
manor ; and since that time, some of the most beau- 
tiful parts of the old building have been pulled down 
for the sake of the materials." 

WINSTER.] The little market-town of Winster 
is situated in the hundred of High Peak, 4| miles 
west by north from Matlock, and 152i north-north- 
west from London. Its market is % on Saturday ; 
and it has a fair on Easter Monday. The popula- 
tion, consisting chiefly of persons employed in the 
mining business, and cotton trade, amounted, in 181 J, 
to 847. 

In the neighbouring commons are several cairns, 
or stone barrows, and also two or three barrows of 
earth : in one of the latter, open in 1768, two glass 
vessels were discovered, containing about a pint of 
water, of a light green colour, and limpid. With 
these a silver collar, or bracelet, was found, and 
some small well-wrought ornaments, several square 
and round beads, of glass and earth, and remains of 
brass clasps and hinges, with pieces of wood, that 
seemed to have belonged to a box in which the or- 
naments had been depicted. On the face of one of 
the ornaments, now, or lately in the possession of 
Mr. Mander, of Bakewell, is some neat fillagree 
work ; and round the centre, a setting of garnets, or 
deeply stained red glass. Mr. Edward King ima- 
gined the barrow to have been raised over some Bri- 
ton of distinction, though long after the Romans were 
in possession of the Island. 

VViRKswoHTH.] Wirksworth is a market-town, 
situated in the Wapentake of that name, 13 miles 
north-north-west from Derby, and 140 north-west 
by north from London. Its market is on Tuesdays ; 
and it has fairs on Shrove Tuesday, the 12th of May, 
the 8th of September, and the 4th and 5th of Octo- 
ber. The population of Wirksworth, according to 
the returns of 1811, was 3474 : of 76-2 families, 42 
only were employed in agriculture ; 280 in trade, 
&c. and 431 in other pursuits. The lead mines, 
which have been wrought in this neighbourhood, for 
at least a thousand years, afford support to great 
numbers of the inhabitants : here is also a cotton 
manufactory, in which from 200 to 300 people are 
employed. About forty years ago, a manufacture 
of porcelain was attempted; but it proved . unsuc- 
cessful. 

The town of Wirksworth, observes the author of 
the Addition* to Camden, lies in a bottom eternally 

overhung 



DERBYSHIRE. 



87 



overhung with smoke from the lead nnd calamine 
works, the principal covering being here aud there 
broken into pillars of white smoke from the smelting 
mills. This town, which one would think the win- 
ter torrents aud land floods must unavoidably over- 
flow, has scarcely any supply of water ; most of the 
streams or springs iu these parts, passing through, 
nnd being tainted by the lead mines. In the moot 
hall, which is a handsome brick structure erected in 
the year 1773, the bar-moot court is held by a mas- 
ter and twenty-four jurors, wh determine all dis- 
jnite? respecting the lead mines within the Wapen- 
take. Here also is deposited the ancient brazen 
dish, already described, as the standard from which 
others are made to measure the lead ore. The 
weekly market was obtained in the year 1307, by 
Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, grandson to Henry the 
Third. 

The features of the country, in this neighbour- 
hood, present a less bold and prominent aspect, than 
in many other parts of the country. Most of the 
lauds are under cultivation ; and the enclosures, in- 
stead of being fenced with stone walls, are generally 
protected by hedges. 

The manor of Wirksworth, at the time of the 
Domesday Survey, was the property of the Con- 
queror ; and it was given by King John to the Fer- 
rers family at the same time with Ashborne. It was 
subsequently annexed to the Earldom and Duchy of 
Lancaster, of which the Manor and Wapentake of 
Wirksworth are still members. The present lessee, 
we believe, is Richard Paul Joddrell, Esq. The 
Dean of Lincoln has a manor within the town, in 
right of his church ; and the Gells of Hopton have 
another manor in the town and neighbourhood, call- 
ed the Holland, or Richmond Manor, from its hav- 
ing belonged to the Hollands, Lords Holland, and 
Dukes of Exeter ; and afterwards to the Countess 
of Richmond, mother to Henry the Seventh. It was 
in the Holland Manor-House, that the unsuccessful 
manufacture of porcelain was attempted. The ad- 
joining manor of Alderwasley, constituting a cha- 
pelry to Wirksworth, and containing about sixty or 
seventy houses, was granted, with Ashley Hay, and 
part of Crick-chase, to Anthony Lowe, Esq. by 
Henry VIII. Francis Hurt, Esq. the present Lord, 
has a very pleasant mansion here. 

Wirksworth Church is a Gothic building, appa- 
rently of the fourteenth century. It consists of a 
nave, and side aisles, a north and south transept, a 
chancel, aud a square tower, supported on four 
large pillars, in the centre. On the north side, the 
-Gells of liojitoii have a monument room. Here also 
arc monuments of the Lowes, and Hurts of Alder- 
wasley, and of the Wigleys, of Wigwell. On the 
tpmb to the memory of Antonye Lowe, Esq. whom 
the inscription records as servant to Henry the Se- 
venth, He^ry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and 
Queen Mary, is a recumbent figure of the deceased, 
having round the neck, a representation of a chain 
of gold, and medallion of Queen Mary, which are in 



the possession of Francis Hurt, Esq. his lineal suc- 
cessor. In the church-yard is a grammar-school, 
which was founded by Anthony Gell, Esq. of Hop - 
ton, in the time of Queeii Elizabeth, to Which one 
Agnes Fearne was a considerable benefactor. The 
lands provided for the maintenance of the school, 
are said to produce a rental equal to the support of 
a better establishment than it at present possesses. 
The founder of this school also founded *an hospital 
at Wirksworth, for six poor men, and endowed it 
with 20/. a year. 

WORMHILL.] The little village of Wormhill is 
situated in the hundred of High Peak, two mile 
and three quarters west-south-west from Tideswell. 
Near this village, in a deep and romantic hollow, 
the river Wye flows beneath a stupendous mass of 
rock, called Cliee Tor, which rises perpendicularly 
from the bottom of the dale to the height of nearly 
400 feet>; and which, with its dependent masses of 
rock, is almost insulated by the river, running in a 
direction nearly circular round the mountain. la 
ancient times, this neighbourhood was so much in- 
fested by wolves, that certain persons held lands at 
Wormhill, en the service of hunting and catching 
them. 

YEAVELET.] At the village of Ycaveley, situated 
in the hundred of Appletrec, four miles and a half 
south-from Ashborne, was once a hermitage, which 
in the reign of Richard the First was given by Ralph 
le Fun, with all its appurtenances and revenues, to 
the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem ; and it after- 
wards became a preccptory to that order. At the 
Dissolution, its income, with that of another pre- 
ceptory at Barow, in Cheshire, was valued at 93/. 
3s. 4/7. 

SOIL.] In the northern part of Derbyshire, even 
on the highest mountains, peat bogs are frequently 
met with ; and, in some of them, trees have been 
found in a state nearly perfect. The most commou 
soil of the county, however, is a reddish clay, or 
marl ; the southern district is in general composed 
of it, having little or no stone near the surface : but 
some parts of this tract are interspersed with small 
beds of sand or gravel ; and in moist situations, land, 
of a blackish colour, and loose texture, is sometimes 
met with, continuing through an extent of from 50 
to '200 acres. This description of soil is also found 
throughout the southern and middle part of the ex- 
tensive tract of lime-stone which lies on the north- 
west side of the county. Its colouring principle is 
iron ; but its quality is very various in different situ- 
ations : in some it contains much calcareous earth ; 
in others, it does not effervesce with acids. The : 
large tract on the eastern side of the county, which 
extends from Stnntou, Dale, and Morley, to the 
borders of Yorkshire, and abounds with coal, is co- 
vered with a clay of various colours, black, grey, 
brown, and yellow, but principally the last ; and is 
iti some places mixed with a large proportion of 
sand. Similar soil is also met with in the northern 
extremity of the county ; and in some parts where 

grit-stone 



DERBYSHIRE. 



grit-stone is found ; but in the latter situations, the 
land is more frequently of a black colour, and bitu- 
minous quality. In the vallies near the banks of the 
large rivers, the soil is very different from that of the 
adjacent parts, and has been evidently altered by the 
depositions from inundations. Mr. Farey, in his 
Remarks on the Formations oi' Soils, considers that 
the clayey soils of Derbyshire owe their origin, first, 
to clayey ground, which is indiscriminately strewed 
over the county, but most extensively in local 
patches, to the south and south-west of Derby : 
these are generally found difficult soils, either to 
drain or improve. Second, to red marie strata, in 
the southern district, frequently in lands too much 
marled at a former period : these are capable of a 
high degree of improvement, by draining and lim- 
ing. Third, to coal shales, and the other argillaceous 
and perishable strata, which accompany coal. 
Fourth, to the great lime-stone shale ; which, when 
it has a. proper degree of tenacity, makes excellent 
land, as about Hassop, Ashford, Bakewell, Ash- 
borne, Newton-Grange, &c. and very poor land in 
others. And, fifth, to the decomposition of load- 
stone on the surface, as on the east of Fair-field, and 
other places : this clay is said to be very unfavour- 
able to the growth of oaks. Old clayey soils in this 
county have numerous pewitts or lapwings, flying 
and screaming over them ; whence such are fre- 
quently called pewitty soils.* 

AGRICULTURE.] The southern part of the county 
is appropriated, in nearly equal proportions, both to 
pasture and tillage ; but the same land is seldom 
Buffered to be tilled for a length of time, as the dairy 



* Mr. Farcy's theory is controverted by Mr. Marshall, in his 
" Rcvit-w and Abstract of the Reports of the Board of Agricul- 
ture." " It has long appeared to me," observes the latter gen- 
tleman, "that the surface soils, the cultivated molds, in this 
and everv other cultivated country, are of vegetable rather than 
of mineral origin; but partake of both. By aquatic plants, a 
soil altogether vegetable, may be created in a few years. And, 
seeing the length of time, the millenia of years, winch '.he sur- 
face of the principal part of this kingdom, while in a state of 
nature, or when thinly inhabited, was covered with wood (and 
coarse deep rooting herbage) whose leaves annually fall to the 
ground, and whose dead branches, stems, and roots, were, in the 
ordinary course of nature, converted to vegetable mold, the 
origin and existing depths of soils, might, by a mere vegetist, 
seem to be well accounted for, without calling in the aid of 
mineral substances. For, supposing the leaves, decayed 
branches, and the roots of annual and aged plants, to increase 
the depth of soil, only one-hundredth ofv nu inch, annually, the 
increase, in 10UO years, would be ten inches : a depth which the 
majority of soils do not reach. Let us, now, endeavour to ex- 
plain how far mineral and fossil substances have been instru- 
mental in the formation of soils. The first plants which took 
root, after the present figuration of the surface of the earth was 
cast, were of course nurtured by the substances that were ex- 
posed upon it ; and it would be a length of time, in most situa- 
tions, before vegetable productions arrived at the slate of luxu- 
riance in which we now view them ; and this may serve to 
account for the thinness of soils, at the present day, in various 
situations, and for the greater variation in thin depths, in a ge- 
neral vie*. Where natural clays, or other loose earthy strata, 
of a fertile quality, were exposed on the surface there, vegeta- 
tion would $oon gain strength. On the contrary, where indu- 



is an object of as much consequence as the growth 
of corn. Almost all kinds of grain are cultivated 
round Derby, and the produce is generally abundant. 
The wheat of Derbyshire is remarkably fine ; but in 
no part of the county more so than in the extensive 
fields of Chaddesden and Chellaston, where the fol- 
lowing course is invariably pursued : Fallow, 
wheat, barley, beans, or peas. Hurley is cultivated 
in niost parts of the county, but more in the parishes 
of Gresley and Repton than any where else,, where 
the fanners are induced by the consumption of malt 
in the neighbouring' town of Burton, whose ale is so 
much celebrated. The whole annual produce has 
been calculated at nearly 5000 quarters. On the 
eastern part of the county the land is chiefly tilled ; 
but the midland tracts are employed in pasture and 
tillage according to their situation. The moors in 
the midland districts are in a course of progressive 
improvement. The grounds of the High Peak are 
chietiy appropriated to breeding and grazing of cat- 
tle ; and, with the exception of black oats, very little 
corn is grown. On the more elevated parts, sheep 
of the small horned kind are fed, and the mutton is 
particularly good. 

INCLOSURF.S.] In this county the inclosures are 
very numerous, and are annually extending. Within 
the last thirty years, about one-third of the whole 
county has been inclosed, and the rents in many in- 
stances nearly doubled. The southern part and the 
Wapentake, are almost entirely in this state ; but 
the grounds in the High Peak are chiefly open. The 
former districts are tolerably well provided with 
timber ; but in this respect the plantations of Kedle- 



rated strata, or those of a nature unfriendly to vegetation, though 
of a plastic or loose texture, occupied it, there, it would long 
remain destitute of covering. Again, where water lodged in 
the substiatuin,so as to give an ungenial coldness to the surface, 
or where the surface was a blowing sand, or where the elevation- 
was so great as ta check vegetation, though the exposed surface 
were of a fertile quality, in such situations the growth of plants, 
and the accumulation of vegetable mold, would be slow ; while 
on sounder and better textured grounds, more genially situated, 
the growth ot soil would be rapid; and its depth would of 
course become comparatively great. But although the more 
fertile parts of the generality of soils, must necessarily,. I con- 
ceive, have been produced in the manner above suggested, yet 
there can be few instances in which their entire bulk can be of 
vegetable origin. For, even in the state of nature, the substra- 
tum on which 'the vegetable mold was produced, would be 
raised and mixed with it, by moles, worms, and other inhabitants 
of soils ; and, in the state of cultivation, the subsoil or base is 
still more liable to be turned up, and intimately blended with 
the vegetable matter, by the operations of the plough, and other 
implements. Hence there can be no risk in concluding that 
(unless where the accumulation of vegetable mold has been of 
extraordinary depth) cultivated soils partake more or less of the 
mineral strata on which they rest; and this might inaptly serve 
to riise in the minds of mere mineralogists, the idea that the 
entire matter of soils may have been produced by the perishing 
and decomposition of those strata. The animal matter which 
las accumulated on the surface from the time of its being 
n habited, I have refrained from mentioninp, as it is of vegetable 
origin; vegetable mold highly elaborated and rendered capable 
of giving a superior degree of fertilization to soils.." 

stoav 



DERBYSHIRE. 



ton Park are unrivalled by any iu the county. The 
farms are many of them of a medium extent ; but of 
many others the rental scarcely exceeds 100/. a year, 
and are occupied by persons engaged in the mines, 
or other branches of trade or commerce. Leases 
are not frequent, especially on the larger estates : 
when granted they, are generally for the term of 
twenty-one years ; but they are too often accompa- 
nied by injudicious restraints. 

PRODUCE.] The cultivation of artificial grasses 
has been very little attended to in Derbyshire ; but 
ca nomile is grown in considerable quantities.* 

J\3any of the dairy farms in this county are 
large, and produce great quantities of cheese. 
Farms of this description abound on the banks of 
the Dove. The cheese is generally of a good qua- 
lity ; but the method of making it varies considera- 
bly : the usual mode is as follows: "When the 
milk is sufficiently cold (the colder it is, when put 
together for making cheese, is here considered the 
better) enough rennet is put to it to make it come in 
an hour. It is then stirred, or broke with the hand 
very small, and left to settle about thirty minutes ; 
then the whey is got from the curd as much as pos- 
sible, and the latter gathered into a firm state in 
the churn pan. A Tat is then placed over ilie pan, 
and the curd broken slightly into it, and afterwards 
pressed by the hand in the Tat, whilst any crushings 
will run from it : a small quantity of the curd is 
then cut off round the edge of the vat, and broken 
small in the middle of the cheese, which, after a 
Iktle more pressing, is turned in the Tat, and the 
same method of cutting the edge off is again ob- 
served : afterwards, a clean dry cloth is put OTer 
and under the cheese in the vat, and it is consigned 
to the press for one hour. It is again turned in the 
Tat, and pressed ten hours, when it is taken out, 
and salted on both sides. If the cheese is of the 
weight of twelve pounds, a large handful of salt is 
Tised for each side. Afterwards it is again put in 
the vat, wrapped in another clean dry cloth, and 
carried back to the press, where it is kept two or 
three days, but turned every twelve hours : the last 
time it is turned, it is put into a dry vat without a 
cloth, to take away any impressions. This kind of 
cheese is in perfection at a year and a half or two 
years old. To keep it clean, and make it look well, 



* Brown, in his View of the Agriculture of this County, 
thus describes the culture of camomile : " A loamy -oil "is 
chosen for its cultivation, anil, after the ground is well prepared 
by thorough cleanings, about the end of March the routs of an 
old plantation are taken up, and divided into small slips, which 
are planted in rows about eighteen inches asunder, and about 
the same distance in the rows. The plants are kept clean by 
frequent hoeing and weeding with the hand. In September 
the flowers are fit to gather: their perfection depends upon 
their being fully blown, without having stood so long as to lose 
their whiteness ; the flowering continues till stopped by the 
frosts. The gatherings are repeated as often as successions of 
flowers appear ; but this depends very much pn the season, 
dry open weather furnishing more successions than wet or dull 

VOL. II. NO. 52. 



it is rubbed, while soft, twice a week with a linen 
cloth, and afterwards, once in every week or fort- 
night with a hair cloth." It is the practice, in some 
dairies, when the curd is broken into the vat, to re- 
duce it as much as possible, that the cheese may be 
rendered more sound. Derbyshire cheese is mild, 
and its taste resembles that from Gloucester- 
shire. About 2000 tons are supposed to be sent an- 
nually to London, or exported from the sea^ports 
on the east coast. A good dairy farm is said to 
produce nearly 300 weight of cheese from each cow 
annually. The cheese is always made from the new 
milk; so that the quantity of butter obtained is in- 
considerable, and mostly made from the whey, which 
is all set up for cream, and gathered into large 
earthen cream pots every twenty-four hours, it is 
afterwards boiled twice or thrice a week : and in 
some dairies, to keep it as sweet as possible, it is 
removed into clean vessels once in three days. In 
others, this precaution is not taken, as the cream is 
thought best when sour. A small quantity of milk- 
cream is tlten gathered to the whey-cream, and both 
are churned together : the butter produced is not 
greatly inferior to what is made in the usual man- 
ner. 

CATTLE.]- The horses of Derbyshire are of dif- 
ferent breeds, those employed in the southern parts 
being of a strong and heavy kind, while those of thu 
northern are light and slender ; the latter are chiefly 
used in the Peak for carrying lime-stone, as they 
are remarkably agile in ascending and descending 
the mountains. The neat cattle in this county ar 
handgome, rather large, and principally of the horn- 
ed kind ; the cows become fat in a very short time, 
but the quantity of milk they yield is but small. 
On the northern parts the sheep are small ; but on 
the Leicestershire border they resemble the breed 
of that county both in weight and size. In the 
High Peak their weight is seldom more than from 
fourteen to seventeen pounds per quarter : those 
fed on the grit-stone lands are generally about three 
pounds lighter than those which are fed on the lime- 
stone tracts. The fleeces of the former are consi- 
derably the lightest and thinnest. 

FAIRS.] A If rf ton July 31, for horses and horn- 
ed cattle ; November 22, statute. 

jdshborue February 13, horses and horned cat- 



weather. When the flowers are gathered, they are carefully 
dried, either in kilns very moderately heated, or on the floors 
of boarded rooms, heated by slow iires : the object is to keep 
the flowers white and whole, and this is best effected by dry- 
ing them as slowly as possible. The produce varies from two 
hundred weight, or even less, to four, five, and, in some few 
instances, six hundred weight per acre. The price has also 
varied from 40s. to 7/. per cwt. The plants usually stand 
three years, of which the first affords the smallest pro- 
duce ; and the second, the greatest and best. When the same 
plants are continued beyond three years, the ground becomes 
foul, and the flowers weak. When dried, the flowers are 
packed in bags ; and afterwards sold to persons in the neigh- 
bourhood, who transmit them to the druggists iu. London." 
z tie; 



90 



DERBYSHIRE. 



tic ; April 3, May 21, July 5, ditto ami wool ; Au- 
gust 10, October 20, November 29, horses and 
horned cattle. The fairs for horses begin three or 
four days before the fair day. If the 29th of No- 
vember fall on Sunday, then the fair is kept on the 
Saturday before, the rule being; to keep it on St. 
Andrew's Eve. 

Ashover April 25, October 15, for cattle and 
sheep. 

Baketuell Easter-Monday, Whit-Monday, Aug. 

29, Monday after October 10, and Monday after 
November 11, cuttle and horses. 

Jiotiover Easter-Monday. 
Belper May 12, October 31, cattle and sheep. 
Cublet/ November 30, for fat hogs. 
Chapel -in-the- Frith Thursday before February 
13, March 24 and 29, Thursday before Easter, Apri'l 

30, Holy Thursday, and three weeks after, for cat- 
tle ; July 7, wool; Thursday before August 24, 
cheese and sheep ; Thursday after September 29, 
and Thursday before November Jl, for cattle. 

Chesterfield January 27, St. Paul ; if January 
27 falls on Sunday, then kept on Saturday, for 
beasts, &c. February 28, hut if on Sunday, it is 
kept the day before ; first Saturday in April, May 
4, July 4, for cattle, horses, and pedlary ; Septem- 
ber 25, for cheese, onions, and pedlary ; last Satur- 
day in November, for cattle, sheep, and pedlary. 

Critch Old Lady Day, and Old Michaelmas 
Day- 

Derby January 25, March 21 and 22, cheese ; 
Friday in Easter week, for horned or black cattle ; 
Friday after May day, Friday in Whitsun-week, St. 
James, July 25, for horned cattle ; September 27, 
28, 29, for cheese ; Friday before Old Michaelmas, 
meeting by custom, for horned cattle. 

Dartey Flush May 13, October 27, for sheep and 
cattle. 

Dronfield April 25, cattle and cheese. 

Diiftield March 1, for cattle. 

Higham First Wednesday after New Year's 
Day. 

Hope May 12, September 29, for cattle. 

Mattock February 25, May 9, July 10, October 
24, horned cattle and sheep. 

Newhaven September 11, October 30, for sheep, 
cattle, and horses. 

Pleasley May 6, October 29, for sheep, cattle, 
and horses. 

Ripley Wednesday in Easter week, October 23, 
for horses and horned cattle. 

Saw/ey November 12, for feals only. If on Sun- 
day, the fair is kept the Saturday before. 

Tidesreell May 3, for cattle ; second Wednesday 
in September, October 29, for sheep and cattle. 

Winder Easter-Monday. 

Wirkfivorth Shrove Tuesday, May 12, Septera- 
ker 8, October 4 and 5, for horned cattle. ' 

CANALS.] The seven under-mentioned canals 
intersect this county, in different parts : 

The Peak Forest Canal, which joins the Ashton 



and Oldham Canal, on the south side of the tovnj 
of Ashton, and, crossing the river Tame, passes 
Dftnton, Chad-Kirk, Maple-Chapel, Disley, and 
arrives at Whaley Bridge, whence a rail-way goes 
by Chapel-in-the-Frith to Load's-Knovvl in the Peak 
Forest ; the canal from Chad-Kirk runs parallel 
with and on the western side of the river Geyt. The 
length of this canal is about 15 miles ; and that of 
the rail-way about six. 

The Derby Canal, which commences on the river 
Trent, and, running through the village of Swarks- 
ton, joins the Grand Trunk Canal ; at about one 
furlong- to the eastward, it commences its principal 
course, through Sinfiumoor, between Bolton and 
Osmaston to the east side of Derby, where it crosses 
the river Derwent ; from Derby the cut to join the 
Errewash Canal takes an easterly course, passes 
Chaddesden, Spoodcn, Burrowash, Breaston, and 
joins the Errewash Canal between Long Eaton and 
Sandyacre ; from Derby to the north there is a cut 
to Little Eaton, with rail- ways to Smalley Mills and 
Smithey-houses. The total length of the canal i 
17 miles. 

The Trent and Mersey Canal, or Grand Trunk 
Navigation, which proceeds from the river Mersey, 
joins the Duke of Bridgewater's Canal, and parsing 
by Preston Brook, is carried near Northmen to 
Harecastle, where it runs for a mile under ground. 
From Harecastle it is continued by Newcastle, 
Stone, Weston, and many other intermediate places, 
into the Trent at Wilden in this county. The other 
part of this grand work proceeds from Hay wood, at 
the confluence of the river Sow with the Trent, by 
Penkridge, Wolverhampton, &c. and passing near 
Stourbridge and Kidderminster, falls into the Severn 
a little below Bewdley. From Great Haywood it is 
called the Wolverhampton Canal. The whole na- 
vigation is 139 miles and a half, with 1,068 feet 
fall. 

The Ashby-de-la-Zouch Canal, which joins the 
Coventry Canal at Marston Bridge, about two 
miles to the south of Nuneaton, and taking an east- 
erly course passes Hinckley, whence it takes a 
northern course, and passes Stoke Golding, Dad- 
lington, through Bosworth Field, and %yithin a mile 
of Market Bosworth, after which it crosses the 
river Sence, and passing to the east of Gopsal 
Park, arrives at Suareston, where is a small tunnel, 
whence the canal winds along and passes Measham 
and Okethorpe in this county ; and over Ashby 
wolds, when passing through Blackfordby, it 
reaches the north-west side of Ashby-de-la-Zouch. 
The canal is then continued about one mile and a 
half beyond the town, where, passing a tunnel of 
nearly one mile, a branch bends to the west and 
goes to Ticknall ; another branch goes to the east, 
and finishes at the lime works at Cloud Hill ; on 
the Ticknall branch, near the commencement, is a 
short cut of the lime-works at Staunton : there is 
also a branch on the north edge of Ashby wolds, 
which goes to the coal works at Swadlincote ; the 
7 total 



DERBYSHIRE. 



91 



total length of this canal, with the branches is fifty 
miles. 

The Errewash Canal, which runs nearly parallel 
with the river Errewash ; and after passing by the 
extensive coal-mines in the neighbourhood of Hea- 
nor, Langley, Eastwood, Awswortb, Cossal, Ilke- 
ston, &c. is carried over Nutt Brook, by a water - 
bridge or aqueduct, to Stapleford and Sandyacre, 
and crosses the main road from Nottingham to Der- 
by, and by Long Eaton into the river Trent, nearly 
opposite where the branch to the river Soar takes its 
departure, and not far from Sawley Ferry ; and a 
course of eleven miles and three quarters, with a fall 
f 181 feet. 

The Cromford Canal, which begins at Croinford, 
runs some way parallel with the river Derwent, and 
after passing Critch-Frithley, Todmoor, Heage, 
Hartey, Lescoe, Heynor, joins the Errewash Canal 
at Langley Bridge. The total length from Crom- 
ford to the junction is about fourteen miles ; of which 
the first eleven are level, and the latter three towards 
the junction have a fall of about 80 feet. There is a 
collateral cut, to some coal works, of three miles : be- 
sides several small tunnels, there is one on this canal 
of about 3,000 yards long. This canal is of great 
service to the numerous mines of coal, &c. which 
abound in the whole of its neighbourhood. 

The Chesterfield Canal, which begins at Chester- 
field, and proceeds by Ricket's Mill near Staveley 
Forge, by Staveley town and coal works, the 
Hague, and near Eckington and Kilmarsh to the 



beginning of the tunnel at Harts Hill : at the length 
of 3,000 yards, it comes out again near Pccksniill, 
and proceeds then by Shire Oaks by Worksop, 
across the Royston river at Hilton. It thence takes 
a circuit to near Bilby Hall, and round again to 
Babworth, and nearly encircles the town of Ret- 
ford ; and then, turning from the south-west, to due 
north. 

ROADS.] The great turnpike road from London 
crosses the Trent, about sixteen miles from Leices- 
ter, and enters the county of Derby at Shardlow 
Moor ; whence it proceeds, in a north-west direc- 
tion, through Elvaston to Derby ; and thence 
through Mack worth, Langley, and Brailsford, to Ash- 
borne : it then proceeds in a more northerly direc- 
tion, through Tissington, to Buxton, and leaves the 
county about sixteen miles from Manchester. 
Another turnpike road enters the county at Monk's 
Bridge, eight miles from Derby ; whence several 
roads diverge, chiefly in a northerly direction : one 
of them enters Yorkshire, near Sheffield. There is 
a turnpike road from Stoney Iloughton, which leaves 
Derbyshire seven miles from Rotherham in York- 
shire. f There are three turnpike roads from Not- 
tinghamshire ; one from Nottingham, entering Der- 
byshire near Sandyacre ; another from Mansfield, 
crossing the Errewash, entering near Langley, and 
proceeding to Derby, in a south-west direction ; and 
the third entering at Little Hallam, and joining the 
second about six miles from Derby. 



TABLE OF DISTANCES. 

The Names of the respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square where loth meet gives the distance. 



Ashborne 


Alfi 


eton I 


distance fn 








17 


Ashborn 


: . i3y 






Bakewell 


15 


16 


Bakewell 


ji3 






Bolsover 


11 


24 


IS 


Bolsover 


. , n . i4s 








28 


23 


15 


29 


Chapcl-iu-the- 


Frith 167 






Chesterfield 


9 


22 


12 


6 


23 


Cbesterfi 


eld 150 






Derby 


15 


13 


23 


24 


34 


24 


Dei 


by . 126 






DronfieM 


14 


25 


11 


9 


20 


6 


27 


Dronfield...., 156 






Tideswell 


23 


19 


7 
6 


23 


7 


16 


30 


14 Tideswell 160 








12 


10 


17 


18 


13 


17 


15 12 Winster 150 




8 


9 


10 


16 


22 


14 


13 


16 Ifi '> Wirkewnrtli 1 An 







TABLE 



DERBYSHIRE. 



J8 



- 

K 
PS 
U 

Q 
fa 
O 



o 



c 
S 

>< H "3 

H u 

v- <-> tS 



O 
U 



w * 

s 

~ n 



f- 

cn 2 



H ., H 

D IA ** 



O "5 






t? 


C/l 


3 




a 






en 



8 





rt 




** 


M 


a 


U 


^ 


LJ 


o 


e> 


WJ 


4 

is 


a 
"S 


^j 


Cxi 


_^ 


rrt 




U 









5 


t, 
g 


J 


^ 


(ft 


4 


"rt 


S 


O 




JS 


C 


rt 


U 

s 


.. 


3 
a 


*~^ 


< 


S 


o 


_ 


S5 


X 





^ 


_c 


^ 


o 


^< 


** 





n 


sJ 


fe 


*"* 


: 


> 


Q 


u 




O 




s 


-^ 






H 










n 




ie 






K 

&H 


1 


O 
u. 


=" 


w 


1 


2 


5 


s 

H 

a 


Cj 


NCEME 


_]j 
j 


a 
t 
o 


i 


OMME 









W 




K 


o 


U 




H 


p 


E 
H 




en 
JH 
H 


1 

c 


6 

a 








fck 




2 


g 






*~~i 


"to 


U 








Q 






^ 


1 


X 

< 
H 

C/l 







.2 


5 




u 


S 









1 






H 


J 












X 



J3 . 






. 









td 






t'S- 



o 
M <3 

o 
"a =T 

3 O 



-oS 









5 o* 

W CO 

=sW 

t> J3 1 

b"5 

0-8S 9 

fe^fe 



*i 

fl 

9 

en 



H 

. 
an 

lh 



a 
fc 
H 

i I 

a 







Esq. 



c.5 



Mt>'f 

S2J3S?.-; 



S. 
. 
ld. 



ir 
C. 
ffiel 
ugh 
ld. 



Si 



h 
. 
o R 



.i i g i 



Hi 



-Renishaw Hall, 
Bariborough Hall, 
turnpike road to Sh 
Between Bariboro 
pike road to Mansfiel 
A turnpike load to 



PS 

H 
en 



. Ol CI 



CN 01 CO 



u 
cfi IE 

0) O 


CO 




i 




J! 















2 to 




S S=^ 

S- 5 S ^ J I 


U r- O 

>, e s fj> 

V o* O cj 


S-H 

11 


^5^& 

T! C 

3 _o oj 2 


u 

' 

IM 

_!; 


3 

"oo i^ 2 

= .2 o 
'c ^ -^ 


js 


rt 2"c3 O rt ^i'rt 3 


13 "c c3 


. O 


r. ^ "4; ^ 


-C 


'^" ^ c3 


~ 


wtSu^Hfeeq 


OU< >JU 


^0 


^Sg: 


u 


ca ^co 


" 




J. c 


cT* 










CD 

k^ 


k 

i^ f~ ^* 


^"5 

fJ'K 











I:- 



; 












i 



. 



- 



l 



o 






r- j 

j< 
w5 | 

n . ^H 



S.-g'J S 

5 sj -1 

S u < E 

< "-a -t 

*iy ;- 

"i ^ . ~ 

O*"' "M 1 Q 

jg=|> 5 



T 



f 
E 
i 



i 



6sr 

- PW 

^3 S . 



?fa 



.5^^ 

w i 

I cnca 



5i4sj 



a 



SH 



A* 



-s 



! 

-S 



- 



= 






i 

*5 












f b ^ 



=2J^|2 
U^0 






1 



i 



ii^ Qi 






DERBYSHIRE, 



4.. FROM BUXTON to MATLOCK. (E. by S.) 



Sheldon 





71 




Ash ford 


1* 




L. Robert Wright, Esq. 


Bakewell 


i 


-z 


L. Three miles, Chatsworth, Duke of Devon- 








shire. 


Raosley 


3j 


12| 


Inns Old George and New George. 
R. Stanton Hall, B. Thornhill, Esq. 








L. Haddon Hall, Duke of Rutland. 


Darley 


2 i 


15 


Holt House, D. Dakeyne, Esq. 


Matlock 


3J ' 18| 


Inns Old and New Baths. 


5. FROM PLEASLEY to BUXTON, through CHESTERFIELD. 


(W. by N.) 


Glapwell 


2 


2 


L. Hardwick Hall, Duke of Devonshire. 








R. Bolsover Castle, Duke of Portland. B. Hal- 








lews, Esq. 


Heath 
Hasland 
Chesterfield 


2 
4 


4 
8 


R. Sutton Hall, C. Kinnersley, Esq. 
L. Wingerworth Hall, Sir W. Hunloke, Bart. 
Inns Falcon, Angel. 








L. Turnpike road to Derby. 


Ashgate 


2~^ 


llf 




Brampton 


1 






Corbar 


6 


18 1 - 




(Cro.is the Derwent) 








Stoney Middleton 


'4 


20 


L. Stoke Hall. A mile before Middleton, a 








turnpike road to Bakewell. 








R. Two turnpike roads to Sheffield. 


Hardlow 


3* 


23J 


R.-Brosterfield, Carlisle, Esq. 








L. A turnpike road to Bakewell. 


Tideswell 


2? 


25| 


Inns New George, Old George. 








R. Half a mile before Tideswell, a turnpike 


Hargath Wall 
Fairfield 


2 
4 


27* 


road to Chapel-in-the-Frith. 
L. Wormhill, J. Bagshaw, Esq. 


Buxton 


1 


32| 


Inns White Hart, Grove, Hall, Eagle and Child, 








George, Angel. 


6. BUXTON to DERBY, through ASHBORNE. (S. E.) 


Over Street 


5| 


5| 




Hurdlow House 


1 


4 




Newhaven Inn 


43 


ll| 




New Inn 


3$ 






Bentley 
Sandy Brook 




!s* 


L. Tissington Hall, Fitzherbert, Esq. 


Ashborne 


1 


20J 


Sir B. Boothby, Bart. 








Inns Blackmoor's Head, Green Man. 


Penters Lane 


2 


ooi 




Brailsford 
Langley 
Mackworth 


2| 


^6^ 

OAJ_ 

31* 


R. Shirley, Beresford, Esq. 
L. Robert Cheney, Esq. 


Derby 


2| 


33| 


Inns Bell, George, King's Head, New Inn. 



VOL. it. ue. 52. 



9 A 



DEVONSHIRE. 



04 



DEVONSHIRE. 



GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY. 



NEXT to Yorkshire, the county of Devon is 
the largest in England. It is also one of the 
most valuable. Its area has generally beeii esti- 
mated at 2,552 square miles, or 1,600,000 acres ; 
but, according to the Population Returns of 1811, 
it contains only 2,488 square miles, or 1,592,328 
acres.* Of a circumference <>f about 287 miles it 
has a maritime coast of nearly 150. In form, this 
county resembles a parallelogram, having its oppo- 
jite angles projecting into the English and Bristol 
Channel. Its extent from sea to sea, taken from 
Praul Point, near the Start, and Salcombe, in the 
couth, to Couatesbury Foreland in the north, is 
about seventy-one miles ; and from the eastern 
boundary, where it makes an angie with the river 
Axe, in the parish of Thorncombe, to Hart land 
Point, nearly seventy-two. It is bounded, on the 
north and north-west, by the Bristol Channel ; on 
the west, by the river Tamar, and a small rivulet 
called Marsland Water ; on the south, and south- 
east, it is skirted by the British Channel ; on the 
east, and north -east, it borders on the counties of 
Dorset and Somerset, the dividing limits being ar- 
tificial. 

The general face of the country is extremely irre- 
gular. The hills in many parts, but more particu- 
larly in the neighbourhood of Dartmoor, deserve the 
appellation of mountains, their altitudes being some- 
times fifteen or eighteen hundred feet. This tract, 
when approached from the south and south-east, 
presents to the eye an extensive waste covered with 
scattered masses of granite, and rocks precipitated 
into the vallies from the overhanging declivities. 
These immense fragments, which resemble the 
masses projected by volcanoes, or the ruins of 
ome mighty castle, lie confusedly scattered over the 
ground. 

The climate of Devonshire is so peculiarly mild, 
that medical men frequently recommend it to their 
consumptive patients in preference to Lisbon or the 
south of France. In the severe winter of 1788-9, 
the thermometer, in the northern aspect at Exeter, 
was but one day so low as 13 of Fahrenheit ; and 

* Campbell, in his Political Survey, mentions Devonshire 
as containing as much land as forms the dominion of the Ke- 
lic of Genoa; as not interior to all ike Balearic Islands, 



the mean heat of April on the average of twenty 
years is 53.03 of the same scale. The most pre- 
vailing winds, influenced probably by the direction 
of the English Channel, arc west or south-west, 
and the severer gales are almost always from 
the same quarter. The easterly winds of spring, 
which are so severely felt on the eastern coasts of 
the kingdom, are here shorter in their duration, and 
milder in their temperature. They are, however, 
more productive of blights than any other winds, 
and are particularly injurious to the bud of the ap- 
ple tree. Thunder is not, even in summer, a fre- 
quent event ; and though the annals of the county 
record the occurrence of earthquakes, they have 
never been violent or alarming. From the mild and 
even tenor of the climate, many plants not naturally 
evergreen retain their leaves during the winter in 
the vallies near the sea, or lose them only for a very 
short period. The myrtles at Mount Edgecumhe 
have resisted the cokl of many winters ; and near 
the sea, as well as in the lower regions at a dis- 
tance from it, they are seldom sheltered. They suf- 
fer only from a severe frost following a rainy 
season. 

RIVERS.] This county is remarkably well water- 
ed with brooks and rivers which rise out of the hills, 
and take their several courses, some running into 
the English and some into the Bristol Channel. 
The principal streams may be noticed in the follow- 
ing order : 

The Arme, and the Aven, both rising in Dart- 
moor, flow southwardly, and fall into the British 
Channel within a few miles of each other. 

The Axe enters this county from Dorsetshire and 
also flows into the British Channel. 

The Dart, which is the chief of all the numerous 
streams that rise in the mountainous regions of 
Dartmoor, is generally considered to derive its name 
from the velocity of its current. " Rapidity," 
observes Skrine, in his History of Rivers, " ia 
its first characteristic, and this quality it re- 
tains long after it leaves those mountains which in- 
close its source, as it descends into the rich plains 



I 



which were once a monarchy ; and twice the size of the king- 
dom of Algarve. 

f 



DEVONSHIRE. 



of the southern part of Devonshire. A little to the 
west of Ashburton it forms a charming valley, and 
flows in placid beauty beneath the high hill which is 
distinguished by the castle and church of Totness. 
Soon after, the Dart receiving the tide, rolls in a 
majestic stream between two bold hills, covered 
with cultivation, woods, and villages, disclosing new 
beauties at every curve, and presenting a grand 
object to the adjacent country, varied perpetually 
both in its form and attendant features. The emi- 
nences which inclose the channel of the Dart be- 
come at last almost mountainous, forming on the 
west a barrier to the southern peninsula of Devon- 
shire, and on the east to the road to Torbay ; while 
the river, winding between these rocky bases, passes 
the very striking position occupied by the hamlet of 
Kingsware on its eastern bank, and the singularly j 
irregular town of Dartmouth on its western, the 
whitened fronts of whose houses, built in stages over j 
each other, and beautifully interspersed with rock | 
and wood, form a curious assemblage of interesting \ 
objects. The ivyed walls of Dartmouth Castle, with , 
a rustic spire starting out from beneath a bold rocky | 
hill, close the prospect with great majesty, and j 
strongly mark the proud exit of the Dart towards ] 
the British Channel." 

The Exe, anciently the Isc, or Isca, rises in the 
heights of Exmoor, in the western part of Somer- 
setshire ; and after uniting with the Barle enters 
this county near Ex-Bridge ; flowing hence through 
a beautiful vale to Bampton, and passing Tiverton, 
its current is increased by joining the Loman. Soon 
after, the Greedy, from Crediton, in the north-west, 
and the Culm, or Columb, from Collumpton, in the 
north-east, mingle with its waters. The vale now 
expanding, opens into a delightful plain, adorned 
by lofty eminences and skirted with wood. The ri- 
ver then proceeds through a fine range of meadows, 
passing Exeter and Topsham, where it meets the 
tide, and suddenly widens to an extent of more than 
a mile, and becomes navigable for vessels of large 
burthen. Hence, spreading into a grand estuary, it 
continues its course, which, however, being impeded 
by a large sand-bank called the Warren, winds to 
the eastward, and near Exmouth, after a course of 
about sixty miles, flows into the British Channel. 

The Lyn is a small but rapid river, which rises in 
the forest of Ex-Moor, and, forcing its way over 
numberless huge rocks, rushes into the British 
Channel. 

The Otter, which also falls into the British Chan- 
nel, flows from the borders of Somersetshire, across 
the eastern corner of this county. 

The Plym, which with the Tamar unites in form- 
ing Plymouth Sound, issues from Dartmoor, three 
miles above Walkhampton, and passing Meavy, and | 
Shaw -Prior, reaches Plympton, between which and 
the old town of Plymouth it joins the Tamar. 

The Syd, which flows across the eastern cor- 
ner of the county into the Bristol Channel, rises in 
Somersetshire. 



The Tamar, which we hare already described in 
our account of Cornwall (ride Vol. I. p. 37 1) is 
sometimes considered as a Devonshire river ; but, 
though it is common to both counties, it more pro- 
perly belongs to Cornwall. 

The Tavy rises in Dartmoor, and passing Peter- 
Tavy and Mary -Tavy, glides through a deep vale 
to Tavistock, where the ruins of the abbey, which 
stand on the borders of the stream, give a very ro- 
mantic appearance to the scenery. Its course, is af- 
terwards broken by rocks ; and it forms a number 
of water-falls and small bays, which with the hang- 
ing woods on each side, produce an effect highly 
picturesque. It flows into the Tamar at some dis- 
tance below Tamerton-Foliol. 

The Taw also rises in Dartmoor, and winding to 
the north, flows to Chumleigh, near which it takes 
a direction somewhat westerly ; and being joined 
by the Moule, which divides South-Moultou and 
King's-Nympton, passes Barnstaple, anil proceed- 
ing directly west to Appledore there unites with tho 
Torridge. 

The waters of the Teign, which is the most east- 
ern of the Devonshire rivers rising in Dartmoor, are 
derived from two springs, which issue near Gid- 
leigh. Its course is generally inclining to the east. 
" It is often pent up in deep and narrow vallies," 
observes Mr. Polwhele, " whence the sound of its 
waters may be heard at a considerable distance : it, 
is increased at every turn, by brooks descending from 
those coombs which terminate in the heights of Hal- 
don, and the downs of Bradford and Heimock. The 
country through which it passes is full of rocks, till 
it approaches Bovey-Tracey, when it glides over a 
flat marshy ground, and rolling under Teign Bridge, 
spreads itself into a broad shallow channel, and thus 
runs on without interruption to the sea. When 
swelled with rains, its colour is almost black ; at 
other times, brown." 

The Torridge takes its rise in the same district as 
the Tamar, in the north oi Cornwall, on the summit 
of a high moor, and within a lew yards of the foun- 
tain of that river : its spring is perhaps the same j 
but, from a slight difference in the height of the 
ground, the course of one is a hundred miles dun 
south, while that of the other is sixty miles north. 

Torriclge, no sooner gotten from his head, 

Is by a turning crooked channel led. 

And full of windings thro' the dales doth wander, 

Sporting itself in many a wry meander, 

Still gliding forth, altho* it fleet full slow, 

Which way it bendcth lest Us noise should show. 

R i sous. 

After meandering for upwards of fifty miles, it 
becomes navigable for boats at Wear-Giftard, about 
three miles from Biddeford, when; it becomes a very 
rapid river. Flowing onward, it joins the Taw, 
and, proceeding to the north- west, falls into the 
Bristol Channel, at Barustaple Bay. Owing to the 
moory country in which it rises, and through which 
it 



96 



DEVONSHIRE. 



H passes, the water* of the Torridge are generally 
of a dark brown tinge. 

The last river which we have to mention is the 
Yealme : it rises in Dartmoor, and falls into the 
British Channel within a few miles of the Arme and 
the Aven. 

FISH AND FISHERIES.] The rivers of this county 
-are abundantly productive in fish ; and, from its 
numerous convenient ports and harbours, the coun- 
try is well supplied, and considerable quantities are 
sent to the Bath and London markets. Devonshire 
also participates in the herring 1 and pilchard fishery. 
In the Tamar and Tavy, great quantities of salmon 
are annually obtained, which produce large sums to 
the proprietors of the estates which have the right 
of fishing. The salmon fishery on the river Tavy 
belongs to the lands of Buckland Place, the seat of 
the Drake family, whose ancestor, the celebrated 
navigator, purchased the estate. The wicr of this 
fishery is very large, and consists of a dam, ten or 
twelve feet high, thrown over the river where two 
projecting rocks serve as buttresses to the masonry, 
which is built somewhat arching-, to withstand the 
force of the water in time of flood. At one end of 
the dam is a wier-house, or trap, the external ap- 
pearance of which is large, but it is contracted in- 
wardly, so as to prevent the escape of any thing 1 
which may enter it. The trap is about fifteen inches 
square on the inside ; and has, opposite to the en- 
trance, an opening in the rock, or stone-work, to 
suffer the water to pass. This opening has two 
lifting flood-gates ; the one close, to shut out some- 
times the whole of the water ; the other a grate, as 
a passage for the water, and at the same time to 
hinder the escape of large fish. When the trap is 
set, the close grate is drawn up and the water thus 
suffered to pass through : but, on the contrary, when 
it is requisite to take the fish which have entered, the 
close grate is let down, and the trap in a short time be- 
comes nearly dry. The narrowed entrance of the 
trap is placed somewhat above the floor ; so that be- 
fore the salmon are alarmed by the fall of the water, 
it has sunk below the mouth of the trap, and their 
retreat prevented, as by following the water near 
the iloor, they are led under the tunnel ; which is 
made of strong wooden bars in the manner of the open 
flood-gate, wide enough to suffer the passage of the 
water, but not of the fish. Besides salmon, salmon- 
peal, and sometimes trout, are caught hi the wier ; 
but the greatest quantity taken here is by nets. For 
about a mile below the wier, the river is broken 
into deep pools and rapids. A number of these pools 

* Polwlicle, in his History of Devonshire, relates the follow- 
ing curious circumstance, which occurred between fifty and 
.sixty years ago, at the house of Mrs. Aldridge, called the New 
Jnn, at Ashburtou, in this county : " In an underground cel- 
lar, a dish of Wrmibnry oysters was laid by way of coolness. 
At the time the tide flows, it is u-ell known oysters open their 
thells, tc. admit the waters, anil take their food. At this period 
a large oyslo: had expanded its jaws; and at the same period 
twa uiice, searcuiug tor prey, pouuced at once on the victim, 



are adapted for the draw-net, which is used on ce or 
twice a day by four men, attended with dogs to con- 
vey the end of the rope across the river, where it is 
inconvenient to ford it. In this manner, after a 
flood, or when salmon abound, ten or twelve are 
often taken at a draught. The fishing season com- 
mences about the middle of February, in the Tavy, 
and closes in October or November. In the Tamar 
it begins several weeks afterwards. When the water 
is clear, a number of salmon are taken by poachers, 
who spear them with surprising dexterity. 

The salmon procured in the Tamar and Tavy are 
not of equal quality to those taken in many other 
Devonshire rivers : those of the Exe are considered 
as the most delicate, and of the best flavour. In 
the river Dart they abound, and are sometimes 
taken of the weight of twenty pounds, though 
usually they weigh from six to fourteen. The 
salmon which ascend the Teign are often sold 
at Chudleigh for no more than three halfpence, op 
two-pence a pound. 

The fish which chiefly prevails in the rivers of 
Devon, is tho trout, which are here, from the swift 
manner in which they pass through the water, called 
" shots." The Otter is famous for its trout, and 
salmon-peal ; the former of a flavour exceedingly 
fine, and the latter firm and large. The plaice of 
the Devonshire rivers are perhaps more delicious 
than those of any other part of the world. The tor- 
pedo has sometimes been t-iken in Torbay, and also 
in the river Dart. The depth of water in which 
they are usually met with, is from thirty-six to forty 
fathoms ; and their weight varies from ten to eighty 
pounds. The Opate, or King-fish, is very rare. One 
of them was caught at Brixham, in 1772, and is said 
to have weighed 140 pounds, to have been four feet 
and a half long', two feet and a quarter broad, and 
four inches thick. Its general colour was a trans- 
parent scarlet varnish, over burnished gold, bespan- 
gled with oval silver spots of various sizes : the 
breast was a hard bone ; and the flesh looked and 
tasted like beet. The sepia, or cuttle-fish, is fre- 
quently caught offTeignmouth, and Slaptou Sands. 
CJreat quantities of oysters are obtained on the 
coast ; and the beds at Starcross, Topsham, and 
Lympstoue, are much esteemed. Those at Lymp- 
stone are full a hundred acres in extent. Oysters 
also abound at Dartmouth, Wemburgh,* and other 
places on the coast. Besides those already enume- 
rated, various species of fish are to be obtained on 
the coasts and in the rivers of this county. 

PLANTS, &c.] Devonshire was anciently a rough, 

and seized it with their teeth : the oyster, shrinking at the 
wound, closed its shell, collapsing with such force^ as to crush 
the marauders to death. The oyster, with the two mice dan- 
gling from its shell, was, for a long time, exhibited as a curio- 
sity by the landlady to her guests." A similar circumstance, 
of an oyster clasping a mouse with its shell, has been recorded 
in one of, the Epigrams of the Greek Anthology. 

woody, 



DEVONSHIRE. 



woody, mountainous country, and the plains were 

covered with heath and coppices; but, for many 

years past, the land has been almost every where 

cultivated and improved ; and, from the genial tem- 



* Aira aquatica ft distant, A variety of water hair grass ; 

ill sanely places near Exmouth. 

Jgrostis alpina. (With. Dot. Ar. 3 Edi.) Canina ft. Hud. Al- 
pine bentgrass ; on Hall Down near Exeter, 

and elsewhere. 
Antirrhinum majus. Great snapdragon, or calves' snout; on 

walls. 
Arenuria marina (With.) rubra ft. Lin. Sea spurry ; on the 

shore atTeignmouth. 
Asparagus ojjicinalis. Asparagus, or sperage ; on rocks, and 

in meadows near tlie sea. 

Asphnium marinum. S^a splecnwort ; rocks near the sea. 
Bartfia vi.icosa. Marsh eyebrighl, or cow wheat ; bogs and 

marshy grounds. 
Brassica muralis. Sea, or wild rocket ; on old walls about 

and in Exeter. 
Campanula hederacea. Ivy, or tender-leaved bellfiower ; in 

shady damp places. 
Conferva elongata. Pointed conferva ; ~\ 

nierescens. Blackish conferva; ( on sea rocks and 
< peliucida. Pellucid conferva; stones. 

muitifida. Mtiltifitl conferva; * 

Cucubalus acautis. Moss campion. 

Cochlearia ujficinulis. Scnrvy grass ; on a stone wall between 

Oakliampton and Litton. 
Cust'utha epitimum var. ft. A variety of large hellweed, or 

devil's guts ; on the Ulex. 

Cotyledon umbilicus. Venus naveh- ort ; on walls and rocks. 
Drocera Angtica. Great sundew ; in bogs. 
Daucus carotti. Wild carrot ; on the sea shore. 
Elymus arenarius. Sea lime grass ; on loose sands near Ex- 
mouth. 

Euphorbia paralias. Sea spurge ; near Dawlish. 
peplis. Small purple spurge; on sandy sea shore 

near Exmouih. 

portlandica. . Portland spurge; sea shore near Ex- 
mouth. 
Eryngium campestre. Common eryngo ; on a rock which you 

descend to the ferry from Plymouth to Corli- 

wall. 
Exacumfuli forme (Smith.) Gentiunujolijorme. 

centory ; marshy places. 
FUCKS aculeatus. Prickly fucus ; 

articulatus. Jointed fucus ; 

caplllaris. Capillary fucus ; 

canfervoides. Contervalike fucus ; 

corneus. Horny fucus ; 

crispatu.i. Crisped fucus ; 

crishitus. Crested tucusj at Whitney*; 

dentatus. Dentated fucus ; 

diffusus. Spreading fucus; 

faeniculaccus. Fennel fucus; 

laciniatus. Laciniated fucus ; at Plymouth ; 

' mcmbranaceus. Membranaceous futus ; at Sid- 

mouth ; 

multiftdut. Mullifid fucus ; 

obtusus. Obtuse fucus ; 

- pinnatus. Pinnated fucus; 
pinnatiflidus. Pinnatifid fucus ; 

tainanscifolitK. Tamarisk-leaved fncus ; 
tnmtntosus. Woolly fucus; 

spiralis. Spiral fucus ; 

Geranium moiduitunt. Musk cranesbill ; near the shore not 

far from the garrison at Plymouth. 
Hypericum elodes. Marsh Saint Pelerswort ; on moist boggy 

grounds. 
VOL. II. NO. 52. 



Linn. Marsh 



perature of the climate, fruit' abounds, and vegeta- 
tion is in general luxuriant. The plants which are 
most rare in this county are mentioned iu the not* 
below.* 

FOSSIL*. 



lllecebrum verticillatum. Verticillate knot-grass; at Mar- 
sham and in the west part of the county. 
Jungcrmannia cochleariformis. Shell-shaped jungermannia; o 

the sides of hills in the forest of Dartmoor. 
julacea. Silver jungermannia ; on the rocks at 

Dartmoor. 

Laratera arborea. Tree mallow ;. on the sea shore, common. 
Lepidium Anglicum. Procumbent pepperwort ; on rubbish 

near Exeter. 

Lichen apthosus. Thrush liverwort ;. on rocks on Dartmoor 
eiilii. Little black-tufted liverwort ; on the sides of 

peat earth hills on Dartmoor. 

fallax; on rocks at Dartmoor. 

furfuraceus. Greyhorned, or branny liverwort ; o* 

wild Tor Rocks, five miles fromChagford, and 

elsewhere. 

- globiferuf. Roundheadcd liverwort ; on rocks at Dart- 
moor. 
glomuliferus: Pale blue scallop livenvort; on ash, 

sycamore, and oak trees in the north west part 

of this county. 
Herbacens. Herbaceous liverwort ; near Ivybridge. 

hispidus. Hispid liverwort ; on rocks at Dartmoor. 

lanatas. Woolly liverwort ; on rock> at Dartmoor. 

latevireru. Lovely gruen liverwort ; on ash, syca- 
more, and oak trees in the nortli-wcst part of 

this county. 

nigrescene. Black lichen ; on trees near Holsworthy. 

pasc/ialit. Crisped warty alpine liverwort ; on rocks 

at Dartmoor. 
plumb<-us. Lead-coloured spongy -s on ash, sycamore, 

liverwort ; f and oak trees in 

scrobiculatus. Pitted warty liver- > the north- west 

wort ; V part of this 

sylvalicus. Villous wood liverwort ;J county. 

sinuatus. Sinuated liversvort; on rocks at Ashburton, 

and on a stone wall at Chagford. 
tartareus. Welch liverwort ; on rocks and stones, 

common. 

tristis. Grey liverwort ; ~\ 

torrefactus. Sad coloured liverwort ; f on rocks 

uncialis. Tri'lenl liverwort; / at 
vtntosus. Red spangled tartareous V Dartmoor. 

liverwort; J 

* vulpinus. Goldwire liverwort ; on trunks of trees on 

Dartmoor 
Linum tenuifolium. Narrow-leaved flax-; near the pathway 

from Plymouth to the Marine Barracks. 
usitatissimum. Common flax ; on sandy corn fields. 
Lobelia ureas. Stinking lobelia; on Shute Common, between 

Axminster and Honiton. 
Leoutodon hispidum. Rough dandelion. 
Lycoptrdon cerrinum. Subterraneous puff-ball ; in woods and 

hedges. 
Mtliltis melissophyllum. Bastard baum ; about TotneSs, in 

the woods and hedges. 

Mentha mridit. Spear-mint; in wet plices near Exmouth. 
Myrica gait. Gale Dutch myrtles, or goule, sweetwillow ; 

not uncommon in marshy places. 
Oxalis corniculata. Yellow wood sorrel ; in a waste rubbishy 

place near Dawlish, and elsewhere. 
Orobanche ramosa. Branched broom rape ; in corn fields and 

dry meadows. 
Pinguicula lusitanica, (the Villosa not being a British plant.) 

Cornwall butterwort ; on bogs and wet 

places. 
2 B Polycarpon 



08 



DEVONSHIRE. 



FOSSILS.] In this county fossil bones arc often 
met with, and also real hones not in a state of petri- 
faction. From a cavern in a marble rock near 
Chudleigh, some years ago, were taken bones of an 
animal of the stag kind, which were of an astonish- 
ing size, and can be referred to none but the species 
of mouse deer or elk. Mr. Swcte had in his pos- 
session a few of the bones of tin's animal ; and a 
tooth, one of the molares, in its circumference at the 
face measured five inches and a half, and at the 
middle, whence the roots branched off, six and a 
half. He also took up in his grounds at Oxton, 
embodied In sand-stone and flint, great numbers of 
echini, astroites, and bivalve shells fossilized ; and 
from an estate near Newton Bushel, a fossil, which 
tnay be referred to the class, tubulariae, in a mass of 
which one of the porpitie was embodied. In the 
rocks near lloniton, on the eastern angle of the 
county, some fossil bones, seemingly of birds and 
smaller animals, were found in a magncsian rock. 
The coruiia asnmonis and common fossil shells are 
frequent in the lime-stone district, and are (bund 
embedded in solid marble. " The most remarkable 



Polycarpon tetraphyllum. Four leaved polycarpon ; on the 
sea shore near Exeter. 

Poh/podium pJtasgopleris. Wood polypody; in the chinks 
of wet rock?. 

Rubia tincloria. Wild madder; on the rocks near the bridge 
at Bidi'ord, and near Exmouth. 

Salso'la fntticosa. Shrub grasswort ; on the shore. 

Scirpu.s srtaceus. Least rush ; on wet grounds near Plymouth. 

Jioloschienus. Raundheaded rush ; at Broughton Bo- 
roughs. 

Sedum Anglimm. Mountain stonecrop ; on stony, sandy, and 
sparry rocks. 

Sibthorpia Europxa. " Bastard moneywort; near springs, com- 
mon. 

Spcrgula laricina. Larch-leaved spurry; on meadows and 
sandy heaths. 

Targionia hypnphjlut. Vetch targionia ; on heaths and banks 
of ditches near Ex-mouth. 

TrichoinunC'i .Tunbrigense. Tunbridge trichomanrs, or goldy 
locks ; in the fissures of rocks on Dartmoor. 

Uha articulata. Jointed laver; on rocks and stones in the 
sea. 

coccinca. Scarlet laver ; on rocks and stones in the sea 

near Plymouth. 

compress::. Compressed laver ; in the sea near Ply- 
mouth. 

dichntoma. Forked laver.; on rocks and stones in the sea. 

pavonia. Striated laver, or Turkey feather ; on the coast 

near Exmouth. 

P'ulcriana rubra. Red valerian ; on old walls and rubbish near 
Exeter, and elsewhere. 

.Verlascum blatturia. Moth mullien ; about Plymouth and 
Ashburton, frequent. 

.t'iola littoraHs (Curtis). A new species of violet ; on the 

shore at Broughton Borough. 
* The newspapers of the day presented the follovingaccount 

Of this singular fossil; " An extraordinary discovery was lately 

made in a courtlage, on a rising ground, belonging to Chapel 

Farm, in the parish of Curwys M orchard, near 1 ivtrton. The 

house and estate are the property of Mr. Brooks, a wealthy and 

.respectable i ; ..rmer, who resides there. It was formerly a mo- 
nastery belonging to the Augustine friars ; and at the Dissolu- 
tion ot the religious houses fell into the hands of the Curwys's, 



fossil that was ever found, perhaps, in this county," 
observes Mr. Polwhcle, " was lately discovered in 
a bed of stiff clay, on Chapel Farm, in the parish of 
Curwys-Morchard. It is called fossil bacon : it is 
certainly an animal substance : and, if I may form 
any judgment from a large specimen which I imme- 
diately procured, I think I may safely pronounce it 
to have been originally hog's-flesh ;* but the bris- 
tles on the piece in my possession must determine 
the question as to what animal the substance be- 
longs. This piece is very light, somewhat spongy ; 
mottled like mottled soap, and evidently of a seba- 
ceous nature. On a slight chemical analysis, it was 
mostly soluble in spirit of wine, while hot ; but se- 
parated into white flakes on cooling, in which it re- 
sembles spermaceti ; but it was easily convertible 
into soap on being boiled in a fixed alkaline lixi- 
vium." 

MINES AND MINERALS.] From the confused in- 
termixture of the strata, in Devonshire, the opera- 
tion of earthquakes and volcanoes is strikingly ap- 
parent, t Of the calcareous genus of mineralogical 
substances, lime-stone, of almost cvcvy description 



from whom, by various alienations, it came to the present, pos- 
sessor. In order to convert a very fine spring into a pond, to 
water the meadows below, and also for the use of the caitle, 
Mr. Brooks dismantli-d the courtlage, the linhays, sheds, &c. 
and began to sink an extensive pond. When the workmen had 
sunk about ten feet from the surface, the strata appearing in a 
natural state, they came to a spongy matter ; it appeared to he 
a very thick cuticle of a brown colour. 'I hey soon found bit* 
of bones, and lumps of solid fat, of the same colour. Astonish- 
ed at this discovery, one of them ran to his master, who, upon 
viewing the place, sent for Mr. Sharland, a person of great ex- 
perience and practice as a farrier in the neighbourhood. It was 
then resolved cautiously to work round the carcass ; and at last 
the complete body of a hog was found, reduced to the colour 
and substance of an Egyptian mummy : the Mesh was six inches 
thick, and the hair upon the skin very long and elastic. As the 
workmen went on further, a considerable number of hogs, of 
various sizes, were found in different positions ; in some places, 
two or three together; in others, singly, at a short distance. 
Upon the bodies being exposed in contact with the open air, 
they did not macerate, nor reduce to powder, as is usually the 
case with the animal economy after lying two or three centuries 
divested of air : perhaps this may be occasioned by the mucilage 
of the baron. This piggery continued to the depth of twelve 
feet, when the workmen stopped for the season, and the pond 
was filled with water. The oldest man in the parish had never 
heard that the ground had ever been broken; and, indeed, the 
several strata being entire, renders it impossible to conjecture 
from what causes this extraordinary phenomenon can be ac- 
counted for. The family of Curwys have a complete journal 
of remarkable events which have happened in the parish for 
three centuries ; and not the least mention is made of any dis- 
order which could occasion such a number of swine to be buried 
in such a situation, &c." 

f The following remarks, from the pen of Mr. Polwhele, 
furnish sufficient proof of the violence of the changes which, at 
some period, this part of the island must have undergone: 
" Between Exeter and Exminster, the strata seem to have been 
greatly agitated, from their present irregular appearance. There 
is one spot, in particular, on the left, a little before the approach 
to Exminster village, where the white and red layers of sand, 
some loose, and some concreted, are jumbled together in a very 
extraordinary manner. We here observe the strata in all possible 
7 directions. 



DEVONSHIRE. 



: 



is found in different parts of the county ; and many 
quarries have been opened, to procure it for the 
purposes of building, agriculture, and ornament. In 
the eastern part of Devon, it approaches to tho na- 
ture of chalk, and, in general, is scarcely susceptible 
of a polish : in other parts, and particularly in 
South-Hams, it assumes the: qualities of marble, 
anil, for hardness, beautiful veinings, and lustre, it 
resembles the best marble of Italy. In the parish of 
South-Moulton are many quarries of black marble, 
variegated with small streaks of white, which takes 
a fine polish, but is mostly burnt into lime. The 
marble which is not black, is in general of a flesh- 
colour, having brownish veins of different shades: 
tliis is most abundant in the north of Devon. At 
Bickingtou, near Ashburton, are several varieties ; 
nt Deiibiiry, it is blue, and red ; in the neighbour- 
hood of Berry-Pomeroy, finely variegated ; at Ply- 
mouth, of a blackish grey, with white shades in con- 
centric stripes, interspersed with irregular red spots, 
and of an ash-colour, with black veins ; at Mary- 
Church, of many varieties : one kind resembling 
porphyry, very rich, of a dove-coloured ground, 
_ pervaded with reddish, purple, and yellow veins, 
Ultimately blended : another sort, with a black 
ground, variegated with purplish globules, called 
the Devonshire blood-stone : in some specimens of 

directions. The lime stone rocks, which to the south and west 
of Dartmoor appear insulated in theschistus, are evidently parts 
of some great stratum that at first occupied a place superior to 
theschistus. To break up, therefore, this lime stone stratum, 
and give it the appearance of rocks standing out of the srliiatus, 
as vc observe it in many places, must have "been a subsequent 
work. In the vicinity of these fractured strata, we have irregu- 
lar layers of soil, marble, and schist, as they were originallv 
Disposed. The strata of schistus and marble, which appear in 
the descent from Rohorough to Plymouth, and succeed each 
other alternately to the shores that "border the Sound, discover 
great irregularities. When they are arranged in a more regular 
manner, they generally incline to the east ; but in many places 
they are almost vertical : a proof of the violence and derastation 
which must have occasioned these phenomena in some ancient 
period of time. But the cliffs in the eastern part of the country 
will give us no inadequate idea of the arrangement of the 
different strata. A sort of lime stone, that bears some resem- 
blance to chalk, begins in the parish of Salcombe, runs through 
that of Branscombe, and extends northwards nine miles to 
Widworthy, and possibly "till further. At Salcombe Cliff, 
westward, where this stone begins, it is very near (he surface, 
being covered only with a bed of red clay, mixed with flints, 
about twelve feet thick. Here the lime stone, which lies under 
it, is in some places not above three feet thick; but in others, 
twenty or thirty ; the surface rising and sinking in different 
places, like mountains and valleys. In this bed'of limestone 
are lists of black flints, which are usually apparent in chalk 
quarries. This bed of lime stone dips, and" becomes thicker as 
it goes to the eastward. At Bransnoinbe, where the largest 
quarry is opened, is a large head upon it, which consists chieily 
of white flints, with a small quantity of reddish clay ; and the 
bed of lime stone is from twelve, to thirty or forty feet deep, 
according to the different rises and falls tliat are in'it. In some- 
places are large masses of this lime stone separated from the 
rest, and entirely surrounded with the flint and clay that form 
the head. As it goes further eastward, it dips into the sea; 
and a quarry of soft sand stone rises above it. At Widworthy 
this stone is nearer the surface, beinc undoubtedly a continuation 



this marble, ara impressions of marine shell-fish ; 
and particularly of the ramifications of polypi. 

Gypsum, though obtained in various parts of the 
county, is not abundant : near Plymouth, it appears 
in union with the lime-stone : it is also found at 
Salcombe-Rcgis, and many places in the lime-stone 
district, south-west of Exeter. In the mines of 
Beer-Ferris, fluor-spar is procured in great plenty, 
and of several varieties, both as to shape and colour : 
of stellated spar, specimens have been found at Ox- 
ton, near Haldon, &c. 

From South-Moultou to Bideford, thence to 
Clovelly; and from Clovelly along the western ex- 
tremities of Devon, the clayey soil greatly predomi- 
nates. Fine white pipe-clay is found in abundance 
at Wtar-Giflbrd, and in the valley between Morton 
and Petrokstow : it lies at the depth of fifteen or 
twenty feet from the surface. In the vale of King's- 
Teignton, pipe, and potter's clay are procured in 
great quantities ; and sixteen or seventeen thousand 
tons are annually sent from the port of Teignmouth, 
to supply the pipe manufactories of London, Liver- 
pool, &c. lu the parish of Fremington, great quan- 
tities of reddish potter's clay is obtained, and manu- 
factured into various kinds of ware at Bideford. 
Schistus is common to almost every part of the 
county ; and consists of a great number of lamina* 

of the same bed, as appears from the exact resemblance of the 
stones to each other. Here also, the surface ot the bed is 
undulated, and rises and falls exactly in the same manner witlj 
the beds at Branscombe and Salcombe. The cliffs near Mary 
Church exhibit marble, not only to a great extent, but of 
superior beauty to any other in Devonshire ; being for the most 
part, either of a dove coloured ground, with reddish, purple, 
and yellow veins; or of a black ground, mottled with purplish 
globules, In a valley below the cliff, about four hundred yard* 
wide, there are loose unconnected rocks of this marble ; owing, 
from their situation, probably, to the falling down of the ground 
into the sea : for there are very large marble rocks even on the 
beach. The greater part of the coast is marble. On the 
northern cliffs we may, in general, see the beds of shelfy rock 
rising nearly perpendicular to the surface. They appear in 
many places to have been forced out of their rectilinear direc- 
tion since their first induration; sometimes only by a small 
undulation, and sometimes by the strata being broken off, and 
turning up again in a different rectilinear direction. Wherever 
tliis alteration occurs, it has affected alLthe adjoining strata 
equally : they are all moved together. I had an opportunity, 
at Haftland Quay, of observing the nature and course of these 
strata ; the beds of stone here are broader and harder than 
usual ; some of them above three feet thick, and the thinnest 
above six inches. Their direction seems to be to the south- 
cast ; and for the most part, they are nearly perpendicular la 
the surface. The strata observed at the cliff, very often change 
their direction : in some places they incline towards each other, 
tending to the centre, in the shape of a wedge; and when they 
come near to a point, the strata sometimes run in a different 
direction, and forming a curve, descend again towards the, 
centre. Some of these strata abut full in the middle of another 
layer ; some run on in a straight line ; others form a curve. 
These sort of strata frequently meet in a sharp edge on the 
summit of the hills; of which I observed an instsm e on the 
hill over Swimbridge, in the upper road between Barnstaple 
and South Moulton, where the rock being bare, and th 
strata almost uniting in a point, exact!/ resembles a pave- 
ment." 



100 



DEVONSHIRE. 



differing in thickness, from three feet to half an 
inch : most of the thin laminse are very rotten, 
quickly dissolving into mud ; but the thicker beds 
are sometimes used in building. At Drew-Steign- 
ton it is of a black colour ; and being particularly 
hard, compact, and disposed in very thick lamina;, 
is frequently used for the paving of kitchens and cel- 
lars, and also for tomb-stones. A hard and coarse 
variety, of a blue grey colour, is cleft out of the 
rocks on the sea-coast near Salcoinbe harbour, on a 
high land called the Soars. This is easily split, by 
wedges, into slabs of any thickness, and to the 
length of ten or twelve feet : its surface, when split, 
is smooth, yet not even ; sinking and swelling ac- 
cording as the laminae have been more or less com- 
pressed. In the eastern part of the county are nu- 
merous quarries of slate, which is also obtained of 
an excellent quality near Slapton Sands, and East- 
Alwington. Large quantities of good slate are ob- 
tained at West-Alwiugton, and annually exported 
to Holland, under the name of Holland Blue. The 
slate procured in Cann-quarry, in the parish of 
Plympton St. Mary, is much celebrated for its 
Strength and durability ; and that of Lamerton and 
Tavistock is distinguished by its hardness and fine- 
picss. 

Quartz crystals have been found in various parts 
of Devonshire, but generally very small. On Dart- 
moor they have bt-.cn sometimes met with in the fis- 
sures of the granite : they have also been discovered 
in abundance in the red soil, or rock, at Rougemont- 
Castle ; and near Sampford- Spinney, in great plen- 
ty. Amethistine quartz, finely tinged, but of ;rude 
and irregular forms, has also been found at Samp- 
ford. Flints exist in abundance, particularly in the 
mountainous tract of Ilaldon : here, in some parts, 
they are mixed with a blackish fenny earth ; in 
others, they appear to cover a lime-stone sub-stra- 
tum ; and in others, a stratum of light brown sand, 
which, at the depth of two or three fathoms, is con- 
creted into a substance, of which good whetstones 
are formed. The white flint is the most general ; 
the black kind rarely occurs ; but has been met with 
on the cliffs at Beer. The principal kinds of free- 
stone are dug in the parishes of Salcombe, Brans- 
combe, and Beer. " That at Salcombe," observes 
Mr. Polwhele, " consists of a sandy grit, closely 
united, rather coarser than the Portland stone, and 
very hard. It is used for the outside of buildings ; 
works very easy in the quarry, and bears the wea- 
ther well, as appears by the cathedral of Exeter, the 



* It has been observed, by the author of the History of 
Exeter, that " that part of this rock which lies deep, is very 
compact and ponderous, scimillates with steel, and breaks alike 
in all directions. It has a granulated bluish purple ground, 
sprinkled with many minute shining points. Its numerous 
fissures, crossing in all directions, are filled with white hard 
veins of calcareous spar. Above this the stone is more porous 
and light, and without veins ; ils ground, inclining to red, is 
charged with mimerou. very small specks of white calcareous 
spar, or, as has been supposed, of steatite. Nearer Ihe surface, 



outside of which 5s built of Salcombe stone ; and 
though some of it has been erected 600 years, yet it 
is very little, if at all, worn by the weather. The 
free-stone of Beer is of a much softer nature, and 
finer grit, than that of Salcombe ; when hewn out of 
the quarry, it cuts as soft as the Bath stone, which 
it greatly resembles : all the vaulted roof and orna- 
ments of the arches at Exeter Cathedral are made 
of this stone." 

Iron-stone, whin-stone, and basalt, are found in 
different parts of the county, and bear a striking re- 
semblance to the Derbyshire toad-stone : they exist, 
however, in the greatest abundance in the neigh- 
bourhood of Exeter ; and the entire rock on 
which the castie stands has been considered as 
volcanic.* 

" Out of the schistus near Crediton," again ob- 
serves Mr. Polwhele, " arise a compact lava, of a 
purple colour, with large crystals of felspar, and 
numerous crystals of pellucid quartz and black 
mica, the cavities containing farinaceous steatite : it 
does not effervesce with acids. In this specimen it 
is remarkable, that the crystals of k-lspar have cavi- 
ties in them, anil are filled also with the steatite, like 
the rest of the stone." Specimens of basaltes have 
also been obtained at South-Bovey, Bishop's-Teign- 
ton, &c. 

Granite, or moor-stone, as it is called here, and in 
Cornwall, is met with in various places, but parti- 
cularly on Dartmoor, where the mountains com- 
mence which extend into Cornwall. It generally 
lies in vast irregular masses ; and is found in great 
variety, both as to texture and colour. The red 
granite is exceedingly beautiful and well polished. 
On exposure to the 'atmosphere, it becomes ex- 
tremely hard ; but when first raised, it may be 
wrought with comparative ease. 

Of the inflammable substances discovered in De- 
vonshire, the most remarkable is the Bovey coal, the 
origin of which has occasioned considerable discus- 
sion. It is obtained in the extensive flat called Bo- 
vey-Heathfield, which appears to have been for- 
merly covered by the tide, and is supposed to be 
lower than the level of the sea. Its strata run nine 
miles to the southward, through the Heathfield, by 
Kuighton, Teigngrace, and Newton Marshes, to 
Abbots-Kerswell, generally keeping to the west of 
the beds of potter's clay, which range through vari- 
ous parts of the Heathfield, and sometimes crossing 
them.f From the thick bed of sand rises water of 
a vivid green colour, which is said to abound in 

sulphur 



it is still more porous, light and ruddy ; and the many whit* 
spots, now enlarged, are filled with a sott chalky substance." 
The pores of some varieties, which are in a state of decomposi- 
tion, are filled with a beautifully green malachite; in others, 
the cavities apparently contain lumps if a black powder, which, 
on examination by the microscope, with powerful glasses, is 
discovered to be a mixture of ferruginous crystals and an ochrey 
earth, strewed with a few specks of chalk. 

f Dean Milles, in his Letter to the Earl of Macclestield, 
published in the year 1760, observes, that " the uppermost of 



DEVONSHIRE). 



101. 



sulphur and mriol, and is as warm as some of the 
Bath springs. In some of the beds of clay are small 
and narrow veins of coat, shooting through and 
forming impressions like reeds ami grass. The 
coai tuat is taken up for use, is obtained from an 
extensive open mine (having an easy descent for 



the strata rises to within a foot of (lie *uriaie, under a sharp 
whitr sand, intennixed willi an ash-coloured clay, and under- 
lies to the south, about twenty inches in a fathom : the perpen- 
dicular depth of these strata, including the beds of clay with 
which they are mixed, is about seventy feet. The strata of coal 
near the surface are from eighteen inches to four feet thick, and 
are separated by beds of a brownish clay, nearly of the same 
dimensions, but diminishing in thickness downward, in propor- 
tion as the strata of coal grow larger; and both are more com- 
pact and solid in the lower beds. The lowermost stratum of 
coal is sixteen feet thick: it lies on a bed of clay, under which 
is a sharp green sand, not unlike sea-sand, seventeen feet thick ; 
and under that, a bed of hard coarse clay, which has not been 
bored through." 

* The peculiar properties of flits coal are thus described by 
Mr. Polwhele : " Though the substance and quality of the 
Bovey coal, in its several strata, be much alike, and all indis- 
criminately used for the same purposes, yet there is some 
difference in the colour, form, and texture of the several reins. 
The exterior parts, which lie nearest to the clay, have a greater 
mixture of earth, and are generally of a dark brown or chocolate 
<x>lour : some of 'hem appear like a mass of coal and earth 
mixed : others have a laminous texture ; but the lamina; run in 
such oblique, wavy, and undulatory forms, that they bear a 
strong resemblance to the roots of trees. There are other veins 
of this coal, which lie more in the centre of the strata, and 
abound most in the lowest and thickest bed, the substance of 
winch is more compact and solid ; these are as black, and 
almost as heavy, as pit-coal. They do not so easily divide into 
lamina:, and seem to be more strongly impregnated with bitu- 
men. They are distinguished by the name of stone-coal, and 
the fire of them is more strong and lasting than that of other 
Teins. But the most curious vein in these strata is that called 
the wood-coal; which is sometimes of a charcoal colour, and 
sometime, of a shining black the former sort seems to be less 
impregnated with bitumen, is not so solid and heavy as the 
latter, and has more the appearance of wood. It lies in straight 
and even veins, and it frequently dug in pieces of three or four 
feet long; and, with proper care, might be obtained of a much 
greater length. Other pieces of the same kind are found lying 
upon them in all directions, but without the least intermixture 
of earth, or any interstice, except some small crevices, by which 
the pieces are divided from each other. When it is first dug, 
and moist, the thin pieces will divide like horn ; but when dry, 
it loses its elasticity, and becomes short and crisp. At all times 
it is easily separated into very thin lamina?, or splinters, especi- 
ally if it lie exposed to the heat of the sun, which, like the fire, 
makes it crackl", separate, and fall to pieces. This fossil con- 
sists of a number of lamina.', or vi ry thin places, lying upon 
each other horizontally, in which small protuberances sometimes 
appear like the knots of trees; but they are only mineral 
nuclei, which occasions this interruption in the course of the 
lamina;: and pieces of spar have been sometimes found in the 
middle ol this wood-coal. Though the texture of this coal is 
laminaied, set it does no! appear to have any of tho^e fibrous 
interjection*, which are observed in the grain of all wood. It 
easily breaks transversely ; and the separated parts, instead of 
being rugged an<! uneven, are generally smooth and shining, 
and even the course of the laminx is hardly d^cernible. The 
fire made by this coal, is more or less strong and lasting, ac- 



(a) It is remarkable thai the small of the Bovey coal, when 
VOL. II. KO. 52. 



horses to bring tip the produce) at the west end of 
South- Bovey To wn.* 

Pyrites is obtained in various parts of the county, 
and has not unl'reqiiently been found in globular 
balls of different sizes.f 

Amongst the metallic substances of this county 

are 



cording to its different veins : those which lie nearest to the 
clay, having a greater mixture of earth, burn heavily, and leave 
a large quantity of brownish ashes. The wood-coal is said to 
! make as strong a fire as oaken billets, especially if it be set on 
j edge ; that the fire, as it ascends, may insinuate between, and 
! separate the lamina;. But the heat of the stone-coal is account- 
I ed the strongest, though not sufficiently intense for the mines. 
j When this coal is put into the fire, it crackles, and separates 
into laminx, burns for some time with a heavy flame, becomes 
' red-hot, and gradually consumes to light white ashes, (a) 
Though the transverse crevices made in it by the fire, give it 
the external appearance of a wooden brand, yet, if quenched 
when red hot, the unconsumecl part seems to be almost as 
smooth and solid as when first put into the fire. The thick 
heavy smoke which arises from this coal when burning, is very 
fetid and disagreeable; entirely different from the aromatic 
scent of the bituminous loam which is found adhering to it, but 
much resembling that of the asphaltum, or bitumen of the Red 
Sea. That part of the clay which lies nearest the coal, seems 
to partake of its nature, being somewhat of a laminous texture, 
and in a small degree inflammable: and among this clay, but 
adhering to the veins of coal, are found lumps of a bright yellow 
loam, extremely light, and so saturated with petrolium, that 
they burn like sealing-wax, emitting a very agreeable, and aro- 
matic smell." The basis of the Bovey coal is generally sup- 
posed to be vast assemblages of trees, which have, in various 
and distant ages, been washed by torrents from the neighbour- 
ing hills ; and on which, from time to time, intervening beds of 
clay have been deposited. This opinion is corroborated by 
the situation of Heatlifield, which at some period was probably 
a morass, and is almost encompassed by the secondary hills 
that undulate at the feet of Dartmoor and of Haldon ; and also, 
by the lightness and appearance of the wood-coal ; the nuclei 
found in it, and the lamina; being taken up in all directions, as 
though formed of trees laid confusedly across each other. The 
argument for its vegetable origin may be further strengthened 
by comparing it with the Surturbrand of Iceland, and the 
Piligno of the Italians, which are unquestionably fossil wood ; 
and resemble the Bovey coal too nearly to admit the supposition 
that the origin of the latter can be different. Kirwan observes, 
that it consists ol wood penetrated with petrol, or bitumen, and 
frequently containing pyrites, alum, and vitriol. Its specific 
gravity is from 1.4 to 1.558: its proportion of pure carbon, 
from 54. to 75. per cent. The particular species of wood of 
which the Bovey coal was probably formed, is supposed to be 
the Pinus Sylvestris, or Scotch Fir; a specimen, with (lie bark 
remaining, was recently in the possession of Dr. Cornish, of 
Tot ness. 

f A great number were met with some years ajjo in the 
sclustus, near Chudleigh, lying at some distance from each 
other. Several of them were in the cabinet of the laie P. Rash- 
leigh, Esq. of Menabilly, who described them as follows. 
" The balls which I have, weigh from fifteen drams to five 
ounces. They are nearly circular, and resemiile military 
bullets of the same weight: the outward coat is of a brown 
rusty colour, composed of very minute angular crystals, either 
triangular, or quadrangular : the inside is a' very solid shining 
substance of sulphur and iron, not radiated, hke the pyrites 
tound in chalk-pits ; they are embedded in a black hardened 
clay, which, from the specimen I have, must have ionneci and 
hardened 

thrown on a heap, and exposed to the weather, is liable M 
spontaneous ignition. 
2 c 



102 



DEVONSHIRE. 



are the ores of tin, lead, iron, and manganese. 
Gold, silver, copper, bismuth, antimony, and cobalt, 
have also been found, but iu small quantities. Thu 
tin-works were anciently numerous and valuable, 
but have in a great measure been abandoned,* the 
mines of Cornwall being considerably more produc- 
tive : though in the reign of King John, Devonshire 
produced greater quantities of tin than that county ; 
its coinage being set to farm at 100/. annually, and 
that of Cornwall at no more than 100 marks. The 
importance of its trade in tin, is, indeed, manifested 
from its stannary courts, and coinage towns, of 
which there are no fewer than four ; Plympton, Ta- 
vistock, Ashburton, and Chagford. The members 
of these courts have the prmlege, from time to time, 
a/id under the direction of the Lord Warden, of 
choosing certain jurats to meet in a general assem- 
bly at Crockett! Tor, in the midst of Dartmoor ; 
with power to make laws for the regulation of the 
inines and stannaries. 

The lead ore of this county is chiefly grey, but of 
several varieties. The potter's or tessellated ore is 
shining, rectangular, and tabulated, breaking into 
cubical granules : a second variety is of a flaky, 
mooth, and glossy texture, and when broken its 
fragments are more ponderous ; a third kind is ex- 
ceeding close grained and rich in silver ; fracture, 
sparkling, and uneven : this latter sort abounds in 
the mines ot Beer-ferris. Some years ago very rich 
lead ore was discovered near the surface at Comb- 
Martin. Iron-stone is discovered in different parts 
of this county, and in many varieties, though none 
appear to be very rich in metal, f Native silver has 
been discovered in various substances and forms 
granular, filamentous, capillary, arborescent, and 
crystallized : the lead mines at Comb-Martin are 
reported to have produced it in great plenty in the 
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries : and it appears, 
from different grants made in the reigns of Edward 
III. and Richard II. with a reservation of the tenths 
of the church, that both gold and silver mines exist- 
ed in Devonshire. Manganese is chiefly obtained 
at Upton-Pyne, where it was discovered forty or 
fifty years ago. It does not run in veins, but is 
spread in flat, irregular patches, at no great depth 
from the surface ; and seems to extend from Upton- 
Pyne, south-eastward to Huxliam, and north-west- 
ward, to Newton St. Cyres. " It is found," says 

hartlened about the pyritical ball atter its lormation. The py- 
rites opens and cracks in the fire, but without noise, or flying 
off. This fossil contains nearly one-third sulphur; the other 
two-thirds iron, and argillaceous earth : it is nearly five times 
heavier than water." 

* " There are numberless stream-works on Dartmoor, and 
in its vicinities," remarks Mr. Polwhele, " which have lain 
forsaken for ages. In the parishes of Manaton, Kine-Steignton, 
and Teigngrace, are many old tin-works of this kind, which the 
inhabitants attribute to that period when wolves and winged 
serpents were no strangers to the hills or vallies. The Bovey- 
Heathfield has been worked in the same manner ; and, indeed, 
all the vallies from the Heathfield to Dartmoor bear the traces 
of shoding and streaming; which, I doubt not, was either Bri- 



the author of the History of Exeter, " in large 
rugged, irregular masses, and contains great variety 
of crystallizations : some shoot irregularly ; some 
are plane, and transversely striated ; others arc 
streaked, like the lead ore ; and others shoot into 
hollows, crossing each other every way. The cry- 
stals seem to bi> the metal in a pure state, and arc 
not cvpually advantageous with the calx, which con- 
tain a larger proportion of pure air, the ingredient 
lor which it is chiefly valuable. It is employed in 
the potteries, but principally in the glass-houses, 
where it is used to discharge the colour imparted by 
calces of lead, and for other purposes. It has also 
been applied, latterly, in preparing the oxygenated 
muriatic acid, employed to facilitate the operation of 
bleaching. From 150 to 200 tons are exported an- 
nually : the general price is from thirty shillings ta 
three pounds per ton." Antimony has been found 
in several places within the parishes of Clmdleigh, 
llennock, and South Bovey. It is mostly of a dark 
lead-colour, full of long shining needle-like strise ; 
of a close-grained texture, hard, brittle, and very 
heavy. Cobalt, interspersed with numerous fila- 
ments of silver, has been found at Sampford in con- 
siderable abundance. 

MINERAL SPRINGN.] The mineral springs of De- 
vonshire are very numerous, and of the chalybeate 
kind ; though they have not principally been much 
appropriated to medicinal purposes. The strongest 
springs arise at Gubb's Wall, near Cleave ; at 
Bella-Marsh, near King-Steignton ; at Ilsington, in 
the vicinity of Ashburton ; at Brook, near Tavis- 
tock ; and at Bampton : the spring at the last- 
mentioned place is considered to be more strongly 
impregnated with iron than any other in th 
county. 

ETYMOLOGY.] It now appears to be established, 
that the original name of this county, though it was 
afterwards included with Cornwall, under the gene- 
ral appellation, Danmonium, was Dyvnaint ; and by 
this term it is frequently mentioned in ancient Welch 
manuscripts. Its import is descriptive of the coun- 
try, and implies Deeps or Hollows ; and hence the 
people might be called Dyvni, Dyvniaid, Dyvnoni, 
Dyvnonwyr, Dyvnonwys, and Dyvnwys ; all im- 
plying the inhabitants of the glens, or deep valleys. 

GENERAL HISTORY.] It has frequently been the 
subject of discussion among historians, whether the 

tish or Phoenician. Lead was also familiar to the western 
Britons. That the Danmonians had iron works, is plain from 
Cxsar, who mentions the exigua copia of our ifon in the mari- 
time parts: the iron pits of Blackdown, were, I conceive, 
originally British, and were afterwards worked by the Ro- 
mans." * 

f It is recorded, in No. 23 of the Philosophical Transactions, 
that, in the year 1667, a large loadstone was sent from this 
county to the Royal Society, by Dr. Edward Cotton, Arch- 
deacon of Cornwall. It weighed sixty pounds, and would 
move a needle at the distance of nine feet ; but a part of it 
having been broken off, its attraction did not extend beyond 
seven feet. Loadstones have also been found at Brent, and 
also on Dartmoor, but of an interior quality. 

first 



DEVONSHIRE. 



103 



first colonists of Britain emigrated from some re- 
mote region of the east, or from the neighbouring 
continent of Gaul ; however conclusive the argu- 
ments on cither side may be thought, tradition and 
history both furnish sufficient evidence, that it was 
on the coast of Devonshire they first established a 
settlement. 

Previously to the arrival of the Romans on the 
shores of Britain, the Belga;, who had invaded the 
island from Gaul, made incursions into Devonshire, 
and obliged numbers of the inhabitants to emigrate 
to Ireland ; the remainder joined with the inhabi- 
tants of the adjacent coasts and opposed the enemy. 
It appears, that before the arrival of Cassar, the war 
against Balgae was conducted by Cassibelinus, 
whose second son Theomantius, was then Duke of 
Danmonium. By the Romans, Devonshire was in- 
cluded in the division of Brittania Prima. The 
Saxons attached it to the kingdom of Wessex, and 
it so continued till Egbert consolidated the heptar- 
chy into one monarchy. 

ANTIQUITIES.] There are two Roman stations 
in this county, Moriduno near Seaton, and Isca 
Duninaniorum, now Exeter : the two grand military 
roads, the Ikening-street and the Fosse, meet ; but 
it is difficult to determine which of them has a ter- 
mination at this union. There are also several an- 
cient camps. The principal buildings entitled to 
notice from their antiquity are the following : 
Ashburton Church, Axminster Church, Barnstaple 
Bridge, Berry Pomeroy Castle, Bideford Bridge, 
Buckfastleigh Priory, Chegford Church, Compton 
Castle, Crediton Church, Dartmouth Castle, Exe- 
ter Church, Cathedral, &c. Ford Abbey, Frithel- 
stoke Priory, Hart land Priory, Henny Castle, Lid- 
ford Castle, Newnham Abbey, Oakhampton Church 
and Castle, Ottery Priory, Plympton Castle, Pow- 
derham Castle, Tavistock Abbey, Tor Abbey, Tor- 
rington Castle, Wear Abbey, Weycroft Abbey, &c. 

CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL DIVISIONS.] This 
county is divided into thirty-two hundreds, com- 
prising 462 parishes, and two parts of parishes^ 
Jt has one city (Exeter) ; and the following eleven 
boroughs : 



* Bishops during the present reign: Dr. Geo. Lavington, 
died 1702; Hon. Dr. F. Keppel, died 1777; Dr. Ross, died 
1792 ; Dr. W. Butler, died 1797 ; Dr. H. K. Courteney, died 
1803 ; Dr. J. Fisher, translated to Salisbury, and succeeded by 
the Hon. Dr. Pelham. 

f The following statement, recording an interesting instance 
of longevity, in this county, appeared in the year 1809: 
" Sarah Williams, in her 108th year, is now living in a small, 
but neat and comfortable cottage, at the foot of that celebrated 
eminence, called Brent Tor, situated about half way between 
Tavistock and Lidford. The writer of this article visited her in 
the month of August, 1809, and found, after a little conversation, 
that her faculties were but little impaired ; her hearing was 
perfect, and, with the assistance of glasses, she could read toler- 
ably well ; her person was by no means emaciated. She has 
keen unable to walk for the last five years, yet appears not 



Ashburtoit 
Barnstaple 
Beeralston 
Dartmouth 

I I 01 llll. I! 

Oukhampton 



Plymouth 

Plymplon 

Tavislork 

Tiverton 

TolnenS. 



The whole county is in the diocese of Exeter, and 
the western circuit.* 

PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.] The total 
number of members returned to Parliament for 
Devonshire is twenty-six : two for the county, two 
for the city of Exeter, and two for each of the bo- 



roughs. 



MARKET TOWNS.] The 
county are considered to 
markets : 



following towns in this 
be entitled to regular 



Ashburton 


Crediton, 


Oakhampton 


Axminster 


Culliton 


Ottery St. Mary 


Barnstaple 


Dartmouth 


Plymouth 


Hampton 


Dod brook 


Plymouth Dock 


Beeralstou 


Hartland 


Plympton 


Bideford 


.Hatherleigh 


Sheep Wash 


Bowe 


Holsworthy 


Sidmouth 


Bradninch. 


Honiton 


South Motion 


Brent 


Ilfracomb 


Tavistock 


Clegford 


King's Bridge 


Teignmouth 


Chudleigh 


Lyston 


Tiverton 


Chumleigh 


M'odbury 


Tot ness 


Columpton 


Moreton 


Topsliam 


Comb Martin 


Newton Bushel 


Torrington. 



POPULATION.] Respecting the early population 
of this county we have no data; : according to the 
Population Returns of the year 1811, Devonshire 
contained 57,955 houses, and 348,00 i inhabitants 
being 157,243 males, and 185,761 females, of whom 
60,844 were returned as being employed in trade 
and manufacture, and 96,208 in agriculture : in 
1811, the number of houses, including those which 
were building and uninhabited, had increased to 
82,056; the number of families 79,415; and, of 
persons, 383,308. The scale of mortality in this 
county appears to be in the proportion of I to 52 
annually, f 



deficient in strength ; otherwise, she has enjoyed very good 
health during the whole course of her life, and has never lived 
out of the parish of Brent Tor, or the one adjoining. Within 
these few years she has cut five teeth, three of which stUl 
remain, together with ten or twelve old ones. Her diet consists 
principally of broths, and other nourishing things. She has had 
twelve children, the eldest of whom, now living, is in his 83d 
year, and is a strong hale looking old man. She is attended 
by a daughter, who is upwards of sixty years of age, and, from 
whose healthy and active appearance, there is every probability 
she will attain the great age of her mother. When she feels 
languid or faint, she smells to wormwood, which speedily re- 
freshes her. In the younger part of her life, she was employed 
as a domestic in a farm house, and was always accustomed to 
very early rising, to which she attributes, in some measure, the 
attainment of her extraordinary age." 

Summary 



104 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Summary of the Poptilatinn of the County of Devon, as publithrd by Authority of Parliament : 1311. 





HOUSES 


OCCUPATIONS. 


PERSONS. 


HUNDREDS, &c. 


Inhabited. 


='5 

18 . 

$ V V 

2391 
1194 
2835 
2995 
3650 
544 
3313 
1291 
2248 
1656 
2722 
1326 
613 
688 
2281 
3944 
1078 
1626 
2140 
753 
1523 
1656 
3016 
636 
2309 
1214 

2174 
2301 
1475 
1572 
4179 

4465 

1360S 


^e 

cs 


Uninhabited. 


1.1 i 
5 3 

lls 


'c 3 

JEj 


Ah ol llf| ! alh! 

lies not comprised 
in the two pre- 
ceding Clashes. 


Males. 


Females 


Total 
of 
Persons. 


= E Jp 




Axniinster 


2191 
1061 
2661 
2708 
3392 
507 
2508 
1172 
2130 
1408 
2516 
1208 
495 
659 
2159 
3439 
932 
1326 
2030 
554 
1225 
1337 
2769 
609 
1373 
662 

1988 
1820 
1374 
1467 
3723 

2879 
5430 


27 
5 
39 
16 

53 
8 
17 
3 
24 
17 
56 
19 
1 
13 
12 
57 
4 
13 
9 
4 
15 
23 
14 
4 
18 
9 

13 
9 
9 
9 

45 

21 

ISO 


42 
2fi 

77 
65 
228 
24 
107 
72 
97 
70 
136 
38 
31 
12 
75 
151 
26 
54 
117 
29 
47 
49 
91 
28 
77 
16 

73 
91 
44 

76 
228 

92 
116 


1231 
686 
2141 
1191 
1795 
405 
1582 
749 
99 
975 
1142 
772 
381 
540 
1116 
1811 
622 
1145 
1474 
259 
651 
852 
1640 
474 
1308 
479 

1524 
1142 
505 
1128 
2114 

156 
65 


951 

459 
509 
1146 
1331 
122 
1227 

1119 
536 
914 
395 
192 
115 
997 
1057 
4. '6 
342 
534 
286 
515 
343 
793 
114 
799 
613 

508 
1039 
809 
366 
1385 

2898 
7859 


209 
49 

185 
658 
524 
17 
504 
244 
140 
145 
666 
15S 
44 
33 
168 
1076 
50 
139 
132 
208 
357 
461 
583 
48 
202 
122 

142 
120 
161 
78 
680 

1411 
5684 


5436 
2882 
7345 
6401 
7979 
1367 
1425 
2914 
4786 
4236 
6008 
3064 
1290 
1908 
5049 
8818 
2251 
4821 
5002 
1195 
3771 
4330 
7019 
1548 
5896 
2731 

49S2 
5265 
3378 
3814 
9675 

7908 

24469 
4530 


5958 
52982 
7704 
7886 
9494 
1396 
9104 
3174 
5R62 
4435 
7003 
3523 
1400 
2062 
5798 


11394 
5864 
15049 
14287 
17473 
2763 
16529 
6088 
10648 
8671 
13071 
6587 
2690 
3970 
10847 
19406 
4817 
9710 
10552 
2880 
7766 
9045 
15243 
3275 
12285 
5778 

10606 
11269 
7461 
7749 
20049 

18896 

56060 
4530 


























II MtliMul 






10588 
2566 
4889 
5550 
1685 
3990 
4715 
8224 
1727 
6389 
3047 

5624 
6004 
4083 
3935 
10374 

10988 
31591 








Ottery St. Mary 














Taw ton, North, with 
Winklpy 








Wonforcl 


City and County of 
Exeter 


Borough of Plymouth 
and Suburbs 






Totals 


62318 


79415 


706 


2475 


33644 


30977 


15394 


79553 


.'03755 38330S 





CHIEF TOWNS, PARISHES, &c. 

AI.PHINGTON.] At the village of Alphington, in 
the hundred of Wonford, two miles south from Exe- 
ter, is a complete cross, and a fine Saxon font. 
Here also is a fair, on the first Thursday in June, 
for horned cattle ; and another for horses, on the 5th 
of October. 

APPLEDORE.] The little sea-port town of Apple- 
clore, anciently called Apple-tree, is situated on the 
side of a hill in the hundred of Bampton, five miles 
and three quarters north-north-east from Colump- 
ton. Here Hubba, the Dane, lauded in the reign 
of Alfred, by whom he was discomfited and slain, 
with 1200 men, before Kiuvith or Heiiny Castle. 



ASHBURTON.] The borough, market, and stan- 
nary town of Ashburton is situated in the hundred 
of Teignbridge, 20 miles south-west from Exeter, 
and 191-| west-south-west from London. It is a 
borough by prescription, and was constituted a 
stannary-town by a charter of Edward I. It ap- 
pears to have first sent representatives to Parliament 
in the 26th year of the reiga of this monarch, and 
not again until the 8th or Henry IV. it then omitted 
the exercise of this privilege until the year 1040, 
when it was resumed. The chief officer of the town 
is the portreeve, who is chosen annually at the cotirt- 
leet and baron of the Lords ot tiie Manor. The 
manor is described in Domesday Book as belonging 
to the King ; and subsequently it appears to have 

bceu 



DEVONSHIRE. 



105 



been possessed by the Bishops of Exeter ; to one of 
whom, Bishop Stapledon, it is indebted tor its weekly 
ir.arket on Saturdays, and an annual fair ; the grant 
of which was procured by him in the early part of 
the reign of Edward III. 

The town consists chiefly of one long 1 street, upon 
the high road from London to Plymouth. The river 
Dart is only half a mile distant. The manufacture 
of serge, to a very considerable extent, is carried on 
here ; and a market held once a week for the sale of i 
wool and yarn. The church is a handsome build- j 
ing, with a tower ninety feet high, terminated by a i 
mall spire. The chancel contains several stalls, j 
similar to those in collegiate churches ; and in one ! 
part is a curious memorial, recording, that in the 
year 1754, the representatives of the borough " chose 
to express their thanks to their constituents by pur- 
chasing an estate for educating the boys of the bo- 
rough." An ancient building, which before the 
Reformation was a chapel or chantry, adjoins the I 
church, and is now appropriated to the use of the I 
grammar-school, and also as the place of election of ! 
the representatives in Parliament, and other public 
business. 

ASHE.] This was the birth-place of the celebrat- 
ed Duke of Marlborough. It is situated in 
Musbury parish, which lies in the hundred of Ax- 
minster, two miles east by north from Colyton. The 
mansion-house, iu which the Duke was born,Jnow in 

* Sir Winston Churchill (author of a Chronicle of the Kings 
of England, published in the year 1675) was originally of Wot- 
ton Glanvill, in Dorsetshire ; but his adherence to the royal 
cause obliged him to take refuge at the house of his father-in- 
law, where John, Duke of Marlborough, and most of his other 
children were born. At the Restoration, he recovered his 
estates, and obtained a seat in Parliament, with the honour of 
Knighthood. He died in 1688. John Churchill was born in 
the year 1650. He received only an indifferent education ; for 
his father took him to Court at the age of twelve years, where 
he became page as his sister Arabella became mistress to the 
Duke of York. In 1666, he obtained a pair of colours in the 
guards. His first service was at the siege of Tangier ; and on 
his return from thence he became the favourite of the Duchess 
of Cleveland, who gave him 5.000/. with which he purchased 
an annuity for life. He afterwards served under the great 
Turenne, who was so pleased with his person and bravery as to 
call him the handsome Englishman. At the siega of Maestricht 
he so distinguished himself, that the King of France publicly 
thanked him. On his return to England he was made Lieute- 
nant-Colonel, Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and Master of the 
Robes to the Duke of York, whom he attended In Holland and 
Scotland, and about this time married Miss Jennings, Maid of 
Honour to the Princess, afterwards Queen Anne. In 1682 he 
was shipwrecked with the Duke of York, in their passage to 
Scotland, on which occasion his Royal Highness expressed tin- 
greatest anxiety to save his favourite. The same year he was 
made a peer, by the title of Baron Eymouth in Scotland; and j 
when James cnaie to the crown, he was sent to France to notify i 
the event. In 1635 he was created Lord Churchill of 'Sand- 
ridge. The same year he suppressed Monmouth's rebellion 
and took him prisoner. He continued to serve James with 
gn-.it fidelity, til! the arrival of the Pi.nce of Orange, and then 
left him, lor which he has been stigmatized, and perhaps not 
unjustly, with base ingratitude. His own apology was a regard 
for the religion and consutution of !iis country, lie was HVUed 
Earl of Marlboronch by King William in 1689, and appointed 

VOL. n. NO. 53. 



a state of ruin, was rebuilt, shortly after the Civil 
Wars, by Sir John Drake, whose daughter had 
married Sir Winston Churchill.* 

AXMINSTER.] Axminster, a large irregularly 
built town, giving name to the hundred in which it 
is situated, lies 25| miles east by north from Exe-^ 
ter, and 147 west -south-west from London. The 
petty sessions for the hundred are holden here ; the 
market is on Saturday ; and here are fairs on the 
Festival of St. Mark, the ->5tli of April, the first Wed- 
nesday alter the 24th of June, and the first Wednes- 
day alter the 10th of October. 

This town appears to have derived its name from 
the river Axe, which runs through it, and from a 
Minster said to have been founded by Athelstan, for 
seven priests, appointed to pray for the souls of se- 
ven Earls, slain at Calesdown. Prior to William 
the Conqueror, the manor belonged to the crown. 
In the reign of John it was granted to William, 
Lord Briwere, and from him it descended to Regi- 
nald de Moluens, who erected an abbey at Newen- 
ham of the Cistercian order, and granted it to the 
manor and hundred of Axminster. At the Dissolu- 
tion, it came to the family of Norfolk. James the 
First granted it to Sir William Pctre, whose de- 
scendant Lord Petre, is now the proprietor. 

The streets of Axminster are wide, but the houses 
are neither regular nor elegant; the number, ac- 
cording to the late return, was 4o(3, and that of in- 



commander of the English army in the J.uw Countries. He 
next served in Ireland, and reduced Cork, with other strong 
places. In 1692 he was suddenly dismissed from his employ- 
ments, and committed to the Tower ; he was, however, very 
soon released ; but the cause of this disgrace was never clearly 
explained. After the death of Queen Mary he was restored to 
favour; and at the close of that reign ho had the command of 
the English forces in Holland, and the stales chose him captain- 
general of their forces. On the commencement of the reign of 
Anne he recommended a war with France, and his advice was 
adopted. In the first campaign of 170'2 he took a number of 
strong towns, particularly Lie<{e. In the following year he was 
created a Duke. In 1704 he joined Prince Eugene, in con- 
junction with whom he conquered the French at Hochstedt, 
and took Marshal Tallard prisoner, and brought him to England 
with '26 other officers of rank, 121 standards, and 179 colours. 
He then received the grant of Ihe manor of Woodstock. In 
1706 he fought the famous battle of Ramilies. This victory 
accelerated the fall of Lonvain, Brussels, and other important 
places. He arrived in England ami received fresh honours 
from the Queen and Parliament. Blenheim house was ordered 
to be built, and he received a pension ot 5,000/. a year. In 
1709 he defeated Marshal Villars at Malplaquet. In the year 
171 1 -he returned to England with addet! laurels; but was soon 
after dismissed from his employments. To add to this unjust 
treatment, a prosecution was commenced against him for ap. 
plying the public money io his private purposes. Indignant at 
such condmvt, he went into voluntary banishment till 1714, 
when he landed at Dover :<.nidt the acclamations ot the people. 
George l'ie First re.toreil him. to his military employments, but 
he retired from his app<jitilm<-m, to Windsor, and dvd in 1722. 
His remains were interred with great pomp in Westminster 
Abbey. His Duchess outlived him several years. She was a 
woman of a strong min.l, bill of overbearing paisr.ns. Her 
letters have bet-n printed, and display uncommon sagacity,. 
blended with a great share of vanity. 



2 D 



habitants 



100 



DEVONSHIRE. 



v habitants 2387. The lower orders are mostly en- 
gaged in manufacturing carpets, feather breeches, 
gloves, &c. The manufactory of carpets, which 
was established here about 1755, is in a flourishing 
state, and employs more than a hundred people. 
The manner of weaving is different here from that 
pursued at most other places ; the carpets heing 
woven in tliejiiece, and several hands employed at 
the same loom. The common patterns are flowers, 
,' roses, &c. though the Turkey and Persian carpets 
have been imitated with success. In many large 
pieces, Roman tesselated pavements have been co- 
pied,, which have produced a very rich effect. One 
loom xisually measures twenty-seven feet, and the 
carpet woven in it may be of any length. 

The Church, dedicated to St. Mary, is a large, 
ancient building, exhibiting various kinds of archi- 
tecture ; but it .appears doubtful if any part be so 
old as the time of its reputed founder. The interior 
is heavy and cumbrous, and a bulky tower, which 
rises from the centre of the structure, gives an effect 
peculiarly heavy. A few parts of the building are 
very ancient, particularly a Saxon door-way, which 
was removed some years ago from the south side to 
the eastern end of the aisle. This church is report- 
ed by Lyland to have been " famose by the sepul- 

. f .. tures of many noble Danes slain in King Athelstane's 
time, at a battle on Branesdowne thirby, and by the 

, sepultures likewise of sum Saxon Lordes slain in 
the same field." The school-house, which is near the 
church, is also an ancient building, and has win- 
dows rounded in the Saxou style. The Roman Ca- 
tholics have a chapel in this town, and there are also 
two for Dissenters. 

AXMOUTH.] Axmouth, in the hundred of Axmin- 
pter, three miles and a quarter south by east from 
Colyton, was anciently a commodious harbour ; but, 
for some ages, it was rendered useless by being the 
seat of a religious house ; and, though several at- 
tempts have been made towards its restoration, it 
continues but of little service. Tanner informs us 
that the abbey being given to the manor of St. Mary 
at Moantborough in Normandy, by Richard Rivers, 
Earl of Devonshire, in the reign of Henry II. it was 
considered sometimes as a distinct alien priory, and 
.at other times as parcel of Loders in Dorsetshire, 
which was a great cell to that foreign monastery. 
After the Dissolution, Axmouth was bestowed on 
the mopastery of Sion, and, as parcel of its posses- 
sions, was granted to Walter Erie in the 6th of Ed- 
ward the Sixth. 

BAMPTON.] Bampton, or Bath-hampton, which 
appears to have given name to the hundred, is situ- 
ated twenty-one miles north by east from Exeter. 
Formerly it Kent members to Parliament : it is now 
governed by a portreeve, and some inferior officers, 
who are chosen by the inhabitants. It has a mar- 
ket on Saturdays,, and fairs on Whit-Tuesday, and 
the 24th of October. The town lies in a bottom 
near the little river Batherm, which flows into the - 
Exe at about a mile distant. 



Mr. Polwhelo considers that this was a " Roman 
station ; and here probably the Romans had artifi- 
cial hot-baths, supplied with water from the river 
Batherm ; which is, perhaps, a compound of bath, 
and therm (from calidus) hot-baths." The manor 
was granted by William the Conqueror to Walter 
de Doway, who had a castle here, but of which no 
vestiges remain. The houses, covering an extent of 
about a mile, are irregularly disposed, and built 
chiefly with stone : their number, as returned under 
the late act, is '284; and that of inhabitants 1422. 
The church, which is a spacious building, has been 
the burial-place of several of the Bouchers, Earls of 
Bath. The chalybeate spring here is celebrated for 
its medicinal virtues. The sheep fed in the neigh- 
bourhood are of extraordinary size, and excellent 
flavour. At Bampton was born John De Bampton, 
a Carmelite ; he was the first who publicly read 
Aristotle at Cambridge : he died in 1391. 

BARNSTAPLE.] Barnstaple, said to derive its 
name from Bar, which in the ancient British signi- 
fies the mouth of a river, and the Saxon word staple, 
a mart, is a borough and market-town, situated in 
the hundred of Braunton, 38 miles north-west by 
north from Exeter, and 193| west by south from 
London. It returns two members to Parliament : 
the market is on Friday ; and it has a fair on the 
19th of September. The town appears to have been 
incorporated by Henry I. ; yet it retains some traces 
of feudal jurisdiction ; a number of common bur- 
gesses claiming a right to vote with the corporate 
officers for members of Parliament. This privilege 
is deduced from the time of Athelstan, and it con- 
tinues to be exercised independent of the charters 
which different sovereigns have granted to the town. 
The corporation, under the charter of Queen Mary, 
consists of a Mayor, two Bailiffs, two Aldermen, 
twenty-two Common Councilmen, and other officers; 
and the number of voters is about 260. James the 
First confirmed and ratified the privileges of the 
tawn. The first return made to Parliament was iu 
the reign of Edward I. 

Barnstaple, which is one of the neatest and most 
respectable towns in the county, lies on the eastern 
bank of the river Taw, in a broad and fertile vale, 
bounded by a semicircular range of hills. The Taw 
here spreads to a considerable breadth ; but, from 
the great accumulation of sand, the port is shallow, 
and vessels of more than 200 tons are not able to 
enter. Over the river is a bridge of sixteen arches, 
which is said to have been built by one of the Tra- 
cys, at the time that family were lords of the manor. 
The streets are spacious and regular, and the build- 
ings are generally good. The town indeed boasts 
some of the marks of a metropolis ; balls every fort- 
night, and a regular theatre ; and nothing but a 
good pavement is wanted to make it highly agree- 
able. A noble quay extends seme way along the 
river, terminated by a handsome piazza, over the. 
centre of which stands the statue of Queen Anne, 
with an inscription testifying to the loyalty of Ro- 
bert 



DEVONSHIRE. 



bert Rolle, of Stevenstone, in tliis CQunty, the erec- 
tor. The woollen trade, formerly carried on here 
vith considerable spirit, greatly increased the wealth 
of the town, and enabled its inhabitants to erect a 
number of very respectable houses : this trade has 
of late failed ; but the manufacture of baize, silk- 
stockings, and waistcoat pieces, still gives life to the 
place. Besides this source of wealth and popula- 
tion, the beauty of the surrounding country, and the 
cheapness of provisions, have induced many respect- 
able families to reside here entirely ; a circumstance 
which renders Barnstaple the most genteel town in 
the north of Devonshire. Near the north gate is a 
walk called the Northern Hay, which, from the fine 
views it commands, forms a very agreeable prome- 
nade. The number of houses in this place, as 
enumerated under the late act, was 6*1 ; the num- 
ber of inhabitants, 4,019 ; of these 1,633 were males, 
and 2,386 females. 

Leland mentions, that in his time some part of the 
wall, which had been half a mile in circumference, 
yet remained ; and that the four gates were then 
visible. Over the north gate is a charity school for 
poor children of both sexes. Here is also a cele- 
brated grammar-school, which has been founded 
above three centuries, and is famous for having edu- 
cated a number of distinguished men ; among whom 
were John Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, author of the 
Apologia Ecclesioe Anglicanae ; his theological an- 
tagonist, Thomas Harding, Professor at Louvain ; 
the poet Gay,* and the learned Dr. Musgrave. 

Barnstaple Church is a spacious building, having 
a handsome spire, and being furnished with a good 
organ : previously to the Reformation it contained 
teveral chantries. 

Barnstaple, before the Conquest, was a royal de- 
mesne ; and King Athelstan is said to have built a 
castle here, near the confluence of the North Yoe 
with the Taw, but, of this fortress, a high artificial 
mount is now the only vestige. At the time of the 
Domesday Survey, the inhabitants were exempted 
from serving on any expedition, or paying taxes, 
but at the same times as Exeter and Totness. Wil- 
liam the Conqueror bestowed the manor on Judhael 
de Totnais, who founded a small priory here for 
Cluniac Monks, which continued till the suppression 

* This distinguished poet was born at, or near Barnstaple', in 
the year 1683, and educated under Mr. Luck, a man of con- 
siderable talent, then master of the grammar-school. He was 
afterwards apprenticed to a silk-mercer in London, which situa- 
tion he did not like, and in a few years bought the remainder 
of hi? lime. His first poem, intitled Rural Sports, and dedicat- 
ed to Mr.- Pope, gained him the friendship of that poet, 
which lasted till death. The year following he was appointed 
Secretary to the Duchess of Monmouth : at this time he 
printed his Trivia, in the composition of which he was assisted 
by Swift. In 1714 appeared his Shepherd's Week, a series of 
pastorals, intended to ridicule Phillips, but they possess more 
merit as a genuine picture of rustic life than as a satire. The 
same year he became Secretary to the Earl of Clarendon in his 
embassy to Hanover. On the death of Queen Anne he re- 
turned to England, but his expectations of preferment from the 



of religious houses, when, according to Dugdale, its 
revenues were valued at 123/. 6s, Id. per annum. 
The manor, having passed through numerous fami- 
lies, was re-granted, by Queen' Mary, to Thomas 
Marrow, Esq. of Warwickshire, whose son sold it to 
the Chichesters, in wlsom it remains. 

BEERALSTON.] Beeralston, or Beere r Alston, a 
chapelry in the parish of Beer Ferris, in the hun- 
dred of Roborough, five miles and three quarters 
south-south-west of Tavistock, has the privilege of 
sending two members to Parliament. It is chiefly 
inhabited by labourers employed in agriculture, and 
miners, and contains, of all descriptions, about 300 
persons. The borough is under the influence of the 
Earl of Beverly. The right of election is vested in 
those who have land in the borough, and pay three- 
pence acknowledgment to the Lord of the Manor ; 
who varies the number of electors at his pleasure, by 
granting burgage -tenures, which are generally re- 
signed when the election is concluded, to as many of 
his partizans as may be requisite. The portreeve, 
chosen annually in the Lord's court, is the returning 
officer. The first members were returned in the 
twenty-seventh of Elizabeth. Risdon mentions that 
Beare was bestowed by William the Conqueror, on 
a family descended from the house of Alenc.on in 
France, and that it still continues its name under 
the corruption of Bere-Alson. In the reign of 
Henry II. Henry Ferrers had a castle here which 
came to the possession of his descendant Martin 
Ferrers, the last of the house, in the time of Ed- , 
ward III. The manor then came, te the Champer- 
nounes, and passed respectively through the families 
of Willoughby, Mountjoy, Maynard, and Stamford, 
to the present possessor the Duke of Northumber- 
land. In this place are several lead-mines, now of 
inconsiderable value, though sometimes impregnated 
with silver, but in the reign of Edward I. it is said", 
that in the space of three years, 1600 weight of sil- 
ver was obtained. Since that time, no considerable 
quantity has ever been procured. 

BEERE FERRIS.] This parish is situated about 
eight miles south by west from Tavistock. Here, 
observes Risdon, " lieth LEY, the ancient possession 
of a family so called, whence the name tooke that 
honor ; for from hence Sir James Ley, Knt. Lord 



new court were disappointed. In 1720 he published his poems, 
by subscription, which produced him 1000/. but this lie lost 
by the South Sea Bubble, which reduced him to an alarming 
state of despondency. He next produced the tragedy of the 
Captive, and wrote his Fables for the young Duke of Cum- 
berland. In the year 1727 appeared on the stage his Beggar's 
Opera, which met with astonishing success : but though it was 
a favourite with the town, it was not so at court, and his Sequel 
to it, intituled Polly, was prohibited by the Lord Chamberlain. 
He was now taken into the house of the Duke and Duchess of 
Queensberry, where he died in 1732. His remains were 
interred in Westminster Abbey, and his epitaph written by 
Pope. - He wrote, besides llie works already mentioned, 
some smaller dramatic pieces, ballads, and poems, making two 
duodecimo volumes. 



8 



Chief 



108 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Chief Justice of England, and High Treasurer, 
created afterwards Earle of Marlborough, de- 
scended ; a lawgiver in the chief place of justice, 
and a preserver of venerable antiquity, whose noble 
thoughts were so fixed on virtue, and his discourses 
ymbellished with wisdome, and his heart with in- 
tegrity, that his words did never bite, nor his ac- 
tions wronge any man, to give him just cause of 
complaynt." 

Amongst several ancient monuments, in Becre- 
Ferris Church, is one, under an arched recess, of a 
cross-legged knight half reclined on his right side, 
with his right hand on his sword ; and another of a 
knight and his lady, under a richly ornamented arch 
in the chancel. Among the figures painted on the 
east window, is that of William Ferrers, who was 
probably the builder of this fabric, as he is repre- 
sented kneeling, and holding the model of a church 
hi his baud. 

BERRY POMEROY.] This place, situated in the 
hundred of Hayter, a mile and three quarters east- 
north-east from Totness, derives its name from the 
Pomeroys, a very considerable family in these parts. 
Ralph de Pomeroy, who came to England with 
William the Norman, and for his services was re- 
warded with fifty-eight lordships in this county, 
built a castle here, the magnificent ruins of which, 
seated on a rocky eminence, rising over a pellucid 
brook, now form, in combination with the other fea- 
tures of the scenery, one of the most delightful views 
in Devonshire. The approach to the castle, ob- 
serves Dr. Maton, in his Observations on the 
Western Counties, " is through a thick wood, ex- 
tending along the slope of a range of hills that en- 
tirely intercept any prospect to the south ; on the 
opposite side is a steep rocky ridge, covered with 
oak, so that the ruins are shut into a beautiful val- 
ley. The great gate, with the walls of the south 
front, the north wing of the court, or quadrangle, 
some apartments on the west side, and a turret or 
two, are the principal remain* of the building ; and 
these are so finely overhung with the branches of 
trees and shrubs which grow close to the walls, so 
beautifully mantled with ivy, ana so richly encrusted 
with moss, that they constitute the most picturesque 
objects that can be imagined : and when the sur- 
rounding sciuery is taken into the account, the 
noble mass of wood fronting the gate, the bold 
ridges rising in the horizon, and the fertile valley 
opening to the east, the ruins of Berry Pomeroy 
Castle- must be considered as almost unparalleled in 
thoi reflect." 

The posterity of Ralph de Pomeroy resided here 
till the reign of Edward the Sixth, when Sir Thomas 
Pomeroy sold the manor to Edward Seymour, Duke 
of Somerset, from whom it has descended to the 
present Duke of Somerset. 

Sierry Pomeroy Castlo, whose venerable ruins we 
have just mentioned, appears to have been originally 
quadrangular, and to have had but one entrance, 
was on the south side, between two hexagon 

* O 



towers, through a double gateway ; the first of which 
was machiolated, and strengthened by angular bas- 
tions : and having over it the Pomeroy arms, still 
visible. A small room over the gateway was pro- 
bubly the chapel : it is divided by a wall, supported 
by pillars and arches. From tho eastern tower is a 
fine view of the surrounding country. The ruins in 
the interior part, or quadrangle, are considerably 
more modern than the rest of the building. These 
appear to have belonged to a " magnificent struc- 
ture," commenced, says Prince, in his Worthies of 
Devonshire, by the, Seymours, at an expence of 
20,000/. but " never brought to perfection : for the 
west side of the mansion was never begun : what 
was finished may be thus described. Before the 
door of the Great Hall was a noble walk, whose 
length was the breadth of the court, arched over 
with curiously carved free-stone, supported in the 
fore part by several stately pillars of the same stone, 
of great dimensions, after the Corinthian order, 
standing on pedestals, haying cornices and friezes 
finely wrought. The apartments within were very 
splendid, especially the dining-room ; and many 
other of the rooms were well adorned with mould- 
ings and fret-work ; some 6"f whose marble clavils 
were so delicately fine, that they would reflect an 
object true and lively from a great distance. Not- 
withstanding which, it is now demolished, and all 
this glory lyeth in the dust, buried in its own ruins ; 
there being nothing standing but a few broken walls, 
which seem to mourn their own approaching fune- 
rals." The walls are formed of slate and appear to 
be rapidly decaying. The grounds round the castle 
consist of steep eminences, covered with oak and 
other trees. Even in the court, and remains of the 
fortress itself, trees of nearly a century's growth are 
flourishing in luxuriance, and compose, with the 
shrubs thickly scattered within the area, a scene 
highly beautiful. In the wars between Charles the 
First and the Parliament, this castle was disman- 
tled. 

Berry Pomeroy Church, which was built by one 
of the Pomeroy family, contains a splendid alabas- 
ter monument to the memory of Lord Edward Sey- 
mour, Knt. ,son to the Duke of Somerset ; Edward 
Seymour, Bart, and his Lady, the daughter of Sir 
Arthur Champernoune. The two first are repre- 
sented in arrrour ; the knight having a truncheon in 
his hand, and lying cross-legged. The lady is in 
a black dress, with the figure of a child, in a cradle, 
at her head, and at her feet another in a chair : be- 
low, are nine figures kneeling, with books open be- 
fore them. This monument was repaired by the late 
Duke of Somerset, the eighth lineal descendant of 
the Duke of Somerset the Protector. 

BICTON.] Bicton is sit.iated in the hundred of 
E'ist Bodleigh, three miles and three quarters west 
by south from Sidmouth. The manor was given by 
flenry the First to one John; surnamed Jauiter 
i'rom lus office, and the tenure by which this estate 
was held, that of keeping the prison for the county, 

a service, 



DEVONSHIRE. 



109 



at service which, on the erection of a new goal at 
Exeter some years ago, was commuted by the then 
Lord for the sum of 1000/. From the Janitors, the 
manor descended to Sir Thomas Dennis, who was 
knighted in Holland by the Earl of Leicester in 
1585. From Sir Thomas, it was conveyed, by the 
marriage of his daughter, to Sir Henry llolle, of 
Stevenstone, whose descendant is now the possessor. 
The mansion is a spacious building, situated in a 
pleasant park, covered with beech and oak trees, 
and well stocked with deer. The church is a neat i 
building, delightfully situated, and surroundad by a 
wood. Within, is an alabaster monument to the 
memory of Denys Roilc, Esf, . who died in 1638. 
The inscription, written by Dr. Fuller, is as fol- 
lows : 

His earthly part within this tombe doth reste, 

Who kept a court of honour in his breaste : 

Birth, beautie, wit, and wistlonie, sat as pieres, 

Till Death mistooke his virtues lor his years; 

Or else Heaven envy'tl Erin so rich a treasure, 

Wherein too tine the ware, too scant the measure, 

His mournful wife, her love to show in part, 

Tills tomb built here a better in her heart. 

Sweete babe, his hopeful heyre Heav'n grant this b:/on, 

Live but so well ; but, oh ! dye not so soon. 

BIDEFORD.] The ancient sea-port, market, and 
borough-town of Bideford, which anciently possess- 
ed the privilege of being represented in Parliament, 
is situated in the hundred of Shebbear, 40 miles 
north-west from Exeter, and 201| miles west by 
south from London. We have no mention of Bide- 
ford previously to the Conquest ; but the etymology 
of its name proves the existence of it in th Saxon 
times. Be, signifying situated, and ford, are Saxon 
words, and evidently the derivatives of By-the-ford, 
By-de-ford, and Bideford ; in all the different man- 
ners of which the town has been written. The 
etymology is the more certain, from there being 
a fording-place a little above the bridge, which 
was formerly the common passage for travel- 
lers. 

The greater part of the town occupies the decli- 
vity of a steep eminence, on the western bank of the 
river Torridge, which is here of considerable breadth, 
and with spring-tides rises to the height of eighteen 
feet. The other part of the town lies at the foot of 
a hill on the opposite side of the river. The general 
appearance of the houses is mean, from their being 
built of timber, brick, or mud, and covered witli bad 
slate or thatch ; but the streets are wide, and its 
sloping situation renders Bideford cleaner than the 
generality of sea-ports. The quay is convenient, 
being situated near the centre of the town, and the 
body of water is sufficient to bring up vessels of 
500 tons, except at ebb-tide, when almost half the 
channel of the river is left dry. The bridge was 
constructed in the fourteenth century, and is the 
largest in the county. It consists of twenty-four 
irregular stone arches, which were originally poiut- 

VOL. II. NO. 53. 



ed ; but, from various repairs, several of them are 
now circular. The extreme length is 677 feet : the 
bases of the piers Tare protected from the violence of 
floods, by large quantities of loose stones surround- 
ed by slates. One of the principal contributors to 
its erection, was Sir Theobald Granville, Knt. but 
the conduct of the bishop of the diocese, who grant- 
ed indulgences to all who gave money to aid the 
work, much forwarded the structure. Prince, in his 
Worthies of Devon, thus notices what used to be 
considered as the miraculous origin of this bridge : 
" At first the town of Bytheford had no other 
passage over the river there but by boats ; the 
Dreadth and roughness whereof upon times was 
such as did often put people in jepardy of their lives; 
and some were drowned, to the great grief of the 
inhabitants. To prevent whi'jh great inconveniences, 
some did divers times, and in sundry places, begin 
to build a bridge ; but no firm foundation after often 
proof being to be found, their attempt in that kind 
came to no effect. At this time Sir Richard Ger- 
nard, or Gurney, was parish priest of the place, who, 
as the story of that town hath it, was admonished by 
a vision in his sleep, to set on the foundation of a 
bridge near a rock which he should find rolled from 
the higher grounds upon the strand. This at first 
he esteemed as a dream ; yet, to second the same 
with some act, in the morning he went to sec the 
place, and found a huge rock there fixed, whose 
greatness argued its being in that place to be only 
the work of God, which not only bred admiration, 
but incited him to set forward so charitable a work. 
Upon this encouragement, he, eftsoons with Sir 
Theobald Granville, Knt. Lord of the Land, an 
especial furtherer of, and a great benefactor to that 
design, began the foundation of the bridge where it 
stands now." The bishop who assisted in promot- 
ing the design, appears to have boon Grandison. 
Numerous lands have been bestowed to keep the 
bridge in repair, the management of which is con- 
ducted by eighteen of the principal inhabitants, de- 
nominated feoffees. 

The market of Bideford, is holdcn on Tuesdays ; 
and it has fairs on the 14th of February, the 19th of 
July, and the 14t'a of November. The market-place 
is spacious ; and the town-hall, which was erected 
in 1698, is large and convenient, having two prisons 
for criminals and debtors beneath. The number of 
inhabitants, according to the returns of the Popula- 
tion Act of 1811, was 3,211; of these 1,829 were 
males, and 1,415 females. The number of houses 
was 650. 

During the Civil Wars, the inhabitants of this 
town very early declared for the Parliament, and a 
fort was erected on the highest ground on each side 
of the river, commanding that and the town. A 
small fort was also erected at Appledore, which 
completely secured the entrance of both the Bide- 
ford and Barnstaple rivers. The success of the 
insurgents, however, was not equal to their zeal ; 
2 E for, 



110 



DEVONSHIRE. 



for, on attempting to relieve Exeter, they received a 
severe defeat.* 

Bideford, in the year 1646, was ravaged by a 
plague, which appears to have been occasioned by 
the landing of a cargo of Spanish wool, an article 
which, at that time, constituted a principal part of 
the trade of the town. At this time, as we learn 
from Mr. Watkins, in his Essay towards a History 
of Bideford, the Mayor having deserted the town 
through fear, Mr. Strange, a native, and merchant 
of Bid'eford, " with a fortitude of mind, and a phi- 
lanthropy of heart, rarely equalled, took the very 
difficult and extremely hazardous office upon him- 
self; and, by the prudence and vigilance of his ma- 
nagement, prevented the infection from spreading to 
so great a degree and extent, as in all probability 
it would have done. He saw the sick, particularly 
the poor, properly taken care of, the dead decently 
buried ; the avenues to the town carefully guarded, 
to prevent the disease being carried into the country; 
mid performed every other office of the good Chris- 
tian, and the vigilant magistrate." Mr. Strange 
himself at length fell a victim to its ravages, and 
was buried in the church on the 13th of July, 
1616. 

Another curious incident in the history of this 
town, strongly marking the deplorable ignorance of 
the age, occurred about the middle of the year 1682. 
Three poor and friendless old women, named Tem- 
perance Lloyd, Mary Trembles, and Susannah Ed- 
wards, were accused of witchcraft ; . and so strong 
was the evidence given against them by their preju- 
diced neighbours, that after several long and singu- 
lar examinations, the magistrates of Bideford com- 
mitted them to Exeter goal. They were shortly 

* Mr. Watkins, in his Essay towards a History of Bideford, 
relates the particulars of this affair, nearly as follows: In the 
summer of 1643, Prince Maurice of Bohemia, with Sir John 
Berkley, at Hie head of a considerable army, invested Exeter; 
to preserve which, the friends to the Parliament were extremely 
solicitous, and none more so than those of Bideford, and the 
adjacent parts. To accomplish this desirable purpose; the 
Parliament forces at Barnslaple joined those of Bideford, which 
was then garrisoned by a considerable force, under the com- 
mand of a Colonel Bennet. Sir John Berkley being informed 
of their intentions, dispatched a regiment of horse, and some 
other troops, to impede their march, under the command of 
Colonel John Digby, who fixed his head quarters at Torring- 
lon, where he was soon joined by a regiment of foot from 
Cornwall ; so that his army consisted of 300 horse, and between 
COO and 700 loot. Had the Parliament forces, which consisted 
of 1200 foot and 30i> horsr, marched against the Royal Army 
before it was strengthened by Hie Cornish regiment, they would 
in ail probability have been the conquerors; but they wasted 
their time in preaching, pra\ ing, and seeking the Lord; till at 
length, alter assurances of certain victory from their preachers, 
they inarched out of Bideford in the morning of the second ot 
September, to attack the Philistines at Torrington. Colonel 
Dij'.by having received information of their inarch, advanced 
tp receive them at a little distance from the town ; but, after 
waifing some hours, and seeing no appearance of the enemy, he 
considered it as a false alarm, and therefore dismissed his troops 
to their quarters, except a guard of 150 men. In less than an 
hour, however, he. received information that the enemy were 
within the distance of half a mile; and immediately hastened to 



after tried, condemned, and executed. These wera 
the last sufferers under the detestable statutes en- 
acted against witchcraft. The strangest circum- 
stance attending this case, was the confession of the 
prisoners themselves, that much of the accusation 
brought against them was true. This confession, 
which nothing but wretched weakness of mind could 
have induced them to make, or their judges to be- 
lieve, was the ground of their conviction ; and even 
on the scaffold they acknowledged its justice. Th 
particulars of this extraordinary affair wore publish- 
ed under the title of " A True and Impartial Rela- 
tion of the Information against three Witches ; who 
were indicted, arraigned, and convicted, at the As- 
sizes holden for the County of Devon, at the Castle 
of Exeter, August 14th, 1682, with their several 
Confessions." The nature of the evidence appears 
by. the following passage, extracted from the infor- 
mation of Elizabeth Esstchaut, &c. " The said 
informant, upon her oath, s-iith, that, upon the 2d 
day of this instant July, the said Grace Thomas 
(one of the persons on whom the powers of witch- 
craft was supposed to have been exercised) then 
lodging in this informant's husband's house, and 
hearing her to complain of great pricking pains in 
one of her knees, she, this informant, did see her said 
knee, and observed that she had nine places in her 
knee which had been prickt ; and that every of th 
said pricks was as tho' it had been the prick of a 
thorn. Whereupon this informant upon the said 2d 
of July, did demand of the said Temperance Lloyd, 
whether she had any wax or clay in the form of a 
picture, whereby she had pricked and tormented the 
said Grace Thomas ? unto which the said Temper- 
ance made answer, that she had no wax or clay, but 



the spot where he had left the cavalry, and waited their approach 
in the morning. He did not then intend to engage the insur- 
gents, but merely to keep them in play till his whole force was 
collected; but having divided his small body of horse into 
parties, and distributed them into several little classes, from 
which there were gaps into the more open space occupied by 
the enemy, lie was directly attacked, by a party of fitly men, 
which obliged him to collect his own party, a. id come to action. 
The contest vas but short; for, through his admirable presence 
of mind, and undaunted courage, the rebel detachment were so 
well received, that they threw down their arms, and retreated 
to the main body. The Colonel having succeeded tlius fortu- 
nately, pursued his advantage, pushed forwards upon the 
enemy, who were atlacked with such fury by his men, that 
they gave way on all sides, and lied wilh the utmost precipita- 
tion. The whole glory <;f this victory w^is enjoyed by th<e 
Colonel's guard of horse, the foot only coming up in sufficient 
time to join in the pursuit. ' The action was so vigorous, 'says 
Lord Clarendon, ' that the swords of the Royalists were blunt 
with eliughter, and they were o\erburtheecl with prisoners.' 
The fugitives who escaped, told their friends, according to the 
language of the times, strange stories of the supernatural horrors 
and fears that fell upon them ; and that none of them saw above 
six of the enemy who engaged them. The next day, September 
the third, Bidetord, Barnstaple, and the fort of Appledore, 
smrendrred to the Royal Army, upon the promise of pardon, 
and the usual articles of capitulation, which the Colonel saw 
punctually observed ; and, much to his honour, preserved the 
town free from plunder and violence. 

confessed 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Ill 



confessed that she had only a piece of leather, which 
she had prick' d nine times." 

Bideford continued to increase its foreign com- 
merce till about the commencement of the last cen- 
tury, at which period its export trade to Newfound- 
laud exceeded every town but two in the kingdom, and 
its import was exceeded by one only. The neglect 
shown by the government to colonial purposes dur- 
ing the reign of Queen Anne, caused, however, a 
stagnation to mercantile affairs, and Bideford suf- 
fered considerably. This neglect was perhaps not 
worse than the unwise conduct of administration, 
which left the coasts exposed to the depredation of 
French privateers, who made so many valuable prizes 
in Bideford Bay, that they emphatically called it the 
Golden Bay. 

From 1700 to 1760, the chief article of importa- 
tion was tobacco ; greater quantities of which were, 
in some years, brought into this town than even into 
Liondon itself. The contest with America, however, 
destroyed this source of profit, and with it, the prin- 
cipal branches of foreign commerce. The number 
of vessels belonging to the port at this time, is about 
one hundred : these vary in burthen, from 20 to 250 
tons ; and are mostly employed in conveying coals 
and culm to the southern parts of the county ; in the 
exportation of oak-bark to Ireland and Scotland ; in 
the herring trade; and in the bringing fish from New- 
foundland. The greatest manufacture of Bideford, 
is that of coarse brown earthenware, the clay for 
which is obtained at Fremingtou, near Barnstaple, 
for the trifling sum of 2s. QfL per ton. 



* Sir Richard Granville, who conquered Glamorganshire in 
the reign of William Rufus, and the brave Sir Richard Gran- 
ville, who perished of the wounds he received in an engagement 
with the Spaniards in the year 1591, were both of this family ; 
as was also Sir Bevil Granville, who bravely fell in the Cause of 
Charles the First at the battle of Lansdown. The remarkable 
battle between Sir R. Granville and the Spaniards is thus related 
in Mr. Watkins's work, from which we have already quoted: 
In 15yl,the English court having intelligence that the rich licet 
which had continued in Spanish America frnm the fear of being 
captured by Sir John Hawkins and Sir Martin Frobisher, was 
on its return lo Europe, it was determined on, to send a strong 
squadron for the purpose of intercepting it at the Western 
Island-;. This fleet consisted of seven ships, of which Lord 
Thomas Howard was Admiral, and Sir RichardGranvillo Vice- 
Admiral. The Spanish court hearing, of the English design, 
Jilted out a fleet of fifty-five of their best men of war, to meet 
and protect the American ships. The English Admiral was 
informed of the approach of this formidable armament in the 
aiternoon of the 3lst ol August, while he lay at anchor under 
the island of Flores ; and immediately after receiving the 
intelligence, the enemy appeared in sight. TheEnglish squadron 
was greatly inferior to the Spaniards in numbers, and nrar half 
the men on board were ill of the scurvy. In consequence of 
this disproportion, Admiral Howard weighed anchor directly, 
and put lo sea, being followed by the rest of his squadron. Sir 
Richard Granville, in >he Revenge, was the last that v iMghed, 
on account of his waiting for several of his men who were CHI 
shore. The Admiral, and the other ships, gained the wind of 
the enemy with great difficulty ; and Sir Richard not being able 
to du it, was advised by the master to cut down his main sail, 
and heave about, trusting to the sailing of his ship, the Seville 
lyuadron being already on his weather bow. But he relused to 



Subsequently to the Conquest, the manor of Bide- 
ford was bestowed, in conjunction with Kilkhamp- 
ton, in Cornwall, on Richard de Grenaville, a Nor- 
man Knight, who accompanied the Conqueror to 
England. From him descended the illustrious fa- 
mily of the Granvilles,* who continued to be the 
proprietors of the lordship for more than five hun- 
dred years. On the death of William Henry Gran- 
ville, third Earl of Bath, in the year 1711, the family 
estates were divided among his co-heirs, and many 
of them wore afterwards sold ; but the manor of 
Bideford was not disposed of till about 1750, when 
it was bought by John Cleveland, Esq. one of whose 
descendants is the present proprietor. 

Bideford, though described as a borough-town in 
a charter granted by Edward the First to one of the 
Granvilles, and afterwards made returns to several 
Parliaments, was of so little consequence in the time 
oi'JLeland,that he merely notices the river and bridge, 
terming the latter " a notable work ;" and Camden 
only remarks its being very populous. In the time 
of the latter, notwithstanding, it must have risen to 
some consequence, as it participated in the newly- 
opened trade with America and Newfoundland; and 
was incorporated by Queen LJiizabeth ; by whose 
charter the government of the town was vested in a 
Mayor, five Aldermen, seven capital Burgesses, a 
Recorder, Town Clerk, and two Serjeants at Mace ; 
and a weekly market and three annual fairs were 
granted. By this charter and other privileges, the 
trade of Bideford increased ; but the patronage of 
Sir Richard Granville, who was the kinsman, and 

turn his back on the enemy, saying, ' Th:.t he would much 
rather die, than leave such a mark of dishonour on himself, his 
country, and the Queen's ship.' Abiding by tiiis heroic deter- 
mination, he was soon surrounded by the enemy, and his single 
ship engaged with the whole Spanish fleet of' fifty-three sail, 
having ten thousand men. In this extraordinary fight, which 
began a'jout three in the afternoon, ami lasted till the break of 
day the next morning, Sir Ruhard repulsed the enemy fifteen 
times, though they alternately changed tin ir vessels and men. 
At the commencement of the action hi- received a wound ; but 
he would not quit the deck till eh-vi-n at night, when having 
received another wound, he was constrained to be carried down 
to be dressed. While this was doing, he was wounded by a shot 
in the head, and the Surgeon killed by his side. The English 
now began to want powder; their small arms were totally de- 
stroyed ; and out of the ship's crew, which at the beginning of 
the action consisted but of one hundred and'three, -forty were 
killed, and nearly all the rest wounded ; the masts were all shot 
away, so that nothing but a hulk war, left above water. Sir 
Richard then advised t] le remainder of his company to trust to 
(he merry of God, raiher than to that of the Spaniard, by blow- 
ing up the ship. To this the master gunner and several" of the 
mariners agreed ; but the rest opposed it, and the ship was 
surrendered. Sir Richard was removed into the ship of the 
Spanish Admiral, where, though every attention was paid to 
him, he dieii of his wounds in three days. H's last words were, 
' Here die I, Richard Granville, with a joyful and quiet mind ; 
for that I have end-'d my life as a true 'soldier ought to do, 
fighting for his country, Queen, religion, and honour : my soul 
willingly departing from this body, leaving behind the lasting 
fame of having behaved as every valiant soldier is bound to i!o.' 
The loss o! the Spaniards in this contest consisted of four ships, 
and above a thousand men. 

participator 



lit 



DEVONSHIRE. 



participator with Sir Walter Raleigh in the disco- 
very of Virginia and Carolina, and who had fixed 
his residence here, greatly extended it. The trade 
and population augmenting, a new charter was ob- 
tained in 1610, which confirmed that of Elizabeth, 
and increased the number of Aldermen to seven, 
that of the Burgesses to ten, and invested the Com- 
mon Council with the privilege of making bye- 
laws. The Mayor, Recorder, and one of the Alder- 
men were constituted Justices of the Peace wit 1. in 
the borough. 

Bideford Church is a large building, apparently 
erected about the fourteenth century ; its form, 
which was originally that of a cross, is now ex- 
tremely irregular from the various alterations it has 
undergone. It has three galleries and an organ, 
the latter built by the corporation about the year 
1728. The monuments in it are few, and those not 
deserving particular notice. That to the memory of 
Mr. John Stmnge, the gentleman whose philan- 
thropy has been noticed in the account of the plague, 
is said to have been erected by a sea-captain, 
through gratitude for the relief Mr. Strange afford- 
ed him after shipwreck. The charity and benevo- 
lence of Mr. Strange is spoken of by the inhabitants 
with enthusiasm : his bust is placed in an oval niche 
in the upper part of the monument. Bequests have 
been left by various persons for the use of the poor ; 
and a house of industry has been erected for their 
more certain relief. A free grammar-school was 
established here about the year 160!) for the educa- 
tion often boys appointed by the corporation. Here 
is likewise a free and Sunday-school, in which a 
great number of children are instructed. 

Among the distinguished persons to whom the 
town of Bideford has given birth, may particularly 
be mentioned Dr. Shebbeare,* and Mr. Stucley, a 
descendant of the celebrated chaplain to Oliver 
Cromwell, t 

A beach of pebbles of considerable breadth and 
depth, and nearly three miles long, is at Northam 
Burrows, about a mile and half north of Bideford. 
This beach appears to have been formed by the sea, 
which has inundated a number of acres of land lying 



along the coast. 



* Jolm Shebbeare, M. D. and a political writer of some emi- 
nenqe, was born at Bideford in 1709, and educated there under 
the learned Zachary Mudge: after which he served an appren- 
ticeship to a surgeon and apothecary. On the expiration of 
his time he carried on business for himself at Bristol. In 1740, 
he removed to London, but acquired no celebrity till 1754, 
when he published a satirical novel, called, the Marriage Act ; 
and another, called, Lydia, or Filial Piety. He. then com- 
menced a Series of Letters to the People of England, for the 
seventh of which he was pilloried and imprisoned two years ; 
but in the succeeding reign he obtained a pension of 200/. per 
annum, and from that time employed his pen in defence of 
government. He died on the first of August h, 1788. His 
other works are a History of the Sumatrans, two vols. Practice 
of Physic, two vols. and the celebrated novel of Chrysal, or the 
Adventures of a Guinea, four vols. 

j- Thomas Stucle}. This singular character was born at 
Bineford about the year 1680 ; to which, after studying in the 



BORRINGDON."] Borringdon, situated about five 
miles east of Plymouth, was the ancient seat of the 
Parker family ; but it now belongs to Lord Bor- 
ringdon, and is occupied by a farmer. The 
house, which is nearly four hundred years old, has 
been greatly altered and reduced in size since it was 
first built. A fine hall, and a few other good rooms, 
however, are still preserved. The park, which is 
close to the house, contains about 500 acres, com- 
prehending a variety of beautiful scenery. The 
present noble proprietor has added considerable 
plantations to the rich mass of ancient woods, which 
extend on the northern side of the park as far as 
Dartmoor. The forest of Dartmoor formerly 
abounded with wild deer, but they are now nearly 
exterminated. Some of them, however, entered this 
park a few years ago, and remained with the fallow 
deer during several months. It was in the early 
part of the eighteenth century, that Lady Catherine 
Parker (daughter of Earl Paulett, Secretary of State 
to Queen Anne) transferred the family residence from 
Borringdon to Saltram. 

Bow.] Bow, or Nymett Tracey, is a-mean little 
market-town in the hundred of North Tawton, seven 
miles and a quarter west by north from Crediton. 
The court of the duchy of Lancaster is usually kept 
here. Thursday is the market-day ; and the fairs 
are on Holy Thursday and the 22d of November. 
The population of Bow does not much exceed 
700. 

BRADNINCH.] Bradninch, anciently caHedBraines, 
is situated in the Inindred of Hnyriuge, two miles 
and three quarters smith-west from Columpton. 
This town, the population of which is upwards of 
1300, sent two members to Parliament so late as the 
reign of Henry VII. but on complaint that the inha- 
bitants were not able to pay them their wages (two 
shillings per day) they were excused on the pay- 
ment of five marks. It is a barony, which is a par- 
cel of the duchy of Cornwall, whose Dukes were 
always styled Barons of Braines ; and the Mayor 
accounts every year for its privileges, with the 
officers of the Dukes of Cornwall. A destructive 
fire is said to have occasioned the decay of this 
town. 



Inner Temple, he retired ; and living very secluded endeavour- 
ed to discover the quadrature of the circle, and the perpetual 
motion. His application to abstract studies, and the little 
exercise which he took, brought on hypochondriac disorders, 
and was the cause of his uumerous eccentricities. Among 
others, he cherished the idea that he should cither die for want, 
or of some epidemic disorder ; his clothes were always ragged 
and rilihy, and, from fear of infection, he would never wear 
new ones. From the same cause, and a dislike to company, he 
refused the visits of every one, even of his brother and sister. 
If he condescended at any time to receive money, it was always 
put into a basin of water, in which it remained some hours, and 
was afterwards concealed in some obscure corner, or added to 
the heap of gold and silver which he had accumulated in his 
bedchamber; through which, by frequently walking backwards 
and forwards, he had formed two paths. His death occurred 
somewhere near 1738, at the age of 57. 

2 BRATTOrf. 



DEVONSHIRE. 



JI3 



BRATTON.] Bratton CloYelly, or Bracton, situ- 
ated in the hundred of Litton, nine miles west-south- 
~\vest from Oakhaiapton, is celebrated as the birth- 
place of Henry de Bracton, an eminent civilian of 
the thirteenth century.* 

Bratton Fleming is situated in the hundred of 
Braunton, six miles east-north-east from Baru- 
staple. 

BRAUNTON.] Braunton, which gives name to a 
hundred, is situated five miles west-north-west from 
Barnstaple. St. Brannoc, to whom the church is 
dedicated, and from whom the place appears to 
have derived its name, is said to have converted the 
Britons here, Anno Domini 310. North-west of 
Braunton a great quantity of land has been over- 
flown by the sands ; and trees of thirty feet in length 
have been dug up. 

BRENT.] The market-town of South Brent is 
situated in the hundred of Stanborough, 7| miles 
south-west by south from Ashburton, and 199| west- 
south-west from London. It has a population of 
1230 persons. Saturday is the market-day ; and 
here are fairs on the last Tuesday in April and the 
last Tuesday in September. 

BRENT TOR.] The little village of Brent Tor, 
situated in the hundred of Tavistock, four miles 
north from the town of that name, appears to have 
originated in circumstances of a somewhat remark- 
able nature. Brent Tor is a vast mass of craggy 
rock, which rises in the road between Tavistock and 
Lydford, and, when seen from the British Channel, 
forms a very conspicuous sea-mark. The summit 
is often wrapped in clouds ; but when the weather 
is clear the prospect it commands is extensive and 
beautiful, and ships lying in Plymouth Harbour are 
plainly distinguished. On the top stands the church 
belonging to the village of Brent, which, like a num- 
ber of churches similarly situated, is dedicated to 
St. Michael. " This practice," observes Mr. War- 
ner, " seems to have arisen with our ignorant an- 
cestors, from a confusion of the two ideas of dig- 
nity and elevation ; this saint being the chief or head 
of all the angelic band." Tradition accounts for 
the erection of this edifice in so strange a situation 
by the following story : A merchant, returning to 
his native laud, with considerable wealth, was in the 
greatest, danger of being shipwrecked, and, in the 
moment when destruction seemed inevitable, vowed, 
that if Providence should preserve his life, he would 
build a church on the first land he saw. His vow 
was heard, the tempest abated, and the first land 
that presented itself was the Tor, on which he erect- 
ed the building. " The wild appearance of the 
country arotui I this spot," observes Mr. Warner, 
" prevented it in former times from being visited by 
strangers ; and so trifling was the intercourse be- 
tween it and the populous and more cultivated parts 

'I his gentleman, by indefatigable study, attained great 
proficiency in his knouledue of the common law ; and was 
made by Henry 11F. one of his Itinerant Judges. He died in 
VOL. II. NO. 53. 



of England 200 years ago, that Fuller, in his Wor- 
thies, describes the inhabitants of a village near 
this church as a lawless tribe, wild as the Scy- 
thians." 

BRIXHAM.] The parish of Brixham is situated 
on the English Channel in the hundred of Ilaytor, 
twenty-five miles south from Exeter, nnd 198 west- 
south-west from London. Its population appears 
to be rapidly on the increase : in 1801, the number 
was 3,071 ; and, in 1811, 4,341. Great improve- 
ments have also been effected in the trade, buildings, 
&c. of Brixham, which was originally only a little 
fishing town. Its receut advantages may be traced 
chiefly to the circumstance of Tor Bay having, dur- 
ing the late wars in particular, been a great naval 
station. The parish now appears to comprise two 
villages ; Brixham Church Town, and Brixham 
Quay. At the former is a remarkable ebbing and 
flowing spring, called Layvvell, which has been thus 
particularly described by the Editor of the Tour 
through Great Britain : " I had so much patience 
as to sit by it for fourteen hours together, and care- 
fully observe its periods, and the quantity of its eb- 
bing and flowing. The situation of this spring is 
pretty near the foot of a large ridge of hills, and the 
quantity of water that flows from it is considerable. 
It falls into a large basin, where it is very easy to 
observe (by lying in an inclining piano) the perpen- 
dicular height of its ebbing and flowing, as well as 
Ihe time between high and low water. By a careful 
observation of a great mini her of fluxes and refluxes, 
I find, that when it proceeds regularly, (as it does 
sometimes for eight hours together) it is eleven 
times in an hour: for thus the 10th of July, 1733, 
I observed it high water at 8 h. 31' in the morning, 
and continued to observe it until 3 h. 3' in the after- 
noon ; in which interval of seven hours it had ebbed 
and flowed exactly seventy-seven times. Them 
happens sometimes an intermission of those cbbings 
and Howiiigs ; for in the morning of the same day, 
I observed that from 6 h. 37' to h. 58', it had no 
motion at all ; and at another time I found it to in- 
termit for an hour, or more. The basin which re- 
ceives the water, contains, as I guess, about twenty 
feet in area ; and the perpendicular height of the 
flowing, when I observed it, (which was in the- mid- 
dle of summer, an:i at a dry season) was various, 
vi/. sometimes an inch and three quarters, and at 
other times not above half an inch ; but generally 
about one inch and one-eighth." 

BUCKFASTLEIGH.] -This is a considerable village, 
in the hundred of Stanborough, three miles south- 
west by south from Ashburton. It appears to have 
arisen from an abbey which was formerly established 
in the parish. Leland says it was founded by Ethel- 
wardus, son of William Pomcrui, during) the reign 
of Henry the First, and was endowed witii some re- 

the reign of Eduard Ihe t'irt ; but the lirs; edition of his works 
on the Laws and Customs ol England was not priuted till 156y. 



2 F 



venues 



114 



DEVONSHIRE. 



by Richard Banzan, rated at the Dissolution 
at 166.'. 11.?. -2d. Many of the houses, and a large 
manufactory, arc built with materials from the ruins of 
the abbey, a lew ivy-clad fragments of which are still 
remaining. The old parish church is situated on a 
high hill, north of the village. Jt has two small cha~- 
pels on the north and south sides. 

BucKLAND-MoNACHonuM.] This village, situat- 
ed about a mile north-east from Buckland Abbey, 
from which it appears to have derived its name, is 
in the hundred of Roborongh, four miles and a quar- 
ter south by east from Tavistock. It is particularly 
entitled to notice on account of its handsome church, 
and the numerous elegant monuments of the Drakes 
and Ileathfielfls, which that edifice contains. The 
church consists of a nave, two side aisles, two tran- 
septs, and a fine tower, with octagonal turrets and 
Einnacles. At the east end of the north aisle, is a 
eautiful marble monument from the chissel of John 
Bacon, R. A. in the year 1795, to the memory of 
the venerable and illustrious Lord Jleathfield, the 
brave defender of Gibraltar.* It is executed with 
much historical taste. " Below is a figure of Bri- 
tannia, holding the model of the gate of a fortress, 
inscribed plus ultra ; and a boy, with a key and a 
palm branch, holding a shield. On the monument 
are four has reliefs, representing, first, a piece of 
ordnance, with a lighted match : second, a furnace 
for heating red-hot shot, cannons, culverins, &c. 
third, Lord Heathfield directing military operations ; 
fourth, floating batteries on fire, and the drowning 
sailors rescued from the waves." The following is 
the inscription : 

Sacred to the Memory of 

GEORGE AUGUSTUS ELLIOT, BARON HEATH- 
FIELD, OF GIBRALTAR, 

Knight of the Bath, General of His Majesty's Forces, and 

Governor of Gibraltar. 
ile was the seventh Son of Sir Gilbert Elliot, Bart, of 

Stobs, in the County of Roxburgh, in Scotland. 
The Universisy of Lei/den enriched his Mind witli Sconce, 

ajid formed his 

Taste for Literature and the Polite Arts. 
The Bias of his Genius soon inclined him to the Profession of 

Aims in which 

He rose by regular gradation to the highest Eminence, 
And at lenaih closed a brilliant Career 

Wiili immortal Glory. 
Germany beheld him in the War of seven Years, discharging 

all the Duties of a Gallant Officer. 
The British Cavalry owed to him a System of Dicipline 

that made him 
The Pride of their Country. 

The Havannah, the Metropolis of the Island of Cuba, 
Saw him among the Officers who levelled her boasted 

Fortifications, and conquered by their Valour. 

Gibraltar was reserved to crown him with unfaded Laurels : 

Though closely pressed during a Siege that lasted three Years 

without Intermission, 
He remained Invincible. 

The Spectacle which he there exhibited to the Eyes of 
France and Spain, and to the 



* This' nobleman is said to have been remarkably abste- 
mious ; his constant food being vegetables, and his drink water. 



Amphitheatre of Princes, who beheld the glorious Scene, 

will be an eternal Memorial of 

British Courage, and British Humanity. 

GENERAL ELLIOT derived no hereditary Honors from 

his Ancestors; 

His Titles were earned by Services to his Country. 
He ma'rried ANN POLEXFKN DRAKE, Daughter of 

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE, Bart. 

\Vlio lies interred near this Spot: 

And by her left a Daughter, who was married to 

John Truyion Fuller, Esc/.' 

And an only Son, now LORD HEATHFIELD, 

Who has erected this Monument to the Virtue which he admired. 

History will tell the rest. 
He died July 6lh, 1790, Aged 72 Years. 

At a little distance from the monument just de- 
scribed, is a small mural tablet, presenting the figure 
of truth leaning over an urn. The following inscrip- 
tion appears below : 

" In a Vault beneath are interred the Remains of 
SIR FRANCIS HENRY DRAKE, Bart, of Buckland 
Abbey, in the County of Devon. He died on the 
9lh of Feb. 1794, aged 70 years. His Descent was 
illustrious, being lineally descended from the great 
Naval Warrior of the 16th century. His natural and 
acquired Endowments were such, that had the 
Strength of his Constitution been equal to the Powers 
of his Mind, he might justly have aspired to the first 
Offices of State. He was Clerk Comptroller to the 
Board of Green Cloth, in the Reigns of their Majesties 
King George the Second, and King George the Third ; 
and for more than Twenty Years immediately pre- 
ceding his death, was Master of the King's House- 
hold ; the Duties of which Stations he discharged 
with Fidelity to the King, and Honor to himself. In 
Testimony of the Respect due to his Memory, his 
Nephew, the Right Honourable Francis Augustus, 
Lord Heathfield, Baron of Gibraltar, caused this 
Monument to be erected." 

Buckland Abbey or Place, one of the residences 
of Lord Heathfield, stands on the eastern banks of the 
Tavy. Anciently there stood at this place a monas- 
tery of Cistercians, founded by Auiicia, wife of 
Baldwin de Rivers, Earl of Devon, and daughter of 
Gilbert de Clare, in the year 1278, the yearly re- 
venue of which, at the Dissolution, according to 
Dugdale, was 211/. 17s. Qd. The site was subse- 
quently granted to Richard Greynfield. Frequent 
alterations have nearly destroyed the ancient ap- 
pearance of the fabric, but in some parts its monas- 
tic features are still visible. An original portrait of 
Sir Francis Drake, Anno Dom. 1594, setatis sure 53, 
is still preserved in the house ; with a framed copy 
of his patent of arms granted by Elizabeth in 1581. 
There is likewise a full-length of him ; with a sword 
and an old drum which accompanied him in his 
celebrated voyage. 

BUDEAUX, SAINT.] St. Budeaux, anciently call- 
ed Budeokshed, and now corruptly Budshed, is 
situated in the hundred of Roborough, four miles 
and a quarter north-west by north from Plymouth. 
It lies near the Tamar, on an eminence which corn- 
He never allowed himself more than four hours' sleep at a 
time. 

rounds 



DEVONSHIRE). 



110 



mands several delightful prospects. It appears to 
have derived its ancient name from the respectable 
family of Budeokshed, who possessed the manor for 
fourteen generations ; and one of whom, Thomas 
Budeokshed, served the office of Sheriff of the 
County in the reign of Henry VI. The manor 
went, by marriage, to Sir William Gorges or 
Georges, whose last descendant is said to have been 
the celebrated patriot and loyalist Georges, who com- 
manded the Chouans in Bretagne, during the latter 
part of the French Revolution, and who subsequently 
fell a victim to the blood-thirsty tyranny of the fal- 
len usurper Buonaparte. The manor, which has 
passed through two or three other families, is now, 
or was lately, the property of G. H. Clarke, Esq. 
The manor-house, now in a state of rapid decay, 
and inhabited only by a farmer, is a very ancient and 
venerable building. 

The present church of St. Budeaux was erected, 
with the materials of an elder structure, which stood 
in an unhealthy situation, near the water's edge, by 
Robert Budeokshed, Esq, somewhere near the year 
1400. It is a plain and simple fabric standing on a 
pleasant elevation, and containing several monu- 
ments of the Georges who lie within its walls. The 
Rev. Thomas Alcock,* a gentleman of much eccen- 
tricity, was rector of this parish, where he officiated 
upwards of sixty years. 

CADHAY.] Cadhay, situated in the parish and 
hundred of Ottery St. Mary, was anciently a seat of 
the Cadhay family, from which it went, by marri- 
age, to the Haydons, and was afterwards the re- 
sidence and property of William Peere Williams, 
Esq. the well-known editor of the Law Reports. t 

CHAGFORD.] Chagford, one of the stannary 
towns, and the place where the principal mining 
concerns of the county are transacted, is situated in 
the hundred of Wonford, nine miles and a half south- 
east by east from Oakhampton. It is an ancient 
market-town, lying near theTeign,at the foot of some 
bold and picturesque hills. Antecedent to the Con- 
quest, the manor was in the possession of Dodo, the 
Saxon ; but was afterwards given by the Conqueror 
to the Bishop of Constance in Normandy. Hugh 
de Chagford, Knight, held it in the reign of Henry 
III. and from him, after having passed through va- 
rious families, it came to Sir John Whyddon, one 
of the Justices of the King's Bench in the reign of 

* One of the most distinguishing traits in this gentleman's 
character was a rigid penuriousness, which deprived him of 
many of the comforts of life. " The homeliness of his dwell- 
ing no description can exceed : every article of modern conve- 
nience was excluded. His drawing-room was a miserable bed- 
chamber, with walls that once were white-washed, and where 
nothing appeared in opposition to their simplicity. Here he 
boiled his coffee, toasted his cakes, and entertained his guests 
at the same time ; who forgot, in the charms of his conversation, 
the wretched apartment they were in, and the vellow time- 
worn bed on which some of them perhaps were obliged to sit 
instead of a sofa. His sermons abounded with Latin and Greek 
quotations, and passages from the English Poets : even the 
treasures of private epistolary correspondence contributed to 



' Mary, and who was buried in Chagford Church. 
| Not long since it was in the possession of a farmer. 
! The charter, by which a market and two annual fairs 
i were held, was destroyeil by a fire in the latter part 
j of the seventeenth century. According to the re- 
turn of 1811, the number of inhabitants in this pa- 
rish, was 1,197. 

CHUDLEIGH.] Chudleigh, situated in the hun- 
dred of Exmiuster, nine miles and a half south- 
south-west from Exeter, was a small but neat town, 
for which the privilege of holding a weekly market 
on Saturday, and two annual fairs, was purchased 
by the Bishops of Exeter, who had a magnificent 
palace about a quarter of a mile to the south. The 
houses were chiefly disposed in one long street, at 
the western extrt mity of which was a small white- 
washed church, containing some monuments of the 
Courteuay family. On the morning of the 22d of 
May, 1807, a tremendous calamity befell this little 
town, the greater part of which was destroyed by- 
fire. The conflagration began in a bake-house, and 
the explosion of a quantity of gunpowder contribut- 
ed to extend the flames among the thatched houses, 
of which the place was principally composed, so that 
all attempts to check their fury proved ineffectual. 
The only fire engine in the place yvas consumed. 
The church fortunately escaped, and served as a re- 
fuge to the inhabitants, not one of whom, however, 
is known to have perished. The total number of 
houses destroyed by the conflagration was 180, be- 
sides outhouses, many of which were of greater 
value than the dwelling-houses, and the total loss 
amounted, as nearly as could be ascertained, to 
70,000/. From a very liberal subscription which 
was raised for the relief of the inhabitants, this 
town is now in a renovated state ; and in proof that 
it has not been deserted in consequence of its de- 
struction, it may be mentioned, that its popula- 
tion, which, in 1801, was only 1786, had in- 
creased, in 1811, to 1832. At the latter period 
the entire number of houses in the parish was 
about 390.J 

Lord Clifford, of Ugbrooke, is the present Lord 
of the Manor of Chudleigh : it formerly abounded 
with wood and timber : and the north-east side of 
the parish is still called Chudleigh Woods. The 
neighbourhood is celebrated for its cyder : a single 
orchard of three acres, which stands near the town, 

the instruction of his congregation." His Memoirs of Dr. 
Nathan Alcock, his brother, is well known to the literary 
world. 

f Mr. Williams died in the year 1706, and was buried in 
the church of St. Mary Ottery, "where a small mural tablet, by 
Bacon, was erected to his memory in the year 1794. 

t It is remarkable that many of the towns in Devonshire 
have been entirely consumed by fire : insomuch that the in- 
surance offices always charge property in this county with ad- 
ditional insurance, and never expect to hear of a single house 
consumed by fire, but of a whole village or town. This is 
probably owing to the frequent use of thatch for the roots of 
the buildings. 

8 is 



116 



DEVONSHIRE. 



is said to have yielded a sufficient quantity of apples 
for eighty hogsheads. The adjacent country is emi- 
nent for the beautiful views it affords. 

Mr. Polwhele supposes that Chudleigh Rock, 
about half a mile from the town, is " one of the most 
striking inlitnd rocks in the island." Its eastern 
aspect is bold, broad, and almost perpendicular, and 
appears one solid mass of marble ; to the north-west 
it is more rushed, and an impetuous stream, dash- 
ing from a hollow of the rock over the rude frag- 
ments that impede its progress, forms a romantic 
water-fall. Warner, mentioning the immense masses 
of lime-stone of which the Chudleigh rock is form- 
fid, observes, that " Nature, who ornaments with 
incomparable taste, has relieved the flat broad face 
of these prodigious elevations with mountain plants, 
scattering them down the steep ; or making amends 
for their absence, by throwing an elegant drapery of 
ivy over the parts where she has denied her trees." 
From the most elevated part of the rock, the views 
are very rich ; the scenery is composed of fine hang- 
ing woods ; and in some places the branches of a 
picturesque oak form a sort of natural canopy for 
the contemplative spectator. Midway down the cliff, 
is a large cavern, the gloomy recesses of which are 
said in the traditions of the peasantry to be inhabit- 
ed by Pixies, or Pisgies. a race of supernatural 
beings, " invisibly small." The entrance to the 
cavern is by a natural arch, about twelve feet wide, 
and ten high: the passage continues nearly of the same 
dimensions for about ninety feet, when it suddenly 
diminishes to nearly six feet wide, and four high, 
and still decreasing in size, extends about forty-five 
teet further. It then expands into a spacious cham- 
ber, which dividing into two compartments, runs off 
in different directions : the. rock drooping, neither 
of them can be pursued to any great distance ; but 
tradition asserts, that a dog which had been put into 
one of them, came out at an aperture in Hotter rock, 
about three miles distant. Various quarries have 
been opened in this rock, and a kihi erected for the 
burning of the lime-stone, which is of superior qua- 
lity, and employs a great number of hands. 

CHUMLEIGH.] The little market-town of Chum- 
leigh, or Chimleigh, is situated in the hundred of 
Witheridge, twenty-one miles north- west from Exe- 
ter. The market is on Wednesday, and it has a 
fair en the first of August. The population is about 
1340. Risdoii observes, that " This place is re- 
markable for the seven prebends sometyme there : 
the manner how they were will hardly persuade cre- 
ditt. One inhabitant of this towne (for so the tale 
runneth) being a poore man, had many children, and 
thought himselfe too much blest in that kinde, 



wherefore, to avoid the charge that was likely to 
grow that way, he absented himself seven years from 
his wife ; when returning, and accompanying her as 
before, she was within one yeare after delivered of 
seven r male children at one byrth, which made the 
poore man think himselfe utterly undone, and there- 
by dispaireing, put them into a baske.tt, and hasteth 
to the river with intent to drown them ; but Divine 
Providence following him, occasioned the Lady of 
the Land, coming at that instant in this way, to de- 
mand him what he carryed in his baskett, who re- 
plied, that he had whelpes, which she desired to see, 
proposing to choose one of them, who, upon sight, 
discovering they were children, compelled him to 
acquaint her with the circumstance ; whom, when 
she had sharply rebuked for such his inhumanity, 
forthwith commanded them to be taken from him, 
and put to nurse, then to schole ; and consequently 
being come to man's estate, provided a prebendship 
for every of them in this parishe : but these eliemo- 
zinary acts of hers are almost vanished ; togeather 
with a free-school there founded by the charitable 
bounty of the Earl of Bedford."* 

Chumleigh Church was originally collegiate, and 
the rectory has still four prebends annexed to it. A 
dreadful storm in the month of July, 1797, did consi- 
derable damage to this structure ; and so great was the 
force of the lightning, that one stone weighing more 
than 200 pounds was carried by it from the south- 
east pinnacle completely over the tower. 

The manor of Chumleigh formerly descended 
from the Barons of Oakhampton to the Courteuays, 
Earls of Devon. On the attainder of the Marquis 
of Exeter, in the reign of Henry VIII. it came with 
his other estates to the crown, and was bestowed oil 
the Earl of Bedford, one of whose family gave 
it to the daughter of his wife, the widow of Lord 
Grey. 

CLOVELLY.] The little village of Clovelly is situ- 
ated in the hundred of Ilartland, eleven miles and a 
quarter west by south from Bideford (to which it is 
an appendage) on a romantic steep adjoining the 
sea. " This place," observes Watkins, " is very 
curious and deserves observation. It is built on the 
side of a steep rock, to which the houses seem joined 
like pigeon huts against a wall. At the bottom 
there is a small pier. The place is famous for the 
best herrings taken in the Channel." Above th 
cliffs, to the south-east of the village, are the re- 
mains of an encampment, called Clovt'lly Dykes. 
These works are of a square form ; but when, or 
by whom they were constructed is uncertain. 

The manor was anciently in the Gifford family, 
but in the reign of Richard II. it was sold to Sir 



* Sunns, Garon, and some other Chronologers, relate a story 
of a l.uly of I'nm.'iice, called Irmentrude, wife of Isembard, 
Count of Altorf, who being broiu lit to bed of twelve sons, 
woui '. have caused eleven to be drowm d in the river. They 
add, that [sembard meeting 'hi' woman who carried them, ask- 
ed her what she had in her baJtel : the woman answered, they 



were liltle whelps which she was going to drown. Isembanl 
was resolved to see them, and having discovered (lie mailer, 
took the children and put them to nur*e, and when the\ >n:re 
thrown up, piesented them all alive to his wife; in meinory of 
which the iamily assumed the name of Whelps, which it still 
retains. 

John 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Jolm Gary, whose family constructed the harbour 
nd pier, it now belongs to Sir J tunes Haiulin, 
Bart. 

Clovelly Court is a neat mansion, which was 
erected on the site of a more ancient structure, con- 
sumed by fire about five-and-twenty years ago. 
The views from the house and grounds are particu- 
larly fine. 

CLYST HOVSF..] This mansion, situated about 
four miles from Exeter, was, previously to the Dis- 
solution, a palace of the Bishops of that see. 
Though some portion of its ancient grandeur has 
been destroyed by the removal of the gateway, it is 
still a large and venerable building. A great extent 
of country is seen from the front. 

COLLIPRIEST HOUSE.] This mansion, standing 
in a pleasant spot to the south of Tiverton, was for- 
merly in the possession of the Blundell family, but 
Thomas Winsloe, Esq. who rebuilt the mansion a 
short time since, is the present proprietor. It is 
situated on the banks of the Exe, having a lawn in 
front, and the back ground ornamented with a num- 
ber of fine elms and other trees. 

COLUMPTON.] Columpton, or Columbton, which, 
according to Risdon, " is the chiefest place on the 
river Culme, and was the King's demesne in the 
Saxon heptarchy," is situated in the hundred of 
Hayridge, twelve miles north-east by north from 
Exeter. The parish comprises four villages, viz. 
JLangford, Mutterton, Ponsford, and Weaver. The 
inhabitants have generally a procession once a year 
in which at Ponsford they mark the boundaries of a 
stream that waters the town, and see that the water 
course is in order. A water bailiff is appointed once 
a year, who has a salary for taking charge of the 
stream. 

The town of Columpton consists chiefly of one 
long street, badly paved, and the central part is in- 
convenienced by some old shambles. The turnpike 
road from Bath to Exeter passes through this street, 
which gives the town some advantages, and from its 
woellen manufactories it appears a commercial 
place. It has many well-built houses, though the 
dwellings of the labouring classes are principally 
built with cobb walls. Ttie town is governed by 
one high and four petty constables. Its principal 
manufactures are of broad cloths, serge's, and kersy- 
meres. 

Columpton Church, the only ornament the town 
can boast, is a fine structure, dedicated to the Vir- 
gin Mary, having a nave; chancel, three aisles, and a 
lofty tower at the western ettd. The inside is de- 
corated with a richly carved roof, and a beautiful 
rood-loft which separates the nave from the chancel. 
The south aisle was erected by John Lane, a clothier 
of this town, on whose tomb the following inscrip- 
tion appears : 



* Translation.-Hete lies John Lane, merchant, who, with 

VOL. II. NO. 54. 



" Hie Jacct Johannes Lane mercator, luijusque 
capellae emulator ciitn Thomasia uxore siia, qni 
diet. Joluui. obiit XV Ve'a annoque Doni iniilo 
CCCCCXXVIl."* 

This aisle is of elegant architecture, the windows 
large, and the roof ornamented with rich tracery. 
On the outside are numerous ,ornaments emblematic 
of the founder's profession. An inscription on the east 
end informs us that it was finished in 1 552. Running 
round the whole aisle, and every word cut on a se- 
parate stone, appears the following : 

" In honor of God and his blessed mother Mar)', 
remember the soule of John Lane, Wapentaki Gustos, 
Lanarius, and the soule of Thomasine his wife, to 
have in memory with all other their children and 
friends of your own charity, which were founders of 
this chappie, and here lie in sepulture, the year of our 
Lord one thousand live hundred and six and twenty. 
God of his grace on both their souls to have mercy, 
and tinally biing them to the eternal glory, amen for 
charity." 

In this town is a free-school, and the Anabaptists, 
Methodists, and Presbyterians have each a meeting- 
house. 

COLYTON.] Colyton, Culliton, or the town upon 
the river Coly, is a small but ancient market-town, 
called, by Risdon, " a borough of reputation." It 
is situated in the hundred of the same name, twenty- 
two miles east from Exeter. The population is 
about 1774. The market is on Thursday ; and here 
are fairs on the first Wednesday in May, and the 
30th of November. Tire greater part of the houses 
are erected with flint and covered with thatch. 
Colyton was a demesne of William the Conqueror ; 
and John granted it an annual fair of eight days. 
A portreeve is chosen every year at the Lord's 
Court, by the inhabitants of a small district called 
the borough. 

Colyton Church is a large- stone building, having 
an octagonal tower rising from the chancel. The 
De la Poles had a buryiiig-place here mi the south 
side of the chancel, in which are numerous decora- 
tions and effigies. In the small aisle between the 
church and chancel is 'the figure of a girl of about 
five years of age, reported to have been the grand- 
daughter of Edward IV. and to have b'een choaked 
by a fish-bone. She is represented standing under 
h stone canopy, and has the Royal and Courtenay 
arms over her. 

Colcombe-Honse, near Colyton, was 'built in the 
reign of Edward I. by the Earls of Devon ; but 
when Henry, Marquis of Exeter, was attainted, the 
edifice was suffered to decay. Subsequently it came 
to the possession of Sir William De la Pole, the 
author of the Collections for the History of Devon- 
shire, who rebuilt it and resided here. In' tin's fa- 
mily it still continues, though it is again in a ruinous 
state. 

. . - 

his wife Thomasine, founded this chapel. He died on the 15tU 
February, Anno Dom. 1527.- 

2 6 COMB- 



118 



DEVONSHIRE. 



COMB-MARTIN.] The town of Comb-Martin, 
which has a weekly market on Saturday, is situated 
on the Bristol Channel, in the hundred of Brauntou, 
four miles cast from lltracombe. This place, ac- 
cording to Wcstcott's MSS. " dyriveth its name 
from the situation, being a lowe and deep valley, 
surrounded with very high hills (towards the sea 
cxceptcd) and the addition of Martin from Le Sieur 
Martin de Turon, a man of much worth, and assist- 
ant to William Duke of Normandye, when he con- 
quered this land, of whom he had this with other 
great possessions given him." The houses extend 
along the dale for at least a mile from the sea shore. 
" The scenery of the latter," observes Dr. Maton, 
" is really magnificent ; its more prominent parts 
are singularly striking, and have the happiest ac- 
companiments imaginable. A well broken lofty pile 
of rocks rises on one side of a little creek, and con- 
stitutes the termination of a ridge, deliciously wood- 
ed towards the village, and answered by hills of 
equal boldness opposite. From the brows of the 
rock hang a tuft of foliage, spared by the rude 
blasts of the main ; the waves buffeting the partial 
verdure at the base. The road winds down by two 
or t'aree tempest-torn cottages, which a painter 
would consider inestimable, as they are exactly 
on that part of the precipice where he himself 
would have placed them for the advantage of his 
picture." 

In former times, Comb-Martin was celebrated for 
its silver mines ; or rather from the quantity of that 
metal which was obtained by working the veins of 
galena that run in numerous courses through the 
neighbouring hills. It is observed, in Westmacott's 
MSS. from which we have already quoted, that, 
" of the first fynding and working the silver mynes, 
ther are no certain records remayninge.- In the 
tyme of Edward the First they were wrought ; but 
in the tumultuous raigne of his sonn they might 
chance to be forgotten, until his nephew, Edward 
the Third, in his French conquest, made good use 
of them ; and so did Henry the Fifth : and lately in 
our age, in the tyme of Queen Elizabeth, there was 
found a new lode in the land of Richard Roberts, 
gentleman, first begann to be wrought by Adrian 
Gilbert, Esq. and after by Sir Beavis Buhner, Knt. 
by whoes mynerall skill great quantetie of silver was 
landed and refined, of which he gave a rich and 
fayer cup to the Right Honorable William Earl of 
Bathe, whereon was engraven, as I remember, this 
poesie : 



< 



-lt ol 






-HKO 



In Martin's-Combe long lay I hyd, 

Obscured deprest with grosser soyle, 
Debased much with mixed load, 

Till Bulmer came, whoes skill and toyle 
Refined me so pure anil cleene, 

As rycher no where els is scene. 
And adding yet a farder grace, 

By Fashion he did inable 
Me worthy for to take a place 

To serve at any prince's table. 



Combe Martin gave the use alone, 
Bulmer fining and fashion. 

' Anno nostra: salutis 1593. 

' Regina: virgiuis, 35. 

' Nobilissimo viro Willielmo Corniti Bartheon, Locumtenenti 
Devoniz et Oxon.' 

" He gave also another, with a cover, to the Ho- 
nourable Sir Richard Martin, Knight, Lord Mayor 
of the Citie of London, to contynue to the said 
citie for ever. It wayeth 137 ounces fine, better 
than sterlinge, on which these verses are yet to be 
seen : 

' When water workes in Broaken Wharfe 

At first erected weare, 
And Bevis Buhner with his art 

The waters 'gan to reare, 
Disperced I in earth dyd lie 
Since all beginninge old, 
In place called Comb, where Martin longe 

Had hid me in his molde. 
I did no service on the earth, 

But no man set me free, 
Till Biilmer, by his skill and change, 
Did frame me this to be. 

' Anno nostrae Redemtionis 1593. 
' Reginis virginis 35. 

' Ricardo Martino iniliti ; iterum major! sive, dice secunda 
civitatis London.' " 

-,W'1 ,V,'.N-tV ; 

COMPTON.] The village of Compton is situated 
in the parish of King Charles the Martyr, belong- 
ing to the town of Plymouth. The ruins ef Comp- 
ton Castle are situated at the upper extremity of 'the 
village. The castle and manor formerly belonged 
to Lady Alice de Pola, who bestowed it on Peter 
de Compton, whose descendants for a long time 
retained it. It afterwards came to the Gilberts, but 
James Templar, Esq. is the present owner. A por- 
tion of the chapel, part of the north front, its tower, 
and gateway are still remaining ; but, owing to their 
being converted to the out-buildings of a farm, and 
having undergone alterations, their picturesque ap- 
pearance is lost. 

CHEDITON.] Crediton, or, as it is generally pro- 
nouHced, Kirton, is an ancient and populous town, 
which, in the 35th of Edward I. was represented in 
Parliament. It lies between two hills, near the 
river Greedy, in the hundred of Crediton, 7J miles 
north-west from Exeter, and 180{ west by south 
from London. One of the hills just mentioned rises 
with a gradual elevation towards the north, whilst 
the other, to the south, has a more quick ascent, and 
overlooks the tops of the houses. The town consists 
of two parts, respectively known as the east and the 
west town : the latter was formerly of much greater 
extent than it is at present; as, in the month of 
August, 1743, upwards of 460 houses were destroy- 
ed by fire, besides the market-house, wool chambers, 
and other public buildings ; so that tlic loss in goods 
and stock in trade, was computed at about 3000/. 
and the loss in houses and goods injured, at nearly 

SOjOOO/. 

.If. .OK- 



DEVONSHIRE. 



119 



50,000^. The town was again visited by fire on the 
first of May, 1772 ; when many of the new build- 
ings, which had been erected on the sites of those 
before burned, together with the market-house and 
shambles, were destroyed ; but they have since been 
rebuilt in a handsome and improved style. Accord- 
ing to the returns of 1801, (Jrediton contained !J03 
houses, and 4>)29 inhabitants. In 1811, the number 
of houses was 1157, that of inhabitants 5178. A 
great part of the population derives subsistence, from 
the manufacture of serges, which is carried on here 
to a considerable extent. At the market, which is j 
on Saturday, great quantities of wool and yarn are 
constantly sold. The government of the town is j 
vested in a portreeve.* 

This town is considered to have been a place of 
consequence in the Saxon times, as no fewer than 
twelve bishops had their seat here between the years ! 
924 and 1049, when the see was removed to Exeter. ' 
The old church, or cathedral, was, according to Le- 
land, situated on the spot now occupied by houses ; 
on one side of the present burial-ground ; but not 
any part of it remains. From the time of the re- 
moval of the sec, there continued in it, a chapter, i 
under the peculiar jurisdiction and patronage of the ' 
Bishops of Exeter. The revenues, at the period of ! 
the Dissolution, were estimated at 32'2/. 17s. 8</. ; 
annually. The site of the college was granted by i 
Henry the Eighth, to Elizabeth, Countess of Bute, 
and Sir Thomas D'Arey ; but the church and lands 
belonging to it were given by Edward the Sixth, in 
the fifth year of his reign, to the master and gover- 
nors of the free grammar-school, which about that 
time was established here. 

The church now standing is a spacious structure, 
in the form of a cross, with a tower rising from the 
intersection of the nave, and supported by four pil- 
lars of uncommon magnitude. The interior is re- 
markably neat ; having a raised floor, and with 
pews of the best wainscot. The east and west win- 
dows are large, and decorated with rich tracery. 
The altar-piece, which represents Moses and Aaron 
sustaining the decalogue, extends through the en- 
tire height and breadth of the chancel. Connected 
with the latter, at the east end, is a Sunday school ; 
and over the south porch is a small library. 

lu addition to the grammar-school, Crediton con- 
tains a charity-school for forty poor boys and girls ; 
and a Sunday-school, kept at a meeting-house for 
Dissenters. . 

DARTINGTON.] This parish is situated in the 
hundred of Stauborough, two miles north by west 
from Totness. Dartington, the beautiful seat of 
Arthur Chainpernoune, Esq. was said, by Mr. Buck, 
to have been inhabited by a community of Knights 

* " Very notable," observes Risdon, " hatlie binn this town 
for her biilhe childe, Winit'nd, surnamecl Boniface, who was 
Archbishop ot Mentz, from whence he wrote an epistle to 
Elhelb.iUI, King of Mercia, which took such an Piled, that the 
Sacred Scriptiuvs were used in the monasteries, and the Lorde's 
Prayer, uiid ihe Creed, in the English tongue, about the year 



Templers ; but neither Carudcu nor Tanner makes 
any allusion to such a circumstance ; and Gough 
observes, that during the whole period of the order 
of the Knights Templars' existence in England, 
Dartingtou can be proved to have been the property 
azid residence of the Martya family. The estate was 
granted by the Conqueror to William de Falaise ; 
afterwards it became the property of the Martyns ; 
from whom, in the reign of Edward the Second, it 
passed in marriage to William Lord Audelegh. On 
the extinction of this family, in the reign of Richard 
the Second, the manor escheated to the crown, and 
wns given by that monarch to his half-brother, John 
Lord Holland, Earl of Huntingdon, and Duke of 
Exeter, who, says Prince, " for the most part made 
it his principal residence." On the death of Anne, 
wife to the last Duke of Exeter, it again reverted to 

the crown ; and was next purchased by Ail- 

wortli, of London, who, according to ^ir William 
Pole, exchanged it for some lands near Exeter, with 
Sir Arthur Champernoune, second son of Sir Philip 
Champernoune, of Modbury. The manor-house, 
supposed to be of the fifteenth century, stands on au 
elevated spot ; and some of the windows command 
a line view of the beautiful vale of Totness, and 
other places. The walls are of black marble, ex- 
ceedingly firm and well-built ; but it is probable 
that the dwelling-house, and other apartments now 
used, were originally only offices to the more superb 
structure inhabited by the Duke of Exeter's family, 
and of which the great hall is the only part of con- 
sequence now perfect. From various circumstances, 
it is evident that the original buildings composed a 
double quadrangle, the courts being connected by 
the hall, kitchen, buttery, &c. Behind these, to the 
left, is a large area, surrounded by very thick walls ; 
and on one side (that directly opposite the hall) are 
the remains of a long range of building, supported 
by an arched front, the arches of which are walled 
up to the height of two feet. The foundations of 
various walls were also discovered some years ago, 
in digging up the area. 

Of the outer quadrangle, or that supposed to have 
been formerly the offices, three sides are nearly per- 
fect ; the buildings on the fourth side have been 
mostly destroyed. The central part is now the 
dwelling-house ; the range to the right is occupied 
as a barn, stable, &c. on the left is the hall and great 
kitchen ; the latter is thirty-five feet square, having 
walls of immense thickness : the roof is destroyed. 
The dwelling-house is 250 feet in length ; "and was 
formerly divided into various distinct tenements, 
each room having only one door, and that opening 
immediately to the air ; but scarcely any part of the 
original building remains unaltered. The apart- 

758. This Bishop converted the Hrssian*, Thuringcrs, and 
Frisians, of Germany, unto Christ, and was therefore accounted 
the apostle ot that nation, and canonized a saint." Winifrid 
was sevenil times employed as Pope's Legate ; but was at 
length murdered by the Frisians, and afterwards buried in Fulda 
Abbey, of which he wai Ihe founder. % 

/ meuw 



120 



DEVONSHIRE. 



mcnts in the ancient state of the mansion, were en- 
tered by five door-ways, projecting from the front, 
and having steps extending from each, and leading 1 
to the rooms over the ground-floor. In that part 
inhabited by Mr. Champernoune are a few very 
beautiful paintings, and also a good collection of 
drawings, chiefly by old masters. Amongst the for- 
mer is an exquisite Venus, by Annibal Carracci ; a 
Holy Family, by Ludovico Carracci ; a Bacchus, 
by Rubens ; a small Landscape, by Poussin ; the 
Four Seasons, in as many large pictures, by Artois, 
and Teniers ; and three very fine Landscapes, by 
Wilson. Most of these were brought by Mr. Cham- 
pernouue from Italy ; and form but a very small 
jwrt of a noble collection which he made in that 
country. 

The Great Hall is a very fine apartment, seventy 
feet in length, by forty wide : the roof is of oak, cu- 
riously framed : the chimney-piece is fourteen feet 
high. The windows arc large, and pointed. The 
outside is embattled, and strengthened by buttresses. 
The entrance porch arid tower, al*o embattled, is 
forty-four feet high : the porch is vaulted ; and in 
the centre of the cross of the arch is an ornamented 
rose, with a recumbent stag in the middle. 

Darlington Church, a building of some antiquity, 
with large pointed windows, battlements, and a 
tower, stands immediately behind the mansion. The 
windows were formerly decorated with a consider- 
able quantity of painted glass-; hut this was taken 
down upwards of forty years ago, and only a small 
portion replaced. Amongst it are various coats of 
firms ; and a figure of a Duchess of Exeter, praying 
for " the soul of Thomas her sou." Before her are 
the arms of England, borne also by Holland, quar- 
tered with Mortimer. This Duchess was probably 
Anne, widow of Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March ; 
and afterwards married to John, Duke of Exeter. 
Near the altar is an alabaster monument to the me- 
mory of Sir Arthur Champcrnoune, the first of this 
family that possessed Dartington. On it, besides his 
own figure, arc those of his wife, and seven children, 
with the arms of the families with whom they inter- 
married. The date is 1578. 

The scenery near the Dart, which winds round 
great part of the estate, is remarkably beautiful and 
romantic. In a large field, dignified with the name 
of Park, is a small circular entrenchment, surround- 
ing about half an acre of land. Dartington parish 
includes about 3000 acres ; of which nearly two- 
thirds are the property of Mr. Champernoune, whose 
tenants have their farms, on an, average, at about 25 
or 20 shillings per acre. Some excellent pasture 
land on this estate, in the vicinity of Totness, is, 
however, rented at as high as from 4/. to 11. per 
acre. 



* Tristram Risdon, a topographical writer, from whom \ve 
have frequently had occasion to quote, wis born i.t Winscot, 
in Devon-hire, about 15RO. He was educated at Oxford, and 
lied at his family seat in 1640. He wrote the History of his 



DARTMOOR FOREST.] The following curious ac- 
count of Dartmoor Forest, which is situated towards 
the western part of the county, in the hundred of 
Liftoii, is copied from Risdon :* " Many possess 
store of acres, but little quantity of good land in the 
north and west of this shire ; and yet, for the num- 
ber of gemtry and tall men, these parts may be com- 
pared with any other. Between the North and the 
South Hames, (for that is the ancient name) there 
lieth a chain of hills consisting of a blackish earth, 
both rocky and healthy, called by a borrowed name 
from its barrenness Dartmoore, richer in its bowels 
thaw in the face thereof, yielding tin and turf, which 
to save for fuel, you would wonder to see how busy 
the by-dwellers be at some season of the year. From 
these hills, or rather mountains, the mother of many 
rivers decliueth either way, witness their diverse 
courses, some of which disburthcn themselves in the 
British Ocean, others, by long wandering, seek the 
Severn sea. There are certain tennants dwelling in 
and about the Moore, which are called Fenfield 
Men, in ancient times, Fengefield : and these be the 
King's special tennants, pay him yearly rent, do 
suit and service to his court : and these are not to 
be attached by any officer, but for default of the 
non-payment of their rents ; which is 4t/. yearly at 
Michaelmas. They may winter in the King's forest, 
so much cattle as they can keep, so that it be by 
day ; but if they tarry by night, they shall pay 3d. 
If they have more cattle than they can winter by 
night upon their tenement, they shall pay for the 
said cattle as strangers ; that is, for every young 
cattle, Ijd. Anil for every other greater beast, "2d. 
And they shall have in the said Moore, all that may 
do them good, except green oak and venison. They 
may fish in all the waters, and dig turft's in any 
place. The King hath the royalty of the whole ; 
and the correction of the corn, ditches, and leap 
yeats, shall be in the court of Lidford. And the 
Feufield Men, his free tenants, shall present at the 
0ourt, all faults found in and about the forest, as 
often as they shall be summoned for the King. If 
any man tlie, or be slain on the forest, th* 
coroner of Lidford shall crown him ; for the forest 
is out of every lything. And here understand, that 
where there are divers parishes lying in the borders 
of the said waste, the persons of these places do pre- 
tend to have the tythe, and other profits of the pa- 
rishes next adjoining. It is found by sundry ver- 
dicts and records, that the whole Moore doth lye in 
the parish of Lydford, and the parson thereof is to 
have all the whole profits and tythes of corn, catlle, 
wool, lambs, and whatsoever breedeth therein. The 
town of Lidford, and all the tenements within these 
bounds, doth lye within the limits of the Fenfield 
Me.n." This extensive waste was originally made 



Native County; many copies of which are extant in MS. 
There was printed a mutilated edition of it in 1714, in two vols. 
8v.j. The Chorographical Description was printed from the 
original in one volume, quarto, in 1735. 

6 a forest 



DEVONSHIRE. 



121 



_ 

a jbrest by King John, and its bounds were set out 
l>y perambulation in the reign of Henry III. With- 
in the last seven or eight years, it has been greatly 
cultivated and improved. A grand prison of war 
has been erected, under the 'auspices of the Lord 
Warden, which has given name to a new town, now 
building, and called Prince Town, in compliment 
to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent. 

The surface of Dartmoor, is diversified by im- 
mense masses of granite, visible at a great distance, 
and distinguished by the name of Tors. The 
chief are High Tor, Believer Tor, Hcssary Tor, 
Steeperton Tor, Ham Tor, Mist Tor, Row Tor, and 
Croekern Tor. The last is celebrated as the place 
where the Stannary Parliaments of this county as- 
sembled. From this and similar circumstances, Mr. 
Pohvhele conjectures it to have been a seat of Bri- 
tish judicature prior to the arrival of Julius Cassar ; 
and observes, that " Exposed as it is, to all the se- 
verities of the weather, and distant, as it always 
hath been within the memory of man, from every 
human habitation, we might well be surprised that 
it should have been chosen for the spot on which 
our laws were to be framed, unless some peculiar 
sanctity had been attached to it in consequence of 
its appropriation to legal or judicial purposes, from 
the highest antiquity. On this Tor, not long since, 
was the Warden's or President's chair, seats for the 
jurors, a high corner stone for the cryer of the court, 
and a table, all rudely hewn out of the rough moor- 
stone of the Tor ; together with a cavern, which, 
for the convenience of our modern courts, was used 
in these later ages as a repository for wine. Not- 
withstanding this provision, Crockern Tor was too 
wild and dreary a place for our legislators of the 
last generation, who, after opening their commis- 
iion, and swearing the jurors on this spot, merely to 
Iceep top the old formalities, usually adjourned the 
court to one of the Stannary Towns. From the na- 
ture of this spot, open, wild, and remote, from the 
rocks that'were the benches, and from the modes of 
proceeding, all so like the ancient courts, and all so 
unlike the modern, I judge Crockern Tor, to have 
been the court of a cantred (a district, or number of 
townships) or its place of convention, for the pur- 
poses of the legislature." 

From the strange shape of many of the Tors, and 
from the rocks ia their vicinity appearing as if form- 
ed by art, some have supposed them to owe their 
origin tu the ancient Druids, and imagine cairns, 
rromlcclm, and circles in every pile of stoues. 
Though these opinions seem to be, for the most part, 
fallacious, yet, undoubtedly, some combinations of 
the stones on Dartmoor were originally used for re- 
ligious purposes. 

At the distance of about four miles from, and to 
the east of, Tavistock, adjoining the road leading 
thence to Moreton-Hainpstcad, stand several rows 
of stone, but the period at which they were placed 
there is unknown. Tradition states them to have 
been collected at a time when Tavistock Has ravaged 

vot. 11. NO. 51. ( 



by a dreadful plague, and placed there for farmers, 
to set their commodities on, and then retire, while 
the inhabitants approached and deposited money in- 
stead. The stones are upright, placed in double 
rows, extending nearly 300 yards, and have circles 
attached to them. They stand on a dry level part 
of the moor, on the south side of which is a cairn, 
and, at a short distance, a cromlech. 

The summits of many of the hills on Dartmoor 
are crowned by a great number of barrows or tu- 
muli, constructed with large blocks and fragments 
of granite, proviucially termed moor-stone, which is 
every where met with in vast quantities. One of 
these tumuli was opened in the summer of 1802 : it 
was nearly twenty feet high and of a peculiar slvipc. 
It was opened in the apex and gradually descended 
to the depth of ten leet, where a natural karn was 
found yet undisturbed. On descending stHl lower 
a kind of cell or kistvaen was discovered, formed by 
a number of columnar pieces of granite, having one 
end resting on a ledge of the natural karn, whilst 
the other was supported by a wall of stones, of a se- 
micircular shape, and joined to the rock at each ex- 
tremity. Nothing was found iu this cavern but it 
few human bones, and a small quantity of dark-co- 
loured ashes. Several of the others were opened 
but differed but little from the one now described. 

DARTMOUTH.] Dartmouth is a considerable sea- 
port, borough, and market-town, situated in t!w 
hundred of Coleridge, 30-J miles south by west from 
Kxeter, and 203| west-south-west from London. 
It lies near the confluence of the river Dart, from 
which it takes its name, with the British Channel. 
The borough, which was incorporated by Edward 
III. sends two members to Parliament, and is go- 
verned by a Mayor, twelve Aldermen, twelve Coin- 
mon Councilmen, a Recorder, two Bailiffs, a Town 
Clerk, and a High Steward, was formed out of 
Clifton, Dartmouth, and Hardness, which were ori- 
ginally thceo distinct towns or villages, and still 
possess some distinct local regulations. Dartmouth 
comprises he throe parishes of St. Petrox, St. Sa- 
viour, and Townstull ; containing, together, a po- 
pulation of about 3000. One of the churches is si- 
tuatcd on a hill about a quarter of a mile from the 
town ; and having a tower sixty-nine feet high forms 
a good sea-mark. The harbour, the entrance of 
which is .defended by a castle, and two platforms of 
cannon, is very sail- and can contain five hundred 
ships. Browne AVillis informs us that this fortress 
was erected by Henry VI I. who " agreed, for him- 
self and heirs, to pay tin: corporation 40/. per annum 
for their building ti strong and mighty tower, and 
bulwark, with lime and stone, for furnishing the 
samo with guns, artillery, and ordnance, and for 
finding u chain in length and strength sufficient. 1 * 
The castle, however, is not large, and but thinly 
mounted with camion. It stands in a situation 
highly beautiful, and is surrounded with a number 
of rich oaks from the midst of which, adding greatly 
to the picturesque scene, springs up the tower and 
2 H spire 



1-22 



DEVONSHIRE. 



spire of a small church. " The view towards the 
mouth of the harbour," observes Dr. Maton, " ex- 
hibits such a happy assemblage of objects for a pic- 
ture, that it is, perhaps, scarcely to be exceeded. A 
rocky knoll projecting i'rom the shore, makes an ad- 
mirable lore-ground. One of the side screens is 
formed by the picturesque castle, with the adjoining 
church, just emerging from a fine wood, which en- 
riches the right hand side ; the other, a high pro- 
montory, with a fort at its feet ; whilst the main sea 
appears in front through a narrow opening, and 
leaves nothing for the imagination to wish for in 
the composition." The vestiges of another castle, 
of a circular form, more ancient but not so strong, 
are visible at the south-end of the town. From the 
bay, the view of the town is eminently pleasing : as 
the houses appear situated on the declivity of a 
craggy hill, and extending, embosomed among trees, 
nearly a mile along the water's edge. The dock- 
yards and quay project into the river, and cause an 
apparent curvature in its course, which has a very 
beautiful effect ; while the uniformity is farther bro- 
ken by the ships of war, and smaller vessels, gliding 
along its current. The rocks on each side are corn- 
posed of a glossy, purple-coloured slate, and their 
summits are fringed with various plants and shrubs. 
From the situation of the ground, however, some of 
the streets are much higher than others ; most of 
them are incommodiously narrow ; and the lower 
tier of houses frequently communicates with that 
above, by flights of steps. 

The town of Dartmouth was first represented in 
Parliament in the twenty-sixth of Edward the First; 
but it afterwards intermitted sending till the reign 
of Edward the Third, since which the members have 
been regularly returned. The right of election is 
possessed by the corporation, who have the power of 
creating freemen. 

A considerable portion of the trade of Dartmouth 
arises from the Newfoundland fishery, which is car- 
ried on to a great extent and employs about 3000 
men. The number of vessels engaged in this trade, 
In catching the fish, and conveying them, when cur- 
ed, to foreign markets, is about 350. The chief 
markets are the different ports in the Mediterranean ; 
the returns from which are generally wine, oil, fruit, 
salt, &c. The quay is large and convenient ; and 
before it is a spacious street, of large and commo- 
dious houses in which the principal merchants re- 
side. 

The Dissenters, who are very numerous, have a 
large meeting-house here ; and there are three cha- 
rity schools for the education of the children of the 
poorer classes. 

Dartmouth has been twice destroyed by fire : in the 
reigns of Richard the First, and Henry the Fourth. 
The French were, in both instances, the invaders ; 
and both times escaped with slight loss ; yet, on. 
landing here a third time in the year 1404, they were 
intercepted by the peasants and women, and the 
whole party either taken or slain, together with their 



leader, Motis. tie Castell. lu the time of the Civil 
Wars, the town was garrisoned for the King ; but 
in January, 1645, it was stormed by the forces com- 
manded by General Fairfax. 

The manor was granted by the Conqueror to Jud- 
hael de Totnais, and from him passed to the Zouches, 
of whom it is probable the Dawneys, purchased it, 
and conveyed to the Teuksburys, merchants ; ami 
these granted it, to the town, in the fifteenth of Ed- 
ward -the Third. In the second of Edward the 
Fourth, it appears to have escheated to the crown, 
and to have been bestowed on Nevill, Lord Falcon- 
bridge, and after his decease given to the Duke of 
Clarence, brother to the King. Again reverting to 
the crown on the death of the Duke, it was given to, 
the Carews by Henry the Eighth ; and though their 
title was confirmed by Mary in 1557, it once more 
returned to the Sovereign. Elizabeth, in the twenty- 
third of her reign, bestowed it on Downing, 

Asheton, and Robert Peter : from the two 

latter it came to the corporation, by which it is still 
held. 

DAWLISH.] Dawlish, written Doules in the 
Domesday Book, is supposed to derive its name 
from Dol-is, a compound, signifying, a " fruitful 
mead in a bottom," or, on " a river side." This 
agrees with the situation of the place, which occupies 
a delightful spot in a valley, having the sea on the 
east, and on the other sides, high and pleasant 
grounds. The beauties of Dawlish have been thus 
commemorated by Dr. Downsman, a native bard of 
Devon, in hie poem intituled Infancy : 

" O Dawlish, though unclassic be thy name, 
By ev'ry muse unsung, should from thy tide, 
To keen poetic eyes alone revealed, 
From the cerulean bosom of the deep 
(As Aphrodites rose ef old) appear 
Health's blooming goddess, and benignant smile 
On her true votary ; not Cytherea's fame, 
Not Eryx, nor the laurel boughs which waved 
On Delos erst, Apollo's natal soil, 
However warm enthusiastic youth 
Dwelt on these seats enamoured, shall to me 
Be half so dear. To thee will I consign. 
Often the timid virgin, to thy pure 
Incircling waves; to thee will I consign 
The feeble matron ; or the child on wnom 
Thou mayest bestow a second happier birth, 
From weakness into strength. And should I view 
Unfetter'd, with the sound firm-judging mind, 
Imagination to return, array'd 
In her once glowing vest, to thee my lyre 
Shall oft be tuned, and to thy nereids green, 
Long, long unnoticed in their haunts retired. 
Nor will I cease to prize thy lovely strand, 
Thy towering cliffs, nor the small babbling brook, 
Whose shallow current laves thy thistled vale." 

The parish of Dawlish (comprising the hamlets 
of Cockwood, East Town, Higher Holcombe, Lower 
Holcombe, Middlewood, Shattern, Wcstwood, and 
the chapelry of Lithewell) is in the hundred of Ex- 
minster, two miles and three quarters north by east 
from East Teignmouth. At the time of the Domes- 
day Survey, the manor belonged to the bishop of 

th 



DEVONSHIRE. 



* j . i * * 

tjie diocese : it is now among the possessions of the 
Dean and Chapter of Exeter, of whom it is held 
under a lease of three lives, by John Inglctt For- 
tescue, Esq. Agreeable to the custom of the manor, 
the Lord Farmer is entitled to grant estates for three 
lives by copy of court roll ; and the widow of each 
life terminating in possession, is entitled to the estate 
during her widowhood. 

Towards the east, the valley in which Dawlish is 
situated opens towards the ocean ; fronting which 
are many excellent houses commanding beautiful 
views. One object is particularly pleasing a Go- 
thic structure built by Sir William Watson, and 
standing on the ground of that gentleman. The 
prospect from the top of this pile is extensive and 
delightful. One the lands of the same gentleman, 
and nearer the sea, a mount, resembling a natural 
rock, has been formed. Higher up the valley, 
among a range of neat buildings, stands the two 
inns, which afford comfortable accommodations. 
Nearer the end of the valley are several genteel 
lodging-houses, and a very romantic water-mill. 

Dawlish Church is a handsome Gothic building 
standing at the end of a row of cottages, and sur- 
rounded with elms. The south part of the church 
is very fine ; and in the nitches, which are between 
the windows, stand a number of statues though in a 
very mutilated state. The vicarage house, a de- 
lightful spot, is sheltered from the north by a high 
hill, and on the west protected by a row of elms. 

The bathing machines here are numerous and 
kept in good order. The beach is pure ad clear, 
and the promenade, extending across the strand, is 
excellent. The cliffs are bold and of a great height, 
hut not composed of very firm strata, as the sea is 
daily wasting them. 

Dawlish has no regular market, birt provisions 
are easily obtained in the neighbouring places, and 
it has a communication with Exeter three times a 
Week. 

DoDBttooKE.] This little place is situated in the 
hundred of Coleridge, half a mile enst-south-east 
from Kingsbridge. It has been celebrated as the 
place where a liquor called white ale made one day 
and drank the next was first brewed. Perhaps it 
was more on account of the liquor's being subject to 
tithes ; instead of which each innkeeper now pays a 
small sum per annum. Dodbrooke has a market 
every third Wednesday in the month, and four quar- 
terly cattle markets. 

DUNKESWELL.] This place, which is in the hun- 
dred of Hernyock, five miles and a half north by 



1 The following account of Mr. Winstanley is extracted 
from Smealon's Narrative of the Construction of the Edystone 
Light-house: " He had distinguished himself in a certain 
branch ot mechanics, the tendency of which is to excite won- 
der and surprise. He had at his house, at Littlebury, a set of 
contrivances, such as the following : Being taken into one 
particular room of his house, and there observing an old slip- 
per carelessly lying in the middle of the floor, if, as was natu- 
ral, you gave it a kick with your foot, up started a ghost before 



west from Honiton, derives part of its name from a 
spring, which is called St. Patrick's Well. Here 
was an abbey of Cistercians, founded by William, 
Lord Briwere in 1201. It was endowed with the 
revenues of the village, and several estates in the 
neighbourhood ; the whole amounting; at the Disse- 
lution, to 298/. Us. lOrf. 

EDYSTONE.] The Edystone Rocks, situated 
about twelve miles and a half from Portsmouth 
Sound, are composed of a mass of small irregular 
rocks subject to the violence of the heavy swells 
from the Atlantic Ocean and the Bay of Biscay. 
They are supposed to have derived their name from 
the number of eddies which the tide makes in flow- 
ing from the British Channel. 

The dreadful accidents which were constantly 
occurring on these rocks excited an ardent wish of 
erecting some mark to warn seam on of the danger ; 
and, notwithstanding the difficulties which attended 
the plan, Mr. Henry Winstanley,* of Littlebury in 
Essex, in 169(5, undertook to erect a light-house on 
the spot ; and having obtained the requisite autho- 
rity from the Trinity House, he commenced his ope- 
rations. Mr. Winstanley's building was composed 
equally of wood and stone, and from the difficulty 
attending the conveyance of the materials to the 
rock, was upwards of three years in erecting. Wheir 
completed, it seemed impossible that it should resist 
the shock of a raging sea ; it had more the appear- 
ance of a Chinese Pagoda, and it was said that in a 
high sea a six-oared boat might be lifted by a billow 
and driven through the open gallery of the structure. 
Such, however, was not the opinion of Mr. Win- 
stanley, as he expressed himself fearless of remaining 
in the light-house, in most violent storm* . And though, 
unfortunately, he was mistaken in his opinion of the 
strength of the building, the highest praise is due to 
his noble spirit for shewing the possibility of that 
which had before been thought impracticable. 

In the November of 1703 some repairs becoming 
necessary, Mr. Winstanley attended to inspect the 
work. On the evening of the twenty-sixth, when 
he was about to depart from the rocks, a violent 
storm arose, and the danger to which the light- 
house was exposed was intimated to him. So high, 
however, was the confidence of Mr. Winstanley in 
the strength of his building, that he expressed a 
wish to be in it in the greatest storm that could 
blow. Most unfortunately this desire was gratified ; 
for while there, that tremendous storm, which so 
dreadfully devastated the coast of Britain, com- 
menced. It raged with awful fury through the 

you: if you sat down in a certain chair, a couple of arms 
would immediately clasp you in, so as to render it impossible 
for you to disentangle yourself, till your attendant set you at 
liberty: and if you sat down in a certain arbour by the side 
of a canal, you was forthwith sent out afloat into the middle, 
from whence it was impossible for you to escape till the mana- 
ger returned you to your former place." 

& night i 



124 



DEVONSHIRE. 



flight ; but towards morning it increased to an un- 
paralleled hurricane, and the light-house, no longer 
able to remain, was, with all its occupiers, swept 
into the deep. The storm abated on the twenty- 
ninth, when some people went off to discover if any 
thing remained ; but nothing was left but part of an 
iron chain, which was so firmly jambwl into a chink 
of the rock, that it was not possible to be disengaged, 
till in 1750 it was cut out.* 

Shortly after the destruction of the light-house, a 
Virginia ship, laden with tobacco, was wrecked in 
the night on the Edystone Rocks, and every person 
on board lost. From this, and a number of other 
accidents, the necessity of a light-house here was 
fully shewn ; yet till 1706 the second was not be- 
gun. In that year, an act, which vested the duties 
payable by ships passing the rocks to the Trinity 

' Ilouse, passed, and which also conferred the 
the power of granting leases to the Master, War- 
dens, &c. These, in consequence, agreed with a 
C'aptain Lovet for a term of ninety-nine years to 
erect another. A Mr. John Rudyerd was then em- 
ployed by Captain Lovet, as engineer and architect. 
air. Rudyerd was, at that time, a silk-mercer re- 
siding in London, and, though not of any mechani- 
cal business, had talents naturally adapted for such 
an undertaking ; and, assisted by two experienced 
ship-wrights from Woolwich (Messrs. Smith and 
Norcutt) erected, in the course of two years, in a 
very masterly manner, a second light-house. 

The main column of this structure was one sim- 
ple figure, an elegant frustrum of a cone, unbroken 

. by any projection on which the violence of the storm 
oould lay hold, Jt was, exclusive of its sloping 
foundation, twenty-two feet eight inpbes upon its 
largest circular base; sixty-one feet high .above 
that: and the diameter of the top was fourteen feet 
three inches. The whole height, from the lowest 
side of the foundation to the top of the building, was 
ninety -two feet. The lantern ^vaB of an octagonal 
form, ten feet two inches in diameter. Five hun- 
dred tons of stone, twelve hundred tons of timber, 
live hundred tons of lead, and eighty tons of iron, 
besides an immense quantity of trenails, screws, 
and rafk-bolts, were expended in its construc- 
tion, f 

This building remained for upwards of forty-six 
years sustaining the fury of numberless storms ; but 

* Tiiis violent storm arose, about eleven 'o'clock at night, 
from the west south-west, attended with dreadful thunder and 
lightning, and continued with unabaling fury till about seven 
the next mowing. Thirteen sail of men of war perished in 
this awful tempest, and 1519 seamen were drowni'd, among 
jvliom was tlear-AdmiraJ Keauinont. The loss sustained by 
the city of London was computed at a million sterling ; anil 
Bristol suffered to the ammuit of upwards of 150,000/. 

A public fast was observed witli great Solemnity, and an or- 
der in council appeared in the Gazette lor the payment of the 
bounties, and advanced wages, to the families ef'such officers 
and seamen as had perished in the stonn, in the sajne manner 
AS if they had been killed in battle. 
<j- The following circumstance, which occurred during the 



was at length destroyed by fire. The particulars 
are thus related by Mr. Smeaton : " On the twen- 
ty-second of August, 1755, the workmen returned 
on shore, having finished all necessary repairs for 
the season ; between which time, and the second of 
December -folio wing, the attending boat had been 
several times to the light-house, and particularly 
on the first of December, and had landed some 
stores, when the light-keepers made no manner of 
complaint. On the morning, however, of the second 
of December, about two o clock, when the light- 
keeper, then upon the watch, went into the lantern, 
as usual, to snuff the candles, he found the whole in 
a smoke ; and, on opening the door of the lanteru 
into the balcony, a Hanie instantly burst from the 
inside of the cupola : he immediately endeavoured 
to alarm his companions ; but they being in bed, and 
asleep, were not so ready in coming; to his assist- 
ance as the occasion required. As there were al- 
ways some leathern buckets kept in the house, and 
a tub of water in the lantern, he attempted, as 
speedily as possible, to extinguish the fire in the 
cupola, by throwing water from the balcony upon 
the outside cover of lead : by this time, his coin- 
r.idcs approaching, he encouraged them to fetch up 
water with the leathern buckets from the sea ; but 
as the height would be, at a medium, full seventy 
feet, this, added to the natural consternation that 
must attend such a sudden, and totally unexpected 
event, would occasion the business of bringing up 
water to go on but slowly. 

" Meanwhile, the flames gathering strength every 
moment, and the light-keeper having the water to 
throw full four yards higher than his own head, to 
be of any service, we must by no means be surpris- 
ed, that, under all these difficulties, the fire, instead 
of being s^oon extinguislied, would increase : but 
what put a sudden stop to further exertions, was the 
following most remarkable circumstance. As he 
was looking upward with the utmost attention, to 
sec the direction and success of the water thrown, 
(on which occasion, as physiognomists tell us, the 
mouth is naturally a little open,) a quantity of lead, 
dissolved by the heat of the flames, suddenly rushed 
like a torrent from the roof, and fell, not only upon 
the man's head, face, and shoulders, but over his 
clothes ; and a part of it made its way through his 
shirt collar, and very much burnt his neck and 

erection of (he second light-house, is mentioned by Mr. Smea- 
ton:" Lewis the Fourteenth being at war with England, a 
French privateer took the men at work upon the Edystone 
Uot-k, together with their tools, and carried them to France ; 
anil the captain was in expectation of a reward for the achieve- 
ment. While ihe. captives lay'in prison, the transaction reach- 
ed the ear* of that monarch: be. immediately ordered them to 
be released, and the captors to be put in their places ; declar- 
ing, that though he was at war with England, he was not so 
with mankind. He therefore directed the men to be sent back 
to their work, with presents; observing, that the Edystone 
light-house WAS so situated, as to be of e<jual service to all na- 
tions having occasion to navigate the channel between England 
and France." 

shoulders 



DEVONSHIRE. 



123 



shoulders : from tins moment, he had a -violent in- 
ternal sensation, and imagined that a quantity of 
lerd had passed his throat, and got into his stomach. 
Under this violence of pain and anxiety, as every 
attempt had proved ineffectual, and the rage of the 
flames was increasing 1 , it is not to bo wondered at 
that the terror and dismay of the three men increas- 
ed in proportion ; so that they all found themselves 
intimidated, and glad to make their retreat from that 
immediate scene of horror, into one of the rooms be- 
low, where they would find themselves precluded 
trom doing any thing : they seem, therefore, to have 
had no other source of retreat, than that of retiring 
downwards from room to room, as the fire advanced 
over their heads." 

Early in the morning some Cawsand fishermen 
discovered the light-house to be on fire, and a boat 
was immediately sent to relieve the people. About 
ten o'clock, after the fire had been burning eight 
hours, the boat reached the rock, and found the 
three light- keepers in a cave on the cast side, where 
they had retreated to avoid the falling of the timber, 
&c. It was then low water, and the men were al- 
most in a state of stupefaction at the thoughts of 
their condition. The wind was easterly at the time, 
and though not strong, was sufficiently so to pre- 
vent any landing upon the rock ; and it was with 
difficulty the men were taken into the boat ; which 
being done, they were conveyed to Plymouth ; where 
they were no sooner arrived, than one of them made 
off, and was never after heard of. This at first ex- 
cited a suspicion that the fire was wilful, but the 
peculiar situation of the building rendered that im- 
possible. It is more probable that his flight pro- 
ceeded from a kind of panic.* 

The fleet of Admiral West was then laying at 
Plymouth, and directly the admiral was informed cf 
the fire, he dispatched a launch and an engine, but 
fhe violence of the sea prevented every endeavour 
to land, and, after some ineffectual attempts to play, 
the engine-pipe was broken. The fire consequently 
was left to its own course, and it was not till five 
days after its commencement, that, with the joint 
action of the wind, and the sea, it destroyed so com- 
pletely the building that nothing remained but the 



* Henry Hall, the unfortunate discoverer of the fire, who 
suffered so dreadfully from the melted lead, was conveyed to 
his house at Stonehouse. Though ninety-four years ofage, he 
was remarkably active previous to ibis ; but from the time of 
his accident, he constantly told his medical attendant (Dr. at 
that time, Mr. Spry) that before he could do any thing to re- 
lieve him, he must tirst take the lead trom his stomach. Dr. 
Sj>ry, however, di'emed it impossible that he could have lived, 
luid there been any there, especially as he had encountered so 
much fatigue before the application of any remedies. The 
man languished In- twelve days after the accident, when he 
expired. During ihe whole time he constantly took his medi- 
cines, and swallowed both liquids and solids. Mr. Spry opened 
the Ix.dy. and f.->und in it an oval piece of lead, weighing rather 
inorc th:m -cvt-n ounces. An account of this circumstance he 
transmitted to the Royal Society ; but it appeared so strange 
that that learned body declined publish ng the paper, till some 
further elucidation Jiad taken place. To remove this iucredu- 

VOL. n. NO. 54. 



iron cramps and branches which were left standing' 
on the rock. The interposed beds of timber were 
observed, in the course of its burning, to heat the 
moor-stone beds in such a manner, that the whole 
mass became one red-hot body. 

The present light-house was, at the recommenda- 
tion of Robert Weston, Esq. one of the proprietors 
of the lease held under Trinity House, constructed 
by the ingenious Mr. Smeaton.f He was at the 
time the proposal was made to him, in Northumber- 
land, and supposing the fire to have been only par- 
tial, and himself employed to inspect the repairs, 
was unwilling to relinquish his employment there by- 
undertaking it. But being informed by Mr. B. 
Wilson, at the desire of Mr. Weston, that it was to- 
tally demolished, and that he was appointed to erect' 
another, he hastened to complete his business in the 
north, and returned to London in February, 1756. 
In the interview which lie had with Mr. Wilson, he 
obtained an idea of the importance and difficulty of 
his undertaking ; and having attentively inspected 
the plans of the former light-houses, directed his 
thoughts to the causes of the failure of the other 
buildings. 

Mr. Smcaton conceived the idea of the figure of 
the present building, from the trunk of a large oak, 
which resists the assaults of violent winds partly by 
its elasticity and partly by its strength. lie 'ob- 
served that the figure of the tree, as connected with 
its underground roots, rose from the surface with a 
bold swelling base, which, at the height of one dia- 
meter, sometimes diminishes to hall' its original size. 
Thence the trunk becomes less more gradually, its 
sides come into a perpendicular and form a cylinder, 
till a preparation of more circumference is necessary 
for the insertion of the principal boughs. Hence h- 
deduced the proper shape of what a column of the 
greatest stability ought to be when the quantity of 
matter which composes it is given. 

That the building of the light-house might be ac- 
celerated, the architect resolved to frame all his 
materials, and get them ready on shore. For this 
purpose he chose a field, screened from the winds, 
particularly the western, for all vessels employed, 
lying about a mile from Plymouth, adjacent to Mill 

lity, Mr. Spry made a variety of experiments, by whose issue 
the possibility of the occurrence was fully established. A fowl 
lived for some time with upwards of three ounces of lead in its 
stomach, and after the lead had been poured down its throat, 
pecked and swallowed a number of barley-corns. 

|- This gentleman was born in the year 1724, at Austhorpe, 
in Yorkshire. HisfaUier, who was himself an attorney, intend- 
ed him for the law ; but at his own request lie was placed under 
a mathematical instrument maker. In 1753 he became a fellow 
of the Royal Society, and in I7;">9 he obtained the gold medal 
for his paper on " The Natural Powers of Wind and Water to 
Uirn Mills and other Machines depending on a Circular Mo- 
tion." Mr. Smeaton published bis Account and History of 
Kdystone Light-house in one volume folio. He was also tlu: 
author of an Account of the Improvements in Uamsgate Har- 
bour, which were conducted by him. His deutli occurred in 
the year 1792. 



2 I 



Bay. 



126 



DEVONSHIRE, 



Bay. Among 1 other steps necessary to such an en- 
terprise, Mr. Smeaton digested a plan of accounts, 
for the satisfaction of the proprietors, and the num- 
ber' of articles wanted occasioned fourteen books to 
be opened. 

On the twelfth of June, 1757, the first stone of 
the edifice was laid. The date of the year was cut 
in very deep characters, it was embedded in mortar, 
trenailed down, and fixed. The work now went 
rapidly forward ; and by the eleventh of August, the 
principal difficulties were considered over, as the six 
basement courses, containing 123 pieces of stone, 
many of them weighing considerably more than a 
ton and a half, were completely fixed. The last 
stone of the main column was set on the twenty-fifth 
of August, 1759, the height of which was seventy 
feet. 

About the middle of October the building was en- 
tirely finished, and the whole surmounted by a gilt 
ball. The lantern is octagonal and composed of 
cast iron and copper. On the night of the sixteenth 
of October, the first time the new edifice was light- 
ed, there happened a very great, storm, and the 
light-keepers felt a sensible motion in the building, 
but, confident of its strength, felt no degree of 
alarm. The time of working on the rock during the 
erection of the present light-house was one hundred 
and eleven days ; and from the destruction of the 
second to the rekindling of the light in this was very 
near four years. 

Granite, a stone more durable, and better able to 
resist the action of the sea than any other, is em- 
ployed in the basement and outside of this structure ; 
but the interior is chiefly of Portland stone. Round 
the upper store room, near the ceiling, the following 
inscription appears : 

EXCEPT THE LORD B'JILD THE HOUSE, 

THEY LABOUR IN VAIN THAT BUILD IT. 

Palm CXXVI1. 

Over the door of the lantern, on the east side, and 
and upon the last stone set up, are the following 
words : 

24th Aug. I7S9. 
LAUS DEO. 

ESCOT HOCSE.] Escot House, situated about 
five miles from Honiton, is the seat of Sir John 
Kennaway, and stands in a demesne of nearly five 
hundred acres. Mr. Polwhele remarks that, " Per- 
haps there are no plantations in Devonshire so 
strong and luxuriant as those at Escot. The firs, 
as well as the forest trees, are very large, tall, and 

* George Baker, Esq. was born at Tormoham in this county, 
and early in life eml>arke<l for India, where he arrived destitute, 
of money anil patronage and nearly uneducated, but possessed 
of a genius which soon conducted him to eminence in scientific 
pursuits. For a Jong time the inhabitants of Madras had no 
fresh water but what they procured with great labour and ex- 
pence. This inconvenicjice, however, was removed by Mr 

.8 



branching. The growth of these trees has been re 
marked to be very rapid, as soon as their roots have 
spread through the loamy substratum." The estate 
was sold by riir George Yonge, whose grandfather 
erected the house in 1580, to the present proprietor 
iu the year 1794. The house is of an oblong form, 
and built with brick : it has been inucii altered and 
improved by Mr. Wyatt. It contains a number of 
valuable paintings ; and among the portraits are 
one of the Marquis Cornwallis, and another of 
George Baker, Esq.* The former was executed by 
Mr. II. W. Devis, the artist whose historical paint- 
ing of the Marquis receiving the hostage princes of 
Mysore, acquired some celebrity. The latter was 
painted in India, by Home, and represents Mr. Ba- 
ker seated iu a pensive and meditating attitude. 

EXKTEK.] Exeter, considered as a distinct coun- 
ty, and under 3d Geo. I. c. 5, called " The City 
and County of the City of Exeter," is situated about 
24 miles frotn the eastern border of Devonshire, 30 
from Cornwall, 9 from the sea towards the south, 
30 from the Bristol Channel, and 168 west-south- 
west from London. Risdon emphatically terms it 
" the emporium and principal ornament of the 
west." 

Exeter is evidently a city of great antiquity ; and, 
though its origin cannot be distinctly ascertained, 
there can be no doubt that it was a settlement of the 
Britons long previously to the Roman invasion. 
By Geoffrey of Monmouth it is called Caer-Pen- 
huelgoit, which, iu the language of the Britons, sig- 
nifies, the Prosperous Chief City in the Wood ; and 
among its other ancient appellations, are Caer-Isc, 
and Caer-Rydh, or the Red City : the former de- 
rived from its situation on the banks of the Isc ; the 
latter, from the colour of the soil round the castle. 
These names would hardly have been given to it, 
had it been of Roman growth : and though Camdeo 
imagines that it was not built in the time of Vespa- 
sian, by whom Geoffrey affirms it to have been taken 
under the auspices of the Emperor Claudius, the 
circumstance of its being ranked, by Richard of 
Cirencester, among the stipendiary cities, strongly 
militates against his opinion : as the Romans would 
neither have suffered it to become tributary, nor to 
receive wages, if it had not existed previously to 
their making it a station. Indeed, it seems highly, 
probable, that it was anciently regarded as the capi- 
tal of Danmonium. 

In the Itinerary of Antoninus, it is called Isca- 
Danmoniorum ; and is the most westerly station he 
has noticed : though, from the Iters of Ptolemy and 
Richard ; from the remains of Roman roads over, 
and around Haldon ; from the vestiges of ancient 

Baker, who conducted water to the town through leaden pipes. 
The death of this gentleman took place in the year 1797, and 
the fortune which he had acquired, which through life had been 
charitably devoted, was at his death dedicated to the same 
purposes. He bequeathed about 600/. to the Asylums at Ma- 
dras; and to the poor of eight parishes in this county, he left 
legacies of from fifty to five hundred pounds. 



DEVONSHIRE. 



127 



Ways through Drews-Tcignton, to Oakhampton, 
aivjt, perhaps, of a road from hence over Dartmoor, 
by Hollow- Street, in the parish of Chagford, it is 
clear that various principal roads ran westward from 
this city ; and therefore probable, that the Romans 
had other stations beyond, it.* " It must be ob- 
served," remarks the author of the History ef Exe- 
ter, " that Horsley has assigned Exeter no place 
among the Roman stations ; but the many evident 
Roman summer camps on the highest hills around 
it, untenable in winter, called for a principal winter 
station ; and Exeter, from its natural situation, as 
well as from its history, was tliis station. Some 
writers have asserted, that we have no remains to 
prove it to have been one. On this it may be re- 
marked, that the destruction made by the inroads of 
the Saxons and Danes, the building of religious 
houses, for the foundations of which, and for their 
cemeteries, the old remains must have been remov- 
ed ; the erection of new walls, and the digging anew 
the ditches around the city by Athalstan ; and, in 
fine, the rebuilding the whole town, since its total 
erasure by Sueno, King of Denmark, in 1003, must 
all have contributed to a change, and even to the 



* The Latin name of this city, according to Ptolemy, is 
" Isca, with the Legio SecunJa Augusta:" as if, says Camden, 
" the Second Legion Augusta had been stationed there ; 
whereas that was garrisoned in fsca Silurum." Notwithstand- 
ing the doubt of Ptolemy's accuracy, thus expressed by an 
author of established credit, an attentive examination of tacts 
will strongly corroborate ihe implied meaning of the former. 
The Second Augustan Legion was commanded by Vespasian, 
who is now generally admitted to be the conqueror of Britannia 
Prima, in which province Danmonium was included. The 
second legion, then, must have been in this country, and that 
for ome time prior to its removal to Isca Silurum ; for the 
Danmonii, who are represented by Richard as the most respect- 
able of all the British tribes, are said, by the same writer, to 
have fought thirty battles, in conjunction with the Belgse, against 
the Romans ; and several of these battles were undoubtedly 
maintained against the troops of Vespasian. In this instance, 
then, both the authorities of Geoffrey of Monmouth, and of 
Ptolemy, are in accordance ; and there seems no real grounds 
of questioning the assertions of either. " It was necessary that 
the country from which the Romans were to derive their 
greatest revenue, the province most renowned for its metals, 
should be well guarded, and the nation held in the strictest 
obedience ; and as we hear of no revolt against the Roman 
power in this part of the island, it may be concluded, that the 
number of resident troops were sufficient to prevent insurrec- 
tion; and consequently, that a considerable part of the Second 
Augustan Legion remained here for a long period. Another 
circumstance in proof of the residence of this legion at Exeter, 
is the ancient tradition, that it was once honoured by the Ro- 
niajis with the name of Augusta. 

f These Penates were of bronze, and consisted of five 
figures, appearing, from their execution, to have been the work 
of foreign artists, and of an early period. They were found in 
tVigging a cellar under the house of Mr. Upham, in the High 
Street, at the corner of Broad Gate : they lay within a narrow 
space, and not more than three or four feet below the present 
pavement of the cellar. The first, a female figure, representing 
either the goddess Ceres, or Fortune, four inches and a half 
high, is dressed in a long loose garment covering her whole 
body : her hair is adorned with a diadem, like those which ap- 
pear on the heads of Livia, and Trajau's Queens ; her liair, tied 



destruction of old materials, and consequently of our 
antiquities. Many Roman remains and coins have, 
however, been found here ; and even Roman coins 
have been discovered in the walls." Amongst other 
proofs of the Roman residence in this city, may be 
mentioned the Penates, or Household Gods, whicU 
were discovered, with other antiquities, in July, iu. 
the year 1778.f 

To what period Exeter retained its name of Isca- 
Damnoniorum, is uncertain ; though it seems pro- 
bable that it fell into disuse very soon after the Ro- 
mans quitted the island, about which time it appears 
to have been re-occupied by the Britons who had 
preserved their independence by retiring to the wilds 
of Cornwall. They did not, however, continue its 
masters many years ; for Cerdic, the founder of the 
kingdom of Wessex, having greatly extended his 
possessions, either by conquest or intrigue, included 
the most considerable portion of Devonshire within 
his dominions ; and at length Exeter became sub- 
jugated to the power of the Saxons. Under the 
government of these people, its name was again 
changed, and the new one of Exan-Cestre imposed 
in its, stead. This compound, originating iu the 



behind, falls down her back: her left hand is broken off; in her 
right she holds a cornucopia. The folds of the drapery are so 
corroded by rust, as to exhibit but very faint traces of the ori- 
ginal workmanship. Two statues of Mercury; one four inches 
and a half long ; the other only four inches and a quarter. The 
former is a perfect and well-proportioned figure: instead of a 
bonnet or petasus, the wings on his head grow out between his 
hair, as they do in some statues represented by Montfaucon ; 
and he has no wings on his feet. A long loose garment, doubled 
on his left shoulder, and passing under the upper part of the 
arm, is brought over it below the elbow, and hangs half way 
down his leg. His left hand, though turned up, as if meant to 
contain something, is empty ; his right holds a purse. The 
other statue of Mercury has the pelasus, and wings on his feet; 
he is more clothed than the former figure, his garment entirely 
covering his right arm and side, and reaching down almost to 
his feet. His left arm is in a similar attitude; but the shape of 
the purse in his right hand is different. The fourth statue re- 
presents either Mars, or a Roman warrior, completely armed, 
with a high crested helmet, coat of mail, and boots covering the 
whole front of the leg: both the hands are broken off. Th 
last of the figures, only two inches and a quarter in height, from 
the delicacy of its make, the turn of countenance, and the dress 
of the hair, seems applicable only to Apollo: the right hand is >. 
broken offal the elbow; the left holds something like a lineiv 
cloth, but so covered wilh rust, that it is impossible to ascertain 
its form. These five penates were found with, or rather sur- 
rounded by, a considerable quantity of large oyster shells. 
There were also in the same mass, fragments of two urns, of 
different colours and kinds of earth: one of dark brown; the 
other of a bright red ; the latter, in particular, very highly 
glazed, and adorned will) fancied borders, and human figures 
executed in relief. A large Romau tile was likewise found 
lying on the natural earth, but neither medal, nor coin of any 
kind; though, on the opposite side of the street, on digging 
the foundation of a house, about two years before, some small 
remains of a tesselated pavement was discovered, with a few 
jloman medals, one of them a Trajan in large brass. With. 
these antiquities were also found some fragments of horns, 
bones, cinders of glass and njetal, a quantity, of burnt wood,. 
&c. 

Coaster., 



128 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Ceastcr, Ccstrc, or Castle, which had been erected 
here, and to its situation near the Exe, has been 
softened into Exeter, through the various appella- 
tions of Exceaster, Excester, and Exeter. 

It has been the late of this city to sustain several 
sieges ; but the greatest calamities it ever experi- 
enced, were inflicted by the Danes, who, in the reign 
of Alfred, (870) in violation of a solemn treaty, sur- 
prised and routed the King's horsemen, and mount- 
ing their steeds, rode to Exeter, and remained there 
for the winter. Alfred, fully convinced that nothing- 
could preserve bis country from being conquered, 
but a brave resistance, collected all his forces, and 
invested Exeter by land : while a fleet, which he had 
prepared and manned chiefly with Frisian pirates, 
blocked up the harbour. This fleet having happily 
defeated a Danish squadron, which brought a rein- 
forcement to the besieged, the Danes in Exeter ca- 
pitulated, and agreed to evacuate that city, and all 
the territories of the West Saxons. Between the 
period of the death of Alfred and the reign of Athel- 
-stan, the Cornish or Western Britons had recovered 
possession of Exeter ; but the latter monarch having 
defeated and driven them beyond the Tamar, they 
were never afterwards able successfully to oppose 
the Saxon arms. Athelstan, to secure his conquest, 
surrounded Exeter with a wall of hewn stones, de- 
fended by towers ; and under his auspices, says 
Malmsbury, " it became such a place of trade, that 
it abounded with opulence." lie adds also, that 
many other remarkable works of Athelstan, who 
held one of his gemots, or national councils here, 
were to be seen in the city and its neighbourhood. 
When Sueno, King of Denmark, landed in England 
in 1003, to revenge the massacre committed on his 
countrymen, in the preceding year, Exeter became 
the first sacrifice to his vengeance. It was bravely 
defended during two months, but was at last deli- 
vered up through the treachery of Hugh, its Nor- 
man governor ; and its inhabitants were put tp the 
sword without mercy, and most of its buildings 
burnt. Scarcely had this calamity been forgotten, 
when it was again besieged by the army of William 
the Conqueror, and, part of the walls falling, obliged 
to surrender. * 

In the reign of Stephen, Exeter was garrisoned 
for the Empress Matilda, by Baldwin Rivers, Enrl 
of Devon : but was soon recovered for the King, 
who forced the Earl to seek refuge in the Isle of 
Wight, where he was soon after taken, and banish- 
ed. During the contest betw; en Edward the Fourth, 
and Henry the Sixth, it again became the scene of 

* HoKnshed inl : mates, thai the citizens nude only a show 
.of opposition ; but it appears from Hooker, that their resistam e 
was more determined ; for the King " perceiving the siege to 
continue, marched, and came himself to the same ; but rather 
.cam*. no further than S:.-.lis!>uno. In the meane time the citi- 
zens were advertised how. the whole reahne had yeeWed, and 
.seeing also how their confederate did daiiie shrinke awaie from 
them, and by that me'an-es they to grow weaker and weaker, 
and therefore the lesse able to withstand so great a force, and 



hostility ; but the imminent dangers to which it war- 
exposed, were averted by the prudent conduct oi' 
the Mayor, and other citizens. At that period of 
domestic calamity, the Duchess of Clarence, Lord 
Dineham, Lord Fitz-Waren, and other distinguish- 
ed partizans of Henry, who, with many fighting 
men, had entered the city, were blockaded in it, by 
Hugh Courtney, Earl of Devon ; but, after twelve 
days, the blockade was discontinued through the 
mediation of certain canons of the cathedral. 

In the time of Henry the Seventh, Perkin W T ar- 
beck, the real or pretended son of Edward the 
Fourth, la-uded in Cornwall, assembled an army of 
about three thousand men, and with this force, to 
use the words of Holinshed, he " determined first 
of all to assaie the winning of Excester. Then 
hasting thither, he laid siege to it ; and wanting 
ordnance to make batterie, studied all waies possible 
to breake the gates : and what with casting of stones, 
heading with iron barres, and kindling of fire under 
the gates, he omitted nothing that could be devised 
for the furtherance of his purpose. The citizens 
perceiving in what danger they stood, first let cer- 
teine messengers downe by cords over the wall, that 
might certifie the King of their necessitie and trou- 
ble. And herewith taking unto them boldnesse of 
courage, determined to repell fire with fire, and 
caused fagots to be brought and laid to the inward 
parts of the gates, and set them all on fire ; to the 
intent that the fire being inflamed on both side the 
gates, might as well keepe out their enemies from 
entering, as shut in the citizens from fleeing out ; 
and that they, in the meane season, might make 
trenches and rampires to defeat their enemies in- 
stead of gates and bulworks. Thus by fire was the 
citie preserved from fire. Then Perkin of verie ne- 
cessitie compelled to forsake the gates, assaulted 
the towne in diverse weake and unfortified places, 
and set up ladders to take the citie. But the citi- 
zens, with help of such as were come forth of the 
countrie adjoining to their aid, so valiantlie defended 
the walles, that they slue above two hundred of Per- 
kin's souldicrs at that assault. The King having 
advertisement of this siege of Excester, hasted forth 
with his host, in as much speed as was possible, and 
sent the Lord Daubencie with certame bands of 
light horsemen before, to advertise all men of his 
comming at hand. But in the meane season, the 
Lord Edward Courtneie, Earl of Devonshire, and 
the valiant Lord William his sonne, accompanied 
with Sir Edmund Carew, Sir Thomas Trenchard, 
Sir William Courtneie, Sir Thomas Fulford, Sir 

to keepe out so puissant an armie as was round about them ; 
and considering also, that small mercy or favour should they 
find, if the citie by force were taken ; did by way of intreatie 
offer submission, and desire peace, which in the end they ob- 
tained : and so paieng a grievous line, tljey and the citie were 
restored. But yt tin token of his conquest, the King altered 
and changed the gates of the castell, ami tooke an otli 01" all. the 
citizens to be, his liege subjects." 

John 



DEVONSHIRE. 



129 



John Halewell, Sir John Croker, Walter Courtneie, 
Peter Edgecombe, William Saint Maurc, with all 
speed, came into the citie of Exfwstcr, and holpe 
the citizens ; and at the last assault was the Earle 
hurt in the arme with an arrow, and so were many 
of his companie, but verie few slaine. When Perkin 
saw that he could not win the citie, when he saw it 
was so well fortified with men and munitions, he de- 
parted from thence, and went unto Taunton." The 
conduct of the citizens during this siege so concili- 
ated the favour of Henry the Seventh, that, on his 
visit to the city shortly after the flight of Warbeck, 
he bestowed on them great commendations, and 
gave them the sword which he then wore, as a tes- 
timony of his good-will ; directing it to be borne 
before the Mayor on all public occasions. 

The last siege sustained by this city was in the 
reign of Edward the Sixth, when the proposed 
changes in religious worship occasioned an alarm- 
ing insurrection of the inhabitants of Devonshire and 
Cornwall. The insurgents, in considerable force, 
encompassed the city on the second of July, 1549; 
but, after several vain attempts to reduce it, through 
a period of five-and-thirty days, were obliged to 
abandon their enterprise ; several bodies of their 
confederates having been vanquished by John, Lord 
Russell, and other persons who commanded for the 
King. The inhabitants, during the latter days of 
this siege, were reduced to great extremity ; being 
obliged to feed on horse-flesh, and other loathsome 
viands. Their loyalty, and brave defence, occasion- 
ed the King to make a grant to the city of the entire 
manor of Ex-Island. 

After this historical sketch, we hasten to notice 
the great ornament of the city its venerable and 
magnificent Cathedral. This noble memorial of re- 
ligious zeal, is singularly interesting to the admirer 
of ancient English (or, as it is frequently, but erro- 
neously termed, Gothic) architecture. The variety 
of styles discovered in this edifice, and the ambi- 
guity, and silence, of our early historians concerning 
its foundation, have been fruitful themes for various 
and opposite opinions. The generality of writers, 
from Hooker,* in 1584, to those of the present time, 
have stated, that St. Mary's Chapel (at the east end 
of the choir) is the ancient Saxon church ; and that 
the whole of the present fabric was five hundred 
years in building. The following description Vvill 
assist every person in determining the various eras 
of its erection, from the styles which characterise 
the different parts of the structure. 

The city of Exeter is said to have been at one pe- 
riod called Monktown, from the number of religious 
houses established within its walls. Three of these 
were situated within the precincts of the close be- 
longing to the Cathedral, and were inhabited by 
nuns and monks. The nunnery occupied the site of 

* John Hooker, a learneil antiquary, was born at Exeter in 
1524, anil educated at Oxford, after which he .travelled into. 
Germany. On his return he settled at his native place, which 

VOL. II. NO. 54. 



the Dean's House and College of Vicars. King 
Etheldred founded a monastery here about the year 
808 : and in J)32, Athelstan founded a second mo- 
nastery for Benedictines. The latter- did not long 
enjoy their new foundation : for the piratical Danes 
assailed the town ; and the monks were dispersed, 
to seek safety and sustenance in other parts of the 
country. But they found a new friend and patron 
in King Edgar, who passing through Exeter in 986, 
on his way to visit Ordegar, Earl of Devon, whose 
daughter Elfrida he had married, commiserated 
their distressed state, replaced them in their former 
establishment, and appointed Sydenham, afterwards 
Bishop of Crediton, to be their abbot. This re- 
establishment continued scarcely seventeen years ; 
for on the conquest and subsequent desolation of 
Exeter, by Sueno, the Dane, the monasteries suffer- 
ed in the general wreck. Soon after the accession 
of Canute, the monks were once more settled at 
Exeter; and in 1019 this monarch invested them 
with all their former privileges. About thirty years 
after, on the removal of the See of Devon to *his 
town, the monks were sent, by Edward the Confes- 
sor, to Westminster. Leofric, the first Bishop of 
Exeter, caused a nunnery and monastery to be taken 
down, and proper habitations for the members of 
this cathedral to be erected in their stead : after 
making ordinances for the church and clergy, and 
exercising his episcopal office for about twenty-three 
years, he died in 1073, and was buried in the ceme- 
tery of his pwn church, in a place now included 
within the walls of the south tower. In 1568, a mo- 
nument was erected to his memory at the expence of 
the Dean and Chapter. 

The episcopal See of Devon was seated at Credi- 
ton previous to its establishment at Exeter ; but 
Leofric, who was Bishop of the See, and Lord 
Chancellor of England, prev-ailed on Edward the 
Confessor to remove it to the latter town in the year 
1049. The monarch, in person, with Edyth, his 
Queen, attended at the installation, and placed the 
Bishop in his new See, in the most solemn manner; 
using the following form of words upon the occa- 
sion : 

" I Kynge Edward, taking /Leofricke bye the 
Ryghte Haunde, and Edythe my Queene by tiie 
Lefte, de installe hym the fyrst and most famous 
Byschoppe of Exon, withe a grate Desyre of Aboiin- 
dance of Blessynges to all such as shall furd<-r and 
encrease the same ; but wythe a fearful and execra- 
ble Curse on all such as shall diminish or take unye 
thynge from it." 

At the same time, the King endowed the See with 
the lands and emoluments that had previously be- 
longed to Crediton. The See being thus establish- 
ed, it seems probable that a suitable cathedral was 
soon afterwards provided : but whether constructed 



he represented in Parliament in 1571. He wrote a description 
of Exeter, and some part of Holiiislied's Chronicle, besides 
other pieces. He died in'1601. 

2 K by 



130 



DEVONSHIRE. 



by the enlargement and alteration of some existing [ 
edifice, or whether a separate and entire building ! 
were raised, is uncertain. It is probable, observes | 
Sir Henry Englefi eld, " that the first Cathedral was j 
not more than about sixty feet in length, and occupied i 
the site of the present chapel of fit. Mary. That 
the chapel, in its present state, was not the Saxon 
church, is satisfactorily proved by an examination of 
its architecture'. Mr. William, Davey, of Exeter, 
who inspected the present building with minute and 
discriminating attention, contends, that the ancient 
Cathedral did not occupy the site of St. Mary's 
Chapel, but was on the same ground as the present 
choir, having its high altar where it still remains. 
The sanctuary was the most sacred spot ; and it is 
extremely probable, that the religious architects of 
those sacred times would rather extend their build- 
ing in any direction, than remove the site of the host. 
Besides, Hooker only compares the size of the an- 
cient Cathedral to the Lady's Chapel. No par- 
ticular alteration appears to have been made in the- 
Ciiliedral before the time of William Warlewast, 
the third Bishop, who was a Norman, and had been 
chaplain to the Conqueror, and his two sons, Wil- 
liam and Henry; the latter of whom inducted him 
to this See in 1107. This Prelate was a liberal be- 
nefactor to his Cathedral ; and it appears that he 
considerably enlarged it, and laid the foundation of 
the present choir : " And to him the towers yet re- 
maining ave probably to be-ascribed. They are per- 
fectly similar in style to the buildings of Gundul- 
phus, his cotemporary ; and much more resemble 
the magnificence of the Norman architects, than the 
simplicity of the English Saxons." Hence it ap> 
pears that the first considerable Cathedral was plan- 
ned under the direction and patronage of Bishop 
Warlewast : but how nearly he may have ap- 
proached completion, is not ascertained. That 
he extended it westward of the tower, is in- 
ferred by a circular arch, which opens from the 
south aisle of the nave to the cloisters. This is or- 
namented on the inside and outside with columns, 
having capitals of the same character as some of 
those in the towers ; and of others which are evi- 
dently of Norman architecture : whatever grandeur 
and consequence the Cathedral may have assumed 
under Bishop Warlewast, was nearly annihilated 
during the siege of Exeter by King Stephen, in 
1138, when it was plundered and burnt; and the 
choir is mentioned as having particularly suffered. 
Bishop Chichester, the successor of Warlewast, is 
said to have expended much money in the repairs of 
the fabric. These repairs were continued by Robert 
Warlewast, Bartholomew of Exeter, and John the 
Chantor ; and were completed by Henry Marshall, 



* Bishop Stapledon, continued in the See from 1307 to 
13?(). IJe was of u noble family ; and being highly in favor 
wilh Edward UK- Second, was c'hosen one of the privy council, 
and afterwards Lord Chancellor of England, lu these high 



who became Bishop in the year 1194. From the 
death of Bishop Marshall, in 1206, to the accession 
of Quivil, in 1281, there was but little alteration or 
addition to the fabric : though Prince says, that 
Bishop Blondy, who was appointed in 1445 was 
" a worthy benefactor to his church, contributing 
very liberally towards the building of the same." 
Walter Bronescombe, his successor, built a chapel 
on the south side of the east end, which was dedicat- 
ed to St. Gibriel, and intended it to be his place of 
sepulture. Here he was interred, and his tomb re- 
mains. In this chapel he established two chaplains 
to pray for his soul, those of his benefactors, and all 
the faithful deceased ; for which he appropriated the 
vicarage of Bokerel in Devon. 

Bishop Quivil succeeded Bronescombe in 1281 ; 
and to him we are principally indebted for the mag- 
nificence and magnitude of the present Cathedral. 
The uniformity of the structure, as it at present 
stands, seems to prove," observes Sir H. Engle- 
field, " beyond a doubt, that the whole, as the uni- 
form tradition of different writers has delivered down 
to us, was the fruit of one great design ; and its sin- 
gular elegance does as much honour to the taste, as 
its noble size does to the munificence of the founder." 
Hooker informs us, that Quivil " first began to en- 
large and increase his church from the chancel down- 
wards." In constructing the choir, he appears to 
have retained the old walls, which were altered and 
perforated with larger windows, to correspond with 
his whole plan. The two ponderous Norman towers 
were great obstacles to the completion of the build- 
ing with exact symmetry : and the Prelate thought 
it more prudent to convert them into transepts, than 
to destroy them, and erect new cross aisles in their 
place : yet this was a daring attempt, and required 
great skill, as the architect was obliged to take away 
one side of each tower nearly half its height from the 
ground, and construct a large and mighty arch to 
support the remaining upper part. It now became 
necessary to have large windows in the towers, to 
light the newly-formed transept, and to correspond 
in style with those introduced into the upper part of 
the, choir. One was accordingly inserted in the 
north, or St. Paul's Tower, and another in the south, 
or St. Jehu's Tower, in 1280. During the time of 
Quivil's successor, Button, great sums were in dif- 
ferent years expended on the work ; and the choir 
does not appear to have been finished till the year 
1318, in the time of Bishop Stapledon, when $Qt. 
was expended on the altar-piece. This Bishop was 
inducted to the See with great pomp and splendor, 
and afterwards became a liberal benefactor to the 
Cathedral.* He is stated to have made (or com- 
pleted) the choir, and adorned it with two images of 

St. 



offices, his income must have been considerable; yet his gene- 
rosity was proportionate to his wealth ; and the Cathedral ap- 
pears to have been much improved by his bounty, but the dis- 
iraction of the times proved fatal to his loyalty and his life. 

During 



DEVONSHIRE 



lir 



St. Peter and St. Paul. The church appears to 
h&ve been new glazed, at least in great part, about 
the year 1317, and both the plain and coloured glass 
was brought from Rouen in Normandy. The Bi- 
shops, however, were not the only contributors to- 
wards the erection and decoration of the Cathedral : 
for the several dignitaries of the church, the clergy 
of the diocese, and the different religious houses de- 
pendent thereon, were all required to participate in 
the expences. " From the beginning of the four- 
teenth century to the middle of the fifteenth," ob- 
serves Bishop Lyttleton, " 100/. per annum, at an 
average, was expended in this work ; and if we allow 
the value of money to be as ten to one compared 
with the present time, and at less I think it cannot 
be estimated, the yearly amount will be 1000/. per 
annum ; not to mention that from the Saxon age 
down to the reign of Henry the Vlth a penny was 
equal in weight to three-pence ; consequently one 
shilling, was three shillings ; and one pound, three 
pounds, &c." The Cathedral appears to have been 
totally neglected from Stapledon's death till the time 
f>f Bishop Graudison, who was consecrated at Rome 
the 18th of October, 1327. Afterwards being ap- 
pointed Nuncio or Ambassador from the Pope to Ed- 
ward the Third, that Monarch preferred him to the 
See of Exeter. Five arches on each side of the 



During the King's journey to Bristol, lie committed the go- 
vernment of the city of London to the Bishop : but Queen 
Isabel, and her paramour Mortimer, who had just returned 
from France, approached the city with an army, and, in the 
midst of the anarchy and riot which ensued, the good Bishop 
was sacrificed by the mob, who forced him to the cross in 
Cheapside, and there beheaded him, with his brother, Sir Ri- 
chard Stapledon, Knight. His body was first interred in " a 
heap of sand" near Essex House, Temple Bar; but afterwards 
taken np by order of the Queen, and conveyed to Exeter. He 
was now interred with great pomp on the north side of the high 
altar, the 28lh of March, 1327. A sumptuous monument 
which was erected to liis memory, displays the fine style of 
ornamental architecture which characterised that period. In 
the north aisle, opposite the Bishop's, is another monument to 
Sir Richard Stapledon. 

f The magnificent facade is thus described in the description 
of the Cathedral, published by the Society of Antiquaries. " It 
is divided into three parts, separated in some degree by two 
projecting parts or buttresses; but both of them comprehended 
in tin: regular tit-sign. In the centre part is the principal en- 
uance into the church ; and on the right of it are the small 
windows of Bishop Grandison's Chapel : in the two other divi- 
sions are the smaller entrances, which differ in tlieirform. The 
anglt s on each extremity of the screen are different ; the prin- 
cipal parts of it, area plinth wilh mouldings, on which rises a 
regular number of divisions, separated by small regular but- 
tresses, enriched. Each division contains two tier of niches : 
the lover one lias a pedestal of three sides, with panncls, and 
embattled at top; from which issue angel.-, eilher placed against, 
or embracing small clusters of columns : they display an ele- 
gant variety of attitudes, &c. 

" On the pedestals of the smr.ll windows there is but one 
tolumn ; though there are three capitals, corresponding with 
the rest of the several capitals. They support an assemblage of 
personages, who are seated, some in their robes, and some in 
very splendid armour. Those statues oil the buttresses which 
are standing, are religious; ihc one that is perfect on tlie right, 
a bishop. Over the entrance of the left part of the screen are 





nave, towards the west, were added by this Bishop. 
He, also, vaulted the whole roof of (he nave, and 
decorated the west front with a magnificent external 
screen, or fa9ade, which is profusely ornamented 
with niches, tracery, statues, &c. It is probable, 
however, that this part was added after the comple- 
tion of the front, as it projects beyond the wall, ob- 
scures a part of the great west window, and is great- 
ly dissimilar in style and character to any part of the 
building. He also made some additions to the clois- 
ters ; and constructed an elegant chapel for himself 
behind his elaborate screen.* 

The Cathedral, in its present state, consists of a 
nave, with two side aisles ; two short transepts, 
formed by the towers already noticed ; a chapter- 
house ; a choir, with side aisles ; and ten chapels, 
or oratories ; with a room, called the consistory 
court. The nave presents a magnificent and grand 
appearance on entering it from the western door ; 
though much of its grandeur is destroyed by the seats 
and pews in this part of the fabric. It measures 
seventy-six feet in width within the walls, and 175 
in length from the western door to the organ screen. 
The roof is supported by fourteen massive clustered 
columns from which spring sixteen pointed arches ; 
and above them are two tiers of small open arches. 
On the north side over one of the arches, is a project- 
three of the Cardinal virtues ; the fourth destroyed. The first, 
from the scales, Justice ; the second, from the lance and shield. 
Fortitude ; the third, from the religious dress, and .the hart in 
her hands, Discipline: they each have crowns on their heads, 
and are trampling under their feet prostrate figures, emblematic 
of their opposite vices. 

" In the spandrels of the arch of the principal entrance are 
four angels reposing ; and in four small niches on the side of 
the architrave, are small statues of royal personages seated. 
Over the entrance of the third part, issue, from smalj orna- 
mented brackets, two royal personages ; and between them, 
a griffon. On the returns, or sides of the buttress, are four 
more royal persons. The canopies to the niches differ on the 
buttresses, and to the four first divisions on the third part. 

" In the second tier, all the statues are standing, except in 
the niche joining the centre small angular buttress, in which is 
a royal figure seated : in his right hand, the remains of a 
sceptre ; and in the other, a book : his foot on a globe, which 
is divided into three parts : below is a shield, with the arms of 
the see, quartered wilh the old Saxon kings, supported by two 
kneeling angels. The corresponding -.latue is gone ; though 
the shield, with the arms of England, and Edward the Con- 
fessor, supported likewise with angels, remains. The five 
statues on each side comprehended ten of the Apostles, with 
their attributes. On the buttresses are the four Evangelists, 
wilh their symbols at their feet. The rest of the statues which 
till (he remaining niches, have no particular badge to distinguish 
them. There are, likewise, four more statues in this line, on 
the returns of (lie buttresses; but they have no distinguishing 
marks. The statue on the anple at the extremity to the right 
in lliis tier, isSl. Michael triumphing over I. ucifer. The heads 
of the niches differ also in the buttresses ; but those in the third 
part, alter their design entirely. The line of the entablature 
continues to the right-hand buttress, and then loses part of its 
width. The battlements on the first and third parts are of a 
most uncommon fancy: angels appear between the openings: 
some playing on musical instruments, and others in altitudes of 
devotion : the battlements of the centre part and buttresses are 
open, and much enriched." 

ing 



132 



DEVONSHIRE. 



ing kind of stone pew, called the minstrels' gallery, 
which is ornamented with some figures in alto-re- 
lievo, holding different musical instruments. The 
choir is of the, same width as the nave, and measures 
K8 "I'et't in length. St. Mary's Chapel is 61 feet in 
length, and between that and the altar screen is a 
space of -25, feet. The whole cathedral measures 
408 il>et from east to west, including the walls ; the 
height of the roof, or vaulting-, is (39 i'eet ; and of the 
Norman towers, to the top of the battlements, 130 
feet. The towers, though similar in shape and cha- 
racter, display some varieties in their ornaments ; 
for the fascia, or intersecting arches, on the exterior 
of the north tower, are entirely different from any 
]irts of thosa on the south; its tipper story is more 
modern, and the turrets at the angles are later ad- 
ditions. The exterior appearance is massive gran- 
deur : and though the architect has diversified the 
surface with shallow niches, numerous columns, and 
'/igzag mouldings to the arches, the beauty and 
lightness intended to be produced by these enrich- 
ments, are eclipsed by the style of architecture which 
prevails in the windows and ornamental parts of the 
cathedral. 

The Chapter-House is a large handsome room, 
in the form of a parallelogram ; and is said to have 
been built by Bishop Lucy in 1430 : but Sir H. 
Englefield thinks that this prelate only built the up- 
per part of it ; as " the lower part of this elegant 
room is so different from that of the superstructure, 
and so much resembling the architecture of the 
church, that it is highly probable that Bishop Qui- 
vil, who is recorded to have begun the cloisters, 
did also build, or at least begin, the chapter- 
house." 

The windows of the cathedral are very large, and 
many of them contain fine specimens of painted 
glass. They are all of the same shape, yet the ar- 
chitect has ornamented each with a studied variety 
of tracery, by which plan there are not two windows 
exactly similar on either side of the building, though 
the windows which are opposite to each other cor- 
respond in almost every instance. The large win- 
dow to the east was repaired and beautified from 
the bequest of Henry Blackburn, a canon, in 1390 ; 
when an agreement was made with Robert Lym, of 
Exeter, glazier, to furnish the new glass at 20r/. per 
foot ; and that during the time employed, he was to 
have 3s. Ad. per week for his own work, and 2?. for 
his family. It is still in good preservation, and con- 
tains nineteen whole-length figures of the patriarchs 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with some saints, and 
other personages. Besides several painted figures, 
there are also various armorial bearings of thePlau- 
fagenet andCourtnay families, and different Bishops 
of the See. The great west window, measuring 37 
feet high by 27 feet broad, was fitted up with paint- 
ed glass, &c. in 1706. The lower part is divided 

* The cathedral is now called St. Peter's ; but it was for- 
merly dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul. 



into nine compartments, seven of which are occupied 
with full-length figures of as many saints ; that of 
St. Peter* being iu the centre. Besides various 
crests, coronets, mottos, Mosaic work, and other 
ornaments, this elegant window is emblazoned with 
forty-six coats of arms, properly adorned with their 
fields, supporters, quartering^, &c. The upper por- 
tion consists of two circular mouldings, including se- 
veral cinquefoils, quartrefoils, and trefoils, each con- 
taining a complete coat of arms : and the centre is oc- 
cupied with the arms of the King of England. 

In the North Tower is a curious clock, given by 
Bishop Courtenay to the cathedral. This is worthy 
of notice from the singularity of its ornaments, and 
the ingenuity of its mechanism. On the face, or 
dial, are two circles, marked with figures. The in- 
terior circle is marked from 1 to 30, whereby, is 
shown the age of the moon, which is represented by 
an artificial ball revolving within the circle, and 
which changes its aspect with the varying phases of 
that satellite. In the centre is a globe, represent- 
ing the earth ; the figures on the outer circle mark 
the hours of the day and night. From this tower, 
a noble panorama salutes the eye : immediately un- 
derneath lie the handsome streets and squares of tho 
city, while the surrounding country is covered with 
cottages, and seats, and all the hills are cultivated 
to their summits. Powderham Castle appears at a 
distance on the side of a hill ; and the river Ex rolls 
his placid stream through the whole extent of this 
beautiful country. 

On the south side of the altar are three stone 
seats, or stalls ; the canopies and ornaments of 
which are extremely rich and elegant. The recess, 
or back of each seat, forms a semi-octagon, and is 
adorned with enriched Mosaic work. At the top of 
the back of the central seat is the bust of a bishop, 
and in each of the lateral seats is that of a priest. 
The seats, as they rise, form the plinths for the co- 
lumns, which are supported by couchant lions. The 
columns on each side of the centre niche are of gilt 
brass. In St. Mary's Chapel are three stone seats 
of similar character. 

The most elegant ornament of the choir is the 
Bishop's throne ; the whole of which is composed 
of wood, carved in a very delicate and tasteful man- 
ner, and so constructed as to form a light pyramid 
of arches, columns, niches, pinnacles, crotchets, and 
foliated ornaments. It is fifty-two feet in height. 

The screen, or rood-loft, which separates the nave 
from the choir, is supported in front by four Pur- 
beck stone pillars, from which spring the groins of 
three Hat arches : above these is a row of thirteen 
small arches, or niches, filled with some curious 
specimens of ancient paintings. These represent dif- 
ferent events in sacred history. The screen supports 
a large and very grand organ, esteemed among the 
finest instruments of the kind in England. It was 



built 



DEVONSHIRE. 



133 



Built In 1665, by John Loosemore ; hut has since 
received many improvements from Jordan and Mi- 
qbean. This organ, independent of the pipes in- 
closed in the case, has some lateral pipes, attached 
to the side columns of the building. These are said 
to be the largest in this country, and belong to a 
stop called the double-diapason, which is" an octave 
below the common pitch. The stops so well cover 
each other, tnat neither the reed stops, nor the f'als.; 
ones, (sesquialtera, &c.) are distinguished. This 
circumstance, perhaps, may account for that purity 
of tone for which the instrument is famed.* 

The Great Bell of Exeter, given by Bishop 

* Mr. William Jackson, a native of Exeter, and well known 
to the public, by his musical and literary talents, was many 
years the organist of this cathedral. He was born in May, 
1730. His father, a respectable grocer in the place, with a view 
to one of the learned professions, gave him a liberal education ; 
but discovering a decided preference to the study f >f music, lie 
placed h m under Mr. Travers, organist of the cathedral church 
in Exeter. Mr. Jackson continued with Mr. Travers of Exe- 
ter two years, and afterwards went to London, where about 
1748, he became a pupil of the celebrated Travers, author of 
" Haste my Nannette," and other admirable compositions. 
Under this Mr. Travers he also continued two years, and then 
returned to his native city, where he practised, with consider- 
able reputation, as a composer, performer, and teacher. His 
compositions were chiefly vocal, and exhibited a cha^teness of 
Conception, ingenuity of construction, and touch of expression, 
which could only result from native genius combined with a 
taste and knowledge of the higher principles of harmony. In 
.London, talents such as these would have quickly ensured him 
wealth and fame; but in Exeter, his pecuniary reward, though 
far from scanty, could not keep pace with his increasing repu- 
tation, and it was not till 1777 that he obtained a settled bene- 
fice, when he succeeded Mr. Richard Langdon, as organist in 
the cathedral of Exeter. 

Mr. Jackson had for a long time amused his friends with a 
variety of ingenious productions in prose and verse, and had 
discovered to them, by a number of specimens, a real genius 
for landscape painting ; but it was not till 1755 that his talents 
as a musical composer became known to the public. At that 
time he published twelve songs, of which the following were so 
simply elegant, so striking tor their originality, as to secure him 
popularity and give him a place among the first composers of 
his lime: " The Heavy Hours are almost past," " Ah why 
must Words my Flame reveal," " 'Twas when the Seas were 
roaring," " fanthe the lovely, the Joy of her Swain." These 
were followed by six "sonatas for the harpsichord ; and these by 
a third work of six three-part elegies, preceded by a delightful 
Invocation, which gave such evidence of taste, feeling, and 
judgment as fully to establish his reputation. Mr. Jackson's 
most unfortunate publication was an Anthem selected from the 
PsaJms, and Pope's Ode of a dying Christian to his Soul, of 
which the contrivance was still and bald, and the expression 
cold and weak. This work was succeeded by a book of twelve 
hymns, prefaced by some very judicious remarks respecting the 
proper style of this species of church composition ; of this work 
it has been said, that, though it is deserving of great praise, tin 1 
precepts are superior to the example. Mr. Jackson's greatest 
work was Warton's exquisite Ode to Fancy, in which the ora- 
torial style was necessarily adopted : but not withstanding his 
merit in lighter compositions, this was evidently beyond his 
compass ; and in those parts where dignity of expression, bold 
contrivance, and grand construction were required, he was Un- 
able to reach the sentiments of the poet. Besides a number of 
deservedly celebrated publications, Mr. Jackson's manuscript 
music was considerable, and every cultivated ear listened with 
delight to his " Fairy Fantasies,"" Lycidas," and other 
works. 

yta. . NO. 55> 



Courtcnay, is an object of much notoriety. It 
weighs 12,500 pounds ; and is suspended at the 
very top of the north tower.f In the south tower 
are eleven bells, ten of which are rung in peal. 

The following chapels have been erected at dif- 
ferent periods within this cathedral, and have geue- 
rilly become the burial-places of the bishops who 
founded them. St. Mary's, at the east end, is ap- 
propriated to a library. St. Mary Magdalen's is to 
the north of it, and St. Gabriel's on the south. St. 
Andrews' is used as a vestry by the canons and 
prebendaries; and St. James's, a vestry for the 
priest vicars. In each of the two last chapels were 

In 1782, Mr. Jackson made his literary entree by publishing 
his " Thirty Letters on various Subjects," a work elegant in 
its style, and replete with ut:ful information. On poetry, DIU- 
sic, and painting, his opinions, though singular, were generally 
just; but on other subjects his ideas were peculiar; and he at- 
tempted to revivi? the explode*! notion of spontaneous genera- 
tion; for which he advanced bold and forcible arguments, that 
must certainly please thougii not convince the muintainers of the 
opinion ex nihilo nihil fit. The letters procured the author 
much credit, and a second edition appeared in 1795. About 
1791 he published a pamphlet " On the present State of Music 
in London," which also passed through two editions. In 1798, 
he added another volume to his letters, intituled " The Four 
Ages ; with Es-ays on various Subjects." Among the latter is 
a most curious nnd entertaining one on the character of Gains- 
borough, the painter; hut Mr Jackson has been censured for 
suffering s'ime anecdotes of that great artist to transpire beyond 
the sacred pale of friendship. 

Mr. Jackson al>o contributed to an octavo volume of ingeni- 
ous pieces, published in 1796 by a literary society instituted at 
Exeter, of which the first members were Dr. Downman, Mr. 
Polwhele, Mr. Jackson, the Rev. Mr. Swete of Oxton, Mr. 
Hole, author of an Essay on the Arabian Nights' Entertainment, 
Mr. Sheldon the anatomist, and other gentlemen of talents re- 
siding in Exeter and its neighbourhood. 

The time of Mr. Jackson was devoted to music, painting, 
and literature. The subjects on which he chiefly employed his 
pencil were landscape; in the colouring of which he was par- 
ticularly strong and bold ; but his pictures had more of effect 
than finish. His music, as a whole, shews justness of concep- 
tion, beauty and novelty of idea, considerable powers of ex- 
pression, and a resource in combination and adjustment rank- 
ing far above mediocrity. But his melodies, accompaniments, 
and basses, are riot of equal excellence with his other composi- 
tior.s. When playing on the' organ or harpsichord, every 
thing which surrounded him seemed forgotten, and his per- 
formance was full, correct, and impassioned. 

Mr. Jackson was married early in life, to MissBartlett, a lady 
of Exeter, by whom he had several children: two sons and a 
daughter are still living. In his temper he was pleasant, social, 
and communicative ; and his manners were modest. His 
figure was tall, and latterly his debility had caused him to stoop 
very much. His aspect, when alone in the street, appeared 
lowering and unsocial, but this was merely the result of studious 
habits, which so far gained upon him, that passing objects of 
any kind seldom attracted his attention. His death occurred 
about the year 1803. 

f The Great Bell at Moscow weighs 432,0001b. thnt at St. 
Peter's in Rome, re-cast in 1785, is 18,C67lb. Another of 
I7.000lb. weight is placed in the tower of the Palazzo Vecchio 
at Florence, and is 275 feet from the ground. The Great Tom, 
of Oxford weighs 17,000lb. the Great Bell of St. Paul's, Lon- 
don, is only 8,4001b. and the Great Tom of Lincoln weighs 
9,894 pounds. 



2 J 



two 



134 



DEVONSHIRE. 



two altars. The chapel of St. John is under the 
south tower; that of St. Paul's under the 
North Tower. Bishop Grandiscn's Chapel is be- 
tween his screen and the wall of the west front. 
At the south-east corner of the choir is Old a ; 
and at tlv? opposite angle of the choir is Spektes 
Chapel. Several of the little apartments are adorn- 
ed with a great variety of sculptured ornaments. 

In addition to the Bishops of Exeter, already 
mentioned, the following have hrcn interred .111 this 
cathedra! -. Osbcrtus, Chicbester, Bartholomew 01 
Exeter, John the Chantor, Marshal, Symon d Apu- 
lia, Brewer, Blondy, Quivil, Button, Berkeley, 
Grandison, Brentinghain, Stafford, Lacy, Ol.lhain, 
Turbeville, Alleigh, Bradbridge, Walton, Cotton, 
Blackall, Weston, Lavington, Ross, and fcJtiller. 
On opening the grave for the latter, in the yeai 
1790, a human skeleton was found, having the 
bones properly united with wires ; and on the fore- 
fore-part of the skull was engraven the following 

words : 

OPERA 

ET 

STUDIO 
JOH: KIT/EN 

ET 

GODFR: SCIILOERl 
GERMANORUM 

1 63i> 
JETAT 

22 - 
FUIS Ell IT. 

Sercral tombs, and inscriptions in memory of the 
above Bishops, exist in different parts of the cathe- 
dral. One, in particular, represents a bishop, who 
had determined to fast during the whole of Lent ; 
but he died, quite exhausted, on the thirty -eighth 
day. His effigies is exhibited in the supposed ema- 
ciated state of the original, in his last moments. 

The cathedral also contains monuments to Hum- 
phry de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex ; Hugh 
Courtenay, Earl of Devon ; Margaret his wile, 
daughter of the above Earl ; Philip Courtenay, their 
son"; and to many other illustrious and private per- 
sons, amongst which is oae to a gentleman ot the 
name of Fenshard, who is said to have been mar- 
ried successively "to fifteen wives, the arms of all ot 
whom are quartered on the tablet with his own. 

In the south aisle of the choir is this tribute to the 
memory of Laura, wife of George Ferdinand, Lord 
Southampton, who died in June, 1798. 

Farewell, dear shade! But let this marble tell, 
What heav'nly worth in youth and beauty fell. 
With ev'ry virtue blest, whate'er thy lot, 
To charm a court, or dignify a cot, 
In each relation shone thy varied life, 
Ot daughter, sister, mother, friend, and wife. 
Seen with delight in Fortune's golden ray, 
Suff'ring remain'd to grace thy parting day ; 
When smiling lungour spoke the candid soul, 
patience cliec-.kM the sigh affection stole, 



The gifts of Ilcav'u in piety cortfesr, 
Calmly resijin'cl. and ev'ry plaint suppresl; 
The consort's faith, the pj rent's tender care, ^ 
Point the last look, and bie.ithe the dying pray r. 

In the nave, near the great west door, appears 
the following inscription, to tlw memory ol Mrs. 
Mary Irvine, widow of Lieu tenant- Colonel Irvine, 
who died in December, I7;H) : 

Though sacred Friendship dfems thy fate severe, 
And loud ?tTect!on drops a silent te;:r; 
Though childless now desponding parents sigh, 
Pour 'the sad plaint, and turn the Streaming e;,e 
To thv cold grave yet oVr eaih aching breast, 
Meek Resignation breathes the balm of rest ; 
Religion whispers peai_e amidst the gloom, 
While pale Affliction, musing o'er the tomb, 
Submits, and iov. l\ bends to Heav'n's high will ; 
Ilush'd ev'ry plaint, and ev'ry murmur still. 
Though all lameut thy blooming grates ili-d, 
And weep for beauty moui'd ring with the dead, 
Thv virtues still the kindled wish shall raise 
To'meet with thee thy God, and hymn thy praise. 

In addition to the cathedral, Exeter has fifteen 
churches within the walls, and four in the suburbs ; 
but most of them are small, and present nothing 
particular for description : it has also several cha- 
pels for different Christian denominations, and like- 
wise a Jews' Synagogue. The ground inclosed 
within the walls is nearly in the form of a parallelo- 
gram, of four furlongs in length, and three in 
breadth : this space is intersected by the four prin- 
cipal streets, which meet near the centre, and di- 
verging at rigiit angles, connect the city with the 
suburbs. The whole extent of ground occupied by 
buildings, is about one mile and three quarters in 
length, and one mile in breadth. In the year 1769 
the walls were entire ; but many parts have been 
since destroyed. Stukeley speaks of them, as being, 
in his time, in pretty good repair, and having many 
lunettes and towers ; various parts of which are still 
remaining. In the year 1769, the north gate was 
taken down, to make a more convenient entrance 
into the city ; and in 1781, the east gate was taken 
down for a like reason. The south gate, the inte- 
rior arch of which Dr. Stukeley asserted to be of 
Roman workmanship, has since experienced the 
same fate. 

The situation of Exeter is commanding and plea- 
sant : it stands on the acclivity of an eminence on 
the eastern bank of the river Exe, which flows in a 
semi-circular direction round the south-west side of 
the city. " What adds to its wholesomeness and 
cleanliness," says Stukeley, " is, that the ground is 
higher, in a ridge, along the middle of its length, de- 
clining on both sides. Further, on the south-west 
and north-west sides, it is precipitous ; so that with 
the river, the walls, the declivity of the ground, and 
ditch without side, 'twas a place of very great 
strength, and well chose for a frontier."* In the 

highest 



* At 



times, however, the situation of Exeter exposes it ,to 



the mischiefs of inundation. This evil occurred, to a serious 

extent. 



DEVONSHIRE. 



highest part of the city, on the north side, stand 
the remains of Rongemout Castle, formerly the seat 
of the West Saxon Kings, and afterwards of the 
Dukes ot Exeter. This building has little to re- 
commend it, but its antiquity, and pleasant situa- 
tion. The ruins of the exterior walls are nearly all 
that remain ; those" inclose a considerable space, 
soinewi.'i-t in the form of a pentagon, ami were de- 
fended ijy lour towers ; tvo or the west, and two 
on the efist side. The ramparts of the castle com- 
mand a delightful view over the adjacent couistry. 
The city, the river Ese and harbour, Torbay, and 
the north-east coast towards Sidmoulh and Lyme, 
as well as the intermediate lands, through a circum- 
ference of fifty or sixty miles, are beautifully spread 
out before the eye, and present as richly a diversi- 
fied prospect as can be seen in almost any part of 
the kingdom. When the castle was erected is un- 
known ; though Grafton's tale, that it was built by- 
Julius Casar, is unquestionably false. William the 
Conqueror, observes Shaw, in his Tour to the West 
of England, " either rebuilt or much repaired the 
whole edifice, and bestowed it on Baldwin de Briono, 
husband of Albreda, his niece, whose descendants, 
by the female line, enjoyed it, together with the 
ollice of Sheriff of Devon, which seems to have been 
annexed to it, till the fourteenth of Henry the Third, 
when that Prince resuming into his own hands sun- 
dry castles and forts in this realm, dispossessed 
Robert de Courtney, in whose family it had been 
for three descents. In the reign of Henry the 
Fourth, John Holland, Duke of Exeter, had a fine 
mansion within the Castle, of which no traces are 
remaining. In the year 1413, the city being visited 
by Richard the Third, he was, during his stay, no- 
bly entertained by the corporation. On seeing the 
castle, he commended it highly, both for its strength 
and beauty of situation ; but hearing it was named 
Rougemont, which, from the similarity of the sound, 
mistaking for Richmond, he suddenly grew sad, 
saying, that ' The end of his days approached ; a 
prophecy- having declared that he should not long 
survive the sight of Richmond.' In the year 1588, 
at the Lent Assizes held here, an infectious distem- 
per, brought by some Portuguese prisoners of war, 
confined in the castle, destroyed Sir John Chiches- 
ter, the Judge ; eight Justices ; eleven, out of 
the twelve, impannelled Jurors ; and divers other 
persons assembled in the csurt on this occasion." 

extent, in the year 1800, and again in the month of February, 
1809. In the latter instance, the waters of the Exc rose to"a 
tremendous height. At Exeter, the parish of St. Thomas the 
Apostle, the Exe Island, and the lands adjoining, were com- 
pletely inundated. The streets of St. Thomas exhibited a most 
melancholy appearance: the shops were shut, being full of 
water, and the inhabitants obliged to betake themselves to their 
tipper rooms, T<ces, field-gates, wrecks of various descrip- 
tions, and a number of sheep, were borne away by the rapidity" 
of the current. The water appears to have been about two 
indies higher than the memorable inundation of 1800. The 
tenter racks in the Bonhay and Shilley were completely cover- 



Here also, John Penruddocke, and Hugh Grove, 
two zealous Wiltshire royalists, who had ineffectual- 
ly attempted to restore Charles the Second, during 
the Protectorate of Cromwell, were, by order of the 
latter, beheaded. The castle was completely ruined 
during the Civil Wars, when the city withstood a 
blockade of two months against Fairfax, one of 
whose forts remains in a field to the north. Within 
the area inclosed by the walls, a small chapel was 
erected by the Lady Elizabeth de Fortibus, Coun- 
tess of Devon, who endowed it with lands, called 
the Prebends of Hays and Catton, for the payment 
oi' certain weekly services therein to be performed. 
A Sessions House was also erected a few years ago, 
within the area on the north-west side : this is ot 
Portland stone. The ancient sally-port was in that 
part of the castle wislls destroyed to make room for 
the new edifice ; at the time of building which, the 
ditch that surrounded the fortress was completely 
filled up, as many portions of it had been previous- 
ly. The care oi the walks on the north of the Cas- 
tle Hill, is entrusted by the corporation to twelve 
poor aged alms-women. On the site of the ditch, 
near the Castle Gate, are some exceedingly pleasant 
gardens belonging to Mr. Granger, which, though 
not large, deserve attention from the disposition of 
the grounds, and the very extensive and beautiful 
prospect they command ; ami on the opposite side 
of the Castle is a terrace shaded by line elms, which 
forms a pleasant promenade for the inhabitants of 
the city. 

Amongst the ancient buildings of this city may be 
specified one in Water Lane, which is said to have 
been formerly the Guildhall, and which Ducarel, iu 
his Anglo-Norman Antiquities, asserts, was the first 
Christian church in Exeter. Jt has been much al- 
tered at different limes ; yet the simple but strong- 
arches which remain, speak its antiquity, and seem 
to be of the same style, and era as that in the South 
Gate. In the Guildhall, a respectable building in 
the High Street, are several valuable portraits of 
illustrious personages. Among them are those of 
General Monk; Henrietta Maria, Charles the First's 
Queen ; and her daughter Henrietta, Duchess of 
Orleans, who was born here in tbe time of the Civil 
Wars. The streets and houses, in general, have the 
appearance of antiquity ; though various handsome 
buildings have been erected within the last thirty or 
forty years. The inhabitants are partly supplied 



ed, and many of them carried away, with the pieces in them. 
The great losses sustained by various individuals were truly 
distressing. Mr. Baker, farmer at Exmoulh, lost forty sheep. 
In tlie town of Thorverton, a brook of water rose in a manner 
unprecedented, and threw down a cob-wall : the obstruction 
caused so sudden a swell that the house of Mr. Anthony, sur- 
geon, was instantly overwhelmed : the family were assisted out 
of the window at midnight : one half of the dwelling house was 
completely washed away. The injury sustained in this part of 
the country was estimated at 30.000/. 



with 



130 



DEVONSHIRE, 



-with water from springs which rise about a mile dis- 
tant. " There are also," observes Hooker, " within 
the citic, certein Ibunteins, or conduits, whereunto, 
through certein can-ales or pipes of lead, the waters 
from certeia springs, rising in the fields not iar trom 
the citie, are brought and conveied. And these wa- 
ters are of most price, because by the carriage 
thereof they arc purified, and made lighter than are 
the other waters springing within the citie, and by 
that means more meet for dressing of meats, 
these conduits two are speciall : the one ot them 
standeth, and is within the cemiterie or church-yard 
of the Cathedral Church of the said citie, and is 
called St. Peter's Conduit : the other, being of great 
autiquitie, standeth in the middle of the citie, at the 
meeting of four principal streets of the same, and 
whereof some time it tooke its name, being called < 
the Conduit at Quatrefois, or Carfor ; but now the 
Great Conduit." This conduit was rebuilt in 1461, 
by William Duke, who had been Mayor of Exeter 
the preceding year ; but was taken down in the year 
1778, when a new conduit was erected in a more 
convenient situation, at the side of the High 
Street. 

In Exeter, the charitable institutions are Tery nu- 
merous. There are eight regular schools for edu- 
cating and clothing, and two for maintaining poor 
children, besides " various Sunday schools. The 
principal benevolent establishment, however, is the 
Devon and Exeter Hospital, for the benefit of the 
sick and indigent poor. This laudable institution 
will perpetuate the memory of Dr. Alured Clark, 
Dean of Exeter in the year 1740, by whom it was 
founded, and opened on new year's day, 1747. 
Since that time many thousand persons have been 
admitted into and cured in this fabric. Various 
alms-houses for the decayed and aged, also exist in 
.different parts of the city : one of the chief of these 
is the Hospital, called the Wyiiard's, or God's 
House, which was built and endowed for the main- 
tenance of twelve poor people, pursuant to the will 
of William Wynard, Recorder of Exeter in the 
.reigns of Henry the Fifth, and Henry the Sixth. 
This gentleman bequeathed various lands and here- 
ditaments in the city, and county of Devon, for their 
support. Each person has a neat habitation, with a 
small garden annexed, and a stipend both weekly 
and annual. The memory of the founder is pre- 
served by the following monkish verses, inscribed 
on a marble tablet, placed on the north side of the 
chapel : 



* Translation. 

May these new walls, which boast their founder's name, 
To distant times his piety proclaim ! 
Not for the rich these peaceful domes he rears. 
But opes their doors when poverty appears ; 
When pain, when dire diseases pour their rage, 
\Vhen creep the pangs of slow-consuming age. 
To HIM, whose glory fills the eternal throne. 
The rising fane he consecrates alone: 
8 



Ha;c nova structure retinens habitacula p!urs 
Sit permansura ptr tempora longa futura, 
, Dtrbilibus simul ac senibus fuit aedificata, 
Pauperibus, non divitibus fuit istabeata, 
Hanc qui fundavit,,donavit, perpetuavit, 
Crimina cum davit sua credimus omnia lavit, 
Constructor cujus patria: decus urbis ct hujus 
Alq : Recordator Wynard heu ! nomine \\ illus, 
Sit Domus ista Dei, aut luce mea 11011 reputetur, 
Sic bnptizetur, sit domus ista Dei.* 
M : C junge quater, fit opus hoc, X nunn-ra ter.f 
Anno octavo regni regis llenrici >c.\!i. 

The Bishop's Palace at Exeter is a venerable 
fabric, standing near the south-east side of the Ca- 
thedral. It was built or enlarged by Bishop Courte- 
nay, who held the See in the reign of Edward the 
Fourth ; his arms, with those of England, and the. 
badge of St. Anthony, of whose Hospital in London 
ic was Master, remain on a curious chimney-piece 
n the Hall. 

On the north side of the city, below /he Castle 
Hill, is the New Gaol for the county of Devon ; and 
were it not for the massy iron window frames, and 
ts concomitant gloominess, it might be mistaken for 
an elegant brick-built mansion. It was completed 
about twenty years ago, at a considerable expence, 
from the designs of the celebrated Blackburn. Th 
old gaol stood within the walls of the city : in the 
year 1796, it was sold to a society of Dissenters, 
called Independents, who pulled it down, and erect- 
ed an elegant and commodious chapel on its site. 
The situation of the new prison is healthful and 
pleasant, and the interior of the building is conve- 
niently disposed. Near it we the Barracks, a re- 
cent establishment for the reception of cavalry; 
and sufficiently capacious for about 200 men and 
horses. 

In a field, on a fine eminence adjoining the coun- 
ty gaol, is a new house of correction. This exten- 
sive and noble structure is equally admired for the 
solidity of its construction, the excellence of its 
masonry, and its handsome appearance, which will 
remain a lasting honour to the county of Devon. It 
stands on somewhat more than an acre and a halt 
of ground. Its foundation was laid in 1807 ; and 
underneath was placed a tin plate, with the follow- 
ing inscription : 

" The foundation Stone of this House of Correc- 
tion was laid by SAMUEL FREDERICK MITFORD, bsq. 
Chairman of a Committee of Magistrates of the 
County of Devon, in the Presence of the said Com- 
mittee, on the 22d Day of August, in the year 1807. 
GEO. MONEYPENNY, Architect." 

Nor is the sacred gift bestow'd in vain, 
It clears his soul from ev'ry earthly stain, 
Wynard, all hail ! though here be thine the praise 
To deal with equal hand thy just decrees, 
Yet thy bright name, not to these halls confin d, 
Thy country graces, and adorns mankind. 

J- To 1000 join 400, and thrice 10. 



DEVONSHIRE. 



137 



The prison is encircled by a boundary wall, 
twenty-one feet high ; in the front of which is the 
keeper's lodge, a handsome stone building, render- 
ed very conspicuous by a noble gate of entrance, 
sixteen feet high, and eight feet wide ; adorned 
with rustic cinctures and arch stones of uncommon 
grandeur, adopted from a design of the Earl of 
Burlington, as executed in the Hanks of Burling- 
ton-house, Piccadilly. Above the gate is a stone 
cornice, crowned with a tablet, on wiiich is in- 
scribed : 

' THE H'^USE OF CORRECTION 
FOR THE COUNTY OF DevoN : 
ERECTED is THE YEAR ISOy." 

On passing the lodge, in which are the turnkey's 
apartments, amply 7 fitted up with every accommo- 
dation, a spacious Hag-stone pavement leads through 
a neat shrubbery to the keeper's house, an octagon 
building, situated in the centre of the prison ; on 
the ground floor of which arc tiie committee rooms 
for the magistrates, a parlour for the keeper, an of- 
fice-room, and a kitchen : and underneath, in the 
basement story, are large vaulted apartments for 
domestic purposes. 

The House of Correction consists of three wings, 
detached from the keeper's house by an area twelve 
feet wide ; each wing containing two prisons totally 
distinct, so that there are six divisions for so many 
classes of prisoners, with a spacious court-yard ap- 
propriated to each, surrounded by a wrought-iron 
railing, six feet high, which prevents access to the 
boundary wall, and preserves a free communication 
of twelve feet in breadth, between the wall and the 
court-yard. 

The entrances to all the court-yards and prison 
apartments open from the area round the keeper's 
bouse, through wrought-iron grated gates opposite 
the several windows of his apartments. 

There are also iron-grated apertures in the ar- 
cades of the ground floor, which open into the area; 
so that the whole prison is completely inspected, 
and the different classes attended to, without the 
necessity of passing or entering the court-yards ; 
the keeper from the windows of his own dwelling 
having a view into the airing grounds and work- 
shops of all the divisions. 

In each court-yard, on the ground floor, are spa- 
cious vaulted arcades, fitted up as work-shops for 
light employment ; and in which a number of pri- 
soners are occupied in weaving, picking and sorting 
wool, beating hemp, cutting bark, &c. Adjoining 
to the arcade in each division, is a day-room, light- 
ed by two large sash-windows, and fitted up with a 
patent kitchen stove, which answers every purpose 
of domestic cookery. Between the stone piers that 
support the vaulted ceiling of the day-rooms, are 
wooden dressers ; and benches of wood are placed 
round the rooms. The prisoners have access to the 
day -rooms only during their meals, ami for one hour 
previously to their being locked up. 
VOL. u. KO. 55. 



On the first floor of each division, to which the 
ascent is by stone staircases, are six cells, and on, 
the second floor six others, making in all seventy- 
two ; each seven feet by ten, and ten feet six inches 
hisch to the crown of the arch ; lighted and venti- 
lated by iron-grated apertures over the doors, of two 
feet six inches by one foot, without glass. Each 
cell is fitted up with one, and some with two wooden 
bedsteads, in the form of those used in the Royal 
Hospital at Haslar, to be used in case of necessity. 
All the cells open into spacious and lofty arcades, 
guarded by iron rails ; and thus a free circulation of 
air is preserved, which cannot fail to render this 
prison always more healthful than it could be with 
close confined passages, into which the cells and 
rooms of other prisons too generally open. The 
floors of all the cells and arcades are paved with 
large flag- stones, and the cell-doors lined with irou 
plates. 

On the upper floor, at the back of the right and 
eft wiug, are two rooms, each thirteen feet six 
nches by ten feet, and ten feet six inches high to the 
crown of the arch, set apart for faulty apprentices. 
These rooms are lighted by sash-windows, and have 
a fire-place iu each ; the floors are paved with flag- 
stones, and each room is fitted up with wooden bed- 
steads, in like manner as the cells. 

On the first floor of the keeper's house is the cha- 
pel, an irregular octagon, thirty-eight feet in dia- 
meter, and fourteen feet high ; lighted by eight 
large sash-windows, and neatly divided by framed 
partition pews, which are so heightened by crimson 
blinds, as to prevent the classes seeing each other. 
The prisoners have a communication with the cha- 
pel, from the first floor of the arcades, into the dif- 
ferent divisions set apart for each class of prisoners, 
where they enter and return, without meeting with, 
or being in sight of each other. 

The prison is supplied with fine water from a re- 
servoir (placed on an arcade in the area between, 
the back wing of the prison and the keeper's house) 
which is filled from a well underneath by an hy- 
draulic pump of excellent contrivance, that is work- 
ed by the prisoners every morning. From the re- 
servoir, pipes are laid into all the day-rooms of the 
prison, the turnkey's lodge, and the kitchen of the 
keeper's house ; iii each of which rooms, eight in 
number, is fixed a stone trough, with a pipe and 
cock. 

The sewers of this prison are judiciously placed 
at the ends of the different wings ; they are spaci- 
ous, lofty, well ventilated, and the vaults are thirty 
feet deep. 

All the areas and walks round the prison, and the 
arcades and day-rooms, are paved with large flag- 
stones, and the six court-yards with fine gravel. 
The roofs of the whole building are so constructed 
as to shelter the walls and the foot-paths round the 
prison in wet weatuer. They project five feet be- 
yond the walls, and the soffit of the projection is re- 
lieved by cautilivers, in the manner of the early 
2 M Grecian. 



138 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Ureeian temples ; of which the church of St. Paul, 
Covent Garden, is an example. 

At the back of the prison, and communicating 
therewith, is a spacious work -yard, in which are 
some extensive working shops, for the purpose of 
more laborious employment than is carried on im- 
mediately within the prison ; such as hewing and 
polishing stone, sawing timber, cutting bark, &c. 
In this work -yard are two sewers, and a pump which 
affords a supply of very fine water. 

It is in contemplation to erect an hospital for the 
use of the gaol and bridewell ; which will be a de- 
tached building, and contain airy wards for male 
and female invalids, with hot and cold baths. 

The rules and regulations for the government of 
this priso:; Are excellent : their principal tendency 
is to enforce cleanliness, morality, and habits of in- 
dustry. The greatest stress is also laid on the con- 
stant separation of the prisoners into distinct classes, 
arranged according to the respective nature of their 
offences ; so that the more criminal may no longer 
corrupt those who have been committed for slight 
offences, and thus render them far more depraved, 
than before their imprisonment ; which was inevita- 
bly the case in the old bridewell. 

Exeter has been time immemorially, and still is, 
invested with great privileges. It had anciently a 
mint, which, as appears from Stowe, was granted 
to the city by King Athelstan ; and money has been 
coined here as late as the reign of William the 
Third, the place of coinage being denoted by the 
letter E under the bust. At the period of the Nor- 
man Survey, it was found to be exempted from pay- 
ing taxes, except when London, York, and Win- 
chester paid them. .Since this it has received many 
charters, and grants of immunities, from different 
monarchs. In the reigu of Henry the First, the 
fee-farm rents were granted to Matilda, his Queen : 
and in the time of King John, " Isabel, his consort, 
held Extter in dower, with a fair thereunto belong- 
ing." In the third year of this Sovereign, the bur- 
gesses paid a fine of 116 marks for a confirmation ', 
of their charters ; and about this period, the city, 
which had previously been governed by port-reeves 
and bailiffs, was incorporated, and had a Mayor for 
its chief officer. In the reign of Edward the First, | 
the burgesses and citizens pleaded that their city ! 
was an ancient demesne, and that they held it in j 
fee-farm of the crown, paying 39/. 155. 3d. To 
supporj this claim, they referred to Henry the 
Third's charter, made to his brother Richard, King 
of the Romans ; whereby they further challenged 
return of writs, a gallows, pillory, &e. and a fair of ' 
four days, beside,s three weekly markets (Wednes- j 
day, Friday, and Saturday) ; which liberties they i 
certified they had enjoyed since the time of the Con- ' 
quest ; upon which they were allowed. Henry the I 
Eighth constituted Exeter a county of itself; thus 
rendering it independent of Devon, and investing it 
with corresponding privileges. 

The corporation consists, of a Mayor, twenty-four 



Aldermen, a Recorder, Chamberlain, Town Clerk, 
Sheriff, four Stewards, and several inferior officers. 
" Civil causes are tried by the Mayor, or his officers, 
who have cognizance of all pleas, hear all causes 
between party and party, and determine them with 
the advice of the Recorder, Aldermen, and council 
of the city ; but criminal causes, and breaches of the 
peace, are determined by eight Aldermen, who are 
justices." The corporate bodies within the city are 
thirteen, each of which is governed uy officers an- 
nually chosen from among themselves. Exeter was 
one of the first cities that returned members to Par- 
liament : the right of election is vested in the ma- 
gistrates and freemen, who are supposed to amount 
to about 1200 persons. The revenues of the corpo- 
ration are considerable. The motto of the city arms 
is " Semper Fidelis" (always faithful) ; a distinc- 
tion to which, from its uniform loyalty, it appears 
fairly entitled. 

The trade of Exeter is extensive ; yet would pro- 
bably have been much more so, but for an unfortu- 
nate quarrel between the inhabitants and Hugh 
Courtenay, Earl of Devon, which deprived the city 
of the use of its river for navigable purposes for se- 
veral centuries. The dispute is recorded to have 
been occasioned by some pots of fish ; which being 
exposed for sale in the market-place, were seen 
nearly at the same time by the cators of the Ear), 
and of the Bishop of Exeter, both of whom wanted 
the whole. The Mayor, to whom the difference was 
referred, adjudged one pot to the Earl, another to 
the Bishop ; and the third he directed to be kept for 
the use of the market. This decision, and a subse- 
quent determination of the Mayor and council, that 
no freeman of Exeter should wear any " foreigner's 
livery, badge, or cognizance, without the Mayor's 
licence," offended the Earl, who immediately im- 
peded the navigation of the river, " stopping, fill- 
ing, and quirting the same," says Hooker, " with 
great trees, timber, and stones, in such sort, that no 
vessel, or vessels, could passe or repasse." Previ- 
ously to this occurrence, the tides flowed beyond 
the city ; but they now only reached Topsham, a 
town between three and four miles nearer the sea, 
the advantage of which was probably the chief ob- 
ject of the Earl's measures, as that place was part 
of his estate, and became exceedingly flourishing in 
consequence. The river was so completely choak- 
ed up, that though many attempts were made to re- 
store the navigation, scarcely any thing was accom- 
plished till the year 1675, when a canal was cut 
from Topsham to the city ; and about twenty years 
afterwards, the present haven was constructed ; 
and, by means of sluices and flood-gates, vessels of 
150 tons burthen are admitted to a good quay; form- 
ed near the city walls. 

A new bridge over the Exe,- at the west entrance 
of the city, was erected about thirty-six or thirty- 
eight years since, after inuuy unsuccessful attempts, 
owing to the rapidity of the stream : it is a hand- ' 
some stone fabric, and is said to have cost bc- 
9 tweenv 



DEVONSHIRE. 



139 



18-,000'A and 20,000/. The ancient building 
south-east quarter of the city, called Bedford 
House, wherein the Princess Henrietta was born, 
was taken down some years ago, and part of a Cir- 
cus erected on the spot, with a ueat Theatre adjoin- 
fng. Besides this provision for the amusement of 
the inhabitants, assemblies and balls are frequent at 
Exeter ; and the neighbourhood is still further pro- 
vided with watering-places, and tea-gardens. The 
literary character of Exeter is considerable ; and 
many of its inhabitants might he mentioned, whose 
mental acquirements do equal honour to them- 
selves, and to their country. 

The principal employ of the labouring classes 
arises from the woollen trade ; and the city has de- 
rived immense profits from the exportation of serge, 
kerseys, and other articles, the value of which toge- 
ther has, been computed at the average sum of 
GOO,QOO/. per annum : the chief markets are-Spain, 
Portugal, Germany, and Italy. Some hundreds of 
persons are also employed in the manufacture of cot- 
ton, at a large factory, on the banks of the Exe. 



* His knowledge of general litenture was very extensive, 
and his acquaintance with the learned languages was profound. 
Cainden informs us, that his works excited as much admiration 
as those of the ancients ; and that his poem on the Trojan war 
had more than once been published in Germany, under the 
name of Cornelius Nepos. This poem has been reprinted va- 
rious times; but his Antiocheis, or History of the Holy War, 
was not so fortunate, as no entire copy of it now remains ; and 
Leland saw only a fragment in the library at Abingdon. This 
latter piece, which Camden says had equal merit with his other, 
was written after he attended Richard I. te the Holy Land. 

f- Sir William Petre, an eminent statesman, was born at Exe- 
ter, and educated at the college of that name at Oxford ; but 
in 1523 he was elected fellow of All Souls. He took his doc- 
tor's degree in civil law, and became principal of Peckwater 
Inn. His abilities recommended him to Thomas Cromwell, by 
whose means he was employed in state affairs, and was in the 
commission for visiting the monasteries He obtained a large 
share of the church lands, which he contrived to keep in the 
reign of Mary, to whom he was counsellor, as he had been to 
her father aivd brother. This complying courtier found means 
to ingratiate himself with Queen Elizabeth, who appointed him 
one of her secretaries of state, and member of the privy council. 
Sir William was a great benefactor to Exeter and All Souls 
Colleges, Oxford, and founded several charitable institutions. 
He died in 1371 . His mano'rs in Essex were very considerable, 
and are possessed by Lord Petre, his descesdant. 

J SirThomasBodlcy was born in the year 1544, and received 
the first part of his education at Geneva, whither his family had 
emigrated, to avoid the persecutions in the reign of Queen 
Mary. After her death, he returned to England, and com- 
menced student at Magdalen College, Oxford ; but afterwards 
he removed to Merton College, of which he was chosen fellow 
~toi 1564. He pursued his studies with perseverance for several 
years ; but wishing to attain a proficiency in foreign languages, 
he commenced traveller in 1576, and, after passing four years 
on the continent, came back to England, and in 1583 was made 
gentleman usher to Queen Elizabeth, who employed him in 
several embassies, in which he gave so much satisfaction, that 
he was sent as resident to the Hague, where he was admitted 
into the council of state. Five years afterwards he returned to 
his native country, and ;igain devoting himself to literature, 
f.inncd an immense collection of books, which he presented to the 
University of tK ,i . I, - the foundation of the wonderful library' 
since termed the Bodleian ; the statutes of which he drew up", 



The population of Exeter, in 1801, was 17,393 : 
in 1811, it had increased to 18,896. 

Exeter has had the honour of producing many" 
eminent and distinguished characters : amongst 
others, the poet, JosephusTscanus,* mentioned by 
Wartou, as the " miracle of his age in classical 
compositions ;" John Hooker, the antiquary, al- 
ready mentioned ; Sir William JPetre,t Secretary of 
State to Henry VIII.; Sir Thomas Bodley,J founder 
of the Bodleian Library, at Oxford : and Sir Pater 
King. Jackson, the composer, has been already 
noticed ; but we cannot close our account of thi* 
city, without also stating, that the late Admiral Sir 
Thomas Louis, one of the friends and associates in 
arms of the " ever-honoured" Nelson, was one of 
her children.]) 

EXMINSTER.] This village, called by Leland, a 
pratty townlet, is pleasantly situated in the hundred 
of the same name, on the western bank of the Exe, 
four miles south-east by south from Exeter. It was 
formerly a seat of the Courtenays, Earls of Devon, 
in which William Courteuay, Archbishop of Can- 
terbury, 



and bequeathed a yearly income for the purchase of books, nnd 
support of proper officers to superintend and keep them in order. 
He died in 1612 ; and was buried in the choir of Merton Col- 
lege, where a handsome monument was erected to his memory. 
A commemoration speech in his praise, is annually mnde at 
Oxford, on the 8lh of November, at which time a visitation of 
the library takes place. 

Sir Peter King, Lord Chancellor of England, was born at 
Exeter in 1659. His father was a grocer of that place, and in- 
tended his son for that business ; but the inclination of the latter 
for learning, happily altered the first intention, and he was suf- 
fered to pursue his own inclination. By the advice of the great 
Locke, his uncle, who left him his library, he went to Leyclen, 
and, on his return, entered himself a student of the InnerTenv 
ple, where he studied the law with great assiduity. Among 
other studies he attended particularly to Ecclesiastical History; 
and in 1691 published an Inquiry inlo the Constitution, Disci- 
pline, Unity, and Worship of the Primitive Church that flou- 
rished within the first Three Hundred Years after Christ. In 
1702 appeared his History of the Apostle's Creed, a learned 
and excellent work. In 1708 the City of London chose him 
for their Recorder, and he was afterwards knighted. The next 
year the House of Commons appointed him one of the mana- 
gers on Dr. Sachevereil's trial. On tiie accession of George I. 
he was made Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas. H 
was created a peer in 1723, by the title of Lord King, Baron of 
Oakhani ; and shortly afterwards made Lord Chancellor. He 
died in 1733. 

|| Sir Thomas Louis, Bart. K.-M. T. and K. S. F. Rear- 
Admiral of the White, descended from a respec table family 
settled in Exeter, was born about 1700. In the year 1770, he 
embarked as a midshipman in the Fly sloop of war. After va- 
rious removals he was made Lieutenant in the Bienfaisant, in 
which ship he was in the memorable engagement with the Spa- 
nish squadron under Don Juan de Lanara. In this action, 4<> 
favourable in its remit to the British, Mr. Louis witnessed some 
hot work, as the St. Domingo blew up whilst in action with the 
Bienfaisant; and had the explosion occurred a few moments 
later, she also must have perished. Langar.i's flag-ship, the 
Phoenix, of 80 guns, alterwnrds struck to the Biecfaisanl, and 
Mr. Louis was appointed prize-master. It was with difficulty 
that he succeeded in carrying her safe to Gibraltar, where he 
arrived three da\s before Admiral Rodney, who \v;i*so pleaded 
with him on this occasion, that he ofered either to take him to 
the West Indies, and promote him to the lint vacancy there, 

or 



1'H)' 



DEVONSHIRE. 



terbury, was born.* The only remains of this 
mansion is a circular arch over the door-way, lead- 
ing to a garden. The Courtenays had also an ex- 
tensive manor in this place. 

EXMOUTH.] This town, or village, as well as the 
preceding, takes its name from the river Exe, at the 
mouth of which it is situated. It lies in the hundred 
of East Budleigh, ten miles south-east i)y south 
from Exeter. Scarcely more than a hundred years 
ago it was only a small hamlet, inhabited by fisher- 
men ; but it is now one of the best frequented wa- 
tering places in the county. At the period alluded 
to, it was brought into repute by the circumstance 
of one of the judges of the circuit having derived 
great benefit from bathing here. " It is situated 
near the sea-shore," observes Mr. Polwhele, " be- 
tween the cliffs, which open, as it were, on purpose 
to receive it, and is furnished with every accommo- 
dation necessary as a watering place. It is well 
sheltered from the north-east and south-east winds, 
by some high hills, which rise almost close behind, 
And supply the place with excellent water. The 
buildings, in general, are low and incommodious ; 
but here and there are some good houses, inhabited 
by genteel families, which of late have made Ex- 
mouth their constant residence, and have now the 
pleasure of meeting in a good assembly room. The 
walks are delightfully pleasant, commanding views 
worthy the pencil of the best masters. From a hill 
called Castle Hill, the eye is presented with a line 
of coast extending from Exeter to the Berry-Head, 
a distance of about twenty miles. The line is bro- 
ken by several hills, that gradually ascend from the 



or to give him an acting captain's commission, to carry home 
the Phoenix, in the hope that the Admiralty would confirm him. 
He preferred the latter, but his promotion was not confirmed, 
and he returned as lieutenant to the Bienfaisant. In 1780 that 
ship captured two French privateers Lc Comte d'Artois and 
La Comtesse d'Artois. In 1781 Mr. Louis was made com- 
mander in the Mac-worth ; and in 1782 became a post captain. 
In the peace which ensued, he was unemployed, but on the re- 
newal of the war, he again served, and became captain of the 
Minotaur; in which ship, in 1798, he was sent to reinforce 
Admiral Nelson in the Bay of Aboukir. An account of the 
Interview which took place between the Admiral and him, 
during the heat of tlu? engagement, we extract from the Naval 
Chronicle: " When the Vanguard anchored along-side Le 
Spartiate, she became exposed to the raking fire of 1'Aquilou, 
the next ship in the enemy's line ; by which the Vanguard had 
between fifty and sixty men disabled in the space of ten minutes. 
Owing, however, to the gallant and judicious manner in which 
Captain Louis took his station a-hcad of the Vanguard, the Mi- 
notaur not only effectually relieved her from this distressing 
situation, but overpovered her opponent. Admiral Nelson felt 
so grateful to Captain Louis for his conduct on this important 
occasion, that about nine o'clock, while yet the combat was 
raging with the utmost fury, and he himself was suffering se- 
verely in the cockpit, from the dreadful wound in his head, he 
requested Captain Berry to hail the Minotaur, and desire Cap- 
tain Louis would come to him, as he could not have a moment's 
peace until he had thanked him for his Conduct ; adding, this 
is the hundred and twenty-fourth time I have been engaged, 
but I believe it is now nearly over with me. The subsequent 



coast on the oppo ite side of the river, and are ce- 
vered with lively verdure, and woody inclosures ; 
the village of Starcross skirting their bottoms. 
Behind these hills spring up some bold towering 
head-lands, of varied shapes, and unequal heights, 
through which the sight is still led to distant ob- 
jects of various kinds, woody summits, and barren 
rocks, gradually diminishing, so as to form a com- 
plete landskip." This delightful prospect is still 
farther increased by the plantations of Marnhead 
and Powderham Castle, and the noble edifices be- 
longing to them. It is mentioned by ilollinshed 
that a castle was erected to defend this haven, and 
some slight vestiges are still apparent near Gun 
Point, where tradition states that it stood. In the 
winter of 1814, some immense shoals of mackerel 
came over the bar to the shore of the town of Ex- 
mouth ; a circumstance which had not occurred tor 
upwards of thirty years. 

FARRINGDON.] Farringdon, anciently Farendon, 
is situated in the hundred of East Budleigh, three 
miles and a half north-east from Topsham. The 
manor was held by a family of the same name, from 
the time of Richard I. till about the commencement 
of the sixteenth century, when the last heir was 
guilty of suicide, in consequence of grief occasioned 
by the loss of a beloved wife. Farringdou House, 
now, or lately, the possession of J. B. Cholwich, 
Esq. is a spacious and commodious building, sur- 
rounded by fine and flourishing plantations. The 
view from Windmill Hill, at a little distance from 
the house, is very extensive : on this hill is said to 
have been a Roman entrenchment. 

FLEET 



meeting which took place between the Admiral and Captain 
Louis, was affecting in the extreme. The latter hung over his 
bleeding friend in silent sorrow. " Farewell, dear Louis." said 
the Admiral, " I shall never forget the obligation I am under 
to you for your brave and generous conduct; and now, what- 
ever may become of me, my mind is at peace." For his con- 
duct in this action, Captain Louis, in common with the other 
captains, received the thanks of Parliament, and a sword from 
the City of London. 

In 1799 he took possession of the Roman territory, for which 
he was presented with the insignia of the Sicilian Ofder of St. 
Ferdinand and of Merit. At the commencement of the war, 
subsequently to the peace of Amiens, Captain Louis was appoint- 
ed to the Conqueror ; and in 1804 was promoted to the rajik of 
Rear- Admiral. In 1805 he served under Lord Nelson in the 
Canopus. In 1806 he shared the honour of destroying th 
French squadron off St. Domingo, for which he again received 
the thanks of Parliament, and was presented by the Committee 
of the Patriotic Fund, with a vase, appropriately inscribed, 
valued at 300/. On the 16th of May, 1807, he was attacked 
by a bowi-1 complaint, which produced a mortification, and 
caused his death on the following day. This event occurred 
at Alexandria, but his remains were sent to Malta and interred 
near those of General Aberorombie. Rear-Admiral Louis had, 
early in life, married Miss Belfield, a young lady of a respect- 
able family, by whom he had four sons .ami three daughters. 
He was created a baronttj.in the month of March, 1800. 

* William Couptenay was the son of Hugh, Earl of Devon, 
by Margaret, the grand daughter of Edward I. and born in 
1341. He was educated at Oxford ; and at the age of twenty- 



DEVONSHIRE. 



141 



FLEET HOUSE.] This estate, situated about two 
frilcs from Modbury, was anciently the property of 
the Heles ; but it has been, about a century, amongst 
the possessions of the Bulteel family. The house, 
which underwent many alterations by the late pro- 
prietor, is delightfully situated on the western bank 
of the Erme, oyer which it commands a fine and 
picturesque view, with Ermington Church, and the 
hills called the East and West Beacons in the dis- 
tance. In another direction, appears a beautiful 
wood, with the church and western end of the town 
of Modbury. 

FORD.] This is a neat and fair house, at the foot 
of Milber Down, about a mile south from Newton 
Abbot. It belongs to the Courtenay family ; but it 
was built in the reign of James - the First, by Sir 
Richard Reynell, a lawyer of considerable reputa- 
tion. In the year 1625, Charles I. visited at this 
mansion, and during his stay knighted Richard 
Reynell and his brother Thomas. The heiress of 
Sir Richard married Waller, General of the Parlia- 
mentary army ; and their daughter and heiress was 
united to Sir William Conrteriay. The house stands 
on a lawn, at a short distance from the road, and 
has a deer park fronting it. 

Lady Lucy, the wife of Sir Richard Reynell, 
founded a charitable institution near Ford, for four 
clergymen's widows, with an annual sum of five 
pounds each ; but the feoffees haVe altered the in- 
stitution, and admit only two widows, who have an 
annuity of ten pounds. In Wilborough Church a 
pew is allotted to these matrons, over which the 
rules, entitling them to the benefaction, are placed : 
the following is a specimen : " They shall be noe 
gadders, gossuppers, tatlers, talebearers, nor given 
to reproachful words, nor abusers of anye. And 
noe man may be lodged in anye of ye said houses ; 
nor anye beare, ale, or wyne, be found in anye of 
ye said houses." The house in which they reside is 
called the Widow's House, and on its front is the 
following inscription : 

1st strange a Prophet's Widowe poorshoulde be? 
. If strange, then is the Scripture strange to thee ? 

FORD ABBEY.] Ford Abbey, the seat of John 
Francis Gwynn, Esq. is situated in the parish of 
Thorncornbe, nine miles west-north-west from Bea- 
minster. The original abbey was founded in 1140, 
by Adeline, daughter of Baldwin de Brioniis, for 
Cistercian Monks. At the Dissolution, it was va- 
lued at 381/. 10s. B^d. and was bestowed, with its 
demesnes, on Sir Richard Pollard. It came into 
the possession of the present family by the marriage 



t was made Bishop of Hereford, and afterwards of London, 
in which see lie distinguished himself by his zeal for ihe papal 
authority, and in opposition to some court measures; but 
more particularly for riling WicKlil'fe l>efore him in St. Paul's 
Cathedral in 1377. That divine appeared, supported by the 
Duke of^Lancaster, and Lord Percy, who treated the Bishop 
VOL. II. NO. 55. 



of Margaret Francis to Francis Gwynn, Esq. in 
1690. 

The present mansion consists of a large pile of 
building, in which Grecian architecture is incongru- 
ously blended with Gothic ; the former is shewn in 
the projecting colonnade, and some central apart-? 
ments, while the cloisters and hall display the latter. 
The cloister "is an elegant fragment consisting of 
eight windows to the south, with light buttresses 
between them, joining the great hall, or refectory, 
on the west, and the chapel on the east. In the lat- 
ter are. several monuments of the Prideauxs, and 
the arms of various possessors of the abbey. The--' 
refectory is a noble room, fifty-five feet by twenty- 
eight, lighted by four large windows, adorned with" 
mullions and tracery. The additions to the south 
front are said to have been made by Inigo Jonesj 1 
but it must surely have been at the desire of som* 
undiscerning proprietor, as a more lamentable want 
of taste cannot be displayed. The saloon contain* 
some tapestry on which Raphael's celebrated car* 
toons are wretchedly copied. The following obser* 
vatiohs upon Ford Abbey are extracted from Gilpin : 
- " The ruin is patched up into an awkward dwell- 
ing ; old parts and new are blended together to tha 
mutual disgrace of both. The elegant cloister is 
still left, but it is completely repaired, white- washed, 
and converted into a greeii -house. The hall, too, 
is modernised, and every other part ; sash windows 
glare over the pointed arches, and Gothic walls ar 
adorned with Indian paper." 

. FRITHELSTOCK.] The village of Frithelstock is 
situated in the hundred of Shebbeare, two miles 
west from Great Torringdon! Here are the ruins 
of a priory founded for secular Augustine canons, 
removed from Hartland Abbey, by Sir Roger Beau- 
champ, in the time of Henry HI. In the reign of 
Edward I. Robert Beauc'iamp gave the manor from 
the Augustine canons to those of St. Gregory. Its 
revenues were valued at the Dissolution at 127/. 2s. 
Id. per annum. Nothing remains of this building 
but the west window of the church, the great gate> 
and the walls of two or three apartments. The site 
is now a farm-yard. 

FULFORD.] Great Fulford is in the hundred of 
Wonford, eight miles west from Exeter; and 
Little Fulford is partly in the hundred of Crediton, 
and partly in that of West Budleigh, one mile and 
a half east by north from Crediton. Great Fulford, 
the seat of Baldwin Fulford, Esq. has been in the- 
Fulford family from th time of Richard the First, 
when it was called " Villa de Fulford." The rnan~ 
sion is one of the most ancient in the county, and 
still retains much of its original character. It stands 

so rudely, that the citizens of London were exasperated, and 
a tumult ensued, fie was made Lord Chancellor in 13S1, and 
raised to the archiepiscopal chair. In this situation he behaved 
with severity ; persecuted the followers of Wickliffe,' and caus- 
ed their tenets to be condemned iu a synod. He died in 1396. 

2 N en 



J42 



DEVONSHIRE. 



BJI a rising ground, near an extensive sheet of wa- 
ter : its form is quadrangular ; and it lias a 
large entrance gateway, over which are the lainily 
arms quartering those of Filz-Wise, Morcton, Bel- 
ston, Bozom, St. George, Dennis, St. Aubyn, and 
Shallons. The -apartments are numerous and large; 
many of them fitted up in a handsome style, and 
embellished with fine and curious paintings. The 
great hall is also ornamented with a variety of carv- 
ed work. Among the pictures are the following. 
A full length of Charles the First, seated in his 
royal robes, by Vandyck. This portrait was given 
to Sir Francis Fulford by the monarch. ' A large 
picture of the Battle of Gravelines, in 1558. A 
Battle Piece of Wouvermans. Two paintings by 
Berghem : and two whole length portraits of Mr. 
and Mrs. Fulford, by Sir Joshua Reynolds. In the 
war between Charles the First and the Parliament, 
Fulford House was garrisoned in behalf of the lat- 
ter, and is supposed to have been considerably in- 
jured, as it was besieged by the republican troops. 
The domestic chapel which attaches to this mansion 
is still in a perfect state. The Fulford family dis- 
tinguished themselves at the time of the Crusades ; 
and since tlion have been eminent as lawyers and 
"warriors. Sir William Fulford was the judge, who, 
With Gascoigne, sentenced Archbishop Scroope to 
"be decapitated. Sir Thomas Fulford was a com- 
mander in the r-.rmy of Queen Margaret, taken pri- 
soner at Teuton Field, and beheaded in the year 
1461. The park, which abounds with trees, and has 
received considerable improvement from the present 
proprietor, affords many delightful views. 

GIDLEY.] Gidley is situated in the hundred of 
Wonford, seven miles and a half south-east by 
east from Oakhampton. The royalty or park lies 
on the north-eastern borders of Dartmoor. In the 
reign of William the Conqueror, it was possessed 
by the Prouzes, and seems to have been obtained by 
grants from the crown, to its subjects, under annual 
quit-rents, and it still pays an annual sum of 3/. 13s. 
4d. The park, an extensive tract of rocky ground, 
is of singular appearance. On three of its sides it 
is bounded by stone-walls, and on the fourth by 
the Teign, to which it is united by a steep descent, 
diversified by immense crags of rock, on the tops of 
which are numerous rock-basons. The stream roar- 
ing at the base of tliis steep, the bold bank which 
rises covered with wood on the other side, and the 
enormous masses of rock which present themselves 
from all parts, render GidJey park highly interest- 
ing-. 

HACCOMBE.] The parish of Haccombe, which 
lies about three miles south-east by east from Abbot's 
Newton, has long been a possession of the Carew 
familj, to whom it descended from its ancient lords 
de Haccombe. Polwhele observes, that it " enjoys 
some very extraordinary privileges. It is not in- 
cluded in any hundred : no officer, either civil or 
military, hath a right to take cognizance of any pro- 
ceeding in ilns parish ; and, by a royal grant from 



the crown, it was exempted from all duties and 
taxes, in consequence of some noble services done 
by an ancestor of the Carews.'' Prince remarks 
that Haccombe is the smallest parish in England, 
as to the number of dwellings, which are two only ; 
the mansion-house, and the parsonage. In the year 
1804 the overseer observed as follows : " Hac-> 
combe is a peculiar, seldom subject to parochial ex- 
pences. It contains but a very few acres of land, 
and only two inhabited houses. There was nothing 
collected for the maintenance of the poor, in 1803 ; 
but the sum of 15s. was expended upon the church 
by Sir T. Carew, Bart, who always repairs the 
church at his own cost." The Population Returns 
in the year 1811, for Haccombe, was one house, and 
one family composed of five males and eight fe- 
males. 

Since the time of Prince, the ancient manor-house 
has been taken down, and a new one erected, by 
Sir T. Carew. The present edifice is a plain build- 
ing, standing at the foot of an easy descent, and 
near the church ; against the door of which two 
horse-shoes are fastened, to commemorate the 
achievement of one of the Carews, who won a wager 
of a manor of land, by swimming his horse a consi- 
derable way into the sea. It contains various mo- 
numents of the Haccombe and Carew families ; and 
the following inscription appears to Thomas Carew, 
Esq. and Anne, his wife, who died, in December) 
166(5, within two days of each other : 

Two bodies lie beneath this stone, 
Whom love and marriage long made one t 
One soul conjoin'd them by a force 
Above the pow'r of Death's divorce : 
One flame of love their lives did burn 
Even to ashes, in their urn. 
They die, but not depart, who meet 
In wedding and in winding sheet: 
Whom God hath knit so firm in one, 
Admit no separation. 
Therefore unto one marble trust 
We leave their now united dust; 
As root, in Earth's embrace, to rise 
Most lovely flowers in Paradise. 

HALDON.] Haldon is situated in the hundred of 
Exminster, four miles and a half south-west by 
south from Exeter. The mountainous ridge called 
Haldon, on Haldown Hill, is about seven miles 
long, in a direction from north- west to south-east, 
and nearly two miles and a half broad. " The 
prospect from the summit," says Mr. Gilpin, in his 
Observations on the Western Counties, " is grand 
and extensive, displaying in many parts a pictu- 
resque distance ; consisting first of the whole course 
of the Exe, from Exeter to the sea, the city of Exe- 
ter, the town of Topsham, and Powderham Castle : 
beyond these objects, all of which seemed in the dis- 
tance to adorn the banks of the river, the eye rang- 
ed over immense plains and woods, hills and vales. 
Of these the vale of Honiton, and other celebrated 
vales, made a part ; but they were mere specks, too 
inconsiderable for the eye to fix on ; distance had 

pressed 



DEVONSHIRE. 



143 



pressecT all their hilly boundaries Rat to the surface ; 
o*, at least, had so diminished them, that the 
proudest appeared only a ripple on the oceau. The 
fixtreme parts of this vast landscape were bounded 
by the long rango of Sedbury Hills, which were 
tinged, when we saw them, with a light ether hue, 
scarce one remove from the colour of the sky : the 
whole immense scene, therefore, without the least 
interruption from the hills of the country, faded 
gradually into air. A view of this kind gives us a 
just idea of the surface of the globe we inhabit. We 
talk of its inequalities in a lofty style. Its moun- 
tains ascend the skies ; its vallies sink into depths 
profound ; whereas, in fact, its inequalities are no- 
thing, compared with its magnitude. If a compre- 
hensive eye, placed at a distance from the surface 
of the earth, were capable of viewing a whole he 
misphere together, all its inequalities, great as we 
make them, Mount Caucasus, the Andes, Teneriffe, 
and all the lofty mountains of the globe, would be 
compressed like the view before us ; and the 
whole appear perfectly smooth. To us, a bowling- 
green is a level plain ; but a minute insect finds it 
full of inequalities." On various parts of this emi- 
nence, particularly on the* Kenn side, are found a 
number of cairns, composed principally of flint 
stones. In 1773, some labourers, digging for stone 
in one of these, discovered an urn of baked clay, 
which, hoping it might contain money, they broke 
with their shovels : but it was filled with a greasy 
kind of ashes, intermixed with small fragments of 
bones. It was lying about four feet below the sur- 
face ; and its mouth was covered with a flat stone. 
About a month after this, the cairn was again 
searched, and two more urns found. They are thus 
described by Mr. Polwhele : " The second urn was 
at the distance of fourteen feet from the spot where 
the first lay ; and the third urn twelve feet distant 
from the second. These also contained a black and 
greasy kind of ashes, and in each of them about a 
handful of splintered bones. The interior diameter 
of the second urn, as it stood in the ground, was 
full nineteen inches j its depth below the surface be- 
ing nearly the same : its height appeared to be 
about eighteen inches ; but this could not be exactly 
ascertained, as ils neck, above the surface of the 
ground, was so rotten, that it mouldered into dust 
on the removal of the stones which surrounded and 
covered it. The third urn also fell to pieces on 
emptying it of the ashes." At a trifling distance to 
the north of this cairn is another, circularly shaped, 
and about sixty feet in diameter, which appears to 
be connected with the former by a line of flint running 
between them below the turf. A large cairn, more 
than two hundred feet in circumference, and above 
fifteen high, called the Great Stone-Heap, was 
opened in 1790. It contained, at eight feet from 
the margin, a small wall about two feet high, sup- 
ported by very large stones ; at the centre a large 
stone, of a round form and two feet in diameter ; 
this stoue covered a cell in the ground, and was 



surrounded .by many large flints. This cell was 
about two feet square, and formed with large stones 
placed in an upright position. It contained an urn 
of unbaked clay, thirteen inches high, ten inches 
wide at the top, and five at the bottom, which was 
inverted, and covered the ashes and bones of a youth. 
In the high grounds of Haldon, between Exeter and 
Chudleigh,is a course on which annual races are held, 
liaison House, the seat of Sir Laurence Palk, 
Bart, stands at the north-western extremity of the 
vale of Kenn, within a demesne of 450 acres. It 
was erected about the year 1735, by Sir George 
Chudleigh, Bart, on whose decease, his estates de- 
volved to his four daughters ; Haldon becoming by 
marriage, the property of Sir John Chichester, of 
Youlston. It was successively sold to Mrs. Basset, 
Mr. Jones, and Mr. Webber, from whom the late 
Sir Robert Palk purchased it in 1769. The house, 
which is of brick, stuccoed, consists of a centre and 
two wings, after the model (on a reduced scale) of 
Buckingham House in St. James's Park. Its situ- 
ation is elevated, and the principal front commands 
an extensive and charming view of the vale of Kenn, 
the Belvidere, the plantations at Powderham, the 
high grounds above Exmouth, &c. On the east 
appear the banks of the Exe, Woodbury Hills, Sid- 
mouth Gap, and numerous other places. On the 
principal floor are an Eating Room, thirty-two feet 
by twenty ; a Drawing Room of the same size ; a 
Library, thirty feet by nineteen ; and three other 
rooms, with principal and secondary stairs. The 
Library contains a select and valuable collection of 
books, and many manuscripts, relating entirely to 
the history of the county. Among the latter are 
the originals of Hooker, Westcote, and Risdon, 
brought from the Portlcdge Library ; and all the 
papers of the late Mr. Chappie, arranged by the inde- 
fatigable and learned Mr. Badcock, of Southmoul- 
ton ; which the late Sir Robert Palk purchased at 
very high prices. A cabinet of medals, from the 
collection of Dr. Trapp, is also attached to the li- 
brary. The principal apartments couta-iu some good 
pictures, chiefly landscapes. 

In the Eating Room are two large ones, by Ar- 
tois, with figures by Teniers. A Game Piece : Wee- 
ninx. Greyhounds and Cats : Suyders. A Land- 
scape : Rysdael. 

In the Drawing Room is the Return of Charle* 
the Second : VanderveMe. Skaiters : Van Goyen. 
Three Landscapes : Rysdael. Two small ditto ; 
Claude. A Cattle Piece : Cuyp. Angel and Shep- 
herds : Wouvernmns. Old Woman Reading : Rem- 
brandt. Portraits of Sir Robert and Lady Palk ; 
half lengths : Dance. Mr. Henry Vansittart ; half 
length : a copy. Major-Genera! Stringer Law- 
rence ; whole length, in excellent preservation ; by 
Sir Joshua Reynolds. 

The ornamented grounds, surrounding the man- 
sion, are extensive ; and the flourishing plantations 
which crown the summit of the hills to the west and 
south-west, cover many acres. In the centre, oa 

Pea. 



144 



DEVONSHIRE, 



Pen Hill rises a castellated building of three stories, 
which was erected by the late Sir Robert Palk, in 
honour, and to the memory, of his friend General 
Lawrence, whose statue, as large as life, and correct 
in resemblance, on a pedestal of black marble, orna- 
ments the entrance. The General is represented in 
a Roman military habit.* 

The views from this castle to the east are diver- 
sified and magnificent, embracing the course of the 
Exe from Exeter to the sea : to the south-east, the 
English Channel, the Cliff's of Beer and Seatou, &c. 
to the north-east, the Quautock Hills ; to the south- 
west, Brent Tor ; and to the west-north-west, the 
range of Dartmoor, the valley of the Teign, &c. 

HARTI.ANB.] Tho little market-town of Hart- 
land, the harbour of which is appendant to the port 
of Bideford, is situated in the hundred of Hartland, 
14 miles west by south from Bideford, and 21 5f 
west by south from London. It is governed by a 
portreeve ; has two annual fairs, on Easter Wed- 
. nesday, and the 25th of September ; with a market 
on Saturday, which is much frequented by the fish- 
ermen of Barnstaple, Bideford, and other towns on 
the coast, who, under the rocky eminences which 
skh-t the shore, obtain good shelter here from the 
south-westerly winds. The population, which is 
chiefly employed in agriculture, amounted, in the 
year 1811, to 1734. 

This little town is situated in a bleak district, 
which terminates northward with the promontory 
called Hartland Pointjt and is bounded to the south 
by some boggy heights, amongst which the Tamar 
and Torridge have their source. 

Hartland Church stands about a mile from the 
town, upon a lofty eminence, near the sea. It is a 
large and handsome building, consisting of a nave, 
two aisles, and a chancel, which is divided from 
the body of .the church by an ornamented screen. 

Hartland Abbey, the seat of Paul Orchard, Esq. 
is situated in a narrow vale, the sloping sides of 
which are richly mantled with hanging woods. The 
mansion was rebuilt from designs oy Mr. Mathews, 
and includes the site and some portion of the an- 
cient abbey. The cloisters .were quite, .perfect, and 
are introduced as the basement story of the eastern 
and western fronts of the house. On a flat part of 
the mouldings over the arches of the cloister, was 



* Stringer Lawrence, an eminent general, in the service of the 
East India Company, was born in 1697, and died in 1775. 
The company, out ot gratitude for his services, erected a fine 
monument to his memory in Westminster Abbey.. 

} Dr. Maton observes, that " in the old authors, we find 
Hartland promontory called Promontorium 'Herculis ; an ap- 
pellation that originated, according to I3r. Stukeley, from the 
Tyrian Hercules having arrived here at the bead of a colony. 
That the Phoenicians might have visited this spot, and that they 
might have named it after the- great hero of their' nation, is far 
from being improbable. In supposing, however, that Hercules 
himself made a voyage to Britain, we should not only embody . 
what many learned men have made a mere emblem, (denoting 
the course of tiie sun through the twelve signs of tin- zodiac,) 
but 'even, if such a personage did ever exist, render his life still 



an inscription in very old characters, which is still 
preserved in the eastern frent, importing, that the 
cloister was built of different coloured marble, at the 
expence, and during the abbacy of John of Exeter: 
During the time of the late alteration, some frag- 
ments of mouldings richly ornamented, and a i;ionu<- 
ment of a cross-legged knight, were dug up 
here. 

Camden, and other writers, state that Hartland 
Abbey was fouuded by Githa, wife of Earl Godwin, 
in. honour of St. Noctan, whose merit she supposed 
had preserved her husband from shipwreck. It ap r 
. pears, however, more probable, that she only placed 
secular canons in the church of Stoke St. Nectan,- 
near the abbey, and granted prebends to them. A't 
the period of the Conquest, the lands at Hartland, 
which possibly had belonged to Harold, son of Earl 
Godwin, were granted to the Dynants, Lords qf 
Dynant in Bretagne, whence they derived their 
name. In the reign of Henry II. as appears from 
the charters in Dugdale, the church of St. Nectaa 
was conveyed by Geoffrey Dynant, the patron, to 
Richard of Poitiers, the Archdeacon, in order that 
an abbey for regular canons of the order of St. Au- 
gustine might be established there. Thomas Pope, 
the last abbot, surrendered' on the 21st of February, 
1530, and was granted an annual pension of 66/. 
13s. 44, The yearly revenue of the abbey was at 
that time 306/. 3s. 2|?. Henry VIII. bestowed th 
possessions on John Abbot, Serjeant of his Cellar, 
who bequeathed it to his nephew. He died without' 
issue, and the estates were divided among his three 
sisters, who married into the families of Lower, 
Risdon, and Luttrell. The abbey came to the lat- 
ter, but passed to the Orchards by the union of the 
heiress of the Luttrells with an ancestor of the pre- 
sent owner. 

HATHERLEIGH.] This ancient market- town, situ.- 
ated in the hundred of Black Torrington, 20 miles 
west-north-west from Exeter, and 200J west by 
south from London, formerly enjoyed the privilege 
of sending members to Parliament. The petty ses- 
sions are holden here ; the market is on Friday; 
and the fairs are on the 22d of May, the 22d of 
June, the 4th of September, and the 8th of No? 
vember. ,*>; i 

This town, which is now but of little note, is seat* 



more marvellous than it has been represented by the most 
fabulous writers He must have visited the Rock named after 
him in the Campania ; the Haven, in Liguria; the Grove, in 
Germany ; and the Promontories, in Mauritania and Gulatiu, 
as well as in Britain. It is most rational to conclude, that all 
these spots obtained their appellation rather from having been 
dedicated to, than actually visited by, the hero; and that hij 
votaries were prompted to pay him particular honours wherever 
they met with objects of unusual grandeur, or had been -suc- 
cessful in exertions of strength and prudence. Our imperfect 
knowledge of the transactions of the Phenicinns. and of the ex- 
tent ol their navigation, may be ascribed to their jealousy of 
the Greeks, from whom they would cautiously conceal every 
thing that could guide them to the source of so much protit." 



8 



ed 



DEVONSHIRE. 



115 



ed on a branch of the Torridgc, near its confluence 
with the Oke. The houses are chiefly composed of 
fed earth and thatch, and make a very mean ap- 
pearance. The manor formerly belonged to Tavis- 
tock Abbey ; one of the abbots of which, about foul- 
Centuries ago, gave a large piece of common land 
for the advantage of the borough. The town is go- 
verned by a portreete, two constables, and some 
inferior officers, chosen annually at the court held 
by the Lord of the Manor. The principal employ- 
ment of the inhabitants is agriculture and the manu- 
facture of woollen. The number, as returned under 
the late act, was 1330. Jasper Mayne, a dramatic 
writer and divine, was a native of this town.* 

HAYES.] This is a farm-house, situated in the 
parish of East Budleigh, five miles west- south-west 
from Sidmouth. It is entitled to notice, only on 
account of its having had the honour to be the 
birth-place of the celebrated Sir Walter lla- 
leigh.f 

HEAVITREE.] Heavitree, distinguished as the 



* He was born in 1004, and educated at Westminster school, 

from whence he removed to Christ Church, Oxford, of which 
he became student. In 1046 lie was created D. D. and two 
years afterwards was deprived of his studentship for his loyally. 
At the restoration he was promoted to a canonry of Christ 
Church. He died in 1672. Mayne was a man of great wit 
nd humour, which lie often carried to a low excess, particu- 
larly in his will, wherein he left his servant man, who was fond 
of tippling, an old trunk, in which (says lie) there is something 
to make him drink. The man eagerly sought for his legacy, 
and on opening the trunk found a red herring. Dr. Mayne 
wrote some poems now obsolete ; sermons ; and a play called 
The City Match. 

f Sir Waller Raleigh was horn in 1552, and finished his edu- 
cation at Oriel College, Oxford. ' His enterprising spirit, led 
him to the pursuit of arms, and he served five or six years under 
Henrv Champerhoun in France. In 1576 he was a student of 
the Middle Temple; in the year following he served in the 
Netherlands ; and on his return engaged with his brother in 
Jaw, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, in a voyage lo America, whence 
thi-y returned in 1579. He next distinguished himself by sup- 
posing tfu Minister rebellion in Ireland. His introduction 
at court was occasioned by the following circumstance : Queen 
Elizabeth was one day waiking, and slopping at a dirty place 
hesitated whether to proceed or not. Raleigh, who was present, 
observing her irresolution, immediately threw oil his new piush 
cloak, and spread it on the ground. The Queen trod gently 
over, no less surprised than pleased at the adventure ;- and from 
that time his advancement was such as might be expected in a 
court, so much regulated by maxims of gallantry. In 1584 he 
made the celebrated discovery of Virginia, whence the first 
tobacco was brought. The following anecdote is related of this 
plant, with regard to Raleigh. Fie was accustomed to smoke 
it privately in his study ; and his servant coming in one morn- 
ing with his tankard of ale and nutmeg, before he had finished 
his pipe, observing that the sinuke issued from his mouth, threw 
all tlw ale in his face, and running down stairs alarmed the whole 
family by exclaiming that his master was on fire, and before 
they could get up to him would be burnt to ashes. On his 
return to Virginia he w;is returned for the county of Devon, 
and knighted. In the defeat of the Spanish armada Sir Walter 
bore a glorious part, for which he received distinguishing ho- 
nours from the queen, but having obtained the grant of a manor 
which had belonged to the bishopric of Salisbury, it gave grr at 
offence, and he was unjustly stigmatised as an atheist. About 
the same time he incurred the Queen's displeasure by an in- 

VOL. II. NO. 56. 



native village of Richard Hooker, the divine,.]; nnd 
of Arthur' Duck, the civilian, is situated in the 
hundred of Wouford, a mile eastward from Exeter. 
It was formerly called Wonford, or Woonford, and 
gave name to the hundred : according to Polwhele, 
" its present name is supposed to come frm the 
' tree,' or ' gallows' at the common place of execu- 
tion lor malefactors in the county of Devon." The 
Kelly family had possessions here, from the time of 
Henry III. to the year 1773, when Arthur Kelly, 
Esq. sold the manor to John Baring, Esq. 

HEMYOCK.] This is an extensive parish, situated 
in the hundred of the same name, nine miles north- 
east by east from Columpton. In ancient times, it 
Jiad a castle, some vestiges of which are still visi- 
ble. It was for many generations the seat of the 
1 liilons ; and after passing through the Dinhams, 
Pophams, and Leighs, it was purchased from the 
latter, some years ago, by the late General Simcoe, 
with the view of making it assume some of its an- 
cient characteristics. The castle had two round 



trigue with one of her maids of honour, whom he afterwards 
married. In I5<JS he sailed to Guiana, and destroyed the'capi- 
tal of Trinidad; and on his return honours were lavished iii 
abundance upon him. In the succeeding reign .the face of his 
affairs ere changed, and, on a frivolous charge, he was tried 
for high treason, condemned, and imprisoned in the Tower. 
He remained there twelve years, and daring that time wrote 
his celebrated History of the World. In 1615, James, whose 
avarice was excited by some accounts which Sir Walter had 
giren of rich mines in Guiana, set him at liberty. He set sail 
but was unsuccessful, and instead of discoverng the mines, 
burnt the Spanish town, and returned to England, where, in 
consequence of the complaints of Gondomar, the Spanish am- 
bassador, he was apprehended, and, in a most unprecedented 
manner, beheaded on his former sentence, in I til 7. 

{ Richard Hooker, styled the judicious, was the nephew of 
John Hooker, the antiquary, of whom we have aheady given 
some account. Born in (he year 1553, he was educated at the 
grammar school of Exeter, whence he was sent by his relation, 
Bishop Jewell, lo Corpus Christ! College, Oxford, of which he 
was made bible clerk, and in 1577 chosen fellow. In 1581 he 
took orders, and in 1584 was presented to the rectory of Dray- 
ton- Beauchamp in Buckinghamshire, where he led an uncom- 
fortable life with his wife Joan for about a year. Being found 
in tliis situation by his pupil, Mr. Edwin Sandys, son to the 
Archbishop of York, he represented his case so pathetically to 
his father, that he procured for him the mastership of the Tem- 
ple. But this place did not suit Hooker, who was fitted fora 
country retirement : he therefore applied to Archbishop Whit- 
gift for a removal to " some quiet parsonage," and he was ac- 
cordingly presented to a living in Wiltshire, where he wrote 
part of his Ecclesiastical Polity. In 159J the Queen presented 
him to the rectory of Bishop's Bourne, wheie he finished that 
great work, and his life in HiOO. Pope Clement VIII. said of 
his book, " that there were in it such seed* of eternity as will 
continue till the last fire shall devour all learning." His works 
have been frequently printed in folio, and at Oxford in oc- 
tavo. 

Arthur Duck was born in 15CO, and educated at Exeter 
College, Oxford, after which he was elecled fellow of All 
Souls. He was made Chancellor of London, and Master of 
the Requests. He died in 1649. He wrote 1. Vita Henrici 
Chiciele; 2. De Usu et Anthoritate Juris civilis Romanorum 
in Dominis princiuiiin Christunoriim. 



lirj 



DEVONSHIRE. 



towers at. the entrance, with a portcullis, and was 
enclosed with a flooded entrenchment. In the time 
of the Civil Wars, it was garrisoned against Charles 
the First ; and, according to tradition, it was demo- 
lished soon after the Restoration. " It is not im- 
probable," observes General Simcoe, " that llem- 
yock Castle was built on Roman foundations, as 
the hills of Black Down, in this neighbourhood, 
abound with iron -pits ; and quantities of wood and 
iron scoria are found in the parishes of Hemyock 
and Dnnkeswell." 

HOI.COMBE.] Rogus Holcombe is situated in the 
hundred of Bampton, seven miles east-south-east 
from the place of that name. Holcombe Court, the 
seat of the ancient and respectable family of the 
Bluetts, one of whom was Bishop of Lincoln in the 
freign of William II. is a rich and extensive demesne. 
The mansion is a venerable lime-stone building, 
with a porch and tower in the front. Holcombe 
Church contains several monuments of this fa- 
mily. 

Burrell Holcombe is in the hundred of Wonford, 
four miles and three quarters west by south from 
Exeter : Higher Holcombe, and Lower Holcombe 
re hamlets in the parish of Dawlish. 

HOLDSWORTHY.] This is a small market-town, 
in the hundred of Black Torrington, 43 miles west 
by north from Exeter, and 214 west by south from 
London. Its market is kept on Saturday ; and it 
has three annual fairs. Its population, chiefly em- 
ployed in agriculture, is about 1206. 

HONITON.] Honiton, a borough and market- 
town, lies in the hundred of Axminster, sixteen 
miles and a half east-north-east from Exeter, and 
156i west-south-west from London. It is situated 
in a delightful vale, upon a rising ground on the 
south side of the river Otter, and commands a fine 
view of the surrounding country, which presents to 
the eye a variegated extent of corn and pasture, 
beautifully interwoven. 

So early as the reign of John, Honiton possessed 
a market which was held on the Sunday, but altered 
by that monarch to Saturday. The first return to 
Parliament was made in the reign of Edward I. ; 



* Ozias Humphry, R. A. was born at Honiton in 1742. 
His family had resided at that place from the time of Eduard 
VI. and one of his ancestors, John Humphry, was an officer of 
the army assembled in Devonshire, under the first Lord Rus- 
sell, to suppress an insurrection in the western counties. The 
early part of Mr. Humphry's education was received from Mr. 
Samuel Bamfield, a man of various skill in common learning ; 
but he was subsequently placed under the tuition of the Rev. 
Richard Lewis, Master of the Grammar School at Honiton. 
Mr. Lewis perceived the talents of his pupil, and during the 
time he remained under his care, devoted much attention to 
their improvement. His passion for drawing was early and 
ardent ; and, wearied with his importunities, his friends con- 
sented to send him to London, and placed him under Mr. 
Shipley. Here he continued about two years ; but the death 
of his father obliged him to return to Devonshire. His desire 
was at this time to be placed with Sir Joshua .Reynolds, but 




but previously to the time of Charles I. it had been 
only twice represented. The right of election is 
now vested in the burgage holders paying scot and 
lot, but formerly extended to every sne " able to 
boil a pot without receiving alms." There are at 
present about 350 voters. The town is governed by 
a portreeve and a bailiff, chosen at the annual court 
held by the Lord of the Manor. 

Honiton is composed of two broad handsome 
streets, crossing each other at right angles, through 
one of which flows a stream of clear water, which 
supplies the inhabitants. The town has suffered by 
two dreadful fires ; one of which occurred in 1747, 
and the other in 1765. By the former three-fourths 
of the town were destroyed, and by the latter 180 
buildings were consumed. The manufacture of the 
place is chiefly confined to broad lace, and edgings, 
of which considerable quantities are sold in Lon- 
don. According to the late returns, the number of. 
houses was 609, and that of inhabitants 2735. 

The manor, previously to the Conquest, belonged 
to Droge, a Saxon ; but the Domesday- Book men- 
tions it as the property of Robert, Earl of Mor- 
taigne, half brother to William the Conqueror. It 
was seized by Henry the First on the rebellion of 
William Mortaigne, and bestowed on Richard de 
Rivers, from whom it descended to the present own- 
er, Lord Viscount Courtenay. 

Honiton Church, originally a small chapel for 
Mendicant Friars, stands on a lofty eminence about 
half a mile from the town. In 1482, Courtenay, 
Bishop of Exeter, much enlarged it, and presented 
the curious screen which divides the nave from the 
chancel. It contains some ancient monuments, and 
one to the memory of Dr. Thomas Marwood, Phy- 
sician to Queen Elizabeth, who died in 1617, up- 
wards of a hundred and five years old. ' The church 
which anciently belonged to the parish is recorded 
to have stood in the town, and on the spot that All- 
hallows Chapel now occupies. This chapel, erect- 
ed, in place of an older edifice, in 1765, is a neat 
structure, with a square embattled flint tower. The 
town also contains three meeting-houses, and two 
free-schools.* 

HUBBLESTONS. 



circumstances ordered it otherwise ; and lie engaged with Mr. 
Collins, an eminent miniature painter, of Bath. In two yews 
Mr. Collins removed to Dublin, and our young artist succeed- 
ed him. In 17f>4 he settled in London, by the advice of S'ur 
Joshua Reynolds, \iith whom he always lived in habits of the 
utmost friendship. In 1766, Mr. Humphry exhibited at Spring 
Gardens a miniature of John Mealing, the well known model 
of the Rnyal Academy, which was purchased by the preseut 
Sovereign at one hundred guineas : and as a further encourage- 
ment he was allowed to paint z miniature of her Majesty, with 
other branches of the Royal Family. He practised this line 
with extraordinary success till 1772, when a fall from his horse 
so much impaired his whole nervous system, that it was thought 
necessary for him to pass a few years in Italy. In 1778, ac- 
companied by his friend Romney, he arrived at Rome, where 
he continued four years. Though his situation here had many 
advantages, yet he bad great difficulties to encounter ; for 

miniature 



DEVONSHIRE. 



147 



IluBBLESTONE.] Htibblestone is situated at a 
short distance from Appledore, near the confluence 
of the Taw with the Torridge. It derives its name, 
according to tradition; from having been the burial- 
place of llubba, the Danish Chieftain, who was kill- 
ed in attacking Ken with, or Cynvit, Castle, in the 
reign of Alfred. The following circumstance attend- 
ing this event, is extracted from Gough's Additions to 
Camdeu. "The brother of Halfdene audlnguar came 
with twenty-three ships from Wales (Demetica,) 
where tliry had wintered, toDomnauia, A.D.878, and 
falling in with Alfred's men, was slain with 1200 
men before Cynvit Castle, (arcem Cynuit,) which 
beii'g unprovided, and fortified only with mcenia 
erecta nostro more, being impracticable by situation 
on every side but the east, they blockaded, hoping, 
for want of water, to make it surrender ; but the 
Christians sallying out in despair, drove them to the 
ships, and took the famous Raven standard. The 
bird in this standard, which was worked in one sin- 
gle noon (uno meriuiano tempore,) if it promised 
victory, appeared as if alive and flying, quasi vivus 
volitans : if a defeat was to ensue, it hung its wings 
as motionless, petideret directe nihil movens." 
Kenwith Castle is supposed to be the place called 
at present Henny Castle, in the parish of Abbots- 
ham, adjoining Biddbrd. 

HUEL FRIENDSHIP.] "Within the precincts of 
Dartmoor," observes Dr. Maton, " in a valley un- 
der the granite mountains, about five miles from 
Tavistock, is a copper mine, called Huel Friend- 
ship : though not more than twenty -three fathoms 
in depth, it has a rich vein of ore. The matrix is 
caple, in the composition of which argillaceous earth 
seems to be predominant; and, the country is for 
the most part killas. In the same rein with the ore, 
a singular species of cubic mundic, having very 
concave surfaces, is found. We discovered some 
small chrystals of this substance embedded in what 
the miners call peach, a soft kind of chlorite, nearly 
allied iu composition to killas. The latter, perhaps, 



miniature painting had.so engrossed his attention, that the whole 
process of oil had to be discovered. To accomplish this he 
copied the finest pieces of Raphael and Titian ; he also drew 
from the antique of the Capitol, and the Belvidere, and institut- 
ed an academy in his own apartments at home. He visited at 
Naples; then, passing through Florence, returned, by Switzer- 
land and France, to England, in 1777. On his arrival in Lon- 
don he engaged a house in Newman Street, and anxiously 
hoped to rise as an liistoricul painter., to which branch all his 
exertions in Italy had been directed. But portrait painting 
was at that time in the greatest request, and Mr. Humphry, 
though mortified, was obliged to comply with fashion, and 
therefore seriously devoted himself to portraiture. He was 
rapidly rising in his profession, notwithstanding his naturally 
defective sight, which had been rendered worse by the fall 
from his horse, when Mr. Hayley addressed a poem to his 
friend Romney, as the most promising candidate. This work 
answered the intention of the poet, and Romney became the 
favourite of the public. The badness of Mr. Humphry's sight 
prevented his oil paintings from answering the expectations 
which had been formed from his early miniatures; and he was 
advised by Sir Robert Strange to endeavour, by an excursion 
f a few years to the courts of India, to secure for himself a 



is no other than the chlorite schiefer of Wernrr, and 
its varieties seem to be produced by the gradations 
between it and the thon schiefer, or argillaceous 
slate. The direction of the lode in this mine, it 
from east to west ; and the dip, or inclination, to 
the north, making a difference of about live feet iu a 
fathom. About forty men are employed, exclusively 
of the cleaners and dressers. The ore is generally 
sold in Cornwall, and smelted in Wales ; it is of 
the yellow, pyritical 'soil ; galena frequently ac- 
companying it. About one mile eastward from the 
copper mine, are two tin mines, Huel Jewel, and 
Huel Unity. The depth of neither of these is so 
great as that of the Cornish tin mines in general. The 
ore is in black irregular crystals ; the direction is 
the same as that of Huel Friendship. Near the 
mines are furnaces for roasting the ore." 

ILFRACOMBE.] Ilfracembe, or Ilfordcombe, the 
most northerly town in the county, is situated in the 
hundred of Braunton, 48 miles north-west by north 
from Exeter, and 181 west by south from London. 
It is governed by a Mayor, Bailiff's, and other offi- 
cers. The market-day is Saturday : provisions in 
general are cheap, and fish is very plentiful. 

This is a neat and populous sea-port, deriving 
considerable trade from the herring fishery in the 
Bristol Channel. Ilfracombe also possesses a num- 
ber of conveniences : the lodging-houses are good, 
and the inn (The Brittania) affords excellent accom- 
modations. Many bathing machines stand outside 
the pier. Packets are constantly passing to Bristol, 
Swansea, and Milford ; and good skiffs may be 
procured in an instant. From here t'J Barnstaple 
a coach goes three times a week, and the road fur- 
nishes delightful views. These advantages, and 
the residence of many genteel families in its neigh- 
bourhood, have contributed to render Ilfracombe, 
in the summer mouths, a resort for persons of 
fashion. 

From the peculiarly safe situation of the harbour, 
which nature and art seem jointly to have farmed, 

respectable income. With this intention, in 1785, he embark- 
ed for India, and on his arrival commenced as a miniature 
painter. During his stay he painted various likenesses of 
princes, nabobs, and rajahs; hut his ill health compelled him 
to return home in 1788. After his return he resumed his pro- 
fession, and in 1790 was elected a member of the Royal Aca- 
demy, at which time he was employed by tlie Kile Duke of 
Dorset, to paint a series of family portraits. The task, how- 
ever, was too great for his sight, ami after having nearly com- 
pleted the whole number, he was forced to resign it. '\ he one 
at which he stopped was that of Lionel, Duke of Dorset, which, 
with another of Warren Hastings, Esq. was the last miniature 
he ever painted. After a short relaxation he attempted crayon 
painting, which permitting him to continue or relinquish his 
task, was well adapted to the condition of his eyes. In this 
branch he acquired universal credit till 179^ wrten, after having 
completed portraits of the Prince and Princess of Orange, his 
sight completely failed him, and thus closed his professional 
life. His death occurred at Knightsbridge in 1810, in his 68th 
year. He was possessed of considerable genius as an artist, 
and in rniniature^painting and crayons displayed great taste and 
skill. As a man he stood distinguished by moral worth, and 
kind affections. 

many 



118 



DEVONSHIRE. 



iuauy vessels enter it when it would be dangerous 
to sail up the Taw; and merchants residing at 
Barnstaple consequently often transact their busi- 
pess at Ilfraconibe. It nearly resembles a natural 
luisin ; and is almost surrounded by lofty rocks, a 
small passage only being left open on the north. It 
is thus described by Mr. Warner : To the opening of 
the harbour runs an artificial pier, judiciously con- 
structed to prevent the accumulation of sand ; so 
that by the joint assistance of the natural barrier 
and tliis piece of masonry, ships of two hundred and 
thirty tons burthen may ride completely land-locked, 
and of course perfectly safe from the violence of the 
weather. Over the gate of the pier, a stone tablet, 
with the following inscription, informs us to whom 
' 4he town is indebted for this valuable addition to its 
convenience and advantages : 

" This extensive Pier, built some Years since, by 
the Munificence of the Bourchiers, Barons Fitzwarine, 
Karl-, of Bathe, and Vice-Admirals of (lie Place, was 
in the year 17(>0 partly rebuilt, lengthened, and en- 
larged, 'by Sir Bourcnier Wrey, Bart, the present 
Lord and Inheritor of this Pier and Manor." 

The rock which so nearly encloses it on the 
northern side rises to a point, and on the top stands 
a light-house. In the year 1731 an act was passed 
for repairing the harbour and pier, which was at 
that time 850 feet long, and nearly destroyed by the 
sea. 

Ilfracombe Church is situated at the upper end of 
the place. It is a large and plain structure, con- 
taining a monument to the memory of Captain Tho- 
mas Bowen, who was killed in the unsuccessful at- 
tack upon Tcneriffe, where he acted with Lord 
Nelson. This structure is scarcely mentioned by 
Camdcn, though prebendary of the place ; and Mr. 
(ioiigh merely says it belonged to Salisbury, and 
was tenable by a layman. 



* The Rev. R. Hole, rector of this parish, who died in the 
summer of 1803, was justly admired for his learning and literary 
talents. When the admiration of the poetry of Ossian was ge- 
neral, and no hesitation respecting its early ;cra\v,is entertained, 
he published a poetical translation of F;ngal, laboured with no 
common care, in lines scarcely less mellifluous than those of 
Pope. The suspicions of Mr. Macpherson's conduct, iu the 
compilation, prevented, perhaps, that version from being so 
generally read and warmly admired as it deserves; hut the 
Ode to Imagination, subjoined, claimed a very general ap- 
plause, as highly animated and poetical. Some years afterward 
he published a translation of Homer's Hymn to Ceres, of which 
there is a rival, though inferior, version by Mr. Lucas. This 
poem, i not Homer's, is certainly of very high antiquity, and 
is translated by Mr.JBote with spirit and elegance. At no 
great distance the epic romance of Arthur followed, of which 
the wildness approaches nearer the school of Ariosto than of 
Homer, though no die was a more ardent admirer of the 
chaster beauties of (toe ancient epic than Mr. Hole. The poem 
itself displays a warm imagination, and the lines are less mono- 
tonous, and the measure more varied in its pauses, than those 
of his former poetical woilts. The notes, though short, are 
valuable, and display a correct knowledge of the northern my- 
thology. When Mr. Polwhele projected his publication of the 
Devonshire and Cornwall Poets, Mr. Hole could not be over- 
looked in his numerous applications ; and some of the very 



The town, according to the late returns, con- 
tained 444 houses, 845 male inhabitants, and 1089 
female. 

At Ilfracombe, observes Dr. Maton, " we found 
a singular grit, forming the substance of the rocks, 
the glittering surface of which led us at first to 
imagine that they consisted of a line gneiss. This 
grit is extremely hard, and heavy, from containing 
a good deal of iron. Its lamellar fracture, and the 
preponderance of the magnesian character in its ex- 
tern facies, render it proper to be classed among 
the rocks allied to killas. In fact, the argillaceous 
slate prevailing about Ilfracombe, seems, in many 
places, just about ti* make a transition into killas." 

INWARDLEIGH.] Inwardleigh, situated in the 
hundred of Black Torrington, two miles and a half 
south-south-east from Hatherleigh, has no particu- 
lar claim upon our attention ; excepting that the 
Rev. Mr. Hole, a distinguished literary character, 
was several years rector of the parish, as well as of 
Faringdon, in this county, already described.* 

IVY BRIDGE.] This picturesque little village in 
beautifully situated in a romantic dell, in the hun- 
dred of Ermington, thirteen miles west by south 
from Totuess. It derives its name from a small 
bridge of one arch, which is covered with ivy, and 
stretches across the river Erme, an impetuous 
mountain torrent, which after forming various cas- 
cades, and dashing through many rocky chasms, 
overhung with mossy woods, and straggling 
trunks and roots, passes on to the English Chan- 
nel. 

KENTON.] The parish of Kenton is situated in 
the hundred of Exminster, six miles and a quarter 
south-south-east from Exeter. .Lord Courtenay is 
the proprietor of the manor, to which appertain 
various harbour dues, payable by every ship that 
unloads coals, culm, corn, or salt, within its pre- 
cincts. 



highly finished poems in that collection are from his pen. The 
Ode to Terror and to Melancholy are thought to be little infe- 
rior to those of Gray, Mason, or Akeiiside. They seem, how- 
ever, to have been the production of an early period. When 
the literary society at Exeter was formed, Mr. Hole was one of 
its first members; and his later exertions were chiefly commu- 
nications to that institution. To this society he addressed the 
" Kemarks on the Arabian Nights Entertainments, in which 
the Origin of Sihbad's Voyages, and other Oriental Fictions, is 
particularly considered;" published separately, 1797, 12mo. 
in which he endeavours to show that the marvellous events in 
these voyages were believed in the East, and not so extrava- 
gantly inconsistent, with what the observation of later travellers 
have supplied, as lias been generally supposed. In the pub- 
lished volumes of Essays, though no names are affixed, a 
humorous poem on the origin of clubs, and the ironical vindi- 
cations of Shylock and lago, are attributed to his pen. The 
irony of the vindication is so well preserved, that manv attacks 
have been made on these articles, on the supposition of their 
being serious, not unlike to Swifi's Advice to the Irish Pea- 
santry, to eat their children, which was, at first, from the grave 
manner in which it was proposed, mistaken in the same way. 
Mr. Hole was an excellent husband and parent, exemplary in 
his religion, and a truly worthy man. He was born at Exeter, 
and admitted of that college, Oxford, where, iu 1771, he took 
the degree of bachelor of the civil law. 

Th 



DEVONSHIRE. 



113 



Tlie church, a handsome structure of red stone, 
ettbattled and ornamented with two fine turrets, 
has, at the west end, a tower of about a hundred 
feet high, furnished with battlements and pinnacles, 
in which are little niches, with images in them 
quite perfect. The windows are large and point- 
ed ; the pulpit is curiously ornamented witli antique 
carving ; and on the screen, standing between the 
chancel and the nave, are painted various figures 
of saints and martyrs. In the north aisle is the 
following inscription, upon a wooden tablet, lit let- 
ters of gold : 



In obitum Elizabeths?: Petri Atwill generosi, uxo- 
ris gravids qua; nitra primum matrimonii annum 
histerico morbo accubuit decimo septio die Novem- 
bris anno salutis nostrje, 1673.*, 

" Under our mother Earth, here lie-- the womb, 

That of her child was both the fate and tomb. 
Though lately made a bride, yet soon she must 

Exchange her nuptial bed for one of dust. 
Well, King of Terrors, now we see thy rage 

On infancy and youth as well as age : 
If drops of tears the harder hearts wont spill, 

On this sad hearse the softer marble will." 

On a small tomb in the church-yard, appears the 
following epitaph on two infant sons of the Rev. 
Richard Polwhele, whom we have so often had oc- 
casion to mention : 

" Ah, babes, could Heav'n in mercy give 

Your forms to mortal eye, 
But a few moments doom'd to live 

Just shown on earth, to die ? 
Weak man ! the vain enquiry cease, 

Wiry Heav'n hath call'd them hence: 
Pure from the world, they died in peace, 

They died in innocence." 

KILMINGTON.] This place is situated in the 
hundred of Axminster, two miles west from the town 
of that name. Kilrnington is vulgarly said to be an 
abbreviation of Kill-men-town; 'but, according to 
Folwhele, it is said to be a corruption from Kil- 
maen-ton, the town at the stony burial-place, bear 
ing the memory of a great slaughter made in Kings- 
held. The Barons of Torrington were the ancient 
possessors of the manor, but on default of male 
issue it came to the five daughters of Matthew de 
I onton ; and passed by their marriages to different 
owners. 

KINGSBRIDGE.] Kingsbridge is a pleasant little 
market-town in the" hundred of Stanborough, 39 
miles south-south-west from Exeter, and 207 west- 
south- west from London. It has three annual fairs 
the market-day is Saturday. 

Kingsbridge is on a branch of the Salcombe river ; 



Arv , f Eli * abttl '. the wife of 

r Atwill, Gent, who, being pregnant, cl.cd of an hysterical 
affection .he first year of her marriage, November 17th! 1073 

t He commenced student at St. Mary's Hall, Oxford 
bout .he n.nth ol Henry VIII. and made a considerable p o- 
VOL. II. NO. 58. 



and, according to Risdon, it derived its name from 
the bridge which separates it from Dodbrooke. A 
Latin free-school, which has obtained some reputa- 
tion, was founded here by a Mr. Crispin, of Exeter. 
David Tolley, or Tolbey, called, by Lelaiul, Tave- 
legus, was a native of this town ;f as was also John 
C ranch, who commenced painter at the age of thir- 
ty-six. He painted the death of Chattertonj and wrote 
a work intituled the Economy of Testaments. 

LAMERTON.] Lamerton, or Lamberton, lies two 
miles north-west by north fromTuvistock. Its church 
is remarkable on account of an ancient monument of 
the Tremains, with the effigies of two twin brothers 
of that family, named Nicholas and Andrew, of whom 
the following particulars are related by Risdon : 
" They were so alike in all their lineaments, so 
equall in stature, so coloured in haire, and such re- 
semblance in face and gesture, that they could not 
be knowne the one from the other, noe not by their 
parents, brethren, and sisters, but privately by some 
secret marks, and openly by wearing some jewel, 
coloured ribands, or the like ; which in sporte they 
would sometyme change to make tryall of their 
friends' judgment : yet somewhat more strange 
was, that their minds and affections wore as one ;' 
for what the one loved, the other desired ; and so on 
the contrary, the louthing of the one was the dis- 
liking of the other : yea, such a confederation of 
inbred powers and sympathy was in their natures, 
that if Nicholas were sick and grieved, Andrew lelt 
the like pain, though far distant and remote in their 
persons, and that without any intelligence given to 
either partie. And it was also observed, that if 
Andrew were merry, Nicholas was so also, although 
in different places, which long they could not en- 
dure to be, for they ever desired to cat, drink, sleep, 
and wake together. Yea, so they lived, and so they 
died together: for in the year 1564, they both 
served at New-Haven, (in France) where the one 
being slaine, the other stept instantly into his place, 
when in the height of clanger, noe persuasions 
able to remove or hinder him, was there also 
slaine." 

LANDCROSS.] Landcross, or Lancrass, is a small 
parish beautifully situated in the hundred of Sheb- 
bear, two miles south by east from Bideford. It 
stands on a peninsula nearly surrounded by the 
ims of the Torridge and the Yeo. The manor 
now belongs toLordRolle,butwas formerly possessed 
by the Giffards. The last owner of that name, tra- 
dition states to have been a Catholic lady, who 
ruined herself by supporting a falling religion, and 
at last received parochial relief. The celebrated 
jeneral Monk, or Monck, is generally supposed to 
lave been a native of Potheridge, near 1 Torriugton ; 



ficiencv in the Latin and Greek tongues. The Proevmna*. 
.ala Grammat.cz Gwr* was written by him for the , n >trJc- 
10,1 of Prince Edward. lie also wrote the themata Homeri 
ud some other pieces. 



but 



150 



DEVONSHIRE. 



but as Landcross -was undoubtedly the place of his 
baptism, it is not improbable that he was also born 
here.* 

LINDRIDOE.] Lindridge is a subordinate manor 
to Bishop's Teignton, and was, previously to 1640, 
possessed by the Martyns, from whom it descended 
to the Lears, and from them to Thomas Comyns, 
Esq. by his marriage with their heiress, Lady Tip- 
ping. It was sold by that gentleman ; and, after 
having been disposed of two or three times, came, 
by -purchase, to its present owner, the Rev. John 
Templar. The central part of the ancient manor- 
house only remains ; this, however, forms a noble 
building, and contains large and commodious rooms. 
One old apartment, the Ball Room, still remains, 
with all its decorations as fitted up in 1673. The 
pannels are of burnished gold, of which the gilding 
alone amounted to five hundred pounds. In the 
house are some excellent paintings by Vandervelde, 
Vanbloom, and other old painters. The grounds 
are eminently beautiful, and possess trees unri- 
valled for the beauty and luxuriance of their 
growth. 

LINMOUTH.]- It has been justly observed " that 
the scenery in the north of Devon, and particularly 
those parts which abut on the Bristol Channel, 
abound with a peculiar wildness of feature, and ro- 
mantic character. The vallies are sunk into nar- 
row, contracted glens, many of which have a gur- 
gling rivulet running through their bosom ; and 
their steep sides adorned with mantling woods, and 
beetling rocks. In the centre of some of these a 
small village is seen crouching beneath the lofty 
hills ; and from many stations, the tumultuous waves 
are beheld constantly lashing the rocky shores. The 
roads in this district are more pleasing to the paint- 
er than to the traveller ; for the latter is continually 
complaining of their fatiguing steepness, and dan- 
gerous inequalities ; characteristics that render them 
interesting to the fancy of the former." One of these 
roads, which leads to the village of Linmouth, is de- 
scribed in the following terms by Warner: "Nar- 
row, rugged, and uneven, it creeps alon'f the face 
of a prodigious rocky down, and runs with a most 
rapid descent to the ocean, which is roaring below 

* General Monk. This eminent statesman, so celebrated 
for his ac tivity in the restoration ot Charles the Second, and the 
ease with which he effected it, seems to have been employed 
by the Parliament in direct opposition to (he dictates of com- 
mon sense and rational deduction. Monk had been bred a 
soldier and a loyalist ; had attended Charles the Fir>t twice to 
the onrth during the Scotch wars; was sent to Ireland to quell 
the rebellion in that country, and soon afterwards made go- 
vernor of Dublin. These things seem sufficient to indicate his 
attachment to monarchy ; yet the Parliament, who, on his re- 
turn, knew of his attempt to relieve Nantwich, in Cheshire, 
where their army had made him prisoner, and on that occasion 
conveyed him to the Tower, granted him his liberty, gave him 
a command, and again sent him to Ireland lo subdue (lie rebels, 
with whom he concluded so disadvantageous a peace, that it 
subjected him to a. vote of censure. But so heedless were the 
republicans that, not yet convinced of his duplicity, they em- 

8 



at the depth of about five or six hundred feet. For- 
midable as the precipice is, the neighbouring inha- 
bitants have not so much as erected a low wall, or 
stretched a friendly rail, along its brink, to lend 
their aid Jn case of accident or darkness ; so that 
should the traveller's horse become restive whilst 
treading this perilous path, or he himself mistaka 
the way, nothing could probably prevent his imme- 
diate destruction. But this road, so alarming to the 
stranger, is totally divested of any thing like horror 
to the Devonian ; custom, which reconciles all that 
is fearful or disagreeable, painful or terrible, to the 
mind, enables him to travel it with perfect indiffer- 
ence ; and whilst I was descending the most abrupt 
part with the greatest caution, a Devonshire peasant, 
seated upon a laden horse, and driving three others 
before him, passed by me down the declivity at the 
rate of a dashing postillion upon a good turnpike- 
road. Following this path to the bottom of the 
steep, I suddenly found myself in a village truly ro- 
mantic ; the little sea-port of LINMOUTH crouching 
at the feet of august rocky hills, which beetle over 
it in every direction, except where the bottom in 
which it stands unites with the shore. Unlike the 
usual formal arrangement of habitations in towns 
and villages, the houses are not here thrown toge- 
ther into regular groups, or stretched out into rec- 
tilinear rows, but sprinkled over the little flat, as if 
dropped by the hand of chance ; and concealed from 
each other by an abundance of shrubby trees and 
high hedge-roads. Two alpine brooks, dashing 
over their craggy beds, rush from deep ravines that 
open upon the village to the east and south, and 
throw their waters under two small stone bridges, 
which, almost hidden in ivy, form happy and appro- 
priate features in this very picturesque scene. A 
port in the epitome lies at a small distance from the 
village, where the Linmouth oysters, which here 
sell for two shillings per hundred, are shipped for 
other places, and necessaries imported from Bristol 
for the consumption of the place and its neighbour- 
hood." 

LINTON.] The little village of Liuton, is situat- 
ed on a high hill immediately above Linmouth, in 
the hundred of Sherwell, fourteen miles east by 

ployed him under Cromwell against the Scots. Oliver, how- 
ever, appears to have penetrated into his character ; and, a 
short time before his death, wrote him a letter, to which this 
singular postscript was added : " There be, that tell me, that 
there is a certain cunning fellow in Scotland, called George 
Monk, who is said to lie in wait there to introduce Charles 
Stuait: I pray you use your own diligence to apprehend him, 
and send him up to me." Monk acted with great caution after 
the death of Cromwell, but at length assembled a free Parlia- 
ment, who voted for the re.-toration of Charles; on whose 
return, honours were heaped upon General Monk, and he was 
created Duke of Albemarle. He died of a dropsy in 1670. 
The Duke, though fearless in the field, trembled before his wife, 
who had been his mistress, was the daughter of a blacksmith, 
and bred a milliner. She was a bitter enemy of Lord Claren- 
don, ami a perfect mistress of abusive eloquence. 

noi-ti 



DEVONSHIRE. 



151 



north from Ilfracombe. The view from the church- 
prd is singularly grand and interesting, presenting 
prospects of the lowering rocky coasts, the Bristol 
Channel, the Welch mountains, &c. Indeed, the 
beautiful scenery round this village and the neigh- 
bouring parish of Countisbury, will scarcely yield 
to any part of the kingdom. 

North- west of Linton, about half a mile, is an ex- 
traordinary tract, which has been thus described by 
a modern writer ; " At its lower extremity, where 
the valley was widest (about four hundred feetj, in 
the very centre, stopping up as it were the outlet, 
arose a large bulwark, like some gigantic building 
in part demolished. More than half of the valley 
was shut up from the sea by its broad base. Les- 
sening by degrees, it rose to a considerable height, 
and terminated in a conical form. While gazing 
on this majestic pile, an adventitious circumstance, 
resulting from the weather, presented itself, and was 
productive of the finest effect : the sky had been 
dark and lowering the whole morning, attended by 
violent gusts of wind : the clouds now broke ; and, 
sweeping in a pitchy volume around the lower parts 
of the rock, terminated about two-thirds upwards, 
and left the more elevated summit beaming with a 
bright stream of sunshine. Nothing, in a pictu- 
resque light, could well exceed this most beautiful 
appearance. The full force of one of the happiest 
images that a poet has almost at any time used, at 
once rose upon my mind ; and I was not more de- 
lighted with its truth, than with the aptness of the 
comparison, and the sweetness of the expres- 
sion. 

" As some tall cliff, that lifts its awful form, 
Swells from the vale, and mklway leaves the storm ; 
Though round its breast the rolling clouds are spread, 
Eternal sunshine settles on its head." 

Of this mass my description will convey but a 
faint notion ; for the imagination would be at a loss 
to figure to itself a ruder congeries than was here 
beheld : rocks piled on rocks ; at one time in un- 
equal and rough layers ; at another, transverse, and 
diagonally inclined against each other in short, in 
every possible form that can be conceived threat- 
ening, however, every moment to be disjoined, and 
to precipitate themselves, either into the valley, or 
beyond it into the depth of waters. Without ac- 
counting for the origin of the Valley of Stones, it 
appears as if a vast collection of waters, resting on 
the surface of the mountainous country behind, had 
burst through all opposition, and forced its way into 
the sea, carrying with it in its torrent every earthy 
substance, and leaving the former rocks in their 
present shapes, mimicking the remains of antique 
towers, of castles split asunder and mouldering into 
ruins." 



* Benson, though a member of Parliament, had for a long 
time carried on an illicit tratle, and {aiding this island well 
adapted for his purposes, he for a considerable time refused to 



LUNDY ISLAND.] Lundy Island is situated in the 
Bay of Bideford, about twelve miles north-west of 
Cloveily. It is somewhat more than three miles 
long, and one broad, and contains nearly '2000 acres. 
Steep and lofty rocks surround it on every side, and 
render it impracticable to land except in one or two 
places, and even there the avenues are so narrow 
that one man might resist a multitude. The wind- 
ing tract that leads to the most elevated part of the 
island, which is about 890 feet above the sea, is co- 
vered with craggy masses, b'ut the summit com- 
mands extensive views of the neighbouring coast, of 
England and Wales. Not more than four hundred 
acres of land are in cultivation, about one hundred of 
which are employed in pasture, and the remainder in 
producing wheat. About 400 sheep, -and 800 oxen 
are fed here ; and the enclosures are stone fences. 
Rabbits abound here ; muirs, and the common rock 
birds, are very plentiful ; and large quantities of 
lobsters, crabs, mackerel, and other fish are also 
procured. In the winter, which is not so severe 
here as might be supposed, great quantities of wood- 
cocks, and starlings are met with. 

The building, called the Morisco Castle, and the 
remains of St. Anne's Chapel, are the principal an- 
tiquities. The former, situated near the south-east 
end, was once strongly fortified with large outworks 
and a ditch. On the battlements are a few dis- 
mounted old cannon, and below it is a singular ca- 
vern. 

Of the history of Lundy Island but little is known. 
Risdon mentions that it was the residence of a not- 
ed pirate named Morisco, who had conspired to kill 
Henry III. but not succeeding in the attempt re- 
tired here, where he was afterwards executed by 
order of that sovereign. We are also informed by 
Sir Thomas More, that, during the time he was 
harassed by his nobles, Edward II. proposed retir- 
ing to it. In the reign of Charles I. the castle was 
held by Lord Say and Seale ; and in that of Wil- 
liam and Mary, it was surprised by the French who 
for some time retained possession of it. It was af- 
terwards sold by government to a nobleman who 
gave the care of it to a notorious smuggler of the 
name of Benson.* The next possessor was Sir 
John Borlase Warren, who erected a small house 
upon it, and let the ground on leases of twenty- 
one years, which have some time expired; In 
1781, it was sold by Sir John Warren, to John 
Cleveland, Esq. for the sum of 1200/. but it was 
shortly after represented by government. 

The yearly rent of the island is but 70/. : and the 
duties, amounting in seven years to barely 5/. will 
not maintain a revenue officer. The number of in- 
habitants is now not more than twenty or thirty, but 
it was probably much more populous, as many hu- 
man bones have been dug up. 



resign possession of it. He was at length detected in making 
false insurances, and obliged to flee to Lisbon, where he as- 
sumed holy orders. 

Lurrox 



152 



DEVONSHIRE. 



LUPTON HOUSE.] Lupton House, situated in the 
neighbourhood of 'i'otness, is the elegant mansion 
of Sir Francis Duller, Bart. The house, of which 
the southern front is remarkably beautiful, stands 
on a noble ascent, and is surrounded by eminences 
richly covered with wood, with fertile vallies at their 
feet. 

LCSCOMBE HOUSE.] This house, which was 
erected a few years ago under the direction of Mr. 
Nash, is the scat of Charles Hoare, Esq. It is si- 
tuated in a narrow vale about a mile to the west of 
Dawlish Church. On account of tVie mildness of 
the air of Devonshire, Mr. Hoare was induced to 
purchase the estate at Luscomhe, and in the erec- 
tion of the mansion, convenience is united with the 
picturesque and beautiful. The grounds around 
are composed of a charming variety of hill and 
dale. On the west rises the lofty eminence of Hal- 
don, to the east Dawlish Church, and beyond that a 
noble view of the English Channel. 

LYDIORD.] Lydford, anciently Lydhatford, for- 
merly a town of great note, is now a miserable vil- 
lage, composed of a few ragged cottages : it lies in 
the hundred of Lifton, seven miles and three quar- 
ters north by east from Tavistock. Prince assures 
that this " ancient town and 



us 



borougli was the 



largest parish in the county, or the kingdom, and 
that the whole forest of the Dart belonged to it ; to 
whose parson, or rector, all the tythes thereof are 
due. 'Tis said that this town, in its best strength, 
was able to entertain Julius Caesar at his second ar- 
rival here in Britain ; but anno 997 it was grievously 
spoilt by the inhuman Danes. Recovering again, it 
had, in the days of the Conqueror, 122 Burgesses." 
Lydford is still the principal town of the Stannaries, 



wherein the court is held relating to these causes. 



From the Domesday Book, it appears that Lydford 
and London were rated in the same manner, and at 
the same ti.ne. Lydford formerly sent members to 
Parliament ; but was excused from this burthen, as 
it was then considered, by pleading propter pauper- 
tatem. Some remains of its ancient importance may 
still be seen in a square tower, or keep of a castle, 
which was formerly used as a court and a prison, 
where those criminals were tried and confined, who 
offended against the Stannary LaWs. The tower is 
situated on a mound of earth, which forms the east- 
ern side of an entrenched area. The banks are 



* William Browne wa;. born at Tavistock, in 1590. H'u 
father was Thomas Brown of that place, gentleman ; most pro- 
bably a descendant from the knigntly family of Browne, of 
Briwnes-HaMi, in the parish ol Lungtree, near Great Torring- 
ton ; where Sir Thomas Browne built a genteel house, and a 
park attached to it, still ra!Vd B-owne Park. ThisSirThomas 
was a younger brother of the lamous Brute Browne, who was 
killed at sea, b\ the Spaniards, before Port Rico ; oi whose 
death Sir Francis Drake, the cuiiuiiander in the \oyage, said, 
" I could grieve for thee, dear B-ule, but now 'tis no time to 
lay down mj spirits." This family became extinct in (he 
seventeenth centurj, and the estate " full amongst Distai'is." 
William Browne, who was remarkably fond of learning, was 



high, and disposed in a square form, nearly similar 
to those at Plympton : on the south-western side 
the ground slopes very quick into a deep narrow 
valley. This tower, and many other points con- 
nected with the place, arc noticed in the following 
ludicrous poem, attributed to Browne, an elegant 
and humorous writer, who flourished in the early 
part of the 17th century.* 

I oft h ave heard of Lydford Law, 

How in the morninge they hange and draw 

And sit in judgment after. 
At lirst I . wond'red at yt much; 
But sfhce, I find the reason's such 

As yt deserves no laughter. 

They have a castle on a hill, 
1 took yt for an old wyndmill, 

The vanes blown down by weather. 
To lie therein one night 'tis guest, 
'Twere belter to be stoned and prest, 

Or hang'd, now cluise you whether. 

Ten men Icsse roome within this cave 
Than five mice in a lanthorn have ; 

The keepers they are slye ones. 
If any could devise by art 
To gett yt upp into a cart, 

'1 were fytt to carry lyons. 

When I beheld yt, lord ! thought 1 
What justice and what clemencye 

Ilath Lydford when 1 saw all ! 
I know none gladly there would stay ; 
But rather hang out of the way, 

Than tarry for a tryall. 

The prince a hundred pounds hath sent, 
To amend the leads and planches rent, 

Within this lyving tombe ; 
Some forty five pounds more had pay'd 
The debts of all that shall be layde 

Ther till the day of doombe. 

One lyes there for a seam of malt, 
Another for a peck of salt, 

Two suerties for a noble : 
If this be true or els false news, 
You may go ask of Master Crews-)- 

John Vaughan, or John Doble.J 

More to these men that lye in lurch 
There is a bridge, ther is a church, 

Seven ashes and an oke, 
Three houses standing and ten downe; 
They say the passon hath a gowne, 

But 1 saw never a cloke. 



educated at Oxford, where he made a considerable proficiency, 
and became particularly attached to poetry. From the university 
he went to the Inner Temple ; but some time after returned to 
Oxford, and became tutor to Robert Dormer, afterwards Earl 
of Caernarvon, who was slain at Newbury in 1643. In 1624, 
Mr. Browne took his degree of master of arts, and shortly after 
quitted college to reside with the Earl of Pembroke, with whom 
he was a great favourite. He published several admirable 
pieces ; and, contrary to the general followers of the muses, 
acquired considerable wealth. 

J- The steward. 

% Attorneys of the courts. 

Whereby 



DEVONSHIRE. 



155 



Whereby you may consider well, 
That playn simplicitie doth dwell 

At Lydford without bravery ; 
And in the towne both young and grave 
Doe love the naked truth to have ; 

No oloak to hyde ther knavery. 

The people all within this clyme 
Are frozen in the winter tyme, 

But sure I do not fayne ; 
And when the summer is begunn, 
They lye like silk-worms in the sun, 

And come to lyfe agayne. 

One told me in King Casar's tyme, 

The towne was built with stone and lyme ; 

But sure the walls were clay : 
And they are fallen for ought I see ; 
And since the howses are got free, 

The town is runn away. 

Ca-sar yf thou ther didst raign, 
While one house stands come ther agayn, 

Come quickly while ther is one ' r 
If thou but stay a lyltle fytt, 
But fyve years more, they will commyt 

The whole towne to a prison. 

To see it thus much ^reved was I ; 
The proverb sayth, Sorrowes be dry ; 

So was 1 at the matter ; 
Now by good luck I know not how, 
Ther by ther came a strange stray'd cowe, 

And we had mylke and water. 

To nyne good stomacks with our wigg, 
At last we gott a roasting pigg ; 

This diet was our bounds : 
And this were just, as yf 'twere knoweit, 
One pound of butter had byn throwen 

Amongst a pack of hounds. 

One glass of drink I got by chance, 
'Twas clarett when yt was in France ; 
But now from yt much wider : 

1 think a man might make as good 

W ith green crabs boyl'd in Brazil wood 
And half a pint of'cydar. 

I kist the Mayor's hand of the town, 
AVho.though heveare no scarlet gown,. 

Honors the Rose and Thistle. 
A piece of corall to the mace, 
Which there I saw to serve in place, 

Would make a good child's whistle. 

.At six o'clock I came away, 

And pray'd for thoes that were to stay 

Within a place so arrant : 
Wyde and ope the wynds so roar, 
By God's grace I'll com there no more,, 

Unlesse by som Tynn Warrant. 



the village of Lydford, the scenery is sin- 
gularly picturesque and romantic; but the most 
prominent objects of curiosity and admiration are 
the bridge, and two cascades. The former bears a 
strong ) resemblance to the celebrated Devil's Bridge 
in Wales. It consists of one rude arch, thrown 
across a narrow rocky chasm, which sinks nearly 
c.ghty feet from the level of the road. At the bot- 
tom of this channel the little river Lyd is heard rat- 

\9L. II. NO. 50. 



tling through its contracted course. The singula- 
rity of this scene is not perceived in merely passing 
over the bridge : to estimate its character, and com- 
prehend its awfully impressive effects, it is neces- 
sary to see the bridge, the chasm, and the roaring 
water, from different projecting crags impending 
over the stream. A little below the bridge, ob- 
serves Warner, " the fissure gradually spreads its- 
rocky jaws ; the bottom opens ; and, instead of the 
dark precipices which have hitherto overhung and 
obscured the struggling river, it now emerges into 
day, and rolls its murmuring current through a 
winding valley, confined within magnificent banks, 
darkened with woods, which swell into bold pro- 
montories, or fall back into sweeping recesses, till 
they are lost to the eye in distance. Thickly shaded 
by trees, which shoot out from the sides of the rent, 
the scene at Lydford Bridge is not so terrific as it 
would have been, had a little more light been let in 
upon the abyss, just sufficient to produce a darkness 
visible. As it is, however, the chasm cannot be re- 
garded without shuddering ; nor will the stoutest 
heart meditate unappalled upon the dreadful anec- 
dotes connected with the spot." 

" Scenes of this nature frequently give rise to mar- 
vellous stories ; and Lydford Bridge is not without 
its tales of wonder. It is related, that a London 
rider was benighted on this road, in a heavy .storm, 
and, wishing to get to some place of shelter, spurred 
his horse forward with more than common speed. 
The tempest hail heon tremendous during the night ;. 
and in the morning the rider w.;s informed that 
Lydford Bridge had been swept away with the cur- 
rent. He shuddered to reflect on his narrow es- 
cape ; his horse having cleared the clrisi:! by a sud- 
den leap, during his course, though tiie occasion o 
his making it was at the time unknown. Two or 
three persons have chosen this spot for self-destruc- 
tion. The scene is indeed highly terrific ; and witii 
these awful associations, lias an extraordinary effect 
on the feelings. About half a mile south of tho 
bridge is the first Cascade, which is formed by the 
waters of a small rivulet, rising in the moors in the 
neighbourhood ; and at this spot uniting with the 
Lyd. The fall is not very considerable in its usual 
quantity of water ; but, like most mountain streams, 
it is greatly augmented by storms, when a large 
sheet rushes over a rocky ledge, and throws itself 
down a perpendicular precipice of above one hun- 
dred feet. The cascade is a pleasing and interest- 
ing part of the scene ; but this single feature is al- 
most lost in contemplating the entire portrait. 
Turning towards the castle, a combination of sin- 
gularly interesting and picturesque objects are ob- 
served. The two side screens are thickly mantled 
with hanging woods, interspersed with the grey- 
crested rock, and folding one behind another as they 
recede from the eye ; whilst in the middle distance 
are seen the mossy tower of the parish church, and 
the embattled castle. Beyond these is a ridge of 
the Dartmoor Hills, whose tops are often immersed 
2 o iu 



151 



DEVONSHIRE. 



ill the fleeting clouds : and beneath the feet of the 
spectator is seen the river Lyd winding through 
its narrow channel." About half a mile east of 
Lydford is the second cascade, called Skaits Hole. 
This is properly the fall of the Lyd : and though 
the water is not precipitated so far as in the other 
cascade, it flows into a greater volume. The water 
is impelled through a yawning ragged fissure in the 
rocks, anil falling in one broad sheet, it rattles 
along a stony channel till it arrives at Lydford 
Bridge. 

LYAIPSTON.] The village of Lympston, anciently 
called Leningston, is situated in the hundred o!' 
East Biulleigh, three, miles north from lOxmonth. 
The church at the end of the village forms, with the 
(Surrounding scenery, a very picturesque object. 
This building was erected on the site of the old 
church, in the y; ar 1409. 

MAMHF.AD.] The parish of Mamhead is in the 
hundred of Exminster, four miles and three quarters 
east by north from Clmdleigh. T lie manor belongs 
t the Earl of Lisbunie, whose seat here has ob- 
tained much celebrity .among the ornamental and 
beautiful parts of this county. Most of its charms, 
however, have been impaired by neglect. Sir Peter 
JJalle, an eminent loyalist, who died in 1680, was 
the builder of the mansion. To this gentleman, his 
son anil heir, William Balle, Esq. raised a monu- 
ment in Mamhead Church, where he was interred.* 
In this family the estate remained till 1749, when it 
was bequeathed to Thomas Ilussey Aprice, who 
shortly after sold it to Joseph Gascoine Nightin- 
gale. It came to the present family by the union 
of Elizabeth Nightingale with the lion. Wilmot 
Vaughan. The woods and plantations are large 
and numerous. Many of them were planted by 
Thomas Balle, the last of that family, who brought 
with him from the continent a number of cork, ilax, 
wainscot, oak, Spanish chesnut, cedar, acacia, and 
other exotic trees, and with them adorned the 
grounds of Mamhead. According to the taste of 
the age, Mr. Balle disposed his terraces in parallels, 
and his gardens were laid out by the rules of Eu- 
clid. These incongruities continued till the late 
Lord Lisburne commenced the task of restoring it 
to its former state. " This," observes Mr. Pol- 
whele, " has been effectually done ; and Mamhead 
appears as one natural and extensive enclosure, 
with various prospects of sea, river, and country. 
Towards Haldon, the most beautiful plantations of 
fir and forest trees in Devonshire, are crowned at 
the top of the hill by a noble obelisk, which was 
built by the late Mr. Balle. This obelisk stands on 
Mamhead Point : it consists of Portland-stone, 

* We learn from the inscription on this monument, that Sir 
Peter was married to Anne, daughter to Sir William Cooke 
of Gloucester, by whom he had seventeen children, and that 
his " excellency in all learning, and great knowledge in the 
Jaw gave him early preferment." He was " Recorder of 
Exeter at thirty-four ; Solicitor, then Attorney, to Henrietta 
Marja, Queen to Charles the Martyr ; and of his council, at 



about 100 feet in height. In front of the house, vee 
cannot but admire the easy swell of the lawn, whose 
smooth verdure is relieved by groups of trees and 
shrubs most judiciously disposed ; whilst at one ex* 
tremity the eye is attracted by General Vaughan's 
picturesque cottage; and a little beyond these 
grounds, by a landscape which no scenery in this 
county exceeds in richness. On this side of the 
Exe are to be seen the ancient castle and posses- 
sions of Courteflay, i'.nd Kenton, and the village of 
Starcross ; on the other side, Kxmout'i, Lympston, 
Nctwell, and the Retreat, with the country stretch- 
ing' away to the Dorsetshire and Somersetshire hills. 
In the- meantime the river itself, and the sea in full 
prospect, give an additional beauty to the scenes 1 
iiave here described." 

MARIDOK.] This is a handsome seat, now, or re- 
cently, the seat of the Rev. George Taylor. It is 
about three reiles north-east from Modbury. 

MARISTOW.] Maristow, the beautiful seat of Sir 
Manassah Lope/, who purchased it of tiie heiresses 
of Mr. Hay wood, for 65,OOU/. is soUeri on the east- 
ern bank of the Tavy. The neighbouring views are 
extremely fine. 

MEM BURY CASTLE.] This is an ancient work, 
occupying a very high spot of land, oil the pastern 
bank of the Axe. Its situation was well chosen, as 
it commands extensive views, both of sea and land. 
The manor anciently belonged to the Barony of 
Oakhampton ; but, on the attainder of the Marquis 
of Exeter, it was given, by Henry VIIF. to Sir Ed- 
ward North. It afterwards was purchased by Sir 
John Drake, of Aslie, one of whose descendants sold 
it, some years ago, to the Tucker family, of Ax- 
minster. 

MOD BURY.]- Modbury, an ancient market and 
borough town, though it is now neither incorporat- 
ed, nor represented in Parliament, is situated in the 
hundred of Ermington, 34J miles south-west by 
south from Exeter, and 207i west-south-west from 
London. The market is on Thursday; and th 
town has a fair on the 4th of May. 

In the 34 s of Edward I. Modbury sent members 
to Parliament ; but, with many other places, it was 
afterwards exempted from duty on the alledged plea 
of poverty. A court-leet is held here twice a year ; 
at the Michaelmas court a portreeve, called Mayor, 
two Constables, and some other officers are elected. 
The persons thus chosen are those possessed of a 
freehold within the borough ; these have certain 
privileges, and are denominated Free Burgesses. 
It appears, from the records, that so late as the 17th 
century the borough court took cognizance of ac- 
tions for all debts below forty shillings ; and that in 

thirty-seven. Engaging in the troubles of 1641, suffered the 
fate of loyalty. At the return of Charles the Second, (dis- 
obliging the great favourite") was only restored to his former 
places, serving his royal mistress all her life, and her concerns 
three years after ; retired hither, and died in his eighty-senond 
year, 1680." 



DEVONSHIRE. 



the feign of Charles I. the liberty of entering deeds 
ui the rolls of the borough was possessed by the in- 
habitants. 

The town of Modhury is composed chiefly of four 
streets, which cross each other at right angles, and 
fun in the direction of the cardinal points. Accord- 
ing to the late returns the number of houses is 31(5, 
Of inhabitants 1890. Many of the latter are engag- 
ed in the woollen trade, which was formerly carried 
on here to an extent much larger than at present : 
here was once a good weekly market for yarn, which 
has been discontinued many years, scarcely any be- 
ing now spun in the neighbourhood : to preserve 
the right, however, the bell still rings for the yarn 
market at twelve o'clock. A plush and a hat ma- 
nufactory have also been established in this town ; 
nud the machines employed in the former are of very 
ingenious construction. 

Modbury Church is a spacious and handsome 
building, having a spire, about 134 feet in height : 
the spire is more modern than the body of the edi- 
fice, and seems, from papers preserved in the parish 
chest, to have been rebuilt soon after the jear 16-21. 
Within the church is a neat marble font and pedes- 
tal, and three large galleries, erected in 171(5. In 
the south aisle is an alabaster statue in armour, sup- 
posed to be the effigy of one of the Champeniounc 
family. It has been remarked, that this structure 
has a considerable deviation from the usual east and 
west position ; this, perhaps, may tend to confirm the 
opinion, that the founders of churches took that 
point for the east, where the sun was seen to rise on 
that saint's day to whom the church was dedicated. 
The head of Modbury Church is within about three 
quarters of a point of the north-east. This town 
has two Dissenting meeting-houses ; one for Pres- 
feyterians, the other for Anabaptists. 

The manor of Modbury formerly belonged to Sir 
James Okestone, or Oxton ; but afterwards became 
the property of the Champernounes, several of whom 
were knights, and lived here, from the time of Ed- 
ward the Second, till the end of the seventeenth or 
beginning of the 'eighteenth century. The noble 
mansion in which they resided, called Modbury 
House, or Court House, is nearly razed : a part, 
which seems to have been one of the wings, how- 
ever, is yet standing, and contains a large arched 
chamber, said to have been the dining-room : the 
doorways and chimney-pieces are ornamented with 
carving ; the window-frames are of granite, or 
moor-stone. At a small distance was a large deer 
park, now converted into a considerable farm, but 
still retaining the name of Modbury Park. Tradi- 
tion speaks highly of the grandeur of this seat, and 
of the magnificent manner in which the Champer- 
nounes lived ; particularly of their keeping a very 
fine band of singers and musicians, which band, if 

* Of this family was Sir John Fortescue, Chief Justice and 
Chancellor in the reign of Henry the Sixth, who was born 
kere about the year 1331 ; and was author of De Laudibus 



report may be relied on, occasioned the ruin of thft 

family : " for that Mr. Champcrnoune taking it on 

the Thames in the time of Queen Elizabeth, her 

majesty was so delighted with the music, that she 

requested the loan of it for a month ; to which Mr. 

Champernoune, aware of the improbability of its 

ever returning, would not consent ; saying that he 

' hoped her Majesty would allow him to keep his 

fancy.' The Queen was so highly exasperated at 

this refusal, that she found some pretence to suo 

him at law, and ruin him, by obliging him, in the 

course of the proceeding?, to sell no fewer than 

j nineteen manors." This account is confirmed, as to 

! the sale of the manors, by the title deeds of som 

, lands in and near Modbury ; from which it also apr 

| pears, that, at the end of the seventeenth century) 

the possessions of this family were very inconsider- 

; able. A branch from the family seated in this townj 

! remains in the Champernounes of Dartington. This 

manor has been for the last century in the family of 

j the present owner, u daughter of the Rev. Mr. Tristj 

of Bowden. 

An alien priory of Benedictines existed at Modr 
bury as early as the time of Stephen ; but on the 
dissolution of the alien priories, in the reign of Henry 
VI. it was granted to Eton College. Its annual 
revenues were estimated at 70/. The site of th( 
priory appears to have been at a place called Scot- 
land, adjoining the western side of the church-yard. 
Some remains of an ancient building, with large 
i arches, filled up, are still existing there. Till lately 
they were inhabited, but they have since been con- 
verted into a barn. Two large fields, on the op- 
posite side of the road, are still called Prior'* 
Parks. 

Wimpstone, a considerable manor near Modbury, 
was anciently the seat of the Fortescues, several of 
whom have been deservedly celebrated for their 
talents, both in the civil and military professions.* 
The Fortescue arms still remain on the glass win- 
dow of the manor-house, but the estate is now 
in the possession of a gentleman of the name of 
Treby. . 

Traine, near Modbury, is an ancient seat of the 
Swete family. 

Butterford, also near Modbury, was formerly th 
seat of the Prestwood family. One of its recent 
owners was Thomas Bowes, Esq. who fitted up 
and repaired the mansion-house at a considerable 
expence. 

Membland, the seat of the late Alderman Pef- 
ring, whose brother, Peter Perring, Esq. purchased 
it in the year 1780, of the Bulteel family, is in th? 
neighbourhood of Modbury. 

Fowelsconabe, situated at about four miles from, 
Modbury, is an ancient structure, formerly the seat 
of the Fowels, and afterwards of a branch of the 

Legum Angliae, a work still greatly- in repute among legal an- 
tiquaries. He <liecl at the age of ninety ; ami was buried at 
Eberton, in Gloucestershire, 



158 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Champornoune family. It has since been the pro- 
perty of George Herbert, Esq. and subsequently 
three gentlemen, brothers, of the name of King, were 
successively the proprietors. 

MONKLEIGH.] Monkleigh is situated in the hun- 
dred of Shebbear, two miles and a quarter west- 
)iorth-west from Great Torrington. In the church 
is a monument to the memory of Sir William 
Hankford, Chief Justice of the Court of King's 
Bench.* 

MORETON HAMPSTEAD.] Moreton Hampstead, 
or Hampstead Moreton, a market-town, in the hun- 
dred of Teignbridge, 11| miles west-south-west 
from Exeter, and 184| west-south west from Lon- 
don, is situated in a highly romantic spot, bounded 
on every side, excepting the west, by lofty hills. 
The country in the neighbourhood is strewed with 
scattered fragments of rocks ; some of which are so 
large, and so curiously piled on each other, as to 
resemble buildings ruined by an earthquake. The 
town is populous, and has an extensive woollen 
trade. It is governed by a portreeve, and other 
officers, who are elected annually, at the court-leet 
of the Lord of the Manor. The inhabitants of the 
parish, according to the late act, amounted to 1653 : 
the number of houses was 345. The inhabitants, 
from their secluded situation on the confines of 
Dartmoor, have a peculiar dialect, and likewise a 
peculiarity of manners, which, to a stranger, appear 
very singular. The working class is chiefly em- 
ployed in manufacturing woollen yarn and serges for 
the East India Company. 

MORWELL.] Morwell Rock, which is about 700 
feet above the level of the rivers Tavy and Tamar, 
is situated in the neighbourhood of Tavistock. It 
rises almost perpendicular to an astonishing height 
from the bed of the Tamar. The views from its 
summit are strikingly beautiful ; and as its base is 
surrounded with wood, they burst at once upon the 
sight with uncommon effect. The tower of Cal- 
stock, and the distant hilis of Cornwall, fading into 
the blue horizon, finely contrast with the neighbour- 
ing headlands, appearing rough with rocks, and in- 
dented with excavations. A few years ago some 
valuable copper mines %vere discovered on Morwell 
Down. The tunnel, which has recently been form- 
ed through the hill, is about thirteen miles and a 
quarter long, including an aqueduct thrown over a 
valley, forty feet deep. The tunnel crosses a rich 
vein ot copper ore. 

Morwell House, formerly the hunting seat of the 
abbots of Tavistock, from its situation near Morwell 
Down, and the woods on the banks of the Tamar, 

* The Devonshire historians relate, that he was the person 

who imprisoned Prince Henry, son of Henry IV.; and that 

fearing h,s displeasure when King, he retired to his seat here 

md charging the keeper of his park to kill any man in his night 

walk tha twoiild not tell him who he was, he went into the 

rk under those circumstances, and was killed. A tree near 
winch this accident is said to have happened is still called 



was well adapted for this purpose. Its form is qua- 
drangular, with a large gateway in front, arched 
and ornamented, in a manner similar to those of the 
abbey. On the vaulted ceiling of this entrance are 
several coats of arms sculptured in moor-stone. 

MOTHECOMBE.] Mothecombe Harbour, situated 
in the vicinity of Modbury, was, a few years ago, 
the seat of a singular phenomenon. From a cliff on 
the western side a peninsula of many acres projects, 
called Motheeombe Back, formed by an accumula- 
tion of sand and gravel : this has resisted the force 
of the waters from time immemorial, and has a yearly 
fair held upon it. It reaches so nearly across the 
harbour, that the river Erme is confined by it almost 
close to the eastern cliff, and there flows into the 
sea. At the beginning of the year 1798, in a stormy 
night, the waves formed another peninsula, across 
the harbour, neurly as large, and apparently as se- 
cure as the old one, and which seemed as firmly at- 
tached to the eastern cliff, as the other to the west- 
ern ; consequently the river, after passing the an- 
cient back, was forced by the new obstruction to run 
quite across the harbour before it could join the 
ocean. So great an impediment to the navigation, 
of tlie river was caused by this, that meetings were 
held to consult on the means of regaining a passage by 
cutting through this new peninsula : but, before a 
determination could be made, the barrier, which 
had continued for several months undiminished, 
was washed away by the sea in another tempes- 
tuous night, and the harbour remained in its for- 
mer state. 

Mothecombe House, a handsome building of com- 
paratively modern structure, is situated iiear the 
mouth of the harbour. It was formerly in the fa- 
mily of Pollexfen, and afterwards in that of Calmady, 
whose female descendants and co-heirs sold a moiety 
of the estate to Henry Legassicke, Esq. whose fa- 
mily have for upwards of a century resided at Mod- 
bury. 

MOUNT EDGCUMBE.] The delightful peninsula of 
Mount Edgcumbe, the seat of the Earl of Mount 
Edgcumbe, which is approached by crossing an arm 
of the sea at the mouth of the Tamar, has been thus 
apostrophised by a modern poet : 

" Mount Edgcumbe ! pride of Britain's flowery meads, 
With tufted woodlands crown'd, and sinking glades, 
Bursting through ocean's wave, and rearing high 
Thy tow'ring summit to the western sky, 
Receive the votive tribute that I pay, 
And to the muse thy matchless charms display. f 

This estate possesses many beautiful and pleasing 
scenes, and presents, from the high grounds, a siu- 

Hankford's Oak. But Hankford was not Chief Justice of the 
King's Bench till alter the death of Sir William Gascoyne, 
who was so appointed in the second of Henry IV. 1401, 
and died in 14'J2. 

f From a poem, intituled " Mount Edgcumbe," by Mr. 
jrus Redding, of Plymouth ; published in the year 1811. 

gular 



DEVONSHIRB. 



157 



gular rariety of grand nnd interesting views. It is 
related, that the Duke of Medina Sidonia, Admiral 
of the Spanish Armada, when sailing up the Chan- 
nel, in 1588, was so delighted with its situation, that 
he marked it for himself, in the intended partition 
of the kingdom. The southern side of the mount, 
towards the seat, is an abrupt rocky cliff, planted 
with every variety of shrubs and evergreens, 
amongst which are the luxuriant arbutus, the lau 
restinus, the Portugal laurel, and the myrtle. In 
the middle of the hill runs a terrace through the 
centre of these plantations : and walks cut as low as 
possible down the rock, conduct to numerous beau- 
tiful and romantic scenes, and form a contrast very 
striking with the polished appearance it has on the 
north. From the profusion of evergreens the scenes 
are nearly of equal beauty in all seasons of the year. 
The following beautiful passage, from Mr. Red- 
ding's poem, already noticed, appears to relate to 
this particular part of the demesne : 

" Beneath the summit of that woody liill, 
An ancient cave records the story still 
Where all around a grateful shade is spread, 
And silence reigns, companion of the dead 

- A limpid spring a rocky basin fills, 
Tbat trickling from ;ibove in drops distils, 
Slow as the tears that in succession break, 
When called by woe down Pity's holv cheek: 
The glossy water ever clear remains, " 
No sluggish tinge its spotless surface stains, 
Chilly as death the polisli'd clirystal steeps, 
While from above the fretted marble weeps ; 
No change it bears from heats or wintry snows, 
But one unvarying coldness ever knows. 
A maid there lived in ;;ges that are past, 
With every virtue seated in her breast, 
Straight as the pines that northern climes adorn, 
tair and unsullied as the breath ol morn : 
An azure none her melting bosom bound, 
Her robes of white a faultless form surround, 
That half conceal the beauties they unfold, 
While o'er her shoulders float her locks of gold 
Her dewy eyes a soften'd light display, 
Sweet as the stars that guide the seaman's way 
O er the broad deep : and wliereso'er she moved 
bin-rounding princes, prais'd, admir'd, and loved 
Uhelia named, from ancient kings she came 
Cornwall's realm, once not unknown to fame,. 



'This family," says Collins, " denominated from the 

isnor of Eggecombe, Eggecomb, and Egecomb (as it has 

been variously written in former records) in the parish of Che- 

nton Fitz-Pam, near Crediton, has been of great antiquity in 

Devonshire, and in that church is Edgecomb's aisle, adorned 

with divers coats of arms belonging to b the family : but in "he 

reign of King Edward Hid. William de Eggecomb taking to 

wife Hillaria daughter and heir of William de Cotehel? of 

Cotehele, in the county of Cornwall, chiefly resided there I 

lwZV Wr S?. C r? il '- and Se P arated fro ' n Devonshire only 
by the breadth of the river Tamar. In 1378 the said William 

Edgecomb writing himself of Cotehele, in Cornwall, gran fed 

He died '4o et0n ,,"r' e C nvenl f T ock, in De'vo 8 . h re 
e died 1380 and left issue, by her, William Edgirombe 
Esq. who married the daughter and heir of _ Denset 
had a grant , 6 Henry V. with Royal Hethe, of the custody 
of the lead mine., with the silver ore therein which were 

VOL u' ' 
v \fijt 11, NO. O 



>e, Esq. who i 



Though now no traces of their power are left, 

By Time and Fate of name and realm bereft. 

Long proof 'gainst love, the maid with proud disdain. 

Heard many a lover urge his suit in vain ; 

Till one beyond the rest engag'd her heart 

'\Vhat maid is proof 'gainst love's all-powerful darl? 

Fair as Adonis was the- matchless youth, 

H is soul was honour and his word was truth ; 

While skill'd alike the bow and sword to wield, 

He knew no equal in the martial field. 

As near the margin of the troubled >e.i, 

Pie uatch'd with her the billows break in spray, 

From the high cliff's wide over hanging steep ;" 

A mountain breaker, foaming from the deep, 

Struck with resistless force (lie trembling mount! 

Down sank with hideous crash the rocky ground 

Ilurl'd in the bosom of the; angry wave, 

No human power the unhappy youth could save 

The wave recoiling bore him from the shore, 

Deep in its dark abyss to rise no more : 

The hapless maid tne dreadful ruin vievv'd, 

Grief stopp'd her utl'rance, petrified she stood, 

The tears at last gtish'd forth, day alter day, 

With fruitless grief and woe she pined away : 

Seated beside the once-loved chrybta! spring, 

Some plaintive song she oft would sadly sing, 

Her wild eyes fix'd upon the faithless deep, 

Alternate would she sing, alternate-weep, 

Till pitying Heaven, with kind parental eve, 

Snatch'd the fnir mourner to that brighter ikv, 

The port of Heaven, the dwelling of the ble'ss'd, 

Where sorrow is not, and the wretched rest." 

Mount Edgcumbe became the property of the 
Edgcumbe family, in the beginning of the sixteenth 
century, by the union of Sir Piers Edgcumbe with 
the heiress of Stephen Duruford, Esq. in whose 
right he inherited East and West Stonehotiso, and 
his son, Sir Richard Edgcumbe, afterwards built 
Mount Edgcumbe House in the latter place. Pre- 
viously to this the family had resided at the old 
mansion of Cotehele, which they possessed by a 
marriage with the last heiress of Cotehele, from'tha 
time of Edward III.* 

The mansion, which was completed in the reign 
of Queen Mary, stands, on the side of a hill beauti- 
fully wooded, in an extensive lawn, bounded with 
fine old trees that reach to the edge of the water. 
From its northern and eastern windows, it com- 
mands delightful prospects of the Hamsage ; Ply- 
mouth 



2 Henry VI. was returned amongst the chief in the county of 
Devon, ho made oaths for themselves, and retainers, to ob- 
serve the laws then existing, from whicn Peter Edgecombe this 
family is lineally descended." George, the late Earl of Mount 
Edgcumbe, second son of Richard, Baron of Mount Edgcumbe, 
very early in life entered into the naval service. He speedily 
passed through the subordinate ranks of Lieutenant and Com- 
mander, and in 1744 was made Post-Captain in the Kenningtom 
In 1747 he captured the Jasori, a French East India ship of 
considerable value ; and in the same year was elected repre- 
sentative in Parliament for the borough of Fowey. In 1751 h 
was appointed Commander in the Momnouth, buUu 1752 re- 
moved to the Deptford, and dispatch, d to cruise in the Medi- 
terranean, In 1756 Captain Edgcumbe was engaged under 
Admiral Byng, with the French fleet off Minorca/ In 1761, 
by the death of his brother, he became a Peer of Gn-at Britain ; 
and, in 1762, was advanced to the rank of Rear- Admiral of th 
blue Squadron. Eight years after he was promoted to the 
2 B rank 



158 



DEVONSHIRE. 



mouth Sound with the Island of St. Nicholas ; Ply- 
mouth and its Citadel ; Plymouth Dock and Dock 
Yard ; and all the surrounding country bounded by 
the lofty hills of Hengist Down, Brent Tor, &c. 
The house is built with red lime-stone, covered with 
stucco, and the door and window cases of moor- 
stone. It is nearly square, having a tower at each 
angle, and battlements on the top. The towers, 
originally round, were, about fifty years ago, taken 
down and re-erected in an octagonal form. The - 
Hall, standing in the centre of the mansion, and 
rising to an equal height with the second story, was 
fitted up by the fii>,t Lord Edgcumbe in the Grecian 
style. It is adorned with Doric columns, surmount- 
ed by entablatures of the Ionic orders. The chim- 
ney-pieces and tables are formed with beautiful 
Cornish granite;. At both ends of the hall are gal- 
leries, in one of which, some years ago, a handsome 
organ wits placed. About twenty-five years since, 
a room was added to the house for the purpose of a 
library, which contains an excellent selection of 
books. Portraits are the only painting's which the 
house possesses : amongst these are the first Earl 
of Sandwich, his lady, the Countess of Sandwich; 
their daughter, Lady Anne, and her husband, Sir 
Richard Edgcumbe, all executed by the pencil of 
Sir Peter Lely. Richard, the first Lord Edgcumbe, 
Richard, the second Lord Edgcumbe, George, 
created Earl of Mount Edgcumbe, and Emma, 
Countess of Mount Edgcumbe, his wife, painted by 
Sir Joshua Reynolds. There is likewise a curious 
old portrait of Margaret Edgcumbe, Maid of Ho- 
nour to Queen Elizabeth, represented in widow's 
weeds, and who was, when the picture was painted, 
in the sixty-eighth year of her age, and the forty- 
eighth of her widowhood. There are also portraits 
of Charles the First, the Duke of Monmouth, Charles 
the Second, James the Second, Prince Rupert, and 
William the Third. 

The grounds of Mount Edgcumbe occupy an area 
of about tbree miles in circumference, which takes 
in the whole peninsula, formed by the Tamar on one 
side, and the sea on the other, and connected to the 
main land by a very narrow isthmus. On the ^um- ' 
nut of the hill lies the deer park, which commands 
besides the prospects described from the house, a 
view of Cawsand Bay, the Channel, and Edystone 
Light-house. At the western entrance of the park, 
and commanding grand and picturesque views, 
stands the parish church of Maker, the tower of | 
which is employed as a signal-house. The flower : 
garden lies in front of the house, at the bottom of 
the lawn, near the water's edge, so that first : rate 



rank of Vice Admiral of the Blue, and. appointed to a tcnmo- 
rary command of a division of (lie fleet lying ; ,t Spithead. 'in 
1781 his Lordship was created a Viscount" of (Great Britain ; an ( 
honour understoo'l to have been conferred on him, for his vo- | 
Unitary and gratuitous sacrifice of several of the plantations at ! 
Mount Edgcumbe; military men having declared it absolutely 
accessary for the safety and defence of Plymouth in case of any 



ships of war pass close to its boundary. A block- 
house is situated in it, built for the defence of the 
the port at the time of the expected invasion of the 
Spanish armada ; below it is a saluting battery of 
twenty-one guns, which, a few years ago, was com- 
pletely remounted. In the retired parts of the en- 
closure are a French and an English flower garden, 
a grand orangery, a green-house, and some other 
buildings. The orangery has a well proportioned 
Doric front, 100 feet in length ; and before it a 
marble fountain in the Italian style. 

A neat Doric alcove, inscribed with the following 
lines from Thomson, stands near the water's 
edge : 



On either hand, 



Like a long wintry forest, groves of masts 

Shot up their spires ; the bellying sheet between 

Possess' d the breezy void ; the sooty liuik 

Steer'd sluggish on ; the splendid bark along 

Kow'tl regular, to harmony ; around 

Tin; boat, light swimming stretch'd its oary wings, 

While deep tin; various voice of fervent toil, 

From bank to bank, increased ; whence ribb'd with oak, 

To bear the British thunder black and bold, 

The rolling vessels rut>h'd into the main." 

The orange trees are numerous ; and several of 
them inferior, in size and beauty, to few in England. 
The other most remarkable trees ace magnolias, of 
extraordinary height ; the Virginia, or red cedar ; 
the irex, or evergreen oak ; and the cork tree. The 
woods in the other parts of the grounds contain 
noble oak, chcsnut, beech, elm, and lime, and plane 
trees ; tulip trees, Carolina poplars, American and 
other oaks, cedar of Lebanus, and every species of 
fir and pine. Every part of the place is converted 
into pleasure ground, the whole of which has been 
laid out, at different times, by the proprietors them- 
selves, no landscape gardener having ever been 
employed. 

The late Earl of Mount Edgcumbe made many 
alterations, both ornamental and convenient ; by 
planting, and other material improvements : parti- 
cularly by removing, to a distant part of the grounds, 
the kitchen garden, which occupied a beautiful val- 
ley near the house. This has since been converted 
into a lawn, and is surrounded by a loity wood, open 
at the end to a partial view of the Tamar and Sound. 
The present Earl a few years ago made a consider- 
able addition to the drive round the place, by ex- 
tending it to the western side of the hill, through 
woods of younger growth, and round the grounds of 
the farm ; whence the harbour and river are seen in 
different points of view, and extensive prospects 



hostile attack. In 1789, his Lordship was elevated to the dig- 
nity of Earl of Mount Edgcumbe. lie died on the 5th of Fe- 
bruary, 1795. Richard, the present Earl, married Sophia, 
daughter of the late Earl of Buckinghamshire, by whom he has 
several children: his son, William, Viscount Valletort, came 
of age in the month of November 1815, on which occasion, the 
family mansion was the scene of great festivity. 

opened 



DEVONSHIRE. 



iffy 



opened to part of Cornwall, and Whitsand Bay. 
We shall conclude our account of this delightful 
place with the following lines from the writer whom 
we have already quoted : 

" Farewell Mount Edgcumbe, all thy calm retreats. 
Thy lovely prospects, and thy mossy seats ! 
Farewell, the coolness of thy dark deep woods! 
Farewell, the grandeur of thy circling floods ! 
Where'er futurity may lead the way, 
Where in this vale of life I chance to stray, 
Imagination to thy scenes shall turn, 
Dwell on thy charms, and lor thy beauties burn. 
For me ere long tliy woods shall wave no more, 
Nor evening find me pacing to explore 
Thy shadowy haunts ; for others they shall bloom, 
Yet where a hapless wanderer I may roam 
As the poor exile from liis native home 
The last fond dream of earth that meets my eyes, 
Shall be tliy lawns and groves, and azure-tinted skies." 

NEWHOUSE.] Newhouse, an estate and mansion 
in the parish of Mamhead, and hundred of Exmin- 
ster, four miles and throe quarters east by north 
from Chudleigh, was formerly a very considerable 
seat ; but, from the long indisposition of its owner, 
it has suffered great dilapidation. The manor came 



* The Oxenhams were ancient!y~eated at South Tawton, in 
t)evon, a place which is noted in the annals of the county for 
having given birth to John Oxenham, who accompanied Sir 
Francis Drake as a volunteer in liis voyage to South America in 
1572; and again in 1573, when he commanded a ship of his 
own. The superstition which originates in the behef of ominous 
appearances preceding death, is singularly illustrated in a tradi- 
tional curcumstance relating to this f;iinilv. It H said, that 
every decease is prognosticated by the apparition of a white- 
breasted bird, which is seen to flutter about the bed of l!ie sick 
person, and suddenly disappear. This circumstance is particu- 
larly noticed by Howel in his Familiar Letters, wherein is the 
following monumental inscription : 

" Here lies John Oxenham, a goodly young man, 
in who'-e chainjiur, as he was It niggling with the pangs 
of death, a bird, with a white breast, was seen flutter- 
ing about liis bed, and so vanished." 

A similar circumstance is related of his sister Mary, and two 
or three others of the family. 

f It was, we believe, in this town, that Dr. Hugh Downman, 
\vho~e poetical talents we have already had occasion to mention, 
was born, in the year 1740. His father was a country gentle- 
man. lie received his education under the Rev.T. Ilodgkin- 
son, master of a grammar school at Exeter. His early years 
do not appear to have attracted much notice ; but he was, how- 
ever, nearly at the head of the school, among companions who 
have since been distinguished by their rank in literature. About 
1758 he was entered at Baliol College, Oxford, and in 17(32 
was ordained in the cathedral of Exeter. At this time his ge- 
nius for poetry discovered itself in various jeux d'esprits, and 
the study of divinity was every day less attractive. He also 
became desirous of a more lucrative profession, as his attach- 
ment to the second daughter of Dr. Andrews, an eminent phy- 
sician at Exeter, had then commenced. By the advice of his 
friends, he therefore directed his attention to medicine ; and, in 
1705, repaired to Edinburgh, to prosecute lu's studies in that 
science. He lodged at the house of Dr. Blacklock, who, a 
poet himself, ardently embraced a fellow bard. In 1708 he 
published at .Edinburgh his Land of Muses, of which poem the 
following anecdote is related. Dr. Blacklock was no admirer 



into the possession of the Oxenham family by mar- 
riage with an heiress of David Long, Esq. who 
was sheriff of the county in the first year of Queen 
Anne.* 

NEWTON, ABBOT'S. | These two parishes the 
NEWTON, BCSHELL. j former in 'the hundred of 
Haytor, the latter in that of Teignbridge are now 
united, and constitute a town, distant 12 miles 
south-south-west from Exeter, and 187 south-west 
by west from London. Here is a market on Wed- 
nesdays, and four annual. fairs. The houses are 
poorly built, and the streets badly paved. The 
principal one is obstructed by an old market-house 
and shambles, said to have been erected by Waller, 
alter the Civil Wars, as a sort of indemnity for his 
having attempted to deprive the inhabitants of tlu-ir 
established market. The church is about a mile 
west of the town : but two chapels of ease are situ- 
ated within it.f 

NEWTON POPPLEFOR.D.] Newton Poppleford, said 
to derive its name from the rounded pebbles, deno- 
minated in this county pebble stones, which abound 
throughout the parish, is situated in the hundred of 
East Budleigh, four miles north-west by west from 

Sidmouth. 



of Spenser, and in a familiar conversation with some friends 
was expressing his objections. Dr. Penny being present, re- 
marked that his dislike was unreasonable, ::ntl that one book, at 
least, of the Fairy Queene, was not less remarkable for its ele- 
gance than for its spirit and fancy ; this was, he said, intituled, 
The Land of the Muses. Dr. Blacklock did not remember it, 
and the book was brought, not Spenser's, but Downman's, 
which the infirmity of Dr. Blacklork prevented him from dis- 
covering. He admired it greatly, on Dr. Penny's reading it, 
and the next morning told his assistant to lake down Spenser, 
and read to him the Land of the Muses. INO such book was 
however, to be found, and the pleasant imposition was soon ex- 
plained. After three years spent in Edinburgh, lie repaired to 
London, where he attended the hospitals during one winter. 
He then took his decree of master of arts at Cambridge, and 
afterwards settled in Kxeter. 

No long period elapsed after his settling at Exeter, before 
he was united to Miss F. Andrews, with whom he lived in al- 
most uninterrupted harmony for nearly forty years. Dr. 
Downman rose rapidly in his profession, but an unfortunate 
chronic disorder compelled him in 1778 to seek in milder situa- 
tions that health which was denied him in the city. His mind, 
however, rose superior to his bodily languor, and, in a short 
time, he produced the tragedy of Lucius Junius Brutus. It was 
said, that, in this play, he aimed at Shakespeare, and hit Mas- 
singer. To those acquainted with the latter, this will appear 
no common praise : but cold indeed must be that critic, who, 
on the perusal of Dr. Duwnman's tragedy, will not allow that 
he has exceeded Massinger. It was notwithstanding rejected 
by the London managers, and published separately in 1779. 
His tragedy of Editha was founded on a local event, and as it 
appea.red likely to be peculiarly attractive to an Exeter audi- 
ence, it was brought forward on that stage in 1781, and by a 
singularity new to a provincial theatre, was represented seven- 
teen nights in one season. His tragedy of Belisarius wanted 
local attraction, and was therefore less eagerly received. Dr. 
Downman's tragedies are all, in fact, better adapted for the 
closet than the stage ; as the force and energy of his language 
are not sufficiently felt, when rapidly, perhaps imperfectly, 
pronounced by an actor. 

A design was formed in 1777 of publishing a translation of 

Voltaire's works, and the poetical department was entrusted to 

7 Dr. 



160 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Sidmouth. In the road from Newton Poppleford 
to Sidrnouth, stands Woodbury Castle, on the edge 
of a, high hill; a small enclosure, of an irregular 
form, deeply intrenched ; in some part the ditch 
on the west is double. The south part seems like 
an appendix to it, the ditch single, and not so deep 
as the other. In it are the remains of a room built 
for the accommodation of those who wished to enjoy 
a beautiful and extensive prospect over the Ex, up 
the vale to Exeter and Iloniton, to Hall Down, and 
the sea. It was never completed. 

NUTWF.I.L.] Nutwell, the beautiful mansion of 
Lord Heathfield, nephew and successor to Sir 
Francis Drake, stands on the eastern bank of the 
Exe, nearly opposite to Powderham Castle. Ac- 
cording to Risdon, the manor-house was a castle 
till Lord Dinham, about the time of Edward the 
Fourth, converted it into a fair and stately dwelling- 
house. Sir Francis Drake made many alterations ; 
and it has since been nearly rebuilt by the present 
owner, on a larger scale, and at a considerable ex- 
pence. The plantations are much improved and 
enlarged. The surrounding scenery is eminently 
beautiful. 

OAKHAMPTON.] The ancient market and borough 
town of Oakhampton is situated in the hundred of 
Lipton, 22 J miles west by north from Exeter, and 
195 west by south from London. The government 
is vested in a Mayor, eight Aldermen, eight Com- 
mon Councilmen, Recorder, and a Town Clerk. 
This town, which was incorporated by James I. 
sends two members to Parliament : The Mayor is 
the returning officer. The market is on Saturday ; 
and here are fairs on the second Monday after the 
llth of March, the 14th of May, the first Wednes- 
day after the 5th of July, and the 5th of August. 
The population, according to the returns of 1811, 
was 1440. Oakhamptou was a borough before the 
Conquest : its earliest return to Parliament was 
made in the 28 of Edward I. ; and its second in the 
seventh of Edward If. from which time, till the 
year 10 SO, it does not appear to have exerted the 
privilege. 

This town lies in a recluse valley, surrounded by 



I 



Dr. Downman. The undertakers of this work failed, and it 
was consequently discontinued ; but a volume of tragedies, 
containing fdipus, Mariamne, Brutus, and the Death of Casar, 
was printed in 1781. In this translation Dr. Downman lias 
preserved all the energy and freedom of original composition. 
In 1792, Mr. Polwhele collected the original and miscellaneous 
poetry of this county and of Cornwall, to which Dr. Downman, 
at that time his intimate friend, was a lara.e contributor. 

Of the literary society established at Exeter, Dr. Downman 
was one of the earliest supporters, and to the collection formed 
by that institution contributed largely. The veiy judicious 
address to the members, on their first meeting, was from his 
pen ; and also a defence of Pinilar from the imputation of 
writing for his hire, supposed to be countenanced by passages 
in tlu llth Pythian, and the 2d Isthmean Odes, accompanied 
by a new translation of each. Another Essay on the Shields of 
Hercules and Achilles, supposed to be the respective works of 
Hesiod and Homer, was written by Dr. Downman. He ex- 
p/essed it as his opinion that each might have been an improv- 



hills, and deriving its name from the river Oke 
which flows through it. Excepting an old chapel 
in the market-place, originally founded as a chauii- 
try, and now belonging to the corporation, here is no 
building entitled to particular notice. The chief sup- 
portof the inhabitants is derived from the manufacture 
of serges,andthe expenditure of travellers ; the turn- 
pike road from Exeter to Launceston, Falmouth, 
&c. passing through the town. The church stands 
on an eminence, at some distance from the town, 
and, from the opposite heights, forms a fine feature 
in the landscape. 

The manor, at the time of the Norman Survey, 
was held by Baldwin de Brioniis, one of King Wil- 
liam's Barons, who erected a castle here for his re- 
sidence. The ruins of this castle are situated about 
a mile south-west of the town, on a high mass of 
rock, which rises from the verdant meadows of the 
valley, and is skirted on one side by the western 
branch of the river. " The extensive area which 
they include, (observes Warner) the solidity of their 
structure, and the advantages of situation, prove 
that this fortress, before it was dismantled, must 
have been strong and important. A lofty keep rises 
magnificently from a large conoidal elevation, which 
is opposed on the other side of the stream by a steep 
wooded bank. The river meanders through the in- 
tervening meads, and laves with its waters the roots 
of the ruined walls." The surrounding scenery is 
remarkably pleasing, the acclivities being covered 
with fine, woods, which, in combination with the 
mouldering turrets, and ivy-clad ruins of the castle, 
form some very picturesque views. The woods to 
the south are included within the precincts of Oak- 
hampton Park. 

OTTERTON.] Otterton is situated in the hundred 
of East Budleigh, four miles south-west by west 
from Sidmouth. " This place," observes- Risdon, 
" coasteth the cliffs near where the river Otter 
empties his waters into the sea at Ottermouth ; 
which is a goodly manor, and from the Conquest to 
the dissolution of abb'es continued in the hands of 
religious men." The Conqueror gave it to the 
monks of St. Michael in Periculo Maris, in Nor- 



ed copy of some former work, for vixere fortes ante Agamem- 
noita, and the recurrence of whole lines in both, shows that they 
could not have been furnished for a mutual contention. Think- 
ing Cowper's version too harsh, and Pope's too flowery, he 
added a new translation of each. Besides these, he contributed 
some other essays in prose, some sonnets, and two or three 
odes. 

Dr. Downman's most fortunate work, and it was so deserv- 
edly, was his excellent didactic poem, " Infancy," which 
passed through seven editions in the life of its author. For this 
work the public are highly indebted, as most useful truths are 
conveyed in captivating and elegant language. 

Some time after, Dr. Downman was sufficiently recovered 
from his chronic complaint to commence practice again, but in 
the year 1805 increased infirmities warned him to desist from 
his pursuits, and obliged him to retire to private life ; and 
he there principally employed himself in reviewing his for- 
mer labours. In the year 1809 Dr. Downmau closed his 
mortal career. 

mandy, 



DEVONSHIRE. 



161 



mandy, who had a priory of Benedictines here ; the 
revenues of which, at the suppression of the alien 
prories in the time of Edward the First, -were va- 
lued at 87/. 10s. 4rl. per annum. There was also a 
nunnery here ; and the area enclosed by the qua- 
drangle formed by the buildings of the manor-house, 
is still known by the name of the Nuns' Court. 

OTTERY ST- MARY.] This large irregular mar- 
ket-town, which derives its name from its situation 
near the river Otter, and the dedication of its church 
to Saint Alary, lies 1'2{ miles east by north from 
Exeter, and 15B west-south-west from London. 
The parish forms a hundred within itself. Edward 
the Confessor, or Earl Otho, gave the manor to the 
Cathedral of St. Mary, at Rouen, in Normandy ; 
but in the reign of Edward the Third, the Dean and 
Chapter, having obtained the King's permission, 
sold it to Grandison, Bishop of Exeter, who found- 
ed a college in the parochial church here, " for a 
Warden, eight Prebendaries, ten Vicars, a Master 
of Music, a Master of Grammar, two Parish Priests, 
eight Secondaries, eight Choristers, and twoClerks." 
At the Dissolution, its revenues were valued at 
338/. 2s. 9</. and the site of the college was granted, 
by Henry the Eighth, to Edward, Earl of Hertford. 
The chief part of the manor, we believe, now belongs 
to Sir George Yonge. 

The town is pleasantly situated and healthy. The 
principal building is the church, which is very large, 
and singular in its construction. On each side is a 
square tower, opening into the body of the church, 
and forming two transepts, in the manner of Exeter 
Cathedral. The towers are furnished with pinnacles, 
and open battlements : that on the north has also a 
small spire. At the north-west corner is a richly 
ornamented chapel, erected by Bishop Grandison ; 
the roof of which is adorned with highly wrought, 
fan -shaped tracery. The interior of the church is 
much neglected ; many of the monuments are bro- 
ken, and various parts filled up with lumber. The 
altar screen is of free-stone, finely carved into niches, 
and tabernacle work ; but this is partly covered 
with boards, and painted. On the south side of the 
communion table are three stone seats rising one 
above another. Most of the windows are narrow, 
and pointed. " In the body of the church," says 
Tanner, ''between two pillars, arched pyramidwise, 
is the proportion of a man cut in stone, armed cap- 
a-pee, with a lyon couchant at his foot : opposite 
hereunto, between two pillars semblably-arched, is 
laid the proportion of a woman curiously cut in 
stone, sometime fairly adorned with coat armories, 
but now defaced by time." These monuments are 
now covered by seats : they are said to have been 
raised to the memory of William Grandison, and 
Sybil his wife, the parents of Bishop Grandison. 
The following inscription is in this fabric : 

* The Martyns derived their descent from Martyn de Tu- 
ron, who came into England with the Conqueror, and whose 
prowess was rewarded by the Norman Monarch, with the Ba- 

VOL. II. NO. 57. 



Nenr this marble lies to test, 

Of John, and Uichard Cooke, the dust ; 

Who here must rest as in a bed, 

Till Death and G.ave give up their dead. 

Among the different epitaphs and inscriptions that 
! have been destroyed, or hidden, through the care- 
lessness so apparent in the inside of this church, was 
one to the memory of the wife of Gideon Sherman, 
Esq. who died in the first week of her marriage : 
this lias been preserved by Prince as follows : 

If wealth, wit, beauty, youth, or modest mirth, 
Could hire, persuade, intice, prolong, beguile, 

Death's fatal dart, this fading flower on earth 
Might yet, unquail'd, have flourished a while: 

But wealth, youth, beauty, wit, nor mirth, nor all, 

Can stay, or once delay, when Death doth call. 

No sooner was she to a loving mate, 

From careful parents solemnly bequeathed, 

The new alliance scarce congratulate, 

But she from him, them all, was straight bereaved : 

Slipping from bridal bed to funeral bier, 

She soon lell sick, expir'd, lies buried here. 

Oh ! Death, thou might'st have waited in the field 
On murdering cannon, wounding-sword, and spear; 

Or there, where fearful passengers do yield, 
At every surge each blast of wind doth rear; 

In stabbing taverns, or infected towns, 

On loathsome prisons, or in Princes' frowns ; 

There, not unlook'd for, many a one-abides 
Thy dreadful summons ; but a nuptial feast 

Needs not thy grim attendance ; maiden brides, 
In strength and flower ot age, thou may'sl let rest. 

With wings so weak mortality doth fly, 

In height of flight Death strikes, we fall, we die. 

The number of houses in this town, according to 
the- late Population Return, was 557 ; of inhabitants, 
2880 : many of the latter are employed in the ma- 
nufacture of flannel, serge, and other woollens, that 
were established here a few years ago, through the 
exertions of Sir George Yonge, and Sir John 
Duntze, Barts. In Mill Street are the remains of 
an ancient mansion, once inhabited by the celebrat- 
ed Sir Walter Raleigh ; and in one of the old col- 
legiate houses, just without the church-yard, is a 
large room, employed as a convention-room by Oli- 
ver Cromwell. The school-house was formerly kept 
by the father of the poet Coleridge, a man of great 
natural talent, who neglected the shuttle, and ap- 
plied to the acquirement of languages. He made 
a considerable proficiency, by his own ability and 
industry, and afterwards went to study at Cam- 
bridge. 

OXTON HOUSE.] Oxton House, a seat of the 
Rev. John Swete, stands about a mile west of Ken- 
ton. This estate was possessed for several cen- 
turies by the Murtyns, who formerly enjoyed consi- 
derable property in this county.* Mr. Swete's fa- 



rony of Kemeys in Pembrokeshire. He was also constituted 
Lord of Combe-Marty ii, and Martyn- Hoe ; places in the north 
of Devonshire, which still retain his name. 

2 s tlier 



102 



DEVONSHIRE. 



ther became possessed of this seat in the year 1767. 
In 1781, the Rev. Mr. *. took down the old man- 
sion, and built a new one on the same site, which 
possesses great advantages and beauties. It stands 
on a rising knoll, at the junction of three narrow 
vallies ; one of which opens to the east, and admits 
a beautiful distant country, including the woods and 
Belvidere of Powderham, the mouth of the Exe, and 
all the south-eastern part of Devonshire. The two 
other vallies run up into narrow glens, which are 
terminated with steep acclivities, richly adorned with 
hanging woods ; and the whole is backed with the high 
ridge of Haldon. 

The variety of grounds belonging to this mansion, 
with the umbrageous woods, devious paths, and 
charming prospects of sea and land, unite in ren- 
dering it beautifully picturesque and interesting. 
Besides a great number of drawings by Payne, a 
fine one of the Waterfall at Tivoli, by Du Oroz, and 
a portrait of Sir N. Martyn, by C. Janson, here are 
several quarto volumes of manuscripts, descriptive 
of Devon, written by the Rev. Mr. Swete. 

PILTON.] Pilton is situated in the hundred of 
Braunton, a quarter of a mile north from Barnsta- 
ple, on the opposite side of the river. Here was a 
priory of Benedictines, founded by Athelstan, and 
dedicated to the Virgin. It was for a long time a 
cell to the Abbey of Malmsbury in Wiltshire, and 
at the Dissolution it consisted but of a prior, and 
three monks. Its revenues were valued at 5(5/. 12s. 
Sd. per annum. 

PLYMOUTH.} The well-known town of Plymouth 
is thus honourably mentioned by our old poet, 
Draytou, in his Poly-Olbion : 

" Plym christeneth that towne which beares her noble name ; 
Upon the British coast what ship yet ever came 
That not of Plymouth heares! where those brave Navys lie, 
P'rom famous thundering flotte that all the world defye ; 
Which to invasive spoile, wlien Englishe li*t to draw, 
Have check'd Hiheria's pride, and kept her still in awe : 
Oft furnishing our dames with India's rare devices, 
And lent us golde and pearle, witb silks, and dainty spices." 

Plymouth is situated in the hundred of Robo- 
rough, 43| miles south-west from Exeter, and 215 
west-south-west from London. It has a plentiful 
market for corn, free of toll, on Mondays and Thurs- 
days ; for poultry, butter, &c. Mondays, Thursdays, 
and Saturdays ; and shambles for meat, fish, and 
vegetables, every day in the week except Sun- 
days. 

The origin of this town, like that of most others 
of ancient foundation, is involved in monkish and 
fabulous obscurity. Under the Saxon domination, 
it appears to have been called Tameorwerth : after 

* The harbour, it should be remarked, comprehends the 
three divisions called, the Catwater, Hamoaze, and the Sound. 
The Catwater is a large expanse at the mouth of the Plym: 
Hamoaze is a bason yet larger, at the estuary of the Tamar: 
the Sound is the capacious bay formed by the union of the 
above rivers with the sea. 



the Conquest, it acquired the name of South Town, 

. or Sutton : and in the reign of Edward I. of Sut- 

j ton Prior, and Sutton Valletort ; the north part of 

! the town lying on the lands of the Prior of Piymp- 

ton, and the south part on the estate of the Valle- 

torts. These names were relinquished in the reign 

! of Henry VI. for the more appropriate appellation 

[ of Plym-mouth. 

Although Plymouth is now one of the largest 
i maritime towns in England, it was inhabited chieily 
by fishermen till the reign of Henry 11. Since that 
period, the goodness of the haven, which is formed 
by the conflux of the Tamar and the Plym with the 
sea, and the stupendous augmentation of our naval 
force, have raised it to its present eminence.* 

Early in the reign of Edward 11. disputes arose 
between the Prior of Plymptou and the King, re- 
specting certain contested rights and immunities-. 
At length, by a writ issued from the Exchequer, 
A. D. Ial3, a jury was summoned to examine the 
various claims, and determine the differences be- 
tween the Prior and the King. By their decision, 
the Prior, in consideration of an annual fee-farm 
rent of 29/. 6.?. Sd. paid into the Exchequer, was 
confirmed in the exercise of various privileges, par- 
ticularly of granting " leases of houses as lord of 
the fee ; having a manor view of frank-pledge, as- 
size of bread and beer, a ducking-stool, and pillory, 
and the right of fishery of the waters from the en- 
trance of Catwater to the head of the river Plym." 
In the reign of Edward the Third, the manor came 
into the possession of John de Eltham, Earl of 
Cornwall, with the fishery of the water, as ancient 
demesne. The claims advanced by the Earl occa- 
sioned new disputes : but on the declaration of a 
Special Jury, that the privileges enjoyed by the Prior 
and his tenants were bestowed by a charter of Hen- 
ry the Third, the decision made in the time of Ed- 
ward the Second was again confirmed. t Plymouth, 
which had been much enlarged by the then Prior of 
Plympton, at this time became an object of jealousy 
to the French, who landed here, and endeavoured 
to destroy the town by fire ; but were repulsed, with 
the loss of 500 men, by Hugh Courtenay, Earl of 
Devon. In a second attempt, in 1404, the French 
were more successful : their soldiers were mostly 
natives of Brittany, and were commanded by the 
Marshal of Bretagne, and Moos, de Castell. They 
landed near the part called Britton's side, and, be- 
fore any effectual resistance could be made, burnt 
upwards of 600 houses ; but failing in tlieir attempt 
to destroy the castle, and higher part of the town, 
retired to their ships, and proceeded to Dartmouth, 
where de Castell, and several hundred men, were 
made prisoners. From this time till the reign of 

f From ancient records the following curious fact appears, 
that in the different disputes between the Crown and the Prior 
of Plympton, the jury assembled on those occasions generally 
gave a verdict hi favour of the Prior, being all his own tenants 
at will. 

Henry 



DEVONSHIRE. 



163 



Henry the Sixth, the town dwindled to a mere fish- 
ing village ; but the spirit of industry and enter- 
prae being once more awakened, its spacious port 
was again the place of numerous resort. 

About the year 1438, the inhabitants of Sutton- 
Prior, and Valletort, petitioned Henry tho Sixth for 
a charter of incorporation, and also that they might 
have a wall built round the town, for its better de- 
fence against the irruption of an enemy. In the en- 
suing year, the chief prayer of the petition was 
granted; and the town was incorporated by the 
style and title of the " Mayor and Commonalty of 
Plymouth." It was at the same time divided into 
four wards : Old Town Ward, High-Vintre Ward, 
Lower- Vintre Ward, and Looe-Street Ward ; hav- 
ing a captain and inferior officers appointed to each ; 
but the whole subjected to the controul of the 
Mayor. 

In the fourth of Edward the Fourth, a confirma- 
tion of the liberties and franchises of Plymouth was 
granted to the Mayor and Commonalty, on condi- 
tion of paying a fee-farm rent of 1 1/, to the Prior of 
Plympton, and ten marks to the Prior of Bath ; and 
from this period, " the lordship of the fee of the 
manor of Sutton-Prior, and Sutton-Valletort, on 
the paying the above compensation to Plympton 
Priory, was vested in the Mayor and Commonalty 
of Plymouth for ever ; together with the assize of 
bread and beer, fishery of the waters, view of frank- 
pledge, tolls of the markets, ducking-stool, and pil- 
lory." On the dissolution of the monasteries, the 
entire lordship of the borough of Plymouth, with the 
patronage of St. Andrew's Church, the Hospital of 
White Friars, the Hospital of Grey Friars, and the 
Abbey of Cistercian Friars, (all situated within or 
near the town,) were granted to the Mayor and 
Commonalty, who still retain the greater part of 
the advantages bestowed by this gift. 

In the reign of Elizabeth, a new charter was 
granted to the town, through the solicitations of the 
celebrated Sir Francis Drake, by which the former 
charters were confirmed, and the Corporation more 
particularly defined, by the style and title of Mayor, 
Recorder, Town Clerk, and twelve Magistrates, or 
Aldermen : these, by a provision of the charter, are 
to be assisted by twenty-four Common Councihnen, 
selected from the body of the Commonalty, or Free- 



* From Haydon's History of the Port of Plymouth, we 
learn that " the water is conveyed to all the houses by leaden 
pipes from a reservoir above the town, on the proprietor, or 
lessee, paying the Mayor and Commonalty, a fine of three gui- 
neas and a half for a lease of twenty-one years, and a quit-rent 
annually, of twelve shillings a year. Persons who use more 
water than private families, pay I/. 4s. per annum ; and brew- 
ers, 2/. 8s. per annum ; as Sir Francis Drake vested the pro- 
perty in the Mayor and Commonalty of that day, and their 
successors, for ever. The lessees for the water pay also the 
cost of laying down the pipes." 

f Sir John Hawkins. This celebrated commander was 
born at Plymouth, about 1520, and went early to sea in the 
merchant service, after learning the mathematics at school, and 

6 



men of thr borough. Besides (his service, a still 
more lasting bcuelit was rendered to the inltabitants 
by the patriotic exertions of Sir Francis, through 
whose .skill and perseverance a stream of water was 
brought to the town* frfim the springs on Dartmoor, 
by a winding channel of nearly twenty-four miles in 
length. This noble undertaking was entirely exe- 
cuted at his own cost ; and various mills were also 
erected here, on different parts of the stream, for the. 
use of the town. 

In 1570, Plymouth was visited by the plague, 
supposed to have been occasioned by some cotton- 
wool landed out of a Smyrna ship. Upwards of 
600 persons fell victims to its ravages : and so ge- 
neral was the fear of its spreading, that the annual 
ceremony of electing the Mayor was held in the 
open air, on Catdown, at some distance from the 
town. In 1581, the plague again broke out, and 
continued for several months. 

In the year 1588, at the period of the expected 
invasion by the Spanish armada, a British fleet of 
1-20 sail were assembled in Plymouth Sound, under 
the command of Lord Howard, and the Admirals 
Sir Francis Drake and Hawkins. t This fleet sailed 
for Torbay to join the Exeter ships ; and soon af- 
terwards, on the Sunday following St. James's 
Day, the Grand Spanish Armada appeared oft' the 
coast, in the form of a crescent. During the whole 
of Sunday, and the succeeding day, this unwieldy 
armament continued in sight of Penlee Point, Mount 
Edgcumbe, the Hoe, and all the adjacent shores, 
but afterwards proceeding to the eastward, it was 
furiously assailed by the British fleet ; and the de- 
struction thus commenced, being completed by a 
violent storm, the entire expedition was frustrated. 
Many natives of this town were among the seamen 
who manned the English ships. 

In 1595, the inhabitants of Plymouth, and its 
neighbourhood, were thrown into considerable 
alarm, by the intelligence that a body of Spaniards 
had landed in Cornwall, and burnt Mouseholo, 
Newlyn, and some other places in that county. In 
the first moments of consternation, barricadoes were 
thrown up on all the roads leading to the town, and 
various precautions adopted to ensure its safety, 
should the Spaniards advance ; but their progress 
being checked by Sir Francis Godolphin, the alarm. 



the practice of navigation from his father. In 1562 he made 
a voyage to the coast of Africa, where he procured a number 
of slaves which he disposed ot in the West India Islands : being 
among the first Englishmen concerned in this infamous traffic. 
For his active services in the defeat of the Spanish Armada, 
Queen Elizabeth rewarded him with the honour of knighthood, 
and made him Treasurer of the Navy. In 1594 he sailed with 
Sir Francis Drake, on an expedition against the Spanish West 
Indies, but being disappointed in some measures by the oppo- 
sition of his colleague, he was seized with a fit of melancholy 
which occasioned liis death off Port Rico in 1595. The va^ 
riety of adventures which Sir John experienced are detailed in 
Hakluyt's Voyages. lie was the founder of a Hospital at 
Chatham, 

subsided ; 



161 



DEVONSHIRE. 



subsided; and twenty-two chests of the Pope's 
bulls, ami pardons, which had been seized in Corn- 
wall, were afterwards brought to Plymouth, and 
pulilicly burnt in the market-place. 

In 10-23, Charles the first, with his whole court, 
came 'from Portsmouth, and remained here ten days, 
with 120 sail, and 6000 troops. He was sumptu- 
ously entertained by the Mayor and Corporation. 
In the following year, Plymouth was a third time 
infected by a plague, which originated through neg- 
ligence in the fumigation of some cotton, and raged 
with incredible fury, till 2000 persons had pe- 
rished. 

About the year 1637, the Mayor and Commonalty 
petitioned Parliament to divide the town into two 
parishes, as it had greatly increased both in size and 
population; and in IGiO, an act was obtained for 
this purpose, and for the erection of a new church ; 
but the Civil Wars, which soon afterwards ensued, 
occasioned these designs to be suspended. Ply- 
mouth, at an early period of the contest, declared 
for the Parliament ; and the year 1(543 forms a me- 
morable era in the annals of its history, from the 
spirited resistance made by the inhabitants against 
the forces of Prince Maurice, who besieged it from 
September till the close of the year, without suc- 
cass. The means of defence possessed by the 
towns-people were, apparently, inadequate to resist 
the superior strength of the King's army ; yet the 
resources created by enthusiasm, enabled them to 
hold out till relieved by the approach of the Parlia- 
ment's forces, under the command of the Earl of 
Essex. The remains of various works constructed 
both for the defence and reduction of the town, may 
be still traced on its different sides. After Essex 
had imprudently marched into Cornwall in pursuit 
of Sir Richard Grenvill*, leaving a superior army of 
royalists in his rear, the King resolved to follow 
him, and having arrived, by forced marches, in the 
neighbourhood of Plymouth, he halted a few days 
to refresh his army. During his residence at Wi- 
dey, about two miles and a half from this town, 
where he had established his head-quarters, he is- 
sued a proclamation addressed to the inhabitants of 
Plymouth, commanding them, on their allegiance, 
to give up the town to him. This proclamation was 
snt by a trumpeter to the Mayor and Governor, 
who firmly refused to surrender ; yet, as the King's 
forces were very strong, and close .at hand, they 
called a council of war in the Guildhall ; and the 
meeting, which comprised the principal inhabitants, 
unanimously resolved to defend the town to the ut- 
most extremity. At this period the works were in 
a state of ruin ; but as an attack was hourly expect- 
ed, the troops began to repair them ; and being as- 

: * The manner of electing the new Mayor is singular : two 
persons are -first chosen by the Mayor and Aldermen, and 
called Alftirers ; two others, under the same appellation, are 
chosen by the Common Councilinen ; those four select a jury 
of thirty-six, and by them the Mayor is elected. This mode 
bf choice lias in two or (hree instances been found inconvcni- 



sisted by the women, and even children, they pro- 
ceeded in their labour with such rapidity, that in a 
few days they were in as complete a state of defence 
as before the siege. The King, with his body guard 
of cavalry, and trumpets, frequently advanced to 
the head of Townsend Hill, and were constantly re- 
ceived by a brisk fire of cannon from the whole line 
on that side ; so that, after a short time, they as re- 
gularly retired. The eminence on which they stood, 
was, by the inhabitants of Plymouth, jocosely named 
Vapouring Hill ; an appellation which it has not yet 
entirely lost. On the return of the King from 
Cornwall, after the discomfiture of the army com- 
manded by Essex, he dislodged a party of the gar- 
rison of Plymouth and Plymptow, whither they had 
advanced to obtain plunder and provisions. Soon 
afterwards he proceeded to Newbury, leaving the 
army of Sir Richard Grenville to besiege the town 
a second time ; yet his endeavours proved as fruit- 
less as the former ones ; and, after a blockad* of 
some weeks, and making several ineffectual attacks 
on the works of Lipson, Lipson Hill, and Mawdlyn, 
he.drew off his army. 

In the Protectorate (1654) a special order was 
directed to the Mayor, directing, that, in future, all 
persons who wished to be married, must be united 
at the Guildhall, by the Mayor and Justices for the 
time being. This occasioned a considerable ferment 
among all ranks of the inhabitants ; and a sort of 
remonstrance, though in a very submissive style, was 
exhibited against it ; but the order was made pe- 
remptory, on the grounds that marriage was a civil 
contract. 

In the year 1679, Charles the Second visited Ply- 
mouth, and was presented by the Corporation with 
a purse containing 150 broad pieces. 

In 1683, the charter of the town was surrendered 
to the King on the requisition of Judge Jefferies, 
and a new one was granted at an expence of 41 11. 
19s. which vested the power in ten Aldermen and 
twelve Assistants only. This continued in force till 
the latter end of the year 1697, when the old charter 
was restored, though not before upwards of 600/. 
had been ineffectually expended.* 

The right of returning the members to Parliament 
is in the Mayor and Freemen of the borough. The 
first return was made in the twenty-sixth or thirty- 
third of Edward the First, when the borough was 
called Sutton. 

Several fortifications have at different times been 
erected for the security of Plymouth, and it is now 
in a very respectable state of defence. The most 
ancient fort of which there is any mention, was built 
in the reign of Edward the Third, by Edmund Staf- 
ford, Bishop of Exeter, and is described by Leland, 



ent ; for the jury being equally divided in favour of different 
persons, no Mayor could be elected till one party receded from 
their determination ; and this has seldom been the case till the 
Corporation has been compelled to appoint a Mayor by a writ 

of manrhm.K. 



as 



DEVONSHIRE. 



1(55 



as a " strong castel quadrate, having at eche corner 
a great round tower." This fortress stood on the 
south of the town, near the barbican, which, a few 
years ago, was formed into a new pier ; and the only 
vestiges now remaining, arc parts of the eastern 
towers. Numerous block-houses and platforms 
were erected on different points of the harbour in 
the reign of Elizabeth : and several of the latter 
were formed, about the years 1591 and 159-2, into a 
regular fort, called the Fort on the Hoe Cliffs, 
which was demolished on the building of the Citadel 
in the time of Charles the Second, in the years 11)70 
and 1671 . This strong fortress consists of three re- 
gular and two irregular bastions ; and the curtains 
of the regular bastions are further strengthened by 
two ravelins, and horn-works. On the east, north, 
and west sides, is a deep ditch, counterscarp, and 
covered way, pallisadoed. The parapets, in time of 
war, are mounted with a great number of cannon ; 
the garrison is generally composed of several com- 
panies of invalids. The prospects from this fortress 
comprehend a great variety of interesting objects : 
on the west and north-west, are Maker Tower, Mount 
Edgcumbe Woods, the Town of Dock, Mount Wise, 
and the entrance of the river Tamar ; on the south- 
west, the beautiful Bay of Cawsand, the Sound, the 
vast expanse of the British Channel, and, in clear 
weather, the distant Rock of Edystone ; on the east, 
the picturesque scenery of Saltram, Plympton-Mary 
Vale, and the river, skirted at the extremity by the 
lofty hills of Dartmoor. The Lower Fort, connect- 
ed with the citadel, and chiefly intended to defend 
the Sound, was planned and executed by Captain 
Horneck, an able engineer. Besides these works, 
several batteries and block-houses have been raised 
on the different points of the harbour : but its chief 
security are the fortifications on St. Nicholas' Isle, 
which rises in the entrance, and is connected with 
the south-west shore by a range of rocks. These 
are uncovered at low tides ; and no vessel, even at 
high water, can pass this ridge but those of small 
burthen : large vessels are obliged to make a circuit 
of at least two miles. The extent of the isle is be- 
tween two or three acres : its natural strength, 
though considerable, has been greatly improved by 
art. Besides the batteries, here is a furnace for 
heating shot. 

Near the citadel is the Victualling Office, an ex- 
tensive range of buildings, where the ovens for sup- 
plying the navy with bread, and the ingenuity cxer- [ 
cised in the process, present a very amusing scene. 
The bake-houses are only two, but each contains 
four ovens, which are heated eight times a day, and 
in the course of that time, bake a sufficient quantity 
of bread for 16,000 men ! The granaries are large, 
and well constructed : when the wheat is ground, 
the flour is conveyed into the upper stories of the 
bake-houses, whence it descends through a trunk 
in each, immediately into the hands of the work- 
men. 

The streets of Plymouth are in general ill-con- 

TflL. II. MO. 57. 



structed, narrow, irregular, and some of the bye 
ones filthy. The trade, which depends chiefly oa 
the royal navy and other shipping, is extensive. 
The pilchard fishery is considerable, and large quan- 
tities are sent to Italy, and other Mediterranean 
ports. Sutton Pool, which is more secure from 
storms, than the Sound, or Catwater, is the place 
where merchant vessels lade and unlade. To the 
west of this pool, government, in 1790, erected a 
new pier, to protect it from storms arising from the 
south-west. 

As the inhabitants of this town consist, in a great 
measure, of the persons connected with the navy 
and army, the population is subject to great 
changes : in 1801 , the number returned was 16,040 : 
in 181 1, the number was 20,803, of which 9069 were 
males, and 11,734 females: the number of house* 
was 2166. 

About fifteen or sixteen years ago, the Guildhall 
was rebuilt : it is a spacious structure situated at 
the junction of four streets. In the year 1808, it 
was painted and fitted up in a most elegant style by 
order of the Mayor. The picture of the Princ^ of 
Wales, by Hoppner, in a splendid gold frame, 
adorned with his Royal Highness's coronet, attracts 
the notice of the spectator on his entrance, being 
placed in a conspicuous situation above the seat of 
justice. It was a present from the Prince, as Lord 
High Steward of the borough, to the Mayor and 
Commonalty of the town. The picture is executed 
in Hoppner' s bast, and most chaste style, and although 
his Royal Highness is represented in his full Par- 
liamentary robes, there is not the least glare in the 
costume ; all is in keeping ; in the true and appro- 
priate style of the chiar obscuro. In the old hall, 
amongst several fine portraits, was one of Sir Fran- 
cis Drake, in the costume of his own time, leaning 
his hand on the terrestrial globe. Tradition affirms 
this to have been a good likeness. 

Adjoining to, and partly under the Guildhall, is 
the town gaol. These buildings communicate with 
each other, by means of a door, through which the 
prisoners are brought into court tt>r trial. At the 
time of the visitations of the prisons, in the year 
1810, this gaol was in a neglected and very dirty 
state. 

There is a House of Industry at Plymouth ; be- 
tween which and Stonehouse, is the Royal Hospi- 
tal, an extensive building, appropriated for the re- 
ception of sick and hurt seamen and marines. 
This valuable institution is extremely well con- 
ducted. 

The Theatre, at Plymouth, is a large and neatly 
ornamented structure. Here is a reading society ; 
and, within these few years, several book-clubs have 
been established. 

Plymouth contains two noble churches : the more 
ancient one, which possesses several remarkable 
monuments, is dedicated to St. Andrew. It con- 
sists of a nave, side aisles, chancel, and a tower at 
the west end, surmounted with pinnacles. The 
2 T other, 



DEVONSHIRE. 



other, called Charleses Church, on account of its 
being consecrated to the memory of Charles I. was 
built in 1616, ou a division of the town into two pa- 
rishes, by an act passed in 1640. The different re- 
ligious sects in this town are very numerous, and 
there are places of worship lor Independents, Bap- 
tists, Methodists, Unitarians, Roman Catholics, 
Jews, &c-. 

A free grammar-school was erected here in the 
year 1573, and endowed for a master, with a salary 
of 30/. per annum, a dwelling-house, and garden. 
Under the auspices of the late Rev. J. Bidlake, a 
gentleman of considerable literary and poetical re- 
putation, the respectability of this school was great- 
ly increased. Here are also several charity-schools, 
and a very extensive Sunday-school. 

Amongst a number of di 'tinguished characters, to 
which the town of Plymouth has given birth, may 
particularly be noticed Sir Richard Hawkins,* son 
of Sir John Hawkins, whom we have already no- 
ticed ; Sir Thomas Edmonds ;f and Dr. Glan- 
ville,! Sir Brook Watson, also, was a native of this 
town. 

PLYMOUTH BREAKWATER.] During the time that 
Ijord Spencer presided at the Admiralty, Mr.Whid- 
hey gave in a survey of Torbay, wherein he pro- 
posed a breakwater which would make the bay into 
a harbour. When Earl St. Vincent and his friends 
came into power the last time, and the present Earl 
Grey presided at the Board, Lord St. Vincent re- 
commended that Mr. Rennie and Mr. Whidbey 
should be sent to Plymouth, to ascertain whether 
a similar breakwater to the one that had been plan- 
ned for Torbay, could not be constructed for Ply- 
mouth Sound. This, in the spring of 1806, pro- 
duced a report to the Lords Commissioners of the 
Admiralty, from those gentlemen, with an estimate 



* The date of the birth of Sir Richard Hawkins, is unknown; 
buthe, as well as his father, distinguished himself in 1588 in 
the engagement with the armada, in 1593 he obtained a com- 
mission to attack the Spanish settlements in South America, 
where, after an obstinate conflict with a superior force, the 
English were taken. Sir Richard, who was severely wounded 
in the action, was detained a prisoner in Peru a considerable 
time, and was then sent to Spain, where he was detained some 
years. On his return to England he employed himself in writ- 
ing the history of his own life. He died in an apoplectic fit 
while attending (he Privy Council, in 1662. 

t Sir Thomas Edmonds was born here in 15(53. He was 
initiated into public business by the celebrated Sir Francis Wal- 
singham, and was employed on several embassies in the reigns 
of Elizabeth and James. The latter sovereign conferred the 
honour of knighthood upon him, and made him a Privy Coun- 
sellor. Some of his letters remain in different collections of 
state papers. He died in 1639. 

J Joseph Glanville, an eminent divine, and ingenious writer, 
was born in 1636. He received his education at Oxford, and 
entered into orders about the time of the Restoration ; when 
he also became a fellow of the Royal Society. He was rector 
of the abbey church at Bath, prebendary of Worcester, and 
chaplain to Charles II. In l66(Mie published his Considera- 
tions of the Being of Witches and'Witchcraft, for which he has 
been censured for betraying a puerile credulity. His other 



of the probable expence of such an undertaking, 
which fell within 1,200,000/. Much investigation 
took place upon the subject ; the 22d of June, 1811, 
an Order of Council was issued, for commencing 
the breakwater ; and, at length, on the l?th of Au- 
gust (the birth-day of his Royal Highness the Prince 
Regent) 1812, the foundation stone of this stupen- 
dous national work was laid. The ceremony, on 
this occasion, was of a highly interesting nature. 

The morning was ushered in with ringing of bells 
in all the churches, and the hoisting the Royal 
Standard and Union Flags on board the Salvador 
del Mundo, Admiral Sir R. Calder, and the Go- 
vernment House, the Dock Yard, Ordnance Wharf, 
Royal Hospital, and the Guildhall. At noon the 
guns of the citadel, and all the batteries, fired a 
royal salute, which was re-echoed by three excellent 
vollies from all the regiments of artillery and infan- 
try. Five thousand men were drawn up in front of 
the Government House. At half past twelve a 
grand procession took place, from Hamoaze, of the 
barges of Admiral Sir R. Calder, and Rear-Admi- 
ral Buller, with their respective flags flying in the 
bo vv and stern sheets. They proceeded through the 
narrow of Devil's Point, the Sound, to the Panther 
Rock Shoal, where, in due form, the foundation- 
stone of the new breakwater was dropped, by Ad- 
miral Sir R. Calder, Bart, amidst the loudest ac- 
clamations. This was the grandest nautical spec- 
tacle ever witnessed in the port of Plymouth ; and 
i the Sound was covered with pleasure yachts and 
boats of all descriptions. The ceremony being per- 
formed, all the men of war displayed, in the same 
instant, their various colours, which, reflecting- 
the sun's beams, had a very pleasing effect ; the 
I ships saluting, in succession, with twenty-one guns, 
! and cheering. Mount Edgcumbe, Mount Wise, 



works are numerous, amongst the principal of which may be 
enumerated Lux Orientals ; Scepsis Scientificia ; Plus Ultra, 
or the Progress and Advancement of Knowledge since the 
Days of Aristotle ; Philosophia Pia, or a Discourse of the re- 
ligious Temper and Tendencies of Experimental Philosophy. 
He died at Bath in 1680. His Plus Ultra is by far the most 
valuable of his works. 

This gentleman, who died in 1805, was born in the year 
173i, and descended from a Yorkshire family. He was left 
an orphan at the age of six, and having an inclination for the 
sea, entered into the naval service very early in life. In 1749, 
while bathing in the sea, at the Havannah, he had the misfor- 
tune to have his right leg bitten off by a shark ; a calamity 
which obliged him to change his profession, and turn his atten- 
tion to mercantile pursuits. He served as Assistant Commis- 
sary for some years; till ia 1759 he settled as a merchant in 
London, and the following year married the daughter of Colin 
Campbell, Esq. of Edinburgh, to whom Parliament shortly 
after granted an annuity of 500/. - In 1784 he was elected as a 
representative in Parliament for the City of London, and in 
the same year became one of the directors of the Bank of Eng- 
land. In 1796 he was elected Lord Mayor, and in 1803 
created a baronet of the United Kingdoms. As Sir Brook 
Watson had no surviving issue, he devised his estate, after the 
death of his wife, to his sister, the wife of the late William 
Pitt, Esq. 

6 Staddon 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Staddon Heights, the two Hoes, Devil's Point, the 
Island and Citadel, were thronged with thousands 
oT spectators, assembled to witness the commence- 
ment of this grand national undertaking. The 
barges and bouts rowed back after the ceremony, 
in the same order, to the flag-ship, and were then dis- 
missed. The foundation-stone weighed about se- 
ven tons, and had the following inscription engraven 
on it : 

G. P. R. 

August, 1812. 

S. K. C. 

Dept. 

The work, which will cover a secure anchorage 
in the Sound for about fifty sail of the line, pro- 
ceeded very slowly at first ; as, at the close of the 
year 1812, only 16,045 tons of marble had been de- 
posited. On the 31st of March, in the following 
year, the first masses of marble were dry at low 
water, spring tide ; at the end of the year, 1813, the 
quantity of marble deposited amounted to 187,240 
tons; at the end of 1814, 426,723 tons had been 
deposited ; and, on the Prince Regent's birth-day, 
iu 1815, 615,057 tons, in blocks of from half a ton 
to nine tons each. The undertaking has now sur- 
mounted every obstacle, and is nearly completed. 
It stretches over the Shovel Rock : its entire length 
will be 1700 yards ; its base 100 yards, and 10 
yards in breadth, at the top or finished part. The 
average depth is 35 feet at low spring-water tides. 
It slopes very much to seaward and but very little 
within : it is opposed to an immense sea, which ex- 
tends from the Azores Islands to the Channel. 
During the winter of 1814-15 many severe gales 
blew directly into the Sound, as violently as any 
that had ever been felt ; yet the Sound presented 
the unusual sight of about forty sail of ships remain- 
ing at anchor in it, all of which rode out the gales 
with great ease, and without damage. The Cat- 
water and its entrance were, during the same criti- 
cal season, full of shipping, amounting to 150 sail ; 
and yet, though the breakwater was not completed, 
scarcely any damage was done; and it was entirely 
owing to the small part of the breakwater which was 
made, that most of the ships both iu the Sound and 
in Catwater, wre not lost. 

PLYMOUTH DOCK.] Plymouth Dock, though of 
recent origin, is one of the most populous towns in 
the county. It is situated in the hundred of Ro- 



* The houses in Dock were wholly erected by the inhabitants, 
to whom the Lords of the Manor granted leases for ninety-nine 
years, determined by the death of three lives of the builders' 
nomination, and subject to a certain annual quit-rent, of proba- 
bly from three shillings to fourteen, according to the space of 
ground occupied ; with a heriot, double the quit-rent, on the 
death of each life. The original leases were renewable on the 
dropping of a life, on paying a fine to the Lord of the Manor, 
equal to about three years value of the premises. In the year 
1791, a plan of perpetual renewal, at a fine certain, was pre- 



borough, on the eastern bank of the Ilamoazo, about 
two miles from Plymouth, 45| south-west from 
Exeter, and 2174 west-south-west from London. 

The manor of Stoke Damareil, comprehending 
the town of Dock, the village of Stoke, Morice 
Town, the Dock Yard, Gun Wharf, Military Hos- 
pital, &c. contains upwards of 1601) acres of land ; 
the whole of which, excepting the glebe, the two 
tenements of Swilly and Ford, and what h;s been 
purchased by the Board of Ordnance for the pur- 
pose of fortification, is the property of Sir John St. 
Aubyn, who inherits it from his great uncle, Sir 
William Morice, Bart, a descendant of Sir William 
Morice, Secretary of State to Charles the Second, 
and mentioned by Clarendon, as having been instru- 
mental in promoting the Restoration. 

Sir John St. Aubyn may, indeed, be considered 
as lord of the whole, as the presentation of the living 
rests in him, and a small quit-rent is annually paid 
him by the proprietors of the above tenements. The 
manor has the privilege of a conrt-lect, and court- 
baron, which are held in the to\vn of Dock. The 
manor, which had previously been made a free war- 
ren by Charles II. was purchased of Sir AVilliam 
Wise, by Sir William Morice, for about. 11,000/. 
It contains some good slate and lime-stone quar- 
ries ; and the arable soil, though shallow, is in ge- 
neral good, and lets high. 

This town is situated on an eminence between 
Stonehouse Creek and Hamoaze : and though of 
considerable size, is wholly of modern date, as v ry 
few, if any, of its houses were erected till the ue- 
ginning of the seventeenth century, and so late as 
1731, it appears that it was scarcely one-fourth of 
its present magnitude. It owes its origin, and sur- 
prisingly rapid increase, to the establishment of the 
Dock Yard and naval arsenals : the greater part of 
the buildings, have been erected since 1700. Tha 
town is of an oblong figure, the longest side of which 
from north to south, measures about 3000 feet, and 
its mean breadth is about 1400. The houses are 
well built ; and the streets, with only one exception, 
cross each other at right-angles, and are in width 
about thirty-five feet. The town is well paved ; 
the foot-paths with marble, which, when washed by 
a shower, have a beautifully polished appearance. 

The town of Dock, and the Dock Y'ard, are de- 
fended by strong fortifications.* The first act for 
this purpose was passed in the thirty-first of George 
the Second j but the works have been much improv- 
ed 



sented to the inhabitants by Sir John St. Aubyn ; the basis of 
which was, that the tenant should constantly keep his premises 
full lived, by nominating some fresh person within a year after 
the dropping of any one of the then existing lives; and paying * 
for this privilege, a small addition of yearly conventiobary . 
rent, and a fine of about two years' clear value of the premises. 
These terms, not being so favourable as those held out by Lord 
Mount Edgcumbe for buildings at Stonelim^e, and by R. P. 
Carew, Esq. of Torpoint, on the Cornibh side of the Tamar, 
met at first with many opponents: but afterwards the inhabi- 
tant* 



DEVONSHIRE. 



r,d under an act made in the twenty -first of his pre- 
sent Majesty. On the north-east and south sides, 
the town is bounded by a wall about twelve feet 
high, called the King's interior boundary wall, which 
was begun to be built in 1787, under the direction 
of the Duke of Richmond : the western side is skirt- 
ed by the Dock Yard and Gun Wharf. Without 
the wall is a line, or breast-work, with a ditch from 
twelve to eighteen and twenty feet deep, excavated 
from the solid slate and. lime-stone rock. These 
lines were planned by Mr. Smelt, who belonged to 
the engineer department, and were begun about the 
year (755, or 1750 : the ground lying between the 
King's interior boundary wall, and the front of the 
glacis of the lines, includes about l!)o acres, and was 
purchased by Government in the year 1758. This 
space is partly occupied by the governor's house ; 
a handsome building, completed about the year 
1795, (before which the seat of government was 
within the citadel of Plymouth ;) and six squares of 
barracks, of one story high only. In these squares, 
begun in 1757, and originally intended for two bat- 
talions only, the troops garrisoning the place are 
lodged. In the lines are three harrier gates : the 
North Barrier, which leads to the new passage 
across the Tamar ; the Stoke Barrier, leading to- 
wards Tavistock ; the Stonehouse Barrier, conduct- 
ing towards Stonehouse, Plymouth, &c. Of the 
other fortifications, the principal are a Battery on 
Mount Wise, (where the ancient seat of the Wises, 
formerly Lords of the Manor, stood ;) another at 
the Obelisk Hill, near Mount Edgcumbe ; and the 
Redoubt and Block House on Mount Pleasant, which 
commands the lines. 

Soon after the alarm spread through the western 
coasts by the appearance of the combined fleets of 
France and Spain off Plymouth, in the year 1779, 
directions were given by the Ordnance Board for 
the repair of these works, which were then, from 
the shallowness of the ditch, and other causes, in- 
capable of much defence ; and for the construction 
of sundry other works of defence in the vicinity. 
The late General Dixon, then commanding engi- 
neer, not being able to obtain a sufficient number of 
men, was assisted by Francis Bassett, Esq. of Te- 
hidy, (afterwards Lord de Dunstauville,) who 
brought up a party of Cornish miners, amounting 
to about 1000. By them the works were immedi- 
ately begun, and brought into their present form in 
the beginning of the year 1783. 

The Dock Yard,* even in its present unfinished 



tants appeared sensible of the advantages attending them ; and 
all the houses which, by the dropping off of lives, on the origi- 
nal plan, came into the Lord's hands, were leased accordingly. 
Of late years, however, Sir John refused to grant any more 
leases on these trims, or even on (he old mode of holding for 
three lives : and the houses which, from time to time, fall into 
his hands, as well as the lands of (lie manor, are let at a yearly 
rent, for seven years only. Tin- present annual income amounts, 
probably, to 8,0<M. or J0,000/. but whenever the whole of the 



state, is acknowledged to be one of the finest in the 
world. When it was first used as a naval arsenal 
is uncertain ; but as the bason and its dock are the 
most ancient, though not made till the reign of Wil- 
liam the Third, it seems evident that this was a 
place of little consequence before that period. The 
Dock Yard is separated from the town by a wall of 
slate and lime-stone, in some places thirty feet high, 
extending from North Corner on the north, to Mut- 
ton Cove on the south. The area within these bounds 
is seventy-one acres and thirty-six poles ; inclusive 
of the projecting parts of the jetties. But a small 
part is the property of Government ; sixty-five acres 
two roods and twenty-three poles, being held of Sir 
John St. Aubyn, on a lease for twenty-one years, 
subject to an annual rent of 50s. per acre ; and a 
fine of 534/. 4s. QrJ. or three years' value, on every 
renewal, which must be made every seven years, 
under the penalty of an entire forfeiture of the lease. 
The first lease, granted by Sir William Morice in 
the year 17-J8, was for forty acres only ; the remain- 
ing part was enclosed in 1708. 

The land entrance to the Dock Yard is from 
Fore Street. No person is suffered to enter who is 
not well known, or in uniform, without an order in 
writing from the Commissioners. Within the gates 
is the Master Porter's House ; nearly in front of 
which is a reservoir. Near this house is a small 
neat chapel, consisting of two aisles, and a tower : 
the tower and one aisle were erected in the year 
1700; as appears by the following inscription over 
the south door : 

In the 1 1th Year of the Reign of King William the 
Third, An. Dom. 1700, this Chapel was founded and 
built by the generous and pious Contributions of Offi- 
cers and Seamen belonging to a Squadron of Men of 
War, paid off in this Yard, (after ten Years expensive 
War with France,"! being propagated and carried on 
by the Industry and religious Endeavors of George 
Si. Leo, Esq. Commissioner of the said Yard, and 
Comptroller of the said Pay. 

The other aisle was erected by the Rev. Mr. 
Hughes, a late incumbent ; on the condition that he 
should receive the emolument arising from letting 
the pews ; which lie continued to do- till the year 
1787, when Government returned the sum he had 
expended in the buildings, and appropriated the 
chapel exclusively to the officers and artificers of 
the Navy and Dock Yard. Besides a regular sti- 
pend, paid by Government, the chaplain receives 
two-pence per month from the pay of each of the 



lands and houses of the manor, not an perpetual renewal, re- 
verts tn the proprietor, it is estimated that the yearly rental 
will increase to upwards of 80,OOOA 

* According to tradition, the Dock Yard was first proposed 
to be established at SaKaSli, about four miles up the Tamar, on 
the Cornish sioe ; but the principal inhabitants, after repeated 
consultations thereon, declined the proffered favour ; under 
the apprehension that they should be deprived of part of Iheir 
gardens, and that the poor's rates would probably increase-! 

officers 



DEVONSHIRE. 



officers and seamen belonging to the ships laid up 
in ordinary. In front of the chapel is the Military 
Guard Office, and over it the Navy Pay Office. 
A captain's guard of marines do duty here ; and, in 
addition to them, a great number of watchmen, la- 
bourers belonging to the yard, are employed during 
the night. 

From the gates, a flat paved road, skirted with 
elms, leads to the Officers' Dwelling Houses, thir- 
teen in number, built of brick, three stories high, 
with kitchens beneath, and pleasant gardens behind : 
in front is a double row of lime-trees. The houses 
are inhabited by the Commissioner ; Master Ship- 
wright ; his three Assistants ; two Masters Atten- 
dant ; Clerks of the Cheque, Survey, and Rope- 
Yard ; the Storekeeper, Surgeon, and Boatswain. 
Before the houses is a flat paved walk, flanked at 
each end by buildings two stories high ; one of which 
is the Commissioner's Office, the other that of the 
Clerk of the Cheque. From hence to the lower 
part of the yard, which has been levelled from the 
solid rock, is a descent by a number of steps, lead- 
ing to two handsome offices : in the northernmost is 
the Joiners' Shop, having a cupola rising from the 
centre. Directly in front of these buildings is the 
bason and dock, that were made in the reign of 
King William. The bason is a large excavation, 
into which the water flows through an opening about 
seventy feet wide : here all the boats belonging to 
the yard are kept, as well as the launches employed 
in the moving of ships. Within the bason is the 
dock, sufficiently capacious for a 74 gun ship ; 
Its length is 197 feet 3 inches ; its width, 65 feet 10 
inches ; and its depth, 23 feet 1 inch. The bason 
is bounded on each side by jetty heads, which are 
platforms projecting over the sea, supported by 
wooden pillars driven full of nails, to prevent the 
worms from perforating them. Vessels of all sizes 
lie alongside these jetties without grounding, and 
here all ships are brought to be fitted out. On the 
south jetty is a landing-place, called the Master 
Attendant's Stairs, where all stores returned from 
ships are landed, and those to be sent them ship- 
ped off. 

Adjoining to this jetty is the Rigging House, a 
handsome building, 480 feet long, and three stories 
high, forming one side of a quadrangle. This fa- 
bric is of lime-stone, with the quoins and cornices of 
Portland stone. Within it, the rigging for ships of 
war is kept in such a state of forwardness, as to be 
tit for use in a very short time. Over the Rigging 
House is the Sail Loft, where all the sails are cut 
out, and made. The remaining three sides of the 
quadrangle are store-houses. 

Advancing southward, is a slip for bawling up 

* In taking away part of this mount, in the year 1814, a dis- 
covery was made, of considerable interest to the ideologist. 
More than twenty feet below the surface, the workmen found 
a large number of petrified cockle and other shells, imbedded 
in the solid rock, which must have lain there ever since that part 

tL. II. NO. 57. 



and graving (cleaning) the bottoms of small vessels. 
Beyond this is the Camber, a long canal, about se- 
venty feet wide, terminating at the upper end in a 
bason, where boats lie ; on the north side of which 
is the Boat House, where boats are built, repaired, 
and kept in store. Here, before the year 1768, were 
the bounds of the yard ; all hence to the southward 
is still called the " New Ground." 

The Blacksmiths' Shop is situated south of the 
canal: it is a spacious building, about 210 feet 
square, and contains forty-eight forges. Those who 
are unaccustomed to places of this kind, are said to 
feel strong sensations of horror on first entering : 
" the clanking of the chains used to blow the bel- 
lows, the dingy countenances of the workmen, the 
immense fires, and, above all, the yellow glare 
thrown on every thing by the flames shining through 
the dismal columns of smoke that continually fill the 
building, form together a very terrific picture." 
The smiths are allowed a certain quantity of small 
beer daily, in addition to their pay ; this, when they 
are about anchor-work, is changed for strong. The 
Anchor Wharf fronts the Blacksmiths' Shop. 

Near this wharf are three slips, whereon large 
ships are built. Northward of the slips is the Mast 
House, and Pond : in the former, the different masts 
and yards are made. The Pond is a large piece of 
water, enclosed from the sea by a very strong wall, 
of at least 10 feet in thickness, and about 380 feet long; 
the top of which is laid flat with large flags of coarse 
granite. - The water flows in through two openings 
of about forty feet wide, over which are light wooden 
bridges. An immense number of masts, yards, &c. 
are always kept in this pond, to prevent their crack- 
ing from exposure to the sun. Near the south end 
of the Mast House is a small mount, generally call- 
ed Bunker's Hill,* on the summit of which ia a 
watch-house, and a battery of five cannon. The 
prospect from this place is very extensive and in- 
teresting, including the Sound, St. Nicholas' Island, 
Mount Edgcumbe, the Dock Yard, Hamoaze, and 
the Cornish side of the Tamar, as high as Saltash. 
Under the hill is a small powder magazine ; and 
near it the slip for building cutters and small ves- 
sels on. 

Returning from this part more into the interior of 
the yard, the Rope Houses first engage the atten- 
tion. These are two buildiusfs of lime-stone, run- 

CT 7 

ning parallel to each other, two stories high, with 
cellars beneath, and 1200 feet long. In the upper 
story twine is made, and the yarns prepared for ca- 
bles, which are layed, that is, twisted together, be- 
low. 

Behind the Rope Houses are the dwellings of the 
Master Ropemaker ; and parallel with them, store- 

of our island rose from the sea, as -no part of the Dock Yard 
could have been subject to the influence ot the sea, at any re- 
cent period, before its foundation, from the nature of the ground, 
which then consisted of cliffs or high rocks, considerably abore 
the level of the tide, , 

2 v houses 



170 



DEVONSHIRE. 



houses for hemp, &c. The Mould, or Model Loft, 
where the different parts of ships to be built are laid 
down according to plans sent from the Navy Board, 
is in front of the store-house, and is the last build- 
ing of importance in that part of the yard, south of 
the bason. 

On the North Jetty is a landing-place, called the 
North Stairs, where officers not on duty 'generally 
land. Near it is a house where pitch is kept conti- 
nually boiling, to be applied to the bottoms and 
seams of ships. The Double Dock, which is the 
first of three very near each other. for line of battle 
ships, is so denominated from its being sufficiently 
large to contain two ships at the same time ; one 
a-head of the other, but so divided by gates, that 
though water is let into the outer division, the inner 
continues perfectly dry. The Dock Gates, by which 
the water is kept out of the docks, form, when 
closed, the segment of a circle, with its convex side 
towards the sea.* 

The second Dock, called the Union, or North 
Dock, is 230 feet 4 inches long ; 86 feet 7 inches 
wide ; and 26 feet 10 inches deep. This was made 
in the year 1702; and is faced with Portland stone, 
having blocks of granite to support the shores. The 
New Union, or North New Dock, 259 feet inches 
long ; 85 feet 3 inches wide ; and 27 feet 8 inches 
deep ; was made in the year 1789, and is on the 
same plan. Near the head of the latter dock is a 
burning- place for old copper, that has been removed 
from ships' bottoms at the time of repairing them.f 
further northward, are the Plumber's, Brazier's, 
and Armourer's Shops, and the Bricklayer's and 
Stonecutter's Yards v Behind all this side of the 
yard, the rock, having never been levelled, rises 
very high, and irregular : on it are a few sheds and 
storehouses. 

Every person belonging to the Dock Yard is un- 
der the command of the Commissioner. The artifi- 
- cers frequently work " two for one ;" that is, they 
execute the work of two days in the number of hours 
allowed for one : to do this, . they have tasks mea- 
sured out by their different officers. In war-time, 
they generally work " three for one." The chips 
which arise from converting timber to the requisite 
shapes, were formerly carried out of the yard, as a 
perquisite by the workmen, in bundles ; to form 
which, not only a large quantity of good timber was 



* Tlie gates are made of timber, very strongly put together, 
and are hung on each side the mouth of the dock. As soon as 
a ship is taken into dock, which is always at high water, the 
gates are shut, and locked : the water within the dock then 
runs out through sluices made for the purpose, till the ebb tide 
has ceased : the sluices are then shut, and the water which may ' 
still remain is thrown out by engines on the plan of pumps, 
worked by the assistance of horses. The pressure of the sea 
against the gates is immense; consequently, from their form, i 
they are always kept tight together. When a ship is to be i 
taken out of dock, the skiicps are opened, and the water flows 
in till its height is equal both within and without : the gates are j 
tflcn opened with ease, though scarce-ly any force could other- 
wise accomplish it. The sbips are hove in and out by means 



frequently destroyed, but articles of more valu 
were secrjeted in them. This occasioned an order 
that no more should be taken from the yard ; awd 
Government allows each man sixpence a day in lieu 
of them. The chips are now sold by auction once 
every fortnight, upon the following plan : the lots, 
instead of being put up at a low price, and sold by 
increasing the biddings, are put up at a sum consi- 
derably above their value, which the auctioneer gra- 
dually decreases, till some person thinking the price 
a fair one, says, " Mine," and the lot is immediately 
knocked down to him. 

The levelling of so large a space of ground as the 
Dock Yard occupies, must have been attended with 
prodigious labour, particularly the Gun Wharf, 
which is hewn out of some schistose rocks, to the 
depth of thirty feet, or more. The Gun Wharf is 
separated from the Dock Yard by North Corner 
Street : it was begun either in the year 171&or 1719, 
and completed about 1725. The buildings are in 
general good, but heavy, and in the Dutch style : 
they were projected by the late Sir John Vanbrugh, 
who was then attached to the Ordnance department. 
The quantity of ground within the walls is four acres, 
and three quarters. Here are two principal store- 
houses, of three stories high, for muskets, pistols, 
grape-shot, and other small stores ; a number of 
sheds for gun-carriages, &c. and a powder maga- 
zine, with a cooperage detached ; but which, since 
the erection of the magazines at Kerham Point, have 
been used for storehouses. The Dock Yard, as well 
as the Gun Wharf, is rated to the poor, and pays 
house and window-tax for the dwellings ; but neither 
tithes, church-rates, nor land-tax. 

In times of peace, a considerable part of the En- 
glish Navy are laid up in ordinary in Hamoaze, and 
constitute, by their number and disposition, a very 
interesting spectacle. This bay is about four miles 
in length, and, in general, about half a mile broad, 
with a bottom of mud : its greatest depth, at high 
water, is between eighteen and twenty fathoms : at 
low water, the depth is about fifteen fathoms. Be- 
low the Creek, which runs up to Weston Mills, is 
the Powder Magazine, consisting of several detach- 
ed lime-stone buildings, erected with every precau- 
tion, to prevent accidents by fire or lightning. Fur- 
ther to the southward, is Morice Town, from which 
place to Cremill Ferry, the shore is oacupied by the 



of hawsers and capstans, and always ground in the dock on 
wooden blocks placed for that purpose. 

\ It is then covered with verdigrease, weeds, muscles, &c. 
all which must be cleared away before the metal can be applied 
to any other purpose. To effect this, it is laid on iron bars, 
raised about a toot from the ground, and covered with chips 
and shavings, which are .afterwards set fire to: the smoke is 
excessively nauseous, and deleterious; yet, when the wind 
blows from the west, the town is tilled with it. After a certain 
time, the copper is taken out of the fire, and beaten with mal- 
lets to remove the dirt, &c. This refuse was formerly thrown 
away as useless; but, having been discovered to contain a 
large quantity of metallic particles, it is now sold at 90/. per 
ton. 

GllB 



DEVONSHIRE. 



Gun Wharf and Dock Yard. Opposite Morice 
Tojpn is the village of Torpoint ; and adjoining; it, the 
Balnist Pond. This is a. large square pond, sur- 
rounded by a wall, into which the water flows 
through an opening; spacious enough to admit barges, 
which bring and deposit here the shingle ballast 
(pebbles) that is taken out of the ships when com- 
missioned ; as they then, from the quantity of stores, 
&c. on board, require much less ballast than when 
in a state of ordinary. The tide flowing into the 
pond, washes off, and carries away, all impurities 
from the ballast, which again renders it fit to be put 
on board ships in a state of ordinary. More to the 
south, is Millbrook Lake, on the north bank of which 
is the Royal Brewhouse, called South Down, whence 
the King's ships, of every description, are supplied 
with beer. The entrance into Hamoazc from the 
Sound is very intricate and dangerous ; and the aid 
of a pilot is always necessary. 

The church belonging to the town originally con- 
sisted only of one aisle, and a tower; imd the in- 
crease of the inhabitants was the occasion of a se- 
cond aisle being erected after the beginning of the 
last century ; and about 1750, a third aisle was 
built. By these additions, what was at first the 
breadth, has become the length, of the building. At 
the west end is a spacious gallery.- The living is 
considered as the best in the diocese of Exeter. St. 
Aubyn's Chapel was erected by subscription in the 
years 1771 and 1772 : it is a plain building, with 
three aisles, aad a neat octagonal spire, and a por- 
tico. St. John's Chapel was also built by subscrip- 
tion, and was finished in the year 1799. The inter- 
nal part, consisting of three aisles, and an elliptical 
gallery, is remarkably neat, and contains a good or- 
gan ; but the appearance of the exterior is in every 
respect the reverse of elegance. The presentation 
is vested in the rector of the parish ; but the sub- 
scribers had the first appointment. Here are seve- 
ral meeting-houses, for different religious sects. 

The market at Plymouth Dock, though not char- 
tered, is held three times a week. The market- 
place, within a few- years, has been almost rebuilt, 
with considerable improvements, by Sir John St. 
Auhyn. It is well supplied with every necessary of 



* Early in the American war, the troops then in garrison at 
Dock, being in want of water, application was made by Colo- 
nel Dixon, the commanding engineer at Plymouth, to thacor- 
poratiou of Plymouth, for a participation of the advantages 
derived by its inhabitants from the stream conveyed to that 
borough by Sir Francis Drake ; offering, at the same time, any 
reasonable compensation. The corporation refused ; intimat- 
ing, that their Leal (Mnall stream, or rivulet) would not convey 
sufficient water fur both places. The troops were therefore 
supplied from reservoirs ot rain-water, soon afler funned in the 
squares of barracks; and the inhabitants, as usual, with rain- 
water from their houses and from the few springs and streams 
in the neighbourhood. The failure of the application made 
by Colonel Dixon, induced that officer to consider nf some 
oth'-r mode of bringing water to Dock, and under his dim-lion, 
levels were taken from the river Walk, in ihe parWi ol Walk,- 
ampton, about ten miles northward. The ground being found 



life, corn excepted ; but particularly with fish: About 
fifty or sixty years ago, the site of the market-placo 
was a pond of stagnant water ; previously to the 
filling up of which, the provisions were sold under 
temporary wood-shambles, near the Dock "V ard 
gates. It is now in the lord's demesne ; and the 
tolls are rented, or farmed, at , upwards of 1000/. a 
year. 

The Poor House is an extensive building, occupy- 
ing about an acre of ground, and capable of con- 
taining 300 persons. This establishment is under 
the immediate direction of a governor and matron, 
who are appointed by, and subject to the controul 
of, the commissions under the act for paving and 
lighting the town, and other purposes. A good Iu- 
firmary, a Council-Room for the Magistrates, and 
some other buildings for the separate accommoda- 
tion of women and children, have been erected with- 
in the precincts belonging- to the Poor House. The 
institution for the relief of distressed Lying-in Wo- 
men, was commenced, and is entirely maintained, 
by the subscriptions of females. A subscription 
school, for the instruction of poor boys, upon Dr. 
Bell's plan, was founded here, .in August, 1809, 
under the auspices of Sir John St. Aubyn, Bart. 

The number of inhabitants of Dock, or rather 
of Stoke Damerall and East Stonehousc together, 
was, according to the Parliamentary Survey, of the 
year 1811, 35,257; of which, 15,400 were males, 
and 19,857 females ; but the real number probably 
exceeded that report, as the military, and persons 
belonging to the navy, who occasionally reside on. 
board the ships in Hamoaze, could not be accurate- 
ly included. The police is under the superintend- 
ence of the County Magistrates ; three of whom re- 
side in the town and its neighbourhood, and dedi- 
cate each one day in the week to the public business. 
The number of inns formerly exceeded 200 ; but 
they have since been limited to 100. Every inn- 
keeper is obliged to have a Limp over his door ; and 
every tavern-keeper two lamps : these are the only 
lamps in the town. The inhabitants were formerly 
considerably distressed for good water, but this in- 
convenience has been removed.* 

On the southern side, of the town, immediately 

above 



favourable, an estimate of expence was made, amounting to 
about 18,000/. and a plan proposed to the Ordnance Board; 
but this also failed of success. Soon afterwards Messrs. Jones 
and Grey, then of Bristol, presented a plan to Government, 
which at first seemed likely to succeed ; Government having 
directed the Naval and Ordnance departments at Plymouth to 
report on the utility of the measure, which not only included 
the sup|)l\ of the troops with water, but likewise of the King's 
shipping from the front of the yard. Favourable reports were 
transmitted from each department : but at length this pn>posi- 
tion also tell to the ground. In the year 1789, another plan 
was in contemplation, under the atHpic.es of Mr. Thomas Brver 
and Company. This also then failed of success; hut in 1792, 
Mr. Bryer, in conjunction with Messrs. Jones ami Grey, and 
others, submitted a plan to the inhabitants of Dock, as well 
as to Government, for sipplyins 'lie inhabitants with water 
on the same terms as those of Plymouth, and the Govern- 
ment's 



172 



DEVONSHIRE. 



above the sea shore, is Richmond Walk, command- 
ing a fine view of Mount Edgcumbe, &c. This 
promenade was projected and raised under the di- 
rection of the Duke of Richmond, when Master- 
General of the Ordnance, in consequence of the dis- 
content excited by his having built the boundary 
Trail which surrounds the town, and thereby exclud- 
ed the inhabitants from walking round the lines, a 
privilege they had before enjoyed. 

The Theatre in this town is tolerably spacious, 
and the internal decorations neat. At the Foun- 
tains Tavern is an elegant subscription assembly 
room. 

The inhabitants of Dock are chiefly composed of 
artificers in the Dock Yard and (iuu Wharf, trades- 
men, mechanics, and officers and others belonging 
to the navy. There is scarcely a person of fortune 
\vho is not engaged in some kind of busines or pro- 
fession ; and, consequently, literature and the fine 
arts meet little encouragement. The amusements 
of the inhabitants are very few. Their principal 
gratification seems to arise from an inordinate love 
of dress, in which almost all indulge with equal ex- 
cess ; and a no less inordinate devotion to cards, 
which occupy whole evenings in succession. 

In the year 1790, an act of Parliament was ob- 
tained for the cst;)blis'iiinent of a new ferry across 
the Tatnar, from a spot to the northward of the 
(Gun Wharf. This passage was completed about 
the year 1796 ; and greatly tends to the accom- 
modation of travellers frequenting the Cornish side 
of the river. Soon after its completion, on the De- 
vonshire side, a house carpenter began to build on a 
spot nearly adjoining on the west with the ferry ; 
and on the south, with the glacis of the lines sur- 
rounding Dock. The convenient situation of the 
houses thus commenced, and the augmented popu- 
lation of Dock, immediately occasioned the erection 
of additional buildings ; and the place is now in- 
creasing under the appellation of 31orice Town ; so 
called, to perpetuate the memory of Sir William 
Morice. To the westward a canal has been formed, 
800 feet in length, and 00 broad, on each side of 
which are spacious wharfs and store-houses. A 
beer brewery, called the Tamar Brewery, the most 
complete and extensive in the west of England, has 
also been established near the canal. 



ment's departments at a stipulated price. This proposition 
appearing likely to succeed, aroused tlie attention of the cor- 
poration of Plymouth, who, probably jealous of the rapidly 
increasing consequence of the town of Dock, threw every 
obstacle in its way. The Leal, which they before declared to 
be incompetent to supply Plymouth, and "the troops at Dock, 
was now large enough, or might be made so, to supply not only 
the troops, but the inhabitants, and naval arsenals, there. The 
inhabitants of Dock, however, awakened to thtir own interest, 
rejected the propositions made from Plymouth, and determined 
to support the plan suggested by Bryer and Company : a bill 
for permission to carry it into execution was accordingly passed 
by the Legislature ; but not without considerable opposition 
from the corporation of Plymouth. Under this acl the scheme 



PLYMPTON.] The respectable borough, stannary, 
and market-town of Plympton, or Plympton Earls, 
is situated in the hundred of Plympton, 39 miles 
south-west from Exoter, and 216 west-south-west 
from London. The market is on Saturday ; and 
here are fairs on the 25th of February, the 5th of 
April, the 12th of August, and the 28th of Oc- 
tober. 

This town lies in a pleasant valley, about a mile 
south-east of the Plym. It formed originally part 
of the honour of Plympton, which was bestowed by 
Henry I. on Richard de Rivers, Earl of Devon, who 
made it the principal seat of his barony. The cas- 
tle, which included nearly two acres, and was sur- 
rounded by a high rampart, and very deep ditch, 
was the place of his residence. The ruins of this 
fortress, a small portion of its walls, an artificial 
mount, and the ditch which encompassed it, are still 
remaining on the north side of the town. Plympton 
was invested by the family of Rivers with various 
privileges. Its charter of incorporation was grant-, 
ed by Baldwin de Rivers, and confirmed by differ- 
ent sovereigns. The corporation is composed of a: 
Mayor, Recorder, and eight Aldermen. The right 
of election is vested in the Mayor, and Free Bur- 
gesses, and the number of voters is nearly 100. 
Its first return of members to Parliament was 
in the reign of Edward I. The town, which 
consists of two principal streets, is composed of 
about 100 houses. Its church appends to that of 
Plympton St. Mary. The town possesses a free- 
school, founded about 1664 by Elizius Hale, Esq. 
of Fardel, who bequeathed 1500/. per annum to 
charitable purposes. The Guildhall, an ancient 
building supported by stone pillars, contains some 
portraits, and among them, one of Sir Joshua Rey- 
nolds, painted by himself.* 

PLYMPTON ST. MARY.] Plympton St. Mary, also 
situated in the hundred of Plympton, half a mile 
north-west by north from the town above described, 
is a village of considerable antiquity, and had for- 
merly a college for a dean and four prebendaries, 
founded by one of the Saxon Kings. This founda- 
tion was dissolved by Warlewast, Bishop of Exeter, 
on the refusal of its inmates to discard their wives 
in obedience to the decrees, enjoining celibacy to the 
clergy, made by the Synod held in London in the 

year 

has been executed ; and the inhabitants are now supplied witli 
salubrious water on reasonable terms. 

* Sir Joshua Reynolds. This celebrated painter was born 
at Plympton in 1723. His father, who was a clergyman, and 
master of the grammar school at that place, is reported to have 
been a man of singular character. Mr. Reynolds when very 
young discovered an eager propensity for drawing, and at eight 
years old read, with great avidity and pleasure, The Jesuit:,' 
Perspective. He afterwards procured Richardson's Treatise 
on Painting, which so delighted and inflamed him that he im- 
mediately resolved to become a painter. His father, however, 
had other views, and intended him for the church, for which he 
gave him a suitable education, and then sent him to Oxford, 
where betook his degree in arts: but his desire for painting 
7 having 



DEVONSHIRE. 



173 



year 1102. Warlewast afterwards established a 
priory of canons regular here, which long flourished. 
At the Dissolution, its revenues wers estimated at 
the animal value of 912/. 12s. Sd. The site of the 
priory was then granted to Arthur Chainperuoune, 
Esq. 

PLYMSTOCK.] Plymstock, also in the hundred of 
Plyiupton, lies three miles south-west by south from 
Plymptou Earls. This place, observes Risdon, 
" once belonged to the abby of Tavistoke ; and to 
shew you the manner how, let my labour counter- 
poize your patience. It is left us by tradition, that 
oneChilde, of Plimstoke, a man of faire possessions, 
having noe issue, ordained, that wherever he should 
happen to be buried, to that church his lands should 
belong. It so fortuned, that he riding to hunt iu 
the forrest of Dartmoor, being in pursuite of his 
game, casually lost his company, and his way ; 
likewise, the season then being so colde, and he so 
benumbed therewith, that he was enforced to kyll 
his horse, and imboweled him to creepe into his bel- 
ly to gett heate, which not be : ng able to preserve 
him, he was there frozen to death ; and so found, 
was carried by Tavistoke men to be buried in the 
church of the abby, which was not so secretly don, 
but the inhabitants of Plimstoke had knowledg 
thereof, which, to prevent, they resorted to defend 
the carryage of the corps on the bridge, where they 

having suffered no diminution he was placed under Hudson the 
portrait painter. (a) About 1749 he went to Italy with his early 
friend and patron, Mr. Keppel. After studying there two 
years, Mr. Reynolds returned to London, where he was tinder 
the necessity of complying with the prevailing taste, and com- 
menced portrait painting, and in that walk soon became unri- 
valled. The first picture by which he distinguished himself, 
after his return, was the portrait of Mr. Keppel. He did not, 
however, confine himself to portraits, but painted several histo- 
rical pieces of high and acknowledged merit. His Infant 
Hercules strangling the Serpents was presented to the Empress 
of Russia, who liberally rewarded him. On the institution of 
the Royal Academy, he was appointed President. He also 
became principal painter to the King, and was knighted. 
His literary merit, accomplishments, and virtues procured him 
the friendship of the most distinguished men of genius in his 
time, particularly Burke, Johnson, Goldsmith, and Garrick : 
and Sir Joshua had the honour of instituting the literary club 
of which they were members. He was also a member of the 
Royal Society, and of that of Antiquaries ; and received th 
degree of doctor of laws from the Universities of Oxford and 
Dublin. Sir Joshua's academical discourses display the sound- 
est judgment and most refined taste ; and are written in a clear 
and elegant style. He died in 1792, and having no children, 
bequeathed the principal part of his property to his neice, who 
afterwards married the Earl of Inchiquin, now Marquis of 
Thomond. The following character of Sir Joshua was written 
by Goldsmith, in his facetious poem " Retaliation:" 

" Here Reynolds is laid ; and to tell you my mind, 
He has not left a wiser or better behind. 



(a) Hudson was a native of Exeter, and born in 1701. He 
was scholar, atid son-in-law to Richardson, the painter and 
author, and derived from him some practical knowledge, and 
connections. Though a very indifferent artist, when compared 
to his illustrious pupil, he obtained considerable busines in 

VOL. ii. NO. 58. 



conceived necessity compelled them to passe ; but 
they were deceived hy a guile, for the Tavistoke men 
forthwith built a sleight bridge, and passed on at 
another place without resistance, buried the body, 
and enjoyed the lands ; in memory whereof the 
bridge beareth the name of Guylbridge to this 
day." 

POLTIMORE.] Poltimore, situated in the hundred 
of Wonford, four miles north-east from Exeter, has 
now little to attract notice ; but it was formerly ce- 
lebrated as the seat of the ancient and famous fa- 
mily of Bampfield ; of which family was the noto- 
rious Bampfield Moore Carew.* 

POWDERHAM CASTLE.] Powderham Castle, the 
principal seat of the Courtenuy family, is beauti- 
fully situated on the banks of the Exe, within two 
or three miles of its junction with the British Chan- 
nel. Most of its martial characteristics, its turrets 
and towers, have been removed to make way for the 
more domestic and ornamental appendages of mo- 
dern times ; so that at present it scarcely retains 
any appearance of its ancient fortified state. ' Pow- 
derham," says Leland, " late Sir William Courte- 
rieis castelle, standeth on the haven shoro, a litle 
above Kenton. Some saye that it was builded by 
Isabella de Fortibus, a widdowe of an E. of Devon- 
shire. It is stronge, and hath a barbican, or bul- 
wark, to beate the haven." Commenting on this 



His pencil was striking, resistless, and grand ; 
His manners were gentle, complying, and bland : 
Still born to'improve us in every part , 
His pencil, our faces ; his manners, our heart : 
To coxcombs averse, yet most civilly steering, 
When they judg'd without skill, he was still hard of 

hearing; 

When they talk'd of their Raphaels, Correggios, and stuff, 
He shifted his trumpet, and only took snuff." 

* This personag* was the son of a clergyman at Bickley, in 
this county, and educated at Tiverton school. Falling among 
some gypsies near that town, he became so pleased with their 
mode of life, that he abandoned the school and his friends. His 
exploits in this course were wonderful. He has imposed upon 
Hie same company three or four times a day tinder different 
disguises, and with new tales of distress. Sometimes he was a 
distressed clergyman, ruined because he could not take the 
oaths; at others, a quaker, who had met with severe losses in 
trade. Now a shipwrecked mariner ; and the same day, a 
blacksmith whose house and family had perished by fire. Ca- 
rew had a method of enticing away people's dogs, for which lie 
was twice transported from Exeter to America, but made his 
escape. On one of these occasions he travelled from Virginia 
through the woods, and swam across the De'avvar upon 
a horse, with only a handkerchief for a bridle. He 
was a man of strong memory and pleasing address, and could 
assume the manners of a gentleman with as much ease as any 
other character. The fraternity to which lie belonged, elected 
him their king; and he remained faithful to them to the last. 
He is supposed to have died about 1770, in his 77th year. 



painting " the honest similitudes" of country gentlemen, who 
were faithfully represented, as Walpole observes, " in the fair 
tied wigs, blue velvet coats, and white satin waistcoats,'' which 
formed the costume of the time. 



2 x 



passage, 



174 



DEVONSHIRE. 



passage, Mr. Polwhele remarks, that " the asser- 
tion, that Powderham Castle was built by Isabella 
de Fortibus, is doubtless erroneous ; for neither 
Isabella, nor any of the Earls of Devon of the fa- 
mily of Rivers, was possessed of Powderham. 
Powderham Castle was probably built either before 
the Conquest, to prevent the Danes (who landed at 
Tcigmnouth in 970) from coming up the river to 
Exeter ; or else by William de Orr, a noble Nor- 
man, who came to England with the Conqueror, 
and to whom the King gave Powderham." This 
William de Orr entered into a conspiracy to deprive 
William Rufus of his crown : being detected, he 
was, according to the custom of the time, tried by 
a duel at Salisbury, when he was vanquished, and 
punished by deprivation of sight. After William 
de Orr, Powderham had owners of its own name ; 
and in the time of Edward the first, John de Pow- 
derham held it, together with Whitstone, of the ho- 
nour of Hereford. Powderham, on the death of 



* The distinguished and noble family of the Conrtenays 
derives its name and origin from Otho, a kniglit of France, who 
erected the Castle of Courtenay, in France, about the tenth 
century. The Courtenays afterwards became separated into 
the three brunches of Kdessa, of France, and of England. The 
Count; of Edessa, of the name of Courtenay, became extinct 
with the fall of Jerusalem. The Courtenays of France were 
allied with the Capets, who ruled in that country, but, after 
various changes, terminated in a female in the beginning of the 
17th century. The Courtenays of England derive their ho- 
nours from Reginald, who came into this country in the reign 
of Henry the Second : of the latter branch of this distinguished 
house, the following particulars are related by the celebrated 
Gibbon: " According to the old register of Ford Abbey, the 
Courtenays of Devonshire are descended from Prince Florus, 
the second son of Peter, and the grandson of Louis the Fat. 
This fable of the grateful, or venal monks, was too respectfully 
entertained by our antiquaries, Camden and Dugdule : but it 
is so clearly repugnant to truth and time, that the rational pride 
of the family now refuses to accept this imaginary founder. 
Their most faithful historians believe, that, after giving his 
daughter to the King's son, Reginald of Courtenay abandoned 
his possessions in France, and obtained from the English Mo- 
narch a second wife, and a new inheritance. It is certain, at 
least, that Henry the Second distinguished in his camps and 
councils, a Reginald, of the name and arms, and, as it may be 
fairly presumed, of the genuine race of the Courtenays of 
France. The right of wardship enabled a feudal lord to reward 
his vassal with the marriage and estate of a noble heiress ; and Re- 
ginald de Courtenay acquired a fair establishment in Devon- 
shire, where his posterity has been seated above six hundred 
years. From a Norman Baron, Baldwin de Brioniis, who had 
been invested by the Conqueror, Hawise, the wife of Reginald, 
derived the Honour of Oakhampton, which was held by the 
service of ninety-three knights; and a female might claim the 
manly offices of hereditary Viscount or Sheriff, and of Captain 
of the Koyal Castle of Exeter. Their son Robert married the 
sister of the Earl of Devon. At the end of a century, on the 
failure of the family of Rivers, his great grandson, Hugh the 
Second, succeeded to a title which was still considered as a ter- 
ritorial dignity ; and twelve Earls of Devonshire, of the name 
of Courtcnay, have flourished in a period of two hundred and 
twenty years. They were ranked among the chief Barons of 
the realm : nor was it till after a strenuous dispute, that they 
yielded to a fief of Arundel, the first place in the Parliament of 
England. Their alliances were contracted with the noblest 
families ; the Veres, Despencers, St. Johns, Talbots, Bohuns, 



John Powderham, came by escheat, or otherwise, to 
Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, 
who gave it with his daughter Margaret in marri- 
age to Hugh, Earl of Devon, who bestowed it on his 
son, Sir Peter Courtenay, about the beginning of the 
fourteenth century.* The present Viscount Courte- 
nay is the sixteenth in descent from Sir Philip, the 
first of the family that resided at Powderham, and 
the twenty-fifth from Otho, who built the Castle of 
Courtenay, in France. 

The Castle has undergone many alterations since 
the time of Leland ; though so lately as the year 
1752, it retained a considerable portion of its ancient 
castle-like form, and had also a quadrangular court 
in front, with embattled walls, and a tower gate- 
way at the entrance. In the north wing was also a 
library and neat chapel, which have since been con- 
verted into an elegant Drawing- Room. The inte- 
rior of the mansion is finished in the most sumptuous 
manner ; and among the various productions of art 

which 



and even the Plantagenets themselves ; and in a contest with 
John of Lancaster, a Courtenay, Bishop ot London, and after- 
wards Archbishop of Canterbury, might be accused of profane 
confidence in the strength and number of his kindred. In peace, 
the Earls of Devon resided in their numerous castles and manors 
of the west : their ample revenue was appropriated to devotion 
and hospitality ; and the epitaph of Edward, surnamed, from 
his misfortune, the Blind, and from his virtues, the Good Earl, 
inculcates, with much ingenuity, a moral sentence, which, 
however, may be abused by thoughtless generosity. After a 
grateful commemoration of the fifty-five years of the union and 
happiness which he enjoyed with Mabel his wife, the good 
Earl thus speaks from the tomb : 

What we gave, we have ; 
What we spent, we had ; 
What we left, we lost. 

But their losses in this sense were far superior to (heir gifts and 
expences : and their heirs, not less than the poor, were the ob- 
jects of their paternal care. The sums which they paid for 
livery and seisin, attest the greatness of their possessions : and 
several estates have remained in their family since the thir- 
teenth and fourteenth centuries. In war, the Courtenays of 
England fulfilled the duties, and deserved the honours, of chi- 
valry. They were often entrusted to levy and command the 
Militia of Devonshire and Cornwall ; they often attended their 
supreme Lord to the boiders of Scotland; and in foreign ser- 
vice, for a stipulated price, they sometimes maintained four- 
score men at arms, and as muny archers. By sea and land, 
they fought under the standard of the Edwards and Henries; 
their names are conspicuous in battles, in tournaments, and in 
the original list of the Order of the Garter: three brothers 
shared the Spanish victory with the Black Prince ; and in the 
lapse of six generations, the English Courtenays had learned 
to despise the nation and country from which they derived 
their origin. In the quarrel of the two roses, the Earls of De- 
von adhered to the house of Lancaster, and three brothers 
successively died either in the field, or on the scaffold. Their 
honours and estates were restored by Henry the Seventh. A 
daughter of Edward the Fourth was not disgraced by the nup- 
tials of a Courtenay ; their son, who was creaied Marquis of 
Exeter, enjoyed the favour of his cousin, Henry the Eighth ; 
and in the cump of Cloth of Gold, he broke a lance against 
the French monarch. But the favour of Henry was the pre- 
lude of disgrace ; his disgrace was the signal of death ; and of 
the victims of the jealous tyrant, the Marquis of Exeter is one 

f 



DEVONSHIRE. 



175 



which ornament its walls, may be specified a few 

Eictures of considerable merit. The Tribute Money, 
y Rubens, is a painting justly admired for its 
grouping, colouring, and execution. Two pictures; 
one of Oakhauipton Castle ; the other, of a Water- 
fall in this county ; Wilson. View of Whitehall, 
looking up to Charing Cross : Marlow. A fine 
portrait of George Monk, Duke of Albemarle. A 
tine portrait of Edward Wortley Montague, Esq. by 
the Rev. W. Peters. * The Picture Gallery ; D. 
Teniers the Younger. This beautiful and highly 
finished painting represents the interior of a room, 
which is supposed to be the picture gallery of the 
artist, and is decorated with a number of his groups, 
portraits, landscapes, and other paintings in minia- 
ture. A Landscape, with travellers halting ; Both. 
Queen Henrietta Maria, full length, said to be by 
Vandyck. Charles the Second, full length ; by the 
same artist. The Five Senses, personified in five 
small pictures ; Teniers. Beside the above, here 
are many cabinet pictures ; and a number of draw- 
ings by Lord Courtenay, Mr. W. M. Craig, and 
others. The miniatures and flower pieces of Mr. 
Craig are executed with much taste and beauty. 

The grounds of Powderham are extensive, finely 
planted with deciduous and exotic trees, and diver- 
sified with some bold swells. On the summit of the 
highest ground is a tower called the Belvidere, 
which commands many fine and interesting scenes ; 
and is also a conspicuous object from many parts of 
the county, and from the British Channel. This 
building was erected by the late Lord Courtenay in 
1773, and is of a triangular shape, with an hexago- 
nal tower at each corner. " The views from the 
Belvidere," observes Mr. Polwhele, " are a com- 
plete garden ; its parts discriminated with the most 
brilliant distinctness, yet flowing into one beautiful 
whole. To conceive an accurate idea of these fine 
peculiarities, we ascend the staircase of the Belvi- 
dere, and separately survey the three different parts 

of the most noble and guiltless. Ills son Edward lived a pri- 
soner in the Tower, and died an exile in Padua : and the secret 
lover of Queen Mary, whom he slighted, perhaps, for the 
Princess Elizabeth, has shed a romantic colour on the story of 
this beautiful youth. The relics of his patrimony were conveyed 
into strange families by the marriage of his four aunts ; and his 
personal honours, as it they had been legally extinct, were re- 
vived by the parents of the succeeding Princes. But there 
still survived a lineal descendant of Hugh, the first Earl of 
Devon ; a younger branch of the Courlenays, who have been 
seated at Powderham Castle above four hundred years, from 
the reia;n of Edward the Third to the present hour. Their 
estates have been increased by the grant and improvement of 
lands in Ireland; and they have been recently restored to the 
honours of the Peerage. Yet the Courtenays still retain the 
plaintive motto, which asserts the innocence, and deplores the 
fall, of their ancient house. " Ubi lapsus: Quid feci?" 
Where was my honour tarnished ? What have I done? " A 
motto which was probably adopted by the Powderham branch 
after the loss of the Earldom of Devonshire, &c. The primi- 
tive arms of the Courtenays were, Or, three torteaux, Gules ; 
which seem to denote the'ir affinity with Godfrey of Bouillon, 
and the ancient Counts of Boulogne." 

* This celebrated traveller is represented in a Turkish dress, 
6 



from the three windows of its elegant room." 
Amongst a number of other places descried from 
this eminence, are complete views of the town of 
Topsham, with its busy shipping ; the river Exe, 
with its windings from the sea up to Exeter ; Sir 
Alexander Hamilton's elegant place, called the Re- 
treat ; Lord Heathfield's (late Sir Francis Drake's) 
fine mansion at Nut well, with its shady groves ; and 
beyond these the commanding heights of Woodbury- 
Hill, with its ornamented clumps ; Exmouth, and 
the pleasant village of Lympstone, with its " rosy 
cliffs ;" the hills of Dartmoor on one side, and the 
city of Exeter, with its cathedral, forming an apex 
to the grouped houses ; also a beautiful tract of un- 
dulating and fertile country, spreading between 
Haldon Hill and the river Exe. The park and 
plantations belonging to this domain, extend through 
a circumference of nearly ten miles ; and the plea- 
sure gardens behind the house are replete with a 
number and variety of flowers and plants, highly in- 
teresting to the botanical student. 

SALTRAM.J Saltram, distant about three miles 
from Plymouth, is the seat of Lord Borringdon. 
At the commencement of the eighteenth century, 
Lady Catherine Parker (daughter of John, Earl 
Paulett, Secretary of State to Queen Anne) trans- 
ferred the family seat from Borringdon to this place. 
Here she enlarged a small dwelling, and made se- 
veral improvements with a view of preserving it as 
a jointure-house. The grounds possess many at- 
tractions : exclusively of a great diversity of land- 
scape, and massy woods, the prospect of Plymouth 
Sound, the Town, Citadel, Mount Edgcumbe, and 
the endless variety of effects peculiar to the sea, and 
harbour, are highly interesting. The mansion, 
which is the largest in the county, extends about 
435 feet in length on the southern and eastern sides ; 
the western side measures 170 feet. The principal 
suite of apartments is on the ground floor : many of 
the rooms are fitted up with much elegance, and 

which he usually wore when at Venice, ami where the late Mr. 
Komney took his portrait. He was son of Lady Mary Wort- 
ley Montague, and a man who experienced extraordinary vi- 
cissitudes of fortune. He eloped from Westminster when a 
boy, and was found in the disguise of a chimney-sweeper. 
Alter this he went as a cabin-boy on board a vt^sel to Spain, 
where he became a servant to a mule-driver. He was aaain 
discovered by his friends, who sent him to the West Indies. 
Returning to England, he became a member of Parliament, 
and for some time conducted himself with much propriety ; 
but another fit of rambling seized him, and he went to the east, 
where he adopted the manners and habits of the Turks. Dur- 
ing his stay at Rosettn, he writes thus to a friend in London : 
"I am much obliged to you for the compliment you paid my 
beard ; and to my good friend, Dr. Mackenzie, for having 
given you an account of it, advantageous enough to merit the 
panegyric. I have followed Ulysses and Juntas : I have seen 
all they are said to have visited ; the territories of the allies of 
the Greeks, as well as those of old Priam, with less we, though 
with more pleasure, than most of our travellers traverse France 
and Italy. I have had many a weary step, but never a tire- 
some hour ; and, however dangerous and disagreeable adven- 
tures I may have had, none could ever deter me from my point, 
but, on the contrary, they were only itimula.'' 

contaiu 



176 



DEVONSHIRE. 



contain a numerous and valuable collection of paint- 
ings, by ancient and modern masters. 

lu the Green Breakfast Room is a copy, by Do- 
minichino, of Raphael's Galatea, in the Farnesine 
Palace at Rome. A small picture of Cattle ; Cuyp. 
Madona and Child ; Ssso Ferrato. Flight into 
Egypt ; Gas. Poussin. A small piece, represent- 
ing the Marriage of St. Catherine ; Forreggio ; who 
made several pictures from the same design, most of 
which are in the palaces on the Continent : this for- 
merly belonged to Sir Joshua Reynolds. A pic- 
ture, containing four Spanish figures ; Palamedes. 
Two small paintings, Sal. Rosa, representing Sol- 
diers in a Rocky Scene. St. Anthony and Christ ; 
Anth. Carracci. St. Catherine ; Guido. Sir Jo- 
shua Reynolds, half-length ; Angelica Kauffman. 
The Tribute Money ; M. A. Caravaggio. A Land- 
scape and Figures ; Wouverman. Adwration of the 
Shepherds; Carlo Dolci. Madona and Child ; An- 
drea del Sarto. A Landscape ; Berghem. A small 
picture with four figures ; Vandyck. 

In the Red Drawing-Room is a Portrait of the 
Marquis of Granby ; by Morland ; and four His- 
torical Pictures, by Angelica Kauffman. 

In the Great Drawing-Room is the Bolingbroke 
Family, consisting of nine figures, by Vandyck. A 
large picture with three Female Figures ; Rubens. 
Game ; by Snyders. The Holy Family ; Guido. 
Bacchanalians ; Titian : this celebrated and esteem- 
ed picture was purchased of Sir Joshua Reynolds, 
by the late Lord Borringdon. Two Historical Pic- 
tures ; Angelica Kauffman. A sitting Piece, con- 
taining six Figures ; said to be by Vandyck. Sir 
Thomas Parker ; Cor. Jansen. 

In the Blue Breakfast-Room, is a Portrait, of 
Queen Elizabeth. Place of St. Mark, at Venice ; 
Canaletti. Sea Piece, Vandervelde. Four Views 
of Naples ; Ricchardelli. Two small Pictures ; Al- 
bano. A small whole-length Portrait of Charles 
the Twelfth. Apollo and Daphne ; Albano. 

In the Billiard- Rom are the following : Por- 
trait of the Marquis of Lansdowne, by Sir Joshua 
Reynolds. Phaeton ; Stubbs : this spirited picture 
has been engraved. Sigismunda : a picture much 
admired for the expression and character which the 
painter has given to the heroine. 

In the Great Staircase is a large Landscape, by 
Wilson. The Decapitation of St. Paul ; Guercino. 
Cattle ; Rosa de Tivoli. A large picture of Ani- 
mals, Snyders, &c. 

In the upper apartments is a fine collection of 
Drawings, by Claude, Guerciuo, Vandervelde, and 
other ancient masters : also Portraits, of Mrs. 
Abingdou ; by Sir Joshua Reynolds : of the late 



* James Northcnte, Esq. R. A. one of our principal histori- 
cal and portrait painters, and member of some Foreign Acade- 
mies, is a native of Plymouth, where one of his ancestors was 
Mayor in the year 1658. During his mayoralty, he suffered 
materially in his fortune, by a singular circumstance, which 
strikingly characterizes the bigotry of the times. Whilst at 



Lord Grantham ; the late Isaac Barrc ; Lord Pel- 
ham ; by Stuart : the late Sir Hyde Parker, by 
Northcote ;* and of several other persons of note. 

SAMPFORD.] Sampford Courtenay is situated in 
the hundred of Black Torrington, five miles and a 
quarter north-east by north from Oiikhampton. It 
was at. this place that an insurrection, in favour of 
the Roman Catholic religion, and in opposition to 
enclosures, began in the reign of Edward VI. 1549. 
The insurgents blockaded Exeter, but in vain : they 
were subdued by Lord Russell. 

Sampford PeVerel, part of the ancient inheritance 
of the Peverels of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, 
several of whom lie buried in the church, is situated 
in the hundred of Halberton, five miles east by 
north from Tiverton. Henry the Eighth sold the 
manor to the Pawlets, whose descendant Lord Paw- 
let, of Heanton St. George, now possesses it. The 
famous Margaret, Countess of Richmond, resided 
in the manor-house, and is said to have built one of 
the aisles of the church. On one of the windows, 
according to Risdon, were the arms of England 
with those of the Earl of Derby ; and the following 
words inscribed on the glass : " Mater Regis et 
Thomas Comitis Derbie mariti ejusdem Marga- 
ret." 

It was at one of these Tillages, that, in the sum- 
mer of 1810, a ridiculous affair occurred, relative to 
pretended supernatural noises,heard at a farm-lwuse. 
Weekly and almost daily accounts appeared in the 
newspapers ; but they at last ended in the exposure 
and contempt of the parties concerned. 

Sampford Spiney is in the hundred of Roborough, 
four miles east by south from Tavistock. 

SEATON.] Seaton, a well-frequented bathing; 
place, lies three miles south from Colyton, in the 
hundred of that name. The scenery on the shore 
round Seaton is perhaps the finest on the southern 
coast of this county. The rocks are b*ld, and, as- 
sociated with other objects, present some very ro- 
mantic and picturesque views. Caraden supposes 
Seaton to have been the Moridunum of Antoninus ; 
and Stukeley, Salmon, and Borlase, agree with him 
in that opinion ; but Baxter imagined it to have 
been at Topsham ; and Horseley, at Eggerton Hill, 
in Dorsetshire. Half a mile above Seaton is Honey 
Ditches, an oblong moated camp of three acres, 
probably the garrison of the port. The sea has re- 
tired considerably in this part of the coast ; though 
possibly the stones and sand that have here accu- 
mulated, may have caused that appearance. " Ther 
hath beene," remarks Leland, " a very notable ha- 
ven at Seton ; but now ther lyith between the twa 
pointes of the old haven, a mighty rigge and barre 

churcfi on a Sunday, he was required to give currency to a 
proclamation issued by the Parliament, which, from scruples of 
piety, he refused, and was immediately sent for to London, 
and imprisoned; a circumstance which terminated in his 



of 



DEVONSHIRE. 



177 



of peble stones in the very mouth of it, and the ryver 
of Ax is driven to the very est point of the haven, 
caalld Whit Cliff, and ther at a very small gut goeth 
into the se ; and here cum in small fischar botes for 
socour. Seten is now but a meane thing, inhabited 
with fischar men ; it has beene far larger when the 
haven was good." Seaton is also memorable for 
having been the place where the Danish princes 
landed in 937. 

SUALDON.] Shaldon, on the English Channel, 
six miles east from Abbot's Newton, and almost un- 
der the promontory called the Ness, is the property 
of Lord Clifford. Of late years it has been the fa- 
vourite summer resort of many families, visiting the 
watering places on this coast. The chapel was built 
by the Carews of Haccombe, about the year 1670; 
it is beautifully situated a short distance from the 
Teign, and about a mile from the hamlet. 

SHARPHAM.] The elegant mansion of Sharpham 
was built by Captain Pownall, who lost his life in a 
naval engagement during the American war. The 
daughter of Captain Pownall was united to Edmund 
Bastard, Esq. the present proprietor of this beau- 
tiful estate. Jt is situated about two miles from 
Totness, on the brow of a thickly wooded declivity, 
near the banks of the Dart, and commands views 
eminent for their picturesque and beautiful appear - 
mnce. 

SHILSTON.] Shilston, corrupted from Shelving- 
tone, is in the parish of Drewe Teignton, in the 
hundred of Wonford. Here is an ancient seat, the 
property of John Savery, Esq. of Balcombe Court, 
near Bristol, to whose family it came by purchase 
in 1614. The family of the Hills were the original 
possessors ; and in the church is an acrostic epitaph 
on one of them, forming the words Oliver Hill, of 
8hilveston, who died in the year 1573. 

SHUTE.] Shute, anciently Le Sheete, is situated 
in the hundred of Colyton, two miles north from 
that place. Shute House is the principal seat of 
Sir William Templar de la Pole, Bart. The old 
manor-house was termed by Risdon an " ancient 
dwelling of personages of goed worth, and some 
Knights surnamed thereof; as Lucas de Sheete ; 
Sir William and Sir Robert Sheete, Knights, in the 
days of Henry the Third, from whom it came to Sir 
Thomas Pyne, Knight." It afterwards continued 
in the Bonville family for some time, and came to 
the crown upon the attainder of Henry, Duke of 
Suffolk. Mary bestowed it on Sir William Petre, 
her principal Secretary ; by whose family it was sold 
to Sir John William Pole, Bart, in 1787, when a 
new house was begun upon a large scale, at about a 
quarter of a mile distant. This was never finished ; ! 
as Sir John died while it was building, and left a 
minor heir. The plan of it is a square body, with 
two uniform wings. The old mansion is falling fast 
to decay. 

SIDMOUTH.] The neat little market-town of Sid- 
mouth, anciently Sidemew, is situated in the hun- 
dred of East Budleigh, 14| miles east-south-east 
TOL. n. HO. 58. 



from Exeter, and 158 west-south-west from Lon- 
don. The market-day is Saturday ; and here am 
fairs on Easter Tuesday, and the Wednesday after 
the 5th of September. 

The town lies in a bottom, between two ranges of 
steep hills, at the entrance of a narrow vale opening 
to the sea. Through this valley, the rivulet Sid flows 
towards the beach, where it is lost among the peb- 
bles. Sand, tinged by the red oxyde of iron, and 
partly calcareous, composes the cliffs, the glare of 
which, together with that of a broad bed of pebbles, 
and its low situation, render Sidmouth intensely hot 
in the summer ; the adjacent scenery is, however, 
extremely beautiful. It was formerly a good sea- 
port ; but the harbour has been so choaked up with 
sand and pebbles, that pleasure boats and fishing 
smacks are the only vessels that can now approach 
it. Of late years, the population and buildings hava 
been on the increase through the number of persons 
who frequent it in the summer season for bathing" 
and amusement. The accommodations are good ; 
and it possesses an elegant ball-room, billiard-room, 
and tea-room, for the convenience of the visitors. 
The number of houses in this parish is 252, and that 
of inhabitants, 1689. Near the beach stands an an- 
cient stone building, with very thick walls, which is 
stated by tradition to have been a chapel of case, 
when Otterton was the mother church. In a path 
leading from Sidmouth to Otterton, called Go-church, 
an ancient cross is remaining. 

Near the town of Sidmouth, a Mr. Worthington, 
lately cultivated 16 acres of land, entirely by the la- 
bour of asses. His waggon was extremely light, 
calculated to carry about a ton and a half, and cost 
16/. ; the asses were harnessed two a-breast in it; 
the harness was a miniature of that of a horse, ex- 
cept that it was divided at top, like an ox's harness, 
and buckled together ; the pair of chains weighed 
about 61bs. ; the wheel harness, with hames, pad, 
iron-work, bridle, breeching, crupper, &c. cost 
about I/. 16s.; the leading ditto I/. 7s.; expences 
of shoeing, Is. 6d. a round. In all stiff work, four 
asses were used at plough, harnessed two a- breast, 
and driven in hand with reins by the ploughman. 
Ton or eleven acres of Mr. Worthington's land in 
aration, lay on the slope of a hill, so steep that 
horses had not been able to plough it up and down, 
but which his ass-team readily performed. The 
asses, none of which exceeded eleven hands iu 
height, cost 40s. or less, each : in the same team, 
stallions, mares, and geldings, were used ; the 
mares were found the most gentle and tractable, the 
geldings most stubborn and inactive, yet the most 
sagacious ; the stallions somewhat vicious, but of 
double the spirit, strength, and vigour, of either of 
the others. The asses were not found liable to any 
maladies ; were temperate eaters, and throve best 
when turned upon a neighbouring common, to cater 
for themselves among brambles. 

SLAPTON-LEA.] Slapton-Lea is a singular lake, 

nearly two miles and a quarter long, parallel to the 

2 T beach 



178 



DEVONSHIRE. 



beach of Start Bay, and distant from the sea a quar- 
ter of a mile. It is formed by three small streams 
of fresh water, which have no visible outlet, but are 
conjectured to unite with the sea, by percolating 
through the sand. It was at one time well stored, 
with pike, pearch, roach, and eels ; but most of the 
fish were destroyed, and great part of the Lea 
drained, by means of a breach made in the sand 
during a storm, some years ago. In the winter 
wild-ducks, widgeons, teal, coots, and other birds of 
different species frequent the lake. 

SOUTH MOULTON.] The ancient market and bo- 
rough town of South Moulton, so called to distin- 
guish it from the village of North Moulton, is plea- 
santly situated in the hundred to which it gives 
name, twenty-nine miles north-west by north from 
Exeter, and 181 1 west by south from London. It 
.stands on an eminence, near the western bank of the 
Moule. The market-day is Saturday ; and it has 
six annual fairs. 

The manor of South Moulton, previously to the 
Conquest, formed part of the demesnes of Edward 
the Confessor ; but in the reign of Edward the First, 
belonged to William, Lord lilartyu, who held it, we 
are informed by Risclon, by the service of providing 
a man, with a bow and three arrows, to attend the 
Earl of Gloucester when hunting in the neighbour- 
hood. It subsequently descended to James, Lord 
Audleigh, on the death of whose heir male, in the 
reigu of Richard the Second, it reverted by an entail 
to the crown ; " since when," says Risdon, " the 
Burgesses have bought the borough, which hath a 
Maior for its chief magistrate, &c." The Mayor is 
assisted in the execution of his office by eighteen 
Capital Burgesses, a Recorder, Town Clerk, and 
two Sergeants at Mace. The first return made to 
Parliament was in the reign of Edward the First, 
but no other has been made since that period. It is 
also remarkable for having been appointed the See 
of a Suffragan Bishop, by an act passed in the 26th 
of Henry the Eighth. 

South Moulton Church is a large and noble build- 
ing, containing some good monuments and an ex- 
cellent organ. The market-place, where several 
streets unite, is large and well-built ; and the Guild- 
hall is convenient. The manufacturing of serges, 
shalloons, aad felts ; and the obtaining of lime from 
the neighbouring kilns, employ the greater part of 
the inhabitants. A respectable free-school was 
founded here in 1614, which had the honour of edu- 
cating Judge Buller, so celebrated for his extensive 
legal knowledge. There is likewise a charity- 
school for children of the lower class. Accord- 



* At South Moulton was born, in 1747, the Kev. Samuel 
Badcock, a critic of some eminence. He was educated among 
the dissenters at Oltery St. Mary, in this county, and officiat- 
ed for a congregation at Wenbourn, in Dorsetshire. He after- 
Wards removed to Barnstaple ; but, in 1787, imagining that the 
ordinances of the established church approached the nearest 
t primiliv* Christianity, be conformed to them, and was or- 



ing to the returns made in 1811, the number ot 
houses was 516, that of inhabitants, 2739.* 

About two miles north-west from South Moulton, 
stands the beautiful seat of Lord Fortescue, called 
Castle Hill. It is situated on the acclivity of a 
finely wooded eminence, on whose summit is the ar- 
tificial semblance of a ruined castle, which com- 
mands a very extensive prospect. The grounds in 
front are disposed into numerous pleasing slopes, 
gradually descending from the terrace to a fine 
sheet of water, and diversified wjth stately groves. 
Beyond the lake, the ground again rises, and a 
handsome triumphal arch, erected on the top of a 
hill, terminates the view. Various other ornamental 
buildings are scattered through the park, which pre- 
sents some very pleasing views. 

It has been conjectured, that the Roman station 
Termolus was between the parishes of South Moulton 
and Churnleigh ; but the precise spot has not been 
ascertained. 

North Moulton is situated three miles north-north- 
east from South Moulton. 

STANBOROUGH.] Stanborough, anciently called 
Merely, is situated at a short distance from Mod- 
bury. It is now only a heap of stones, but was* 
once of sufficient eminence to give name to the hun- 
dred in which it stood. The church was erected 
by Sir Peter Fisharre, as an atonement for having 
killed the parson, in a dispute respecting tithes. 

STOKE.] At Stoke, a village pleasantly situated 
about half a mile from Dock, are the Military 
Hospitals, planned under the direction of the Duke 
of Richmond, but erected under the superintend- 
ence of the Barrack Board, during the war which 
followed the French Revolution. The occasion of 
their having been erected, was a fatal disease that 
broke out on board the fleet of transports detained 
in the port by adverse winds, in the early part of 
the war. The transports were full of troops ; and 
as the contagion spread, great numbers of them 
died, partly through the want of proper accommo- 
dation when brought on shora. The present build- 
ings were then projected ; anil appear well adapted 
for the purpose to which they were applied. 

STONEHOUSE.] East Stonehouse is situated in 
the hundred of Roborough, a mile and a half south- 
west by west from Plymouth. This is a very populous 
place, extending from Plymouth towards Dock. In 
the twenty-seventh of. Henry the Third, it was the 
property of Joel de Stonehouse, but by various mar- 
riages, has now passed into the family of Edgcumbe. 
The buildings are generally good ; and near the 
barracks is the Long Room, where assemblies arc 

dained by Biehop Iloss in Exeter Cathedral. Mr. Badcock's 
critiques on the authenticity of Chattel-ton's Poems procured 
him considerable reputation, but he is htst knoyn by his 
critiques in the Monthly Revie^v on Madan's Thelypthora, 
Dr. Priestley's History of the Corruptions of Christianity, &c. 
and by the large share he had in Dr. White's Bampton Lec- 
tures. He died in 1788. 

held 



DEVONSHIRE. 



179 



held during the summer season, and on public 
nights: the company is chiefly composed of the 
inc-st respectable inhabitants, both of Plymouth and 
Dock. The population of Stonehouse, according to 
the return of 1811, was 5171. The Marine Bar- 
racks are a range of granite buildings, of a quadran- 
gular form, on the east side of Stonehouse. 

Stonehouse Bridge, the principal passage from 
Plymouth to Dock, is a neat stone fabric, of one 
arch. It was erected at the joint expence of the 
Earl of Mount Edgcumbe and Sir John St. Aubyn, 
Bart, instead of an inconvenient ferry, by which no 
one could pass after the hours of nine in summer, 
and eight in winter. Foot passengers, horsemen, 
and carriages, pay a toll at this bridge ; thejearly 
rent of which, during the late war, exceeded 400/. 

STOWFORD.] At Stowford, in the hundred of 
Lifton, is the seat of Henry Rivers, Esq. pleasantly 
situated about half a mile from the picturesque vil- 
lage of Ivy-Bridge, av the base of the hill called the 
West-Beacon. From this eminence, and also irom 
the adjacent one, named the East- Beacon, the pros- 
pects are very extensive and beautiful. All the 
southern part, of the county appears spread like a 
map before the eye ; and from some points, in clear 
weather, the whole sea-coast, from Portland to Dead- 
man's Point, may be distinctly seen. 

TAVISTOCK.] The market and borough-town of 
Tavistock, is situated in the hundred to which it 
gives name, 34 miles west-south-west from Exeter, 
and 205 west-south-west from London. The mar- 
ket-day is Saturday. Tavistock is celebrated for 
being the residence of Orgarius, Duke of Devon, 
whose daughter, the far-famed Eifrida, was married 
to King Edgar. On her story Mason founded his 
elegant drama of Eifrida. Previously to the year 
961, Orgarius, possessed the manor, and, according 
to monastic legends, being admonished in a dream, 
began a splendid abbey here, which was finished in 
1)81, by Ordulph, his son, and endowed, by him and 
his lady, with this and many other manors. King 
Ethelred'increased the establishment of his nephew 
Ordulph, and invested the monks with numerous 
privileges ; but within thirty years after its founda- 
tion, the abbey was burnt to the ground by the 
Danes. Shortly after the abbey was rebuilt, and 
the establishment became more 'flourishing, addi- 
tional grants and immunities having been given by 
various persons. From a charter made in the 
twenty-first of Edward the Third, in confirmation 
of a charter granted by Henry the First, it appears, 
that that monarch bestowed " the Jurisdiction, and 
the whole Hundred of Tavistock," upon the abbey, 
together with the privilege of a weekly market, and 
a tliree days' fair. As the riches of the abbots in- 
creased, their pride seems to, have proportionally 
augmented ; and Richard Barbara, the thirty-fifth 
abbot, procured from Henry the Eighth, the privi- 
lege of sitting in the House of Peers ; or, in other 
words, was mitred : Browne Willis says, perhaps, 
by purchase, iu order to be revenged on Hugh Old- 



ham, Bishop of Exeter, with whom he had great 
disputes ; and at length occasion to be excommuni- 
cated. The patent by which this abbot obtained a 
mitre, is dated the twenty-third of January, 1513 ; 
but the privilege continued only till the year 1539, 
when John Peryn, the thirty-sixth and last abbot, 
surrendered his monastery, and had a salary of 100/. 
per annum settled on him for life. The'value of its 
revenues was then estimated at the annual sum of 
902/. 5s. 7|<y. The same year the King bestowed 
the abbey, with the borough of Tavistock, on John, 
Lord Russell, whose descendant, the present Duke 
of Bedford, is still the possessor. Numerous frag- 
ments of the abbey are remaining, but, the greater 
part, are incorporated with other buildings. The 
church, belonging to the abbey, mentioned by Le- 
land as a magnificent edifice, has been long de- 
stroyed ; and a house for the Duke of Bedford's 
steward was erected on its site in 173(5. Several 
buildings, which appear to have belonged to the. 
abbey, are now converted into warehouses ; and ad- 
joining to the principal inn, is a large handsome 
gateway, of pointed architecture, apparently of the 
reign oi Henry VI. 

The name of Tavistock is derived from the river 
Tavy, and the Saxon word stock, a place. It is at 
present an extensive and populous town, which 
seems gradually to have increased from the esta- 
blishment of its abbey. The streets are close and 
ill-paved, and many of the houses very old. The 
river, at this part, is crossed by two bridges. After 
heavy rains, by flowing over masses of rock, it has 
a rough and grand appearance. A short time 
since a canal was commenced from this place to 
the Tamar, a distance of four miles, two of which 
pass through a rock, containing veins of copper. 

Tavistock Church, dedicated to St. Eustachius, 
is a large structure, consisting of ibur aisles, a 
chancel, and a tower supported by arches. It con- 
tains several good monuments ; and some hones are 
also preserved, found in a stone coffin in the ruins of 
the abbey, the immense size of which has led to the 
supposition, that they belonged to Ordulph, whose 
gigantic stature enabled him to stride over rivers 
ten feet broad ! 

Tavistock contained an institution for the study 
of Saxon literature, at a very early period, and lec- 
tures were read in that language in a building appro- 
priated to the purpose, and called the Saxon school. 
These lectures ceased about the period of the Re- 
formation ; and the report that they were re-com- 
menced in the reign of Charles the First, seems to 
be unfounded. Several of tho abbots were learned 
men ; and from the establishment of a printing- 
press in the abbey within a few years after the art 
was brought into England, it is evident they encou- 
raged literature. Among the books issued from 
their press, were Walton's Translation of ^Boetius- 
de Consolatione, " emprented in the exempte Mo- 
nastery of Tavestoke in Denshyre, by me Dan Tho- 
mas Rychard, mouke of the said monastery," 1525, 

quarto ; 



180 



DEVONSHIRE. 



quarto; and " the 'Confirmation of the Tynners 
Charter ;" twenty-sixth of Henry the Eighth ; six- 
-seen leaves, quarto. Bishop Gibson states that a 
Saxon Grammar was also printed here about the 
commencement of the Civil Wars ; but this asser- 
tion is contradicted by other antiquaries. This town 
sent members to Parliament as early as the twenty- 
third of Edward the First ; but it does not appear 
that it was incorporated. The returning officer is 
the portreeve, who is elected annually at the Lord's 
Court, by twenty-four freeholders ; and the voters 
are about 1 JO. The population of this place, acoord- 
ing to the returns of 1811, -was 4723 ; of these 2-209 
were males, and 2514 females : the number of houses 
"was5l4. Many of the inhabitants are engaged in 
manufacturing serges for the East India Company ; 
lwt the mining business begins to employ a great 
number. 

Among the most distinguished natives which this 
town and its neighbourhood have produced, may be 
mentioned Sir Francis Drake,* Sir John Maynard,f 
and the poet, William Browne, already mentioned. 

TAWSTOCK.] Tawstock, situated in the hundred 
of Fremington, 3{ miles south by west from 
Barnstaple, is entitled to notice as the seat of Sir 
Bourchier Wrey, Bart, in right of heritage from the 
ancient and noble family of the Bourchiers, Earls of 
Bath, who made this their chief residence. The 
manor was possessed jointly, in the time of Henry 
the Second, by William de Brewese and Oliver de 
Traci, and afterwards inhabited by Henry de Traci, 
from whom it came to the Lords Martyn, and Aude- 
legh de Hely, in hereditary succession, until, in 
failure of male issue, it was entailed to Margaret, 
daughter and heir of the last Lord Audelegh, from 
whom, by marriage with Fulk Fitz-Warren, it de- 
scended to the Bourchiers, Lords Fitz-Warren, and 
Earls of Bath ; and from whom Sir Chichester 
Wrey, by his union with Anne, co-heiress of Ed- 
ward Bourchier, Earl of Bath, inherited, and whose 
heirs are the present possessors.! 

* Sir Francis Drake was born in 1545, and went to sea with 
his relation, Sir John Hawkins. During Hie years 1570 and 
1572 he made two very successftd expeditions to the West 
Indies; and on his return from the latter, fitted out, at his own 
cxpeiice, three frigates, with which he served under the Earl 
of Essex in Ireland. His bravery was so conspicuous here that 
he was shortly after introducer! to Queen Elizabeth. He now 
projected his famous voyage round (he world ; and the proposal 
being sanctioned by his sovereign, he set sail on the 13th of 
December, 1577, and, after encountering many dangers, re- 
turned to England, on the 3d of November, 1580. Soon after 
his arrival, tlie Queen went to Deptford, and dined with him 
on board his ship; when, after dh.ner, she conferred on him 
the honour of knighthood, and directed that the vessel, in which 
he had undergone so many difficulties, and obtained such dis- 
tinguished honour, should be preserved as a monument of his 
own and his country's glory. In 1585, he sailed with a fleet to 
the West Indies, and captured St. Jjgo, St. Domingo, Cartha- 
gena, and St. Augustin. Two years afterwards, having receiv- 
ed intelligence that many vessels, intended to form purl of Uie 
Armada, were collected at Cadiz, he entered that port, and 
burnt upwards of 10,000 tons of shipping, la 158J, he was 



The stately appearance of the mansion, from the 
great road on the opposite bank of the Taw, is 
highly grateful to the eye, through the singularity of 
its situation between two verdant hills, richly skirt- 
ed with forest trees, yet with a bold descent in front 
to the river, which beautifully meanders through the 
vale at the distance of half a mile, the boundary hills 
widening as they descend. This place is mention- 
ed by several authors, as remarkable for taking in at 
one view, the best manor, best mansion, finest church, 
and richest rectory, in the county. Having been 
nearly destroyed by fire, in 1786, the house was 
partly rebuilt in the Gothic style ; and the approaches 
each way to it, through the woods and park grounds 
of great extent, much embellished. The church 
near it has many handsome monuments of the fa- 
mily, who have been interred there from very earlj 
times. 

TAWTON.] There are three villages of this name : 
Bishop's Tawton, in the hundred of South Moulton, 
two miles and three quarters south by east from 
Barnstaple ; North Tawton, in the hundred to which 
it gives name, six miles and a half north-east from 
Oakhampton ; and South Tawton, in the hundred of 
Wonfordjfour miles and a half east from Oakhampton. 
Bishop's Tawton is said to have been the first 
seat of a bishop in this county ; Eadulphus, or 
Werstan, and Putta, the first and second bishops of 
Devon, having their residence here from the year 
905 to 924 ; when the see was removed to Cre- 
diton. 

At North Tawton is a large pit, from which a 
spring of water sometimes issues, and continue! 
running several days together. The appearance of 
this stream is imagined by the vulgar to foretell some 
public calamity. 

TEIGNMOUTH.] This town is situated in the hun- 
dred of Exminster, 12 miles soirth by east from 
Exeter, and 188 west-south-west from London. 
Teignmouth obviously derives its name from its si- 
tuation on the mouth of the Teign, where it is situ- 



created Vice-Admiral of the Fleet under Lord Howard, and 
was instrumental in the destruction of the Spanish Armada. 
After this he sailed to the West Indies with Sir John Hawkins, 
but the two commanders disagreeing, liitle was effected. Sir 
Francis died off Nombre de Dios in 1596. The ship in which 
he performed his famous voyage was preserved for a long time 
at Deptford ; and at length some of its remains were made into 
a chair, and presented to the University of Oxford. 

} Sir John Maynard. This eminent lawyer, who distin- 
guished himself equally by his patriotism, his knowledge, and 
his integrity, was born in 1602. After the abdication of James 
II. Sir John waited upon the new monarch with au address; 
and William having observed to him that from his age he must 
have outlived most of the judges of his standing, he replied, 
" and I should have outlived the law too, but for the arrival of 
your Majesty." He died in 1690. 

J This family derives an immediate rectilineal descent from 
the Plantagenet race, by the marriage of Bourchier, Earl of 
En, in Normandy, with Anne Plantagenet, co-heiress of Tho- 
mas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, sou of Edward the 
Third. 

7 ated 



DEVONSHIRE. 



181 



ted on a gentle declivity, sheltered by high hiHs on 
the east and north-east. A rivulet divides it into 
two parts, called, from their relative situations, 
West and East Teignmouth. " The former," ob- 
serves Mr. Polwhde, " is a manor of itself, and be- 
longs to Lord Clifford ; who, by his deputy, holds 
a court-baron, or court-leet, in the town, or bo- 
rough, once every year ; at which court a jury is 
regularly nominated, two constables deputed and 
sworn, and a port-reeve chosen, who is invested 
with considerable authority. In this court, which 
has been held here time immemorial, anciently all 
petit causes relative to the inhabitants were tried, 
and the culprits amerced according to the pleasure 
of the Lord ; and, in order to defray the expences 
of keeping court, the Lord has a right to demand 
annually from the tenants in fee, the sum of 15/. -is. 
7{rf. which is collected by the port-reeve. East 
Teignmouth contains the manor of East Teign- 
niouth, or Teigumouth Courtenay, which belongs to 
Lord Courtenay. The dean and Chapter have also 
a 'manor in East Teignmouth, to whom the great 
tythes, and the tythcs of fish, belong, and who are 
the lords paramount ; Lord Courtenay being the 
puisne lord." 

Teignmouth is a town of considerable antiquity, 
as records remain of its having been burnt by the 
Danes so early as the year 800. In the reign of 
Queen Anne, the French landed, and destroyed 
part of it by fire ; and one of the streets, built by 
money charitably given, bears the name of French 
Street, as a memorial of the calamity. Since that 
period, however, the town has risen to considerable 
consequence, and is now one of the most fashionable 
bathing places on the western coast. The principal 
resort is East Teignmouth, in which the Public 
Rooms and Theatre are situated : the former is a 
neat,.building, containing Tea, Coffee, Assembly, and 
Billiard Rooms. The Theatre, built on a spot of 
ground given by Lord Courteuay, was first opened 
in the summer of 1802. The walk, or promenade, 
leading from the Public Rooms towards the south, 
stretches over an extensive flat, called the Dan, on 
which stands a small fort erected for the defence 
of the town. The view from hence, up the river, is 
highly beautiful ; the ground gradually rising on 
each side into verdant hills, rich with wood, and 
cheerful with cultivation. The cliffs, which over- 
.hang the sea, and are seventy or eighty feet high, 
have a peculiar appearance, being, with the excep- 
tion of a few broad verdant patches, of a deep red 
colour. 

West Teignmouth Church is an ancient stone 
fabric, built in the form of a cross : the roof is sup- 
ported by the ramifications of a wooden pillar, that 
rises from the centre, and was formed from the 
trunk of a single tree. Over the chancel-door-is a 
tablet in memory of Lucy, fifth daughter of the late 
Edward Townshend, Dean of Norwich, on which 
the following lines are inscribed : 

VOL. n. NO. 58. 



If in the tomb deserv'd rrgrets pursue, 

And some true tests to merit still are due ; 

If pleasing manners, if a guileless mind. 

Goodness of heart, to beauteous features joia'd ; 

If purest friendship's undiminisli'd fire 

The fond affection kindred ties inspire ; 

If all the social virtues that endear, 

Claim from surviving friends ll\e flowing tear; 

Or e'en from thee, oh, stranger, who art nigh, 

The humble tribute of a passing sigh ; 

Let not so just a debt be here denied : 

How transient worth was prov'd when Lucy died. 

The Church of East Teignmonth is a venerable 
structure, and bears the appearance of very early 
Norman architecture. The inside, however, is 
gloomy and inconvenient. 

" The trade of Teignmouth," observes Mr. War- 
ner, " consists of some commercial intercourse with 
Newfoundland ; the exportation of clay, and impor- 
tation of coal ; and is carried on chiefly in craft 
built at the place, where are conveniencies for 
launching vessels of 400 tons. The clay exported 
is brought from Bovey, for the most part by a canal; 
about one-fifth of the whole quantity is dug on the 
estate of James Templar, Esq. who, with the only, 
true patriotism, is indet'atigably employed in pro- 
moting the solid interests of his country, by improv- 
ing agriculture, and encouraging manufactures." 
West Teignmouth possessed formerly a chartered 
market, held on a Sunday ; but this was disconti- 
nued in the reign of Henry the Third. The market 
is now held on Saturdays. Salmon, salmon-peal, 
sea-trout, whiting, mackarel, and many other fish, 
are taken here ; and, by some excellent local regu- 
lations, the inhabitants can supply themselves before 
any are sold to the dealers. The number of houses 
in both parishes amounts to 6-29. The population ' 
is 28;i.. 

TEIGNTON.] There are three villages of this 
name in the county of Devon : Bishop's Teignton, 
in the hundred of Exminster, one mile and a half 
west by north from West Teignmouth ; Drewe 
Teignton, in the hundred of Wonford, eight miles 
and a quarter south-west from Crediton ; and King's 
Teignton, in the hundred of Teignbridge, two miles 
north-east from Abbot's Newton. 

The first of these places, at the time of the Nor- 
man Survey, was held between the crown, and the 
Bishops of Exeter, one of whom had a palace here. 
The present proprietor of the manor is the Rev. 
Mr. Comyns, of Wood. The church, an ancient 
structure, having a tower at the east end, is in a 
very decayed condition. At the west entrance is a 
semi-circular arch, of the Saxon style of architec- 
ture/ This parish has been remarked as singular 
from the many roads which intersect it, and which, 
on a moderate calculation, extend between forty 
and fifty miles ; though it is not more than three 
miles and a half broad ; nor above four and a quar- 
ter long. 

At King's Teignton, owing to the marshes in 
2 z its 



182 



DEVONSHIRE. 



its neighbourhood, the inhabitants were formerly 
much afflicted with the ague ; but since the drain- 
ing of these marshes, the disease has been much less 
frequent. On a tomb in the church the following 
strange epitaph presents itself: 

Ric'iardus Adlatn, hujus Ecclesiz 

Vicarins, obiit Feb. 10, 1670. 

Apostrophe ad Mortem : 

Damn'tl tyrant! can't prnphaner blood suffice? 
Must priests tliat offer be Ilie sacrifice? 
Go tell the genii that in Hades lie, 
Thy triumphs o'er this sacred Calvary ; 
Till some just Nemesis avenge our cause, 
And force this kill-priest to revere good laws! 

Drewe Teignton is supposed to have been the 
- chief seat of Druidism in Devon; and, in the opi- 
nion of Mr. Polwhele, its name signifies, " the town 
of the Druids upon the Teign." Risdon, however, 
deduces it from another source ; and Sir William 
Pole observes that " Teiguton Drewe both gave 
and took the name of the possessor thereof in Henry 
the Second's time ; he was called Drewe or Drogo 
dc Teign." The Domesday Survey mentions 
Drewe-Teignton by the name oi'Taintone, and shows 
it to have been held, during the reign of Edward the 
Confessor, by a person named Offers ; and, during 
that of William the Conqueror, by Baldwin, the 
.Sheriff. It subsequently came into the possession 
of Drogo de Teign, mentioned before, whose suc- 
cessors appear to have been the Dabcrnons, one of 
whom held it of Lord Hugh Courtenay, by the ser- 
vice of half a knight's fee. From this family, after 
passing through various hands, it came to the Ca- 
rews of Cornwall, and was sold by R. P. Carew, 
Esq. of Anthony, to his tenants, the Messrs. Dons- 
ford, and Mr. Bragg. 

Drewe Teiguton contains the greater part of the 
few vestiges of British antiquity which have been 
discovered in Devonshire. On the descent of a hill, 
two curious circles are situated contiguous to each 
other. They are nearly of equal dimensions, being 
ninety-three feet in diameter, and the stones which 
csmpose them, placed at equal distances, are four feet 
in height. The stones which were erected on the 
top of the mound arc gone, yet sufficient relics re- 
main for both the circles to-be easily traced out. In 
a farm in the neighbourhood, called Shilston, stands 
a cromlech, composed of three large upright stones, 
supporting a fourth. Towards the west of this are 
several conical pillars, about four feet high, on the 
south are three others, and on the north two more : 
these appear to have formed a circle, of which the 
cromlech was the centre. Towards the south of the 
cromlech, and at a short distance, is a singular 
Rocking Stone ; situated in the middle of the Teign, 
and supported by a mass of stones, grounded very 
deep in the bed of the river. It measures about 
eight feet in height, and eighteen in length. It is 
easily rocked with the hand, though its motion is 



not great. The scenery round this rocking stone a 
strikingly grand. 

Among many wild and romantic spots situated m 
this parish, the following is described by Mr. Pol- 
whele. " Where the Teign runs at the base of the 
Moving Rock, we descend into the valley amidst 
vast masses of granite, and looking back from the 
brink of the river, see. them, as it were, bursting 1 
asunder, and only prevented from falling by their 
chains f ivy. In other places, enormous ledges, 
overshadowed by oaken foliage, appear like the ruin* 
of a castle. This is particularly the case in the vi- 
cinity of the Cromlech ; where the berry of the 
mountain ash, _ here remarkably luxuriant, has a 
beautiful appearance from chasms of rock, encrusted 
with pale moss. The views from this spot are de- 
lightful : the eye reposes with pleasure on the rich- 
ness of the woods of Whyddoii, after contemplating 
precipices that seem ribbed with iron, and follows 
the receding hills, wave after wave, till they are lost 
in azure." 

Bradford Pool, about three miles west of Drewe 
Teignton, long accounted, by the inhabitants of the 
surrounding country, as a curiosity, was formerly a 
tin mine, and has been once or twice drained, with & 
view of renewing the works. When full, the pool, 
which is of an oval form, is nearly half a mile in cir- 
cumference, and about one hundred yards wide in 
the middle. The last time it was drained, was by 
an adit, or level, about a mile iu length, driven from 
the channel of the Teign, which was so increased by 
the waters of the pool, as to overflow its banks. A 
shaft was then dug in the bed of the pool to the 
depth of 120 feet ; but the tin-ore obtained, not be- 
ing equal to the expectations of the adventurers, the 
undertaking was abandoned. 

TIVERTON.] The borough and market-town of 
Tiverton anciently called Twyford Town, and 
Two-ford-ton, from its situation between the rivers 
Exe and Leoman on the slope of a hill gently rising 
towards the north is in the hundred to which it 
gives name, 14 miles north by east from Exeter, and 
1B3J west by south from London. 

This place, in the time of Alfred the Great, was 
only a^village, but possessed twelve tythings, and 
was under the government of a portreeve. In the 
reign of Edward the Confessor, the whole hundred 
was held of that monarch by vassals ; and after the 
Conquest it still attached to the crown. Henry I. 
bestowed the manor and lordship on Richard Rivers, 
afterwards Earl of Devon, who built a castle here 
about 1106, which continued, for a number of years, 
to be the baronial residence of the family. In the 
reign of Edward I. Amicia, the widow of Baldwin 
Rivers, claimed the manor and lordship as part of 
her dower ; and, under an inquiry made in the tenth 
of that reign, certified her claim, " to view of frank- 
pledge, assize of bread and beer, a gallows, pillory, 
&c. a weekly market, and three annual fairs." 
Passing from the Rivers to the Courtenay family, 

Tiverton, 



DEVONSHIRE. 



18* 



Tivcrton continued in that line till it was seized, 
with their other possessions, by Henry the Eighth, 
oirthe attainder of the Marquis of Exeter. Edward 
the Sixth bestowed it on the Protector Somerset ; 
about three years after whose fall, it was granted to 
Sir Henry Gate, from whom it was again taken by 
Queen Mary, and restored, with the other estates 
of the family, to Edward Courtenay, last Earl of 
Devon. On the decease of this nobleman, at Padua, 
his lands were divided amongst the heirs of the four 
sisfers of Edward, his great-grandfather, and were 
soon afterwards extensively dispersed, by sales and 
marriages. Seven-eighths of the lordship of the 
hundred, manor, and borough of Tiverton, is now 
the property of Sir Thomas Carew, Bart, of Hac- 
combe, in this county ; the remaining eighth be- 
longed to the heir of the late Edward Coleman, Esq. 
Sergeant at Arm* to the House of Commons. 

The erection of Tiverton Castle, by Earl Rivers, 
occasioned a considerable increase in the buildings 
and population of the village ; and by the interest of 
its Lords, it was invested with the privilege of a 
market as early as the year 1200. About fifty years 
nfterwards, the stream of water now called tho 
Town Leat, was conducted from the distance of 
about five miles, to supply the inhabitants with wa- 
ter ; and a piece of waste land, called Elmore Com- 
inon, was given for the benefit of the poorer classes, 
either to depasture, or to cultivate. , 

The most rapid augmentation of the town, how- 
ever, took place on the final establishment of the 
woollen manufacture, about the year 1500 : this bu- 
siness had been introduced many years before ; but 
the desolating wa>s between the houses of York and 
Lancaster, and other circumstances, had prevented 
its making much progress. The most considerable 
increase in the trade and population of Tiverton, 
occurred in the latter part of the reign of Elizabeth, 
when the inhabitants amounted to nearly 5000, be- 
ing double the number thirty years before. Tiver- 
ton, at this period, was the principal place in De- 
vonshire for woollen goods ; particularly kersies, 
which still continue to be the chief articles of its 
manufacture. 

In 1591, the plague was introduced into Tiverton 
by a poor traveller, and so fatal was its progress, 
that between five and six hundred persons became 
its victims in the course of a few months. Numbers 
fled ; and the place was so thinned of inhabitants, 
that the growing of grass in the streets is particu- 
larly recorded. ' The effects of this pestilence had 
scarcely been overcome, when the town itself was 
almost wholly destroyed by fire ; a calamity occa- 
sioned by a woman's frying pancakes over 'a blaze 
of straw, which caught the dry thatch of the cottage, 
and spread with such rapidity, that more than 400 
dwellings, and several chapels, were consumed in 
about two hours. Thirty-three persons perished in 
the flames, with a number of horses ; and the value 
of the property destroyed was estimated at 150,000/. 
This accident happened on the third of .April, 1598. 



However, in the course of ten or twelve years, 
" Tiverton was again esteemed a town of great im- 
portance, called the chief market-town in the west, 
and nurse of the country. Many rich clothiers and 
merchants lived in it, and 8000 people were con- 
stantly employed in its manufactures of woollen 
cloth. Two thousand pounds ready money were 
expended every market-day in cloth-wool and yarn, 
brought from all parts of the country for sale, and 
applied to the fabricating plain cloths, and kersies 
of different qualities, but chiefly those of the finest, 
as Tivcrton kersies were highly esteemed for inten'- 
iial consumption, and eagerly bought by the mer- 
chants of London for exportation." The buildings 
at this period were increasing both in number and 
respectability ; and Tiverton would most probably 
have become one of the greatest manufacturing' 
towns in England, but for a second conflagration, oh 
the 5th of August, 1612. This was occasioned, as 
we learn from Dunsford's Historical Memoirs, by 
the " carelessness of two fellows in a dye-house, 
who being more intent on the brutish diversion 
of dog-fighting than minding their business, per- 
mitted the fire from under the furnaces to kindle the 
body of fuel in the house, then chiefly wood and 
furze. The flames soon spread beyond their power 
to extinguish, to the destruction of that and the ad- 
joining houses ; and gathering strength, extended 
with increasing rage to the other houses of the town, 
which being generally covered with thatch, and at 
that time very dry, took fire like tinder, and were 
soon destroyed. It being the assize week, many of 
the inhabitants were at Exon ; and those at home 
were filled with such consternation at the sudden 
rise, and rapid spread, of the fire, tha,t they were 
unable to exercise aright the powers of thought or 
action ; and having no fire engines on proper con- 
structions, it was scarcely possible to prevent the 
total destruction of the town. Six hundred houses 1 
were burnt in a few hours ; and the only buildings 
that escaped, were St. Peter's Church, the Schools, 
and Alms houses ; except about thirty dwellings, of 
little value, on the outskirts of the town. Goods 
and merchandize, to the amount of 200, OOO/. were 
consumed ; utensils, and other means of carrying on 
future trade, destroyed ; and the inhabitants of every 
rank and description reduced to the greatest dis- 
tress." The confusion and want which arose from 
this deplorable calamity, were partly dissipated by 
large sums collected by brief throughout the coun- 
try ; and many hundreds of the poor manufacturers, 
whose dwellings were consumed, were distributed, 
by the magistrates in different towns, by which the 
advantages of the clothing trade, hitherto almost ex- 
clusively enjoyed by Tiverton, were extended to the 
other parts of the county. 

It was in the year 1015, that Tiverton received its 
first charter of incorporation from King James : its 
government was then vested in a Mayor, twelve 
Capital Burgesses, and twelve Assistant Burgesses, 
to ba chosen out of the " most discreet and honest 
7 inhabitants' 



184 



DEVONSHIRE. 



inhabitants of the town and parish." The right of 
returning the members of Parliament was also 
granted to the same persons ; though it had been 
previously exercised by all the inhabitants able to 
boil a pot. This charter continued in force till the 
year 1723 ; when such disscntions arose among the 
members of the corporation, that the Mayor ab- 
sconded on the day appointed for the choice of a 
successor ; and the provisions of the charter being 
violated by the consequent neglect, it became for- 
feited. The ensuing year a new charter was grant- 
ed by George the First ; but, instead of extending 
the privilege of the inhabitants, the principles on 
which it was bestowed, and its most important 
clauses, were precisely similar to those of the 
former. 

From the period of granting the first charter, to 
the year 1625, the population of the town continued 
to increase, and at that time amounted to nearly 
6000. Fifteen years afterwards, the number of in- 
habitants was at least 7900 ; and the woollen manu- 
facture was also proportionably augmented. Dur- 
ing the continuation of the Civil Wars, the trade of 
Tiverton rather declined ; but after Cromwell had 
assumed the Protectorate, it became more prosper- 
ous, and a greater number of marriages were con- 
tracted at Tiverton between the years 1653 and 1660, 
than in any similar period recorded in its annals. 
In the reign of Charles the Second, and James the 
Second, the woollen business again declined, but 
became more flourishing in the time of William the 
Third, when the manufacture of mixed woollen 
serges was established, and greatly promoted, by 
the friendly intercourse which existed with Holland 
during the government of that monarch, and of 
Queen Anne. 

In 1731, another severe check was given to the 
prosperity of Tiverton, by a third dreadful fire, 
which, in a few hours, consumed 298 dwelling-houses, 
besides other buildings, and in its progress threat- 
ened destruction to the whole town. The value of 
the property destroyed was estimated at about 
60,000/. The distresses of the inhabitants were, in 
a considerable degree, relieved by voluntary sub- 
scriptions ; and contributions amounting to nearly 
11,000/. An Act was soon afterwards passed for 
rebuilding the town, and preventing further dangers 
by fire, in which it was enjoined, that " the new- 
built houses should be covered with tiles, or lead, 
instead of thatch ; that no trade likely to occasion 
fires, should be carried on in any of the public 
streets, nor any stacks of corn or straw be erected 
in them ; that fire-engines should be provided ; and 
the streets and passages widened." 

The manufacture of cagathies, druggets, cloth- 
serges, drapeens, and other fine woollen goods, was 
soon afterwards introduced, and these articles were 
made in considerable quantities for the markets of 
Flanders, Brabant, and Germany. For sev-eral 
years, the trade continued with very little variation ; 
but the wars with France and Spain, about the mid- 



dle of the last century, and the introduction of the 
Norwich stuff's into the markets of Holland, contri- 
buted greatly to lessen the demand. The evil was 
heightened by contentious between the merchants 
and the workmen, which frequently occasioned tu- 
mults, and prevented the execution of the necessary 
orders. From this period, both the trade and po- 
pulation decreased rapidly ; and about the year 
1770, the inhabitants were nearly 2000 less in num- 
ber than they were forty years before. The suc- 
ceeding American war was still further productive of 
injurious consequences : but the manufacture of long 
ells, sandfords, and other fabrics, having been since 
introduced, the population has somewhat increased, 
and the general trade of the town is now on a re- 
spectable basis. The number of houses, as returned 
under the act of 1801, was 1322 ; of inhabitants, 
6505 ; of which 3001 were males, and 3504 females. 
In 1811, the number of houses was 1303; that of 
inhabitants, 6732 ; of which 2999 were males, and 
3733 females. 

The site of Tiverton partakes of the triangular 
form, from the course of the rivers by which it is 
bounded. Its greatest length, is nearly one mile ; 
its breadth is exactly three quarters. The four principal 
streets form a quadrangle, enclosing an a-rea of gar- 
dens, in the centre of which is a fine bowling-green. 
Most of the houses are of red brick, or of stone, and 
are generally covered with blue slate. Those on 
the outskirts of the town, and at the ends of the 
street which escaped the fire of 1781, are of earth, 
or cobb, covered with thatch. The principal build- 
ings are the Castle, the Church, and the Free Gram- 
mar-School. 

Tiverton Castle is situated on the west side of the 
town, on a spot conveniently adapted for the defence 
of the eminence on which the buildings are erected. It 
appears to have been nearly of a quadrangular form, 
enclosing an area of about an acre, and surrounded 
by a strong wall, from twenty to twenty-five feet in 
height. At the south-east, north east, and north- 
west angles, were round towers, with battlements, 
each about thirty-five feet high ; and at the west 
angle, a square tower. The chief entrance was by 
a spacious gate-way, under a Jarge square building, 
jutting out a few yards from the centre of the east 
wall : a square tower, somewhat corresponding with 
the former, jutted out in like manner from the centre 
of the wall towards the west. 

This fortress was secured from attack on the west 
side, by a steep declivity of about sixty feet, on the 
edge of which the west wall was built. Two wide 
and deep moats, filled with water from the town- 
leat, defended the whole of the north and south walls ; 
on each side of the causeway leading to the gate on 
the east : over one of these, near the round tower, 
at the south-east angle, was a draw-bridge. " The 
causeway and outer gate, under a strong Gothic 
pointed arch, were defended by means of the battle- 
ments, and small stone arches on the wail over it, 
from whence the guard could unperceived annoy 

the 



DEVONSHIRE. 



183 



the enemy with stones, arrows, melted pitch, or boil- 
ing water, and prevent any approach to it. Two 
other strong gates, under two like arches, eighteen 
feet distance from each other, further secured the 
passage, or gateway, within ; the whole of which 
was thirty-six feet long, and fifteen feet wide, di- 
vided by the gates into equal parts, the ceilings of 
each of them strongly arched with stone. Under 
the round tower, near the draw-bridge, were some 
stone steps, supposed to have led to the entrance of 
a subterraneous passage beneath the moat and 
ehurch-yard, to the middle of the town. The best 
apartments in the Castle were probably towards the 
north wall, now destroyed ; and those over the gate- 
way, which remain almost entire, and are regular, 
lofty, and spacious. On the top of the stone stair- 
case, was a small turret, at present ruinous, called 
the Earl of Devonshire's Chair:" The curious 
stone arches, mentioned in this account, wre, ex- 
cepting one on the north side of the gate, taken 
down several years ago ; their ruinous state threat- 
ening danger. 

In the reign of King Stephen, Baldwin Rivers, 
Earl of Devon, son and successor to Richard, was 
driven from this castle by the arms of that monarch. 
It was afterwards repaired ; and the celebrated Isa- 
bella de Fortibus, and the first Earls of Devon of 
the Courtenay family, made it their place of resi- 
dence. In the wars between the Houses of York 
and Lancaster, it was several times exposed to as- 
sault ; but after the union of the rival families, it at- 
tained considerable splendour ; Catherine, youngest 
daughter of Edward the Fourth, and widow of Wil- 
liam Courtenay, Earl of Devon, making it her court, 
and chief place of abode. On the death of Henry 
Courtenay, Marquis of Exeter, her son, (whom 
Henry the Eighth had caused to be beheaded,) the 
castle gradually fell to decay ; and the parks and 
pleasure-grounds belonging to it, were either sold, 
or granted by the crown to different persons. Pre- 
viously to the Civil Wars in the reign of Charles 
the First, it appears to have been repaired. At that 
period it was garrisoned for the King ; but, after a 
slight siege, it was taken by a detachment from the 
army commanded by General Fairfax.* From this 
period the castle has been falling to decay ; and se- 
veral of the ancient buildings have been" converted 
into the offices of a farm. The moat on the south 



1 he circumstance which led to this event is thus related. 
in Dunsford's Historical Memoirs :-" On Sunday, October 
U nineteenth, 1643, the General went early to see the batte- 
ries ; and the ordnance heing ready, a council of war was call- 
ed, wnemii it was determined to storm the Church, Castle, and 
works; and whilst the officers were in debate at the School- 
House,.aliuiit the manner of the storm, which was that afternoon 
o be executed, the cannon which had been playing hard acainst 
the works of the Castle, broke the chain of the draw-bridge in 
two with a round shot; whereupon the bridge fell down across 
the moat, and the soldiers immediately, without waiting for or- 
ders, seized tie bridge, entered the works, and took possession 
of the church yard, which so terrified the enemy, that they 
quitted their cannon, and some of their posts and lines, and in- 
voi.. ii. W o. 58. 



side, towards the church -yard, is now a kitchen! 
garden ; that on the north side is filled up, and. 
made part of a large court-yard. 

Tiverton Church, a very handsome structure, de- 
dicated to St. Peter, is situated on aiv eminence at 
the north-west end of the town, within a little dis- 
tance of the castle. Its length is 136 feet, and its 
width 82 ; and though the work of different and 
distant ages, more regular than might have been 
reasonably expected. The south side is ornamented 
with much curious sculpture, and particularly the 
porch, and the adjoining chapel : over the windows- 
of the latter, on a cornice of white marble, are re- 
presented many of the incidents of the life and ac- 
tions of Christ, in basso-relievo ; besides ships, and 
other symbols of commerce. This chapel was erect- 
ed about the year 1517, by a respectable merchant 
of Tiverton j named John Grenwaye, who also re- 
built the south aisle and porch ; and founded some 
alms-houses in the town for the poor inhabitants. 
Near the east end on the north side are some slight 
remains of a sumptuous chapel, built by the Rivers, 
Earls of Devon, as a burial-place for the family. 
This building was destroyed at the Reformation ; 
within it was a magnificent tomb to the memory of 
Edward Courtenay, and Catherine his Countess, ou 
which was inscribed the following quaint lines : 

Hoe ! Hoe ! who lies here ? 

'Tis I I he good Erie of Devonshire, 

With Kate my wyfe to me full deer: 

We lyved together tyfty-fyve yeere. 

That wee spent wee had. 

That wee lefte wee loste. 

That wee gave wee have. 

The tower is a plain stone structure, contiguous 
to the church, and ornamented with battlements and 
pinnacles :. its height to the top of the latter is 116 
feet. The summit commands an exceedingly beau- 
tiful and diversified prospect. The interior of the 
church, is spacious-, but irregular. The part now 
occupied by the chancel, is said to have been origi- 
nally the whole extent of the church, which has been 
enlarged at different periods, as the population of 
the town advanced : the altar-piece is a rich paint- 
ing of St. Peter delivered from Prison by the Angel. 
The chancel is separated from the body of the 
church by a screen, ornamented with elegant tra- 
cery : over it is a large good organ. Several cost- 

stantly fled into the church and castle. The soldiers pursued 
the fugatives into the castle, and crept in at the church windows, 
the doors having been fastened, and attacked them with great 
fury in both places, when, they cried out in a lamentable man- 
ner for quarter, ami surrendered themselves prisoners: the 
soldiers plundered and stripped most of them to their shirts, 
but gave them their lives. The governor, who had before been 
summoned, but had peremptorily refused to hearken to any 
treaty of surrender, though he despaired of any relief, now shut 
himself up in his chamber in the castle, and hung out a white 
flag for a parley ; but such was the fury of the soldiers, that it 
could not be attended to ; yet when they got into the castle, 
and came to the place where he was, they gave him free quar- 
ter upon his surrender," 



186 



DEVONSHIRE. 



ly monuments decorate the walls in different parts 
of the church ; and, formerly, amongst several 
others, appeared the following epitaphs : 



Mary Shepherd, a tender blossome 

Only eyglit years old, 
Whom death pluct quickly off, 

Lyeth covered here in mouldc. 



May 5, 1622. 



Margaret Garner: God gave me life: 

But list I sinne should bee, 
He tookt away again : 

That gave yt unto mee. 

Ap. 26, 1621. 

As the church was too small for the reception of 
the numerous inhabitants of the town, a chapel of 
ease was erected here ahout the year 173:3, and de- 
dicated to St. George. This is a neat, building of 
the Doric order, cased with yellow pin-beck stone. 
The roof is supported by two rows of large Ionic 
pillars, which separate the chapel into three 'parts. 
The seats are of Flemish oak, and are disposed with 
much taste and regularity. Here arc several Meet- 
ing-houses for Dissenters of various denomina- 
tions. 

The Free Grammar- School is a fine building, si- 
tuated near the banks of the Loman, at the east end 
of the town, and extending to the length of 170 feet. 
This was erected about the year 1604, pursuant to 
the will of Peter Burrell, a native, and eminent clo- 
thier of this town.* 

The north front of the Grammar- School is neatly 
cased with purbeck stone, and is separated into three 
parts, by two arched stone porches. In each divi- 
sion are three large uniform stone windows, and one 
also in each porch. The interior contains apart- 
ments for the master and usher, two spacious 
school-rooms, where 150 boys receive instruction, 
a dining-room, hall, kitchen, and numerous lodging- 
rooms : opposite the front is a quadrangular green, 
bounded by a stone wall ; in the centre of the front 
of which, under an arch, is an elegant iron gate, and 
over it the following inscription : 



* He was born in the year 1520, " of parents in such a low 
station in life, that, when very young," observes Dunsford, 
" he was obliged to run on errands, and do other little services 
for the common carriers, to obtain necessary support. As he 
grew up, he attended their horses ; and having saved a little 
money in this employ, he bought a piece of kersey cloth, which 
he sent to London by one of the carriers, who making no 
charge for the carriage, sold it to great advantage. The pro- 
fits from this kersey, and a few more savings, enabled him to 
purchase others, which he sent and sold in like manner. From 
similar returns, in a short time he bought as many kersies as 
would-load one horse, with which he went himself to London, 
where he was employed some time by the agents in the kersey 
trade, by whom he was much esteemed for his fidelity and 
great assiduity. When he had acquired a sufficient sum to 
begin the manufacture of kersies, he returned to Tiverton, anc! 
established himself in that business, which he conducted many- 
years with great credit and success. The fortune he thus ac- 
quired by his active and laudable exertions, was very great; 
and as hi mind happily enlarged with his circumstances, his 



This Free Grammar School 

Was founded at the only cost and charge 

Of MR. PETER BLUNDELL, "of this town, Clothier, 

Anno Domini 1604. 

sua? 84. 



Above, on a brass plate, are these lines : 

Hospita disquirens Pallas Tritona sedem, 
Est BJunddlinae percita amore scholae, 

Ascivit sedem placuit cupiensq. foveri, 
Ilospes, sit, Petrns, qui mihi fautor eris.-J- 

Besides the endowments for the support of the 
school, Mr. Blundell left 2000/. to purchase lands 
for the maintenance of three scholars in each of the 
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, " to be 
chosen out of his said school by the trustees, with the 
approbation of the master ; and of foreigners, with 
the consent also of ten freeholders of Tiverton, pay- 
ing taxes to the government ; but always preferring 
natives of Tiverton parish, and all under eighteen 
years of age." 

Tiverton has also a charity-school, supported by 
subscription ; and a free English-school, endowed 
in the year 1611, by Robert Comyn, otherwise Chil- 
cott, who had been confidential clerk to Mr. Bluudell 
many years, and appears to have designed this esta- 
blishment as a preparatory seminary to his master's 
grammar-school. 

The bequests for the benefit of the poor inhabi- 
tants of Tiverton, are exceedingly numerous and 
valuable ; though several of them have been lost, or 
dissipated. Amongst the principal, are the Eastern 
Alms-houses, founded by John Grenwaye about the 
year 1517, the endowments of which are now ap- 
propriated to the support of nine poor and aged 
men ; and the Western Alms-houses, erected and 
endowed in the year 1529, by John Waldron, a mer- 
chant of this town. Under the cornice, in front of 
the latter, appear the following lines : 

John Waldron, and Richoard his wyfe, 

Builded this house in tytne of their lyfe : 

At such tyme as the walls were fourtyne feet hye, 

He departed this worlde, even the eighty-nth of July. 

liberality was unconfined, and his bounty became general 
useful. He died unman led, at the age of eighty, and by 
will bestowed the whole of his ample fortune to promote learn- 
ing, and encourage husbandry, to advance (he trade and ma- 
nufactures of his native place, to animate the industrious ; and 
to remove the ills, or alleviate the distresses, of his fellow crea- 
tures." The whole of the numerous bequests thus made for 
charitable purposes, amounted to upwards of 40,000/. 

f.. )- Translation. 

Minerva, on her travels, sought to find 
Some hospitable place to please her mind : 
She saw this School struck with its stately dome, 
She cried with transport, ' This shall be my home.' 

When wand'ring Pallas sought some sweet retreat, 
In Blundell's School at length she fix'd her seat: 
' Peter,' she cried, ' beneath thy roof I'll rest, 
And at thy table sit a well-pleas'd guest.' 

7 The 



and 
his 



DEVONSHIRE. 



167 



The Town-House te a pacious building, divided 
into many apartments, for the transacting of public 
business. The Mayoralty-Room in this edifice con- 
tains portraits of George the First, Second, and 
Third : beneath it are the offices of the Tiverton 
Bank, opened on New-year's day, 1788. 

The Market- House, for the standing and sale of 
corn, is a large quadrangular fabric, supported on 
rows of strong wooden pillars, and conveniently 
disposed as a repository for the corn that may re- 
main unsold. 

The Hospital, or Poor-House, is a regular brick 
structure, eighty-one feet in length, and ninety-two 
in depth : this was completed about the year 1704, 
and contains various work-shops for the employment 
of its inhabitants. 

The inhabitants of this town have long been cha- 
racterised for a general disposition to social inter- 
course and conversation. The fine bowling-green, 
already mentioned, invites the gentlemen to associ- 
ate there in the summer evenings for salutary exer- 
cise ; and tea-parties are much encouraged by the 
numerous variegated walks, and hospitable farm- 



* The occasion of its being made, is thus related in West- 
cote's Manuscripts : " Sir Hugh Courtenay gave this rectorye 
to the chaplain he had ; who, having lyved incumbent on yt 
sometyme (and, being as it is to be supposed, of a generous 
and bountyfull nature) wfenld complayn generally, and some- 
tyme particularly, to lys Lord's ofhcers, that the rectorye 
yealded not a sufficienlyrnayntenance for one of his place and 
inynde to keepe htfSpitalitie answerable to his calling, This, 
often spoken, came in tyme to his Lord's ears, who, in conve- 
nient tyme, conferred with this sayd chapleyn concerning his 
complaynt ; and told him he had considered thereof, and was 
purposed to procure him a lyvinge more proportionable to his 
inynd, and more convenient, if he would resigne this. The 
incumbent, trickIM wilh these words, and filled with hope of 
higher promotion, was ready at the very instant to resigne; and 
the noble Earle (a work? worthy his wisdom) divided yt (which 
then might easily be done) in fower parts or quarters, Pryor, 
.Tydcombe, Clare, and Pitt, with intent to bestow it on fower 
dyvers men'. But with some respect to his old chaplyn, the 
last incumbent, offered him the choice ; which he, seeing no 
other preferment ready e, and perceiving his Lordship's intent, 
gratefully accepted, and thereby fayrely taught to lyve by a 
crown, that could not lyve by a pound, and may counsell and 
advise all men to be content when they are w'ell, and have 
enough. 

Nature's with little pleas'd enough's a feast 
A sober lyfe but a small charge requires; 

But man, the author of his own unrest, 
The more he hath, the more he styll desyres." 

r Mrs. Hannah Cowley, the daughter of Mr. Parkhurst, of 
Tiverton, was born in 1 743. Her father was a getleman highly 
respected for his probity, and esteemed for his talents and learn- 
ing. Mrs. Cowley may be said to claim hereditary geniils as 
she .was related, by the paternal side, to the celebrated Gay, 
who frequently resided at her house in Barnstaple. In the 
earlier part of her life she was not particularly attached to 
theatrical entertainments; and the fancy she conceived for 
writing was accidental. Being present at a successful comedy, 
her imagination was caught, and she exclaimed to her husband, 
" I too can write." He rallied her for her presumption. 



houses in the vicinity of the (own. The adjacent 

i hills and woods afford much diversion to the lovers 

! of the chase. Regular assemblies, concerts, and 

card parties, are frequent in the winter ; and many 

evening clubs and friendly societies have also been 

formed. A Reading Society was established here 

in the year 1775 ; the members of which, though of 

different sects and professions, have been remarked 

as conducting their affairs with uncommon unanU 

I mity. 

The parish of Tiverton, nearly nine miles and a 
half in length, and about eight miles in breadth is 
j divided into four ecclesiastical portions, three rec- 
tories, and an impropriation ; a division supposed to 
have been made by Sir Hugh Courtenay, first Earl 
of Devon of that name.* 

Mrs. Cowley, of some celebrity, as a poet and 

dramatic writer, was a native of Tiverton ;t as was, 

we believe, the late Sir Francis Baring, described, 

i in his patent of Baronetcy, as of Larkbeer, in this 

county. J 

TOPSHAM.] The maritime and market-town of 
Topslmra is situated at the conilnx of tho Exe and 



the 



" You shall see," said she. Before dinner the next day, she 
presented him the first act of The Runaway, verbatim as it now 
stands; it met his approbation, and he was anxious she should 
complete it: this she did in a fortnight. It was sent to Mr. 
Garrick and brought on the stage in 1776, with uncommon suo- 
cess. This comedy was quickly followed by The Belle's 
Stratagem, Who's the Dupe, Albina, Which is the Man, A 
Bold Stroke for a Husband, More Ways than One, The School 
for Grey Beards, the Fate of Sparta, A Day in Turkey, and 
The Town before You. All these met with a favourable re- 
ception, and the Belle's Stratagem, in particular, for which she 
received 1200 guineas, was performed with loud and boundless 
acclamations, and it had the honour of being performed before 
the Queen, to whom it was dedicated, once every season, foe 
twenty years. These dramas were brought out under the in- 
spection of her husband, except one or two of the last, he hav- 
ing then joined his regiment in the East Indies, where he died 
about 1799. 

Between the intervals of the appearance of her plays, Mrs. 
Cowley produced numerous pieces of fugitive poetry ; among 
which may be particularly noticed her Imitations of Cowley, 
Monologue on the Death of Chatterton, Verses occasioned by 
Lady Manners's Ode to Solitude, and her poem intituled, Ed- 
wina. She also ascended to the higher ran:;e of poetry, and 
produced three Epic Poems The Maid of Arragon, The 
Scottish Village, and the Siege of Acre. 

In privifte life Mrs. Cowley dropped the author, and became 
the elegant and engaging woman ; her manners were lively and 
unassuming, and her countenance animated and expressive. 
The last effort of her pen was in unison with the excellence of 
her heart ; it was a little poem in aid of benevolence and gain 
to the Sexton of the Parish, whose little property had been de- 
stroyed by a flood. It was signed as a School Boy, and claim- 
ed a subscription for one who would not directly beg. Th 
list of subscriptions began with that of The School Boy, and 
quickly more than restored his property. 

Mrs. Cowley died in 1809, in the 66th year of her age. 
t This gentleman, who was born in the year 173G, was one 
of the Directors of the East India Company, and had been a 
representative in Parliament for Taunton, Grampound, and 
Chipping Wycombe. He was said to be one of the most 
accomplished merchants of his time, and celebrated for his skill 

in 



188 



DEVONSHIRE. 



the Clyst, though chiefly extending along the east- 
ern bank of the former, in the hundred of Wonford, 
3| miles south-east from Exeter, and 170J west- 
south-west from London. Saturday is the market- 
day. " Here," observes Lelaiid, " is the great 
trade and rode for shippes that usith this haven, and 
especially for the shippes and merchant-mannes 
goodes of Excester. Men of Excester contende to 
make the haven cum up to Exceter self: at this 
time shippes cum not further up but to Apsham." 
(Topsham.) The manor was the property of the 
Courtenays, Earls of Exeter, one of whom procured 
the town the privilege of ' a market, and annual fair. 
This was probably the Hugh Courtenay who block- 
ed up the channel of the Exe, after quarrelling 
with the Mayor and Corporation of Exeter, as be- 
fore mentioned. 

The town principally consists of one long street, 
of irregular breadth, extending north and south. 
Many of the houses are handsome ; but the greater 
part have a mean appearance. The southern ex- 
tremity, called the Strand, is the most pleasant, the 
river flowing within a short distance of the houses, 
and is chiefly inhabited by genteel families : the 
view from it is extensive and pleasing. The quay 
is large and convenient, and now belongs to the 
Chamber of Exeter, who purchased it some years 
ago. Most of the inhabitants are employed in the 
shipping business : the total number as returned 
under the act of 1811, was 2871; the number of 
houses, 620. The church is situated near the centre 
of the town, on a high clhT, which commands some 
very fine scenery. " A noble river," observes Pol- 
whele, " distant shipping, churches glimmering 
through groups of trees, a fertile vale, and a fine 
range of mountains, rising above each other in beau- 
tiful perspective, as far as the eye can reach." 

TOR ABBEY.] Tor Abbey, the property of George 
Gary, Esq. is finely situated, surrounded by large 
and venerable trees, and commanding a prospect of 
Tor-bay, and other places in the neighbourhood. 
The house, which, with the exception of a small 
part of the old abbey, is mostly modern, consists of 
a centre and two wings ; of which joins a castellat- 
ed gateway. Beyond this gateway is a large barn, 
which anciently belonged to the abbey, covered 
with ivy, but still retaining numerous loop-holes 
and buttresses. The house has a Roman Catholic 
Chapel attached to it, which is ornamented with 
paintings, and has a superb altar. 

In the reign of John, William, Lord Briwire built 

in off-hand calculation. Sir Francis was intimately acquainted 
with the trade and produce of America, and at the close of the 
American war was consulted by Mr. Pitt; a circumstance 
which added to his fame and wealth. In his station as chairman 
and director of the East India Company his talents were con- 
spicuous, and on the renewal of the Company's charter, h 
made a most impressive speech in proof of its justice and utility. 
Sir Francis died at Lee, in Kent, in 1810, aged 74. 

* Mston observes that, " the order of the Premonstre, of 
which few establishments existed in this kingdom, was founded 



the religious house, which anciently belonged to thi 
place, and endowed it with considerable revenues. 
It belonged to canons of the Premonstratensiau or- 
der.* At the Dissolution its revenues were 39G/. 
11s. From the Bruers, Tor Abbey came to the 
Mohuns, afterwards to the Ridgeways, and conse- 
quently to the Carys, the present proprietors. 

At a short distance south-east of the abbey, and 
approachable only at low water, stands a rocky 
island, separated by the sea from a projecting cliff. 
From this are seen several very delightful views ; 
that of Tor Abbey, with its wooded vale, is emi- 
nently beautiful. At a few yards' distance from Jhis, 
is a large cavern, 130 feet in length, and about 30 
feet in height. 

TORBAY.] Gilpin observes, that Torbay is, in 
" its general form, semi-lunar, encircling a circum- 
ference of about twelve miles. Its winding shores 
on both sides are screened with grand ramparts of 
rock ; between which, in the centre part, the ground 
from the country, forming a gentle vale, falls easily 
to the water's edge. Wood grows all round the 
bay, even on its rocky sides, where it can get foot- 
ing, and shelter ; but in the central part with great 
luxuriance. This noble bay has afforded its pro- 
tection many a time to the fleets of England, which, 
in their full array, ride safely within its ample bo- 
som." Vespasian is said to have landed here, when 
he came to attack our Veragers, King of Britain ; 
and here the Prince of Orange, afterwards William 
the Third, landed, on the 5th of November, 1688. 

TORQUAY.] The pleasant village and watering- 
place of Torquay is in the hundred of Haytor, 18-| 
miles south by east from Exeter. It is situated on 
a cove, about two miles from the extreme point of 
the promontory, called Hope's Nose, which forms 
the northern boundary of Torbay. The buildings 
are, in general, good ; and the accommodation for 
visitors, convenient. The surrounding scenery fur- 
nishes a variety of romantic and picturesque views ; 
and, in this respect, a more agreeable place of resi- 
dence can scarcely be found on the coast. From 
Torquay to Teignmouth the rocks are mostly of 
lime-stone ; and most of the kilns in the neighbour- 
hood of Exeter are supplied from the intervening 
quarries. 

Fissures and small openings appear in different 
parts of the cliffs ; but most of them are of inconsi- 
derable extent : the principal is between one and 
two miles from Torquay ; it bears the name of Kent's 
Hole, and has been described by Mr. Polvvhele, in 



by St. Norbert. The appellation originated from Bartholomew, 
Bishop of London, having chosen a place called Preinonstiie 
for a monastery of these canons. A curious story is told by 
the monkish writers respecting the derivation of the name Pre- 
monstre. Inglebrand the Great (say they) who was noted tor 
his heroic achievements, one day set out to kill a lion that had 
long been the terror of the neighbouring country. It happen- 
ed, that he saw Ihe beast much sooner than he expected, 
whereupon he cried out, ' Saint Jean, tu me 1'as de pies Pre- 
monstre,' St. John, thou hast almost foreshown him to me." 

nearly 



DEVONSHIRE. 



J89 



Hearty the following words : Kent's Hole liath two 
opening's about half-way up a steep cliff'. The 
opening to the left is an arch about two feet high, 
which leads immediately into the great cavern ; but 
the more accessible entrance is by a cleft in the rock, 
to the right hand, which is nearly five feet high, 
three feet wide, and forty-three in length. This 
leads also into the great cave, which is about ninety- 
three feet in depth, and one hundred in length. 
The extreme height may be about thirty feet ; but 
the height is very unequal, as the floor rises in the 
middle to within a few feet >of the roof. Two more 
openings front us here ; that on the left conducts on 
a level into a cave, fifty-two feet long, and twenty- 
two broad ; and then into a second, fifty-four feet 
long, and about fifteen wide. : here a pool of water 
closes the cave, and the arch bends over it. These 
caves are also thirty feet high ; but the general 
height of those hereafter mentioned, is only from 
fifteen to twenty feet ; and the extreme breadth 
about fifteen. The opening on the right of the 
great cave, leads, by a very rocky, slippery descent, 
into a passage, 136 feet long, and from six to twelve 
feet high. Hence the way proceeds over several 
steps of rock, covered with incrustations, and 
through different passages, into three caves ;. of the 
respective lengths of thirty-one, twenty-five, and 
twenty-two feet. From the second, another pas- 
sage leads to a ledge of rocks, and over that, by a 
low vault, only to be passed in a creeping posture, 
to a cavern, fifty feet long, with another branching 
from it on the right hand, of the length of about 
thirty feet. At the end of the largest of these ca- 
verns is a pool of water, apparently extending about 
thirty feet ; and here the cave finally closes. Some 
very fine stalactites hang from different parts of the 
roof. The whole depth of the cavern is about 682 
feet : several pools of pellucid water are met with iu 
the various openings. 

TORRINGTON.] Great Torrington is situated in 
the hundred of Fremington, 36 miles north-west 
from Exeter, and 197 west by south from London ; 
Little Torrington is in the hundred of Shebbeare, 
two miles south from Great Torrington ; Black Tor- 
rington is in the hundred to whieli it gives name, five 
milt's and a quarter west by north from Hatherleigh. 
The first and chief of these places has a market 
on Saturday, and four annual fairs. It is a place of 
considerable antiquity, anciently called C'heping 
Toriton ; " so named," observes Risdon, " doubt- 
less of the ancient market there kept ; for Chepan, 
in the Saxon tongue, is as much as to buy." Previ- 
ously to the Conquest, Editlm, mother of Karl Harold, 
had her dower of lands in this tything ; and at the 
time of the Domesday Survey, the manor was di- 
vided between the crown, Baldwin, the Sheriff, 
Ralph Payncll, Ausgerius, and Odo, the son of Ca- 
malyn. 

The town is situated, partly on the summit, and 
partly on the declivity, of a fine eminence, which 
forms the eastern bank of the Torridge. On the 
TOL. it. NO. 59. 



south side are a few vestiges of an ancient castle, 
the origin of which is unknown ; though according 
to Risdon, it was the head of a notable barony, which 
continued from the Conquest to the time of Edward 
the First. Its site is now used as a bowling-green, 
and commands an exceedingly fine prospect. The 
river is here seen to flow in a graceful current along 
a narrow vale, enclosed by grand sloping ridges j 
and having a beautifully wooded back-ground. 
The lauds of the barony passed into divers families ; 
but in " process of tyme," observes Risdon, " this 
manor came to the crovvne ; and Queen Mary gave, 
it to her servant James Basset, whose son sold the 
same unto Sir John Fortescue, Chancellor of the 
Duchy of Lanchcster, and a Privy Counsellor." 
It formerly possessed the privilege of being repre- 
sented in Parliament ; but no return has been made 
since the reign of Henry the Sixth. Its government 
is vested in a Mayor, eight Aldermen, and sixteen 
Burgesses, who act under a charter granted by 
Queen Mary. The town principally consists of one 
long street ; and the chief employment of the 
inhabitants is the manufacture of woollens. To this 
parish belong two churches ; one of which is fur- 
nished with a library. It also has some -ancient 
alms-houses, possessing the right of commonage on. 
an extensive piece of ground. Here is likewise a 
charity-school for thirty-two boys. The number of 
the inhabitants of the parish, according to the hits 
return, was -2151 ; of these 924 were males, and 1227 
females: the number of houses was 414. Marga- 
ret, Countess of Richmond, and mother of Henry 
the Seventh, resided here some lime, and was a con- 
siderable benefactress to the place. Tho views from 
the two bridges in the vicinity of the town are ex- 
tremely picturesque. 

TOTNESS.] The market-town of Totness is situ- 
ated in the hundred of Coleridge, 22 J miles south- 
south-west from Exeter, and 195| west-south-west 
from London. The .market is kept on Saturday. 
Totness, according to Gcoffery of Monmouth, is one 
of the most ancient towns in Britain. In proof oc" 
this assertion he relates a long account of the land- 
ing of Brutus, the great-graudson of /Eneas, on this 
part of the coast ; his destroying the giants, by 
whom the island was previously inhabited, and his 
founding the town of Totness. However, in 
proof of the antiquity of this place, the evidence of 
Geoffery may be dispensed with ; as, from the 
Domesday Book, it appears to have been a place of 
considerable eminence at the time of the Conqueror ; 
and Leland mentions that a Roman foss-way, ex- 
tending through Devonshire and Somersetshire, 
commenced here. William the Conqueror gave th 
manor to Judael, a noble Xorman, who took from it 
his name de Totoness (derived by Lcland from Do- 
doness, a rocky <own) and erected a castle here, 
which still remains. From Judae] it came, by the 
Brewers, Brecoses, and Cantelups, Lords of Aber- 
gavenuy, to the Lords Zouche, who repaired the 
castle, and added to the strength and beauty of the 
3 B town. 



190 



DEVONSHIRE. 



town. In this family it continued till the reign of 
Henry VII. when it was bestowed on Piers Edg- 
cumbe, whose family retained it till the second of 
Elizabeth, when Richard Edgcumbe, Esq. conveyed 
the manor of the borough of Totness to the corpora- 
tion reserving some privileges to his heirs for ever 
for the annual sum of twenty-one pounds, payable 
to the owner of the castle. 

Totness is very finely situated on the declivity of 
a steep hill, at the foot of which runs the river Dart. 
The castle stands on the top of the hill, and is built 
OH a high artificial mount, which commands views 
uncommonly beautiful and extensive. A little below 
the castle stands the church, a fine Gothic edifice, 
erected by Bishop Lacy in 1432. About thirty or 
ft ve-and-thirty years ago the church underwent 
some repairs, when, unfortunately, its venerable ap- 
pearance was disfigured by the introduction of Co- 
rinthian columns, and the alteration of many other 
parts of the fabric. In the church-yard is a large 
monument, erected by the celebrated biblical critic 
Dr. Kennicott,* a native of this place, to the me- 
mory of his parents. The following is the inscrip- 
tion which it bears : 

" As virtue should be of good report, 

Sacred 
Be this humble monument 

To the memory of 
BENJAMIN KENNICOTT, parish-clerk of 

TOTNESS: 
and ELIZABETH his wife : 

The latter, 
An example of every Christian duty I 

The former, 

Animated with the warmest zeal, 
Regulated by the best good sense; 

And both constantly exerted 
For the salvation of himself and others. 

Reader ! 

Soon shall thou die also ; 
And as a candidale for eternity, 

Strike thy breast and say, 
Let me live tlit life of the righteous 
'That my la.it end may be like his. 

Trifling are the dates ot time, 
Where the subject is eternity. 

Erected 

J?y their son BENJAMIN KENNICOTT, D. D. 
Canon of Christ-church, OXFORD. 

On the north side of the church-yard is the Guild- 
hall, and adjoining to it the free-school. The 
school was endowed, early in the seventeenth cen- 

* Dr. Kennicott was born in 1718, and for some lime was 
master of the charity school here. By the liberality of some 
gentlemen, he was sent to Exeter College, where he applied so 
diligently to his studies, that while an under graduate he pub- 
lished two dissertations on the Tree of Life, and Cain and Abel, 
for which the University presented him his bachelor's degree, 
wilhout fees, and before he had completed his terms. He next 
undertook to publish a correct edition of the text of the He- 
brew Scriptures, collated from ancient manuscripts. In this 
great work, for which he was admirably fitted by patience, in- 
dustry, and learning, he met with extensive encouragement, 
aiut many sovereigns, and other illustrious personages, appeared 



tury, by Sir John Mainard, with the fee-simple of ft 
tenement valued at that time at forty pounds per 
annum. The town was formerly surrounded by a 
wall, and had four gateways, two of which are still 
remaining. 

Totness returns two members to Parliament ; the 
right of voting is in the Mayor, thirteen Aldermen, 
and an unlimited number of freemen. The manu- 
facture of the town is principally confined to the 
fabrication of woollen goods for the East India 
Company. According to the returns of 1811, its 
population was as follows : 327 houses, inhabited 
by 2725 persons; of which 1133 were males, and 
1592 females. 

The commerce of Totness has certainly been de- 
clining, but the manners and morals of its inhabi- 
tants appear to have been rapidly improved. At the 
commencement of the eighteenth century, it was 
lamed for its numerous spectacles of bull-baiting 
I and cock-fighting. At the comineocement of the 
present century, no vestiges of those barbarous 
sports remained : and its present inhabitants may be 
characterised as charitable and humane, though in 
some instances proud and ostentatious : their at- 
tachment to literary pursuits is fully evinced by the 
flourishing state of three book societies, into which 
novels are scarcely ever admitted. 

Besides Dr. Kennicott, already mentioned, the 
learned Edward Lye was also born at Totness. t 

This town has no regular streets, no handsome 
buildings, to boast of ; but the beauty of its situa- 
tion is unrivalled. At the bottom of the eminence 
on which it is situated runs the transparent river 
Dart ; on the south is an expanse of water, encir- 
cling a small island on which a number of elms dis* 
play their dark green foliage ; then, making a sud- 
den turn the river disappears, and the hills which 
rise boldly from its bed, terminate the view ; while 
on the noi th, Haytor rocks, and the forest of Dart- 
moor, appear, with their summits frequently above 
the light clouds that hover round their base. 

Speaking of Totness, one of its most celebrated 
literati thus humorously remarks : " Europe is one 
of the finest quarters of the globe ; and no one can 
deny that England is the finest part of Europe; it 
is universally allowed too, that Devonshire is the 
most beautiful county of England, and that Tot- 
ness is the prettiest town in Devonshire ; and who- 
ever has seen my little cottage will say, that there 

in his list of subscribers. To enable him to perfect his design, 
lie was made keeper of the Radcliffe Library, and Canon of 
Christ Church. The lirst volume he published in 1776, and 
the eighth and last in 1780. After his death, which occurred 
in 1783, appeared his Remarks on certain Passages in the Old 
Testament. 

f The learned antiquary Edward Lye was born in 1704, and 
educated at Hart Hall, Oxford, where he took his degree in 
arts. In 1772 appeared his Anglo-Saxon and Gothic Dic- 
tionary, two vols. folio, with a grammar of the two languages. 
He also edited Junius's Etymologicon Anglicanum. He died 
rector of Yardley, in Northamptonshire, in 1769. 



DEVONSHIRE. 



191 



in no house in Totness worthy to be compared 
wtih it ! !" 

UGBROOKE.] Ugbrooke, the seat of Lord Clif- 
ford, is situated at about the distance of a mile south- 
west from Chudleigh.* 

For internal beauties, Ugbrooke is one of the 
most enchanting spots in Devon, the grounds con- 
taining all the constituent objects of beautiful and 
picturesque scenery. Elm, chesnut, oak, and ash, 
of the most luxuriant growth, abound in the park, 
which, with the adjacent pleasure grounds and 
plantations, embraces a space of seven or eight miles 
in circumference. The various improvements that 
have been made in the house and scenery, were 
planned, and partly executed, by Hugh, fourth Lord 
Clifford, whose son, the present noble owner, has 
still further adorned it. 

The mansion, which is built quadrangularly, with 
two fronts, and four towers, and furnished with bat- 
tlements, stands on a declivity. The entrance is 
through a hall, plainly stuccoed, measuring thirty 
feet by twenty-four : this leads to a dining parlour, 
thirty-six feet by twenty-four, stuccoed, and orna- 
mented with several portraits by Sir Peter Lely ; 
and an excellent representation of a Flemish Farm- 
Yard, by John Sibreets. The Drawing Room,,of 
the same dimensions as the Dining Parlour, also 
contains many valuable pictures. Among them is a 
Magdalen, and the Adulterous Woman, with a 
group of Pharisees, by Titian, for which 2000 gui- 
neas have been refused ; a fine picture of the Tri- 
bute Money, by Vandyck ; a Magdalen by the soft 
and graceful pencil of Guido ; Our Saviour blessing 
the Little Children, by Peter Van Lint ; and a Holy 
Family, by Gentileschi ; which Pilkington, in his 
Dictionary of Painters, remarks is justly to be ad- 
mired, for " its drawing, design, colouring, dispo- 
sition, and appearance of nature and truth." The 
State Bed-Room is hung with a bluish-coloured silk 
damask, with similar curtains ; these were exqui- 
sitely wrought in needle-work with birds, flowers, 
and fruit, under the direction of the late Duchess of 
Norfolk. In a poem, descriptive of Ugbrooke, the 
decorations of this celebrated bed are described in 
the following elegant lines : 

See, on the silken ground, how Flora pours _ 
Her various dyes, an opulence of flowers ; 



* The noble family of the Cliffords is descended from Rich- 
ard the Second, Duke of Normandy. His grandson Richard 
came to England with the Conqueror, accompanied by his son 
Walter, who married Margaret, heiress of Ralph de dimly, 
and took the name of De Clifford. In the reign of Henry III. 
Robert de Clifford, fifth in descent from Walter, was created a 
Peer of England. The title was inherited by the elder branch 
of the family, till, in default of male issue, it continued dormant 
among several co-heiresses ; one of whom married Edward 
Southwell, Esq. of King's Weston, in Gloucestershire; and 
whose son, the late Lord de Clifford, obtained the title by a 
grant from his present Majesty in 1777. Roger, the fifth Lord 
de Clifford, had several sons, the third of whom was Sir Lewis 
de Clifford, Knight of the Garter; and from him the Cliffords 



How, blended with the foliage of the rose, 
And rich carnation, the streak* d tulip glows. 
The downy peach, and curling vine appear, 
With all the treasures of the purple year. 
Pois'd on her velvet plumes of vivid green, 
The paroquet here animates the scene. 
With half expanded wing here sits the dove 
In rising attitude ; intent above 
She turns her eye, where on extended wings 
Through fields of air her lively consort springs. 
With yellow crests, the cockatoos unfold 
Their milky plumage, stain'd with tints of gold. 
Here fresh'as life, in all their glory drest, 
The bold macaws display the scarlet breast, 
The painted neck, of variegated hue, 
And glossy wings, of bright cerulean blue. 

The Chapel and Library, which form a distinct 
wing, communicate with the main building by a large 
room, thirty-eight feet by seventeen, stuccoed, and 
a lofty gallery. The Library, a spacious apartment, 
planned by Adams, and elegantly finished, contains 
a large and excellent collection of ancient and mo- 
dern authors. The Chapel adjoining the Library, 
is oblong, with a semi-circular termination at the 
east end, and a kind of dome over the altar. The 
altar-piece, and other paintings with which it is 
adorned, represent the Transfiguration, Passion, 
Crucifixion, Death, and Resurrection, of Our Sa- 
viour. 

The house is approached from the turnpike-road 
leiiding to Plymouth ; and the path winds through 
a space of nearly half a mile, which includes a beau- 
tiful variety of lawn, wood, rock, and water. The 
south front has a prospect of rising ground, backed 
by some fine groves ; and the west front a gentle 
descent sloping to the edge of a deep dell, through 
which -flowed a shallow brook ; but this has been 
thrown back by a high mound, and being increased 
by several others, now forms a spacious lake. The 
superfluous water glides over a marble bed to a 
rocky precipice, from which it rushes, in a foaming 
cataract, through a craggy channel, expanding by 
degrees, and entering a pleasant vale, whence flow- 
ing in a circuitous course, it is lost beneath the 
skirts of a hanging wood. On the northern side of 
the lake, a long steep ascent extends to a richly 
wooded and high ridge of land, called Mount Plea- 
sant, on which is an ancient encampment, surround- 
ed with a trench, and overhung with oaks, and other 
trees : tradition ascribes its formation to the Danes. 



of Chudleigh descended. Thomas Clifford, Esq. (he great 
grandson of Sir Lewis, resided at Boiscombe, in Wiltshire : 
from him came William Henry Anthony, who married Anne, 
daughter and co-heiress of Sir Peter Courtenay, Knight. The 
issue of this marriage wasThomas Clifford, LL. D. upon whom 
Sir Peter settled Ugbrooke, which his descendants have from 
that time made their family residence. Thomas Clifford, a 
celebrated statesman, who represented Totness in Parliament! 
was knighted by Charles the Second, and went Ambassador to 
Denmark and Sweden : on his return, he was made Lord High 
Treasilrer, and'created a Peer, by the title of Lord Clifford, 
Baron of Chudleigh. From him the present Lord Clifford a 
lineally descended. 

From 



DEVONSHIRE. 



From this spot the local beauties of Ugbrooke com- 
bining with the romantic scenery of the surrounding 
country, form a noble and extensive prospect. 

WARLEIOH.] Warleigh, in the reign of Stephen, 
was the principal seat of the ancient family of Fo- 
liat, who owned the manor of Tamerton. From the 
Foliats, it came, by different intermarriages, to the 
Copplestons ; from whom, by marriage also, it has 
become the property of the Radcliffes. The man- 
sion is situated near the confluence of the Tavy 
with the Tamar ; and the grounds are extremely 
beautiful. 

WENINGTON.] Wenington, though it lies on the 
western bank of the Tamar, is in the hundred of 
Black Torrington, twenty miles west-south-west 
from Oakhampton. Here is a seat belonging to the 
Duke of Nortimmberland, which was formerly the 
property of a Sir Francis Drake, who sold it, in 
1651, to Sir William Morrice, a relation of General 
Monk. These gentlemen were very active in effect- 
,ing the Restoration of Charles the Second, on whose 
landing at Dover, Mr. Morrice received the honour 
of knighthood. He was afterwards appointed Se- 
cretary of State ; but preferring retirement to the 
court, he retired in 1658, to his seat at this place, 
and built himself a handsome library, which was 
well filled with books. He died in 1676, in his se- 
venty-fourth year. A descendant of Sir William's 
sold Wenington to the late Duke of Northumber- 
land, who bequeathed it to the present Duke. 
'The house possesses nothing extraordinary in its 
architecture ; but its situation is remarkably fine, 
commanding a richly diversified and expansive view 
of a well-wooded park, the windings of the river 
Airs, the Dartmoor Hills, &c. On the most ele- 
vated grounds, in front of the house, are two struc- 
tures ; one a representation of a ruined castle, and 
<the other a triumphal arch. Near the house stands 
the parish church, an elegant modern building. 

WHYDDON PARK.] Whyddon Park, situated near 
-Chagford, was formerly the seat of the Whyddon 
family : it displays several fine views, arising from 
ihe intermixture of woody with rocky scenery. The 

* John Graves S'uncoe, Esq. a native of this county, was 
torn about the year 1751. He entered into the army in 1770, 
as an ensign in the 85th regiment, and quickly passed through 
the subaltern ranks, and in 1775 was promoted to a company 
in the 40th. In this regiment he served in America, where he 
greatly distinguished himself. A corps of American loyalists 
being raised, Captain Simcoe was appointed Major-Command- 
ant. His services merited from General Sir Henry Clinton 
the rank of Lieutenant Colonel. In this situation he also dis- 
tinguished himself; and published an account of an affair in 
which the enemy had claimed the advantage, and reflected on 
the corps he commanded. At the peace of 1783, he returned 
to England, but was selected to be Lieutenant-Colonel of a 
-corps raised for the service of Canada. In 1790 lie was pro- 
moted to the rank of Colonel ; and in 1791, appointed Lieute- 
nant Governor of Upper Canada, which had been part of the 
province of Quebec. On his arrival there, he had the province 
accurately surveyed.; allotted lands for the purpose of increas- 
ing the population, and endeavoured to .render those who 
<jitted the United Stales, to establish themselves under British 



house, like many ancient mansions in this county, is 
placed injudiciously, though at no great distance be- 
hind, is one of the most beautiful prospects on the 
banks of the 'feign. The rocks are of immense 
size, shaded by the dark umbrage of some magnifi- 
cent oaks, which, throwing their giant arms over 
these hoary piles of stone, form an association high- 
ly interesting. Whyddon Park is a royalty, and 
appears, like Gidleigh, to have belonged originally 
to Dartmoor. 

WJD WORTHY.] This place is situated in the hun- 
dred of Colyton, three miles and a half east by south 
from Honiton. The church contains a beautiful 
monument, by Bacon, to James Marwood, Esq. a 
great benefactor to the parish, whose great uncle 
purchased the manor of the Chichesters. It was a 
possession of the Widwortiiys in the reign of Ed- 
ward I. and in the church is a figure of one of the 
family, who probably built the mansion house. On 
the north-east side of the village, and on a hill 
near the church, are some remains of ancient en- 
trenchments. 

WITHICOM-B.] Withicomb, in the hundred of 
East Budleigh, three miles and a half north-east 
from Exmouth, formerly belonged to the Raleigh 
family. On the 21st of October, 1638, during a 
violent thunder storm, a ball of fire entered the 
church in the time of divine service, killed three 
persons, wounded sixty-two, and did considerable 
other damage. 

WOLFORD LODGE.] Wolford Lodge, in the pa- 
rish of Dunkeswell, already described, was the seat- 
of the late Lieutenant- General Simcoe,* who pur- 
chased it from Peter Jenest, Esq. The house is 
beautifully situated on the south side of a high range 
of hills, which form a semicircle round three of its 
sides. The declivities are decorated with fine hang- 
ing woods, and numerous plantations are springing 
up. The mansion was nearly rebuilt by the late 
possessor, and fitted up in a commodious and com- 
fortable manner. Some of the rooms are large, and 
contain a few good portraits ; and a large collection 
of the best maps, plans, and military treatises. The 

protection, as happy as possible ; and knowing the bravery of his 
troops, he placed them on the frontiers, to repel any insult of 
the Americans. He soon saw his province peopled-, provisions, 
formerly imported, were now exported ; and instead of receiv- 
ing flour from England, grain was sent there. During the five 
years which his government lasted, justice was administered 
with strict integrity. In 1794 he was appointed Major Ge- 
neral ; he was sent t<> St. Domingo in 1796, but, his health de- 
clining, his stay on that island was but a few mouths. In 179<) 
he received the command of the 22d regiment of foot, and 
in the same year was made Lieutenant General. About this 
time General Simroe accompanied Lord St. Vincent to Lisbon, 
but returned to F.ngland when his lordship left the Tagus. 
He was preparing to go to India, to succeed Lord Lake in 
the command of the forces thtre, when he was suddenly 
taken ill, and died in a lew days. This event took place 
in 1 807, in the 55th year of his age. General Simcoe was 
a good classical scholar, and an exemplary instance of military 
courage and extensive learning. 



8 



prospects 



DEVONSHIRE. 



193 



prospects from the honsc, and surrounding lulls, 
include a great extent and variety of richly-culti- 
\ated country ; in which are Exeter, Honiton, Ot- 
tery, and the courses of the Exe, Otter, and other 
rivers. At the extremity of a projecting hill, south- 
west irom the house, is a large treble entrenchment, 
called Ilembury Fort, supposed by some antiquaries 
to have been the Roman station Morklunuin ; 
though others have fixed that station at Seaton. 
There is more reason to fix Moridnuum here than at 
the latter place; as that most probably was never a 
Roman station, though it might have been the site 
of a camp, protecting one; it being uncertain whe- 
ther any Roman antiquities have been found, cither 
t Seaton or ilembiiry ; though at the- latter Roman 
coins are reported to have been dug up. 

VEALMPTON.] This village, deriving its name 
from the Yealme, on the banks of which it is situat- 
ed, is in the hundred of Plympton, four miles south- 
cast by south from East Plymptou. It is said to 
Imve been the. residence of the Saxon King, Ethel- 
wold ; and, by some historians, it is recorded as the 
burial-place of his Lieutenant, Lipsius. In the 
reign of King John, the manor belonged to Mat- 
thew Fitz-Herbert, one of th*s Barons whose signa- 
ture appears to Magna Cluirta. It afterwards be- 
came the property of the Hastings, Earls of Hunt- 
ingdon ; but is now possessed by the representatives 
of the Pollexfeus. In the church-yard is a stone, 
apparently monumental, eight feet four inches long, 
ou which the word T OREIJS is cut in rude letters. 
Tradition affirms, that a King of Yealmpton, or a 
Roman nobleman, was buried in this place. 

YEO VALE.] Tliis place, about four miles south- 
west of Bideford, is an ancient seat, which formerly 
belonged to the Giffards and Carys ; but is now, or 
was lately, the property of the Rev. Thomas Hooper 
Morrison, by whose father it was purchased about 
forty or five-and-forty years ago ; and who made 
many improvements in the house and grounds. 

SOIL.] The soil of Devonshire is so exceedingly 
diversified, that our limits will not permit us to do 
more than to notice it in general terms. In the 
t-outhern and eastern, or South Hams, district, term- 
ed the Garden of Devonshire, from its fertility, a 
strong loam, or a clayey bottom, predominates. A 
few spots of rich blue marl, intermixed with a stra- 
tum of brown slate, are found near the vales. The 
substrata of the western district are similar to those 
which prevail in the adjoining county of Cornwall. 
There is scarcely a valley which lias not been 
streamed and robbed of much of its soil, in search- 
ing for metallic produce, in the northern district 
the soil is of a light sandy nature, on a stratum of 
dnnstonc. The midland district, a great part of 
which is fenny, is chiefly clay, with strata of sand in 
different parts. 

AGRICULTURE.] For improving agriculture, and 
encouraging industry, a society of the most respect- 
able inhabitants of this county was formed in 1791, 
under the name of the Devonshire Agricultural So- 

VOL. ii. jso. 59. 



ciety ; and since tl.at period it lias been of considerable 
service in spreading a knowledge of the most ap- 
proved methods practised in other parts of the 
kingdom. Premiums have been distributed to the 
inventors ot new agricultural instruments, as well as 
to those who have made improvements in those ge- 
nerally used. Bounties have also been given for 
improving the breeds of sheep and cattle ; and re- 
wards distributed among the most deserving ser- 
vants in husbandry. The society is regulated by a 
superior committee, and three inferior ones : the 
former meet at Exeter ; and the Litter in the several 
districts of East, South, and North Devon. 

Lime, sea-sand, and dung, with the use of soap- 
ashes and soot, in the vicinity of the large towns, 
are the principal manures employed in Devonshire-. 
The lime is obtained near Plymouth, and when ap- 
plied as a manure spread evenly on the soil, and in- 
timately incorporated with it. Sea-sr.nd, though 
for many agrs employed as a manure on the coasts 
of Devonshire, is now, in many districts, disused', 
und lime employed in its place. 

lu the western district grasses and corn are prirr- 
cipaily cultivated ; and the system of watering mea- 
dows artificially has been iinuicmorially used. Th 
utility of beat burning, called Devonshiring, which 
is practised here, has bacn much questioned ; but, 
from various experiments, it appears that, though 
unknown and useless to throe-fourths of the king* 
dom, it may bo advantageously employed in old, 
coarse, or tough sward, whether on dry or wet land*. 
The instruments generally used by the farmers of 
Devonshire, in separating the grassy turf from the 
soil, is the common team plough, with some slight 
alterations. The turf, after being ploughed up, is 
suffered to lie till it is rotted ; it is then pulled to 
pieces with rough harrows, and bruised with a roller ; 
then, when it has become sufficiently dry, it is ga- 
thered into round heaps of five or six bushels each, 
which are set on fire, attended to, and rounded up, 
as at first, till all the beat is consumed. 

lu this county the plough chiefly made use of is 
called tiie South Ham Plough. It is the common 
swing plough, like the Norfolk one ; but not a fourth 
part oi the oxpence. They are longer in the sole or 
bottom, the mould board much longer, not forming 
so obtuse an angle, but gently sloping from the back 
of the share towards the tail of' the plough, from 
three to four feet. They are light and handy, and 
make very good work. They use oxen either two 
or four, with generally a pair of horses before them. 
Carts are little used for the purposes of agriculture ; 
but when they are, they are of the common kind, and 
drawn both by oxen and horses. 

ENCLOSURES. [ In the west of Devonshire all the 
cultivated lands are enclosed. These enclosures are 
large, and appear to havs been formed from n state 
of common pasture, in which a large part of the dis- 
trict still remains. The villages of Devonshire are, 
generally speaking, fow and small, and most of them, 
with the greater number of farm-houses, covered 
3 c with 



194 



DEVONSHIRE. 



with thatch, for which purpose the straw is threshed 
in a manner peculiar to Devonshire and a few other 
western counties.* With the exception of a few 
plots, all the lands in the district of South Hams 
are now permanently enclosed. The fences are 
chiefly formed with high mounds, surmounted by 
coppice wood, which affords fuel, poles, faggots, 
and oak-bark to the occupiers of the estates. The 
hedges generally rise to the height of thirty feet, 
and afford pasturing animals shelter from wind and 
sun. A stranger, not aware of this practice, con- 
siders himself as travelling in a deep valley, till, ar- 
rived at some elevated opening, delightful scenery 
bursts upon his view. 

LordBorringden has added considerably to the value 
of his estate in this county, by gaining from the sea, 
by means of an embankment, 175 acres of land, for- 
merly called Chelson Bay. The work Commenced 
in 1806, and was completed in 1807, at the expcnce of 
9,000/. The regained land is valuetl at upwards of 
25,000/. 

TENURES, LEASES, &c.] The lifehold tenures, 
once so prevalent in this county, though now great- 
ly diminished, still form its most distinguishing cha- 
racteristic. The proprietors of the fee simple lease 
their estates either for ninety-nine years, or, as is 
more generally the case, for three lives, nominated 
by the purchaser. More than half the land of De- 
vonshire, is, perhaps, at the present time, held by a 
tenure of this sort, which is disposed of by a kind 
of auction, at which the biddings are made more for 
the priority of being treated with, than for the pur- 
chase of the estate itself, if the highest offer does 
not reach the seller's price, the bidding is void, and 
the seller then names the sum expected, which the 
best bidder is at liberty to accept or refuse ; and, on 
his refusal the tenure is offered to the second bidder. 
The lessee is generally bound to preserve buildings, 
fences, &c. in repair, for which the proprietor finds 
timber. During the term of the lease, coppice 
and underwood are usually at the tenant's disposal, 
and at its expiration forty days is allowed for the 
removal of grain and furniture. 

The farms differ greatly in size, but, though they 
have been increasing for a number of years, it is 
seldom they exceed three hundred acres. The gra- 
dations of landed property are very regular, and, with" 
the exception of a few families there are no large 



* The singular manner in which this operation is performed, 
is thus described in the first volume of the Rural Economy : 
" In the first operation, the ears are either threshed lightly 
with the flail, or they are bealen across a cask, by hand, till 
the grain be got pretty well out of them. The next operation 
is to suspend the straw in large double handfuls, in a short rope 
fixed high above the head, with an iron hook at the loose end 
of it, whk-h is put twice round the little sheaflet, just below the 
ears, and fastened by the hook being fixed in the light part of 
the rope. The left hand being now placed firmly upon the 
hook, and pulling downward so as to twitch the straw hard, and 
prevent the ears from slipping through, the butts are freed from 
short straws and weeds, by means of a small long-toothed rake 



! freeholders in Devonshire. The church property, 
! consisting of tithes and demesnes belonging to the 
; see of Exeter, is frequently held in perpetuity by 
i the nobility and gentry of the county, and is re- 
newable with fixed, or arbitrary fines. 

PEASANTRY.] The servants in Devonshire are 
usually hired by the year, but do not attend, as in 
many parts of England, at fairs, &c. The children 
of paupers are often taken by the fanners as ap- 
prentices, and generally continue with them from the 
age of seven or eight to that of twenty- one. This, 
it might be supposed, would prove tolerable servi- 
tude, but, unfortunately, it is too often the reverse. 
The boy comes from the poor-house with every 
feeling deadened, and instead of meeting with treat- 
ment which might restore the sentiments of nature, 
is received with an unfeeling severity which totally 
destroys them. The greater number of workmen 
are only day labourers, and, consequently, little in- 
terest is excited in the servant, and little kindness in 
the master. The scarcity of fuel is a subject of con- 
tinual temptation, and the practice of obtaining it 
illicitly causes a general laxity of principle, which 
destroys that proper pride of character so ^conspi- 
cuous in the northern peasantry. Abject poverty is 
also another grand cause of this ; and from a con- 
sciousness of dependance, their manners are servile, 
while, from the irritability of want, their dispositions 
are sulky. 

If a country gentleman were riding on the road, 
and a peasant negligent in giving way, the horse- 
whip or cane would be immediately applied. In the 
north the blow would be instantly and deservedly 
returned, but here, such unfortunately is the degra- 
dation of the peasantry, it is received without sur- 
prise, and also without a murmur ! 

CATTLE.] The cattle of Devonshire may be de- 
scribed under the heads of horses, sheep, and cattle 
properly so denominated. The native breed of the 
first, which may still be seen on the mountainous 
tracts of the county, is very small, and resembles the 
Welch and Highland breeds, both in size, and for 
its usefulness in ascending the hills. The pack- 
horses, which were formerly much used, and are 
still employed for the purposes of husbandry in the 
enclosed country, are of a larger size. The sheep 
of Devon are of the middle-woolled class ; but the 
difference in the heads of individuals is remarkable ; 



or comb. This done, the rope is unfastened, and the reed laid 
evenly in a heap. A quantity of clean, straight, unbruiserl 
straw, or reed, being thus obtained, it is formed into small 
sheaves, returned to the floor, and the ears threshed again with 
the flail, or by the hand over the cask, to free it effectually 
from any remaining grain. Lastly, the reed is made up into 
bundles, provincial)}' sheaves, of thirty-six pounds each, with 
all the ears at one end, the butts being repeatedly punched 
upon the- floor, until they are as even as if they had been cut 
off smooth and level with a scythe, while the straws lie as 
straight, and are almost as stout, as those of interior reed, ci- 
sterns of '.he arundo." 

some 



DEVONSHIRE. 



195 



some of them being horned ; others polled, or with- 
out horns, provincially termed nots ; and also u third 
sort, appearing to be a mixed breed, originally pro- 
duced between the two former. Many individuals 
in these varieties so strongly resemble the present 
breed of Dorsetshire, as to leave little doubt of their 
proceeding from the same stock. The true Dorset- 
shire breed is found in great perfection in the Vale 
of Exeter. The principal time of lambing is in the 
month of January. 

It has been remarked that the breed of cattle in 
Devonshire appear to have sprung from the native 
breed of the island, and that they exactly resemble 
the wild cattle preserved at Chillingham Park in 
Northumberland. The Devonshire breed varies 
considerably in different parts of the county, but are 
generally of the middle-horned kind. In the Rural 
Economy of the West of England, which we have 
before quoted, the following remarks, both on the 
breed of this county and the manner of using them 
in the plough, appear : " North Devon takes the 
lead of all other kinds ; and its breed is nearly what 
cattle ought to be. In size, they are somewhat be- 
low the desirable point for the heavier works of hus- 
bandry ; but they make up for this deficiency, in ex- 
ertion and agility ; and arc, beyond comparison, the 
best workers I have any where seen. As dairy cat- 
tle, the Devonshire breed are not excellent ; rearing for 
the east-coantry graziers having long been the main 
object of the farmers of this county ; but as grazing 
cattle, individuals in every part of the county show 
the breed to be excellent. In West Devonshire the 
breed is considerably smaller than in the northern 
district ;. and their quality in every respect lower. 
The style of driving an ox team, here, is observa- 
ble ; indeed, cannot pass unnoticed by a stranger. 
The language, though in a great degree peculiar to 
the country, does not arrest the attention ; but the 
tone, or rather tune, in which it is delivered. It re- 
sembles, with great exactness, the chantings, or re- j 
oitative, of the cathedral service. The plough-boy ! 
chants the counter-tenor with unabated ardour i 
through the day ; the plough-man throwing in at 
intervals his hoarser notes. It is understood that 
this chanting march, which may sometimes be heard 
at a considerable distance, encourages and animates ! 
the team, like the music of a marching army, or the 
song of the rowers." 

PRODUCE.] The chief produce of this county ap- 
pears to be butter and cyder. Of the former a con- 
siderable quantity is made; and the method by 
which the cream-is obtained is peculiar to Devon- 
shire. The milk is put into earthen or brazen pans, 
and the cream raised by heat. It is then put into a 
large tub or bowl, and turned by the hand all one 
way, without using a churn. The butter obtained 
from the milk of each cow averages about a pound 
u3.iiy. 

In the district of South Hams, as wvll as the vale 
of Exeter, great quantities of cyder are made ; suf- 
ficient, notwithstanding the greatness of the home 



consumption, to afford a considerable surplus for 
exportation. The apples usually preferred are those 
of the most juicy kind ; and of these the red-streak 
is thought the most productive. The cyder made 
in the neighbourhood of Exeter, Chudleigh, and 
Totness, is considered of the best quality. The 
svrcet cyder is chiefly made near Staverton, and the 
difference in the flavour arises from the check given 
t the fermentation by often rocking it. 

The orchards of Buckland Priory are said to have 
been the first planted in West Devonshire, and their 
general introduction to have taken place two or 
three centuries ago. The orchards are mostly situ- 
ated in vallies, and in the hollows near farm-houses. 
When liquor is the object, apples are constantly 
cultivated, but great abundance of cherries, pears, 
and other fruit is also raised. The most success- 
ful orchards in West Devon are those lying" in the 
.hollows, and deep narrow vallies, where they are 
sheltered from the bleak blasts on the norfh-east, 
and the sea-winds on the west and south-west. 
The method of planning orchards in this county is 
somewhat peculiar, the ordinary distance between 
the plants not being more than five yards and a half; 
and the soil is removed down to the rock, which 
seldom lies very deep, and this is covered eight or 
ten inches thick, with a compost of fresh earth and 
sea-sand. Upon this compost the inverted turf is 
usually laid ; and on this the young tree is set, its 
root being bedded in the best of the excavated 
mould, and the pitt filled with common soil. New 
orchards, however, are seldom planted ; the general 
custom being to keep the same ground always in an 
orchard state, by planting young trees in the spaces 
between the decayed ones. 

The place where cyder is commonly made is pro- 
vincially termed the Pound House ; probably from 
the ancient method of pounding or breaking the ap- 
ples witii wooden pestles, in a large tub ; a method 
still used in some parts of Cornwall. This building 
is generally a mean barn, or hovel, destitute of form, 
or contrivance, excepting where the orchard grounds 
are extensive, and regular arrangements are made 
for producing the liquor. The best Pound House, 
with respect to plan, which a fruit liquor manufac- 
tory will admit of, is an oblong square, having 
behind it a flooring or platform of loose stones, to 
receive the fruit as it is gathered, and to give it the 
first stage of maturation in the open air. " The 
ground-floor of one end of the building," observes 
Mr. Marshall, " contains the mill and press. Over 
this part is a loft or chamber, in which the apples 
receive the last stage of maturation, ana from which 
they are conveyed by a spout into the mill. Tjie 
ground-floor of the other end of the building is the 
fermenting room, sunk a few steps below the floor 
of the mill and press-room; a pipe or shoot convey- 
ing the liquor from the press, into a cistern ia the 
fermenting room." 

The Devonshire method of gathering apples for 
making cyder has nothing peculiar in it except 

their 



196 



DEVONSHIRE, 



their being gathered either wet or dry. The apples, 
-when collected, are spread in heaps in the open air, 
and remain exposed till they are quite mellow, or 
till the brown rot has commenced. They are then 
picked ; the green or hard fruit being set apart to 
mellow, to prevent the cyder from fretting ; and the 
"black rotten fruit removed, as their juice injures the 
good liquor exceedingly. The apples are then con- 
veyed to the mill, and broken ; and in that state 
taken to the press. The presses are of different 
constructions : the one most generally used is an 
improvement of the simple lever, by adding a rider, 
of lever upon lever ; at the end of which is a weight : 
by this contrivance the acting lever is kept hard 
down upon the passage, and follows it as it sinks ; 
an advantage which the screw-press does not pos- 
sess. The screw-presses, whether made with one 
or two screws are of a surprising size ; being large 
enough to press four, live, or six hogsheads at once. 
The method of pressing is invariably that of piling 
up the pomage in layers of unthreshed straw : those 
of the pomage being three or four inches thick, hav- 
ing the reed laid thinly over, and then another thin 
covering spread across the first. Under the enor- 
mous presses just noticed, the pile is four or five 
feet square, and nearly as many high. On the top, 
is a broad strong covering of wood, and upon this 
the lever is lowered : the pressing of the pomage in 
one of the larger presses, takes two days to com- 
plete. When the pile is sufficiently firm, the out- 
sides, and loose spongy parts, which evaded the 
pressure, are pared off, and either placed upon the 
top to be immediately pressed, or reserved for beve- 
rage, being watered and pressed separately. The 
expressed liquor is placed in large open vessels, 
where it remains till fermentation takes place, and 
it is then drawn off into casks. 

MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.] The inhabitants of 
Devonshire were very early distinguished for supe- 
i-ior virtues, as we learn from Diodorus, that the 
Danmonii were celebrated as ;t civil and courteous, 
as well as a brave and magnanimous people. The 
inhabitants still support thoir ancient character, for 
the peasantry are strong and robust, and the higher 
classes esteemed for their hospitality ; they also be- 
stow an excellent education on their children, winch 
accounts for the number of eminent characters De- 
vonshire has produced. 

In tho south of Devonshire, 'in order to insure a 
goad fruit harvest, the following custom is observed 
on the eve of the Epiphany. The farmer, attended 
by his workmen, with a large pitcher of cyder, goes 
to the orchard, where, encircling one of the must 
fruitful trees, they drink the following toast three 
times : 

Here's to thee, olrl apple free ; 

When thou may'st bud, and when tliou may'st blow ! 

And when thou may'st bear apple enow ! 
Hats full ! caps full ! 
Bushel bushel sacks full ! 



And my pockets full too ! 
Huzza! Huzza! Huzza! 

Having concluded this ceremony they return io 
the house, the doors of which they are s'ure to lind 
bolted by the females, who, be the weather ever so 
inclement, never open them, till some one has guess- 
ed what is upon the spit, which is generally some 
nice little thing difficult to be hit on, and is the re- 
ward of the lucky clodpole who first names it. 

FINE ARTS.] Highly to the honour of the coun- 
ty of Devon, it is in the possession of an " Academy 
for the. Encouragement of the Fine Arts," the first 
exhibition by which took place in the winti-r of 1815. 
" In submitting to the public the first annual exhi- 
bition of the pictures, at Plymouth," observe the 
promoters of the institution, in the Preface to their 
Catalogue, " the proprietors and patrons of the 
undertaking are desirous of making known the mo- 
tives by which they have been actuated, and the 
principal objects they have in view. A recollection 
of the numerous artists who have arisen in the West 
of England, and whose names are already honour- 
ably recorded, induced them to believe that occa- 
sional exhibitions, at Plymouth, of the admirable 
works of Reynolds, Northcote, Opie, and others 
whose rising talents justify the expectation of in- 
creasing excellence, would be highly gratifying to 
the public, and might promote and encourage a taste 
for the Fine Arts ; but above all, they considered 
that such exhibitions could not fail to operate as a 
powerful stimulus to rising artists. With these 
views, and also in the hope of rendering the exhibi- 
tions generally attractive, they have spared no pains 
in collecting together a valuable assemblage of pic- 
tures, as well by the most celebrated Italian, Flem- 
ish, and Dutch masters, as of the British School, in 
which class will be found specimens of Sir Joshua 
Reynolds, Northcote, Opie, Haycion, &c. &c. They 
venture to indulge the most sanguine hope, that the 
present will be the first of a permanent series of an- 
nual exhibitions, and that, fostered by the liberal 
patronage of the public, they shall be enabled not 
only to make the exhibition annual, but also ulti- 
mately to establish a school of the Arts." The 
Academy owes its origin to the exertions of a few 
highly respectable individuals resident in Plymouth, 
These gentlemen have also taken measures with re- 
gard to a " School of Design," by procuring origi- 
nal casts from genuine antiques, and by taking 
every means to facilitate the progress of the stu- 
dents. They also purpose to procure competent 
persons, to give occasional lectures on anatomy, and 
other studies connected with the Fine Arts. As far 
as tl'.f conductors have proceeded, their hopes with 
regard to the exhibition have been realized, and no 
doubt can be entertained, but they will be finally 
accomplished. 

FAIRS.] dlpkington First Thursday in June, 
horned cattle ; and October 5, horses. 

Ashbwton First Thursday in March, ditto in 

June, 



DEVONSHIRE. 



197 



June, August 10, and November II, cattle of all 
*rts. 

Axmimter St. Mark, April 25, Wednesday after 
June 24, and first Wednesday after October 10, 
cattle. 

.Kampton Whit Tuesday, October 24, cattle. 

Barnstaple September 10, Friday before April 
21, and second Friday in December.* 

.Bickington May 3, and December 21.* 

Bideford February 14, July 18, and November 
13, cattle. 

Bishop's Nympton Third Monday in April, and 
Monday before October 25. 

Kovey Tnicey Holy Thursday, sheep ; July 7, 
wool. 

Bore Holy Thursday, and Nov. 22, cattle. 

Brent May 13, Oct. 10, cattle. 

BroadcliflMny 23, cattle. 

Broadhemliiiri/ -Nov. 30, cattle. 

Broadzeort/iy Sept. 9, cattle. 

Biickfastleigh June 29, sheep ; August 24, cattle. 

Biirkland Whit-Tuesday, November 2, aud May 
6, cattle. 

Charoleigh May 6, Dec. 11, cattle. 

Chtigjbid March 25, May 4, Sept. 29, Oct. 29, 
cattle. 

Chumleigh August 1, cattle. 

Chndleigh Easter Tuesday, June 22, and Oct. 
2, cattle. ^ 

Chuirhingford Last Friday in March, horses : 
last Friday in April, bullocks. 

Collumptoii May J 2, Oct. 28, cattle. 

Colyford March I, cattle. 

Cotytun May 1, Nov. 30. 

Creditou May 11, August 21, and September 
11, cattle. 

CullitonMny 1 , and Nov. 30, cattle. 

Culnutoi-k May 21, and Oct. 1, cattle. 

Dentaiiy Sept. 8, cheese and soap. 

Datton March 23, and Nov. 20, cattle. 

Erming&n February 2, cattle. 

En'ter Ash Wednesday, Whit Monday, Aug. 1, 
and Dec. 6, cattle, horses, &c. 

Eibouni Third Monday in April, cattle and 
pedlary. 

Huttland Easter Wednesday, and Sept. 25, 
cattle. 

Halherleigh May 22, June 22, Sept. 4, and 
Nov. 8, cattle. 

High Bickington May 3, Dec. 21, cattle. 

Holt-worthy April 27, July 10, and October 2, 
cattle. 

Honhon Wednesday after July 19, cattle. 

High Budleigh Good Friday, cattle. 

Kilmington First Wednesday in Sept. cattle. 

Kingsbridge July 20, cloth and shoes. 

Lifton February 2, Holy Thursday, St. Simon, 
St. Jude, and Oct. 28, cattle. 



* The places bearing this mark have considerable fairs ; 
TOl. II. NO. 59. 



Membiiry August 10, cattle. 

Modbury May 4, cattle, cloth, and shoes. 

Moibeth Monday after August 24, cattle. 

Moieton Jlamp'ttead June 4, July 18, and Nov.. 
30,* cattle. 

NeictoH, Abbot** June 21, cattle; First Wed- 
nesday in September, cheese; November tt, woollen, 
cloth. 

Newton Popple furd Octolwr 18, cattle. 

Norton March 10, and October 10, cattle. 
^ North Man/ ton First Tuesday after May 11, and- 
November 12, cattle. 

0A-/wwp/oM Second Monday after March 11,, 
May 14, first Wednesday alter July 5, aud August 

5, cattle. 

Olterton Easter Wednesday, and first Wednes- 
day after October 10, cattle. 

Otteiy Tuesday before Palm Sunday, Whit- 
Tuesday, aud August 15, cattle. 

Plymouth February 5, and October 2, cattle and- 
weolien cloth. 

Vli/mpton February 25, April 5, August 2, and 
October 28, cattle and woollen cloth. 

Sampjord Peteie! April 25, and September 29, 
cattle. 

Seaton March 1, cattle. 

Shepwash April 10, August 12, and October 10, 
cattle. 

Sidmouth Easter Tuesday, Monday after St. 
Giles's Day, and September 1, cattle. 

Silverton June 24, and Sept. 4, cattle. 

South Moulton Saturday after February 13, Sa- 
turday before May 1, Wednesday before June 22, 
Wednesday after August 26, Saturday before Oct. 
10, and Saturday before December 12,* cattle. 

Tavistock January 17, March 6, September 9, 
October 10, aud December 11, cattle. 

Tawton, North Third Tuesday iu April, October 
3, and December 11. 

TeigJimouth Third Tuesday in January, Last 
Thursday in February, Sept. 29, woollen cloth. 

Thaverton July 7, cattle. 

Thorncomh Easter Tuesday, cattle and pedlary. 

Tivertoh June 28, and Sept. 29, cattle. 

Torrington May 4, July 5, and Oct. 10, cattle. 

Totness Easter Tuesday, May 12, July 25, and 
First Tuesday in October, cattle, sheep, and horses. 

Uffculme Wednesday before Good Friday, July 

6, said August 12, cattle. 

Underwood July 5, cattle and woollen cloth 

Upottor>/' October 24, cattle, sheep, toys. 

Wimple Second Monday after Sept. 1, cattle. 

Witheridge April 13 r and June 24,* cattle. 

CANALS.] The only canal entitled to particular 
notice in this part of the country, is that which was 
constructed a few years ago by James Templar, 
Esq. of Stover, chiefly for the purpose of conveying 
clay, for the use of the potteries in the neighbour- 
but, as they are not kept by charter, they are termed Great 
Markets. 

3 D hood 



198 



DEVONSHIRE. 



hood of Liverpool, and other parts of the kingdom, 
from Teigngrace to Teignmouth. Mr. Templar's 
'taste for rural improvement soon led him to derive 
.UB additional advantage that of watering his lands 
from this circumstance. A considerable tract of 
marshy land, adjoining to the lower part of the ca- 
jial, which did not produce above eight or ten shil- 
lings per acre, some not five, he drained and level- 
led ; after which, by forming surface-conductors for 
the overplus waters of the canal, and well-contrived 
sluices, he distributed the water of the winter-floods, 
enriched with the slime from the higher grounds, 
over these marshes, and converted them into ver- 
dant meadows. These distributor}' sluices, ex- 
tremely simple and judicious in their construction, 
consist of a number of trunks placed at various dis- 
tances, to each of which a plug is fitted. The trunks 
are placed above the level of the water necessary for 
navigating the canal, and when the flood fills the ca- 
nal, these plugs are taken out, and the water is in- 
stantly distributed in a beautiful manner over the 



surface of the meadows. It is stopped at pleasure. 
Mr. Templar has followed the same 'system in the 
upper line of his canal witli similar success. 

ROADS.] The great road from London enters 
this county near Taunton, 115^ miles from London, 
and thence passes through Tiverton to Exeter, 
\l\l ; it afterward passes through Ashburton, 
Brent, and Piympton, and finishes at Plymouth, 
196 miles from London. The other principal road 
leading from Exeter to the Land's End, passes 
through Oakhampton 193| miles from London, and 
enters Cornwall near Launceston. Another road 
proceeds from Exeter through Crcditon, G^ miles 
from that city, to Chumleigh 19| distant ; thence it 
proceeds to Barnstaple 34{ miles from Exeter, and 
194J from London. Another principal county road, 
which also passes through Crediton, goes from Exe- 
ter to Torrington 30! miles from Exeter, and 198| 
from London. From Torrington a road leads to 
Bidcford 5{ miles distant. 



TABLE OF DISTANCES. 

iVi of tlie respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square where both meet gives the distance* 



Ashburton Distance from London Miles 191 


Axniinstor 43 


Axminsler 






146 


Banistaple : io 


5 / 


Barnstaple 






195 


Bideford 4/ 


64 


8 


Bidelurd 






203 




34 


47 


44 


Chudli; gh 






IS 




45 


16 


II 


30 


Chumleigh 






194 




20 


.M, 


41 


20 


25 

1 i 


CJollumpton 






165 


7- . . t) i 
Grediton " 


33 


30 
68 


30 


17 


14 


Crediton 






ISO 


Dartmouth ' ls 


57 


65 


22 


52 
22 


44 

12 


40 


Dartmouth 






203 


Mxcler ''* 


'' 


3 it 


3f 


c 


8 


31 


Exeter 






173 


llalherlev ~ y 
jHoniton v>0 
Holdsvvorthy 4y 
IHVacomb i 


53 
9 
67 
66 


46 
27 

n 


55 
Ii 


j; 
4( 
57 


35 

J( 


11 
48 
46 


.'.'i 
4i 


4! 
4i 
6( 
78 


H 

4'. 
4s 


4-' 
1- 

J| 


\ 
56 


lor.iton 
lloldsworthy 
37 llfracomb 


1S6 
213 
205 


Modbury 13 

Moreton Hampstead 1] 


go 

37 


7; 
64 
3f 


i)7 

31 


A' 

8 


4' 
23 


47 
4h 
24 


4 
31 
15 


29 


3; 
3( 


50 

4'. 
IS 


51 
52 


52 

M 

is 


7( 
74 
49 


: 

. 
3 


1 

ii 


isbridge 206 
Jodburv 207 
Moreton Hampstead 185 


Newton Abbot 8 
Oakliainplon |22 


47 


51 

29 


'!S 

24 


( 

20 


35 
18 


27 
34 


23 


II 

40 


2i 


31 


3J 
38 


44 
20 


39 43 


2 
35 


12 

u 


t 

24 


Jewton Abbot 187 
Oakhampton 195 


Plymouth 24 

iSoutli Moulton 42 


OS 
ti 


57 
12 
Ii 


18 
In 


i4 
>7 

'I ' 


46 

8 


55 
24 


15 

;n 


30 

io 


43 
?8 

' ! 


35 

; - 


59 

il 

'/ 


38 

j 


67 
22 


2S 
62 

;>. 


14 

57 
(0 


-f 
?4 
- j 


31 
45 
10 


28 P 
2654 
16 14 


v mouth 215 

South M (Hilton 182 
42 Tavistuck 212 


lavistot'k ~" 
1 ivcrlon... * 


25 


i 








5 12 


43 


3 


32 






4J 


is 


49 


24 


AS 


30 52 


9 42 Tivrrtcn 165 


I'orrington 40 


11 


638 


4 


3928 




1 1 


49 


15 


j! 


i] 


j3 


28 


10 


18 46 


634 34 Torrington 193 


Toilless 8 


)S 


55 14 


3 


30 


-i') 


Oi23 


V, 


$9 


, i 


i8 


IS 


; 


s 


s 


3023 : 


OJ30 3648| Totness 195 



.'JK~ TABLE 



DEVONSHIRE. 



199 



1 3 ' 











5 Q .?? g-^w' S" s . ^ = ^' s ' _ * 


r sr"^aB| w 


H " = y 5"? S ** r; D- y f 


?bg'?| - X H' 


S-* ^ ""* ^J3- t *^ T J3 ^3 


E- 5 *^ n *C 3 C 3 ^ ^ 


2 o O rt ^- C 


OQ^CCC- 1^1 t-j 


** ^ ^ (?* t j *" J^ 


rt ^ M & > 


*$ c. o o 


t_ g 2 


to*, to o- co oo to ux *. <* * ~ >a - w - to to o< o 


><oa o*. - to o ? M 


I-W"I-M~ *"" Nl> " " H ST Kh * "'" ^ * h 


j 25-0 


Oi CoCuKJIOlO ~ P^ IO - - ~O 
< *-! (O O it* - **3 c/* O O) ^^ JX, W CO vl V* 4^ "^ O **l tn C^ 


) to W to ***. 2* 
) O tCO)tO4^>W < S'cO 


PI ^ 


. S o S ^ 


.^jf I 1 gg 5- ^ifr.- | 


HB4 & 7^ 
,-, ' - ^ w " ^ 

s c/i O M ^* y 


^ Z-7 ^^ ^J ^T "T -" a; /^ 1? 

e , S s ^ Soi s 5 t '4a 

"S " n ^S ^ != 5- s H 


: . -if !M 

r a n N 


.-"^ re" S. '"'" " O o O 


i ^s B s w 


K M B o' 3 o =- " f- 


-0 % & 


S ^ ' ^ ^^ tS t" 

-r- ^s ^ ? "" ^ t^*" C3 3 

r r 1 f sJ-5r<> cl 
1 f ?' "'? 5 P 


? r o 

w s Z S 
H w 5. O 

j? = ." B 

H?3 


| f p L | CH| n > 


fat; 

S. i i 5 ~ 
5 r 


r 5 1 9 ' B 5 w 

O JD ^^ ^ 


3 H - 2 

3 . o. a =- o 


i g r -T g 

^ i 


> r : g 
p 5 1 ? S 


>- i ta M 


? z z H 


7 i^ 


s 5 z c 




fr g B 


rt-^O^OZOg^O -NOCBS>5O- U ' ^^^^Pi^0^rO'A33ffiDCr^>H: 


=. c-^55? 
/3"^ V" prj (^O^t>-- ^ fc O ^ 


1 i*i 8 S.3 P^l'f ^i^-^ijf ^5 5 w l Ji 5< i"iTof : ' ! * l"^f?iii"^i:='$ 


5'Ds = ^5-=^=- 2. <^ " S 
^S -IJQ' = * L o" > ! 


f^ &5 f^" ^ pj.* C 2. ^~_ -S*^5S*~'" 1 *> ^* S ^ " " *^* --- 2- t3 !/) Sj r * ^ "^ _ 5 C 3 " 


: g- ^- = s. ?. c ? M 




to gjS. S'Ojg 3 2. > " 


Slta-QB* -. o ^ 05*^ S^,~'o^ r <c . S'^-S E. 5-2 2^j OQ' 5-ra* 3 S. o" - C: o" Q 




^ ^ ^ S ^ "~ "*" ^ *g- 3 ^" o"oT" *^ ^"'^''^"'^ "^"o* ^ = 2.^ = oi 


rrj: 3 "S-??! 5 a "T S ^ 




.,75 - J ^^ * I? 


^ 1 | I :f |g fgf I Z "I.* 

O*O *^ 3 V_ ~ v ! 3 "" v &* 

8 a ^ ^ ^ 

pj ^ o 


^O C. ffl M3tJ 

t " 1 If g 

55 " o !; o 


. .^ 1 i. . - r - ^ 


~ > >! CO 


(O OO4i.tO 60OfO CoOJtCl^A* ^^ 


' ; ". 2 1 w 


NH >"H *~ht-h h-H NH r*Hf*H t-HM *!w*^u4 H-H-uH ^H ^~ 


- *O L'T w- N tO !"Q w pj ^** ugl 


jjjj 


t^ p J; - o 


Co OiCxtO*O(CfO ,^- pj ^a. C*JC*3CrftoCoCx>OjKi *O^O*-3*O - 


- _. S 1 * 1 ! >!,"'> 








-, H~H N h^r*i " g, Q S S CO 


ffrrr? r^ r &* ~ t-<r rsa KJ r 

f 1 1 1 r T i i * I i f - ' 1 3 i 

irgf4 p^ ssl ftfl ? 

" s r-5' . Sc^i^S-s]?' ir - s 


" Mi i Z H " 

J" > *H 

PC^^SS WWH z 2 

i i f i i 2= o s H 

3 KC: i a TJ" 3 

ocg.o. g ^g 4 w 3 S 

? 3 | - | wo I o 








H!H 2; 3 I-H ^ <"* ^ ^ 


^ x ^" 3 ^ ^'" ^1 ^ T"* "^ ^ ? 


o,?5iS"<c^ ? c; 


-"? J. ~ 08 _5' 3 " to e< 


5r _^v: o ^ " M ''<>*-* 
i"^ * "" f y ^^ *-i o '^ 


3Q n' C "* 3| : l' 2* 


^ o w ^ 3^ t- 1 o w H 


S.^, s 1 ? 4 g 5 ^ 3 ^.^ ^3 ^ 


^-d.^ 1 " 5 c/5 C^ , ^ ^ 
. a c/) ^-o ^ c o 


o *^ ^ r*" z& c n ^cr^" w* 


3 S^'w" 3^O 


fif' i. S IP Jf 1 | 

S" ^ 9 .oO_. hrj 
- o t-- i i Q V M 


^S'^Mrt 3 C* ^ 

Ho'w- g '!- - rt 

I-P l - s l 

- ? r' P i ?? 


RJ* >> O ^ ^ 


bfi ' Sf* 


1 ? 2? 


* 3 si 


*~^ ^^> 


o - 


^ 


5! ? 


2. 


< 



M 



6. WELLINGTON 



200 



DEVONSHIRE. 



n is 



H|M Nh 



o 



* 



CO 



0- 



3 ?g.2.g 

rfli 



d 
c 



Ow to <o to .- 
^ O Cn to Or p CO 



H T ' ' f 

2 O a" 1 W 

1 1-3 I 
-It* * 

t t 

f 

t- 1 

'l 
g 



a 

S 

2 r> 



Sff 



63 







O 

a 

a 



2 
o 

3 

a 



^ coT 
S. = 3 






S 7 

li 

o 



o. 
o 

c 



o> 
o 

3 



ffi 






"Z 
CO 

H 

Pi 

?3 



w 

5 

P5 
W 



H 
O 



I s 



+* to O O) 









a 



C- 

o ' 

.= CJ 

o g 

S 3 

f I 
C- 



a 

82. 






M 
- 



Pi 

r 1 

r 

?. 
o 

H 
O 



* 
5 



o 
o 

r 
r 
c; 



o 
3 



c- 
en 






r f!Ml| 

o o 

I 



? : 



to tO O) OJ 



to to to _ 

_tn to o W to -to o . 



gL^ 3 
_ 'i g 



c. 

S 
t- 1 



01 

W 
*> 



n 
po 

O 
2 



o 
o 

r- 1 
r 1 
c! 
S 

"0 
H 
O 
S! 



r: SP O 5 -< 



; 



"^DJ^O:-?. -cj^^-" " --,', 




z." 5 = y" g 9 


*Tw W -: Jl"3 3" rt 

|Sj; H f y 






CS 


3 <5 >S 


5 3 


X PJ 


0, a _ K) 


H 

Oo OJ tO tO (*^ ^O ^ *O ^^ "(^ 


"^ **" M ~ jjuum 


*"""*" N|MW " z 






c ^j y> ^i ". o (p ~" tp Oi *> 


tOCOOrtoto^ trt * CO O> 4^ 
M 1-1 



9 

| 


1 


| 


n 

3- 


^r 


3. 




" 








S 


T3 
=r 


O 

a 

rs 


S 

a 









H 

o 

2! 



O 

> 
W 

a 
> 
s 

H 
O 



S"f ' I 



E Jx p. 



TJ 

B 

S-OQ 

3 " 



t8 

25 
H 

T) 

r 1 



a 
> 

3 
t- 

> 

5^ 
d 



W 

50 

|X> 







- 



."' -. .': ':' 

. . 










i - . ^-J *... 
f zi. 

' 5 % 

' j '' 






201 



DORSETSHIRE. 



GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY. 



PROCEEDING eastward from Devonshire, the 
next county is that of Dorset, which is alike 
happy in a mild, pleasant, and wholesome air, and 
not less so in a deep, rich, and fertile soil, finely 
diversified. On the north, it is hounded by Wilt- 
shire and Somersetshire ; on the east, by Hamp- 
shire ; on the west, by Devonshire, and part of 
Somersetshire ; and on the south, by the British 
Channel. The country is level towards the north, 
under the Highlands which divide it from Somerset- 
shire, where there are fine arable grounds, yielding 1 
large crops of various sorts of grain : or. the south, 
on the borders of Hampshire, by the sea coast almost 
03 high as Dorchester, that is, twenty miles in length, 
and four or five in breadth, is a heathy common 
which renders this delightful county less populous 
than it could otherwise be. From east to west, 
runs a ridge of hills, retaining their Saxon denomi- 
nation of Downs : these downs abound with sweet 
short herbage, which nourish, it is said, from 800,000, 
to 1,000,000 of sheep, many of them esteemed equally 
for their flesh and fleece. The greater portion of the 
land in this county is appropriated to pasture : the 
arable is estimated at one third, and the waste at 
about a ninth. There is little wood in Dorsetshire ; 
but the county is very plentifully watered, and in all 
respects so admirably adapted both to pleasure and 
profit, that we need not wonder at its having been 
so particularly distinguished by the Romans, and 
by our Saxon ancestors. 

The form of this county is every where irregular ; 
its long northern side has a considerable angular 
projection in the middle; the seashore, on the south, 
runs out into numerous points and headlands; thence, 
westward, the coast is less deeply indented, inclining 
obliquely towards Devonshire. Its length from east 
to west is about, fifty five miles ; its breadth from south 
to north about 35 ; and its circumference, nearly 
1 tfO. The area was generally considered to comprise 
about 775,000 acres ; but, according to the surrey, 
in the last population returns, it is only 772,560. 
Templeman, in his Survey of the Globe, represents 
Dorsetshire as considerably larger than the Duchy 
of Muutua in Italy, nearly equal to the Dutch pro- 

VUL. 11. NO. 60. 



vince of Guelderland, and exactly of the same size 
as the island of Madeira. 

RIVERS.] The chief rivers of this county are the 
Frome, the Ivel, the Piddle, and the Stour ; which 
afford plenty of fish, particularly trout, and the 
Stour is celebrated for tench and eels. 

The Frome has its source in the northwestern ex 
tremity of the county near Evershot, and after beingf 
increased by some smaller streams at Hook Park, 
flows past Catstock, Maiden Newton, Framptun, 
Bradford Peverel, and Charminster, to Dorchester. 
It then alters its course to the south-east, and being 
joined by the waters of the Winterborne, passes 
Moreton, Bindon, and Wareham, aud falls iut 
Poole Bay. 

The Ivel, anciently the Yoo, rises from seveh 
springs, on a hill to the north-east of Sherborne, 
through which town it passes in its course to Somer- 
setshire, where it flows into the Parret. 

The Piddle rises at a short distance north of Pid- 
dle Trenthyde church, and thence passing to the 
south-east through several villages to which it gives 
name, joins the waters of Poole, Bay near Keys- 
worth. This river is called the Trent, by Asser. 

The Stour, the most considerable river of the 
county, enters it from Wiltshire, near Gillingham. 
Its course is for some way to the south, but after 
passing Stourminster, it flows to the south-east and 
proceeding through Blandford, Stourrninster-Mar- 
shall, and Wimborne, it enters Hampshire near 
Parley. In its course it receives numerous tributary 
streams from Gillingham, Stour Provost, Hintdn 
St. Mary, and other places. 

FISH AND FISHEKIF.S.] In addition to the fish 
obtained in the rivers, as already mentioned, those 
on the coast are numerous, and of various descrip- 
tions. The mackarel fishery, of which we find the 
following account in Hutdiins's History of Dorset- 
shire, is the most considerable : " Vast quantities 
of mackarel are caught near Abbotsbury, and along 
the shore from Portland to Bridport. They are ge- 
nerally first taken from the middle of March, if the 
season be not too cold, till Midsummer, and some- 
times after, in nets, or seins ; somt of -which are 
3 E 100 or 



202 



DORSETSHIRE. 



100 or 120 fathoms long, and eight anil a half deep 
in the bosom, accounting five feet to the fathom. 
One end is fastened to the shore, the other is carried 
out to sea in ;> boat ; they then turn, and row paral- 
lel with the shore, veering out the net all the while, 
till it is al! let go, except the line at the end; then 
the boats row on shore, and the net is hauled in at 
both ends, by men at land. They have sometimes 
caught 30 or 40,000 at a draught ; and 100 have 
been sold for a penny. Between 1746 and 1758, 
very few mackarel were caught on this shore ; which 
was imputed to the scouring of Bridport harbour. 
The fishery, in comparison with former years, has 
of late been very unproductive ; for v.hich no satis- 
factory reason can be assigned. Indeed, many of 
the fishermen, who are in general strongly influenced 
by superstitious motives, have heretofore attributed 
the failure of their endeavours to the commission of 
sonic enormities among themselves, or those of the 
neighbouring villages ; such for instance, as shoot- 
in* tlie seins on a Sunday, manuring the land with 
superabundant fish in a plentiful season, or proceed- 
ing lo se;i on a Monday morning without having per- 
formed th: 'i iis.ua! devotions. Each oi these irregu- 
larities is iicl 1 in universal abhorrence, and should 
any hardened wretch dare to violate his conscience 
in either of ttit.-se respects, his comrades look on him 
as tne harbi. ;;er or some cr.lamitoirs t vent. Tney 
expcvi that t,ie tish will quit t-.eir coast, that mis- 
fortune wij! i'efkl tiH'ii- boats or iv.'ts, or that them- 
selves may become tat- victims o ; such crimes. Here 
we may observe, t.<i! t],<-. exposed situation of the 
coast renders tUe fishing VI.T;. vincertmn, even in the 
best of seasons. Whenever it blows (to use a local 
expression) a cap full of wind from the south or west 
points, there is a very large surf on the shore, so 
that it is not only dangerous to launch the boat, but 
the net could not be drawn with any probability of 
success, when tossed in every direction by the bois- 
terous waves, which instead of fish, would fill it 



* Agrostis alpina (With. Bot. Ar) canina /3. Hud. Alpine 
. Bent Grass; on the high clowns. 

Brando calamugrostis. Branched reed-grass; in woods. 

Asparagus offwinulis. Asparagus, or Sperage ; in the island 
of Portland. 

Beta Maritime. Sea beet ; on the coast. 

Conferva muttifida. Tulted Conferva ; ) on submarine 

parisitica. Feathered Conferva ; on Fusi | rocks and stones. 

Cypcrus longus. Sweet Cyp'Tus, or English Galingale ; on 
bogs in the island of Purbeck, near a chapel 
on that side which looks towards Portland. 

Euphorbia Portlandica. Portland Spurge; on the narrow 
neck of land which joins Portland to Devon- 
shire. 

Exacum filiforme . Marsh Gentian; in boggy places. 

Fucus articulatus. Jointed Fucus ; on the shore. 

ditf'usus. Spreading Fucus ; on submarine rocks in Port- 
hind. 

ftmbriatus. Fringed Fucus ) on the shore in 

pcdunculatus. Pedunculated Fucus $ Portland. 

Lavatera arporea. Tree Mallow ; on the sea shore in Port- 
land. 

Lichen articulate. Jointed Liver-wort; entrees. 



with pebbles and floating sand. During the incle- 
ment season, the boats are dragged to the summit of 
the vast ridge that bounds this bay from the isle of 
Portland." 

PLANTS.] The remarkable plants, or those which 
are peculiar to this county, are mentioned in the note 
below.* 

MINES, MINERALS, &c.] -There are no ores of 
any kind found in this county ; and, we believe, only 
one mineral spring. This is at Nottington, a village 
near Weymoiith The water has a strong sulphure- 
ous smell, with a flavour resembling boiled eggs, 
and, when put in a tin vessel, its colour is blue. 
At the spring itself, a shilling put into this water 
becomes instantly of a gold colour. From several 
experiments, it appears to be impregnated with sul- 
phur and nitron ; and taken internally, it is cele- 
brated for curing foulnesses of the skin. 

FOSSILS.] The only fossil in Dorsetshire, inti- 
tled to the consideration of the curious, appears to 
be the coal which is found at Kemiridge, on the sea 
coast. This is described, by Dr. Maton, " as an 
argillaceous slate, in a high degree of impregnation 
with bitumen, and of a blackish brown colour. It 
is round in large lumps, in a stratum about three 
feet deep ; hut does not extend to any great distance 
from the shore: It burns very strong and bright, 
and emits a sulphureous smell. When exposed to 
the atmosphere it soon falls into pieces ; but in the 
cliffs, or under water, it is very hard. The price 
is about eight shillings per ton ; it is chiefly used in 
ovens, and by the poor people." 

ETYMOLOGY.] Previously to the landing of the 
Romans on our island, the county of Dorsetshire, 
was, according to Ptolemy, inhabited by people 
termed in the British language Durotriges, or Mo- 
rini, appellations of like import, both signifying in- 
habitants by the water. Durotriges is derived from 
dour, or clwr, water, and trig an inhabitant ; and 
Morini comes from Moriu, maritime. The Saxon, 



l.inum usitatissimum. Flax ; in corn-fields. 

Atyagrum sativitrn. Gold of Pleasure; infields among flax 

near Bridport and Lyme. 
Afyrica gale. Goule Dutch Mvtle, or sweet willow; ins 

low marshy ground near Wareham. 
Finguicula lucitanicn. Cornwall Butter-wort; in bogs and 

wet places. 
Polycarpon tetraphyllum. Four-leaved Folycarpon ; in the 

isle of Portland. 
Ranunculus parvijlorus. Small flowered Crow foot ; at Lul- 

worth Cove. 
Sulsola fruticosa. Shrubstone-crop or Glass-wort; on the 

stone beech running from the shore of Dorset- 
shire almost to Portland. 

Santolina marilima. Sea Cud-weed; on the coast near Pool. 
Tltcsium llnophyllum. Bastard Toad flax ; common. 
P'icia biihinaca. .Rough Vetch ; in the isle of Purbeck. 

hi/trida. Bastard Vetch ; ) in meadows and fields about 

cutea. Yellow Vetchling; J Weymouth. 

Ulvaurticulata. Jointed Laver; on submarine rocks and 

stones. 
rubcns. Kedilish Laver; on rocks and stones in the sea 

in the isle of Portland, and near Poole. 

8 appellation, 



DORSETSHIRE. 



203 



appellation, dor-setta, is of precisely the same sig- 
nification, dor being derived from the British dwyr ; 
and setta, from the Saxon word settan, to inhabit. 
In a Poem ascribed to Taliesin, and published in 
Owen's Cambrian Register, the Morini Britons are 
thus mentioned : " Upon the sea there would be 
coming the wooden waiters, full of the tumult of the 
Angles in council : signs are seen boding the rage of 
the Saxons. Of those that are wont to lead, let 
Seiron be the head, against the lion Picts, of the 
Morini Britons." 

GENERAL HISTORY.] Though the ancient name 
of this county, corroborated by numerous monu- 
ments yet remaining, sufficiently evinces that it was 
inhabited by the ancient British, yet, previously to 
the Roman invasion, its history is uncertain, and 
almost unknown. On the division of the island into 
Roman provinces, it became part of Britannia Prima. 
It was afterwards the first settlement of the Saxons 
in Britain, and continued part of the West Saxon 
territory, till Egbert consolidated the Heptarchy 
into one kingdom. Shortly after the Danes landed 
on this part of the coast, and Egbert gave them bat- 
tle near Lyme. In this conflict, his general, Dudda, 
was slain, and himself escaped with difficulty. The 
Danes, however, though victorious, suffered so much, 
that they were obliged to retire, but soon returned 
with greater force. They were again received by 
Egbert, and so bravely, that, after an immense ;oss, 
they fled to their ships, ami during the remainder 
of that monarch's reign attempted no other invasion. 
After the lauding of William the Norman, Dor- 
setshire, like every other county, was speedily sub- 
jected. In the war between Charles the First and 
the Parliament, it sided with the King, but was too 
weak to afford effectual aid. 

ANTIO.UITIES.] Excepting such as will be duly 
noticed in their respective places, the antiquities 
most intitled to attention in this county are the 
Roman roads and stations : it may be proper to 
mention a few particulars of these, as the researches 
of Dr. Stukeley and Mr. Hutchins, have placed 
these subjects in clearer light than has been done in 
almost any other county. Dr. Stukeley travelled 
over the greater part of the Via Iceniana, com- 
mencing at the Venta Icenorum in Norfolk, and fol- 
lowing it through Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, Essex, 
Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire, Oxfordshire, Berk- 
shire, and Wiltshire, entered this county near 
Woodyates. At a small distance from Woocl- 
yates Inn, it passes through an inclosure on the 
right hand, and continues its way over the down to 
Blandford. On this down, some years ago, it ap- 
peared quite perfect ; but has since been destroyed 
for the sake of the materials. At about a mile from 
Woodyates-Lane it passes some barrows, which are 
evidently of an earlier date, as the road goes directly 
over one of them. At Long Critchill Dr. Stukeley 
lost the road, and there the researches of Mr. 
Hutchins commence. From Long Critchill he 
traces it to Badbury Camp, and hence to Badbury 



Down, where it appears to have been composed 
with flint. At Shapwich Marsh it is low, but turn- 
ing to the left beyond Stourminster, it is bold till 
it reaches Aimer inclosures. Proceeding hence 
towards Stinford-Lane, it enters Dorchester on the 
north side of St. Peter's church. It faces the town 
at the west end, and again appears bold and dis- 
tinct. At four miles distant it mounts the ridge of 
a hill, where it commands an extensive view ; and 
thence it takes the name of Ridge-way. From Eg- 
gerton, where it appears very distinct, it proceeds to 
Poorstock. It finally pursues its course to Devon- 
shire, and being intercepted at Seaton by the Foss 
Way, takes a westwardly direction towards Exeter. 
The Roman stations in Dorsetshire, appear to 
have been the following : Londinis, Lyme Regis ; 
Canca Arixa, Charmouth , Durnovaria, Dorches- 
ter ; Vindoghulia, Wimborne Minster; Clavinio, 
Weymouth ; Morinio, Wareham ; and Bolclauuio, 
Poole. Besides these Roman antiquities, various 
memorials of our British ancestors are also found 
in different parts of the county. 

Of the buildings &.<.. the following are deserving 
of notice : Abbotsbury Abbey, Bindon Abbey, 
Brownsea Castle, Cern Abbey, Chidyock Castle, 
Corie Castle, Lulworth Castle, Maiden Castle, 
iMilton Abbey, Portland Castle, Sherborne Church 
and Castle, Sandiord Castle, Statbridge Cross, 
Studland Church, Wareham Church, Weymouth 
Castle, Wimborne Minster, &c. 

CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL DIVISIONS.] The di- 
visions of this county appear to have been different 
at different turns. According to the Population 
returns of 181 1, it now consists of the following nine- 
grand divisions 

Blandford North Cerne ShastonWest 

Blandford South Dfirchesler Sherborne 

Bridport Sliaston East Sturmiiister. 

Each of these "divisions," as they are always 
styled, is subdivided into liberties and hundreds, 
some of which contain not more than two or three 
small villages. The whole comprises 270 parishes, 
and two parts of parishes. The county pays nine 
parts of the land tax, and supplies the militia with 
640 men. According to the latest return, the poor's 
rates amounted to 78,357/. being at the rate of 
Is. \\i in the pound. 

The county of Dorset is within the western cir- 
cuit ; the assizes for which were anciently holden 
sometimes at Sherborne, and sometimes, though 
rarely, at Shaston. Of late years, they have been 
principally holden at Dorchester. The general quar- 
ter sessions of the peace are commonly holden at 
Blandford, Bridport, Shaston, and Sherborne. 

This county was anciently the see of a Bishop, 
but it was afterwards connected, at different periods, 
with the sees of Oxford, Winchester, Sherborne, 
and Sarum : from the last of these, it was separated 
in the thirty-first of Henry the Eighth, when it was 
constituted part of the newly erected Bishopric of. 
Bristol, to which it still appertains. 

PARLIAMENTARY 



204 



DORSETSHIRE. 



PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.] Dorsetshire 
sends twenty members to Parliament, viz. two for 
the county, and two for each of the following places : 
Dorchester, Poole, Lyme-Regis, Weymouth, and 
Melcombe- Regis; Bridport, Shat'tesbury, Wareham, 
and Corfe Castle. 

MARKET TOWNS,] Including the boroughs, the 
following arc the places now recognised as market 
towns : 

TSmis. Market Days. 

Abbotsbury ... .................................... Thursday. 

Beam inkier ..... > ........................ ; .......... Thursday. 

Here- Regis. .,<. .................................... Wednesday. 

.......... ............................... Saturday. 



Cpw\9. Abbas ....................................... Wednesday. 

CorTlIf Castle ....................................... Thursday. 

Cranboum ......................................... Thursday. 



Evershot ..... ........................................ Saturday. 

Lvnie ................................................ Saturda. 



Poole , . f Monday. 

c . ... . (Thursday. 

Shaftesbury Saturday. 

Sherborne Saturday. 

Stalbndge Thursday. 

Sturmmster Thursday. 

Warebm Saturday. 

Wevmouth {Tuesday. 

(Friday. 
Wimborne Friday. 

POPULATION.] The population of the county of 
Dorset, in the year 1700, amounted to 93,800 ; in 
1750, to 109,500; and, in 1801, to 115,319, con- 
sisting of 53,609 males, and 61,652 females ; of 
whom 2-2,259 were returned as employed in trade, 
manufactures, &c. and 28,204 in agriculture. In 
1811, the total number of persons was 124,693 ; of 
whom 57,717 were males, and 60,976 females : the 
total number of families 26,821 ; of which 12,982 
were chiefly employed in agriculture ; 9607 in 
trade, &c. and 4232 in other pursuits. Of mar- 
riages, the annual proportions are 1 to 135 persons; 
of baptisms 1 to 35 ; and of deaths 1 to 57. 



Summary of the Population of the County of Dorset, us published by Authority of Parliament in 1811. 





HOUSES. 


OCCUPATIONS. 


PERSONS. 


HUNDREDS, &c. 


Inhabited. 


g'8 
|8 

ft u a; 

2-5. 
J 


bb 

B 

2 
n 


1 

'3 
a 

S3 


>> 

<c - 

=~ 
5 "3 5 

V. rV^ 

.2 3 
f'jp 

v< 


Ni 

-c~ 2 "i 

" ^.Z - 

tft ^"* WI 

.2 o a 

= Q--S 3 

szs% 

"H" 


' ** ia 

JIM! 

sSI 

iir 

f -3 

<^.= 


Males. 


Females 


Total 
of 
Persons. 


Division of 
Blandford, North 


893 
2102 
3633 
1194 
3020 
3280 
1374 
1006 
1645 

431 
512 
357 
342 
559 
575 
372 

886 
1029 


1020 
2289 
4053 
1444 
3437 
3656 
1604 
1194 
1952 

652 
671 
479 
403 
625 
719 
389 

1130 
1104 


6 

15 
34 
8 
36 
25 
9 
6 
7 


34 
59 
115 
53 
106 
113 
29 
44 
42 

12 

7 
7 
14 
28 
21 
10 

119 

28 


658 
1338 
2434 
1048 
1967 
2224 
93 S 
852 
1017 

12 
20 
33 
57 
123 
179 
75 

7 


179 
64S 
1304 
322 
754 
771 
503 
267 
551 

605 
600 
268 
201 
266 
411 
209 

711 
1032 


183 
303 
315 
74 
716 
661 
158 
75 
384 

35 

51 
178 
145 
236 
129 
105 

412 
72 


2231 
4974 
9477 
3091 
7594 
7766 
3613 
2687 
4363 

1017 
1532 
1187 
808 
1160 
1431 
782 

1861 
2143 


2570 
5503 
10553 
3509 
8386 
8640 
4079 
2957 
4975 

1408 
2035 
1359 
1117 
1475 
1939 
927 

2871 
2673 


4801 
10477 
20030 
6600 
15980 
1 6406 
7692 
5644 
933S 

2425 
3567 
2546 
1925 
2635 
3370 
1709 

4732 
4816 




















Borough of Bridport 


1 

4 
2 
1 
1 

14 
2 






Do. of Sherborne 


Do. of Weymouth and 


Town and County of 
pool 


/ 


Totals 


23310 


26821 


171 


S41 


12982 


9607 


4232 


57717 


66976 


124693 



CHIEF 



DORSETSHIRE. 



20-3 



CHIEF TOWNS, PARISHES, &c. 

ABBOTSBURY.] This inconsiderable market-town 
is situated in the Dorchester division, 8f miles west- 
south-west from that town, and 127| south-west by 
west from London. Lying near the sea, it partici- 
pates largely in the mackarel fishery. Thirty or 
forty thousand of these fish are sometimes taken at 
a draught ; and instances are mentioned of a 
hundred having been sold for a penny. The town, 
which consists of a single parish, divided into three 
streets, nearly in the form of the letter Y, lies in a 
valley, surrounded and protected by bold hills. The 
houses, which arc of stone, are about 170 in num- 
ber ; the population about 81:2, obtaining their prin- 
cipal support from the fishery. 

There is a tradition that this place was called 
Abodesbyry by St. Peter himself, in the infancy of 
Christianity : but it is more probably supposed to 
have derived its name from the magnificent abbey, 
originally founded here in the early part of the llth 
century. 

Among the objects worthy of attention in Abbots- 
bury and its neighbourhood, the ruins of the Monas- 
tery, the chapel of St. Catherine, the Decoy, and 
the Swannery, claim particular notice. The ruins 
of the abbey, which, though once so large and splen- 
did, is nearly demolished, consist of a large barn, a 
stable, conjectured to have been the Dormitory, a 
porch, which belonged to the conventual church, the 
principal entrance, a portion of the walls, and two 
buildings supposed to have been used for domestic 
purposes. The barn, which, when entire, was the 
largest in the county, is now so dilapidated that 
only part of it can be used. The church, in which 
Orcus and his wife, the founders, were buried, is, 
with the exception of the porch, and a pile of ruins 
under some neighbouring elms, totally destroyed ; 
but the numerous chanteries and chapels which be- 
longed to it sufficiently prove its ancient magnifi- 
cence. Of those various chapels, that dedicated 
to St. Mary stood pre-eminent for its beauty ; and, 
on that account, was preserved after the dissolution, 
by Sir Gilas Strangcways, on whom the manor was 
bestowed, as a burial-place for himself and his fa- 
mily. In the Civil Wars, however, it was destroyed, 
together with the house which was erected by Sir 
Giles with the materials of the old abbev. 

The Abbey of Abbotsbury was, as we learn from 
Dugdale, founded by Orcus, Steward of the Royal 
Palace to Canute, and Tholo, his wife, in 10-26, for 
Benedictine friars. But Reyner asserts that Orcus 
only expelled the secular canons, who were esta- 
blished here, and introduced regular ones. Edward 
the Confessor granted to this order all wrecks found 
on the shores of Abbotsbury ; and Henry the First 
confirmed this, and added several other privileges. 

The chapel of St. Catherine is thus described in 
Dr. Maton's Observations on the Western Coun- 
ties : " On an eminence half a mile south-west 
from the town, stands a small building, called St. 

VOL. II. NO. 60. 



Catherine's Chapel, which llutchius conjectures was 
built about the time of Edward the Fourth. The 
style of architecture is very singular, each side of 
the building being strengthened with buttresses that 
rise above the parapet surrounding the roof, and 
terminate in square tops. At the north-west angle- 
is a tower, the steps leading to the upper part of 
which are gone, though the rest of the building has 
suffered but little damage. The roof is arched in 
the inside, where a few ornaments and mouldings 
still remain ; and on the outside, the lower part of 
the parapet is pierced with arched apertures to drain 
off water. There is a porch on each sid, supported 
at the angles by low buttresses." 

From its height and lofty situation, St. Cathe- 
rine's Chapel serves both for a soa and;.'la*nd mark ; 
and if built, as appears most probablei ii the Civil 
Wars of York and Lancaster, to expiate.th&shed- 
ding so much blood, it might, perhaps, h'ave serve.cl ' 
as a place for observing the motions of any enemy^hat 
was upon the coast. It is built of a reddisji. sto.u.e', 
dug out of the hill : but the whole edifice is now 
rapidly decaying, though a Mrs. Homer (a great 
benefactress to this town) repaired it in 1742, at 
the expence of 50/. The length within is forty- five 
feet ; breadth, fourteen feet nine inches. Towards 
the east end, in the south wall, is a niche, and two 
on each side of the east window. In the inside, 
near the roof, were three or four coats of arms : and 
at the top are three apertures to the south-east and 
west, which command a very cntensive view of th* 
surrounding country. 

Abbotsbury Church, which is dedicated to St. Ni- 
cholas, appears to have been built a short time be- 
fore the Reformation. It consists of a body and 
side aisles. The roof is of frame-work, and contains 
several impalements of the Strangeways. Over the 
western door is a piece of sculpture representing the 
Trinity ; an old man sitting on a chair, with a dove 
at his right hand, and a crucifix on his knees. 

The chancel formerly contained a very large cast 
window, on which was a painting of the Virgin ; but 
this was defaced, in erecting the present altar-piece. 
Coker mentions that on the south side of the altar 
was likewise a very ancient coffin ; and he adds, 
" the bones of the founder Orcus, inclosed in a daintie 
marble cofiin, which 1 have often seen, were remov- 
ed (from the monastery) to the adjoining parish 
church." This coffin, in 1750, was deposited under 
the ground on which it once stood. The pulpit is 
pierced in two places, apparently, by musket balls, 
which are said to have been fired by Cromwell's 
soldiers, at the officiating minister, whom, however, 
they missed. But it is more likely to have occur- 
red at the time of Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper's at- 
tack on the Royalists, at the siege of Sir John 
Strangeway's House in 1(554. Towards <he upper 
end of the south aisle, was an ancient painting of 
our Saviour rising out of the Tomb, and on each 
side of him was written Ecce Homo. Under the tomb, 
an altar, with a book, chalice, patten, two cruets, &c. 
3 F Two 



206 



DORSETSHIRE. 



Two monks kneeled before the altar ; a stream of 
blood issued out of Christ's side, which was re- 
ceived by the monk in a chalice. When the church 
was modernized, this curious picture, together with 
an ancient wooden screen, was taken down and 
defaced. 

" At the end of a ridge of hills," observes Mr. Hut- 
chins, "about a mile and a half west of this place, and a 
little north of East Be'xington, is an old fortification, 
called Abbotsbury Castle. Its form is nearly 
square ; but the south side is longer than the north, 
and the atlgles rounded off. On the north is only 
'one rampart : half way down is a shallow ditch ; 
and at bottom another, not very deep. On the south 
"towards the sea, the hill is very steep : half way 
down is a Small ditch, and at bottom an irregular 
one, "not always continued. The rampart on this 
and the north side, does not rise above the area. On 
the east are two very high and very thick ramparts, 
and two deep ditches which separate it from the 
rest of the hill. On the west side are two ramparts 
and ditches ; the innermost rampart high, and rising 
above the area, but not so much as on the east. 
The outer rampart and ditch are not so high and 
deep as the other, and extend only to the north, and 
half of the west side. Where it is discontinued, is 
an entrance in the middle of that rampart. There 
is another entrance near the north-east angle. The 
wea is about twenty-seven acres. Near the south 
side is a low tumulus. The hill on which this cas- 
tle is raised, continues to the east about half a mile. 
At the foot is a ditch, in some places pretty consi- 
derable. The north side is 144 paces ; the south, 
250; the east, 115; the west, 217. In the south, 
west, and north angles, is a circular ditch and ram- 
part, enclosing a small area, twelve paces dia- 
meter." 

About a mile to the south-west of Abbotsbury is 
the " Decoy," where great quantities of fowls are 
annually taken. But the object which most engages 
the attention of strangers, in the neighbourhood of 
this town, is the celebrated " Swannery," which, 
not long since, was the property of the Earl of II- 
chester. We shall extract an account of it from 
Mr. Hutchins. " In the open, or broad part of the 
fleet, are kept 600 or 700 swans, formerly 1500, or, 
as some say, 7000, or 8000, including hoppers, a 
small species of swans, who feed and range, and re- 
turn home again. In the thirty-second of Eliza- 
beth, it was found that, from this rill to the sea, by 
the Isle of Portland, is an aestuary, meer, or fleet, in 
which the sea ebbs and flows ; and iu it were 500 



* The fatal wrecking of (his vessel was attended with cir- 
cumstances peculiarly melancholy. Captain Pearce, accom- 
panied by his two daughters, and some other relations, was just 
proceeding on his intended last voyage to India. A short time be- 
fore the ship went to pieces, he called his second mate, Mr. Meri- 
ton, into the cabin, " where his two daughters, two neices, and 
three other beautiful young ladies were clinging round him for 
protection :" on being told that it was impossible for the 



swans; 410 white; and 90 cygnets, each of the 
value of two shillings and sixpence, the greater 
part whereof were not marked, &c. A writ was 
ordered out of the Exchequer to the Sheriff, to seize 
all the white swans not marked, who returned, he 
had seized 400. The defendants pleaded, that the 
nicer lay in this parish. That the Abbots were 
seized of the actuary, banks, and soil (solum), in 
fee ; and that there was, time out of mind, a game 
or flight of wild swans (volatus cygnorum ct cyg- 
nettorum) harmling there, which were not accus- 
tomed to be marked ; and that the Abbot and his 
predecessors did breed up (pullulent) for the use of 
the kitchen and hospitality, some of the lesser cyg- 
nets, and used yearly to mark them, by cutting off 
the pinion of the wings, to prevent their flying away. 
That 35 II. VIII. the King granted it to Sir Giles 
Strangeways, whose grandson Giles demised it for 
one year to the defendants."" N. B. Without 
prescription, all white swans in an open river, un- 
marked, belong to the King by prerogative." 

ADHELM'S (SAINT) HEAP.] Saint Adhelm's Head 
is a celebrated sea-mark on one of the most elevated 
parts of the Purbeck coast. It rises nearly to the 
perpendicular height of four hundred and fifty feet. 
At the summit of this precipice stands a small stone 
chapel, which measures about seven yards square : 
its roof is vaulted and sustained by four arches 
springing from a single pillar : an arched door-way 
is on the western side, and a small window at the 
south corner. Having been neglected it is now in 
ruins, but, probably, it was once consecrated to the 
services of religious rites performed for the safety 
of mariners. It was near this cliff, that on the 6th 
of January, 1780, the " Halsewell" East Indiaman, 
in which the unfortunate Captain Pearce perished, 
'was wrecked.* 

BADBURY RINGS.] " Somewhat similar to Old 
Sarum," observes King, the antiquary, " is the hill 
called Badbury Rings, about three miles and a half 
from Wimborne, Dorsetshire. It has passed with 
many for a Roman camp, because Roman urns and 
coins, and a Roman sword, have been dug up here 
in 1 665 ; and it has been by others denominated 
Saxon, from the authority of Leland, who, speaking 
of Winborne, says, " The Saxon Kings had hard 
by the towne a castelle, now called Badbyry, but 
clerely down. The ditches, hills, and site thereof, 
be yet evidently seen. Now oonyes borough in it." 
It is remarkable that he adds the words Coneys 
borough, which name is well known to denote a 
royal residence. But thougli the Romans might 



ladies to escape, he folded his daughters in his arms, and ex- 
claimed, " '["hen, my dear children, we will perish together." 
The ship sunk a few minutes after; and, so dreadful was the 
storm, that in two hours, not an atom of her could be seen. 
One hundred and sixty-eight persons perished ; and of the eighty 
two, who, by the brave exertions of the <|iiarriers, escaped 
many were bruised in a most deplorable manner. 

unquestionably 



DORSETSHIRE. 



207 



unquestionably make this a station, as they unques- 
tionably did make the same use of several other Bri- 
tish posts, and though, from the advantage of its si- 
tuation, the early Saxon Kings might afterwards 
reside here, as its name, Coneys-Borough, certainly 
imports, as well as its name of Kingestown Lacy, 
found in certain writings, as belaud tells us ; yet . 
its form, so unlike any thing that Romans or Saxons 
ever constructed, shews it to have been originally 
truly British. And it is very remarkable, that an- 
other similar British post in Dorsetshire is seen from 
its summit ; that a chain of such hill-fortresses, 
within sight of each other, run quite through the 
county ; and it stands on the very same road that 
Old Sarum does, the Via Iceniana ; a road which 
probably was made to pass in this very direction, on 
account of the great strength of these two prior and 
most ancient British strong holds." The opinion of 
Mr. King, that Badbury Rings was a British for- 
tress, appears to be correct; and that it was occu- 
pied by the Romans, is fully proved by the various 
antiquities, of that people, which have been discover- 
ed here. He seems, however, to have misunder- 
stood Leland, as the circumstance of rabbits, or co- 
nies, boroughing in the ruins, is not likely to have j 
given name to the place ; and if it had, instead of j 
a royal it would have signified a rabbit's residence. 
But the resting of Edward the Ehler, with his army I 
at this place, when marching against Ethelwald, j 
proves that it was known in Saxon times. The 
form of the camp is circular, with an entrance on 
the north-east, and another on the west. Triple 
ditches and ramparts surround it, the outermost of 
which measures nearly a mile in circumference. 

BEAMINMTER.] Beaminster, or Beminster Fo- 
rum, a market-town of considerable antiquity, is 
situated in the Bridport division, 17f miles north- 
west by west from Dorchester, and 137| west- 
south-west from London. It occupies a fertile spot 
on the banks of the river Birt. In the Norman 
Survey, the manor is mentioned as forming part of 
the lands of the Bishop of Sarum. In the reign of 
William II. one of the Bishops (Ormund) gave it to 
two prebends of his church, to which it appertained 
till 1049, when it was seized by the Parliamentary 
Commissioners : in 1707, however, it reverted to 
the prebendaries, by whom it is still held. 

Nothing of importance attaches to the history of 
Beaminster, but its having suffered from three 
dreadful conflagrations. The first of these occurred 
on the 14th of April, 1614. The fire was kindled 
by a soldier, under the command of Prince Maurice, 
who was at that time at Beaminster, having dis- 
charged his musket at the gable of a house in North 
Street. The house was almost instantly in flames, 
and the wind being in a right direction, the fire 



* At tliis place was born tlie Rev. Thomas Russell, author 
of a small collection of " Sonnets and Miscellaneous Poems," 
dedicated to Dr. Warton, of Winchester, under whom he was 
educated. His knowledge, both of modern and ancient litenv- 



raged so fiercely that in two hours the whole town 
was destroyed. One hundred and forty-four houses, 
besides barns and stables, were consumed, and the 
goods which were saved from the houses, were car- 
ried oft' by the soldiers. The whole loss was esti- 
mated at 21,084/. Hating received 2000/. from 
Parliament, and numerous other sums, the inhabi- 
tants speedily rebuilt the town. In 1084, however, 
it again became the prey of this destructive element, 
and the loss amounted to 10,000/. The last time of 
its suffering was in 1781, when, besides barns, sta- 
bles, and other buildings, fifty dwelling-houses were 
consumed. Fortunately the greater part was at this 
time insured ; and contributions being made for 
those who had not been so cautions, Beaminster was 
soon restored to its former beauty. 

Its appearance is now very respectable ; most of 
the houses being modern and good buildings : the 
number, as returned under the act of 1811, was 454 ; 
that of inhabitants, 2290. The chief public build- 
ings are the chapel, the free-school, and the alms- 
house. The first is the chapel of ease to Nethor- 
bury, and is a noble edifice ; the tower, which is 
nearly 100 feet high, is adorned with carvings from 
scripture history. It contains several handsome 
monuments of the Strode and other families. The 
free-school, founded by Mrs. Frances Tucker, in 
1684, is intended for the education of twenty of the 
poorest boys in Beaminster, three or four of whom 
are to be bound apprentice every year ; and one, at 
least, to be apprenticed to the sea. The Rev. Sa- 
muel Hood, father of the Lords Hood and Bridport, 
was master of this school in 1715 : he was after- 
wards made Prebendary of Wells. The alms-house 
was built, and richly endowed, by Sir John Strode, 
of Parnham, for the maintenance of s:-x poor persons. 
The workhouse is a large, commodious building, 
formerly an alms-house.* 

BERE REGIS.] The little market-town of Bere 
Regis is situated in the Blandford division, seven 
miles west by north from Wareham, and 113 
south-west from London. Drs.Stukeley and Coker 
conjecture that this place was the site of a Roman 
station ; an opinion which is confirmed by a large 
circular entrenchment upon " Woodbury II ill," 
about half a mile north-east of the parish. The area 
of this place, which contains about ten acres, is sur- 
rounded by triple ramparts, that in some places are 
high and deep. On the summit, which commands a 
very extensive prospect, a fair is annually holden. 
This fair begins on the Nativity of the Virgin, and 
continues through the five following days : though 
of late years it has much decreased, it was once the 
most considerable in the west of England. 

Queen Glfrida, to whom the manor belonged, is- 
said to have retired to her seat in this place, after 

ture, is said to have been very extensive; and lie w.ns one of 
the most strenuous defenders ol Thomas Warton's History of 
Poetry. He died in 1.788, aged 26. 

a the 



203 



DORSETSHIRE. 



the murder of her son-in-law, Edward the Martyr. 
King John also appears to have made it his resi- 
dence. In the reign of Henry III. the manor was 
bestowed on Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester ; 
but, as a consequence attending his rebellion, it was 
taken from him, and granted to the King's brother, 
Edmund. Edmund gave a moiety of it to the Ab- 
bess of Tarent, who, in the reign of Edward the 
First, claimed tor her manor of Berc, a fair, a mar- 
ket, a free -warren, and the whole forest of Bere. 
Her moiety of these was granted her. At the Dis- 
solution, Henry VHI. for the sum of 608/. 16s. 8d. 
granted the manor to Robert Turberville, to whose 
ancestors the other moiety had belonged for ages. 
The mansion of the Turhervilles still remains : it is 
an ancient irregular structure, built with stone, and 
its windows contain various quarterings of the Tur- 
berville family and ils alliances. , , 

Bere Regis, though it does not appear ever to 
have been represented in Parliament, was incorpo- 
rated in the time of Edward the First. Its market 
is ancient, as appears from King John's having con- 
firmed it to the inhabitants. 

The church is a large and handsome structure, 
and contains numerous monuments of the Turber- 
ville and other families. The town of Bere Regis 
has suffered twice by fire : once in 1634, and again 
in 1788. The number of houses at present is 217 ; 
of inhabitants, 953. The most distinguished na- 
tives of the place have been James Turberville, Bishop 
of Exeter, and John Morton, Archbishop of Can- 
terbury.* 

BINDON.] Great Bindon is situated in the Bland- 
ford division, five miles west by south from Ware- 
ham. It is remarkable for a battle which was fought 
near it, A. D. 614, when Kinigels the Saxon beat 
the Britons, after a long doubtful contest. The re- 
mains of a double formed camp are still visible on a 
hill to the south. 

Bindon has also been celebrated for its magnifi- 
cent abbey, which stood in a pleasant and retired 
valley, on the banks of the Frome. This building 
was founded in 1172, by Roger de Newburgh, for 
Cistercian monks. Previously to the founding of this 
abbey, another appears to have been begun by Wil- 
liam de Glastonia, at a short distance from the site 
of the present one. Of the abbey begun by William 
de Glastonia, little, however, is known, and as Ro- 
ger de Newburgh removed it to its present site, 
and endowed it with lands, he was accounted the 
first patron. Henry III. confirmed, by charter, the 
gifts of the two founders, to the church of St. Mary 
at Bindon, and the monks there. He also conferred 
upon them the wood of Stotwood, and several 



* Morton is generally supposed to have been a native of Bere 
Regis, but it is slated by some that he was born at Dorchester. 
However, he was educated at Baliol College, Oxford, 
where he took his degree of doctor in law. IB the Civil U'ars 
between tin; houses of York and Lancaster, lie was in favour 
with botl) parties; and the union of the. two roses is supposed 
lo have been projected by him. On the accession of Henry 



houses, places^ streets, and gardens, within the 
liberties of Dorchester. 

In 1271, Henry de Newburgh, formerly patron, 
by his charter allowed the monks to chuse whom 
they pleased for patron, on which they elected him- 
self, and Queen Eleanor. Edward I. confirmed this 
election, and the clause by which the heirs of Robert 
de Newburgh were declared patrons for ever. 
Succeeding princes granted additional privileges, 
and the abbey continued to receive bequests from 
royal and noble personages ; though it does not ap- 
pear to have had equal power or opulence with many 
others in the county. It was dissolved among the 
lesser monasteries in 1536, its annual value being 
less than 200/. (the sum specified in the Act - t ) 
though both Speed and Burnet assert its revenue 
was larger. The King two years afterwards re- 
stored it, with some few others, and re-instated the 
abbot and monks in their possessions, making them 
hold it of himself in perpetual alms. This was soon 
proved to be a very precarious tenure ; for in 1541 
it was entirely suppressed, and the site and manor 
granted to Thomas Lord Poynings. From the heirs 
of this nobleman it came by descent to James Earl 
of Suffolk, who, in 1041, sold it, with the park, 
fishery, rectory, &c. to Humphrey Weld, Esq. an- 
cestor to the present owHer, Thomas Weld, Esq. of 
Lull wqrth Castle. This geatleman made numerous 
judicious alterations in the estate and mansion. 

Immediately after the Dissolution, the Abbey of 
Bindon was in part demolished, but the abbey 
church, though scarcely a fragment now remains, 
continued for a long time in its ancient splendour 
and magnificence. So late as the year 1733, many 
considerable parts were standing. In that year 
Buck's view was drawn ; this represents five semi- 
circular arches, supported by six round massy pil- 
lars, with four narrow pointed windows above. A 
similar range of pillars, standing opposite to these, 
was blown down in 1703. In 1770, the north wall 
of the nave, 72 feet long, and 42 feet high, with a 
portion of an adjoining wall, 21 feet high, and 3 feet 
thick, were standing ; though nothing remains now 
but the north-west angle of the tower. In order to 
show the different apartments, and disposition of 
the whole abbey, Mr. Weld had the rubbish cleared 
away from the foundations ; which enabled him to 
trace it with accuracy, and a plan of it was engra- 
ven. The fish ponds have been cleaned out; the 
walks planted with trees in their ancient manner ; 
a building erected in a style of architecture similar 
to the ruins ; and the lands belonging to the mo- 
nastery, containing about ten acres, surrounded with 
a pallisade. From the following dimensions of the 



VII. he was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury, and shortly 
after obtained a cardinal's hat. Bacon represents him as " a 
stern and haughty man, odious at court, and equally disliked 
by the people;" but his liberal benefactions to ecclesiastic 
and scholastic foundations, appear to contradict the account. 
He died hi 1500, at the age of 90. 

m 

church 



DORSETSHIRE. 



209 



church, some estimate may be formed of the other 
parts of the abbey : The body, including the choir, 
was 170 feet long ; the north and south aisles were 
each 115 feet long and 14 feet broad. The eastern 
part seems to have extended twenty -four paces be- 
yond the present ruins ; perhaps here was a chapel 
to the Virgin Mary, as was usual in most conventual 
churches. The tower is 53 by 33 feet square. The 
intercolumniations are ten feet ; the circumference 
of the pillars ten feet. 

In digging below the side altar, a figure of an 
abbot, of the natural size, was discovered : round 
the figure, in old English characters, was the fol- 
lowing inscription : 

" iblias KiciurBus Be Scanners foie tumtttatur; 
&B pvnM Urtmjs Dwa fount salaam tttBatur." 

"The greatest curiosity, however," observes Mr. 
Hutchins, " discovered 'here, was the sepulchral 
statue of a child, being about two feet in length, ha- 
bited in the dress and ornaments of an abbot. It 
was found near where stood the staircase. In order 
to account for this singularity, we must have resort 
to the ancient custom, by which one of the children 
of the choir, on the festival, and during the whole 
octave of Holy Innocents, was, in cathedral churches, 
permitted to wear the insignia of a bishop ; and in 
abbatial churches, those of an abbot. Hence, if the 
juvenile bishop, or abbot, as we may suppose was 
the case at Bindon, happened to die in the course of 
this festivity, there is no doubt but what he would 
be represented in the ornaments which he was enti- 
tled to wear during that period. There is just such 
a figure in Salisbury Cathedral, engraved in the 
Introduction to the second volume of the Sepulchral 
Monuments of Great Britain, plate IV. fig. 1." 

In the neighbourhood of the abbey, Mr. Weld, 
under the sanction of government, erected a build- 
ing as an asylum for emigrant monks of the order of 
La Trappe.* 

BLACKDOWN.] A little to the north of Portisham, 
and affording an extensive prospect, stands the high 
eminence of Blackdown. Near Blackdown are four 
upright stones, about two feet high, except that one 
is broken off nearly to the ground. They stand near 
to each other, and at equal distances. The follow- 
ing obscure distich relating to them, is preserved by 
the common people : 

* This order appears to have been founded on the discipline 
of the Cistercians: it had its origin in France, and was one of 
the most austere of ail the monastic institutions. The follow- 
ing account is extracted from Dr. Maton: " One strong in- 
stance of their unsocial and unnatural discipline, is the pro- 
found silence which is enjoined them, and which is never bro- 
ken, unless on very extraordinary occasions, and with the leave 
of the superior of the convent. They shun the sight of wo- 
men ; and in their diet are so abstemious, that they live solely 
on vegetables, never tasting flesh, "fish, or wine. Their em- 
ployment, in the intervals of their religious rites, is generally 
the cultivation of a garden, or any other manual labour. The 
founder of this order is said to have been a French nobleman, 
whose name was Boulhiriier de Ranee, a man of pleasure and 

VOL. II. NO. 00. 



" Jeffery and Jone, 
And their little clog Denty, and Edy alone." 

Several human skeletons, with a row of small 
earthen pots, about seven or eight in number, by 
their side, were dug up near this place in 1765. 

BLACKMORE.] The vale or forest of Blackmore, 
also called White Hart Forest, exterds over a large 
tract of land, in the northern and western pans of 
this county. The name of Blackmore is derived, 
either from the strong and black clay of its soil, or 
from the dark aspect of its woods, and its damp ami 
moorish appearance. Its other appellation, that of 
White Hart, was given to it from the following cir- 
cumstance, mentioned both by Camden and Coker : 
" Henry the Third hunting in this forest, among 
several deer he had run down, spared the life of a 
beautiful white hart, which afterwards Thomas de 
la Lind, a neighbouring gentleman, of ancient de- 
scent and special note, with his companions, hunted, 
and killed, at a bridge since from thence called 
King-stag Bridge, in the parish of Pulham. The 
King, highly offended at it, not only punished them 
with imprisonment and grievous fine, but severely 
taxed all their lands which they then held, the own- 
ers of which yearly, ever since to this day, pay a sum 
of money, by way of fine, or amercement, into the 
Exchequer, called White Hart Silver, in memory of 
which the county needeth no better remembrance 
than this annual payment." Leland also mentions, 
that " this Forest stretched from Ivelle into the 
quarters of Shaftesbyri, and touched with Gilling- 
hain Forest, that is near Shaftesbyri." 

BLANDFORD FORUM.] Blandford Forum, Bland- 
ford Chipping, or Market Blandford, is situated in 
the Blandford division, near the centre of the north r > 
east part of the county, 16J miles north-east by 
east from Dorchester, and 103j south-west by west 
from London. It lies in a fruitful country, on a 
bend of the river Stour, which flows on the south 
and west sides of the town. 

In the Domesday Book, no less than nine parcels 
are comprehended under the general name Blene- 
ford, or Blaneford : four of these were afterwards 
distinguished by the names of Blandford Forum, 
Blandford St. Mary, Blandford Bryanston, and 
Long Blandford, or, as it is now called, Langton. 
This manor, being part of the Honour of Leicester, 
and Duchy of Lancaster, was, in the reign of Ri- 

dissipation, which were suddenly converted into devotion and 
melancholy by the following circumstance. His affairs had 
obliged him to absent himselt for some time from a lady, with 
whom he had lived in the most intimate and tender connections. 
On his return to Paris, he contrived a plan, in order to sur- 
prise her agreeably and to satisfy his impatient desire of seeing 
her, by going without ceremony or previous notice to her 
apartment. She. lay stretched out an inanimate corpse, dis- 
figured beyond conception by the smilt-pox ; and Jhe surgeon 
was about to separate the head from the body, because' the 
coffin had been made too short. He was a tew moments mo- 
tionless with horror, and then retired abruptly from the world 
to a convent, in which he passed the remainder of his days in 
the greatest mortification and devotion." 

3 a chard 



210 



DORSETSHIRE. 



chard the First, mortgaged for 452/. 6s. Bd. by Ro- 
bert Bellomont Fitz-Parnel, Earl of Leicester, to 
Aaron, a Jew, of Lincoln, whose estates being after- 
wards seized, this manor, among others, was put 
into the roll for the King's use. Soon after, how- 
ever, the Earl procured a discharge under th seal 
of Aaron, for 240/. 6.?. 3d. and dying very rich, his 
large estates were divided between his two sisters, 
Amicia and Margaret ; the former married to Si- 
mon deMontford, afterwards Earl of Leicester : the 
latter to Saier de Quincy, afterwards Earl of Win- 
chester, one of the twenty-five Barons who had pos- 
session of the City of London in the time of King 
John. De Quincy was also one deputed to govern 
the realm, and for this was excommunicated by the 
Pope ; and continuing disaffected, he was appoint- 
ed, jointly with Robert Fitz-walter, styled by his 
adherents Marischallus Dei et Ecclesia?, to solicit 
Philip, the Dauphin, to head their army against the 
King. In the first year of Henry the Third, De 
Quincy kept the Castle of Mountsorrel for the Dau- 
phin, and repulsed the King's friends : but being 
afterwards routed, and taken prisoner, at the battle 
of Lincoln, he submitted, was pardoned, and his 
lauds and honours restored to him. Soon after- 
wards he joined the Crusaders, and proceeded, with 
the Earls of Chester, Arundel, and other noblemen 
and knights, to the siege of Damietta ; but died on j 
his journey further towards Jerusalem. He left a ! 
son, named Robert, who married Avice, sister and i 
co-heir of Randel de Meschines, Earl of Chester ! 
and Lincoln, and had by her Margaret, married to ' 
John de Lacy, who, in her right, became Earl of 
Lincoln, and the possessor of this manor. His son i 
Henry, Earl of Lincoln, the next Lord of the Ma- j 
uor, was a nobleman greatly distinguished by his 
Sovereign, who employed him in the most honourable 
commissions ; and his heroic actions against the 
French, in the reign of Edward the First, are much j 
celebrated. He led the front of the army at the fa- ' 
mous battle of Falkirk, in which the Scots were j 
completely routed. He was also one of the noble- | 
men to whom Edward the First left the care of his 
son, with the charge not to permit the return of ; 
Piers Gaveston into England. Walsingham relates , 
that the Earl, a short time before his death, was I 
compelled to represent to his soti ( -in-law Thomas, ! 
Earl of Lancaster, the slavery of "the church, and j 
the impoverished state of the realm, and requested 
him to redress the various grievances of which he | 
complained. This Earl bought the estate in the 
county of Middlesex, called after him Lincoln's 
Inn. 

Thomas Plantagenet, Earl of Lancaster, married 
Alice, only daughter of Henry deLacy, and obtained 
with her the earldom and possessions of her father ; 
but afterwards rebelling against Edward the Se- 
cond, his relation, he was beheaded. His widow, 
married Eubolo, Baron Strange, and conveyed the 
honours and estates to her second husband, who dy- 
ing also without issue, she married Hugh de Frenes. 



| Alice survived her last husband also, and bequeathed 
her numerous honours and inheritances to Henry 
Plautagenet, Earl of Lancaster, her brother-in-law. 
His son Henry, Earl of Lincoln, the next possessor, 
attended Edward the Third in all his expeditions. 
He left two daughters ; Maud, who died without 
issue ; and Blanch, united to John of Gaunt, Earl 
of Richmond, and afterwards Duke of Lancaster. 
Lancaster's son, Henry of Bolingbroke, Earl of 
Derby, Duke of Hereford, and afterwards King, by 
the title of Henry the Fourth, succeeding him, the 
manor came to the crown. Henry the Fifth bestow- 
j ed this and other manors on Henry Chicheley, Arch- 
j bishop of Canterbury, and his uncle Henry Beau- 
I fort, Bishop of Winchester, and Cardinal of the 
j Holy See. After this the manor reverted to the 
crown, and attached to it till Edward the Fourth 
granted the whole to Richard, Duke of Gloucester, 
afterwards Richard the Third. From this time, the 
accounts of the descent of the manor are contradic- 
tory : part of it appears to have been joined to the 
principal manor of Kingston Lacy ; and the remain- 
der was either given to the corporation, or purchas- 
; ed by them. 

Blandford, in old records, is styled a borough ; but 
it returned members to Parliament twice only. James 
the First incorporated a free borough, with the ad- 
dition of certain liberties, besides those they had from 
time immemorial enjoyed. The charter confirms all 
courts-leet, view of frank-pledge, liberties, &c. ever 
enjoyed by prescription or custom. The borough is 
under the government of a Bailiff, and six Capital 
Burgesses. The Bailiff, Seneschal, and two Capi- 
tal Burgesses, have a power to determine suits in 
the borough which do not exceed ten pounds. 

The chief support of this place is derived from the 
resort of travellers, the expenditure of the neigh- 
bouring gentry, its markets and fairs, and the an- 
nual races which have existed since 1729, and are 
held in July and August, on a down in the parish of 
Tarent Monkton. It has no considerable manufac- 
ture, except buttons ; though formerly it was famous 
for band-strings, which growing out of use, the in- 
habitants established a manufacture of bone lace; 
and the finest lace or point in England, equal, and 
perhaps superior to that of Flanders, and valued at 
SO/, a yard, was made at Blandford, till the begin- 
ning of the seventeenth century. The number of 
houses as returned under the Population Act of 
1811, was 443; of inhabitants, 24-25. 

Blandford has been destroyed several times by 
fire. In Camdea's time it was accidentally burnt, 
but soon rebuilt in a handsome manner. It was a 
second time partially burned in 1676 or 1677 ; and 
a third time in 1713 : but the most unfortunate and 
destructive fire occurred on June the fourth, 1733, 
when a general conflagration almost destroyed the 
town. The fire broke out at a tallow chandler's, 
near the centre of the four streets which composed 
the town, and burnt with surprising fury. The 
Church, Town-Hall, Alms-house, Free-School, and 

all 



DORSETSHIRE. 



211 



all the houses, but forty, were destroyed. The de- 
plorable situation of the inhabitants \vas increased 
by\he small-pox, which raged at the time in above 
sixty families ; but, perhaps from the necessity they 
were under of removing into the fields, gardens, and 
other places in the open air, only one died of the 
contagion. About fourteen aged persons, who were 
forgotten in the general confusion, perished ; and 
many died afterwards through fatigue and terror, as 
well as through grief for their losses. The damage 
was computed to be 100,000/. The town has since 
regained its former beauty, and is now one of the 
most handsome in the west of England. 

The Town-Hall, a neat building of Portland stone, 
is supported by columns, with a regular carved en- 
tablature of the Doric order. Within the building 
is a pump, over which, on a piece of marble, appears 
the following inscription : 

" In remembrance 

Of God's dreadful Visitation by Fire, 

Which broke out the 4th of June, 1731, 

and in a few Hours not only reduced the 

Church, but almost the whole Town, to Ashes, 

Wherein 14 Inhabitants perished, 

But also two adjacent Villages : 

And 
In grateful Acknowledgement of the 

Divine Mercy, 

That has since raised this Town, 

Like the Phoenix from its Ashes, 

To its present flourishing and beautiful State ; 

and to prevent, 

By a timely Supply of Water, 

(With God's Blessing) the fatal 

Consequences of Fire hereafter : 

This Monument 

Of that dire Disaster, and Provision 
Against the like', is humbly erected 

By 

John Bastard, 

A considerable Sharer 

In the great Calamity, 

1760." 

The old church having been consumed by the fire 
in 1731, the present building was erected on its site. 
It is an elegant structure, 120 feet long, and consists 
of a chancel, body, two aisles, and a tower ; and 
was built at the expence of 3200/. It is constructed 
in the Grecian style of architecture, of a greenish 
coloured stone ; but the windows, door-cases, and 
ornaments, are of Portland stone. The tower is 
eighty feet high, and is surmounted with a cupola. 
The interior of the church is remarkably neat, and 
contains several handsome monuments ; and also a 
memorial to the parents and the brother of the Rev. 
Christopher Pitt, the translator of Virgil,* with an 
inscription written by him, concluding with the fol- 
lowing beautiful lines : 



b This gentleman, born at Blandford, in 1699, was the son 
of Kobi-rt Pitt, M. D. also a native of that town. He was 
educated at Winchester school, whence lie removed to NP 
College, Oxford, where he took the degree of M. A. in 1774. 
On taking orders, he obtained the rectory of Pimperne (the 



" Ye sacred spirits, while your friends distrest, 
Weep o'er your aslies and lament the blest ; 
Oh ! let the pensive Muse inscribe your stone, 
And with the general sorrows mix her own ; 
The pensive Muse, who from this mournful hour, 
Shall raise the voice, and wake the siring no more. 
Ol love, of duty, this last pledge receive ; 
Tis all a brother, all a son can give." 

Charitable donations to Blandford have been very 
numerous. George Rives, Esq. by a will, dated 
May 8th, 1685, left the remainder of his personal 
estate to purchase lands for the support of an aluis- 
house, which he had built here in the year 1682, for 
the reception of ten poor persons ; and the remain- 
der of the annual profits, for the apprenticing poor 
boys, natives of Blandford and Pimperne. William 
Williams, a gentleman of this town, by will, 30th 
June, 1621, ordered his executors to raise 3000/. 
out of his estate, to purchase land to the yearly 
amount of 140/. for sixty years or up wards, and out 
of the profits to bind two poor fatherless boys to 
fishermen, or masters of ships, out of Blandford, 
Shaftesbury, and the parish of St. James, and Stur- 
minster Newton : fourteen pounds to be disbursed 
annually towards placing and clothing the said boys ; 
and some part of that sum to provide for each of 
them two suits of apparel. The residue to be dis- 
tributed among poor clothiers, serge-makers, linen- 
weavers, stuff-makers, and felt-makers, inhabiting 
the said towns ; giving 5/. at least, and not above 8/. 
at the most, to each. If any of these should be im-. 
poverished by fire, &c. to be relieved out of part of 
what is given to the tradesmen : the remainder of his 
goods and chattels to be employed by his executors, 
&c. for ten years after his decease, to procure lands 
or leases for so many alms-men and women as they 
can maintain with 51. each yearly, for ever. Arch- 
bishop Wake, also, in the year 17-29, gave 1001V. to 
erect a charity -school, and for other charitable, pur- 
poses. Two free-schools have also been established 
here by benevolent bequests. 

At the east end of Blandford stands the stately 
remains of DAMORY COLUT, now a furm-house, 
though its ancient lords were Barons of the realm, 
and held great offices under government. Roger 
D'Amorie, who was constable of Knaresborough 
and Corfe Castles, governor of the castles of Glou- 
cester and St. Briavel, sided with Thomas, Earl of 
Lancaster, against Edward the Second, and dying 
in rebellion, his lands were seized ; but afterwards- 
restored to his widow. The estate came then to the 
crown, and by various grants to the family of Ryves, 
an heir of which sold the farm to Mr. Francis Kings- 
ton, of Blandford, in 1774, who left it to his great 
nephew, Mr. Francis Kingston Galpine. Mr. King- 
ston also left by will 2000/. towards building and 

name of the hundred in which Blandford Forum is situated) 
and he died and was buried there, in 1748. Of his translation 
of Virgil, it will " always be quoted," observes Johnson, 
" when Drydeh's is only read." Mr. Pitt also translated 
Vida's Art of Poetry, and wrote a volume of ingenious poems. 

supporting 



212 



DORSETSHIRE. 



supporting an hospital, for the county of Dorset, 
to be erected near Blandford. To the north of this 
mansion, about 70 years ago, stood a remarkable 
oak, called Damory Oak. In 1747 it measured se- 
venty-five feet high, and the trunk was twelve feet 
in diameter at seventeen feet above the ground : the 
circumference on the surface of the ground was 
twenty-three feet ; the hollow, or cavity, at the bot- 
tom, was fifteen feet wide, and seventeen high, and 
would contain about twenty persons. This oak was 
afterwards sold, and rooted up for fire-\vood. 

Amongst the many distinguished characters, to 
which the town of Blandford Forum has given birth, 
the following were the most eminent : George 
Ryves, warden of New College, Oxford, 1599 ; 
Vice-chancellor, 1601 ; and afterwards warden of 



* This gentleman was educated at Winchester School, 
whence lie was sent to Oxford, where he studied the law, and 
afterwards became King's Advocate in Doctors Commons. 
He wrote The Vicar's Plea ; Historia Navalis Antiqua ; His- 
loria Navalis Media, &c. He died in 1651. 

f Dr. Bruno Ry?es, who died in 1677, at the age of 81, 
was persecuted by the Presbyterians, in the reign ot Charles I. ; 
but, at the Restoration, he obtained the deanry of Windsor. 
He- wrole Mercurius Rusticus, a loyal paper, during the re- 
bellion ; several pamphlets and sermons ; and assisted in pub- 
lishing the Polyglot* Bible. 

J Besides the individuals of this family, which have been 
already mentioned, there is one whose talents and misfortunes 
claim particular notice. Eliza Ryves, the descendant of Wil- 
liam Ryves, Attorney General of Ireland in the reign of James 
the First, had been left, in common with the female part of 
the family, in affluent circumstances. Her fortune, however, 
was lost in a law-suit ; and her sole clependance was on her li- 
terary talents. Her first publication was two volumes of ele- 
gant poems. She then wrote a tragedy, and several comedies, 
but being without patronage, neither oT them was brought upon 
the stage. Afterwards sh employed her pen in writing poli- 
tical matter for a newspaper ; and she is also said to have com- 
posed the historical and political parts, of one of the Annual 
Registers. All these laborious exertions were not profitable ; 
and a bookseller advised her to adopt the mode ol translation. 
She was ignorant of the French language, but purchase*! some 
elementary works, retired to an obscure part of Islington, and 
in less than two months acquired the language sufficiently to 
give the public a well translated version of Rousseau's " Social 
Compart." She afterwards translated the Abbe Raynal's Let- 
ter to the National Assembly; and at length De la Croix's 
" Review of the Constitution of the Principal States in Eu- 
rope," with intelligent notes, in two thick octavo volumes. 
These exertions were unavailing, and this unfortunate and in- 
teresting female died, at Chelsea, in the year 1797, the victim 
of misery. From her last work " The Hermit of Snowden," 
w extract the following pathetic song : 

" A new-fallen lamb, as mild Emmeline pass'd, 

In pity she turn'd lo behold, 

How it shiver'd and shrunk from the merciless blast, 
Then fell all bcnumb'd with the cold. 

She rais'd it, and, touch'd by the innocent's fate, 

Its soft form to her bosom she press'd ; 
But the tender relief was afforded too late, 

It bleated, and died on her breast. 

The moralist, then, as the corse she resign'd, 

And weeping, spring fiow'rs o'er it laid, 
Thus mus'd, " So it fares with the delicate mind 

" To the tempests of fortune betray 'd. 



Winchester College : Sir Thomas Ryves, a cele- 
brated civilian, and judge of the faculty, and Pre- 
rogative Court, in Ireland ;* John Ryves, preben- 
dary of Winchester and Salisbury, and archdeacon 
of the county of Bucks, in the "year 1634 ; John 
Ryves, prebendary of Chichester, who was seques- 
tered by the Parliament Committee, and died in 
1665 ; 13runo Ryves, t dean of Chichester, and af- 
terwards of Windsor ; | Thomas Bastard, A.,B. 
divine and poet ; Frederick Sagittary, an eminent 
physician, who died in 1661 ; Creech, the poet ; | 
William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury ;Jp' Ed- 
ward Wake, uncle to the archbishop ;* * feamuel 
Lisle, chaplain to archbishop Wake, and afterwards 
bishop of Norwich ;tt and Dr. Thomas Lindsay 
(chaplain to Henry, Lord Capel, one of ,the Lords 

=sst ,t 

" Too tender, like thee, the rude shock to sustain, 
" And deny'd the relief which could save ; 

" 'Tis lost ; and when pity and kindness are vain, 
" Thus we dress the poor sufferer's grave !" 

Mr. Bastard was educated at Winchcstet School, whence 
he removed to New College, Oxford, whet* he was chosen 
perpetual fellow, in 1558. Indulging a propensity for satire, 
he was expelled for a libel ; but, soon afterwards, he became 
chaplain to Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Lord Treasurer, through 
whose interest he obtained the vicarage ot Bere Regis, and the 
rectory of Humes, both in this county. 1*owards the close of 
his life, his intellects were deranged ; and, having been thrown 
into Dorchester gaol, for debt, he died then., in greai poverty, 
in 1618. He was the author of some spmons, and of some 
ingenious epigrams. 

|| Thomas Creech M. A. born 1659, sgncl educated at Slier- 
borne School, was a student at Wadhsjtn College, Oxford, 
where he took the degree of B. D. 1696. He was elected 
Fellow of All Souls, and presented by that society to the living 
ofVelwyn, in Hertfordshire, afterwards held by Young, the 
poet ; but, before he had taken possession, he, in an unguard- 
ed hour, terminated his existence by suicide. He translated 
Juvenal, Horace, and several detached pieces, of other ancient 
authors, into English verse. 

f This prelate, descended from an ancient and honourable 
family, was born in the year 1657, and admitted a member of 
Christ Church College, Oxford, in 1672. In 1689, he took 
his doctor's degree, and afterwards became King's Chaplain, 
preacher to the Society of Gray's Inn, and canon of Christ 
church. In 1694, he obtained the rectory of St. James's, 
Westminster ; in 1701, he was made Dean of Windsor ; in 
1705, Bishop of London; and, in 1716, primate. He had a 
controversy with Bishop Alterbury, on the rights of convo- 
cations, and he entered into a correspondence with some of the 
French bishops, respecting a union between the two churches. 
He died in 1737 ; having published a translation of the Epistles 
of the Apostolical Fathers ; an Exposition of the Church Cate- 
chism : several sermons, tracts against Popery, &c. 

* * This gentleman founded the Corporation of the Sons 
of the Clergy. He was a great sufferer in the Civil Wars; 
having been shot in the head with a fowling piece, by the go- 
vernor of Wareham ; poisoned in another garrison ; imprisoned 
about twenty times, and deprived of his preferments; in which 
however, he was reinstated at the Restoration. 

f f Dr. Lisle had formerly been chaplain to the English 
factories at Smyrna and Aleppo. Some inscriptions, collected 
by him whilst at Aleppo, were published by Mr. Chishull, in 
his Antiquitates Attica:. , 

Justices 



DORSETSHIRE. 



213 



Justices of Ireland) who diecl archbishop of Ar- 
ma'gb, aged 70, in the year 1724. 

BLANPFORD ST. MARY.] At Blandford, or Bland- 
ford Parva, St. Mary, or Blandford Parva, situated 
throe-quarters of a mile south from Blandford Fo- 
rum, was bom the celebrated antiuuary, Browne 
Willis.* 

BIUANBTONF.]. The little village of Brianstone, 
or Blandford Brian, lies about one mile and a half 
N. W. from Blandford Forum. Briaustone is not 
remarkable for any thing but the elegant mansion of 
Berkeley Portman-, Esq. This mansion, observes 
Mr. Hutchins, " has been newly built of free-stone, 
nearly on the site of the old mansion, from the de- 
signs of Mr. Wyutt ; its dimensions are 112 feet by 
100. The offices are erected in a separate building, 
and are very spacious and convenient, communicat- 
ing with the house by an inclosed passage. The 
.hall, which is to the east, is 24 feet by 30, and has a 
large niche or tribune, eight feist deep facing the 
entrance, which leads to an octangular stair-case, 
30 feet in diameter, in the centre of the house, with 
a gallery round, level with the bed-chamber story, 
and communicating with all the apartments on that 
floor. This gallery is formed by eight scagliola 
columns and eight pilasters, which have, with other 
well-chosen ornaments, a beautiful effect. To the 
right of the hall, as you enter, is an eating room, 24 
feet by 36, and 18 high; and to the left a drawing- 
room of the same dimensions. Beyond the drawing- 
room, facing the south, likewise, is a library, 24 by 
30, of the same height as those before mentioned. 
These apartments are finished in an elegant style, 
and admired for their proportions as well as deco- 
rations." One of the apartments contains a very 
fine painting by Stubbs of a tysrer basking at the 
entrance of his den. A fine cliff, with the river 
flowing before it, extends, in the form of a crescent, 
from the mansion to Blandford bridge. This, with 
other beautiful contiguous objects, renders the views 
from the house highly delightful. 

The manor of Brianstone was purchased by Sir 
William Portman, from the last heir of Rogers, in 
the reign of Charles II. Sir William died without 



* This gentleman *as born in September, 1682. He was 
the son of Thomas Willis, Esq. of Bletcliley, in Buckingham- 
shire, and grandson to the celebrated physician oi the same 
name. The early part of his education was received at Beck- 
hampton School, in Bucks, whence lie was removed to West- 
minster ; and there, from contemplating its venerable abbey, 
sprung his desire for antiquarian knowledge. While here he 
had the misfortune to lose both his parents in the course of 
three months ; a misfortune which so oppressed his spirits, and 
injured his health, that it nearly disqualified him for study. At 
Hie age of seventeen, however, he eutered as a Gentleman 
Commoner, of Christ Church, Oxford, under the tuition of 
Dr. Edward Weils. After he left the University, he resided 
three years with Dr. Wolton, the author of Leges Wallicac ; 
where his desires for antiquarian and classic literature were fur- 
ther incited. In 1705, he was elected knight of the shin- ( r 
Buckingham. In 1707 he married Catherine, the daughter of 
Daniel Eliot, in Cornwall, and shortly after built Blake Hall, 
at Bletchley, in Buckinghamshire. He afterwards purchased 

vJt. ir. NO. 60. 



issue, and devised the estate to his cousin Henry 
Seymour, fifth son of Sir Edward. This gentleman 
also died without issue, and the estate, by a further 
limitation of Sir William's will, devolved to William 
Berkeley, Esq. of Pylle, in the county of Somerset, 
who, by an act passed in the reign of George II. 
assumed the name and arms of Portman. 

BRIUPORT.] The borough and market-town of 
Bridport, so denominated from the river Brit, which, 
falls into the sea near the harbour, is in the hundred 
and division to which it gives name. Bridport is 
14| miles W. by N. from Dorchester, and 134f 
W. S. W. from London. It lies in a vale surround- 
ed by hills, between two rivulets, one of which runs 
under the west, the other under the east bridge. 
Its distance north from the sea is about a mile : the 
soil is deep and miry. 

From the account in the Domesday Survey, it 
appears that Bridport was a considerable place pre- 
viously to the Conquest. It mentions that in th 
time of Edward the Confessor there were 120 houses, 
a mint master, and half an acre of land belonging to 
the Bishop of Saresbnrie. Henry the Third incor- 
porated the town, subjecting them to pay into th 
exchequer the annual sum oi' forty shillings. Suc- 
ceeding monarchs confirmed the charter ; and James 
I. ordered that the bailiffs should be chosen an- 
nually, and that the corporation should consist of 
fifteen burgesses, with power to chuse a recorder. 
Charles I. granted them their present charter. The 
first return to Parliament was made in the reign of 
Edward I. The right of election is in the inhabi- 
tants of the place, paying scot and lot. 

The history of Bridport contains nothing re- 
markable. Being a place of inconsiderable strength 
it was during the Civil Wars alternately possessed 
by the Royal and Parliamentary forces. In the un- 
successful attempt of the Duke of Monmouth, many 
excesses were committed, and twelve followers of 
that unfortunate nobleman executed there. 

Bridport, according to the Population Returns of 
1811, contains 529 houses, and 3507 inhabitants. It 
is spacious, and consists of throe streets, which re- 
semble in their form the letter T. Its manufacture 



Whaddon Hall (Vide Modern Panorama, Vol. I. pp. 140, 187) 
with an estate of about 100/. per annum, which induced him 
to sell his estates in this county. At the revival of the Society 
of Antiquaries, in 1717, he was elected a member; in 1720 he 
received the degree of M. A. and in 1749 that of L. L. D. from 
his own University, to which, in 1741, he had presented his ca- 
binet of English coins, supposed to be at that time the most 
complete in England. ^ et the University, thinking it too 
large a benefaction, considering his great family, purchased the 
167 gold coins it contained for liO guineas, After immense 
labor in ecclesiastical and provincial antiquity, he rose to the 
highest celebrity. His History of Cathedrals, Notitia Parlia- 
menlaria, and other publications, are in great esteem ; and hit 
MS. collections for Buckinghamshire, to the extent of 150 
volumes, in the Picture Gallery at Oxford, are sufficient spe- 
cimens of his assiduity. He died at Whaddon Hall, in Fe- 
bruary 1760, aged seventy-eight, and was buried at Fenny 
Strattord Chapel, which he had solicited subscriptions to re- 
build, and where a monument was placed to his memory. 

SB i 



214 



DORSETSHIRE. 



is chiefly nets, lines, twines, cordage, and sail-cloth. 
Of these such quantities are exported, that it has 
been computed 1500 tons of hemp and flax are 
forked up annually. This manufacture has long 
been flourishing, and was so much in repute in the 
time of Henry the Vlllth. that cordage for the whole 
navy of England was ordered to be made exclu- 
sively here. A Bridport dagger is a saying among 
the common people for a halter, and hence comes 
the expression " At Bridport be made good dag- 
gers." 

In the centre of the town, erected on the ruins of 
an old church dedicated to Saint Andrew, stands 
the Market House and Town Hall, both very hand- 
some and convenient buildings. Bridport also con- 
tains a Gaol, a Charity School, and three Alms- 
houses. There were, also, formerly two churches, 
but only one, that dedicated to St. Mary, now re- 
mains. This is a large and ancient building, in the 
form of a cross, with a tower in the centre adorned 
with pinnacles and battlements. In the interior of 
this church is a grey marble tomb, with the follow- 
ing inscription in old English : 

" Hie jacet Willi'mus, filitts Elizabet' de Juliers 
ComitissaRancie, Consanguine' Philip ****" * 

Anciently, at the east end of the town, near the 
bridge, stood a priory ; at the west-end was an hos- 
pital, and in various other parts religious founda- 
tions, of which no remains now appear. 

An act was passed in 1722 for restoring the haven 
nnd pier : this haven is situated to the south of the 
town, at the mouth of the river Brit. Several at- 
tempts have been made to make it a port, but they 
have proved ineffectual, and Bridport never appears 
to have possessed any maritime consequence. 
*' The cliffs here," observes Dr. Maton, " are coin- 
posed of sand, though the surrounding country is 
covered with lime-stone, full of shells. The height 
of the cliffs is in some places nearly 200 feet ; and 
they contain belemnita?, and other fossils ; besides 
pyrites, gypsum, hepatic ore, &c." 

The town of Bridport had the honour of giving 
first an Irish, and then an English title, to the gal- 
lant Sir Alexander Hood, in the year 1796. 

BROWNSEA. Brownsea or Branksea Isle is in the 
Shaston division. It is an island of a circular form, 
lying at the east end of the bay of Poole, opposite 
the entrance ; three miles N. W. from Studland, 
and about the same distance S. E. from Poole. In 
length it is about one mile and a half, and in breadth 
three quarters of a mile ; but becomes narrower 
towards the east. It lies pretty high, and, accord- 
ing to Hutchins, contains 800 acres. Its soil is 
andy, and the whole island over-run with heath, 

* " Philippa," says Mr. Hutchins, " Queen to Edward the 
Third, and daughter to William, Earl of Renault, died 1309. 
The King, to oblige her, created her kinswoman's husband, 
Earl of Cambridge. William, here buried, was son of Sir 
Eustace Dabrigecourt, Knight, second son of Ihe Lord Dabri- 



furze, and fern. In the reign of Charles II. it was 
the property of Sir Robert Clayton, whose heirs 
sold it, in 1726, to William Benson, Esq. for the 
sum of 300/. It now belongs to the Sturt family, 
who have made considerable alterations and im- 
provements. At the east end of the island stands 
Brownsea Castle, which in the time of Elizabeth, 
was built by the Corporation of Poole, for the de- 
fence of the town and harbour. This castle was 
fortified during the Civil Wars, but falling into 
decay, was converted by Humphrey Sturt, Esq. into 
a family mansion. A number of curious plants are 
found on this island, many specimens of which were 
collected by Auditor Benson, and for a long time 
preserved in the hall of the castle. 

BULLBARROW.] Bullbarrow is an encampment of 
considerable size, situated upon the summit of a 
hill four miles N. W. from Milton. Its shape is 
nearly circular; and it is surrounded by a deep 
ditch and two low ramparts. lu an adjacent field 
numerous Roman coins have been discovered. To 
the north-east and west, Bullbarrow commands very 
extensive prospects. 

CANFORD.] Canford, or Canford Magna, is in 
the Shaston division, 3 miles S. E. by E. from Wim- 
borne Minster. It is situated on the south side of 
the Stour ; and formerly belonged to the Longespees 
and Montucules, earls of Salisbury, the ruins of 
whose house were remaining here till 1765. The 
manor now belongs to Sir John Webb, in whose 
park, are some very large chesnut trees, one of them 
measuring 37 feet round. A short time before 
Camden wrote, James, baron Montjoy, set up works 
at this place for making coperas and alum. 

In Canford, some years ago, stood part of the 
old mansion belonging to the lords of the manor, 
and knowu by the appellation of " John of Gaunt's 
Kitchen." Of these ancient remains as they stood 
before the year 1765, Hutchins gives the following 
description : " Adjoining to the north was, till 
very lately, a long range of the most ancient build- 
ing in the county, the remains of the seat of the an- 
cient lords of this manor. Near the east end were 
the remains of a very large gate, with a tower over 
it, of which only the stair-case remained. In the 
stable was a very large chimney without any funnel, 
and a vast square window, reaching from the top to 
the bottom of the house, projecting above three feet, 
over this, another room, ascended to by narrow 
winding stone stairs, perhaps the dining room, in 
which was a chimney like the former. Towards the 
west end was a large old kitchen, called by the coun- 
try people, John of Gaunt's Kitchen. It was made 
a brew-house, and had a remarkably large chimney, 
eighteen feet broad, and six feet and a half high in 

gecourt, in Renault, and of Elizabith, daughter of Gerard, 
Earl of Juliers, and widow of John Plantag'enet, Eavl of Kent, 
who died without issue, and was son of Edmund of Wood- 
stock." 

7 the 



DORSETSHIRE. 



515- 



the qrown of the arch. The windows, though for 
tlTc most part walled up, were some elliptical and 
some square, but did not project. On the outside 
of the east end, were three large chimnies entire, 
very broad at the bottom, but narrowing upwards by 
several interchangings. The funnels were indented 
or embattled on the top ; the doors were small and 
low ; some square, and the arches of others elliptical 
or circular ; the walls in general four feet thick. 
These buildings were entirely taken down in 1765." 
Mr. Hutchins appears to have been mistaken, when 
he says they were " entirely taken down" as some 
part of the kitchen was remaining in 1785. 

The manor of Canford, shortly after the Conquest, 
belonged to Peter Lucyan, and subsequently had 
various possessors. It now belongs to Sir John 
Webb, who purchased it of Henry, Earl of Hun- 
tingdon. 

At Little Canford, about a mile N. W. from Ham 
Preston, in the Shaston division, is a small but 
handsome seat belonging, we believe, to Mr. Hum- 
phreys. 

CERNE ABBAS.] The market-town Cerne Abbas, 
er Cernill, is situated in the Sherborne division, 
eight miles N. N. W. from Dorchester, and 120{ 
S. W. by W. from London. It is a small town, 
composed of four or five streets of tolerably built 
houses ; situated in a pleasant vale, and watered by 
the Ccrne. Its inhabitants are principally employ- 
ed in malting and brewing, though a small manu- 
factory for silk has been established. This parish, 
according to the Population Returns of 1801, con- 
tained 165 houses, and 847 inhabitants : but since 
that period it lias greatly increased. 

Cerne is chiefly entitled to notice from the remains 
of its abbey, which William of Malmsbury, Cam- 
den, and some other antiquary, state to have been 
built by St. Augustine. The zeal of this saint for 
the conversion of the Saxons, led him, it is said, to 
visit these parts, and perform several miracles ; but 
DO decisive evidence, however, appears, that Au- 
gustine ever travelled so lar i'rom Kent. The ear- 
liest account of any religious foundation here, which 
can be depended on, places its commencement about 
the year 870, when Edwald, or Eadwald, brother of 
St. Edmund the Martyr, king of the East Angles, 
affected by the murder of his brother by the Danes, 
laid aside his crown, and commencing hermit, fixed 
his retreat near a spring in this county, called Silver 
Well, supposed to have been produced by St. 
Austin. 

Ailmer, ^Iward, or j^gleward, a very rich man, 
venerating the memory of the pious monarch, built 
by the advice and assistance of the famous St. Dun- 
stan, a monastery on the same spot, in honor of St. 
Mary, St. Peter, and St. Benedict. This founda- 
tion he richly endowed, and further increased its 
value by the reliques of St. Edwald, to whom the 
monastery was in after ages dedicated. This noble 
endowment seems to have been much abused, as, 
before the new foundation, the house, which stood 



where the parish church is now, had but three monki 
of the Benedictine order. 

Among the MSS. in the Public Library, at Cam- 
bridge, which formerly belonging to Bishop Moore, 
is one of remarkable antiquity, supposed to havo 
been the property of Cerne Abbey. It contains a 
collection of lessons and prayers, written in the an- 
cient Saxon character ; and, on several leaves in- 
serted in the beginning, contains, according to the 
custom of those ages, particulars relating to the 
abbey. The account begins with grants of indul- 
gences to the faithful visiting and offering up their 
devotions at the several altars here ; as likewise ac- 
counts of the respective dedications, lists of the ab- 
bey possessions, and various other particulars. 
Thomas Cortou, the last abbot, and sixteen monks, 
surrendered this house to John Tregonwell at the 
general suppression, 1539, when, according to Dug- 
dale, it was valued at 515/. 17.v. \Q\d. The abbot 
had a pension of 100/. and the prior and monks in. 
proportion. The manor, demesnes, and tythes, of 
Cerne, belonging to the abbey, were denfised, to- 
gether with the site of the monastery, for fifty years, 
to Pfiitip Vantoilder, at an annual rent of 37/. 13?. 
id. The estate, after passing through several 
hands, came to the Pitts of Stratford. Say, one of 
whose descendants is the present possessor. 

The remains of Cerue Abbey, though not many, 
are interesting. Of the chureh there appear no ves- 
tiges ; and we can only judge of its magnitude ami 
splendor, from the number of altars, chantries, &c. 
mentioned as belonging to it. Of the Abbey-house 
a chamber or t%vo, built by Abbot Vanne, still exists; 
and on some glazed tiles, in a lower room, arc the 
abbey arms. These apartments form part of an 
ancient mansion, chiefly built out of the ruins, which 
Denzil, Lord Holies, afterwards repaired, and re- 
sided in. The chief fragment is the Gate House, 
which stands rather northward of the last mentioned 
edifice, and consists of a large, embattled tower, of 
three stories, in tolerable preservation. In the low- 
er room, are two escutcheons, containing the arms 
of the monastery, and those of Richard, Earl of 
Cornwall. Above this gateway, or arch, are two 
large, elegant bow windows ; under each are eight 
pannels, containing as many escutcheons, with the 
various arms of the Earl of Cornwall before men- 
tioned, Fitz- James, France and England, and the 
Abbey. The groined ceilings within, likewise, con- 
tain numerous arms. Its other reliques are, a largo 
stone Barn, supported by buttresses, standing at a 
small distance from the gateway, and traces of the 
ancient park and gardens, which are known by the 
name of Beauvoir. 

Cerne Church, dedicated to St. Mary, is a plain 
neat structure in the pointed style, with a lofty in- 
dented tower and four pinnacles. This structure is 
supposed to have been built by the abbots, for the 
use of the town, in the middle of the fifteenth cen- 
tury. It consists of a body, chancel, and side aisles; 
on each side of the first are three windows, 

At 



2 If) 



DORSETSHIRE. 



At one end of the town stands an immense chalk 
hill, at the declivity of which, cut iu chalk, is a 
gigantic figure of 180 feet in length. It represents 
a man holding a club in his right hand, and extend- 
ing the other. Between the legs are three letters, 
and above them some ciphers ; but these are quite 
illegible. According to the tradition of the vulgar, 
a Polyphemus, moustrum horrendutn ingens, hav- 
ing feasted on some sheep at Blackmore, laid him- 
self down on this hill to sleep. In this situation the 
incensed peasants found him, and instantly dis- 
patched him : and afterwards traced his exact di- 
mensions to commemorate the achievement. 

CHARBOROUGH.] This place, once a manor and 
hamlet, in the Shaston division, tv/o miles S. from 
East Morden, is at this time remarkable only for the 
ancient seat of the Erie and Drax families, now be- 
longing to R. E. D. Grosvcnor, Esq. It is situated 
in a pleasant vale, surrounded by hills whose sides 
are covered with wood. The mansion is a plain 
building of red stone. The interior possesses, on 
the ceiling over tho staircase, a painting ol the 
Judgment of Paris, by Sir James Thoriihill ; and 
on a small building in the grounds, the following 
inscription appears : 

Under this ROOF, in the Year 1686, 

A set of patriotic Gentlemen of this Place 

Concerted the Plan 

of the 

GLORIOUS REVOLUTION, 

With the immortal KING WILLIAM ; 

To whom we owe our Deliverance 

From Popery and Slavery ; 
The expulsion of the Tyrant l\ace of 

STUARTS ; 
The Restoration of our Liberties ; 

Securities of our Properties ; 

Establishment of our national Honor and Wealth. 

Englishmen, remember this vEra ! 

and 
Consider that your Liberty, obtained by the Virtues 

of 

YOUR ANCESTORS, 
must be maintained 

by 

YOURSELVES. 

Dorset, 17RO. 

Thomas Erie Drax, 

CHARMOUTH.] The ancient little village of Char- 
mouth, deriving its name from its situation near the 
mouth of the. Char, is in the Bridport division, two 
miles N. E. by E. from Lyme Regis. This village, 
which lies at the foot of a steep eminence, is sup- 
posed by Mr. Baxter, to be the " Carixa" of Ra- 
vennas. Two considerable battles were fought here 
between the Danes and Saxons : the first in 833, 
the latter in 840. Charles the Second, after the un- 
successful battle of Worcester, passed through this 
Tillage, where he was very near being discovered. 
Lord Wilmot, one of the King's party, stopped to 
have his horse shod ; and the manner in which the 
old shoes were fastened, excited the suspicion of the 
blacksmith, that the rider came from the north. The 



alarm being immediately given, the king was par- 
sued, and with difficulty escaped to France. 

The cliffs round Charmouth, are chiefly composed 
of indurated marl, and abound with madrepores, am- 
monite', fic/emi/itfi', skeletons of fishes, and other ani- 
mals, iu a fossil state. The Lucius hetmontii is com- 
mon here, and is believed by the vulgar to be a. fos- 
sil turtle. Various curiosities of this nature are di- 
ligently collected by a man living at Charmouth, 
who is known throughout the county by the name of 
the " Cirri-mim." A singular phenomenon was ob- 
served near Charrnouth in August, 1-331. After 
very hot weather, followed by rains, the cliff round 
were observed to burn with a visible flame. This 
continued at intervals till winter. The Hame, how- 
ever, except the sun was shining, was not visible 
during the day ; but at night, and at a distance, it 
might be distinctly seen ; yet when the spectator 
drew near he could perceive nothing but smoke. 
The cliffs are composed of a dark coloured loam, 
impregnated with bitumen ; and, on examination, 
were found to contain large quantities of martial 
pyrites and marcasites. A dark coloured substance 
was also found, resembling a coal-cinder, which 
being powdered and washed, and the water slowly 
evaporated to a pellicle, its salts appeared to be a 
martial vitriol. 

CHIDYOCK.] Chidyock, orChidrick, in the Brid- 
port division, 2J miles W. from the town of that 
name, was formerly remarkable for a beautiful cas- 
tle, of which there are now only very indistinct re- 
mains. It was anciently the lordship and seat of 
the Chidyock family, but afterwards came by mar- 
riage to the Arundale's. 

CHILCOMB.] On the top of a hill, at Chilcomb, 
5 1 miles E. S. E. from Bridport, is a large fortifi- 
cation, 1330 feet by 672, whose area is several acres. 
It is encircled by a single low rampart and a shallow 
ditch ; and in the middle are two or three small 
barrows. Its form is irregular, and its entrances 
are on the north and south. 'JTfie hill is very steep, 
but commands a very extensive prospect, and is one 
of the most spacious camps in this part of the coun- 
ty. This encampment was probably made by the 
Saxons, as its advantageous situation for viewing 
the sea-coasts, its narrow foss, shallow, circular, 
and of great circumference, exactly accord with 
others constructed by that people. 

CLIFTOM]. Cliftou, on the right bank of the 
Idel, was the ancient seat of the Maulbanch and 
Horsey families, and, recently of the Earl of Ux- 
bridgc. The gateway ascribed to Inigo Jones was 
taken down, but purchased entire by Earl Paulett, 
who set it up in its pristine form as an entrance or 
porter's lodge to his magnificent park at Hinton 
Saint George. 

CORFE CASTLE.] The town of Corfe Castle, si- 
tuated in what is termed the Isle of Purbeck, of 
which hereafter, is in the Blandibrd division, 23 
miles E. S. E. from Dorchester, and 115 J S. W. 
from London. It is an ancient market town, that, 

most 



DORSETSHIRE. 



217 



most probably owes its origin to the castle, which 
wjis built previously to the year 980. As the town, 
however, is unnoticed in the Domesday-book, it 
could not have been of any note till after the Con- 
quest. The manor and castle appear to have de- 
scended together, and to have been held by various 
owners. In the reign of Henry IV. they were 
granted to the Beauforts, Earls of Somerset, from 
whom they were taken by Edward IV. In the reign 
of Henry V11I. they were bestowed on Henry, 
Duke of Richmond ; but after his death reverted to 
the crown. Edward VI. bestowed them on the 
Duke of Somerset. On that nobleman's attainder, 
the demesne lands of the castle were leased for 21 
years, on a fee-farm rent of 7/. 13. id. per annum. 
Queen Elizabeth granted the castle, manor, and 
whole isle of Purbeck, to Sir Christopher llatton, 
whose heirs continued possessors till the commence- 
ment of the seventeenth century- At that period 
Sir William Mat ton gave the manor to Elizabeth, 
his wife, who afterwards married Chief Justice 
Coke, of whom it was purchased in 1035, by Sir 
John Baukes, Attorney General to Charles 1. Of 
this gentleman's descendants it is still the property. 

This place, though an ancient borough by pre- 
scription, was not incorporated till the time of Eliza- 
beth, wheu the first return to Parliament was made. 
The charter was obtained by Sir Christopher Hat- 
ton : this, besides other privileges, invested them 
with the same liberties as the Cinque Ports. The 
town is governed by a mayor and eight barons : the 
right of electing the members to be returned to Par- 
liament, is vested in all persons within the borough, 
paying scot and lot, who are possessed of any mes- 
suage, or are tenants of one for life. 

The town of Corfe Castle is composed principally 
of two streets of mean stone buildings : the number 
of houses, as given in the Population returns of 
1S11, was 105; of inhabitants, 744. Numbers of 
the latter are employed in the clay works and stone 
quarries in the neighbourhood ; and some few in 
the knitting of stockings. The children of the 
poorer classes are-instructed in common learning, 
and the rules of good conduct, in Sunday Schools, 
which originated in the noble and highly serviceable 
exertions of William Morton Pitt, Esq. of King- 
ston House. The Church is a large, and ancient 
structure, situated at the east part of the town, near 
the commencement of the two streets. It consists 
of a uave, a chancel, two aisles, and a large indent- 
ed tower. The roof is sustained by twelve irregu- 
lar arches ; and connected with the porch are four 
pillars in the Saxon style. 

Corfe Castle, so celebrated in history, which 
gives name to the town where it is situated, stands 
on a steep rocky hill, opposite to the church, and 
in the opening of those ranges of hills which inclose 
the east part of the isle. From its situation be- 
tween the ends of tbese hills, which overlook the 
tops of the highest towers, it is deprived of much 
of its natural and artificial strength : notwithstand- 

Y(L. 11. NO. 01. 



ing, from the massy thickness of its walls, and the 
ascent to it from all sides but the south being so 
steep, it must, before the invention of artillery, have 
been one of the most impregnable fortresses in the 
kingdom. The Saxons were so sensible of the im- 
portance of this castle, for the command of the isle, 
that they justly termed it Corfe Gate, as being the 
principal pass or avenue. 

A strong bridge of four high, narrow arches, leads 
over the deepmoat, which separates the castle from the 
town. The castle wasformerly composed of four wards, 
of which the first remains tolerably entire, probably 
from the great strength of its walls, which measure 
nine yards in thickness. The outer gate, which leads 
to the first ward, is large, and has a round tower on, 
each side. Within the ward are six other towers, 
on one of which are the arms of Marshal, Earl of 
Pembroke. SOUK old people who were living in 
1710, and remembered the siege of the castle, 
showed a room in this ward, where smiths, plumb- 
ers, and other artificers, wrought. After passing 
another bridge, the " Second Ward" is entered, by 
a gate similar to the former. The left side of this 
gate, with the tower, is parted from the wall and 
rest of the gate, and projects four feet nine inches 
further than the other part. Just within the gate, 
on the right hand, was a flight of stairs, which led 
up to the Great Tower. 

At the higher end the hill forms an angle, called 
" The Dungeon," and the tower on its extremity is 
called " The Dungeon Tower," and is said to hare 
been the place where prisoners were confined. The 
wall on the west in this angle, seems to be the most 
ancient part of the castle, and is built in a different 
style from the rest : the courses of the stone being 
oblique, in the Roman manner, shew it was built so, 
early in the Saxons times, when that mode was not 
quite laid aside. The " Third Ward" appears to 
have been the chief. In the west part stood th 
" Great Tower," two battlements of which, with 
the northern side and part of the southern, are still 
remaining. This seems to have been the state pri- 
son, all the windows that remain being extremely 
high from the floor to prevent escape. A little 
south of this tower is a small platform, which over- 
looks the town, and affords a fine prospect over the 
south and west parts of the isle. In this ward the 
Lords of the castle appear to have resided ; and the 
remains of the buildings show a more neat and ele- 
gant taste. " The Fourth Ward," which lies on 
the north side of the last, is the smallest. In the 
east end of this, is a sally-port, where the enemy 
entered when the castle was surprised ; and near it 
a well, into which, tradition asserts, Lady Bankes 
threw money and plate to a considerable amount. 

The remains of the entrance which led to the se- 
coud ward arc, perhaps, the most remarkable. The 
tower near it is also very singular : " The latter," 
observes Dr. Maton, " which once adjoined to the 
gate was separated with a part of the arch at the 
time of the demolition of the castle, and is moved 
3 i down 



218 



DORSETSHIRE. 



down the precipice, preserving its perpendicularity, 
and projecting- almost five feet below the correspond- 
ing part. Another of the towers on the same side, 
is, on the contrary, inclined so much, that a specta- 
tor will tremble when passing under it. The sin- 
gular position of these towers seems to have been 
occasioned through the foundations being under- 
mined (for blowing them up) in an incomplete man- 
ner. On the higher part of the hill stands the keep, 
or citadel, which is at some distance from the centre 
of the fortress, and commands a \ie\v of boundless 
extent, to the north and west : it has not hitherto 
suffered much diminution from its original height ; 
the fury of the winds being resisted less by the 
thickness of the walls, than by the strength of the 
cement. The upper windows have Saxon arches, 
but are apparently of a later date than any other 
part of the building west of the keep, the stones of 
which being placed herring-bone fashion, prove it to 
be of the earliest style. The chapel is of a very late 
date, as appears from its obtuse Gothic arches ; and 
1 have really an idea that almost all the changes of 
architecture, from the reign of Edgar, to that of 
Henry the Seventh, may be traced in this extensive 
and stupendous ruin. 

" We could not view without horror the dun- 
geons which remain in some of the towers : they re- 
called to our memory the truly diabolical cruelty of 
King John, by whose order twenty-two prisoners, 
confined in them, were staryed to death. Matthew 
of Paris, the historian, says, that many of these un- 
fortunate men were among the first of the Poitevin 
Nobility. Another instance of John's barbarous 
disposition, was his treatment of Peter of Pontefract, 
a poor hermit, who was imprisoned in Corfe Castle 
for prophesying the deposition of that Prince. 
Though the prophesy was in some measure fulfilled, 
by the surrender which John made of his crown to 
the Pope's Legate, the year following, yet the im- 
prudent prophet was sentenced to be dragged 
through the streets of Wareham, tied to horses' 
tails." 

The date of the building of this fortress is un- 
known ; but, from some circumstances, it appears 
probable that King Edgar was its founder. That it 
was not built before 887, or 888, the time when 
the nunnery at Shaftesbury was founded, is certain, 
from an inquisition taken in the fifty-fourth of Hen- 
ry the Third; in which the Jurors said, " that the 
abbess and nuns at Shaston (Shaftesbury) had with- 



* Hutchins, in his History of Dorset, gives the following 
more circumstantial account: " The first mention of this cas- 
tle in our histories, is A. D. 978, as the Saxon Annals, (though 
some of our historians say 979, and 981,) upon occasion of the 
barbarous murder of Edward, King of the West Saxons, son of 
King Edgar, committed litre by his mother-in-law, Elfrith, or 
Elfnda ; 15 cal. April, in the middle of Lent : the foulest deed, 



(a) Henry Hunt. p. 204. 



out molestation, before the foundation of the Castle 
at Corfe, all wrecks within their manor of Kingston, 
in the Isle of Purheck." Mr. Aubrey, in his Monu- 
menta Britannica, says that he had been told, that 
mention was made of Corfe Castle in the reign of 
King Alfred ; but if it had actually existed in the 
time of that monarch, it would surely have been 
more publicly known. The short reigns that follow- 
ed could not allow time for so great an undertak- 
ing ; therefore to idgar, who enjoyed more peace 
than almost any of his predecessors, and who founded, 
or repaired, no fewei- than forty- seven monasteries, the 
origin of this castle may, with the greatest probabi- 
lity, be ascribed. His second wife, Elfrida, resided 
here at the beginning of her widowhood ; and dur- 
ing that residence committed the murder of King 
Edward, Edgar's son and successor, of which the 
following particulars are related by William of 
Malmsbury. 

" King Edward being hunting in a forest neare 
the sea, upon the south-east coast of the couutie of 
Dorset, and in the Isle of Purbecke, came neare 
unto a fair stronge castell, seated on a little river 
called Corfe, wherein his mother-in-law, Elfrida, 
with her soue Ethelred, then lived : the King, ever 
beareing a kinde affection to them, beeing soe neare, 
would needes make knowne soe much by his per- 
sonall visitation ; which haveing resolved, and bee- 
ing either of purpose, or by chance, singled from his 
followers, hee rode to the Castell gate. The Queen, 
wbo longe had looked for an opportunitie, that, by 
makeing him awaye, shee might make waye for her 
own sonne to the crowne, was glad the occasion 
nowe offered itselfe ; and therfore, with a modest 
and humble behaviour, shee bad him welcome, de- 
sireing to enjoye his presence that night. But hee, 
haveing performed what hee purposed, and doubt- 
ing his companie might find him misseing, tolde her, 
that hee now intended on horseback to drink to her 
and his brother in a cuppe of wine, and so leave her ; 
which beeing presented unto him, the cup was noe 
sooner at his mouth, but a knife was at his back, 
which a servant, appointed by this treacherous wo- 
man, stroke into him. The Kinge, nndeing himselfe 
hurt, sett spurs to his horse, thinking to recover his 
companie ; but the wounde being deepe, and faint- 
ing through the losse of much blood, he felle from 
his horse, which dragged him by one foot hanging 
in the stirrup, untill he was left dead at Corfe gate, 
Anno Dom. 979."* 

In 



says the Saxon annalist, ever committed by the Saxons since 
they landed in Britain. This transaction, and the motives of 
it, are so fully recorded by all our historians, that I shall 
content myself with mentioning a few incidents from Bromp- 
ton." 

' This unfortunate Prince, hunting in a large wood near 
Wareham, when the chace was ended, towards evening, (a) re- 
collecting 



DORSETSHIRE. 



219 



In the time of Stephen, Baldwin de Rivers, Earl 
of Devon, seized the castle ; and though the King 
endeavoured to dispossess him, he was unable. 
King John appears to have resided here for some 
time, as several writs, issued by him, are dated at 
Corfe. When Henry the Third was crowned, Peter 
de Mauley, the Governor of the Castle, was sum- 
moned to attend the ceremony of the coronation, and 
to bring with him the re.galia, entrusted to his care 
by John. The next year he delivered up the Castle 
to the King, with all its military engines, ammuni- 



collecting that his brother resided hard b,y, resolved to make 
him a visit. Near this wood was Elfrida's house, where his 
mother was brought up, in a place called Corph, (Br. a body,) 
three miles from Warcharu, where now a famous castle is built. 
He had lost his attendants; which Elfrida having notice of, 
thought it a favourable opportunity to execute her wicked pur- 
pose ; and went to meet him with her wicked retinue; and in 
a most afl'able and friendly manner invited him to alight, which 
he declined, but expressed a desire lo see his brother. She 
then called for wine, which he had scarce put to his lips, when 
one of her attendants, who had given the King the kiss of peace, 
stabbed him in the belly, or, as others say, in the back. 
Knighton and Huntington say, Elfrida herself gave him both 
the kiss and the mortal wound, whilst he was drinking. Find- 
ing himself wounded, he rode away ; but, fainting with loss of 
blood, his foot entangled in the stirrup, and he was dragged a 
considerable way, till the horse stopped of his own accord. 
The servants sent by Elfrida to know the issue of her treachery, 
found the unhappy Prince dead, terribly defaced with the 
flints over which he had been dragged. The Queen, to con- 
ceal the fact, ordered his- body to be lodged in a house near, 
where it was covered with such mean clothes as were at hand. 
In this house lived a woman who was born blind, and maintain- 
ed by the Queen's alms. At midnight she found her sight 
restored, and, to her great terror, the house filled with light. 
On this spot a church was afterwards built. In the morning, 
the Queen, being informedofthesecircumstanr.es, fearing a 
discovery, ordered her attendants to convey the corpse secretly 
into a private and marshy place, where it could not easily be 
found. Ofchers say she caused it to be thrown into a well. 
She then, to prevent suspicion, retired to a mansion of hers, 
called Bere, ten miles distant. Her own son Ethelred express- 
ing his grief for his mother's wickedness, she beat him so 
severely with wax tapers, for want of something else, that he 
liated them ever after. Others say she had beaten Edward 
with them in Ethelred's presence. " The year following, the 
body was found, by the devout search of some faithful persons, 
by warning from heaven. A pillar of fire, descending from 
above, illuminated the place where it was hid. Some devout 
people of Wareham brought it to that vill, to the church of St. 
Mary's, and buried it in a plain manner on the east side, where 
a wooden church, afterwards built by religious persons, was to 
be seen in this author's time. The fountain where the body 
had lain yielded pure and sweet water, and was callpd St. Ed- 
ward's Fountain; at which infirm people were daily healed. 
The news of these transactions being circulated, Alfer, Earl of 
Mercia, a faithful adherent to the deceased King, hearing the 
body was found, resolved to move it to a more suitable place ; 
and, inviting the bishops, abbots, and m bility, to assist him, 
sent to Wolfrida, Abbess of Wilton, to come "with her nuns, to 
perform the exequies. In that house was a sister of King Ed- i 
ward, daughter of King Edgar of Wolfrida, before she became 
a nun. The company, being joined by a great multitude of 
the country people, came to Wareham ; where the body, on 
being taken out of the tomb, in which it had lain three years, 
was found as free from corruption as on the day it was placed 
iji if.. 1 hence it was, the same year, carried on a bier to 



tion, and jewels. Edward the Second, while a pri- 
soner, wa,s removed hither from Kenelworth Castle. 
Henry the Seventh repaired the Castle for the resi- 
dence of his mother, the Countess of Richmond, and 
the Parliament granted 2000/. for fitting it up ; yet 
it does not appear that that Princess ever inhabited 
it. Sir Christopher Hatton was its next repairer; 
who was most probably followed by Sir John 
Bankes, whose lady became illustrious from the gal- 
lant manner in which she defended it from the at- 
tacks of the Parliament's forces.* 

In 



Shaftesbury. Among the concourse of people, were two poor, 
lame persons, who were cured on approaching the bier. 
Elfrida, struck with remorse, prepared to follow the procession 
on horseback, and asked pardon for her crime ; but her utmost 
efforts could not prevent the horse from running backwards. 
She then attempted to go on toot, with no better success. 
Knyghton says, she tried several horses ; but not being able lo 
make them go on, or to get forward herself, she committed the 
charge of the business to Alfer. The Roy 1 corpse was received 
at Shaston by tin; Abbess, and entombed on the north side of 
the principal altar, 12 cal. March.' Elfrida's ambition to raise 
her own son to the throne, urged her to commit this execrable 
murder; and, in order to expiate it and others, she had recourse 
to the general remedy of that age for an uneasy conscience, 
founding and endowing two nunneries, at Ambresbury in Wilt- 
shire, and Whorwell in Hampshire; in which last she took the 
habit, and spent the remaining part of her lite in great austerity 
and superstitious dread, and wus buried there. The manner of 
this Prince's death, and the affection of the monks, whom he 
much favoured, gained him the surname of Martyr." 

* " When Lord Chief Justice Bankes," says Hutchins, 
" was gone to the King at York, in Easter term, 1042, his lady, 
with her children and family, retired hither, and remained in 
peace till May, 1643, when the rebels, commanded by Sir 
Walter Erie, and Sir Thomas Trenchard, having possessed 
themselves of all the towns on the sea coast, resolved to make 
themselves masters of this castle. On May Day, the Mayor, 
Barons, and gentlemen of this Isle, had been accustomed to 
course a stag, when some troops of horse from Dorchester, &c. 
came into the Isle, to surprise the gentlemen and castle. On 
this the hunters dispersed, and Lady Bankes ordered the gates 
to be shut. Some of them came to the castle, under pretence 
of seeing it, but were denied entrance. She, perceiving their 
design, called in a guard. The committee of Poole, suspecting 
her of an intention to victual and man the castle, demanded 
four small pieces of cannon ; but, on her request, that they 
might remain for her defence, and causing them to take oft" the 
carriages, it was allowed. A few days after, forl^ seamen came 
to demand them by virtue of a warrant from the commissioners ; 
but Lady Bankes, assisted by rive men only, and her maid 
servants, mounted them, and discharging one of them, they all 
fled. She then summoned help by beat of drum, and a consi- 
derable guard of her tenants and fiiends came to hc'r assistance, 
and fifty arms were brought in from the Ule. This guard 
continued a week, during which time letters were sent in, 
threatening, that, if the cannon were not delivered, greater 
force would be used, and the houses of her friends and neigh- 
bours would be tired. Two hundred weight of powder was 
intercepted ; and proclamation was made at Wareham, that no 
provisions should be sold tor her use. Strict watch was kept, 
that no message or intelligence should pass in or out of the 
cas'le. Being thus distressed, (all means of victualling the 
castle being taken away, 1 ) and slenderly provided with ammu- 
nition or victuals for a siege, they came to a treaty to deliver 
up the four pieces, the biggest of which was but a three pounder, 
on condition that she should enjoy pe;;ce and quietness. But 
she, not depemluig on this, took every opportunity to strengthen 
8 herstll 



220 



DORSETSHIRE. 



In the year 1646, through the treachery of Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Pitman, an officer of the garrison, 
the Parliamentary forces obtained possession. It 
was ordered to be immediately demolished ; and the 
walls and towers were blown up with gunpowder, 
or undermined and thrown down. " Thus," ob- 
serves Hutchins, " this ancient and magnificent fa- 
bric was reduced to a heap of ruins, and remains a 
lasting monument of the dreadful effects of anarchy, 
and the rage of civil war. The ruins are large, and 
allowed to be the noblest and grandest in the king- 
dom, considering the extent of the ground on which 
they tftand. The vast fragments of King's Tower, 
the round towers leaning as if ready to fall, the bro- 
ken walls, and vast pieces of them tumbled down 
into the vale below, form rtuch a scene of havock and 
desolation, as strikes every curious spectator with 
horror and concern." 

CKANBOURNE.] The ancient market-town of 
Cranbourne lies in the Shaston division, 33 miles 
north-east by east from Dorchester, and 93 west- 
south-west from London. This place was celebrat- 
ed even in the Saxon times for its monastery, and 
manor : the latter, about the year 950, belonged to a 
nobleman, called, from his delicate complexion, 

herself by the very menus by which the world thought she had 
weakened herself. " F'or the rebels, now looking upon themselves 
as sun;, grew remiss in their watches, ;fnd negligent in inter- 
cepting supplies; she made good use of this, and furnished 
herself with provisions, one hundred weight and a halt of powder, 
and match proportionable; and on the entrance of the King's 
forces, under Prince Maurice and the Marquis of Hertford, to 
'Blandford, she represented the condition and consequence of 
the place, and want of a commander. Captain Laurence, son 
of Sir Edward Laurence, was sent to command ; but he, coming 
\vithoiitacommission, could not order provisions and money 
till it was too late: there was also one Captain Bond, an old 
soldier, in the Castle. The first time the rebels came before 
it, they brought a body of between two and three hundred horse 
and foot, and two pieces of ordnance, which from the hills 
played on the Castle, fired four houses in the town, and sum- 
ntuned the Castle, but receiving a denial, left it. 

" June 23d, 1643, Sir Walter Erie, Captain Sydenham, Cap- 
tain Henry Jarvis, Captain Scott of Poole, with a body of five 
or six hundred, taking the opportunity of a misty morning, 
possessed themselves of the town. They brought a demy con- 
Don, a culverijie, and two sakcr*. With these, and their small 
arms, they played on the Castle from all quarters. They 
obliged the soldiers by oath to give no quarter in case of resist- 
ance, and endeavoured by all means to corrupt the defendants. 
To make their approaches to the walls with more safety, they 
made two engines, one called the Boar, the other the Sow, 
framed of hoards lined with woo', to deaden the shot. When 
the Sow moved forwards, the besieged aimed their shot at the 
legs, which were not covered ; nine run away, and one was 
killed out of eleven. The Boar durst not advance. The 
principal battery was from the church, which was their rampart 
and rendezvous. The surplice was made inlo two shirts. They 
broke the organ, and made the pipes serve for cases to hold 
powder and shot. They cut off the lead of the church, rolled 
it up, and shot it. Sir Walter Erie and the commanders earn- 
estly pressed on the soldier*; but, prodigal as they were of their 
blood, they were sparing enough of their own. Sir Walter 
never willingly exposed himself; and, being; once endangered 
by a shot through the coat, put on a bear's skin, and, for fear 
of the musket shot, for the besieged had no other, he was, seen 



Haylward de Meau. The grandson of De Meau, 
Brictricus, was sent into Norway as ambassador, 
where he refused to marry Matilda, who was after- 
wards united to William of Normandy : when this 
princess subsequently became Queen of England, 
she remembered the affront, and ordered the do- 
mains of Brictricus to be seized and himself impri- 
soned. This manor was granted to Queen Matilda, 
on whose death it reverted to the crown, and was 
given, by William Rufus, to his cousin Robert Fitz- 
Hamon. At his death it came into the possession 
of the Earl of Gloucester, and from him passed to 
the Mortimers, Earls of March. It hus since been 
the property of numerous different persons. In the 
time of the British, a college for six priests is said 
to have existed here : and on its site Haylward de 
Meau, before mentioned, founded a small monastery 
for Benedictines. In J10-2, Robert Fitz-Hamon 
rebuilt the church of Tewkesbury, a:nd translated all 
the monks, but three, hence to that place. The 
church at Tewke.sbury he converted into an abbey, 
and endowed it with rich possessions, leaving Cran- 
bourne merely as a cell to it. At the Dissolution, 
the revenue of Cranbourne monastery is not men- 
tioned, and it contained only a prior and two monks. 

to creep on all fours on the side of the hill. This cowardice 
of the assailants added courage and resolution to the defendants. 
They ence sallied to brave the rebels, rather than compelled 
by want, and brought in eight cows, and a bull. Another time 
five boys fetched in four cows. 

" Having spent much time and ammunition with little suc- 
cess, the Earl of Warwick sent them 130 mariners, and several 
cart-loads of petards, granadoes, &c. for an assault. They 
offered 20l. to the first man that should scale the wall, and so 
by descending sums to the twentieth man : but, as this order 
had no effect, they made them drunk with strong waters. Sir 
Walter, for tear he should be valiant against his will, was the 
only man who came sober to the assault. Thus armed with 
drink, they stormed the castle on all sides, and applied the scal- 
ing ladders ; and it was ordered by their leaders, that, when 
twenty men were entered, they should give a watch-word to 
the rest, which was "Old Watt;" an ominous word, as it 
proved. They divided their forces into two parties ; one as- 
saulted the middle ward, defended by Captain Laurence, and 
the greater part of the garrison ; the other assaulted the upper 
ward, which Lady Bankes, her daughters, her daughter's wo- 
men, and five soldiers, defended ; and to her eternal honour, 
as bravely performed it. For, by heaving over stones and hot 
embers, they repulsed the rebels, and kept them from climb- 
ing the ladders, to throw in wild fire, which they had ready in 
their hands. They had killed and wounded in the siege and 
assault 100 men. 

''Sir Waller, hearing the King's forces, under the Earl of 
Caernarvon, were advancing, retired to London, in great haste, 
and left Sydenham to bring oti'lhc ordnance, ammunition, and 
remainder of the soldiers, who retired into the church, intend- 
ing to march off in the night ; but as supper was set on the 
table, an alarm was given, that the King's forces were near. 
On this he left his supper, artillery, and ammunition, and took 
boat for Poole, leaving 100 horses on the shore, which the be- 
sieged made their prize. Thus alter six weeks strict siege, 
this castle, the key of those parts, was, by the resolution of that 
honourable lady, and the valour of Captain Laurence, and 
about eighty soldiers, with the loss of only two men, delivered, 
August 4th, 1643." 

The 



DORSETSHIRE. 



221 



The priory house, which was pulled down iu 1703, 
seems to have been built by Abbot Parker, as it had 
the- letters T. P. in several places. The church 
belonging to the priory, is now the parish church. 
It is very ancient, and contains various monuments 
of the family of the Hoopers. 

Craubourne is one of the largest parishes in the 
county of Dorset, and contains 125 houses, and 
737 inhabitants. It had the honour of being the 
birth-place of Edward Stillingileet, Bishop of Wor- 
cester.* 

DEWLISH.] At Dewlish, situated in the Bland- 
ford division, nine miles and a half south-west by 
west from Blandford Forum, was discovered, in a 
meadow, about the year 1740, a large Roman pave- 
ment. The length of this was nearly 325 feet, and 
its breadth 75. The white and black tessera? whicli 
composed it did not exceed an inch square. A cop- 
per Faustina, and an iron spur, were likewise dis- 
covered. 

On a neighbouring hill is an ancient fortification, 
surrounded by two ramparts and ditches. Its 
length, within the inner vallum, is about 1100 feet, 
and its breadth about 7o(), containing an area oi 
nearly seven acres. The outer vallum is about 120 
feet from the inner one, on the north and west side ; 
200, on the east ; and 150 on the south. The inner 
vallum is high, but the ditch, at the west end, is 
very shallow. The entrance of the inner rampart, 
is from the east, north-east, and south-west angles ; 
the last appears to be the principal, as the end of the 
inner rampart forms there two semi-circles, and 
those of the outer lap over each other, to render the 
passage more difficult. Op the south side of the 
outer vallum is a shallow ditch and low rampart. 
From its vicinity to the Roman road, and from the 
various coins and bones found in one of the barrows, 
it was evidently a Roman encampment. Mr. Pley- 
dell, the proprietor of an adjoining estate, erected 
an obelisk on the highest part. 

DORCHESTER.] Dorchester, the capital of the 
county, lies 119^ miles south-west by west from 
London. It is evident that Dorchester existed in 
the British ages, as- its Roman name, Durnovaria, 
the Passage of the River, is a word derived from 
The British. Richard of Cirencester calls it either 
by this name, or that of Durinum ; but Antoninus 
invariably Dtiruovaria. Ptolemy calls it Duiiium, 
which is in some copies erroneously written Dur- 
uium. Both appear corrupted from Duriimin. 
Dunim, according to Mr. Baxter, meant the Maiden 
('.istlc; while Durnovaria, implied the Town. 
These, however, are only different names for the 
same place, as Ptolemy expressly calls Dunium the 

* This learned and eminent prelate was born iti April, 1035. 
lie wus educated at St. John's College, Cambridge, of which 
hi- was chosen a fellow in !6.">3. In 10J7 he was presented to 
tlie rectory of Sutton, by his friend Sir Roger Btirgoyne, to 
whom he dedicated, in 1G6J, his " Origines Sacra:, or a Ra- 
tional Account of the Grounds of Natural and Revealed Reli- 
gion," 4to. He was soon after chosen preaoher of the UolJs 

vol.. n. No. 01. 



Town of the Durotriges. Canidsn says that Dur- 
novaria meant a Passage over the river Van? ; 
name which Baxter asserts anciently belonged to the 
Frome. Dr. Skinner, from the Cambro-British, 
defines Varia to be a ford, or bridge. The tradi- 
tions of the vulgar assign the name to a King Dorn, 
from a species of Roman coin sometimes found h.ere, 
which are called Dorupeunies. The proper etymo- 
logy of Durnovaria seems, however, to be from Va- 
ria, the British name of the Frome, and a contrac- 
tion of Durnium, or Dunium, meaning a Place on 
the river Vuria. The Saxons call this place Dx>rn- 
ceaster, from the British Dwyr, and the Saxon 
! Chester, a corruption from the Roman Castruin, a 
Camp, or Town : hence the Latin appellation Dor- 
cestria, in ancient records, and the modern one of 
Dorchester, evidently come. " In the Itineraries 
of Antoninus and Richard of Cirencester," observes 
Hutchins, " Dorchester appears as a Roman sta- 
tion : and, indeed, the ancient walls, the Via Iceni^ 
ana, on which it stands, the several vicinal roads 
that issue hence, coins, and other pieces of antiquity 
found here, Maiden Castle, and the Amphitheatre, near 
it, shew it to have been at that time a place of con- 
siderable note." 

Under the Saxons, Dorchester was very eminent, 
and Athelstan granted it two mints ; a privilege only 
given to cities' and walled towns. In 1008, Sueyn, 
King of Denmark, landed in Cornwall, to revenge, 
the massacre of his subjects. After ravaging Corn- 
wall and Devon, he directed his march to this town, 
which he besieged, and burnt, and afterwards demo- 
lished the walls. Camden describes many tumuli of 
these Danes as being near the town. The ravages 
they committed appears from the Domesday Survey, 
which states that, in the time of Edward the Elder, 
" there were 172 houses, which defended themselves 
for all the King's services, but which were then re. 
duccd to eighty-eight, a hundred being totally de- 
molished from the time of Hugh, the High "She- 
riff." 

No important event occurs in the history of Dor- 
chester from the Conquest till the reign of Eliza- 
beth ; when between the years 1587, and 1594, six 
persons wc:r<? put to death in this town on account 
of their religion, and from the. severe penal statutm 
then existing. In 1505, it was devastated by a most 
dreadful plague, so destructive, that not sufficient of 
the living remained to bury the dead. In 1H13, 
Dorchester suffered partially by a fire, which broke 
out at a tallow-chandler's, from his having made 
loo large a fire under his melting copper. The 
flame caught the tallow, and communicated to the 
liouse, and the wind being high, it was carried pver 

Chapel, and in 1605 became rector of Saint Andrew's, Hol- 
xirn. In I6sy he was made Bishop of Worcester. He died 
n lf>9y. Besides his Origines Sacra, he wrote " Irenicum ;" 
' Origines Britamiica: ;" " The Unreasonableness of Separa- 
ion ;" " A Vindication of ArcliUishop Laud's Conference with 
iishop Fislier ;" and numerous controversial tracu. 



3 K 



all 



222 



DORSETSHIRE. 



all the town. This fire destroyed 300 houses, be- 
sides the two churches of the Holy Trinity, and All 
Saints. The loss was computed to be 200,000/. 
In 1602, a second conflagration occurred, but it 
does not appear to have been so dreadful as the 
other. 

Clarendon states that Dorchester was more par- 
ticularly disaffected to the cause of Charles I. than 
any place in England. He calls it a magazine, from 
which other places were supplied with the principles 
of rebellion ; and, a seat of groat malignity. It was 
one of the first places fortified against the King ; 
and though neither strong by nature, nor art, the 
spirit and obstinacy of its inhabitants were supposed 
to counterbalance its disadvantages. The fortifica- 
tions were begun in 1643, and carried on with 
surprising activity ; and during some part of the 
period in which they were building, the town's peo- 
ple worked day and night. But notwithstanding 
all these preparations, they, on the approach of the 
Earl of Caernarvon with 2000 men immediately re- 
linquished the defence. After this, the town was dis- 
mantled, and lay open during the remainder of the 
war to either party which happened to bo con- 
querors. 

" In March 1645," says Hutchins, " Cromwell 
lying here with all his horse, and the united forces 
from Tauuton, Poole, and Wey mouth, 4000 in all, 
Geueral Goring had notice of it, and advanced to- 
wards them with 1500 horse, the rest of the army 
and cannon being ordered to follow for securing the 
retreat. Eight hundred of the rebel horse disputed 
a pass over a little river; but some of Goring's 
horse facing them there, whilst others got in behind 
them, they presently quitted the pass, and fled ; and 
his Lordship following them almost hither full four 
miles, took many, with two colours of horse, and 
great store of carbines and pistols ; and killed more. 
Their forces were so beaten and scattered, that, 4000 
at first, they durst not next morning draw out of the 
town against 1500 of his Lordship's horse, though 
his other horse, foot, and cannon, were full six miles 
behind." 

In 1685, the assizes were held here before the 
execrable Jefferies, on account of the Duke of Mon- 
mouth's rebellien. On the first day 21 persons were 
condemned; and on the following day, 292. Of 
these, eighty were ordered for execution, and thirteen 
of the number suffered. John Tutchin, author of 
the Observator, and immortalized by being noticed 
by Pope in the Dunciad, was sentenced to be whip- 
ped through every town in the county once a year, 
to be imprisoned seven years, and to pay a fine of 
100 marks. He begged that he might rather be hanged 
than suffer this cruel sentence, on which he was re- 
prieved, and afterwards pardoned. 

Previously to the Conquest, the manor of Dor- 
chester attached to the crown, but was subsequently 
granted to several persons for terms, and frequently 
to the Burgesses for life. In the twenty-first of 
Henry the Sixth, the town was granted to the Bur- 
6 



gesses for ever. Their privileges were afterwards 
confirmed by Richard the Third, and by Eliza- 
beth : the latter granted some additional privileges. 
James the First granted the farm rent of 20/. per 
annum, by which they were held, to Henry, Prince of 
Wales, and Prince Charles. This rent is now re- 
ceived by the Earl of Hardwicke. The manor of 
the borough, together with the toll of the markets, 
and fairs, belongs to the corporation. In the reign 
of Edward the Third, the town was governed by 
Bailill's and Burgesses : the number of the latter, in 
the time of James the First, was increased to fifteen, 
with permission to chuse a Recorder, and other offi- 
cers. Charles the First incorporated the town, un- 
der a Mayor, two Bailiffs, six Aldermen, six Capi- 
tal Burgesses, a Governor, and twenty-four Common 
Councilmen. Thefirsttime that memberswere return- 
ed to Parliament was in the twenty-third of Edward 
the First. The right of election is vested in the inha- 
bitants paying scot and lot ; and in all persons pos- 
sessed of real estates within the borough, and pay- 
ing the church and poor-rates. 

The town of Dorchester, which is delightfully si- 
tuated on the river Frome, about six miles from the 
British Channel, forms an irregular square ; though, 
from observation, it appears anciently to have been 
a perfect one. It is composed chiefly of three spa- 
cious streets, which meet about the centre : these, 
with the smaller ones, are well paved, and, in gene- 
ral, furnished with respectable buildings. The most 
eminent structures are, the churches of St. Peter's, 
Trinity, and All Saints ; the Town Hall, the County 
Hall, and the New Gaol. 

The church dedicated to St. Peter is a noble edi- 
fice, situated near the centre of the town, and com- 
posed of a chancel, nave, and side aisles ; the tower, 
which is ninety fed, in height, is indented, and adorned 
with pinnacles : it is esteemed the principal church 
in the town. It contains a few monuments of dis- 
tinguished persons, and some ancient inscriptions. 
Among the monuments is one to the memory of 
Den/el, Lord Holies, Baron of Ifleld ; it is of white 
marble, supported by variegated marble pillars, and 
adorned with the different family arms and quarter- 
ings. The effigy represents Lord Holies in a robe 
of loose drapery, i:i a cutnbent posture, leaning his 
right elbow on a cushion. Another monument de- 
serving of observation, is that, erected to the memory 
of Sir John Williams, of Herringstone, Knight, 
whose ancestors are reported to have founded the 
church. His statue is in armour, bare-headed, and 
knee-ling, placed under a canopy, supported by 
four pillars. The statue of his wife, under a similar 
canopy, and in a like posture, is near him. The in- 
scription informs us, that they lived together man 
and wife, for the space of fifty years, in which time 
they had issue seven sons aud four daughters. Sir 
John died at the age of seventy-two, in 1617. 
" His Lady left alone, lived alone ;" and having at- 
tained her eightieth year, " she was again joined 
unto her husband in this place." In a vault near 

this 



DORSETSHIRE. 



22-3 



this monument lie Sir Francis Ashley and his Lady. 
He was Steward of the Marshalsea to Charles the 
Fl'-st, Kind's Sergeant, and Recorder of Dorches- 
ter, and died in .Sergeant's Jnn, in 1635. Many 
other funeral memorials are scattered ahout the 
church ; and on them, appear some venerable in- 
scriptions. On the floor, on a coarse grey marble, 
is the effigies of a woman in an antique dress, kneel- 
ing. Over her head a label with the following : 

}5ismre met JD'* js'num itugnatn m'iam num.* 

Under her was another inscription, still preserved 
in the church : 



??ic t'-^t Johanna at <> to SDmero. relteti Rob'ti flRor?, qne 
obitt in toigflia <- e 'SLrinitatis *C'DO Tie mtnzis '. . . Simo 
D'ni MccccxxxYi..cttf S'ie p'plciet 'D'Smen. t 

The most remarkable pieces of antiquity in this 
edifice, are the effigies of two warriors. The first, 
lies in the north aisle, on a stone coffin, under the 
fourth window : " he is cross legged," says Hut- 
chins, " and completely armed in a coat of mail, 
and helmet, which covers the greatest part of the 
laee, and resembles those which Speed, in his Chro- 
nicle, represents on the seals of Henry the Second 
and Richard the First. He has a belt, spurs, sword, 
and shield ; on which last are no arms. His hand 
rests on a cushion, his feet on a lion or dog." This 
figure most probably represents one of the early 
crusaders, and consequently must be of a great age. 
The second figure, which is in every respect similar 
to the former, is in the south window. These mo- 
numents are reported to have belonged to the Chi- 
diocks, founders of the neighbouring priory ; and, 
on the demolition of the Priory Church, are said to 
have been removed hither. " One of these figures," 
observes Hutchins, " is said, by tradition, to he 
founder of the church, and vulgarly called Geoffery 
Vann. or rather Ann ; for, about 1680, was dug up 
in a _garden in this down, a seal, on which was a 
crescent, surmounted with a star, and round it, Si- 
gillvm Gallridi de Ann." 

The church of "the Holy Trinity is remarkable 
neither ibr antiquity nor beauty. It contains an ele- 
gant white marble tablet to the memory of Dr. 
William Cuming, who practised as a physician in 
this town for forty-nine years. The epitaph informs 
us, that at his own request he was buried in the church- 
yard rather than in the church, " lest he, who stu- 
died whilst living to promote the health of his fel- 
low citizens, should prove detrimental to it when 
dead." The church of All Saints has nothing re- 
markable. 

The Town Hall, which stands at a short distance 
from St. Peter's Church, was built by the corpora- 



tion in 1791. It is a spacious and handsome struc- 
ture, having a market-place tinder it. The Shira 
ILill is a neat building, fronted with Portland- stone, 
and having a pediment in the centre. The courts 
HIV well contrived, and the building is altogether com- 
modious. 

The New Gaol, situated on the north side of the 
town, contains the County Gaol, Penitentiary House, 
and House of Correction, and is built on the plan 
recommended by Mr. Howard. It was erected at 
the sum of 1(3,179/. 10s. (W. by the ingenious Mr. 
\ Bradburn. 

The exterior appearance of this edifice is pecu- 
liarly handsome, and the interior possesses every 
convenience. The buildings consist of a lodge, 
keeper's house, chapel, debtors' day rooms, female 
fines, and female debtors' rooms, visiting rooms for 
male debtors, fines, felons' infirmaries, &c. and of 
four wings, detached from, but communicating with, 
the centre building on each story, by means of cast 
iron bridges from the several galleries. There are 
separate sleeping cells for eighty-eight prisoners, 
which are distributed in the several buildings ; and 
two airy dormitories for male debtors, each contain- 
ing four beds, to be used in case the number exceeds 
that which can be accommodated in the debtors' 
wing ; besides four cells for condemned prisoners, 
light and airy ; four over these perfectly dark, yet 
airy, for the refractory ; and six reception cells, 
which last are fitted up in the lodge. The rooms 
are so arranged, that not only the male prisoners 
are separated from the female, and the felons from 
the debtors, fines, &c. but those of each description 
are subdivided into classes ; and for each class, by 
means of distinct stair-cases, separate subdivisions 
are appropriated, with courts, work-rooms, &c. -to 
each. The female fines, and female debtors, hav 
each a commodious room, with every possible con- 
venience, separate and detached from every part of 
the building, except the keeper's house and court. 
" In the reception cells," says Mr. Hutchins, " iu 
the lodge, prisoners are placed immediately on their 
entrance, until they can be examined by the surgeon, 
and thoroughly cleaned, for which purpose here are 
a hot and cold bath. If in a foul or infectious state, 
they remain there till the surgeon pronounces them 
fit to be removed into the interior parts of the pri- 
son. They are then sent to their proper classes ; 
and all felons are apparelled in the Gaol uniform ; 
and their own clothes, if fit to be preserved, are lu- 
migated in a kiln, and laid by in a wardrobe till their 
liberation, or are delivered to the care ef their 
friends. There are also two rooms in the lodge for 
the habitation of the task-master, and a small one 
for one of the turnkeys ; a wardrobe ; a room con- 
taining one of Stockdale's mills for grinding corn, 



* Translation. O God of thy great kindness be merciful 
to me. 
f Translation. Here lies Johanna, widow of Robert More 



of St. Omer, who died on the eve of the Holy Trinity, on the 
2nd day of the Month., .A. D. 1426. To her soul the Lord be 
merciful. Amen. 

and 



224 



DORSETSHIRE. 



and every other requisite for grinding and for dress- 
ing the Hour, where all the corn used for supplying 
the prison is ground, and which is found to answer 
extremely well ; a committee room, for the magis- 
trates to transact business in ; an office for the 
gaoler ; a hake-house and brew-house, with iron 
boilers, an oven, and other conveniencics for cook- 
ing for the prisoners ; and on the top of the lodge 
there is a flat roof covered with copper, on which 
executions take place, in view of all the criminal 
prisoners." The regulations for the government of 
the prison are of great excellence, and confer the 
highest credit on the persons concerned. 

This town possesses two Free Schools : one of 
them erected and endowed by Mr. Thomas Hardy, 
of Melcornhe Regis, in 1569 ; the other by the Cor- 
poration in 16-23. There are also two alms-houses, 
and some other charitable institutions. 

Dorchester was fortified by the Romans with a 
wall and fosse, and two exterior 'ramparts to the 
south and west, which, though in many places le- 
velled by the plough, are still visible. These en- 
closed an area of about eighty acres. On the west 
side, part, of the old Roman wall was standing in 
1802 ; this was six feet thick, and in some places 
twelve feet high. The foundation laid on the solid 
chalk, and the wall formed of wrag-stones, laid in an 
oblique direction, and covered over with very strong 
mortar. The next course ran the contrary way, 
and occasionally three horizontal ones for binding : 
much flint was likewise employed. Some of the 
foundations of this wall appear in other places : 
" On the east," says Mr. Hutchins, " a small lane 
is built upon it, and the ditch filled up ; though it is 
still called the walls. Great part of the remains 
were levelled or destroyed in making the walks 
round the town. About the year 1764, eighty-five 
feet of the wall were pulled down, and only seventy- 
seven left standing. The method of making them 
seems to have been by building two parallel walls, 
and filling up the interval between them with hot 
cement or mortar, and with flint and stones promis- 
cuously used." 

Various Roman coins have been dug up in differ- 
ent parts of Dorchester : and in 1750, a gold ring, 
half an inch thick, valued at 3/. 17s. 6r7. was found 
in the Frome. The most valuable relic, however, 
was a bronze image of a Roman Mercury, about 
four inches and a half high, discovered in the back 
garden of the Free School, endowed by Mr. Hardy. 
A considerable fragment of a Roman pavement was 
also found here. 

Dorchester contains, according to the Population 
Returns of 1811, 364 houses, and -2516 inhabitants. j 
Its environs are extremely pleasant. The view of j 
the town, with the tower of St. Peter's Church, and | 
that of Fordington near Dorchester, may be seen in 
every situation. The country around is level and 
fruitful ; every where covered with immense flocks ! 
of sheep. On the south and west, and part of the 



' north and east of the town, are agreeable walks, 
I of lime and sycamore trees. 

The vicinity of this town has several objects of 
antiquarian research. " The extended plains of 
Dorsetshire," Mr. Gilpin remarks. " however deso- 
late they now appear, have once been busy scenes : 
the antiquary finds rich employment among them 
for his curiosity. To follow him in quest of every 
heaving hillock, and to hear a discussion of conjec- 
tures about the traces of a Danish or a Roman mat- 
tock, where the eye of common observation per- 
j ceives no traces at all, might be tedious ; but he 
j shows us several fragments of antiquity on these 
; plains, which are truly curious ; aud convinces us 
that few places in England have been more consi- 
derable in Roman times than Dorchester. Pound- 
bury and Maiden Castle (these places will be no- 
ticed under their respective names) are both extra- 
ordinary remains of Roman stations. Numberless 
1 tumuli also are thrown up all over the downs : these 
i were antiquities in the times even of the Romans 
themselves. But the most valuable fragment on 
these plains is a Roman amphitheatre, which retains 
its complete form to this day." (For a description 
of this amphitheatre, see MAUMBIJRY.) 

EASTBURY.] Eastbury, or Uunville Eastbury, 
was, in ancient times, a manor, but it has long been 
depopulated. Here was formerly a magnificent 
seat, erected by Bubb Doddington, Esq. afterwards 
Lord Melcombe Regis. The gardens, which were 
ornamented with canals, and fine plantations of trees, 
were very extensive. On the death of its noble 
owner, the estate devolved on the late Earl Temple, 
who offered 200/. a year to any gentleman who would 
undertake to occupy the house, and keep it in re- 
pair ; but, as no one embraced the offer, the man- 
sion, which had cost upwards of 140, OOO/. was taken 
down, and the materials were sold for scarcely more 
than the original amount of the plumber's and gla- 
zier's bills. 

EGGERDONCAMP.] Eggerdon Hill, on which this 
ancient fortification is situated, stands partly in the 
parish of Askerwell (five miles east from Bridport) 
and partly in the parishes of Poorstock and Litton. 
The area of the encampment appears to have com- 
prised upwards of forty-seven acres, in an oval, of 
which the largest inner diameter is 1380 feet, the 
smaller 720 feet. It has only two ditches and two 
ramparts on the north and east sides, each about 
thirty feet wide. On the west side are three ram- 
parts and two regular ditches. The ramparts on 
the south side are irregular and at present scarcely 
perceptible. There is no doubt of this camp having 
been the work of the Romans ; the vicinal ways in 
the neighbourhood, and other circumstances fully 
proving the point. 

ENCOMBE.] At Encombe, a hamlet in the parish 
of Corfe, is the seat of Sir William Morton Pitt, 
Bart, which lies in the bosom of a deep vale, open- 
ing to the British Channel. The manor, supposed 

to 



DORSETSHIRE. 



225 



to liave belonged to Shaston Abley, from its found- 
ation, was for some ages the property of the family 
of the Cullifords. In 1734, being aJieiiatcd for the 
payment of debts, it was purchased by George Pitt, 
Esq. of Stratfield Sea, in the county of Southamp- 
ton, who gavo it to his second son, John Pitt, Esq. 
The ancient mansion being imii/'.i decayed, it was 
pulled down, and an elegant house of P'.irbeck stone, 
erected on .its site. Tlve grounds are disposed with 
much taste ; tlie plantations are extensive ; and a 
piece of water, near the house, is so happily managed, 
as to have the appearance, from the windows, of 
forming part of the sea, which terminates the view 
along the vale. 

. The farm of Encombc, con sis tiny of arable, and 
pasture for sheep,- is cousideml to be one of iha best 
in the island of Purbcck. The hilly part, as well as 
the vale, yields a greater plenty of grass, and more 
beautiful verdure, than is. usually seen in this island, 
and from its fertility, it has been distinguished by 
the name of the Golden Howl. A mushroom, fifteen 
inches long, ten round, eight deep, wighing -eight 
pounds, and formed almost like a figure, of 8, was 
found here in th,c yoar 17-53. 

r . EYKRSHOT.] The, little market-town of Evprsliot 
is situated in the Dorchester division, near the 
sriiree of the Frome, seven miles and a quarter cast 
by north from Beaminster. It had anciently a 
chauntry, which was suppressed on the dissolution 
of alien priories, in the reign of Henry VI. The 
church is an old Gothic structur:-. There is a cljar 
rity school here for boys and girls. 

FLOWER'S BARROW.] About a mile from Lul- 
tvorth Castle, on the summit of a lofty eminence, is 
an ancient fortification, surrounded by ramparts and 
ditches, which enclose an area of about five acres. 
Its shape is a parallelogram ; and it has two en- 
trances, one ,on the south-east, and another 'on the 
south-west. The south-west side faces the. sea, 
and, being almost perpendicular, the ramparts are 
slight. It is termed by the country people " Flow- 
er's Barrow ;" a term which Mr. Hutchins supposed 
to be a corruption of Florus' Barrow, perhaps from 
so.iio Roman oilicer of that name, by whom it was 
formed. Mr. Aubrey, calls it a British Camp. Near 
(his spot, in 1701, the Rev. Mr. Mihier, of Win- 
chester, assisted by Mr. Weld, and some other gen- 
tlemen, opened several barrows. The following 
particulars of the discoveries are extracted from 
their communications to the Gentleman's Maga- 
zine. 

" We began with two barrows, of no great di- 
mensions, opposite to Eastj Liillworth, on a level 
piece of ground, that is met with in the ascent up a 
steep and lofty mountain, the top of which is .crown-, 
ed with a double entrenchment. In these two bar- 
rows we found promiscuously scattered, perfect 
human teeth, burnt human bones, together with 
tiiose of animals, such as pieces of the jaw-bones of 
horses .or oxen, teeth of the same animals, tusks of 
hours ; small round stones, of the Portland kind, 

vol. n. NO. 01. 



not bigger than children'* marbles ; pointed stones, 
that possibly have been the heads of weapons ; cer- 
tain lumps of corroded metal, seemingly iron, but of 
an undeterminod shape; a few particles of yellow 
metal, wijich, being lost,, could not undergo the as- 
say ; some crumbling pieces, of dark-coloured, un- 
luu-nt urns ; a i'ew lumps of .brick, or earthenware, 
that appeared to be well burnt. A considerable 
quantity of iine, rich, black earth, having whito 
mouldiness between the particles, was strewed over 
the remains. The bottom of one of these graves, 
was pared with large round stones, apparently pro- 
cured from the adjacent shore." ic "h* n 

The state in which the contents of the barrows 
lay, \yassp confused, that Mr. Milner and his friends 
imagined they had been previously opened ; and 
therefore selected another barrow, in a more remote 
and less accessible situation, for further research. 
This was called Hambury taut, or toote ; and, like 
the other, was of a large size, being twelve feet 
high, and -200 in circumference. , 'j,, -\-.\-. , 

" Many of the same articles were found on the 
surface, and at the extremity of t,h,is r ;as in, the ter- 
mer barrows, such as burnt human bones, bits of 
metal, .c. but on our approaching to the ceutre. at 
about the depth of four feet from the, surface, a ske- 
leton appeared in perfect preservation, lying with 
its head to the nor^h ; but so tender as to crumble 
into dust with the least pressure : its posture, which 
was. that of a person sleeping on his side, with the 
feet rather drawn up, one hand; resting on its breast, 
the other on its bip, prevented, it from being accu- 
rately measured. The account of the people, how- 
ever, employed in digging, wo found afterwards, had 
magnified it to the size of seven, and even of eight 
feet. , But what may be $aid with certainty is, that 
the thigh-bone measured twenty inches, which, in a 
well proportioned man, I find, gives a height of 
about six feet and as many inches. One of the leg- 
bones appeared to have been fractured ; but whether 
this had happened by some wound in war, or by 
some accident at the, funeral, or .by .the weight of the 
superincumbent earth, it is impossible to determine. 
On the breast of the skeleton was deposited a rude 
urn, too much decayejL iq .lie handled without falling 
to pieces, of about tho measure of two quarts, but 
empty of every thing, , except the same fine mould 
that covered the skeleton. Near the neck of the 
latter were found many of the round stones I have 
before mentioned, but of different sizes, from that of 
a pigeon's egg down to a pea. As they were im- 
perforated, it is not improbable that tlu-y had once 
been covered with met;' 1, in which state they might 
have formed a necklace, or any similar ornament. 
The substance of the. barrow, as high as the site of 
the body, was formed of flinls and stones; into 
which a shaft was sunk to a considerable, depth, but 
without finding any thing worth notice." They, 
then opened a third barrow, which contained five 
perfect skeletons. " Three of them were in a row, 
lying on their backs : two of thcs appeared to in- 
' :} i. of 



DORSETSHIRE. 



of the common size ; but that in the middle was a 
small one, probably of some young person. The 
two others were at the distance of a few feet from 
those of the ordinary size, with the head of one ly- 
ing on the breast of the other. Bach of the skele- 
tons had an urn upon it ; but these were so perish- 
ed, that, upon being touched, they fell into the earth, 
except a few pieces near the top rim of one of them. 
Under the head of one of the three that lay in a row, 
was found a small earthen urn, about the size of the 
cup of an ordinary wine glass. This urn was of the 
same shape with the rest which were found, namely, 
that of a truncated cone, and was about two inches 
high, and one in diameter ; it was nicely covered 
with the shell of a limpet, but quite empty : the 
broken pieces of urn were ornamented, by being 
rudely indented iu a zigzag fashion. The five ske- 
letons were not all exactly on the same level in the 
barrow, which appeared to be a family sepulchre i 
but the two last mentioned seem to have been depo- 
sited in the side of the barrow without taking it to 
pieces." 

Five or six more barrows were subsequently 
opened ; but the contents of all were similar. One 
of them, about 10 feet high, and 150 in circumfer- 
ence, enclosed a " rude vault, or kistvaen, formed 
with unhewn stones, surrounding an urn capable of 
holding about two gallons, and full of burnt human 
bones, being covered at the top with a thin flat stone, 
and having a quantity of the roots of quilch grass 
undecayed near it ; which also frequently occurred 
in the other barrows. The urn in question was 
composed of a coarse black clay, of the shape above 
described, and did not seem either to have been 
turned with a lathe, or burnt in a kiln, but merely 
hardened by fire, or the heat of the sun. Of the 
Bame substance and form were all the other urns 
discovered in this neighbourhood : there was this 
difference, however, in their position, that some of 
them stood upright, and others were found in- 
verted." 

From observations which occurred to Mr. Milner 
during the progress of these discoveries, he draws 
conclusions in favour of these barrows being British, 
rather than Roman, Saxon, or Danish, lie thinks, 
that the Romans, though they both burned and bu- 
ried their dead, did so rather near cities, and in pub- 
lic highways, than in such sequestered places, as the 
monuments described are situated in ; and that this 
circumstance, with the rudeness of the urns, and the 
absence of sepulchral lamps, lachrymatories, coins, 
and other tokens of Roman sepulture, evidently 
point them oBt as the work of barbarians. Sup- 
posing they are not Roman, to which of the three 
nations must they be attributed the Britons, the 
Saxons, or the Danes ? Neither of these people 
were allowed to burn their dead after the introduc- 
tion of Christianity : these barrows must have been 
constructed, therefore, previously to their conver- 
sion. The claim of the Danes, upon this principle, 
> th weakest, as they appear never to hav been 



sufficiently stationary to construct family sepulchres 
till after they had professed Christianity. To which 
nation, therefore, shall we attribute these ancient 
monuments ; to the Britons, before the adoption of 
Roman customs, or to the Papal Saxoiu ? " There 
are more and stronger arguments," says Mr. Miluer, 
" for ascribing them to the former, than the latter 
people ; for though the ancestors of both the Britoni 
and Saxons were in the practice of at least occa- 
sionally using funeral piles, barrow*, and urns, yet 
there is this striking difference between the two peo- 
ple ; that the former, according to Caesar, were fond 
of the pomp of funerals, sacrificing men as well a 
animals on the occasion, and depositing with the 
dead whatever they had most precious : whereas the 
latter, according to TacitHs, despised the fruitless 
ambition, as they considered it, of magnificent fune- 
rals ; and it was only on some extraordinary occa- 
sion that the warrior's horse was buried with his ' 
master. It has been said, likewise, though not upon 
sufficient authority, that the Saxons had laid aside 
the custom of burning the dead previous to their in- 
vasion of this island. I think the evident conse- 
quences to be deduced from what has been alledged 
above, together with the great antiquity of these 
barrows, manifested by the condition of the metal, 
bones, and urns, found in them, and the coarseness 
and rudeness of the urns, (more likely to be the ma- 
nufacture of the savage Britons, than the compara- 
tively polished Saxons,) and, above all, the confor- 
mity between these barrows and those opened by 
Dr. Stukeley, and others, in the neighbourhood of 
Stonehenge, taking the latter for granted to be a 
Druid temple ; all these circumstances considered 
together, induce me to attribute the barrows I have 
described, to the aborigines of this island, the Bri- 
tons, rather than the Saxons, or any later people." 

FORDINGTON.] The large and populous village 
of Fordington lies half a mile east-south-east from 
Dorchester, of which it may almost be considered as 
forming a part. In the reign of Edward III. the 
manor was held by Isabella, theQueen Dowager, who 
had a grant of a weekly market, and an annual fair 
of three days. Subsequently it was granted to various 
persons, but it now belongs to the principality of 
Wales, in which it was vested by James the First. 
Fordington Church is mi ancient edifice, built in the 
form of a cross, and situated on a rising ground. 
In the south aisle, are two pointed arches supported 
by round Saxon pillars. Over the porch of the 
south entrance, are the effigies of St. George on 
horseback, and behind him two figures in a kneeling 
position. The east end of this village is always 
called the " Iccn Town :" probably from the Iceu- 
niug way passing so near it. The road which leads 
to it passes through a moor, and was formerly, in the 
wet season, very dangerous. But in the year 1747, 
Mrs. Lora Pitt, of Kingston House, formed, at the 
expence of 1500/. a new causeway 1980 feet long, 
and 36 broad. This public spirited lady also erect- 
ed a bridge of three arcbc* over a branch of the 

From*. 



DORSETSHIRE. 



237 



From-. In for mm? the causeway some Roman re- 
lics were discovered ; and about the same time, 
more tlian 200 skeletons, lying at the depth of t'ottr 
or fire feet in the ground. The following account 
of some skeletons subsequently found, is related by 
Mr. Hutchins : " In the autumn of 1799, five ske- 
letons we're dug up about a quarter of a mile from 
the spot where Frome Whitfield Church stood, or, 
as some call it, Hollis' Farm, in a field called Pond 
Close. Some men were digging the ground to plant 
firs and shrubs, and the pick-axes struck against a 
stone repeatedly. The men, from curiosity, remov- 
ed the earth to take up the stone, and underneath 
found a skeleton ; and searching further, they dis- 
covered in all, five skeletons, laid in exact order, the 
heads to the west, lower than the feet ; owing, per- 
haps, to the situation of the ground, and inclosed in 
stone coffins in the following manner : a large stone 
et up edgeways at the head and feet ; a stone 
placed in the same manner between each skeleton, 
and a broad one of the same kind laid flat on the top 
to cover them ; but on a stone at the bottom, the 
sail, gravel, and larger earth mixed. They were 
about five feet ten inches long, perhaps one inch 
difference." 

FRAMPTON.] Frampton, or Frometon, in the 
Bridport division, 5| miles N. W. by W. from Dor- 
chester, is a small town, which receives its name 
from its situation on the river Frome, over which 
it has a good stone bridge. During the time of the 
West Saxon Kings, here was a priory, which was 
afterwards given by William the Conqueror to the 
abbey of Black Monks of St. Stephen in Norman- 
dy. It was dissolved by Henry VI. and the rents, 
amounting to 120 marks per annum, were bestowed 
on the canons of St. Stephen's in Westminster. At 
the dissolution of religious houses, it became the 
property of the crown, and has since passed into 
various hands. The only building in the town at- 
tracting particular notice is the Mansion House, 
built of Portland stone, which is a very elegant struc- 
ture. The town is agreeably situated, and the 
Frome supplies the inhabitants with abundance of 
fine fish ; particularly trout. 

GII.MNGHAM.] Gillinghara, the largest parish in 
the county, including an area of 64,000 acres, chief- 
ly appropriated to grazing, is situated on the Stour, 
1J miles N. W. by W. from Shaftesbury. Here 
was formerly a palace of the aucient Saxon and 
Norman kings ; in which Henry I. resided, and 
which was repaired by King John, at the expense 
of the county. Near Gillingham was formerly a 
very large forest, which, in Leland's time, was 
" fonre miles in length, and a mile or thereabout in 
bredth." In the reign of Charles I. by whom it 
was disforested, the lessee was obliged to keep 400 
deer for the King's recreation. By its inclosure, 
much dissatisfaction was excited amongst the pea- 
santry, ard several persons were fined, and other- 

* Viflc Modern Panorama, Vol. I. p. 539. 



wise punished, through the riots which ensued. 
Near this place, at Penn, in the adjoining county 
of Somerset, the battle between Canute and Ed- 
mund Ironside was fought ; and, according to tra- 
dition, the pursuit extended to the spot called 
Slaughter Gate, in Gillingham. 

GRANGE.] Grange, or Creech Grange, now the 
seat of John Bond, Esq. was anciently the retiring 
place of the Abbot of Bindon, and part of the pos- 
sessions of the abbey. After the Dissolution it 
came to the Laurence family, the last of whom sold 
it, about the time of Charles the Second, to Na- 
thaniel Bond, Esq. ancestor to the present owner. 
The mansion is an elegant and convenient structure: 
it was built by the Laurences, but has since been 
greatly improved. The grounds are pleasant; and 
from groves, lawns, and pieces of water being ju- 
diciously intermixed, they form an agreeable con- 
trast to a dreary heath which surrounds them. 

On an eminence a little south from this mansion, 
a phenomenon, similar to the one said to have been 
observed at Cumberland, in 1744,* was seen here. 
This was the appearance of a mulitude of armed 
men, who seemed to be marching from Flower's 
Barrow, over Grange Hill : at the same time a loud 
noise, like the clashing of arms, wasfancied to.beheard. 
These appearances were observed by the owner oi' 
Grange Captain John Laurence, his brother, and 
various other persons, in an evening in December, 
1678. " The people in the cottages and hamlets 
thereabouts," says Hutchins," left their sapper and 
houses, and came to Wareham, and alarmed the 
town ; on which the boats were all drawn to the 
north side of the river, and the bridge barricadoed. 
Three hundred of the militia were also marched to 
Wareham ; and Captain Laurence and his brother 
went post to London, and deposed the particulars 
on oath before the council." It appears that, had 
not Captain Laurence and his family been of known 
affection to the government, he would have been, 
severely punished, for having created a false alarm. 
HAMBLEDON HILL.] Hambledon Hill is a lofty 
eminence, situated in the neighbourhood of Stui'- 
minster, having on its summit the remains of an 
extensive fortification.. Facing the principal front 
of this work, are two or three low ramjmrts cross- 
ing the narrowest part of the hill ; the west end of 
this hill is broad and level, but gradually becomes- 
narrower, and ends in a point. The river Stour 
runs at the foot of the lull, and fronting- the river is 
a small parapet. The part most easy of access is 
on the east. The form of this fortification, is irre- 
gular, its breadth unequal, but its length about 
three quarters of a mile. It was supposed by Bi- 
shop Gibson to have originated with the Danes ; 
but, from some coins ploughed up on the top of the 
hill, Mr. Aubrey conjectured it to be a Roman 
camp. 

Hop HILL.] Divided by a deep and narrow 



328 



DORSETSHIRE. 



Tale from 1he eminence- just mentioned, stands 
Hod Hill, on whose top is an old fortification, re- 
sembling- iu its form the letter D. It consists of a 
double rampart and fosse : on the north and south, 
where it is almost inaccessible, the rampart is low, 
and the fosse shallow ; but ou the east and west, 
-where the hill is less precipitous, they are high and 
deep. It has five entrances ; and near its northern 
one two shallow ditches, parallel to each other. The 
area of this camp contains several acres, and in it 
are many circles, four or five yards in diameter, 
bounded with a trench. At the north end, are some 
circles, perfect, distinct, and curious, resembling 
the Pimperne Maze, which will be mentioned here- 
after. 

HORTON.] The village of Horton is situated iu 
the Shaston division, five miles S. S. W. from Cran- 
honrne. Here was an abbey founded by Orgar, 
Earl of Devonshire, or, according to some, by his 
son Ordulph, for Benedictine, friars. No traces of 
it now remain, though we are informed by Lcland, 
that it was of some note. 

" In this parish, surrounding the site and ruins 
of.an ancieut chapel and chapel-yard, is a large and 
<leep circular entrenchment, without any entrance ; 
the area contains about an acre : it is quite distinct 
from the chapel-yard, which is easily distinguished 
from .it, and is of an oblong figure, nearly approach- 
ing to a long square : the ditch is within : the turn- 
pike road crosses it : and it is boldest in the semi- 
circle on the west. On the south side four barrows 
surround it ; one levelled, had four men : two re- 
main in Harrow Field. In Wimborne St. Giles's 
church-yard is another planted. In Kuolton Field 
another, planted by Lord Shaftesbury ; and one al- 
most levelled : a raised one from the outer camp to 
the; river points south. Badbury lies south-west. 
In 'levelling the south vallum, great quantities of 
human bones, with spear heads, and pieces of iron, 
"wefe found without it. The space between the 
chftpel-yard and the entrenchment is very unequal, 
a,nd contains several tumuli, and their respective 
hollows, from whence perhaps they were dug. About 
twenty yards from the former entrenchment is ano- 
ther, which either was, or was intended to have 
been, much larger. It is only a segment of a circle, 
less than a semicircle, and lias two large gaps in it. | 
In some parts the vallum is high, and the ditch j 
broad ; but in others the rampart decreases till it 
becomes level with the plane of the hill, and seems 
intended to inclose fifteen acres. There is only one 
entrance at the west. Ou every side, near two 
miles round, are many tumuli ; several of which 
have been opened, but no coins, armour, or bones, 
found. In the adjoining fields are many other 
works of this nature." 

Horton Church, which is conjectured to have be- 
longed to the priory, ' was almost entirely rebuilt 
about the year 1720. In the belfry of the old church 
was an aisle belonging to the Hastings family. In 
this aisle stood a monument to the memory of Hen- 



ry, son of George, Earl of Huntingdon. At Lord 
Shattesbury's is a portrait of this gentleman, under 
which is the following curious inscription, said to 
have been written by that nobleman : 

" In the year lo;il, lived Mr. Hastings, by his 
quality, son, brother, and uncle, to the Earls of 
Huntingdon. He was, peradventure, an 1 original 
in our age, or rather the copy of our ancient no- 
biiity, in hunting, not in warlike times. He was 
low, very strong, and very active; of a reddish 
flaxen hair; liis clothes always green cloth, and 
never worth, when new, five pounds. His house 
was perfectly of the old fashion, in the midst of a 
large park, well stocked with deer ; and near the 
house rabbits for his kitchen ; many fish-ponds, great 
store of wood and timber ; a bowling-green in it, 
long, but narrow, full of high ridges, it being- never 
levelled since it was ploughed : they used round 
sand-bowls ; and it had a banquetting-house, like 
a stand, a large one built in a tree. He kept all 
manner of sport hounds that ran, buck, fox, hare, 
otter, and badger ; and hawks long and short wing- 
ed. He had all sorts of nets for fish. He hud a 
walk in the New Forest, and the manor of Christ 
Church : this last supplied him with red deer, sea 
and river fish ; and, indeed, all his neighbours' 
grounds and royalties were free to him, who be- 
stowed all his time on these sports, but what he 
borrowed to caress his neighbours' wives and daugh- 
ters ; there being not a woman in all his walks, of 
the pedigree of a yeoman's wife, or under, and un- 
der the age of forty, but it was her own fault if he 
was not intimately acquainted with her. This made 
him very popular ; always speaking himself to the 
husband, brother, or father, who was, to boot, very 
welcome in his house. Whenever he came there, 
he found beef, pudding, and small beer, in great 
plenty ; the house not so neatly kopt as to shame 
him or his dirty shoes ; the great hall strewed with 
marrow-bones, full of hawks, perches, hounds, span- 
iels, and terriers ; the upper side of the hall hung 
with fox-skins of this or the last year's killing ; here, 
and there a pole-cat intermixed ; game keepers' and 
hunters' poles iu great abundance. The parlour 
was a -large room as properly'- furnished. On a 
great hearth, paved wifli brick, lay son.e terriers, 
and the choicest hounds and spaniels. Seldom but 
( ,vo of the great chairs had litters of cats in them, 
which were not to be disturbed : he having always 
three or four attending him at dinner ; and a little 
white stick, of fourteen inches long, lying by his 
trencher, that he might defend such meat as he had 
no mind to part with to them. The windows, which 
were very large, served for places to lay his arrows, 
cross bows, and stone bows, and such like accoutre- 
ments ; the corners of the room full of the best cho- 
sen hunting or hawking poles ; his oyster table at 
the lower end, which was of constant use, for he 
never failed to eat oysters all seasons, both dinner 
and supper ; the neighbouring town of Poole sup- 
plied him with them. The upper part of the room 
7 had 



DORSETSHIRE. 



had two tables and a desk, on the cue side of which 
was a church bible, and on the other side the Book 
oflVIartyrs : on the tabie were hawks' hoods, bells, 
and such like ; two or three old hats, with their 
crowns thrust in, so as to hold ten or a dozen eggs, 
which were of the pheasant kind of poultry ; these 
he took much care of, and fed himself. Tables, 
dice, cards, and boxes, were not wanting. In the 
hole of the desk were store of tobacco pipes that 
had been used, on one side of this end of the room 
was the door of a closet, wherein stood the strong 
beer and wine, which never came from thence but 
in single glasses, that being the rule of the house 
exactly observed ; for he never exceeded in drink 
or permitted it. On the other side was the door of 
nn old chapel, not used for devotion : the pulpit, as 
the safest place, wns never wanting of a cold chine 
of beef, venison pasty, gammon of bacon, or a great 
apple-pie with thick crust, extremely baked. His 
table cost him not much, though it was good to eat 
at. His sports supplied all but beef or mutton, ex- 
cept Fridays, when he had the best of salt fish, as 
well as other fish he could got ; and this was the 
day his neighbours of best quality visited him. He 
never wanted a London pudding, and always sung 
in eating it " with my pert eyes thereina," (" my 
part lies thereina," it should be). He drank a glass 
or two of wine at meals, very often put syrup of 
gilly-flowers in his sack, and had always a tun glass 
without feet, stood by him holding a pint of small 
beer which he often stirred with rosemary. He was 
well natured, but soon angry, calling his servants 
bastards and cuckolding knaves, in one of which lie 
often spoke truth to his own knowledge, and some- 
times in both, though of the same man. He lived 
to be an hundred, never lost his eye-sight, but al- 
ways wrote and read without spectacles, and got on 
horse-back without help. Until past fourscore, he 
rode to the death of the stag as well as any." 

KIMEIUDGE.] This is a poor little village, in the 
Blandford division, 4} miles W. S. W. from Corfe 
Castle. It is situated about one mile from the sea, 
near the termination of a ridge of hills. These are 
composed of a white compact species of lime-stone, 
with very nnrrow veins of chert at the base. The 
manor oi Kimevidgc was the. property of the abbey 
of Cerne previously to the Conquest, and continued 
so till the Dissolution, when Henry the Eighth 
granted it to Sir William Uvedale, Knt. In the 
fourteenth of Elizabeth it bwiomo the property of 
John Clave!, it collateral branch of whose family 
*till possesses it. Kimeridge contains Alum Mines, 
which appear to have been discovered by .Lord 
Mountjoy, who procured a patent to make alum 
lnye, lint hi* plan did not succeed.. Subsequently 
Sir William Clavol searched, and had accomplished 
his undertaking, when the works were seized by a 
person who had procured the King's patent for 
making alum, to the exclusion of all others ; and 
Sir William, after expending large sums, was ob- 
liged to desist. On the cliffs bordering Kimeridge 

VOL. n. NQ. 62. 



Bay, at sixteen feet below the summit, a Fossil Coal, 
mentioned under the head " fossils," is dug. 

KINGSTON HALL.] This mansion, the seat of 
Henry Bankes, Esq. is situated upon a slight emi- 
nence, about three miles N. W. from Wnnborne 
Minster. It was erected about 1663, and is com- 
posed with brick, with stone architraves to the doors 
and windows. In the interior it is spacious and 
elegant, and contains, among other valuable paint- 
ings, a fine Landscape by Berghem, and some ex- 
cellent portraits by Vandyke, Lely, and Sir Godfrey 
Knellcr. It was to an ancestor of the present pro- 
prietor that, on his arrival in England, Sir Godfrey 
Kneller was first introduced, and whose likeness, 
with others of the family, he painted. These por- 
traits were seen and approved of by the Duke of 
Monmouth, who introduced the painter to the 
King. 

In the year 1736, in a field adjoining this estate, 
a labourer accidentally found a small Roman urn, 
which contained about twenty small silver coins of 
Gallienus, Posthumus, &c. 

KINGSTON HOUSE.] Kingston House, at Styns- 
ford, I mile E. N. E. from Dorchester, is the mag- 
nificent seat of Sir W. M. Pitt, Bart. It was erect- 
ed about the year 17-20, upon a rising ground, com- 
manding very delightful views of the surrounding 
country. The grounds and plantations, are laid 
out in a style highly picturesque, and the whole 
mansion and demesne, when seen from the great 
western road, is strikingly grand. 

LAMBERT CASTLE.] Lambert Castle, situated sit 
miles south-west from Beaminster, is so named 
from a castle, which formerly stood on an eminence 
still called Castle Hill. This eminence is of con- 
siderable height, fortified on its summit with triple 
trenches and ramparts, which inclose an area of 
twelve acres. 

LEWESDON HILL.] Lewesdon Hill, at Broad 
Windsor, 3* miles W. by N. from Beaminster, lias 
given birth to a beautiful poem, by the Rev. William 
Crown, Public Orator at Oxford. From this poem, 
which is intituled Lewesdon Hill, we extract the 
following lines. The poet is imagined to be tra- 
versing its summit, ou a May morning, and vie-.vinjf 
the various clifl's which surround it : 

" From this proud eminence on all sides round, 
'!'!>' unbroken prospect opens to my view, 
On all sides large ; s;ive only where the head 
Of Piltesdon rises, Pillesdon's lofty Pen ; 
So call'd, (still rendering to his ancient name 
Observance due,) that rival height south-west, 
Which like a rampire bounds the vale beneath." 

LUI.WORTH.] East Lulworth, in the Blandford 
division, lies seven miles S. W. from Wareham. 
The manor appears to have given name to its an- 
L'ient possessors, the De Lolleworth's, one of whom, 
in the reign of Edward 1. granted, for the sum of 
100 marks, all his right in this manor, to John De 
Novo Burgo. In this family it continued till the 
3 M reign 



?30 



DORSETSHIRE. 



reign of Henry VIII. when Christian Newburghs 
married Sir John de Marney and conveyed it to him. 
From Hm it came to the Howard family, one of 
win' eh, in 1641, soW it to Humphrey Weld, Esq. of 
whom the present owner is a descendant. 

l<ulworth Castle, the seat of Mv. Weld, is thus 
described by Hutching : 

" Liulworth Castle is an exact cube of 80 feet, 
with a round tower at each corner, 30 feet in dia- 
meter, and rising 10 feet above the walls, which, as 
well as the towers, are embattled. The walls are 
six feet thick ; the offices are under-ground, arched 
with stone. The house has three stories, but the 
towers four : in each front are three rows of four 
windows ; in the towers are four rows of three each, 
exclusive of the offices. The hall and dining-room 
are large, and the rooms are in general 18 feet high, 
la the apartments are some family portraits, exe- 
cuted by the celebrated Sir Peter Lely. The prin- 
cipal front is on the east, and faced with Chilmark 
stone : before it was a large court, now laid into 
the lawn, loading to the land-place, which is guard- 
ed by a ballustrade of stone (which, in the late Ed- 
ward Weld's time, only extended, along the east 
front), called the Cloisters, because paved with the 
stones taken from the Cloisters of Biiidon Abbey : 
this has been continued by the present possessor 
along the north and south sides, at the extremity of 
which it forms a terrace to the west, of the same 
height as itself. Over the doors are statues of two 
ancient Romans in their gowns. On each side of 
the door, which is supported by four pillars of the 
Ionic order, is a large niche, and over them two 
shields, on which are the arms of Weld, properly 
blazoned. In the niches are the statues of Music 
and Painting." 

I/.ilworth Castle is situated at the south-east end 
of a noble park, which was surrounded a few years 
ago by a stone wall, upwards of eight feet high, 
and nearly four miles and a half in extent. The 
castle commands a fine view of the surrounding 
country, and through the opening of the hills, a 
prospect of the sea. The present building was be- 
gun about 1588, but not finished, as to its interior 
decorations, before 1641. It. is supposed to stand 
mi the site of a castle, mentioned so long back as 
1146 ; the materials used in its formation were 
chiefly brought from Bindon Abbey. ' Over the en- 
trance of the castle are two inscriptions, commemo- 
rative of several royal visits, which Mr. Weld had 
the honour of receiving, during their Majesties' 
residence at Weymouth, in 1789. 

An elegant little Chapel was erected at a short 
distance from the castle by Mr. Weld, for the con- 
venience of his family. Its form is circular, increas- 
ed by four sections of a circle, so as to form a cross; 
it finishes with a dome and lantern. In the interior 
are a well-toned organ, a copy of Raphael's Trans- 
figuration, and two other scriptural pieces lately 
brought from Italy. The altar-piece, decorated 
with \ery costly ornaments, disposed with much 

8' 



taste and effect, is chiefly composed of the richest 
and most curious marbles. " The front and outside 
pannels of the two supporters of the altar-table are 
of -beautiful oriental rose alabaster, having mould- 
ings of gidllv de Sienna : within the former are two 
angels of bronze, in postures of adoration ; between 
them is a vase, composecj of one piece of amber- 
Violorcd transparent alabaster : the platform on 
Which the latter is placed, is of porphyry, with a 
base, of a brilliant brescia corullina : the back part 
and two sides of the space wherein the vase and an- 
gels stand, are of a btescia antiqua, so variegated as 
to throw a kind of splendor about the urn ; the pan- 
nels of the altar-steps are of plasma di smeraldo, set 
in gi'i/lo (inti.cn ; the small step that projects imme- 
diately on the altar table, is of choice pecorel/a mi- 
iiitta alabaster ; the door of the tabernacle, and its 
frame, are composed of lapis lazuli, amethyst, verde 
di Corsica, Cianco e Jiao tintico, verde d'Egipto, and 
other 'choice stones. The pedestal of the crucifix 
is composed of plasma di smeraldo and verde antico ; 
the entire sides of the cross are incrusted with lapis 
lazuli; the Saviour stf carved in ivory, and the Mag- 
dalen is of gilt bronze." In a magnificent folio 
Psalter, made by order of Geoffery, Lord Louterell, 
who died in the reign of Edward the First, and 
which is now in the possession of Mr. Weld, is a 
most beautiful and curious illumination, an accurate 
engraving of which is given by Mr. Carter in his 
" Specimens of Ancient Sculptures and Paintings." 
It represents a Knight arming for a tournament, or 
some martial exercise, the particulars of whose dress 
I are highly curious, and most minutely delineated : 
| two ladies, apparently his wives, assist him. " As 
! he sits on his steed, alady, habited in curled hair, 
with a fillet, a veil throwji back, and a wimple, her 
surcoat charged with his arms, lifts up to him, with 
her right hand, a close pointed helmet ; and in her 
left hand she holds a pennon of his arms round the 
point of a spear. Behind her is another lady, in 
the same dress, holding in her right hand a pendant 
shield of his arms, which are likewise on her sur- 
coat ; and on her left arm is hanging, as it may be 
presumed, the embroidered collar, an usual prize 
or favour given by some lady to her favourite 
knight, as a eharge to him to meditate some feat 
of chivalry, which collar was generally fastened 
above the knee, by some of the lady's female atten- 
dants. The ladies' dresses are alike, the hair comb- 
ed back on the head, and curled at the ears ; a fil- 
let of gold beads encircles the head ; a red band 
edges the veil, as a stitt kind of ornament does the 
ears. Their boddice, or under dress, is red, with 
the surcoat of their arms over it." 

The Parish Church of St. Andrew, an ancient 
structure near the castle, was rebuilt, some time 
since, at the expence of Mr. Weld, who previously 
removed the bodies of his ancestors, which were in 
the family vault beneath the church, to the new 
catacombs he has made under his chapel. It now 
contains but a few luneral memorials, and those 

chiefly 



DORSETSHIRE. 



231 



chiefly of the above family, one of which, to the 
memory of Sir John Weld, who died in 1674, gives 
a very distinct genealogy of the house of Weld, 
who are said to he lineally descended from " Edrike, 
snrnamed Sylvaticus, or Wild, whose father was 
Alfrike, brother to Edrike Stratton, Duke of Mer- 
cia, who married Edina, daughter of Etheldred, 
King of England." 

West Lulworth is also in the Blandford division, 
12 miles W. from Peverel Point. On the coast, at 
a little distance from the village, is Lulworth Cove, 
a sort of natural bason, into which the sea flows 
through a gap in the cliff, wide enough to admit a 
vessel of 70 or 80 tons burthen. " The rocks around 
it," observes Dr. Maton, " rise to a great height, 
particularly those opposite the entrance, which are 
composed of a hard, calcareous grit Those nearer 
to the main sea consist of a shelly lime-stone (simi- 
lar to that of Peverel Point, and St. Adhelm's 
Head) and chert ; and it is observable, that the 
strata of these substances on one side of the Cove 
correspond exactly to those on the other, both in 
direction and texture. It may be remarked too, 
that the whole range, quite from Peverel Point, 
makes the same angle, about forty- five degrees from 
the horizon, or nearly so, pitching, or dipping, in 
general, to the north. The rocks west of the cave 
have been undermined in a singular manner by the 
sea, and there are large grotesque caverns, through 
which it pours with an awful roar. Immense masses 
.seem just ready to drop into the deep, exhibiting 
marks of some wonderful convulsion : alterations in 
their aspect daily take place, and the depth and ex- 
tent of the sea within the Cove, have considerably in- 
creased even in the memory of several natives of the 
village. About these rocks, the razor-bill andpufiin 
lay their eggs. They generally make their appear- 
ance towards the middle of May, and migrate before 
the end of August. The former deposits its eggs 
on the bare rocks ; and even those belonging to 
different birds are placed contiguous to each other. 
These eggs are food for the country people, who 
often run most terrific risks, by trusting themselves 
at the end of a rope to the strength of only one per- 
son above, if whose footing should be insecure, 
they must both tumble down the precipice together." 
Nearly a mile from the Cove stands an Arched liuck, 
which projects from the land into the sea, having an 
opening fifteen or twenty feet high in the middle, 
formed like an arch. 

LYME REGIS.] This town, seated on the little 
river Lyrne, from which it takes its name, is in the 
Bridport division, 23J miles west from Dorchester, 
and 143 west-south-west from London. The river 
Lyme rises about two miles north from the town, 
through which it passes and divides it into two 
parts. The town is situated on a declivity, and, 
consequently, one part is elevated much above the 
other. The houses, which are chiefly composed of 
blueish wrag-stoue, are covered with slate. Lyme 
possesses a neat aud ancient church ; a brick-built 



Custom House, supported on pillars, for the con- 
venience of corn merchants, who hold their market 
beneath ; a quay, commodious though not large ; 
a harbour, furnished with several forts, mounted 
with cannon ; and a most important structure, .for 
the defence of shipping, locally termed the " Cobb." 
To this structure Lyme is indebted for all its im- 
portance. The time of its construction is unknown, 
but the manner is said to have been by weighing up 
vast rocks out of the sea with empty casks, which 
being placed in a regular order a considerable way 
into th sea, and the interstices filled up, large 
buildings were erected thereon. It answers the 
intention of a pier, and the port it forms is so safe 
and deep, that vessels are defended from all winds, 
and as secure as if in a bason. From the Life of 
Lord Keeper Guildford, by North, the following 
account, which relates the manner of its foundation 
an.d appearance, is extracted : " The Cobb at 
Lyme is situated in the cod (as they term it) of a 
bay, where there was no river or land-lock pro- 
vided by nature, and of all places upon the coast of 
England, least to be suspected for a good port. It 
is about twe furlongs from the town, and so named 
from the Cobbe stone of which it is composed : an 
immense mass of stone, of the shape of a demi- 
lune, with a bar in the middle of the concave. The 
stones are not wrought with any tool, nor bedded 
in any cement ; hut being all pebbles of the sea, are 
piled up, and hold by their bearings only ; and the 
surge plays in and out through the interstices of the 
stone. As the best cemented square stone -will 
scarce hold against the surge, it often decays ; but 
there is warning enough to repair and prevent any 
great ruin of it ; for sometimes a swamp appears 
upon the flat top where they walk ; and when that 
is perceived, they take down all that part, and build 
it up from the bottom ; and nothing less will prevent 
the downfall of much more, as the sea rages more 
or less against it. And it u}ay happen that some 
new foundation stouts are to be laid ; these are the 
largest that can he got upon the coast, aud mount- 
ing them on casks chained; together, with but one 
man mounted upon them, who, with the help of a 
pole, conducts it to the place where it is to lie, and 
then striking out an iron pin, away go the casks, 
and the stone falls into its' place. The vessels are 
laden and unladen by horses going upon the sand 
between the Cobb and the town : they have no dri-s 
vers, but are charged with the bales at the ware- 
house, and trot away to the ship's side, and stand 
fair, sometimes above the belly in water, for the 
tackle to discharge them ; and then they return to 
the ware-house for more ; and so perform the tide's 
work, aud know, by the flood, when their labour is 
at an end." 

The Cobb has suffered great damages several 
times, the last was in 1762, when it was refrrfired 
by government at the expense of 4000A Lyme in 
the time of Camden was of little importance, but 
from the erection of the Cobb, which renders the 

harbour 



232 



DORSETSHIRE. 



harbour so secure, it has been gradually rising into 
consequence. 

The earliest mention of Lyme occurs in the year 
784, when Cenurelf, King of the West Saxons, 
granted a charter to the church of Sherbourne of 
the land of one mansion near the west bank of the 
river Lin. Lyme is again mentioned in the Domes- 
day Survey, as being divided into three parcels, re- 
spectively appertaining to the Bishop of Salisbury, 
Glastonbury Abbey, and William Belet, a servant 
ot the King. In the reign of Edward III. it fur- 
nished four ships, and sixty-two mariners for the 
siege of Calais. In the time of Henry the Fourth 
and Fifth, it suffered, in common with other twus 
on the southern coast, severely from the incursions 
of the French. In 1588, the defeat of the Spanish 
Armada occurred within sight of this town. Du- 
ring the war between Charles I. and the Parliament, 
Lyme, as commanding the road to the west of En- 
gland, and being of importance to either party, was 
closely besieged by the royal army. The besieged, 
who defended the town with the greatest courage 
and resolution, were commanded by Colonel Tho- 
mas Ceely, and Lieutenant Colonel (afterwards Ad- 
miral) IJIukc. The besiegers, who were about 2500 
in number, were commanded by Prince Maurice, 
assisted by Lord Paulet, Sir John Stanwel, and Sir 
John Berkeley. The defenders of the town were 
inspired with an enthusiastic courage by the ha- 
rangues of a number of fanatical preachers, whose 
discourses inflamed even the women of the garrison. 
The siege continued for many months, and the in- 
habitants were reduced to the greatest distress, 
when in May 1644, Lord Warwick arrived with a 
small squadron before the town, and relieved them 
with provisions, at the same time, writing to the 
Lords an account of its state. Immediate relief, 
and pecuniary satisfaction for their losses, was voted 
by both Houses ; and the Earl of Essex having 
advanced towards Dorchester, Prince Maurice, af- 
ter suffering great losses in his army, raised the 
siege on the 14th of June. 

It was at Lyme that the ill-fated Duke of Mon- 
mouth landed, on the llth of June, 1685. Accom- 
panied by Lord Grey, a Genoese Count, and some 

* This young mail, mentioned before as having joined Mon- 
mouth's standard, was, with his brother Benjamin, who was 
executed at Taunton, the son of a Turkey Merchant residing 
in London. He had lost his father early, and been educated in 
Holland, where lie imbibed a zeal for the Protestant religion, 
which urged him to assist the deposing of James I[. ; and to 
accomplish this he joined Monmoulh's army, and bore the rank 
of Lieutenant at Sedgemore, where he conducted himself with 
groat valour. After the defeat of their army, he attempted 
with his brother to escape to Holland; but being driven back 
by contrary winds, and seeing no prospect of escape, they sur- 
rendered themselves, and were taken to Exeter prison. They 
were afterwards removed to separate prisons; and Benjamin, 
agei *Wnly-two, was executed at Taunton, while William, 
Dot yet ninetocn, suffered, at Lyme. Speaking of the transac- 
tions which.occurred at this time, Hutchins observes " of all 
the unhappy victims that died in the west, none were more 
pitied than these two brothers. Their youth, their beauty, their 



other officers and gentlemen, and bearing arms and 
ammunition for about 4 or 500 men, the Duke, after 
having been nineteen days at sea, landed en the 
Cobb, at eight o'clock in the evening, and having 
erected his standard, read his declaration in the 
market-place. On the following morning the Duke 
mustered his army, consisting of nearly 4000 men, 
and being joined by two young gentlemen of the 
name of Hewling, Colonel Joshua Churchill, and 
some other persons of repute, he commenced his 
march towards the west. The fatal battle of Sedga- 
more almost directly took place, and the Duke and 
his adherents were involved in the greatest calami- 
ties. Jefferies and Kirk commenced their opera- 
tions, and after having executed inhuman barbarities 
as they advanced, a.t length came to Lyme. Here 
the twelve following unfortunate persons were exe- 
cuted : William Hewling,* Christopher Battis- 
combe, Esq. Colonel Holmes, the Rev. Sampson 
Lark, Dr. Temple, Captain Marders, Captain Ro- 
bert Matchet, Captain Kidd, Josiah Askew, John 
Hays, Leonard Jackson, and Henry Watts. 

In December, 1814, after a violent storm, part of 
the cliffs on the coast, near that place, fell down, 
and discovered the fossil remains of an enormous 
crocodile, in a perfect state. This was on the estate 
of H. H. Henley, Esq. who presented it to Bullock's 
Museum, London. 

In the twelfth of Edward I. the manor of Lyrae 
attached to the crown, and the town was made a 
borough. In the twenty -seventh of the same reign, 
Lyme was given to the king's sitter Margaret, 
Queen of Scotland. Succeeding monarchs granted 
various privileges to the town, and, in consequence 
of the losses of the townsmen, from invasion and in- 
undation, frequent remission of their farm-rents and 
tythes. Elizabeth, following the example of her 
father, Henry VIII. granted the inhabitants great 
privileges; and James 1. and Charles I. bestowed 
many additional immunities. 

The corporation is at present composed of a 
Mayor, who acts as Justice the year before and after 
his mayoralty, Recorder, Town Clerk, and fifteen 
capital Burgesses, two 'of whom, with the Mayor, 
are Justices of the Peace. The Mayor and capital 



being the only sons of their jnodier, and she a widow, their 
extraordinary piety, resignation, even excessive joy, at their 
approaching fate, made ail men look with horror at a throne, 
which, instead of being that ot mercy, was not only that of se- 
vere justice, but excess of cruelty. The people, us if to reflect 
upon the flintiness of the. Sovereign's heart, strove who should 
most express their pity and regard for them whilst living, and 
when dead; and when the body of the subject of our memoir 
was deposited in Lyme Church-yard, it was attended by 200 
persons, accompanied by some of the most fashionable young 
women in the town ', though it was only the day foflpwmg his 
untimely death, and no invitation or preparation m;ide. The 
dipuity'and acquiescence.il) God's providence under these 
misfortunes, and the cruelty of their deaths, made a great im- 
pre^ion upon all sofjer m'-ri; and the outrages committed in 
the west, more than any thing contributed to overthrow the 
throne of a tyrant, which he had discoloured with the blood of 
so mauy of liis subjects, to gratify an unsalable cruelly." 

Burgesses 



DORSETSHIRE. 



238 



Burgesses admit an indefinite number of persons 
(generally about thirty) to the freedom of the bo- 
rough, who have a right to elect members to be re- 
turned to Parliament. A Collector, Customer, and 
Comptroller, belong to the port ; and two Wardens 
are chosen yearly by the inhabitants to superintend 
the repairs of the Cobb, towards which 100/. per 
anuuni was granted by Charles II. 

Lyune, according to the Population Returns of 
1811, contains 360 houses, with 1925 inhabitants. 
Among the distinguished persons who have resided, 
or been born here, may be mentioned John Case,* 
Thomas Coram, f and Sir George Sommers. 

MAIDEN CASTLE.] Maiden Castle, situated about 
a mile south-west from Dorchester, is a strong and 
extensive camp, of an irregular form, occupying the 
summit of a hill. It is surrounded by ramparts and 
ditches, high and deep ; the former lapping over 
eacli other, and rendering Uie outlets, which are on 
the east and west, winding and intricate. Its area, 
within the inner rampart, is about forty -four acres ; 
its circumference, about a mile and a quarter. On 
the south side of the encampment is the mouth of a 
passage, said, by tradition, to extend a considerable 
way under ground. About the centre the ground 
rises to its greatest elevation, and commands ex- 

* The date both of the birth and cleath'of Case is unknown, 
but he is said to have been living in the reign of Anne. He 
was, however, a native of Lyme, and practised for many years 
in physic and astrology. He was looked upon as the successor 
of the famous Lilly, whose magical utensils he possessed, and 
which he would sometimes expose in derision to his intimate 
friends. He is said to have got more by this distich, than 
Dryden did by all his works : 

" Within this place 
Laves Doctor Case." 

He was doubtless very well paid for composing that which 
he affixed to his pill-boxes : 

" Here's fourteen pills for thirteen pence, 
Enongh in any man's con-sci-ence." 

He was the author of- " The Angelical Guide, shewing Men 
and Women their Lot and Chance in this elementary Life," in 
four bonks, 1697, 8vo. 

f Thomas Coram, the first patron of the Foundling Hospital, 
was born here in 1688. He was bred to the sea in the mer- 
chant's service, and from frequent residence in the eastern part 
of London, where he often witnessed the lamentable situation 
of deserted children, he was induced to project the erection of 
the present asylum, called the Foundling Hospital. To effect 
this he laboured with incredible diligence for seventeen years, 
ami at length had the happiness of seeing it accomplished. He 
was also the author of an establishment formed in North Ameri- 
ca, for the education of Indian girls. By these and other be- 
nevolent schemes, Mr. Coram expended all his property, so 
that in his old age he was obliged to be supported by the con- 
tributions of several noble patrons. He died in 17ol, and was 
buried in the vault under the chapel ot the Foundling Hos- 
pital. 

{ Mr. Hussey was distinguished for an original mode of 
thinking, particularly wkli respect to the arts, which led him to 
disregard professional trammels, and to seek eminence by fol- 
lowing the deductions of his own judgment. The first part of 
education he received at Douay, in France, whence h was re- 

VOL. II. NO. 62. 



ceedingly fine and extensive prospects. Maiden 
Castle, though commonly supposed to be of Roman 
origin, has been asserted, with great apparent pro- 
bability, to be a British fortification. The walls, 
which are erected with mud instead of stone ; tbfe 
irregular form ; the circumstance of neither Roman 
bricks, nor coins being found in it ; its being divi- 
ded by a ditch and vallum running across ; and the 
numerous tumuli and barrows which are in its vi- 
cinity, are all evident proofs of this. It was, how- 
ever, undoubtedly employed as a military post by 
the Romans ; who, wishing to possess so strong a 
fortress, might be induced to lead the Via Icenania 
into its neighbourhood. 

MARNHULL.] At Marnhull, in the Sherborne di- 
vision, six miles west-south-west from Shaftesbury, 
is the seat of the Hussey family. The late Giles 
Hussey, Esq. so deservedly celebrated for his por- 
traits in pencil, was born here, on the 10th of Fe- 
bruary, 1710.J 

MAPMBURY.] This Amphitheatre, termed by the 
common people Maumbury, " is situated" says 
Hutchins, " on a plain in the open fields, about a 
quarter of a mile south-west from the walls of Dor- 
chester, close by the Roman road which runs thence 
to Weymouth. It is raised 011 the solid chalk, upon 

moved to St. Omer's ; and, on his return, placed under Ri- 
chardson, the painter. Disliking the idea of seven years con- 
tinued servitude, he soon left that artist, and agreed to assist 
an Italian historical painter, named Damini, who was employ- 
ed to decorate the Cathedral of Lincoln. With him he re- 
mained four years, and in 1730 accompanied him to Bologna; 
but was there deserted and robbed by his master, and for 
nearly three months his situation was deplorable. At length, 
having procured the patronage of Signior Gislonzoni, he re- 
commenced his studies, and afterwards went to Home, where 
he became the pupil, or rather friend, of the celebrated Her- 
cule Lelli, from whose valuable lessons he derived abundant 
information. When asked on what terms he would take Hus- 
sey as a pupil, Lelli said, " What we receive from God we 
should give gratis; and the liberal arts are not to be sold ! I 
accept you not as a scholar, but as a friend ; and I wish to be 
known and called by that title, and not by that of Master '" 
He continued his studies at Rome till the year 1737, when he 
returned to England, and was reduced to paint portraits for a 
subsistence. This, which he esteemed the lowest branch of 
the art, was peculiarly mortifying to his feelings; but a proud 
spirit of independence enabled him for some years to persevere 
in the employment, rather than be indebted tor support to the 
bounty of others. At length, wearied and spirit-broken, he 
retired to his elder brother at Marnhull, with whom he resided 
in the most friendly cordiality ; and on the death of the former, 
succeeded to the estate ; but afterwards, from religious motives, 
relinquished it to a near relation, and retired to Beaston, near 
Ashburton, in Devonshire ; where, as he was one day employ- 
ed in gardening, he suddenly expired. This was in the month 
of June, 1778. 

The academical drawings of Mr. Hussey weje previously <o 
the conquest of Italy by the French, carefully preserved at 
Bologna, and shown on account of their superior excellence ; 
notwithstanding the custom in that school, of removing the 
old drawings to make room for those of superior merit. His 
portraits in black lead are particularly celebrated, and are 
finished in a remarkably delicate and correct style. Several of 
them are preserved at Wardour Castle, the seat of Lord A run- 
del, in Wiltshire ; but the greatest number are ill the posses- 

~ - A i - i i , r it .1 *- . * * 



sion of Mr. Weld, at Lultworlh Castle. 
3* 



a level 



234 



DORSETSH'RE. 



a level ; the jambs at the entrance are somewhat 
worn away. Half the work is above live feet anil a 
half under the surface of the ground ; the greater 
part of the chalk was dug out of the cavity within, 
and the rest fetched from elsewhcn: : probably it was 
framed of solid chalk, cemented by mortar made of 
burnt chalk, and covered with turf. This is art- 
fully set on the top of a plain, declining to tlie 
north-east, whereby the rays of the sun falling upon 
the ground hereabouts, is thrown oft' to a distance 
by reflection ; and tle upper end of the Amphithea- 
tre, for the major part of the day, has the sun be- 
hind the spectators. The whole is delineated from 
four centres. In the ground it is a true circle, 
(oval ;) but upon the plain became a walk of eight 
feot broad, gradually ascending from the ends upon 
the longest diameter to its highest elevation in the 
middle upon the shortest diameter, where it reaches 
up the whole series of seats of the spectators, who, 
marching hence, distribute themselves therein, from 
all sides, without hurry or tumult. On the top is 
a terrace of twelve feet, besides the parapet, out- 
wardly live feet broad, and four high. There are 
three ways leading up to the terrace ; one at the 
uppt-r end, over the Cavea, and one at each side 
upon the shortest diameter, going from the elevated 
part of the circular work. Several horses abreast 
may go upon this, ascending by the ruins of the 
cavea : this receptacle of the gladiators, wild beasts, 
&c. is supposed to have been at the upper end, un- 
der the ascent to the terrace, there being vaults uu- 
der that part of the body of the work. The area is 
no doubt exceedingly elevated by manuring and 
ploughing for many years, yet it still preserves a 
concavity, for the descent from the entrance is very 
great, and you may go down as into a shallow pit. 
The middle part of it is now ten or twelve feet lower 
than the level of the field ; and that, especially about 
the entrance, is much lowered by 1 ploughing ; be- 
cause the end of the circular walk there, which 
should be even with the ground, is a good deal 
nbove it, and has filled up the adjoining part of the 
area with its ruins. On the outside of the upper end 
is a large round tumor, a considerable way beyond 
the exterior verge, and regular in figure, which cer- 
tainly has been somewhat appertaining to the work. 
On the shortest diameter, but towards the upper 
end, are two rising square plots, four feet above the 
level of the walk, or terrace, capable of holding 
twenty-four people each. There is a seeming ir- 
regularity of the terrace on both sides at the lower 
end, for it is higher within than without ; yet this 
produces no ill effect ; for when you stand in the 
centre within, the whole surface of the terrace seems 
of one level ; but on the outside, the verge of the 
north-eastwardly part is sloped off gradually to- 
wards the entrance, where the declivity is conform- 
able with it : hence the exterior contour also ap- 
pears of an equal height. The circular walks cut 
the whole breadth into two equal parts, upon the 
shortest diameter, probably making ah equal number 

6 



of seats above and Under it.-^-Dr. Stukeley ob- 
serves, that this Amphitheatre is computed to consist 
of about an acre of ground ; and by an accurate ad-' 
measurement taken for this work, it was found that 
the greatest perpendicular Iveight of the rampart 
above the level of the Arena, was thirty feet ; the; 
external longest diameter, 343 feet, 6 inches ; the: 
external shortest diameter, 339 feet, 6 inches ; the 
internal longest diameter, 218 feet ; the internal 
shortest diameter, 163 feet, (J inches ; and the first 
ascent from the arena to the greatest curve height, 
is thirty feet. The breadtli of the side of the work, 
or solid, taken upon the ground-plot, is equal to 
one half of the longest diameter of the area, or a 
fourth of the whole longest diameter. Its perpen- 
dicular altitude, from the top of the terrace to the 
bottom of the area, is a fourth of the longest diame- 
ter of the area. In the middle of each side is a 
Ciuiens, or parcel of seats, of nearly thirty feet 
broad, just over the more elevated part of the cir- 
cular work, reaching up to the terrace, which swells 
out above the concavity of the whole, and answers 
to the rising ground in the middle of the terrace. 
Some years ago a silver coin was ploughed up here, 
which fell into the hands of Mr. Pownall, of Lin- 
coln ; on the face was this inscription : IMP. M. 
IVL. PHILIPVS. AVG. on the reverse, L^ETAT. 
FVNDAT. and a Genius, or Fortune, with a gar- 
land in her right hand, and the helm of a ship in the 
left. This Emperor reigned in the year 240 ; but 
the Amphitheatre was probably made under the go- 
vernment of Agricola." Agricola, we are informed 
by Tacitus, encouraged the building of temples, 
baths, and other works of luxury, to soften the 
rough tempers of the Britons. 

According to the calculations of Dr. Stukeley, 
12,960 spectators might be contained in this build- 
ing ; and 10,000 persons are said to have been pre- 
sent to witness the execution ef Mary Channing, 
who was burnt here for poisoning her husband in 
1705. The prospects from the top of the hill are 
extensive, and interesting, frojn the view of Pound- 
bury, Maiden Castle, and the numerous tumuli which 
are around. 

MELBURY SAMPFORD.] Sampford, or Upper Mel- 
bury, is in the Dorchester division, ~1\ miles north- 
east by east from Beaminster. Mclbury is remark- 
able for its venerable church, which contains ancient 
monuments of the Brownings, and of the Strange- 
ways, the owners of the adjoining seat. The boun- 
daries of the church-yard are marked by neat freer 
stone urns, on which the following inscriptions ap- 
pear : 

" We trace the limits of man's last retreat : 
Where good and bad, where poor lie mix'cl with great, 
Each with his share of sins; but each alone 
For mercy trusting to th' Almighty throne. 

" In tins small sp;ice is mad Ambition lu'nl, 
Who for itself alom; thought earth was made : 
Pride from her pinnacle thus low is tost ; 
Here cv'ry hope of Vanity is lost : 

Tc 



DORSETSHIRE. 



23-3 



To Ot'i coanf bed U Luxury con fin' d, 
, AuU Avarice leaves htr darling heaps behind. 
Yet think not w encompass Vice aluiio, 
Virtues transcen'I.Mit to their 'rest are gone: 
Bosoms (hat melted at each tale of woe, 
And hearts forgiving of their greatest loe ; 
Hands open to each charitable deed, 
And doubly bounteous where the claim was need. 

" Then, heedless vvand'rer, -..lay thy steps, and learn 
To place in Virtue's path (hy great' concern ; 
Though all, unarm'd, come here alike to lie, 
The man who best lias liv'd, knows best to die." 

Withiu the church, in the south aisle, is a marble 
tomb, ou which is the effigy of a man, carved in 
alabaster, completely armed, lying at length, ami 
resting his fi:et on a coucliant lion. Round the 
tomb, is the following inscription, engraven on 
brass, in old English characters : 

" Hie jacent Egidius Strangewaies mile;, films et heres 
Henrici Strangewaies, armigeri, et Dorothse uxoris 
SUE, filiz Johannis Arundel, militis : nee non Johan- 
na uxor predict' Egid" et filia Johannis Mordant, mi- 
litis Egidius obiit die 11 Decembris 1547. Cujus 
a'i'e p.picitur D. Amen.*" HJ .,,)) 

.-?' ij '>( *ffij)}SfO') 1on:>Jlli 

. The seat of the Strangeways, mentioned before 
as adjoining this church, was, in the beginning of 
the last century/ erected on the site of one nearly 
equal in magnificence. The present edifice stands 
on a slight eminence : its principal front, which is 
supported by six Corinthian pillars, is towards the 
east; and a bridge ef ten stone arches forms the 
path leading to it. The apartments of the interior 
are elegant, and, like the windows, ornamented 
with the arms and quarterings of the Strangeways, 
and their numerous noble alliances. The estate be- 
longing to this edifice is thus described by Mr. Hut- 
chins : " The ground around the mansion is di- 
versified by nature in beautiful irregularity of hill 
and dale, of verdant pastures and v? nerable woods. 
Various trees, of great size and beauty, present 
themsplvtfS in every point of view. The oak and 
the elm distinguished themselves above the rest : of 
the former there is one whose circumference exceeds 
thirty-two feet. At a pleasing distance from the 
south front, the canal extends itself into the shape 
and size of a majestic river, whose opposite bank is 
clothed with u numerous assemblage of lofty forest 
trees. They cover the base of a hill whose summit 
rises over their tops, and extends in a delightful 
terrace to the east and west. Hence the ey tra- 
verses an immeasurable tract of country. On the 
east the bold prominence of Bub Down presents the 
first object ; and at the distance of almost thirty 
miles in the same line, the 'entrenchments at Ham- 
bledon Hill, and the town of Shaftesbury, are dis- 
tinctly seen. Proceeding northwards, Bradley 
Knoll, Alfred's Tower, Well's Cathedral, the Men- 



* Translation :" Here lie Egidins Strangeways, the son 
and heir of Henry Strangeways, and Dorothy his wife, the 
daughter of John Arundel ; and also Johanna, the wife of the 



dip range, of hills, the wonderful chasm at Ched- 
di.-r dirt's,, and other remarkable objects, rise. tt 
visw. On the north-west are the Quantock Hills ; 
and to the west, (he eye catches the appearance of a 
forest, stretching to an immense distance, whose 
utmost boundaries reach the clouds." 

There are several other places of the name of 
Melbury in this county : Melbury Abbas, or West 
Melbury, 2 miles south-east from Shaftesbury. ; 
East Melbury, a hamlet adjoining to West Melbury ; 
Melbury Bubb, ()* miles south-south-west from 
Sherborne ; and Melbury Osmond, or Lower Mel- 
bury, 8j miles south-west from Sherborne. 

MELCOMBE BINGHAM.] Melcombe Bingham, or 
East Melcombe, situated in the Sherborne division, 
about a mile and a quarter east from Melcombe 
Horsey, lies on the banks of a rivulet called Devil's 
Brook. It was formerly the property of the Tu- 
bervilles, whose heiress married into the family of 
the Binghams, from whom the Earl of Lucan, of 
Castlebar, in Ireland, is descended. 

MKLCOIWBE HORSEY.] Melcombe Horsey, or 
West Melcombe, is 9| miles north-north-east from 
Dorchester. On a high hill, called Nettlecomb Toul, 
in this parish, is an ancient encampment, inclosing 
a square of about twenty acres. The prospect from 
the hill is very extensive, comprehending the entire 
vale of Blackmore, and considerable parts of the 
county of Somerset and Wilts. 

MELCOMBE REGIS.] (See Weyraouth.) 

MILBOURNE ST. ANDREW.] Milbourne St. Au- 
drew, in the Blandford division, lies eight miles 
south-west from the town of Blandford Forum. 
This manor, iu the reign of Athelstan, belonged to 
Milton Abbey, but, in the Domesday Book, it is mea- 
tioaed as belonging to Matthew de Mortonia, Odo, 
son of Eurebold, and Swain, of the King's Thanes. 
A market, which has been discontinued for a long 
time, was granted to this place by Henry III. The 
manor remained for a number of descents in the 
family of Matthew de Mortonia, of which was Sir 
George Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the 
reign of Hcury VII. but it devolved from that fami- 
ly to Edmund Pleydell, Esq. by his marriage with 
Anne, the heiress of Sir John Morton. The pre- 
sent owner, Edmund Morton Pleydell, Esq. is the 
grandson of Edmund and Anne. The Mansion 
House, situated in Milbourne Churchstone, near the 
Church, is a handsome stone building, of a square 
form, with two fronts to the west aud south. The 
Church has nothing remarkable in its exterior, but 
the interior contains several monuments of the Mor- 
ton, Pleydell, and other families. 

MILTON.] Middletou, Milton Abbas, or Abbey 
Milton, is a large parish, including the village ef 
the same name, in the Sherborne division, eight 
miles south-west by west from Blandford Forum. 

above Egidius, and daughter of John Mordant. Egidius died, 
on the nth of December, 1547. On his soul the Lord have 
mercy. Amen." 

What 



236 



DORSETSHIRE. 



What is now th village was formerly a market- 
town, and consisted of about 120 houses, disposed 
in streets contiguous to the Abbey, from which the 
place derives its uame ; but the whole of these have 
been swept away, and the site converted into plea- 
sure gardens and shrubberies. This was effected 
by the present Earl of Dorchester, the proprietor of 
the estate, who erected a church, alms-house, and 
several cottages, in a vale a short distance from his 
mansion. The cottages are erected in a uniform 
manner, at regular distances from each other, and a 
piece of ground is attached to each. Water was 
with difficulty obtained in the village, till it was pro- 
cured 'by a well being sunk in the middle of the 
place. The Alms House, consisting of six tene- 
ments, has the following inscription on the out- 
ride : 

" Hzc ScdesSenectritis Rezctificata est Anno Dom. 1779."* 

Sir John Loder founded a free school here, which 
has since been transferred to Blandford. Milton, 
according to the Returns of 1811, contains 80 
houses, inhabited by OJ9 persons. 

The magnificent seat of George Damer, Earl of 
Dorchester, is situated in this parish, at the junction 
of three richly wooded vallies. The grounds, on 
every side, are irregular, abounding with wood, and 
eminently picturesque. In order to increase the 
effect, several attempts have been made to fill the 
lower part of the valley with water, but none of 
these have hitherto succeeded. The place the man- 
sion now stands upon was, anciently, the site of an 
abbey, stated to have been built by King Athelstan, 
about the year 940. Its revenues were increased 
by Henry III. who granted to it ten hides of land 
in Stockland. The riches of this foundation con- 
tinued to augment ; and how considerable it was 
in the time of Henry VI. may be seen from the fol- 
lowing list of the live stock belonging to it : 79 
horses and colts, 217 bulls, 77 cows, 27 steers, 17 
yearlings, 35 calves, 5502 sheep, 129 rams, 4015 
ewes, 2744 hogs, sows, and pigs, and 203 cocks, 
bens, and chickens. Though the Abbey was not 
properly a mitred one, yet the Abbot was summoned 
to Parliament, in the several reigns of Henry III. 
Edward II. and Edward III. According to 
Speed, it was valued, at the Dissolution, at 
720Z. 4s. Id. 

The mansion, called at the present time Milton 
Abbey, was erected by the present Earl, from a de- 
sign of Sir William Chambers. It was intended to 
assimilate in style with the beautiful collegiate 
church adjoining to its southern front ; but its ar- 



* Translation: " This retreat for age was rebuilt A. D. 
1779." 

f Translation. Pray for the souls, and happy state of Lord 
William Micldlelon, abbot of this monastery, and of Thomas 
"VVilktu, vicar of this parish, who placed this altar to the praise 



chitecture is neither English, Grecian, nor Roman ; 
and the incongruity is more striking, from compar- 
ing it with the Abbey Church, which displays the 
elegant architecture of the fourteenth century. The 
mansion, which, with its offices, forms a quadrangle, 
is cased externally with a fine white stone. The 
interior is furnished with peculiar elegance, and con- 
tains a collection of fine paintings. Among those 
eminently claiming attention, are, two Heads of 
Monks, "by Raphael and Titian : a Sea View, by 
Claude ; and the Feeding of the Israelites, by Bas- 
san. On the south side of the house is a venerable 
old room, called the Monk's Hall, which has a fine 
oak roof, painted and gilt, with a richly carved 
screen, in a corresponding style. The date of 1498 
appears on the screen, and on the cornice. 

The Abbey Church, now used as a private cha- 
pel to the mansion, was probably built on the site of 
another church, which had been destroyed by light- 
ning in 1309. It consists only of a transept, and 
choir, with side aisles. The nave, or part west from 
the tower, was either never finished, or destroyed at 
the Dissolution. The tower is square and low. The 
interior contains a few ancient and fine monuments. 
At the east end, behind the altar, is a stone screen, 
peculiarly rich, and ornamented, and having very 
florid canopies, and tabernacles. On the cornice is 
the following inscription : 



" SDraee pro bono statu tt animating Domini - 
fclnu BiDBlrou bui9 aim' monastmi abbatis ac 
ccum magiBtci 'Cftonue Celilknt fjufits parodjiac 
lunni tt Bfcntonim unc.-ll.uu tnii Ijor altact an Btf 
lauotm suis foonorifici * * * * sumptujuei anno lnear= 
nations Domini nostri Jfjn tti millrsuno quaDrlngtntc 
(fmto nonagwfmo wumio," t 

On the south side of the altar stand a bason for 
holy water, and three stone seats, with ornamental 
canopies ; and in the south transept is a beautiful 
octagon font, executed with much taste, and con- 
taining eight small emblematical figures, placed in 
nichea on the pedestal. 

In the north transept is a white marble monument, 
by Carlini, erected to the memory of Lady Caroline 
Milton, wife of the late Earl of Dorchester. ' In the 
north aisle is an old monument of Purbeck marble, 
with some brass plates, on which are the following 
inscriptions : 

Nos autem gloriari oportet in cruce Dni nostri Jesu 
Christi.J 

Here lyeth buryed Sur John Tregonwell, Knight, 
Doctor of the C ivy II Lawes, and one of the Magislers 
of Chancery e, who died the Xlll day of January, in 
the yere ot our Lorde 1566. Of whose soule God 
have mercy. 



of God * * * * in the year of the incarnation of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, 1492. 

J Translation. It becomes us to boast in the cross of cur 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

ID 



DORSETSHIRE. 



237 



Tn the south aisle, on a small mural tablet, is the 
following : 

To the memory of John Tregonwell, late of Milton 
Abbas, in the county of Dorset, Esq. who died Jure 
20th, U~>80, and by his last will and testament, gave 
all the books within this vestry to the use of this Ab- 
bey Church for ever. As a thankful acknowledgment 
of God's wonderful mercy in his preservation when he 
fell fio:u the top of this Church, is this Mommu nt 
erected, at the proper cost and charges of Jane Tre- 
gonwell, his relict and executrix. 

Beneath the organ gallery are two very ancient 
paintings, badly executed on pannel, said to repre- 
sent King Alfred and his Queen. 

MORE CRICHELL.] At More Crichell, in the 
Shaston division, six miles south-west by west from 
Cranhqrne, is the noble seat of Charles Sturt, Esq.* { 
By this gentleman, the mansion was, a few years 
ago, much enlarged. His principal additions were 
the hall, dining-room, drawing-room, portico, libra- 
ry, and dining parlour, with the apartments over 
them. Inclosing a large area, and forming a dis- 
tinct building on the north side, stand the stables j 
and offices. In front of the house, is a very large 
piece of water, bearing the appearance, from some 
points .of view, of a noble river. The Prince of j 
Wales has twice occupied this fine mansion. A few 
alterations have been made by Mr. Sturt, in the vil- 
lage church, a plain, ancient edifice, containing 
some curious monuments of the Eyfrewast and Uve- 
dale families. The arms of the latter are emblazon- 
ed over a door of the aisle, and their pedigree is 
shown on a large mural tablet. 

NINE BARHOW DOWN.] Nine Barrow Down, si- 
tuated about three miles east from C,orfe, is an emi- 
nence which derives its name from nine large bar- 
rows supposed to be of British construction. The 
whole number of barrows on this Down is sixteen ; 
most of them are circular, differing in size, but very 
neatly shaped. Eight or ten are surrounded with a 
shallow trench ; and near them is a cavity. The 
most elevated part of this Down, which is 642 feet 
above low-water mark, commands exceedingly ex- 
tensive, and beautiful prospects ; including the vil- 



* Charles Stint, Esq. was descended by the maternal side, 
from the family of (he Napiers, a branch of which was seated 
in Scotland. Mr. Sturt had been a Lieutenant in the Navy, 
itnd possessed a fast sailing cutter, stationed in Weymouth Bay. 
In September, 1800, he went out early in the morning, and, 
after dinner, being about two leagues from shore, made a match 
for his cutter to sail against lhat of Mr. Weld, of Lul worth 
Castle. At the commencement, Mr. Slurt's boat was fastened 
to the cutter, whirli, retarding her sailing, he ordered a boy to 
row to shore. The sea running high, the boy was afraid to 
venture, and Mr. Slurt requested any man on board; but as 
they all declined the task he jumped into the boat himself. 
Just at Hut instant, tin: rope, which lashed it to the vessel, 
broke, and the force of the tide drifted the boat a considerable 
distance into the sea, where it was upset. Thus perilously si- 
tuated, he pulled off all his clothes, except his nankeen trow- 
sers and stockings, and kept his station as well as he could on 
the keel of the boat. Giving up all for lost, before he threw 

VOL. n. NO. (J2. 



lage and bay of Swanwich, the British Channel be- 
yond it, the sandy shores of Hampshire, and the 
white, cliffs of the Isle oi Wight. 

NOTTINGTON.] At Nottington, in the parish of 
Broadway, between two and three miles north by 
west from Melcoinbe Regis, is a mineral spring, 
possessing properties and qualities similar to that at 
Kedleston, in Derbyshire. 

ORMINKTON.] About seven or eight years ago, 
on the hills of this estate, opposite Weymouth Bay, 
an equestrian figure of his present Majesty, was 
formed in chalk; ami although it was--280Jeet in 
length, and 320 in height, yet the proportions 
were well preserved, and the likeness of the King 
correct. 

PARNHAM.] Parnham, near Beamiaster, is the 
ancient mansion of Sir William Oglander, Bart, 
which came to his family by marriage with Eliza- 
beth, daughter of Sir John Strode, in 1699. The 
hall is a noble room, containing arms of the family 
and their alliances. A pane of painted glass has on 
it the arms, with the name of " John Strode, 1499." 
The Withdrawing Room contains an original por- 
trait of Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, and ano- 
ther of his son Gregory, Lord Cromwell. The 
Gallery possesses numerous portraits of the Strodes, 
of the time of Elizabeth. 

From a bill, situated at East Axnoller, in this 
neighbourhood, issue the three following springs : 
the Axe, which falls into the sea at Axmouth ; the 
Birt, which joins the Axe ; and the Smiene, which 
falls into the sea near Bridport. 

PIDDI.ETON.] Piddleton, which is entitled to at- 
tention on account of the monuments in its church, 
is situated in the Dorchester division, six miles and 
a. half north-east by east from that town. The 
church was erected about 1505. It is composed of 
a body, chancel, side aisles, and an embattled tower. 
A series of pointed windows extend over the roof, 
which is supported by five arches. Among the mo- 
numents, which are numerous, the following deserve 
to be mentioned : In the arch of the south aisle, is- 
the effigies of a man armed, supporting his feet on 
some animal, now defaced, and having at his head 



away his clothes, he wrote with a pencil, on a slip of paper, 
" Charles Sturt, Brownsea, to his beloved wife." This label 
he placed in the case of a diamond watch, which hud been 
presented to him by his lady. In this situation he remained 
till the evening, when some transports, driven back liy contrary 
winds, passed nt about three miles to the westward of him. All 
had passed, unnoticing him, but the last vessel, by the mate of 
which he was observed, and, the transport not be'ng able to 
bring to, four ircn embarked in the boat, and happily succeed- 
ed in rescuing him from a danger which seemed inevitable. 
In 1799 the crew of a transport vessel, which was wrecked near 
Mr. Sturt's seat, within a short distance of Poole, were clinging 
to the wreck, and must have perished but for his intrepidity. 
He offered at first 100 guineas to any one who should alien pt 
their deliverance, but all being afraid, he jumped into his boat, 
and encouraging some others to follow him, succeeded in sav- 
ing the lives of all the crew, 

3 o an 



238 



DORSETSHIRE. 



an escutcheon, but the arms are obliterated. Near 
this, on a brass mural plate, is the effigies of a man 
completely armed, with the following inscription be- 
neath : 



tytth the bos? of (Christopher SBartin, 
>on ana heiv of "Stir OTilliam S^arttn, ftnt, 

J3rag fot rtjeit eoul0 foitb hrarts Desire, 

Chat the? both ma? be foeirs of eternal %ht, 

Calling to remembrance that etoer? foisht 

Sj?ttt nao?0 Dye, anD therefore let us pra?, 

KB ortjer for us ma? BO another Da?." 



" ffilui cnticem cbri8to|)bmis obitt rrii tie me' 05aii ano 
3D'oi mil'mo q.tiinjj2ntesimo toinsimo quarto."* 

Under the south wall is an altar-tomb of alabaster, 
ornamented with nltches and angels, on which are 
the full-length effigies of a man in armour, and a 
woman. On the wall above them are seven niches, 
in which stand the same number of angels, bearing 
shields ; but the arms are totally defaced. No in- 
scription, or memorial, remains to ascertain the 
date of this tomb ; but, from the architecture, as 
well as the fashion of the armour, it is evidently co- 
eval with the church. Under an arch in the wall, 
beneath these, is the effigies of an armed man, with an 
helmet, sword, and shield : the arms and inscription 
are totally defaced. 

Under a canopy, supported by four pillars, are 
the effigies of a man in a gown, and three children 
behind, all knee-ling, in the attitude of prayer. Op- 
posite is a woman, and behind her seven daughters, 
in the same posture. The following is the inscrip- 
tion : 



l?cth the boo? of /ftichola* S^acrgn, 
foho DeparteD tijis life, ana slept toith bi fathers, the 
jcjrtii Da? of spare!), ano SjW>. (<S. anD left behinD 
in laughters copies, CHijabertj, JFrannws, 3!am, anD 
3nne, toho# soul assurenl? Doth rest foitb Abraham, 
3isacke, ano Jacob, in the StingDeth of I?eai>cn." 

PILLESDOJJ.] The village of Pillesdon is in the 
Bridport division, four miles and a quarter west by 
south from Beaminster. Pillesdon Pen is a cele- 
brated eminence, a mile to the north of this village. 
On the most easterly part, near the turnpike road 
leading from Broad Windsor to Lambart's Castle, 
is a very large entrenchment, surrounded with a tri- 
ple rampart and ditches on every side except the 
eastern, where the natural ascent is so steep, as to 
have rendered the camp inaccessible. The form of 
this encampment is almost an oval, being adapted 
to the shape of the hill on which it stands. Fuller, 
in his Worthies of England, mentions a saying pro- 
verbial here : 

" as much a-kin 
As Lew 'son Hill to Pil'son Pen." 



* Translation. The said Christopher clitJ on Ihe 22nd of 
!Vlay, A. D. I53. 



This was spoken of such as dwell in the same 
neighbourhood without acquaintance. The two hills 
are within a mile of each other, and form eminent 
sea marks. One is denominated by seamen the Cow, 
and the other the Calf, from their imagined resem- 
blance to those animals. 

PIMPERN.] In a close in this parish, which lies 
two miles and a half north-east from Blandford Fo- 
rum, was formerly an antique curiosity called Pirn- 
pern Maze. It was a labyrinth formed of small 
ridges of earth, about a foot high, which extended 
over nearly an acre of ground. The form, as ap- 
pears from the plan in Hutchins's Dorset, was tri- 
angular ; having one entrance, which led by numer- 
ous winding and irregular passages to th centre. 
Dr. Stukeley supposes it to be Roman ; and in- 
cludes it in that class of antiquities which he called 
Julian Bowers ; and which he imagined to have 
been made for the playing of a Roman game. 
Others, however, with greater probability, suppose 
these kind of works (of which many exist in Eng- 
land) to have been formed for the diversion of rus- 
tics, who, as Randolph, a poet of the 17th century,, 
expresses it " nimbly run the windings of the 
maze." Pimpern Maze was entirely destroyed by 
the plough in 1730. 

POKESWELL.] About a quarter of a mile south- 
east from Pokeswell, near Weymouth, is a Druidi- 
cal circle, thus described by Hutchins : " It con- 
sists of fifteen stones : one or two seem missing on 
the north-west, where, perhaps, was the entrance. 
Some of them are quite level with, and some but 
little above the surface of the ground : two of them, 
on the south-west, are about two feet high, and 
broad ; some are scarcely one foot high. They are 
all extremely old, rough, and irregular, and full of 
holes, worn by the weather. They stand on a lump, 
round which are the remains of a small ditch. The 
circle is four yards and a half in diameter. Eight 
or nine paces from it, are three or four erect stones, 
which seem the remains of another circle ; and 
about 200 yards distant, on the north-east and east, 
are four pretty large stones, which, perhaps, formed 
another large circle, or, possibly, an avenue to the 
former." 

POOLE.] Under this head we shall first notiee 
Poole Bay, then Poole Harbour, and afterwards the 
town of Poole. 

Poole Bay is formed by two long narrow pro- 
montories, which, approaching within a quarter of a 
mile of each other towards the east, form a buy, se- 
cured on every side from the winds, and extending 
in circumference, the. indentures being measured, 
sixty-three miles. Immediately within the bay, are 
two or three small islands, the principal of which is 
Branksey. The town of Poole claims much domi- 
nion in Jiis bay, but in 1792, a ease was decided in 
favour of Sir John Webb, which made his manor 



extend 



DORSETSHIRE. 



extend into the bar as far as low-water mark. 
'Fhe Lord of Corfc Castle has also a power and ju- 
risdiction here, and grants to the fishermen of Ware- 
ham, upon their paying a small fine, a right to fish 
in these waters. An oyster fishery is carried on 
here to a considerable extent, in which no less than 
forty vessels of different sizes are employed. The 
returns are between six and seven thousand pounds. 
Other fish abound, and herrings have been sold 
here for a penny a dozen. In 1717, as some men 
were digging a doek at Ham, opposite the harbour, 
they discovered a large bed of oyster shells, regu- 
larly piled up. This bed had been formed by the 
fishermen, who deposited the shells after they" had 
taken out the fish ; a custom which the corporation, 
fearful that it might injure the channel, altered, and 
ordered the fishermen to cast their shells on the 
strand. Poole Bay Was supposed, by Horsley, to 
be the " Magnus Portus" of Ptolemy, but other 
antiquaries place that station at Porchester. 

Poole Harbour is a capacious haven extending 
nearly four miles in length, and of the depth of 
about sixteen feet. The trade, which is chiefly con- 
fined to Newfoundland, consists in exporting 
nets, cordage, sail-cloth, and wearing apparel ; and 
importing cod, salmon, oil, seal-skins, firs, &c. 
The number of ships belonging to Poole, at the 
present time, is about 230, of which 140 are employ- 
ed iu foreign commerce. The central situation of 
this place from the northern ports, and from Hol- 
land, renders it extremely convenient for the corn 
trade, and large quantities of grain are annually im- 
ported and exported. The Court of Admiralty be- 
longing to this port was formerly kept on the quay; 
and its records are extant from the time of Edward 
VI. This court, which is now holden at pleasure, 
consists of the Mayor as president, and a Jury is 
impannelled to judge of causes within the jurisdic- 
tion. " The sea," in this harbour, observes Dr. 
Maton, " ebbs and flows four times in twenty-four 
hours; twice when the moon is at south-east and 
north-west, and twice when she is at south by east, 
and north by west. - Two of these tides seem to be 
occasioned by the Isle of Brownsea, which obstruct- 
ing the water as it runs towards the mouth of the 
harbour, causes it to flow back again ; this is the 
second Hood. In the harbour the ebb and flood ap- 
pear alternately every six hours. The ebb at low- 
water, between the coast of Hampshire and the Isle 
of Wight, runs so strong, that it shoots into Poole 
Harbour, (which lies in the line of its course ;) so 
that when it is low-water at Hurst Castle, it is high 
water here." 

The town of Poole a town and county of itself, 
deriving its name from the Bay, or Pool, on the 
uorth side of which it is situated lies 27 miles east 
by south from Dorehester, and 105 south-west by 
west from London. It is seated upon a peninsula, 
three quarters of a mile long, and half a mile broad, 
which is connected with the main land by a narrow 
isthmus. The approach to this peninsula is bleak 
6 



and dreary, being over a desolate heath, or along an 
unsheltered shore. The history of Poole contains 
no events of great importance. No traces of it can 
be followed with certainty 'either in the British or 
the Roman times. Mr. Baxter, however, supposes 
that it was known in both ; and makes it the " Bol- 
nelaunium" of Ravennas, which he derives from the 
British " Bolnelaun ice," importing a bay of water. 
This, indeed, has some appearance of probability, as 
a Roman road passes from Poole to Wimborue, and 
as the harbour forms so convenient a landing place. 
It was known to the Saxons by the name of Fro- 
moiith ; and the Danes twice effected a landing 
here: once in 908, and again in 1015. By these 
ravagers it appears to have been almost totally de- 
stroyed, and to have sunk to so little note, as not to 
be mentioned in the Domesday Survey. In the 
reign of Kdward III. it appears to have attained 
some consequence, as it furnished four ships and 
ninety-four men for the siege of Calais. In the 
reign of ll.-nry VJ. it arose still higher, and the 
succeeding monarchs, Edward IV. and Richardlil. 
added to its privileges. In 1 183, the Earl of Rich- 
mond, afterwards Henry VII. was driven near this 
place by a storm, and Richard III. wishing to se- 
cure him, ordered signals to be made that might in- 
duce him to land : but the Earl, suspecting their 
treachery, sailed back to St. Malo. Alter this it 
decreased, and is mentioned by Leland, as " a poor 
fischar village." In the Civil Wars, it sided against 
Charles I. It has subsequently risen to considera- 
ble eminence, and is now one of the most flourishing 
towns in the county. In 16.53, a phenomenon was 
observed in this place : a black cloud hung 1 over it 
for about two hours, and at. last burst, but instead of 
common water, the whole was like a shower oi' blood, 
which dyed whatever substance it fell upon of a deep 
scarlet colour. 

Poole, which formed a part of the manor of Can- 
ford till the reign of Elizabeth, being a parcel of the 
Duchy of Lancaster, belonged to the Long-espees, 
the PJantagenets, the Lacys, and the Montacutcs ; 
the last of whom left an only daughter, who marry- 
ing to Neville, Earl of Westmoreland, this manor 
devolved to him. Upon his joining the York party, 
his estates were seized by the crown ; and from the 
Uth of Henry the Sixth to the reign of Charles the 
First, it was granted severally to (icorge, Duke of 
Clarence, and to Edward, Earl of Warwick. Henry 
the Eighth gave it to his natural son, Henry Fitz- 
roy, Duke of Richmond and Somerset. It was af- 
terwards granted by the same monarch to Henry 
Courtenay, Marquis of Exeter, and his wife. On 
his attainder, the manor again reverted to the crown. 
Charles the First bestowed it on the Webb family, 
whose descendant, Sir John Webb, Bart, is the 
present owner. Though Poole was made a town 
and county in itself, and its manor severed from that 
of Canford, yet the Lord of Canford still receives 
the ancient fee-farms, and has a right to hold a court 
in Poole oace a year. 

- The 



210 



DORSETSHIRE, 



The Corporation of Poole appears to be of some 
antiquity, since by an inquisition taken 15. Edward 
III. it is proved that it sent members to Parliament 
at that time, and had done so long before. Privi- 
leges were granted to it by various sovereigns, but 
its most considerable benefactor was Elizabeth, who 
incorporated and made it a free town and distinct 
county. The corporation of Poole is non* governed 
by a Mayor, four Aldermen, and twenty-eight Bur- 
gesses. The Mayor is also admiraj within the 
liberties. The Burgesses are chosen by the Mayor. 
The right of electing members to be returned to 
Parliament is possessed by the Burgesses, from 
whom the Sheriff and Water Bailiff are annually 
.elected. The Mayor and Justices hold a quarter 
session for the town, and should any criminal or 
civil cause remain, the Judge comes hither on his 
circuit. Civil causes are, however, usually tried a( 
Winchester or Dorchester. 

The town of Poole is composed of four irregular 
streets, consisting of 1059 houses, inhabited by 
4818 persons. T!;e chief buildings are the Church, 
the Town Hall, the Wool House, and the Market 
Place. The Church is an ancient structure con- 
sisting of a body, two aisles, and a tower. It con- 
tains jiii elegant altar-piece, and a monument to 
the memory of Mr. Peter Joliffe, who, assisted by 
only two others, took a privateer, for which Wil- 
liam III. rewarded him with a commission and a 
gold medal. The Town Hall, built in 1572, is si- 
tuated in Fish Street, and has under it a prison. 
The Wool House, or King's Hall, is an edifice of 
considerable antiquity, which has lately been re- 
built. The Market Place was rebuilt in 1761, at 
the joint expence of Joseph Gulston, Esq. and Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Calcraft, representatives for the town 
and county that year. Poole also contains several 
dissenting places of worship, and a very flourishing 
Sunday school. 

The following distinguished persons were natives 
of this place : Robert Rogers, Leather-seller, of 
London, who bequeathed large sums of money for 
charitable purposes in London, Oxford, Cambridge, 
and this town ; William Thompson ;* and Sir Pe- 
ter Thompson, Knt. who made considerable col- 
lections for a history of this town and neighbour- 
hood. 

PORTLAND.] The Isle, or rather Peninsula of 
Portland, is situated nearly opposite to Weymouth, 
15 miles south from Dorchester, and 133 south-west 
by west from London. It is in length about four 
miles and a half, and about two in breadth, and is 
one entire rock of free-stone, joined to the main 
land by a ridge of pebbles, seventeen miles long, 
called the Chesil Bank. Portland derives its name, 
according to the conjectures of some, from Port, a 

* This man, the master of a small hoy, look, on the 30th of 
May, 1695, with the assistance of one man and a boy, two puns, 
;md some small arms, a French privateer, having on board six- 
teen men, two patereroes, &c. The engagement lasttcl two 



Saxon freebooter, who settled here about 501 : but 
according to others from its nearness to the Port 
of Weymouth. It is supposed by Baxter to be the 
" Vindelis," or, as corrected by him, the " Vinde- 
nis" of Antonine, which he derives from " vindensis," 
Portuosa Insula ; whence, by contraction, comes 
Port-island, or Portland. 

The first historical account of the island is in 787, 
when some Danes first effected a landing in Eng- 
land, and slew the governor who had been appoint- 
ed by Brithric, the reigning monarch. Nothing re- 
markable occurs from this time till 1652, when it 
was ravaged by the celebrated Godwin, Earl of Kent. 
In the early part of the Civil Wars it was possessed 
by the Parliamentary forces, but shortly after the 
Royalists obtained it by the following stratagem, 
thus related by Hutchins : " A gentleman who 
well knew the castle, undertook, with the Earl of 
Caernarvon, to take it with sixty men, which were 
granted him. He furnished himself with Parliament 
colours, and marched towards the castle with great 
haste, as if he fled from an enemy, and culled to tltti 
guards that he had brought some forces, but was 
closely pursued by the Earl of Caernarvon ; on 
which the ports were set open. By this means they 
made themselves masters of a place of very great 
importance, commanding the haven and the town of 
Weymouth, and, as the case stood, of infinite 
wealth ; the rich furniture and treasure taken by the 
rebels out of Wardour Castle, and elsewhere, being 
lodged here." 

The manor of Portland attached, in the Saxon 
ages, to the Crown. Edward the Confessor, as an 
atonement for having suffered a charge of incpnti- 
nency to be brought against his mother Emma, be- 
stowed this manor, with several other lands, on the 
Church of Winchester. William the Conqueror is 
supposed to have alienated it from the Church, as it 
is mentioned in Domesday Book under the title of 
Terra Regis. The manor, at that period, yielded 
sixty-five pounds of pure silver; and there were 
also 900 sheep, three horses of burden, fourteen 
beasts, and twenty-seven hogs. Henry the First 
re-granted it to the Church of Winchester, but it 
was soon afterwards again alienated. In the reign 
of Edward the First, Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Glou- 
cester, held it of the Church of Wintoii by exchange. 
It) the reigns of Edward the Fourth, and Richard 
the Third, it had reverted to the Crown ; and was 
granted, first to Cecilia, Duchess of York, and af- 
terwards to George, Duke of Clarence. Henry the 
Eighth bestowed it respectively on his Queens, Ca- 
therine Howard, and Catherine Parr. James the 
First granted it to Queen Anne, of Denmark, 
and afterwards to Prince Charles. It conti- 
nued in the possession of the Crown till the 



hours, and when the privateer struck she had on board, besides 
eight sound men, the captain, lieutenant, and six men who had 
been wounded. 

year 



DORSETSHIRE. 



241 



year 1900, when it was offered for sale by public 
auction. 

Portland, although one continued rock, is not 
sterile ; the herbage is a fine, short pasture ; and in 
wet seasons the meadows produce abundance of 
grass. The sheep, which, though small, have been 
long famous for their delicacy of flavour, are about 
3000. The corn, oats, peas, and barley, are ex- 
cellent ; though the quantity is necessarily small. 
The corn is usually cut down with the reap-rook, 
which the women use with much dexterity ; aud to 
them is consigned the task of getting in the greater 
part of the harvest, while their husbands are em- 
ployed in the stone quarries. Excepting a few elms 
on the south, there is little wood ; and cow-dung, 
which the inhabitants collect, and dry on the walls 
of their houses, is used for fuel. Water, supplied by 
a number of springs at the lower part of the isle, 
abounds. Some of these springs are sufficiently 
strong to turn a mill. 

Portland, which contains 303 houses, and 2079 
inhabitants, consists of but one parish, which in- 
cludes seven hamlets, or villages. Of these, Che- 
silton, which gives name to the Chesil Bank, is the 
principal. Before it stands Portland Castle, com- 
manding Weymouth Road. This fortress, which 
is the residence of the governor whenever he vi- 
sits the isle, was built by Henry the Eighth, about 
the same period, and for the same purpose, as the 
opposite one of Sandesfoot. On the wainscot of a 
little closet over the Gun Room, appears the follow- 
ing quaint inscription : 



jfabe &ing $enrs rfj: &3I3I3! of tijat nanu 
aim latins (ZEufouritt, tirgottin of uwtn 3Iant, mg law 
95.in rt).u gooSii Qicgin, ana f!j? tot GlijabttI) $o 
totMfuli, luit!) rfj? JCvingetf Ijonoi'abtr otmnscUcrs," 

From this place the land rises boldly, to a height 
of upwards of 400 feet above the level of the sea. 
Here is a small entrenchment, said to be Danish ; 
and the beginning of a trench, or breast- work, which 
was thrown up by "the inhabitants in the time of 
the Civil Wars. Innumerable quarries appear 
from this spot ; and the whole isle resembles a 
map. 

The rocks which surround the peninsula rise fre- 
quently to a very considerable height. .They are 
composed, according to Dr. Maton, of calcareous 
grit, containing moulds, or larvae, of various shells ; 
and emitting, \vhen rubbed with steel, a bituminous 
smell, like that of the lapis suillus. The grit is ce- 
mented together by a calcareous paste ; but the 
moulds of eiitrochi, vertebra;, &c. which the stone 
contains, resemble, in their composition, the ham- 
mites of Pliny ; for the granules seem to unite only 
by the natural cohesive power of their surfaces. In 
some parts of the rocks are immense ammonita: ; 
an 1 regular veins of chert, similar to those near 
Kimeridge, may be traced. The cavities of these 
rocks are the haunts of innumerable aquatic birds. 

VOL. n. NO. b'2. 



" Whilst we were making our observations," says 
Dr. Maton, " gulls, and a great variety of water- 
fowl, fluttered over our heads. Amidst the screams 
and wild notes of these birds, the roar of the waves, 
the alpine aspect of the rocks, and the dusk of even- 
ing, there was a sort of gloomy grandeur that highly 
interested us." 

Portland Old Castle, or, as it is generally called, 
Bow and Arrow Castle, is at present only an incon- 
siderable ruin, containing scattered remnants of 
walls, and a portion of the keep. The rocks near it 
exhibit a romantic and almost awful appearance. 
Its erection is commonly ascribed to William Rufus. 
In 1142, Robert, Earl of Gloucester, took posses- 
sion of it for the Empress Matilda, which is the only 
anecdote that can be found respecting it in history. 
The form of it is pentagonal : on its top are several 
machicolations and loop-holes. 

In the southern, and nearly highest, part of the 
isle, are the Light-Houses ; the first of which was 
erected in 1710; the other in 1789. The Old 
House contains two rows of Argand's lamps, fur- 
nished with highly polished metal reflectors. The 
New Light House contains six lamps of a similar 
construction, the light of which is increased by a 
lens of twenty-two inches diameter. The lanterns 
of both houses are glazed with the finest plate glass, 
fixed in copper frames, and every expence has been 
bestowed to render them as good as possible ; hence 
in clear weather, they are often visible till lost be- 
neath the horizon. 

The New Light House was erected at the ei- 
pence of the Trinity Corporation, by William Johns, 
of Weymouth. It is built of Portland stone, with 
pointed windows, and iron ballustrades round the 
top : the form is conical, upon a circular plane, twen- 
ty feet in diameter at the base, and ten at the top, 
besides the cornice, which projects two feet. The 
height of the building, from the base, is sixty-three 
feet. In the inside is a geometrical stair-case, with 
stone steps, rail, and ballusters, which render the 
ascent to the very curious apparatus fixed for con- 
taining the light 'perfectly secure. An inscription 
over the door-way commemorating the munificent 
founders, states, that the building was erected " For 
the Direction and Comfort of Navigators, the Be- 
nefit and Security of Commerce, and a las ring Me- 
morial of British Ho-pitality to all Nations.' 1 " Its 
distance from the clin" is 1608 feet. " 1 bid often 
thought," observes Dr. Maton, " that light-houses, 
and other buildings of the kind, which, from their 
very design, must be durable, might be used for 
ascertaining the changes on the coast in a certain 
series of years, and therefore made of eminent ser- 
vice to geology ; and was much pleased to find this- 
idea realized by the New Light House in Portland." 
The services of these erections may be judged by 
tilt 1 ; grc-at danger 01 the surrounding coast. Innu- 
merable masses of rock, just, beneath the surface of 
the sea, extend i:Va south-west and eastward direc- 
tion to a considerable distance off the coast. In the 
3 p former 



242 



DORSETSHIRE. 



former direction is a conflux of the tides from the 
French and English shores. 

At a short distance from the Light Houses is a 
singular cavern, about fifty feet square, and twenty- 
one deep, called " Cave Hole." The inside is 
grand and striking, and the effect is increased hy 
the ceaseless roaring of the waves. In the west part 
the cave branches into two caverns, the extent of 
which is unknown. Small craft are frequently 
driven into this cave, and, some time since, a ves- 
sel of forty tons burthen was forced into it. In 
stormy weather a large column of sea water is often 
forced through the aperture to the height of several 
feet. 

About the middle of the aisle stand the remains of 
a very ancient building, called the " Vicar's House." 
Its origin is unknown, but from its present appear- 
ance, it is conjectured to have been a little chapel, 



* " In the quarries," says Mr. Smeaton, " the first stratum 
is owe foot of blackish or reddish earth ; then six feet of cap, 
or stone, but not lit for exportation. Below this is the bed of 
good stone, ten or twelve feet deep ; and beneath it, flint or 
clay. In some parts an irregular vein of flint runs through it. 
Under the good vein there is no more good stone. This stra- 
tum of stone that is wrought for sale, lies nearly parallel with 
the upper surface of the island, and with not much cover of 
earth or rubbish upon it. There are several beds of stone lying 
in contiguity one above another, varying in thickness, in gene- 
ral from two to four fest and upwards. Those which are usu- 
ally called the merchantable beds, (on account of the blocks tor 
sale being produced therefrom,) are universally covered with a 
stratum called the cap, which is formed entirely of a great 
variety of kinds, but in general so distinct and separate in their 
forms, that, to the curious naturalist, their species seem very 
easy to be made out ; but as they in a considerable degree re- 
tain their respective figures, (though in some places more, some 
less,) spaces or cavities are left between them, which conse- 
quently very much diminish the coherence of the mass ; but 
yet the cementing principle is so strong, that the whole toge- 
ther is considerably harder than the merchantable beds ; and, 
indeed, so hard, that, to get rid of it as easily as possible, it is 
generally blasted off with gunpowder : were it not for these 
cavities, the cap-stone would not readily be worked with tools ; 
or, at least, it would not be worlh working at a place where 
there is so great plenty of stone of a better quality ; but as it 
is necessary to remove it in the course of working the better 
kind of stone, though by far the greatest proportion is blasted 
in fragments, yet, for the buildings on the island, the cap stone 
is in general use, and also for the piers and quay walls of Wey- 
mouth Harbour ; and for several rough purposes under water, 
the cap would make quite as good and durable work as the 
merchantable bloxrks. 

" When the merchantable beds are cleared of the cap, the 
quarry men proceed to cross cut the large flats, which are laid 
bare with wedges in the way 1 have described as to the moor- 
stone; only the wedges are not so numerous ; nor does Port- 
land stone split so evenly as the granite ; and frequently in the 
splitting, as well as other working, of this stone, oyster ami other 
fossil shells are discovered in the solid subslance of the mer- 
chantable stone. The beds being thus cut into distinct lumps, 
the quarry man, with a tool called a kevei, which is at one end 
a hammer, and at the other an axe, whose edge is so short and 
narrow, that it approaches towards the shape of a pick, by a 
repetition of sturdy blows, soon reduces a piece of stone by his 
eye to the largest square figure' which it will admit ; and blocks 
are thus formed, from half a ton to six or eight, or upwards, if 
particularly bespoke. 



which, perhaps, was destroyed by the Puritans, dur- 
ing the protectorship of Cromwell. 

Portland abounds in every part with stone quar- 
ries ; but those of most repute are at Kingston, 
where 6000 tons of stone, it is said, are annually 
shipped off.* 

Though the inhabitants of Portland seem fitted 
for the hardest labour which the quarries require, 
there are few instances of longevity amongst them ; 
owing, probably, to the free use of spirits^ They 
were anciently celebrated for flinging stones, and 
hence among the Britons, acquired the name of Ba- 
leares. " It generally happens," observes Dr. Ma- 
ton, " that capacity or ability for the labour which 
a particular situation furnishes, becomes in a suc- 
cession of generations, congenial with the constitu- 
tion of the people by whom that labour is inherited. 
We talk of a breed of race -horses ; why should we 



" When I viewed the simple construction of their carriages, 
I could not but wonder, upon being told that such a very 
plain piece of machinery was all they had for getting the largest 
blocks down to the water side ; but when I saw the application, 
my wonder ceased. I have already observed, that the plane 
upon which the quarries are situated, is considerably elevated 
above the sea. It is further observed, that, though the greatest 
part of the circumference of the isle to seaward is bounded by 
cliffs almost perpendicular, yet on the north side, towards the 
main land of Dorsetshire, the descent is more moderate ; though 
it is rather quick every where. It did not, indeed, at once 
occur to me, that, though it would require very great power 
to draw large stones against gravity, or up hill, and even a con- 
siderable one to draw them upon the plain ground ; yet, in 
moving down hill, their gravity would assist them. The 
carriages are a sort of carts, consisting of nothing more than 
a pair of very low strong wheels, (as well as I remember,) 
about a yard in diameter, and a very thick axle-tree, upon 
which is fixed a stout planking, or platform, that terminates 
in a drought tree, for steerage, and yoking the cattle to. 

" The wheels and platform K- ing low, the blocks are the 
more easily loaded thereon ; and a necessary power is employ- 
ed, according to the size of the block, to draw it to the com- 
mencement of the descent. To this place a quantity of blocks 
of different sizes have been at leisure times previously drawn ; 
and one of these blocks, of a suitable size, such as experience 
has pointed out, is by a strong chain attached to the carriage 
on which the other block is placed, which is then drawn forward 
by the block in tow, till they are got sufficiently on the slope 
of the road to find an inclination in the loaded carriage to move 
the attached block ; after which the horses and beasts of 
draught are taken off, except such as are absolutely necessary 
for the guidance ; and in this way (the descent being con- 
tinual to the pier) two large stones are got down with a 
degree of ease and expedition that would be almost impracti- 
cable with one alone, without more complicated machinery. 
About 9000 tons of stone are supposed to be dug in these 
quarries yearly."' 

Portland ston* obtained its first reputation in the reign of 
James the First, when it was employed in the construction of 
the Banqueting House at Whitehall. After tlie fire of London, 
it was used by Sir Christopher Wren, in" erecting St. Paul's 
Church, the Monument, and other public edifices. As the 
Portland stone endures to be cut in any direction, whether 
horizontal, perpendicular, or parallel to the ; site of the strata, 
while it bears the injuries of the weather equally well in every 
position, the name of " Free-stone" is very apposite. 



uppose 



DORSETSHIRE. 



213 



suppose any absurdity in a breed of quarry-men ? I 
was amazed to see with what facility these people 
lifted, and divided, masses of stone, large enough 
to deter ordinary men from attempting it." 

A very singular custom, which is called by the 
natives, Portland Custom, prevails here, and is thus 
related by Mr. Sraeaton : Admiring the strength 
and healthy appearance of the men, " I enquired," 
he observes, " of my guide, Mr. Roper, where they 
could possibly piek'up such a set of stout hardy'fel- 
lows." " If you knew how these men are pro- 
duced," replied he, " you would wonder the less ; 
for all our marriages are productive of children." 
On desiring an explanation how this happened, he 
proceeded, " Our people here, as they are bred up 
to hard labour, are very early in a condition to mar- 
ry, and provide for a family. They intermarry with 
one another, very rarely going to the main land to 
seek a wife ; and it has been the custom of the isle, 
from time immemorial, that they never marry till 
the woman is pregnant." " But pray," says I, 
" does not this subject you to a great number of 
bastards ? Have not your Porthuiders the same 
kind of fickleness in their attachments, that Eng- 
lishmen are subject to ; and in consequence, does 
not this produce many inconveniencies ?" " None 
at all," says Roper ; " for, previous to my arrival 
here, there was but one child on record of the parish 
register, that had been born a bastard, in the com- 
pass of 150 years. The mode of courtship here is, 
that a young woman never admits of the serious ad- 
dresses of a young man, but on the supposition of a 
thorough probation. When she becomes with child, 
she tells her mother ; the mother tells her father ; 
and he tells his son, that it is then proper time to be 
married." " But suppose, Mr. Roper, she does not 
prove with child, what happens then ? do they 
live together without marriage ? or, if they se- 
parate, is not this such an imputation upon her, 
as to prevent her getting another suitor ?" " The 
case is thus managed," answered my friend. " If 
the woman does not prove with child, after a com- 
petent time of courtship, they conclude they 'are not 
destined by Providence for each other : they there- 
fore separate ; and as it is an established maxim, 
which the Portland women observe with great strict- 
ness, never to admit a plurality of lovers at one 
time, their honour is no-ways tarnished. She just 
as soon (after the affair is declared to be broke off) 
gets another suitor, as if she had been left a widow, 
or that nothing had ever happened, but that she had 
remained an immaculate virgin." " But pray, Sir, 
did nothing particular happen upon your men com- 
ing down from London r" " Yes," says he, " our 
men were much struck, and mightily pleased, with 
the facility of the Portland ladies ; and it was not 
long before several of the women proved with child ; 
but the men being called upon to marry them, this 
part of the lesson they were uninstructed in ; and, 
on their refusal, the Portland women arose to stone 
them out of the isle ; insomuch, that those few who 



did not care to take their sweethearts, for better for 
worse, after so fair a trial, were, in reality, obliged 
to decamp. On this occasion, one bastard only was 
born ; but since then matters have gone on accord- 
ing to the ancient custom." 

From this cause, and their almost always marry- 
ing among themselves, perhaps, arise that degree of 
jealousy and dislike, which the natives express to- 
wards strangers who.- attempt to settle in the isle, 
and whom they call " Kemberlins." These fre- 
quent intermarriages, by producing relationship, like- 
wise prevent that appearance of want in individuals 
which is common in other places. " I think," it has 
been observed, " there is less poverty here than in 
any place I ever saw ; and where it is so, it usually 
proceeds from a father's dying before any of his fa- 
mily can provide for, or help to maintain the rest : 
the young men are generally very attentive, in such 
cases, to their mothers ; and it is no uncommon 
thing to hear them say, they will not marry whilst 
their mothers live. The custom of Gavelkind, or 
an equal distribution of land among the heirs of a 
family, which obtains here, no doubt conduces to the 
same end. The women, who inherit land in their 
own right, claim the privilege of doing so ; and the 
property thus acquired, they are very tenacious of 
parting with, looking upon it as a disgrace to sell 
what they never earned. A man has been known 
feelingly to lament his misfortune, in not being able to 
leave that to his children which his father left to him." 

This isle has evidently suffered many convulsions, 
the marks of which are every where visible. In. 
1665, the great pier was entirely demolished ; the 
ways leading from it to the quarries were turned 
upside down ; and near 100 yards of earth slid into 
the sea. In 1734, about 150 yards on the east side 
gave way, and fell into the sea, occasioning, by the 
shock, huge chasms, in one of which, between the 
pier and the castle, several skeletons were found, 
placed between two stones set edgeways, and ano- 
ther laid over thorn. But the greatest slide occurred 
in the year 1792 : 

" Early in the morning," says Hutchins, " the 
road was observed to crack and rent ; this continued 
increasing, and before two o'clock, the ground had 
sunk several feet, and was one continued motion ; 
but attended with no other noise than what was oc- 
casioned by the separation of the roots and brambles, 
and now and then a falling rock. At night it seemed 
to stop a little, but soon moved again ; and before 
morning, the ground, from the top of the cliff to the 
water-side, had sunk in some places fifty feet per- 
pendicular. The extent of the ground that moved 
was about a mile and a quarter from north to south, 
and 600 yards, from east to west." 

The innumerable strata which compose this island, 
afford to the researches of the mineralogist an al- 
most exhaustless store. Not far from the castle 
runs a stratum of black schistus, or coal-stone. It 
is found on the outside of the cliff, and is of two 
soils, black aud reddish : it rises in lamina;, and is 
8 dug 



244 



DORSETSHIRE. 



dug horizontally. This species when burnt is era- 
ployed as a manure. On the quarries in the south- 
west part of the isle, is found another species, called 
" sugar-caudy-stone," one sort of which is pale, 
and another of an amber colour. The quarries to 
the north-west, contain in the vein of good stone, 
many petrified shells. The cockle, oyster, muscle, 
and turbinated kind, are common. * Many of the 
heart kind, and some of the corima ammonis spirals, 
or screws, abound in the free-stone. .Some of these, 
peculiar to the place, are very large and esteemed 
as great curiosities : they are difficult to get out, 
being of the same substance with the stone, and very 
friable. They are perfectly solid ; and so nicely 
coiled about an imaginary axis, as to form an equal 
and regular bore. Jn digging stone for the found- 
ation of Westminster Bridge, .a large coruua am- 
mpuis was discovered, which is still preserved at 
Wilton : and in digging stone for Blackfriars' 
Bridge a petrified trunk of a tree was found. The 
.greatest curiosity, however, about Portland, is its 
teach, called the Chesil Bank, an account of which 
we extract from Dr. Maton : " The Chesil Bank 
is one of the most extraordinary ridges or shelves 
of pebbles in Europe, and perhaps the longest, ex- 
cept that of Memcl, in Polish Prussia. Its length 
is supposed to be about seventeen miles. Its breadth 
is in some places nearly a quarler of a mile. The 
pebbles are so loose, that horses' legs sink almost 
knee deep at every step ; but a traveller of any cu- 
riosity should by no means neglect to examine the 
productions of this pebbly desert. With regard to 
the pebbles themselves, they in general consist of 
white calcareous (known by the name of Portland) 
pebbles; but there are many of quartz, jasper, 
chert, and a variety of other substances. It is wor- 
thy ot remark, that they gradually diminish in size, 
the nearer they approach to the main land, being 
very little larger than horse-beans towards Abbots- 
bury ; though at the other eiid<of the bank, they are 
irom one inch to three inches in diameter. We 
found the edge to the right by far the firmest, and 
easiest for our horses, especially as the pebbles were 
somewhat bound together by the marine plants 
growing in patches along the water- side." The 
channel which adjoins this bank is extremely dan- 
gerous, and in the winter season, when the wind 
blows from the south-west it is attended with dread- 
ful storms, occasioning numerous wrecks. When 
these occur off their coast, though no people arc 
more ready to save the lives of mariners than the 
Portland men, yet they plunder with an avidity dis- 
graceful to humanity, 

POUNDBLRY CAMP.] Poumlbury, or Pomery 
Camp was supposed by Camdeii and Speed to be a 
Danish work raised by Sweno, King of Denmark, 
in the year 10D2, when lie besieged Dorchester. 
With this opinion Mr. Ilutchtns agrees ; but Dr. 
Stukeley, in his Itinerarium Curiosnm, from which 
the following account is extracted, alledges it to be 
Roman, " It stands half a mile west of Dorchester, 



in a pasture called Pomery, upon the brink of the 
river Frome, which is very steep ; the form square, 
the rampart high, but the ditch inconsiderable, ex- 
cept at the angle by the river, because, standing on 
a high ground, they dug the earth clear away before 
it, and threw it entirely into the vallum ; so that its 
height and steepness, wherein its strength consists, 
is the same as if a regular ditch was made in level 
ground : the chief entrance was on the south side. 
There was another next the river made with the 
greatest art ; for a narrow path is drawn all along 
between the edge of the precipice and the vallum ; 
and beyond the camp, west for a long way, a small 
trench is cut up on the said edge, which seems de- 
signed to prevent the ascent of cavalry, if they 
should pass the river. The ground rises in the 
middle, as was usual among the Romans. Near 
the south side is a tumulus too, which is probably 
Celtic, extant before the camp was made. The 
name Poumlbury is taken from its iuclosure round 
this tumulus as a pound." Its name of Pomery 
seems derived from the Latin " Pomaarium," a 
space of ground, both within and without the walls 
of a city, which the Augurs, at its first building, so- 
lemnly consecrated, .and on which no edifices were 
suffered to be raised. The length of this camp is 
1890 feet, and its breadth 735, 

PURBECK.] " This tract," observes Hutchins, 
" commonly, but improperly, called an island, is in 
reality only a peninsula ; for it may be entered from 
East Lulworth, by an Isthmus between the head of 
Luckford Lake and the sea. It is situated in the 
east or south-easterly extremity of the county. Its 
form approaches nearly to an irregular oval. Its 
length from Luckford Lake to Peverel Point, is 
about twelve miles. Its greatest breadth from Arne 
to St. Adhelm's Chapel ten miles. It is bounded 
on the north by the river Frome, and Bay of Pool ; 
on the east and south by the British Channel ; on 
the west by Luckford Lake. The air is healthy, the 
soil generally a deep clay, and in the east and south 
parts very stony. It comprehends two hundreds, 
viz. Masler, and Rowbarrow. The former includes 
the west part of the island, the other the east, and 
these wore anciently stiled east and west Purbeck. 
It contains one town, and nine parishes ; and was 
anciently more populous ; but many of the small 
manors being extinguished, and converted into 
farms, the hamlets are generally depopulated. The 
forest extended over the whole island, and the woods 
were well stocked, with red and fallow deer, ami 
stags, especially in the west part ; but these were 
destroyed in the Civil Wars, and few, if any, have 
remained in the memory of man. The government 
of the island was anciently exercised by a Lord- 
Lieutenant, generally the governor of Corfe Castle, 
who was admiral of the island, and governor of 
Brownxea Castle, and hud power to raise and mus- 
ter a militia. This act ceased, when the militia act 
was passed, 1757, 3Jr. Bankes not entering his 
claim ; and the direction of it is now under the 

Lord- 



DORSETSHIRE. 



215 



Lord-Lieutenant of the county. It anciently enjoy- 
c<l great privileges, and was exempt from any ser- 
vices in the county ; but these mostly ceased after 
the demolition of Corfe Castle." The quarries of 
Purbeck afford an inexhaustible fund of natural cu- 
riosities, and furnish large quantities of stone much 
in repute for buildings. At Dunshay was formerly 
dug marble of various colours, which is frequently 
to be met with in our old churches, where it was 
employed, with much reputation, for grave-stones, 
and monuments. 

RAMPISHAM.] Rampisham is situated in the Dor- 
chester division, seven miles east from Beaminster. 
The church is an ancient fabric, standing on an emi- 
nence to the south of the village. The tower is 
embattled, and has a carved pinnacle on each cor- 
ner. The inside was, a few years since, repaired, 
when the original architecture was injured. In the 
south wall of the tower is a cavity for the holy wa- 
ter ; and in the east wall are three, niches. On the 
floor of the nave, on separate slabs, are the brass 
figures of a man and woman, with this inscrip- 
tion : 

Jbere lyttt SDrjontaa Djgencge ann 3!btn fit* fo?fe, 
foiitrf) font gun benefactors to rfe e&ercfje, fofiicl) 3H)o= 
OTJS oecnssiti rtje btiitij Baj> of June, anu tlje sain 3&i= 
brtl DWgifl fije tritfc n.ig ef 3J5arcfje, in tjie jro of out 
<e>oo atyousann 



The church-yard contains a very curious piece of 
antiquity, which consists of the remains of a cross 
elevated on three ranges of steps, to the east side of 



* Dr. Glisson was born in Ij97. He was educafed at Caius 
College, Cambridge, and was regius professor of physic in that 
University forty years. He was a long time presideut of the 
College of Physicians. He died in 1677. He wrote a Latin 
Treatise on the Rickets, 12mo.; Arratomia Hcpatis, 8vo. ; Trnc- 
tatus de Ventriculo et Intestinis ; De Natura Substantial Ener- 
getica, seu de Vita Nature, 4to. 

f In the year 1794, a very beautiful tesselated pavement 
Avas discovered in a vale between Maiden Newton and Framp- 
ton, near the banks of .the river Frome. From the irregular 
appearance 1 of the ground, a suspicion had been entertained, 
that it was once occupied by buildings, and large llints and 
stones were said to have been procured here for the erection of 
several houses in the neighbourhood. Some workmen digging 
for (lints discovered this pavement at the depth of about one 
foot from the surface: and a number of the tessera; were re- 
moved, before they were aware that any thing remarkable lay 

concealed. It measured twenty-seven feet by twenty " It 

lid not appear," says Hutchins, " to have !:een laid out on a 
regular and uniform plan, like a modern carpet, but was com- 
posed of parts not at all correspondent with each other, in which 
the artist seems to have indulged his fancy, without any regard 
to order, or regularity of design ; but the figures were very 
beautiful, and in exact proportions, so that the work must have 
been finished w lien ihe art was in perfection. Round the whole 
there once went a border, which remained perfect only on one 
side, exhibiting dogs in chace of deer. 

" The upper or north end of the Pavement was divided into 
nine compartments, viz. four rounds, and live squares; three 
.of those which run in one line were almost entirely destroyed, 
probably by the falling in of the building ; but there were six 
very perfect. The corner compartments were all circular, in 

VOL. II. NO. 63. 



which is annexed a long stone, like an altar-tomb ^ 
but, from the four holes in it, and in the steps, it 
seems rather to have served as a place to preach 
from, and to have been covered with an awning. 
Round the four sides of the base is an inscrip- 
tion, so much defaced, that only the following ir 
legible : 

m jjfc Writ )9omr 
>< 3!n Nomine 3!'l)tt, -Y- 

Above it are the following representations : The 
Stoning of Saint Stephen, the Martyrdom of St. 
Edmund, the Martyrdom of Saint Thomas a Becket, 
and three other figures. Over the projections, at 
the ends of the pannels, are figures representing St. 
Peter, with a scroll, the cock standing on a pillar, 
two monks, two zanies, ami two men in armour. 
On the base of the shaft is the word " Wri," perhaps 
the remains of some former inscription. Near this 
cross are two smaller ones. 

Ur. Frances Glisson, an eminent physician and 
anatomist, was a native of Rampisham.* 

In the middle of an uncultivated common, be- 
longing to this parish, was discovered, in 1799, a 
tesselated pavement. It measured fourteen feet by 
ten, and the tesserae were nearly two inches square. 
From the circumstance of no vestiges of any build- 
ing having been found near, and from the largeness 
of the tesserae, it is conjectured to have been an 
officer's tent. It was destroyed by some ignorant 
persons, under the expectation of finding a conceal- 
ed treasure, t 

RIDGE 



square^, exhibiting each a human head, covered with a winged 
pctasui, like Mercury, and holding a twisted stick. The 
square compartments of the square, with that in the centre, 
were perfect ; one of them gave the figure of Mars in a ilnmaa 
dress, standing by a tree ; his right-hand uplifted, and holding 
a flower, like that held by Spes on coins; his left holding n 
spear. The next, or centre compartment, represented Bac- 
chus, having his right-hand raised above his head, and holding 
a bunch of grapes ; and his left, a thyrsus. The third com- 
partment in the same line contained the figure of Apollo with a 
flowing mantle, and in his hands a spear, with which he was 
encountering Python ; a serpent twisted round a tree, with its 
mouth pointed towards the spear, and brandishing its tongue 
with great fury. The compartment that remained perfect OB 
the west side, between the two heads, exhibited Neptune witli 
his trident, which he seemed in the act of darting against some 
winged sea-monster, that reared its fore feet against his knee. 

" The lower or south end of the Pavement consisted of one 
grand compartment of nearly equal extent with the nine com- 
partments in the upper end ; but the subjecfconld not be as- 
certained, on account of the injury which it had received from 
the workmen. In a part of the circle which went round thrs 
compartment, several sea-monsters, cows, horses, boars, &c. 
particularly a dolphin, were plainly to be perceived, in very 
excellent preservation. The tessera of the Pavement were 
about I lie size of modern dice ; there were some on the ex- 
tremity of the work of double this size ; but these were only 
intended as a kind of termination to the ornamental border, 
and exhibited no kind of figures. The colours of the lessera: 
were black, blue, red, yellow, and white ; the white were of 
marble, the red were of brick." It may be worth while to 
mention that, " in a portico belonging to ihe gardens of Com- 
3 g mo'!.' 



246 



DORSETSHIRE. 



RIDGE IlrLL.] On this eminence, which is si- 
tuated to the north of Portisham, is an ancient re- 
main, called by the vulgar Hell Stone. Tradition 
says, that the devil flung it from Portland Pike, as 
he was diverting himself -at quoits. Numerous vast 
stones, in different parts of the kingdom, are called 
by the same name, and fictions equally absurd are 
related of -them. They appear to derive the name 
from the Saxon Helidn, to cover or conceal. "This 
Cromlech,' 1 '' observes Hutchins, " consisted of nine 
upright stones, or supporters, about three feet 
broad, and six high above ground, and an horizon- 
tal one, which is oval : its long diameter is ten feet, 
six inches ; its short one, six feet ; and it is about 
two feet thick at the north and south ends, and one 
foot eight inches at the east and west ends. These 
supporters wore not of equal height ; the highest 
were on the south, so that it must have dipped to- 
wards the north. They are now almost all thrown 
down on the south, and it leans only on one at the 
north. Its original position was from north-west 
to south-east. All these stones are rough, as drawn 
out of the quarry, except the under part of the ho- 
rizontal one, which seems roughly chizeled. This 
monument stands on a tumulus ; and on the north- 
west is a terrace, or avenue, sixty feet long, lead- 
ing to it ; thirty feet broad at one end, and ten at 
the oilier. To the east is a small barrow, but no 
other nearer than on the top of Blagdon. Win- 
terbourne Temple lies about two miles and a half to 
the north." 

SANIMSFOOT CASTLE.] Sandisfoot Castle, now 
only the ruins of a once strong fortress, stands on 
a high dill' about one mile from the town of Wey- 
niouth. It was erected by Henry VIII. about 1539, 
when it was expected that the anger of the Pope 
would cause an invasion of England. Its form was 
a parallelogram ; and the walls, which were ex- 
ceedingly strong and lofty, were mostly cased with 
squared Portland stone. " At the north end," ob- 
serves Jlutchins, " was a tower, on which were the 
arms of England, supported by a Wyvern and a 
Unicorn. The north part seems to have been the 
governor's apartment, which is all vaulted : the 
south front is semicircular, and is said to have been 
the gun-room ; before it was a platform fer cannon : 

modus at Rome, was a very grand pavement of this kind, in 
\vhichwas represented a solemn procession of the votaries of 
Uis carrying the sacred vases. The Em peror.Commodus seems 
to have headed the procession, accompanied by his friends ; 
amongst whom occurred Pescennius Niger, who succeeded 
Commodus in the empire, represented carrying some of the 
sacred vessels of Isis. By this it should seem that the art of 
mosaic work extended to taking portraits." 

In the year I 797, while their present Majesties were at Wey- 
niontl^ this spot was again laid open for their inspection. " It 
had -been greatly injured by the frost," observes Hutchins ; 
" but there was enough remaining to make out the ornaments 
with accuracy, and some of the compartments were entire. At 
a little distance from this pavement, clearly within the limits of 
the same building, after the departure of the Royal visitors, 
was discovered another, of a greater extent, but mutilated 
like the lirst. The edge, or border, was chiefly ornamented 



on the east are the remains of a small gate, faced 
with stone. At the. south end is a building, lower, 
but broader than the castle, and serving to flank its 
east and west sides, which had each -'embrasures for 
great guns, and beneath them two tiers of loop- 
holes tor small arms ; the lowest almost even with 
the level of the ground : a deep trench at a small 
distance surrounds the whole, except on the south. 1 * 

SHAFTESBIIUY.] The ancient borough town of 
Shaftesbury, or Shaston, is situated in the division 
to which it gives name, 28 miles north-north-east 
from Dorchester, and 101 west-south-west from 
London. It stands on an eminence difficult of ac- 
ces,s on every side but the east. From the south 
and west very extensive views of large portions of 
the counties of Dorset, Somerset, and Wilts, pre- 
sent themselves. When approached from the south 
the town appears in the form of a bow. Its lofty 
situation renders it cold and bleak, though the air is 
generally pure and healthy. Its high station causes 
also another inconvenience a scarcity of water. 
With the exception of two wells in St. James's pa- 
rislt, Shaftesbury is destitute of springs, and, though 
several attempts have been made to supply it by 
engines, water is procured from Motcomb, a hamlet 
in the parish of Gillingham, about a quarter of a 
mile below the town. In its present appearance it 
is mean, which arises from the irregularity of the 
streets and the badness of the houses. The latter 
are chiefly constructed with stone, dug from the 
neighbouring hills : they are, according to the Po- 
pulation Returns of 1811, 589 in number, and in- 
habited by 2635 persons, who are principally em- 
ployed in the manufacture of buttons. 

Though Shaftesbury formerly contained nume- 
rous religious buildings, an account of which will 
be given hereafter, only four churches are now re- 
maining, dedicated to St. Peter, the Holy Trinity, 
St. James ; and St. Rumbald. Of these only St. 
Peter, and the Holy Trinity will need description, 
the other two, though neat structures, not contain- 
ing any thing particularly deserving of notice. The 
church of St. Peter is an ancient fabric, composed 
of a nave, supported by four pointed arches, a chan- 
cel, and two side aisles. On the outside it is or- 
namented with various devices, and several of its 

with fish and chequer work ; the figures in the centre were 
nearly of the same size and fashion with those of the other 
pavement, which exhibited a head of Neptune, surrounded 
with two dolphins. What is very remarkable (and seems to 
ascertain the age of the building*) in the border, on the south 
side of this pavement, was the figure of a cross, that bears a 
striking resemblance to the Labarum, or military standard of 
Constantinople, and ascertains it to be a work of the Lower 
Empire. Adjoining this passage, but not in a direction with 
the farmer, was a passage covered in like manner, but with 
tessera of a larger size, disposed in strikes, and not in figures, 
like those of the two rooms. From an opening which has 
been made between the two rooms, there were evident traces 
of another passage ; and in all probability other larger pave- 
ments might be discovered, as the inequality of the ground 
shews the buildings to have been of great extent. 

8 windows 



DORSETSHIRE. 



247 



windows are partly composed of stained glass. 
Tl-.e interior contains a font of high antiquity cu- 
riously curved ;* and a monument supposed to have 
been removed from the Abbey. This, which now 
serves as a step to the altar, is a large blue slab, on 
which, engraven on a brass plate, in old English 
characters, is the following : 

" Sub isto Saxo tumulat' corpus Steph, 'i Payne, ar- 
miger, fil 'et hereu" Nichi' Payne, arm' quond', 
senescUaHi hujiis monaslerii, qui. obiit xiiij die mens' 
Decemhris, Anno D'ni m cccc.viij cujusa'ic p'piciet" 
Alt. ssimmus De y . Ami-n."f 

The chnrr-h of the Tloly Trinity, which possesses 
nothing remarkable in the interior, is composed of a 
chancel, body, and side aisles, and has a square em- 
battled tower. The church-yard contains part of 
the abbey wall, and on a base of three steps, a neat 
stone cross of an hexagonal form. Near this is the 
half of a blue slab, traditionally reported to be a 
memorial of Edward the Martyr, on which is a 
space that appears to have been occupied by a brass 
plate representing an armed knight. Shaftesbury 
contains, besides these four churches, three other 
places of religious worship belonging to the Dis- 
senters. The other principal buildings are, the 
Town Hall, or New Guildhall, a handsome edifice ; 
a Free School ; an Alma-house for sixteen poor 
women, originally founded in 1611, by Matthew 
Chubb, a gentleman of Dorchester ; a second alms- 
house for ten poor men, erected in the year 1660 ; 
and a Poor House, formed by uniting three old 
alms-houses. 

The eminences around Shaftesbury afford, as we 
before noticed, delightful prospects. One in par- 
ticular, a hill t the west of the town, called Castle 
Green, and supposed to have been a Roman en- 
trenchment, presents a landscape of peculiar 
beauty. 

" In front," observes Dr. Maton, " an eminence, 
called Pencliffe Hill, rises with a beautifully wooded 
summit, bounding the fertile vale of Blackmoor, 
through which a white road, sometimes losing itself 
among woodlands, and sometimes traversing ver- 
dant pastures, winds westward into the distance. On 
the left a fine undulating ridge shelters the vale ; 
while the hills of Mere, in Wiltshire, with Alfred's 
Tower at the extremity, the Tor of Glastonbury, 
and the lofty heights of Quantoch in Somersetshire, 
range themselves in the remaining part of the hori- 
zon." 

From the mention made of the borough of Shaf- 
tesbury in the Domesday Book, it must have been 
very ancient : its first regular charter of incorpora- 
tion was, however, granted by Queen Elizabeth. 

* In Carter's Specimens of Ancient Architecture is an en 
graving of this font. 

) Translation : Beneath this tablet lies the body of Stephen 
Payne, the son and heir of Nicholas Payne, formerly senes 



This charter vests the government of the town in a 
Mayor, Recorder, twelve Aldermen, a Bailiff, and 
a Common Council. But previously to the time 
of Elizabeth, it had a Mayor and several Burgesses; 
and Henry VI11. made it the see of a suffragan 
Bishop. The first return to Parliament was made 
in the twenty-filth of Edward the First. The right 
of election is possessed by the inhabitants paying 
scot and lot ; the number of voters is about 300. 
The chief proprietors are William Bryant, Esq. of 
Reigate, and Sir Mark Wood, Bart, of Piereefield, 
who purchased his share at the expense of 30,000/. 
Tlie borough has been noted for its extreme venali- 
ty ; as an instance of which the following story is 
related by Hutchins : 

" Sir Thomas Rumbold, and Sir Francis Sykes, 
two Nabob?, were returned to represent this bo- 
rough. A petition was presented hy Hans Wintrop 
Mortimer, Esq. complaining, that the two sitting 
members, by themselves, and their agents, had been 
guilty of many gross and notorious acts of bribery 
and corruption. It appeared in evidence on the 
trial of this petition, that money to the amount of 
several thousand pounds had been given among the 
voters, in sums of twenty guineas a man ; and that 
persons wiio were intrusted with the disbursement 
of this money, and who were chiefly, the Magistrates 
uf the town, devised very singular and absurd con- 
trivances to conceal through what channel it was 
conveyed to the electors. A person concealed un- 
der a ludicrous and fantastical disguise, and called 
by the name of PUNCH, was placed in a small apart- 
ment, and through a hole in the door delivered out 
t the voters, parcels containing twenty guineas 
each ; after which they were conducted to another 
apartment in the same house, where they found a 
second person, called Punch's Secretary, who required 
them to sign notes for the value received : these 
notes were made payable to another imaginary cha- 
racter, to whom was given the name of Glenbucket. 
Two of the witnesses swore they had seen Punch 
through the hole in the door, and that they knew 
him to be Mr. Matthews, an Alderman of the 
town." 

The early history of Shaftesbury is so involved 
in fable that nothing can be known with certainty, 
but that its origin, in what age soever it had its rise, 
is extremely remote. By some it is asserted to 
have been built by Rhudubrasius, or Cicuber, King 
of the Britons, 940 years before Christ : Holin- 
shed says, it was built by Lud, or Ludhudibras, son 
of Leil, eighth King of the Britons from Brute, 
who began to reign A. M. 3046 ; and Brampton 
affirms, that it was founded by the British King. 
Camden, however, from an inscription mentioned 
by William of Malmsbury as having been found iu 

chall of this monastery ; he died on the 14th of December, 
in the year 1408 On his soul the Most High Go<l have 
mercy. 

the 



218 



DORSETSHIRE. 



the town, supposed that it was built by Alfred. Th 
following is the inscription alluded to : 

" Anno DoHiinicie Incarnationis, Aelfredus Hex fecit 
Imnc Urbem DCCCLXXX, Rcgni sui mi."* 

Those who contend for a greater antiquity to 
Shaftesbury, suppose, that the word " fecit" mereh 
means that it was enlarged and repaired ; and in 
proof they quote both Brompton and Asser, who 
seem in some degree to corroborate the supposition. 
In consequence of the celebrated nunnery, which il 
uot founded by Alfred was at least coeval with that 
monarch, Shaftesbury had, in the Saxon times, ob- 
tained considerable reputation. Athelstan allowed 
it the special privilege of having two mints, and a 
third was granted by the Confessor. Shortly be- 
fore the Conquest, its importance was somewhat 
less, owing to the irruptions of the Danes. The 
Domesday Book mentions it as containing " 166 
houses, thirty- eight having been destroyed since the 
time of Hugh the Sheriff ; nnd in that part of the 
town belonging to the Abbess, where had been 158 
houses, there were only 111, forty-seven being de- 
stroyed." It shortly recovered its ancient splen- 
dour ; and is mentioned soon after, as possessing 
no less than twelve parish churches, including the 
magnificent Abbey Church of St. Edward the Mar- 
tyr. The manor of Shaftesbury appears to have 
been very early divided into two parts : one of which 
attached to the crown, and the other to the Abbey. 
The Abbey manor was surrendered to Henry the 
Eighth ; but was granted by Edward the Sixth, 
to Thomas Wrothesley, Earl of Southampton, to- 
gether with the town, borough, site, and precincts 
of the late monastery of Shaftesbury. From him, 
after being in the possession of Sir Thomas Arun- 
del, it came to the Earls of Pembroke, one of whom, 
Philip, sold it to Anthony Ashley Cooper, who de- 
rived from it his title of Earl of Shaftesbury. 

In former ages Shaftesbury was much resorted 
to, for its celebrated monastery. This, as we before 
observed, was founded in the time of Alfred, whose 
charter, appointing his daughter Ethelgeda, Abbess, 
is yet extant. Its site is well known, though 
scarcely the least vestige remains. This nunnery, 
which was of the Benedictine order, was one of the 
richest in England, and occupied a great extent of 
ground, possessing numerous offices and apart- 
ments within its precincts. The Abbess, who was 
one of the four that held of the King a whole ba- 
rony, was consequently liable to be called to Parlia- 
ment, but was excused on account of her sex : she 
had writs, however, directed to her, to send her 
quota of men into the field, according to her knights' 
fees. The Church, which is said to have possess- 
ed eleven chantries, was most probably large and 
magnificent, as may be supposed by the romantic 

* In the 8th year of his reign, and in tin; SSOth of the In- 
qrnalion of our Lord, King Alfred founded this city. 



tales of its magnitude and height. It was originally 
dedicated to the Virgin Mary ; but, on the transla- 
tion of tha body of Edward the Martyr, it assumed 
the name of that Saint, which it retained till the Dis- 
solution. Many miracles were said to be wrought 
at his shrine, and the concourse of pilgrims was 
very great : among which the name of Canute ap- 
pears conspicuous. The annual revenue of the 
Convent was valued, at the Suppression, according 
to Dngdale, at 1166/. 8.v. Qd. : but by Speed, at 
1329/. Is. 3d. The last Abbess was Elizabeth 
Souche, or Zouchc, who had a pension assigned her 
of 133/. per annum and waa living in 1553. 

By the manner in which Leland speaks of them, 
both the church and monastery appear to have been 
ruined as early as his time. Bones and coffins arc 
frequently dug up where the former stood, but no 
part of it is remaining. Oi' the Abbey House, there 
appear two or three large arches walled up : tho 
greater part of the materials, on its demolition, are 
supposed to have been used in erecting a house for 
Sir Thomas Arundel, who formerly resided hero. 
The park belonging to the monastery still retains 
the name of Park Hill, and is of considerable ex- 
teat. At the east end part of the wall that inclosed 
it remains. This next the town is strong, high, and 
embattled, and supported by very large buttresses. 
In other places little more than the ruins are extant. 
Many antiquities have occasionally been discovered ; 
and some reliques supposed to have belonged to tho 
abbey, are yet remaining. " In the year 1746," 
says Hutchins, " on sinking a saw-pit in a garden 
between the east end of Park Hill and the passage 
that leads to the Abbey Green, about four feet deep, 
was found, with some human bones, a gold ring, 
weighing three quarters of an ounce, without 
any inscription or figure. In 1761 was dug up 
on the same hill, a stone about two feet square, on 
which were the arms of the Abbey, a cross patonce 
between four martlets, very fairly cut." A gentle- 
man of this town has a remnant of a cloth, and a 
chalice, formerly belonging to one of the religious 
louses, most probably the Abbey. The chalice, 
which is of silver-gilt, is uncommonly elegant ; the 
)ody of it, with its cover, resembles a pine apple, 
rom which issues a sprig of foliage. The stand is 
:qually excellent, being the stem of a vine, round 
which a man is clinging, with an axe, in the action 
of striking at its root. The cloth, which belonged 
,o the altar, appears to have been Holland, and 
>art of the following verse from the Psalms is work- 
ed round it : 

' Thejeare of the Lord is the beginning of wisdome." 

Shaftesbury, besides the Convent of St. Edward, 
tad anciently twelve Churches, several chantries and 
raternities, and a Priory or Hospital of St. John 
he Baptist. The Cross of this is mentioned in a 



court 



DORSETSHIRE. 



241) 



court roll of the eleventh of Edward the Third, as 
tending in East Street. 

" With iill these religious edifices," observes 
Ilutchins, " this town made a very great figure in 
times of Popery. They wore not only an ornament, 
but a great advantage to it, by the great concourse 
of pilgrims, and superstitious persons, whose mis- 
taken piety drew them here, especially to the shrine 
of St. Edward. To these the town owed its repu- 
tation and flourishing condition ; but at the Disso- 
lution they all sunk in one common ruin."* 

SHAG'S HEATH.] " In the midst of a heath called 
Shag's Heath," remarks Ilutchins, " lying between 
the roads leading to Ringwood and Fording Bridge, 
is an enclosure of several fields, in one of which, in 
a ditch under an ashen tree, inscribed with several 
names, and visited by the curious, was taken the 
unfortunate Duke of Monmouth, after his flight 
from the battle of Sedge.moor, in Somersetshire. 
Several of our historians will have him to be taken 
at Hiugwood, Holt, &c. but that it really happened 
here, is proved" by the testimony of several persons 
lately living, who remembered the fact. The tra- 
dition of the neighbourhood is, that after the defeat 
of Sedgcmoor, the Duke and Lord Lnmley quitted 
their horses at Woodyates, whence the former, dis- 
guised as a peasant, wandered hither. He dropped 
his gold snuff-box in a pea field, where it was after- 
wards found full of gold pieces, and brought to Mrs. 
Uvedale, of Horton : one of the finders had lo/. 
for half the contents or value of it. The Duke 
went on to the hJand, as it is called, a cluster of 
small farms in the middle of the heath, and there 
concealed himself in a deep ditch, under the ash. 
When the pursuers came up, a woman, who lived in 
a neighbouring cot, gave information of his being 
somewhere in the Island, which was immediately 
surrounded by soldiers, who passed the night there, 
and threatened to fire the neighbouring cots. As 
they were going away next morning, one of them 
espied the brown skirt of the Duke's coat, and seiz- 
ed him. 'The soldier no sooner knew him, than he 
burst into tears, and reproached himself for the un- 
happy discovery. The family of the woman who 
first gave the information, arc said to have fallen 
into decay, and never thrived afterwards. The 
Duke was carried before Anthony Ettricke, Esq. of 
Holt, a justice of the peace, who ordered him to 
London. Being asked what he would do, if set at 
liberty, he answered, if his horse and arms were re- 
stored, he only desired to ride through the army, 



' The Rev. James Granger, author of the Biographical 
History of England, was a native of this town. He was the 
son of a steel-cutter, \vho resided in a house near the Park, for- 
merly occupied by Mr. Augier, and lately by Mr. John Good. 
Through the influence of Lord Ilchester," he was sent Servitor 
to Christ Church College, Oxford. He afterwards married a 
Miss Jennings, of Shiplake, in Oxfordshire, and through her 
became possessed of the living of Shiplake, where he died in 
177<>. His death was noticed hy one of his friends in the fol- 
lowing words : " T^arly on Easter Monday morning died, 
universally lamented, the Rev. James Granger. On the pre- 

VOL. II. NO. 63. 



and he defied them all to take him again. Farmer 
Kerley's grandmother, lately dead, saw him, and 
described him as a black, genteel, tall man, with a 
dejected countenance. The close where he conceal- 
ed himself is called Monmouth Close, and is the ex- 
tremest north-cast field of the Island." 

SiiERBonNE.] The market-town of Sherborne is 
in the hundred and division to which it gives name, 
18 miles north by west from Dorchester, and 116| 
west-south-west from London. It is very pleasant- 
ly situated, partly on the acclivity of a hill, and 
partly in the fertile vale of Blackmore. Its anti- 
quity, though not clearly ascertained, appears to be 
very remote. Its Saxon appellation of Scireburn, 
was given with reference to its situation ; sciro sig- 
nifying clear, and burn a rivulet. This rivulet, or 
brook, is supposed to have been a branch of the 
Yeo. Mr. Baxter endeavoured to prove that it was 
the " Aranus" of Ravennas, but no Roman anti- 
quities of any kind have beon discovered to corro- 
borate the assertion. Sherborne became an epis- 
copal see so early as the year 705, when the divi- 
sion of the bishopric of Winchester took place. 
Ina, king of the West Saxons, was the founder, and 
his nephew Adhelm was the first bishop. This pre- 
late is celebrated for his learning and his piety ; and 
several miracles are ascribed to him. The see of 
Sherborne had also another eminent prelate the 
famous Asser Menevensis, the biographer of the im- 
mortal Alfred. This see was at first very extensive, 
comprehending seven counties, but afterwards lost 
three of them, and, in 107$, was finally removed to 
Old Sarum. A monastery was erected here pre- 
viously to the year 672, which gradually rose in re- 
putation, and subsequently was of go great con- 
sideration, that its Abbots were esteemed spiritual 
barons, and had particular write to Parliaments or 
great councils. At the Dissolution its revenue* 
amounted to 6I2/. 14*. 1{d. 

Long anterior to William the Conqueror the ma- 
nor of Sherborue had been granted to the see. In 
the reign of Edward I. the manor was of very con- 
siderable extent, and valued at upwards of one hun- 
dred aud ninety pounds. Several attempts were 
made by Henry VIII. to separate it from the see, 
but it was not till the time of Edward VI. that the 
alienation was effected. In that reign, the Protec- 
tor Somerset first seized the lands of this manor 
himself and afterwards had them granted to Sir 
John Paulet, from whom, in the succeeding reign 
of Mary, they were taken and restored to the bi- 



cetling day, as he was entering upon the solemn office of the 
Holy Communion in his Church, where he had read prayers 
and preached, he was suddenly seized with an apoplectic fit, 
which, notwithstanding every human assistance, continued upon 
him till his departure from this world. Ele was universally 
respected by every person of rank and station. As an author, 
he was eminently ingenious, spirited, and candid: as a man, 
.and a Christian, he was benevolent and humble, and without 
guile. He was what it was his highest ambition to be, an honest 
man, and a good parish Priest." 



3 R 



shoprie 



250 



DORSETSHIRE. 



shopric. In the next reign, that of Elizabeth, they 
were, however, completely alienated from the see of 
Sarum, and the greater part of them granted to Sir 
Walter Raleigh. But in the possession of Sir Wal- 
ter and his family they did not long continue ; for 
after the unfeeling and tyrannical successor of Eliza- 
beth had executed that illustrious nobleman, he 
tricked away the estate from his suffering family, to 
gratify the rapacity of Car, Earl of Somerset. In 
the remaining part of this reign, and in that of 
Charles I. several attempts were made to recover 
the manor for the Raleigh family, but without ef- 
fect ; and after being taken from Car, it was grant- 
ed to Sir John Digby, whose descendant, the Right 
Honourable Edward Digby, Lord Digby of Sher- 
borne, still possesses it.* 

The following are the principal events which occur 
in the history of this town. From the account, 
however, the circumstances which took place du- 
ring the civil wars are omitted, as they will be re- 
lated under the head of Sherborne Castle. For 
nearly three centuries after the establishment of the 
episcopal see, Sherborne appears to have been in an 
exceedingly flourishing condition. At the end of that 
period, Sweyn, king of Denmark, landed on the 
coast, and nearly razed it. From this time till the 
removal of the see to Old Sarum, it seems to have 
recovered no portion of its former consequence, as 
Loth Matthew of Westminster, and William of 
Malmsbury, after describing it as a village of no 
reputation, express their surprise that it should so 
long have continued a bishopric. In the reign of 
Henry HI. charters of confirmation were granted 
for the markets and "fairs; but in that of Edward 
IV. the assizes, which had been hitherto held here, 
were removed. In the time of Henry VIII. it had 
again acquired consequence, and is stated by Le- 
land to have been, on account of its woollen manu- 
facture, one of the most frequented towns in the 



* In Peek's Desiderata Curiosa is the following strange ac- 
count, extracted from a MS. in the University library at Cam- 
bridge, of a curse pronounced against any one who should 
unjustly become possessed of this domain: " Osmand (a Nor- 
man knight, who had served William, Duke of Normandy, 
from his youth, in all his wars against the French king, and 
the Duke's [William's] subjects, with much valour and dis- 
cretion) for all his faithful services, when his master had by 
conquest obtcyned the crown of England, was rewarded with 
many gifts ; among the which was the Earldome of Dorset!, 
and the gilt of many other possessions, whereof the Castle and 
Baronie of Sherburne were parcel!. But Osmund, in the de- 
clymnge of his age, calling to mynde the great effusion of 
blood which from his infancie he had shedd, he resolved -to 
leave all worldly delights, and betake himself to a religious life, 
the better to contemplate on his former sinnes, and to ebteyn 
pardon for them. And, with much impoitunitie, having got- 
ten leave of the Kinge (who was unwilling to want the assis- 
tance of so grave and worthy a counsellor) to resign his tem- 
poral honours, and having obteyned the bishopric of Sarum, 
he gave Sherburne, with other lands, to the bishopric. To 
which gift he annexed this curse : That whosoever should take 
those lands from the bishopric, or diminish them in great or 
small, should be accursed, not only iu this world, but also in 



county. In June, 16] I, Sherborne was visited by 
so dreadful a mortality, that no less than 275 per- 
sons were swept off by it in the two succeeding 
months. During the reign -of James II. twelve 
persons, who had been active in the cause of the 
Duke of Monmouth, were executed at this place. 
In 1688 the Prince of Orange arrived here, where 
he was joined by the principal noblemen of England. 
After the Reformation, the woollen manufacture, 
mentioned as flourishing here, began to decrease, 
and the making of buttons and haberdashery ware 
was introduced ; but this also failed, and in 1740 a 
silk engine was erected, which, with the manufac- 
ture of linen, still employs many persons, and con- 
stitutes the chief trade of the place. It at present 
contains 595 houses, inhabited by 1 191 males, and 
1939 females ; in all 3370 persons. 

The principal ornament of the town of Sherborne, 
at the present time, is its magnificent church, an- 
ciently the cathedral of its bishops. It is built in 
the form of a cross, and adorned in every part witli 
that florid and elegant style of Gothic architecture, 
which prevailed in the reign of Henry VI. In this 
reign a dispute occurred between the town's-men 
and the monks, respecting the removal of the font, 
in which the church was set on fire, and almost to- 
tally destroyed. A small portion of the south and 
west end, however, appears to have been preserved, 
as they display some semicircular arches, with zig- 
zag mouldings, characteristic of the Norman era. 
After the conflagration the east end was soon rebuilt 
by William Bradforde, who became Abbot about 
that time ; and the west end, with a Chapel dedi>- 
cated to our Lady of Boree, were erected by the 
next Abbot, Peter Ramsam, who was elected in 
1475, and died in 1504. The eras of the subse- 
quent additions are notlfecorded ; but the prevaih- 
ing uniformity of style shews, that they were com- 
pleted in a short time after the accident. The fol- 

the world to come ; unless in his life-time he made restitution 
thereof : and so he died Bishop of Sarum. 

" Those lands continued in the possession of his successors 
till the reign of King Stephen, who took them away ; where- 
upon (says this account) his prosperity forsook him. King 
Stephen being dead, these lands came into the hands of some 
of the Montagues (after Erles of Sarum,) who, whilst they held 
the same, underwent many disasters. For one or other of them 
fell by misfortune. And finally all the males of them became 
extinct, and the Earldome received an end in their name. So 
ill was their success I Afterwards the lands were restored to 
the bishopric ; but were taken away a second time by the 
Duke of Somerset, in the reign of Edward the Sixth : when 
the Duke being huntinge in the Parke of Sherburne, he was 
sent for presently unto the Kinge, (to whom he was Protector,) 
and, at his cominge up to London, was forthwith committed 
unto the Tower, and shortly after lost his head ! The lands 
then, in a suit at law, were adjudged to the Bishop of Sarum, 
ami so remained till Sir Walter Raleigh procured a grant of 
them : he afterwards unfortunately lost them, and at last hi: 
head also. Upon his attainder, they came to Prince Henry 
by the Kinge's gift, who died not long after the possessioi 
thereof. After Prince Henry's death, the Erie of Somerse 
(.Car) did possesse them. Finally, he lost them, and man; 
other greater fortunes.'-' 

to win; 



DORSETSHIRE. 



231 



lowing are the dimensions of the present edifice, as 
given by Hutchins : the whole length '207 feet ; 
breadth 102; height 100; length of the nave 18-2 
feet by 32, and height 109 feet. The north and 
south aisles 198 feet by 15, and 24 feet three inches 
high each. The transept 202 feet long, and 102 
feet wide. The tower 151 feet high ; the length and 
breadth 30 feet by 32. The height of the body, 
from the paving to the vaulting, 109 feet. The 
whole is supported by eight arches, over which are 
as many large windows on each side, containing 
many remains of painted glass. The interior is 
spacious and elegant, ornamented at the intersec- 
tions of the tracing work, with numerous arms ; 
among which appear those of Bishop Nevill, the 
initials and rebus of Bishop Langton, and the let- 
ters H. E. connected with a lover's knot, said to 
be the initials of Henry VII. and his Queen. The 
north and south aisles are vaulted, as is also the 
greater part of the nave, and enriched with mould- 
ings and other ornaments. In the chancel is a 
handsome altar-piece, of Norway-oak ; 32 feet 
broad, and of a proportionable height. It com- 
poses a pediment, supported by four iluted pillars 
of the Corinthian order, and was the gift of the 
late William Lord Digby. In the south transept is 
a superb monument erected at the expence of 1,500/. 
to the memory of John, Earl of Bristol, who died 
in 1098. It is composed of various kinds of mar- 
ble, the work of J. Nost. On it is the statue of the 
Earl, standing in his parliamentary robes, holding 
a coronet in his right hand. On his left stands his 
first lady, Alice, holding in her left hand a burning 
lamp ; on his right hand his second lady, holding 
in her right hand a flaming heart. On the pedes- 
tals of these statues are their names, and the dates 
of their births and burials y at the sides two weep- 
ing Cupids. A vein in the marble of the left leg, 
which is naked, represents the mortification near 
his knee which occasioned the Earl's death. Over 
the whole is a noble semicircular pediment, sup- 
ported by two Corinthian columns, on which are 
two lions, supporting the arms of Digby. The in- 
scription beneath was written by Dr. Hough, Bi- 
shop of Worcester. Near this is a black marble 
tablet, to the memory of a son and daughter of 
William, Lord Digby, on which the following in- 
scription, written by Pope, appears : 

" Go, fair example of untainted youth, 

Of modest reason, and pacific truth, 

Go, just of worth, in evr"y thought sincere, 

Who knew no wish but what the world might hear; 

Of gentlest manners, unaffected mind, 

Lover of peace, and friend to human kind ; 



* Among the able preceptors of this school the Rev. James 
Knight Moor, who died in November, 1810, deserves parti- ! 
cuiar notice. This gentleman was, we believe, born at Rugby, i 
and very early in life married to a lady of exemplary virtue 
and easy fortune. For some years Mr. Moor officiated a-i as- j 
listant-master to the grammar-school here, and displayed much i 
learning, both theological anU classical. He was afterwards : 



Conipos'd in suft'e rings, and in joys sedate ; 
Good without Hoist- ; without pretension-), great ; 
Go, live, for Heaven's eternal year is thine, 
Go, and exalt Iliy mortal to divine. 

And thou, too close attendant on his doom, 
Blest maid ! hast hasten'd to the silent tomb ; 
Sleei'd the same course to the same quiet shore ;. 
Nor parted long, and now to part no more. 
Yet take these tears, mortality's relief, 
And till we share your joys, forgive our grief; 
These little rites, a stone and verse receive ; 
'Tis all a lather, all a friend, can give." 

The tower, which stands near the middle of the 
church, is supported by four arches, and contains 
six large bells, besides the fire-bell, and the little, 
saints' bell. The tenor, or sixth and largest, is 
said to weigh 60,0001bs. and to have been brought 
from Tournay, and given by Cardinal Wolsey, who 
was once Rector of Lymington in this neighbour- 
hood. It was new cast in 1670, and bears on it 
this inscription : 

" By Woolsey's gift I measure time for all, 
To mirth, to grief, to church, I serve to call." 

Adjoining with the eastern end of the church-, 
stands the Free School, founded by Edward VI. 
who appointed governors from the inhabitants of the 
town, and granted to the foundation various privi- 
leges. The school has two masters, who are cler- 
gymen and graduates in one of the Universities. 
These have generally been men of considerable ta- 
lents, who have contributed to the production of 
several eminent characters.* The windows of tlte 
school contain several shields painted ou the glass, 
and over the door is the following inscription : 

EDVAR&l imperil) patet hie Schola publica SEXTI 
Grammatics cupidis nobile REGIS opus, -j- 

On the south side of the church-yard, is an an- 
cient building, originally an Hospital, now employ- 
ed as an alms-house. It was founded by license 
from Henry VI. in honour of St. John, for twelve 
poor infirm men, four women, and one perpetual 
chaplain. It contains at present sixteen men, and 
eight women, who still preserve a custom in honour 
of the saint to whom it was dedicated ; that of hang- 
ing up a garland of flowers every midsummer night, , 
and watching it till the next morning. At the east- 
ern end of the church-yard, is an old gateway, lean- 
ing to the Conduit ; and on the north side of the 
church, are some remains of the cloisters and do- 
mestic buildings, belonging to the Abbey. 

Among the distinguished persons who have been, 
either residents, or natives of this place, may be 

presented to the rectory ofSapcotc, in Leicester, where he con- 
tinued to practise every Christian precept. He died, after- a 
long and painful illness, at Hinchley, whither he went for me- 
dical assistance. 

f Translation : This public School, the noble work of 
King Edward VI. lies open to th command of those desiring 
grammatical knowledge. 

mentioned; 



52-52 



DORSETSHIRE. 



mentioned William Englcbert,* an eminent engi- 
neer, and Dr. Joseph Towers. f 

SHERBOKNE CASTLE.] At about half a mile east 
from Sherborne, and in a suburb still called Castle- 
ton, stood Sherborne Castle. Its situation was ex- 
cellent. It commanded all the adjacent vale on the 
north and west, and the whole ridge of hills on the 
south ; it was protected on the northern side by a 
large moor, lately drained and converted into a fer- 
tile meadow. Its form was octagon, moated round, 
and over the moat were several draw-bridges. On 
flie north side was also a subterraneous passage in- 
to the vale. Leland describes it as standing " upon 
a. rokky billet, having four great toures in the cas- 
telle waullc, whereof one is the Gate House. Every 
of them hath three lodgg'mges yn highth. The 
great lodgging is yn the middle of the Castle Court, 
very strong, and full of voultes. There be few 
peaces of work yn England of th'autiquite of this 
that standith so hole, and so welle couchid." This 
structure, after the Norman invasion, was granted to 
Osmond de Sils, but subsequently was annexed to 
the bishopric, to which, though once or twice aliena- 
ted, it continued to belong till the reign of Elizabeth, 
when it was granted, -with the manor, to Sir Walter 
Raleigh. It afterwards came to Sir John Digby. 

In the time of the Civil Wars, Sherborne Castle 
was one &f the first fortresses that declared for the 
King, and one of the last Which continued to op- 
pose the Parliamentary forces. In 1642 it was, 
together with the town, besieged by th Earl of 
Bedford and an army of 7000 men, to which the 
Marquis of Hertford was opposed, with u force of 
only 400 infantry. With this inferior number, how- 
ever, he compelled the Earl to raise the siege ; a 
circumstance which is accounted for by the follow- 
ing story : Whilst the Earl of Bedford besieged 
the Castle, his sister, the Countess of Bristol, being 
at the Lodge, he sent a message to desire her to 
quit it, as he had orders from the Parliament to de- 
molish the fortress. She immediately went on 
"horseback to his tent, and told him, that " if he 
persisted in his intention, he should find his sister's 
bones buried in the ruins." In the next year the 
town was taken and pillaged, but the castle remain- 
ed in the possession of the royalists. The ensuing 
year, 1645, the fortress was, however, besieged by 
Cromwell and Fairfax, who, after sixteen days, 
took it, and ordered its complete demolition. When 
the castle was taken, it contained a number of gen- 
tlemen, the owners of the surrounding estates, who 



The date of the birth of this engineer is unknown, but in 
1588 he had an annual pension of 100 marks granted him by 
Queen Elizabeth. James the First valued his abilities so high- 
ly, that he would not suffer him to /enter the service of any 
other power. Englebert died in 1634. 

f Though Dr. Toweis is stated by some to Imve been born 
at Sherborne, by others he is said to be a native of London, 
and only to have been apprenticed at that place. He was 
born in 1737, and after having learned the printing business, 
settled as a bookseller in London; lnit having n ardent at- 
tachment to literature, he engaged in the ministry among the 



with their families and ladies, were all sent prison- 
ers to London. In the castle were also large stores 
of provision and ammunition, besides other valua- 
ble effects. 

This fortress was the ancient residence of the 
Bishops of Sherborne, and appears to have been 
erected in the reign of Stephen. Dr. Maton ob- 
serves, that it was " probably built by Bishop Ro- 
ger, who constructed castk-s at Devizes and Malms- 
bury. His edifices are described as being e j'or ipacc 
very large, Jor cost very chargeable, for iliow vert/ 
beautiful. The stones are set in such exact order, that 
the joints cannot be seen, and the whole structure scents 
to he but one stone.'' The Castle of Sherborne was 
certainly in every respect correspondent to this de- 
scription, as we may perceive even from its ruins." 

SHERBORNE LODGE.] Sherborne Lodge, the seat 
of Edward, Earl of Digby,- is situated a little to the 
north of the ruins of the old castle. It is a singular 
structure, built at different periods, and by various 
owners. The central part, which is the most an- 
cient, was built by Sir Walter Raleigh, whose arms, 
and the date 1514, are on the windows. The house 
contains some fine paintings, and, among several 
portraits of the Digby family, are a fine three-quar- 
ter length of Sir Kenelm Digby, and a family- 
piece, representing Sir Kenelm, his wife, and two 
children. Here is likewise the celebrated Procession 
of' Queen Elizabeth, ascribed by Vertuc to Marc 
Garrard. She is represented in an open sedan, 
borne by eight principal noblemen, who carried her 
from London to Hunsdon House in Hertfordshire, 
on a visit to Henry Carey, Lord Hunsdon. The 
mansion is surrounded by a noble park, which con- 
tains about 840 acres, and affords views highly pic- 
turesque and beautiful. One of the groves, still 
called Sir Walter Raleigh's Grove, is said to have 
been planted by that nobleman. 

SMEUMORE.] Near Smedmore, in the parish of 
Kimeridge, observes Hutchins, " is found what the 
country people call Coal Money. This is generally 
discovered two or three feet below the top of the 
cliffs, inclosed between two stones set edgeways, 
and covered with a third, like kistvaens, and min- 
gled with a few bones of some animal. Sometimes 
many of the pieces are found in the adjoining 
grounds, near the surface ; and it is observable, that 
the spot where they lie seems to be made ground : 
they are of a round form ; from one to two, or three 
inches and a half in diameter, and a quarter of an 
inch thick : one side is flat, the other convex, on 

Dissenters of the Presbyterian persuasion, and in 1774 became 
pastor of a congregation at Highgate. In 1778 he was chosen 
one of the ministers of Newiiigton Green Meeting, in con- 
junction with Dr. Price. In 1779 he received the degree of 
LL. D. from Edinburgh. He died in 1799. Dr. Towers 
published the British Biography, 7 Vols. Svo.', Observations 
on Hume's History of England; the Life and Reign of Fre- 
derick 111. of Prussia, 2 vols. 8vo. : a Vindication of Locke; 
several Sermons, and Political Tracts. He was aUo a coad- 
jutor with Dr. Kippis, in compiling, the new edition of the 
Biographia Britannica. 

7 -which 



DORSETSHIRE. 



253 



which are several mouldings. On the flat side are 
two, sometimes four, small round holes near the 
run ; but they do not penetrate through the piece. 
Antiquaries conclude them to be British antiquities ; 
but whether amulets or money, is not agreed." 

SPETTISBURY.] Spettisbury, or Spectisbury is 
situated in the Shaston division, three miles south- 
east by south from Blandford Forum. This large 
scattered village occupies a pleasant site, on the 
banks of the Stour. " On the right oftheroad," ob- 
serves Dr. Maton " passing through it to Poole is 
a very perfect encampment, called Spethbury Ring, 
which has been considered by some as Roman, and 
by others as Saxon. Its proximity to the Icening 
Street (which runs about a mile distant) seems at 
first to countenance the former supposition ; but the 
same circumstance induces me to think that it was 
constructed after the Roman times. If it had been 
a Roman station, the road would certainly have 
been made to communicate with it, either directly, 
or by means of a vicinal branch, no traces of which 
are to be perceived. Besides, the rampart is nearly 
circular, and several Saxon coins have been found 
within its area. The entrance is from the north- 
west." 

STALBRIDGE.] The little market-town of Stal- 
bridge, lies near the banks of the Stour, in the Stur- 
miuster division, 9| miles east by north from Sher- 
borne, and 113 west-south-west from London. The 
whole of the town, and the greater part of the parish 
of Stalbridge, (comprising 232 houses and 1331 in- 
habitants) is situated upon a rocky soil, which sup- 
plies the neighbourhood with stone for building. 
About the centre of the town stands a neat cross, 
which, according to Hutchins, " including the base, 
is thirty feet high. At the top is a square block, 
with four niches ; those on the east and west fronts 
have the Crucifixion, with the Virgin, and St. John. 
On this block stood a cross ; and from the top of 
the free-stone of the pyramid to the hole in which 
this cross was fixed is ten feet. At the bottom of 
this block are several coats of arms : one of them 
seems a chevrou or foss between three roses or es- 
callops. The pyramid itself is twelve feet high, 
and all the angles are fluted. On one side of it is 
a defaced figure of our Saviour, with the lamb at 



* This celebrated philosopher was the seventh son of Rich- 
ard, Earl of Cork, and born at Lismore in Ireland, in 1627. 
In his childhood he was so unfortunate as to acquire an incur- 
able habit of stuttering. In 1635 he was sent to Eton School, 
and three years afterwards accompanied his brother Francis in 
his travels. They settled some time at Geneva, where Mr. 
Boyle applied to the mathematics. After a stay of nearly two 
years at Geneva, he visited Italy, where he" paid particular 
atteminn to the discoveries rnr.rS' by Galileo. In 1644, the 
two brothers n tinned to England, and found their father was 
dead. To his son Robert he li;,d beqni -allied the manor of 
SJtalbridge, where he chiefly resided; but when in London he 
lived with IIK sister, Lady Ranclagh. He now devoted himself 
to philosophical pursuits^ for which purpose lie made frequent 
excursions to Oxford, where he became one of the earliest 
members of the Royal Society. In 1654 he settled at Oxford. 

VOL. n. so. 63. 



his feet. The four sides of the base are adorned 
with reliefs, one of which seems to represent the re- 
surrection of Christ ; who holds a cross in his hand. 
The whole stands on three octagon flights of steps, 
each diminishing in the ascent." 

The manor of Stalbridge anciently belonged to 
the Abbey of Sherborne ; but after the Dissolution, 
it was granted, by Edward the Sixth, to the Duke 
of Somerset : on his attainder, it came to the Aud- 
ley family, and afterwards to Richard Boyle, Earl 
of Corke. This nobleman left it to his youngest 
son, the celebrated Robert Boyle, who in the early 

8 art of his life, made it his place of study ; and his 
rst experiments in natural philosophy were made 
at the Manor-house about the year 1646. Mr. 
Boyle* resided here many years ;. and, at his death, 
left 300/. to the poor of the parish. The niiinor 
was afterwards purchased by Peter Walter, Esq^, 
who was Clerk of the Peace for the county of Mid- 
dlesex, and Steward to the Duke of Newcastle, 
besides other noblemen and gentlemen. lie repre- 
sented the borough of Bridport, and after acquiring 
a great fortune, died in 1745, aged eighty-three. 
Ten years afterwards, an act was passed to empower 
Edward Walter, Esq. and other persons, claiming 
under the wills of his grandfather and brother re- 
spectively, to make leases of the lands, &c. pur- 
chased by the former. 

STOUR-MINSTER-NEWTON CASTLE.] This littl* 
market-town, generally called Stourmiuster New- 
ton, is in the Sherborn division, 8| miles south-west 
from Shaftesbnry, ami 111 west-south-west from 
London. It is divided by the river Stour, into two 
parts, Sturminster, which lies on the north side of 
the river, and Newton, or Newton Castle on the 
south side. They form one manor, and are joined 
together by a causeway and a bridge of six arches. 
In the reign of Edgar the manor was granted tu 
the abbey of Glastonbury ; this grant was confirm- 
ed in 1016 by Edmund Ironside. After the Disso- 
lution it was granted by Henry VIII. to his Queen, 
Catherine Parr. After her decease it carmu to Ed- 
ward VI. who bestowed it on his sister Elizabeth. 
Elizabeth granted it to Sir Christopher, from whom 
after passing through many hands, it came to its 
present possessors, the noble family of Uivurs. The 
1 

Here, besides applying himself to natural philosophy, he culti- 
vated an acquaintance with the learned languages, and devoted 
a considerable portion of his time to the study of theology and 
sacred criticism. He was a Director of the East fndia Com- 
pany, and one of the principal instruments in procuring their 
charter; for which he only required as a return, that they 
should do something towards propagating Christianity in their 
settlements, to which end he had printed at Oxford 500 copies 
of the Gospels and Acts of the A|>ostles, in the Malay tongue. 
He was also at the expence of printing, in Arabic, Grotius de 
Veritate. He likewise engaged himself in promoting the pro- 
pagation of the gospel among the Indians of North America. 
In 1678 the Royal Society would have chosen him pit-sidem, 
which honour he declined. He died in 1691, in a week after 
his sister, Lady Ranelagh. His works have been published in 
five vols. folio, and six vols. 4to. 

3 s town. 



254 



DORSETSHIRE. 



town, according to the returns of 1811, contained 
$25 houses, inhabited hy 1461 persons. 

Stourminster-Newton is conjectured by Baxter, 
to be the " Anicetis" of Ravennas. However cor- 
rect this supposition may be, it is certainly of great 
antiquity, as is proved by the ruins of its castle. 
These are in the form of a D, standing on a high 
hill, surrounded by a vallum and ditch, and having 
a small artificial mount in the centre. 

STOWBOROtjGH.] Stowborough, a suburb of the 
borough of Wareham, of which, according to tra- 
dition, it is the mother town, is now only a little vil- 
lage, of about 40 houses. The fact advanced in 
support of its having been the mother-town is, that 
it was formerly governed by a Mayor, an office 
which was discontinued in the year 1714, when the 
schism act was passed, the greater part of the in- 
habitants, who were Dissenters, refusing to qualify 
themselves. Since that time the local jurisdiction 
has been vested in an officer, called the Bailiff. 

In the year 1767, as some labourers were digging 
the turnpike road, through a large barrow, called 
" King Barrow," which stood at the south end of 
Stowborough, a curious discovery was made. At 
the bottom of the barrow, nearly in the centre, was 
a large hollow trunk of oak, rudely excavated, con- 
taining a small quantity of human bones, unburnt, 
black, and soft. All the bones were wrapped up in 
a covering, apparently of deer skin. In the inside 
was a piece of what was imagined to be gold lace. 
Near the south end of the barrow, was found a small 
oak vessel of the shape of an urn. The body found 
here was conjectured to have been that of Edward 
the Martyr, but without any probability ; and it 
seems more likely to have belonged to some Saxon 
or Danish chieftain. 

STOOLAND.] The little village of Studland, com- 
prising about 70 or 80 houses, scattered over a 
common, is in the Blandford division, 6| miles east 
by north from Corfe Castle. A romantic range of 
cliffs adjoins the common, forming a boundary to 
Poole Harbour, and culled the South Haven Point. 
From this point to another, called Handfast Point, 
is what is denominated Studland Bay. The ground 
is nil clear, and the whole forms a good harbour for 
ships not exceeding fourteen feet draught. The 
ebb, in this bay, is about eight hours, and the flood 
four. On the common are a number of barrows ; 
but that which excites more particular attention is 
an insulated rock, resting on an eminence to the 
west of Studland Bay ; it is called the Adlinge- 
stouc, or Agglcstone, a name derived from the 
S:xxjj Halig-Han, q. d. Holy Home. This extra- 
ordinary stone, which is somewhat in the shape of 
an irregular triangle, one of the sides of which is 
placed uppermost, measures in circumference about 
!*0 feet, and in height nearly 26 ; while its weight is 
computed at 400 tons. " On the east front," ob- 
serves Hutchins, " it is convex or gibbous ; on the 
west nearly Hut ; on the top a ridge, or bulge, runs 
iu whole length from north to south, whence it 



slopes away to the cast, six feet, and to the west 
five. There is a considerable cleft in the middle 
from east to west ; and on the surface are three hol- 
lows, or cavities, perhaps rock-basons, in which ra- 
vens are bred. It is overgrown with heath, and 
turfs have been cut there ; the stone is much worn 
by the weather, and the surface is very unequal, 
rough, and full of cracks, and likewise parts into 
horizontal layers, or lamina?, especially on the east 
side, and at the ends." The eminence on which it 
is placed occupies upwards of half an acre : the per- 
pendicular height is about 90 feet, and the bottom 
appears to have been surrounded by a shallow ditch. 
From the form of the hill on which this monument 
is placed, and from the numerous barrows which 
surround it, it is conjectured that it was raised to 
the memory of a British chief. Dr. Maton sap- 
poses it to he Druidical, and that it was not brought 
from a distance, but composed on the spot with fer- 
ruginous sand-stone, and semi-oxygenated parti- 
cles of iron. By the country people this rock is 
called the " Devil's Night Cap ;" and tradition 
says, his Infernal Majesty, intending to destroy 
Corfe Castle, threw it from the Isle of Wight. 

SWANWICH.] Swanwich, situated in the Isle of 
Purbeck, six miles east-south-east from Corfu Cas- 
tle, contains within itself eight distinct manors and 
hamlets. It is a large and populous village, lying 
in a low situation near the margin of the bay to 
which it gives name. / This bay is included between 
Handfast Point on the north, and Peverel Point on 
the south. A vessel of 300 tons may ride in it, but 
owing to the ground being sandy, the anchorage is 
bad. It was near this bay that the Danish fleet was 
wrecked in the reign of Alfred. The houses of the 
village of Swanwich are chiefly built with stone ; 
but they are small and low, disposed into one street 
of about a mile long. The church, the tower of 
which is of great antiquity, is a spacious building, 
enlarged at different times as the parish increased, 
and consequently displaying various styles of ar- 
chitecture. Hutchius thus notices it : " It is, per- 
haps, the oldest building in the Isle, not excepting 
even Corfe Castle ; for though composed of the 
same sort of stone, this has acquired a greater de- 
gree of incrustation than that has, and like it, the 
mortar is almost petrified, or turned into stone, by 
length of time. The walls are very thick, and 
about eighty feet in perpendicular height : the chief 
entrance was through a large arch in the east side, 
which now serves for a passage into the church. In 
this side, and at about halfway the height, is a large 
arched window. In the upper loft are four lancet 
windows, one on each side ; besides some small 
apertures for the admission of light in every loft." 

By the exertions of William Morton Pitt, Esq. a 
herring fishery, and manufactory for dried herrings, 
was instituted here in 1788. This still continues to 
flourish, and employs a considerable number of 
persons. The women and children are mostly em- 
ployed in spinning flax : but it is from its stone 

quarries 



DORSETSHIRE. 



255 



quarries that Swanwich derives its chief importance. 
()' these there are upwards of sixty within the pa- 
rish constantly worked. The quarriers or stone- 
merchants, are united in a society, governed by 
particular regulations. This society meets annually 
on Shrorve Tuesday, at Corfe Castle, where its re- 
cords are kept. The quantity of stone which is 
shipped every year from the quay, is computed at 
50,000 tons ; and the better sort sells for twelve 
shillings a ton at the vessel. When these quarries 
were originally opened is unknown : " it is certain, 
however," observes Ilutchins, " that the columns 
in Salisbury Cathedral, which were finished in 1258, 
and likewise the Hall at Winchester, an ancient 
building, are made of the stone (though not now in 
use) called Purbeck marble, dug- near the fort, at 
the point of land called Peverel Point, that runs 
into the sea^ and forms one side of Swanwich Bay. 
There are likewise some miles within land very 
large quarries where this marble is supposed to have 
been formerly dug." This stone is of various kinds, 
but chiefly closely cemented marine exuviae. " Im- 
mense rocks," observes Dr. Maton, " extend along 
the coast of St. Adhelm's Head, and beyond, and it 
seems to be the basis of the southern part of Pur- 
beck. It exhibits different degrees of fineness, and 
the decomposition of the shells is much further ad- 
vanced in some specimens than in others. In the 
interstices of the strata of lime-stone about Peverel 
Point, are numerous glittering crystals of selenite, 
formed in a sort of fibrous marl. The surface of 
this marl is here and there covered with a fine fari- 
naceous gypsum ; and it appears also in an indurat- 
ed state, constituting alternate strata with the lime- 
stone. Pyrites abound in the latter, and hence the 
sulphuric acid concerned in the formation of the se- 
lenite and gypsum seems to be obtained." 

Petrifactions of marine substances, and fossils of 
different species of fish, are frequently dug out of 
the quarries. A gentleman at this place possesses 
two very perfect resemblances of bream fish ; one of 
them fourteen inches long, and the other ten. Jn 
April, 1809, at the depth of seventy feet from the 
surface, a perfect land tortoise was discovered. 
The men who found it brought it to the Rev. S. 
Woolmer for his inspection, who, struck with admi- 
ration at so great a curiosity, offered them five gui- 
neas for it, which they declined accepting; but after 
shewing it about, sold it to a gentleman at Apway 
for eight guineas ; after which 300/. was offered for 
it, but refused. It was supposed that its mate 
might be found near, as the male and female are 
generally together, upon which further search was 
made, when after digging some time, another 
was dug up, but entirely broken in pieces and 
spoiled. 

TARRANT CRAWFORD.] Tarrant Crawford, or 
Little Crawford (to distinguish it from Great Craw- 
ford,) is a village in the Shastoa division, three 
miles and a half south-east by east from Blandford 
Forum. In thit place was formerly a nunnery of 



the Cistercian order, reported to have been founded 
by Ralph de Kahaines, a follower of the Conqueror, 
who, in the reign of Richard I. built near his man- 
sion a monastery, which he endowed with a tythe of 
all the provisions consumed in his family. About 
the year 1530, this edifice was repaired by Bishop 
Poor, the celebrated founder of Salisbury Cathedral, 
who presented it to Joan, Queen of Alexander II. 
of Scotland ; and by her it was chosen as a place of 
burial. At the Dissolution, according to Dugdale, 
j its annual income was 214/. 7$. Qd. The site of this 
j abbey, after belonging to the families of Wyat, Sa- 
I vage, and Strangeways, came to Sir William Port- 
"nan, one of whose descendant^ is still its possessor. 
It appears, from the account of Leland, to have 
been demolished immediately on the Dissolution ; 
and at this time not the slightest vestige remains, 
cither of the nunnery or church. A large old barn 
near the place is conjectured to have formed part of 
the Abbey Church. In this structure, besides 
others, the following illustrious personages were 
buried: Bishop Poor: the Kahaines of Tarrant; 
Joan, wife of Llewellyn, Prince of Wales ; and 
Joan, Queen of Scots. 

At Great Crawford, in Spettisbury parish, are the 
remains of an oval camp, 184 paces by 120; and, 
near it, a smaller camp of a circular form. 

WAREHAM.] The ancient borough and market- 
town of Wareham is situated in the Blandford divi- 
sion, ]8 miles east-south-east from Dorchester, and 
110 south-west by west from London. It is nearly 
surrounded with water ; having Poole Bay on the 
east, the Frome on the south, and the Piddle on the 
north : but, notwithstanding this, the air is salubri- 
ous, and the place one of the most healthy in the 
county. It seems to be of high antiquity ; and, from 
the earthen vallum which is near it, and the barrows 
in its neighbourhood, it most probably is British. 
That it was also a Roman station appears from the 
military way, which proceeds henee to Dorchester, 
and from the discovery of numerous Roman coins. 
Wareham probably derives its name from " Vara- 
ham," a " habitation" on a " fishing shore." 

The consequence of Wareham appears to have 
been considerable in the time of the Saxons, as both 
Dugdale and Leland mention, that Beorthric, the 
last of the West Saxon monarchs, was buried here 
about the year 800. In 875 the Danes landed on 
the western coast, and took up their head-quarters 
at Wareham, which, however, they were obliged by 
Alfred to quit, after destroying a nunnery and cas- 
tle. In the reign of Athelstan it again rose into 
note, and two mints with mint-masters, were ap- 
pointe 1 here by that Kiug. Here the body of Ed- 
ward tJ*e Martyr was also first interred, thouglt 
shortly after it was removed to Shaftesbury Abbey. 
In 998, and in 1015, Wareham was again visited by 
the Danes ; and, indeed, during the whole time this 
island was subject to the irruptions of that people, 
this place was kept in continual alarm. At the time 
of the Norman Conquest it possessed two mints, and. 
8 subsequently 



DORSETSHIRE. 



subsequently became of more importance. In 1142 
Robert dc Lacy defended the castle for King Ste- 
phen, but it was besieged and taken by Henry II. 
From that time till the period of the Civil Wars, the 
history of Wareliam presents nothing of note : dur- 
ing those convulsive events it was alternately pos- 
sessed by the royal and parliamentary forces. In 
July, 1762, a destructive fire burst out in the centre 
of the town, which, besides the Town Hall and other 
public buildings, destroyed 143 d welling- houses ; 
and the loss, not including the insured property, was 
computed at 10,000/. The town was, however, 
speedily rebuilt, and considerably improved. 

Anterior to the Conquest the manor of Wareliam 
belonged to the Crown, to which, after various 
grants and reversions, it continued attached till the 
reign of James I, when it was granted to Thomas 
Emerson, and Richard Gowda], Esqrs, It subse- 
quently came to the Plunkets, and to Thomas Erie, 
Esq. The latter, in 1717, granted the whole to Sir 
Edward Erneley, and the magistrates of Wareham ; 
that the clear .issue might be laid out in apprenticing 
poor children born in the borough, to be nominated 
by Mr. Erie and his successors. In 1734, Gabriel 
Redwood, the surviving truslee, conveyed them to 
Henry Drax, Esq. of Charborough. John Cal- 
craft, Esq. in 1767, with various other freeholds of 
the borough, purchased the manor of Thomas Erie 
Drax, Esq. 

Wareham was anciently a borough by prescrip- 
tion, and the Domesday Book mentions it in that 
manner. A charter was granted to this place by 
Queen Elizabeth, bat the privileges mentioned in it 
are now neglected. The one which is now acted 
under was granted by Queen Anne. This places 
the government of the town in a Mayor, a Recorder, 
six Capital Burgesses, and twelve Common Couu- 
cilmen, with their assistants. By virtue of this 
establishment, the Mayor, Recorder, and preceding 
Mayor, are constituted justices of the peace, and the 
two first being of the quorum, are empowered to 
hold their own sessions. The choice of members to 
be returned to Parliament, is in all the inhabitants 
paying scot and lot : these are about 150 in number, 
and the Mayor is the returning officer. 

The town of Wareliam is in form almost a square, 
and the buildings, which are chiefly of brick, form 
open and spacious streets, intersecting each other at 
right angles. A high rampart or wall of earth in- 
closes it on every side except the south, and the 
area which it surrounds is computed at about 100 
acres. The space between this rampart and the 
wall of the town, is occupied by gardens, the produce 
of which is large, and is sent chiefly to Poole and 
Portsmouth. This town formerly possessrf. eight 
churches, but at present it contains only three, which 



* The Rev. Mr. Hutching was horn in Dorsetshire, in 1693, 
and educated at Ualiol College, Oxford. In 1747 he obtained 



are respectively dedicated to the Holy Trinity, Saint 
Martin, and Saint Mary. That of the Holy Trinity is 
reputed the mother-church, but contains nothing re- 
markable. St. Martin's is a neat ancient structure. 
The principal is St. Mary's, a lofty edifice, which is 
one of the most spacious and ancient in the county ; 
but neither its exterior nor interior merits particular 
description, exctept the chapel in the south aisle, 
which is conjectured to have been the place of inter- 
ment for the Saxon Kings. It contains a neat mu- 
ral monument, to the memory of the Rev. John 
Hutchins.* The church, formerly dedicated to St. 
Peter, it now used as a Town Hall, School House, 
and Gaol. This parish is curious for a house in the 
Market-Plaoe, called "Homo cum cane," the owner 
of which is always tything-man, and obliged to at- 
tend at the Wool Court twice a year, with a one- 
eyed bitch. Wareham contains also two meeting- 
houses, in which several eminent ministers, have of- 
ficiated. 

Near St. Mary's Church stood the Priory, and 
the river, one of the most ancient buildings in the 
county ; and reported to have been built by Adhelm, 
Bishop of Sherborne, who died in 709. It was 
changed by Robert Bellomont, Earl of Leicester, 
into a convent for monks, subject to the Benedictine 
Abbey of Lira, in Normandy. At the dissolution of 
alien houses, it was bestowed on the Carthusian 
Monastery of Shene, in Surrey ; and, after the ge- 
neral dissolution of religious houses, it became the 
property of different persons, till, by various de- 
scents, it came to Lord Rivers, the present pos- 
sessor. 

The Castle of Wareham, of which no remains are 
now visible, formerly stood in a close, still called 
Castle Close. It is famous for the rigid confine- 
ment, and shocking death, of Robert de Belesme, 
Earl of Montgomery, who was imprisoned in this 
fortress by Henry I. Here he starved himself to 
death about the year 1114. The free-school in this 
town was founded by George Pitt, Esq. of Strat- 
field Say : the established salary of the master is 
25/i per annum. The alms-house, an ancient build- 
ing nearly opposite to St. Peter's Church, was ori- 
ginally founded by John Streche, Esq. of Exeter ; 
but it was repaired, and fitted up for the mainte- 
nance of eleven poor persons, by Henry Drax, and 
John Pitt, Esqrs. in 1741. The bridge which 
crosses the Fro me was erected some years ago, at 
the expence of nearly three thousand pounds, in the 
room of an old bridge which appeared to have been 
built in the reign of William II. The salmon fishery 
in this river anciently belonged to Bindon Abbey, 
but is now held by John Calcraft, Esq. and Thomas 
Weld, Esq. of Lulworth Castle. The Quay, which 
is on the south side of the town, is commodious, 



the rectory of Wareliam, where he died iu 1773. He was 



author of the History and Antiquity -s of the County of Dorset, 
two vols. folio. This work was first printed in 1774, and has 
the j since been republUhed by Gough. 

though 



DORSETSHIRE. 



257 



thougfli the trade is now inconsiderable. The chief 
article of exportation is pipe-clay, of which 10,000 
tons are annually shipped off to London, Hull, Li- 
verpool, Glasgow, &c. " Near the road," observes 
Dr. Maton, " between Wareham and Corfe Castle, 
a very fine clay is procured : large quantities of it 
are sent from Wareham to Poolc, and thence into 
Staffordshire, and various parts of the kingdom, for 
the manufacture of earthenware. The colour is al- 
most white, and the pits appear to be about twelve 
or fourteen feet deep." The number of inhabitants 
in Wareham was, according to the Population Re- 
turns of 1811, 1,709 ; that of houses, 383. 

Among the many distinguished persons who have 
been born at Wareham, may be noticed John Chap- 
man,* Jacob Bryantjt Thomas Ashton,| and Ho- 
race Walpole. 

WEYMOUTH, AND MELCOMBE REOIS.] The cele- 
brated bathing-place of Weymouth is situated in the 
Dorchester division, 8 miles south by west frem 
that place, and 127| south-west by west from Lon- 
don. Its site is particularly beautiful, being on the 
British Channel, at the bottom of a semicircular bay, 
which is protected from the winds by bold and pic- 
turesque hills. Weymouth derives its name from 
its position at the mouth of the Wey. This town, 
though it now possesses so much celebrity, was, till 
1789, when their present Majesties first visited it, a 
place of inconsiderable reputation. That it was a 
place known to the Romans is probable, although 
no positive proofs can be given : but that it was 
known to the Saxons, the charter of Etheldred, still 
extant, sufficiently proves. In the Domesday 
Survey it is mentioned under the general name of 
Wai, which is given to several separate parcels of 
land. In the reign of Edward I. the inhabitants 
were ordered to send a certain quota of ships for 
that monarch's expedition to Gascony ; and when 
Edward III. besieged Calais, they furnished him 
with twenty ships and two hundred and sixty-four 
mariners. Margaret of Anjou lauded at this place 
in 1471, when she came to restore her husband to 
his throne. In 1507, Philip of Castile was driven 
into this port by distress of weather, and detained 



* Dr. John Chapman was educated at Eton, and enter? d of 
King's College, Cambridge. Archbishop Potter gave him the 
livings of Mercham and Aldington in Kent ; and the university 
of Oxford conferred on him the degree of I). D. He died in 
1784, aged 80. His principal work was, Kusebius, or a Defence 
of Christianity, two vols. 8vo. 1749. Dr. Chapman was tutor 
to the celebrated Earl of Camden. 

fr Mr. Bryant received his education at Eton, and, in 1744, 
took his degree of M. A. from King's College, Cambridge. 
He led a retired life at Cypenham, in Berkshire, where he died 
in 1804, aged 89. Mr. Bryant engaged in the Rowleian con- 
troversy, and wrote against Priestley on Necessity ; but the 
work which will carry his name to posterity is his " New Sys- 
tem, or an Analysis of Ancient Mythology ; wherein an attempt 
is made to divest Tradition of Fable, and' to reduce Truth to its 
original Purity," three vols. quarto. 

J Dr. Ashton was born in 1716, and educated at Eton, 

whence he was removed to King's College, Cambridge. Li 

VOL. II. NO. 64. 



till an interview had taken plnce between him and 
Henry VII. To oppose the Spanish Armada, six 
ships were contributed by Weymouth. In the early 
part of the Civil Wars, it was garrisoned by the 
King's fonvs, but subsequently by the Parliament- 
ary. In 1649 the Corporation presented a petition 
to Parliament, stating that they had " a fair aud 
large Chapel at Weymouth, with two aisles and 
large galleries, able to contain all the people in both 
towns, the building whereof cost the town 1500/. 
and was destroyed in the Civil Wars ; that the 
bridge is now in decay, and cost 1200/. and the 
harbour filled with rubbish." Their wish in pre- 
senting this petition was to obtain a remuneration 
for their losses, but none seems to have been pro- 
cured. 

The manors of Weymouth and Melcombe Regis 
are so frequently united in different grants, that 
though they anciently possessed distinct privileges, 
it is difficult to separate them. In the reigns of 
Henry I. and II. they both belonged to the monks 
of St. Swithin ; but in the reign of Edward I. Wey- 
mouth belonged to Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Glou- 
cester, and Melcombe to the Abbey of Cerne. Sub- 
sequently they both became Vested in the Crown,, 
but the manor of Melcombe Regis being given to 
Queen Eleanor, it obtained privileges which greatly 
exceeded those of Weymouth, and which caused 
those disputes that subsisted till they were made into 
one borough. 

Neither Weymouth nor Melcombe returned Bur- 
gesses till the reign of Edward II. though the for- 
mer was most probably a borough before that time. 
In various charters of succeeding monarchs, Mel- 
combe is more frequently mentioned, and appears to- 
have attained considerable reputation. In the reign 
of Edward III. it was nearly destroyed by the 
French, but in 1463 it had regained its former con- 
sequence, and was invested with all mariner of 
usages and customs granted to the citizens of Lon- 
don. At the time of Elizabeth, the disputes between- 
the boroughs of Melcombe and Weymouth, respect- 
ing their privileges, had arrived at so great a height, 
that it was deemed expedient to unite them ; and 

1749 he was made rector of Sturminster Maishall, in this coun- 
ty. In 1759 he took the degree of D D. and in 1762 was ap- 
pointed prearher at Lincoln's Inn. He published a volume of 
sermons in 1770, and died in 1775. 

Horace W'alpole, the youngest son of the celebrated Sir 
Robert Walpole, was educated at Eton School, wlu-iice he was 
sent to King's College, Cambridge. In 1738 he was made 
Inspector of Exports and Imports, but the following year tra- 
velled with the poet Gray. In 1741 Mr. Walpole was elected 
into Parliament ; but he never made any other speech than 
one in defence of his father. He retired from Parliament in, 
1761, and passed the remainder of his life at his seat of Straw- 
berry Hill, in Middlesex. In 1791 he succeeded to the title of 
Earl of Orfen), which became extinct at his own death in 
1797. Lord Orford's works are, A Catalogue ot Royal and 
Noble Authors : Historic Doubts concerning Richard: III. 
Anecdotes of Painting, enlarged from VerHie ; the Cattle ot 
Otranto, a romance ; and the Mysterious Mother, a tragedy. 
3 T thej 



258 



DORSETSHIRE. 



thoy- were accordingly incorporated in the 13th year 
of that,reign, and ordered to be called " The united 
Town and Borough of Weymouth and Melcombe 
Regis." Tlie government was vested in a Mayor, 
Recorder, two Bailifts, an indefinite number of Al- 
deniien, and twenty-four Capital Burgesses ; and 
they now possess, as one borough, the privilege of 
the City of London, Jtha.t of sending- four members to 
Parliament. The representatives are chosen by 
freeholders of Weymouth or Melcombe, whether in- 
habitants or otherwise. These are about 200 in 
number. 

Coker, after relating the disputes between the 
towns of Weymouth and ( MelcHi>be, and their- being 
united by the advice of Lord Cecil, thus notices the 
two places : " Weymouth, as now it is, is but little, 
consisting chiefly of one street, .which for a good 
-space lyeth open to the sea ; and on the back of it 
riseth an hiil of such steepness, that they are forced 
to clymbe upp to their chapel by eighty steps of 
stone, from whence you have a faire prospect of the 
town and haven lying under.it. From one side you 
may see Weeke, the mother-church of Weymouth, 
and Mcleombe on the other side, which much sur- 
passeth the other for conveniency of scite ; for this 
standing on a flat, attordeth roomo for building, 
with a market-place, and convenient streets, and 
also yardes for ther wares ; by means whereof most 
of the merchants have chosen this, for their habita- 
tion, which of late years is fairely new built : ther 
anciently was placed the woolstaple ; but King 
Henry VI. took it from them, and gave itt to Pool, 
when he granted to itt the priv Hedges of an haven. 
These townes, now united, gaiue well by traffique 
into Newfoundland, where they have had eighty 
sayle of ships and barkes ; as also a nearer cutt into 
France opposite to them, whence they return la- 
den with wines, cloath, and divers other useful 
commodities, with which they furnish the coun- 
try." The chapel mentioned above was demolished 
during the Civil Wars. It was of some antiquity, 
but no vestiges now remain : the place, however, 
on which it stood, though now employed as n 
bowling-green, still bears the name of Chapel 
Hays. . 

In 1783, Ralph Allen, Esq. having received con- 
siderable benefit from bathing at Weymouth, pro- 
claimed its salubrity to his numerous acquaintances, 
and by his praises brought it into repute. About 
this time the Duke of Gloucester deriving advantage 
from a. residence here, provided temporary accom- 
modations for the Royal Family. In 1739 the first 
visit of their Majesties was made; and they expe- 
rienced such beneficial effects from the air and sea- 
bathing, that they have frequently resided there 
since; a circumstance which has caused so great 
a concourse of company, and so great an influx of 
money, that Weymouth has been rebuilt, enlarged, 
and beautified in an extraordinary manner. 

After having thus related' the history, and ac- 
counted for-the rise of Weyinoutli, tve proceed to give 



some description of the town in its present state. 
The objects most attractive to a stranger are the 
Bay and the Esplanade. The former, in which arc 
placed the bathing machines, is, as was before no- 
ticed, semicircular, extending with a sweep of nearly 
two miles, and surrounded with lofty and pictu- 
resque hills. These protect it from ail winds, and 
render the sea perfectly secure at every season. 
The machines, about thirty in number, are, during 
the summer season, fully employed from six o'clock 
iii the morning, till noon. They arc attended by. 
proper guides, and drawn by a horse into the sea, 
to the requisite depth. In Dr. Crane's Observa- 
tions on Sea-Bathing, the following remarks oc- 
cur : "The sea water of this bay (Weymouth) 
is quite pure, of a beautiful colour, perfectly clear 
and transparent ; the sands under foot are soft, yet 
firm, and entirely feee from obstructions. The de- 
clivity is so gradual as to be almost imperceptible, ;i 
great security to the weak and fearful. The Bay is 
so well, sheltered by nature, that for tranquillity it 
surpasses what I have ever seen ; scarcely any wea- 
ther happening to interrupt bathing ; whereas it not 
unfrequently happens at other places of resort for 
this purpose, that there are long interruptions to 
bathing from the turbulence of the sea, to the great 
disappointment, loss of time, and expence, of those 
to whom such delays may be most distressing and 
injurious." He adds, " that Weymouth and ita 
neighbourhood are entirely free from stagnate wa- 
ters, wet or marshy swamps, to produce noxious 
vapours: the soil is of such- a nature as to afford 
nothing from which any insalutary exhalation can 
proceed ; and the air is proverbially mild, soft, and 
serene." The Esplanade, formerly a depository for 
rubbish, is now one of the most delightful prome- 
nades in England, and adorned by edifices pecu- 
liarly elegant. This noble walk is half a mile in 
length, and in breadth about thirty feet : hence you 
may go by a flight of stoae steps, or by a gradual 
descent, to the sands, which are perfectly firm, and 
at the same time smooth, and level. 

The Assembly Rqoms, with the Hotel, were erect- 
ed by Mr. Sproule, of Bath, in 177-2, at the expence 
of 6000/. which was defrayed by subscriptions of 
100/. each. These buildings are 600 feet in length, 
and 250 in depth. The following account, in which 
some of the other principal buildings are mentioned, 
arc extracted from the recent edition of Hutchins's 
Dorset : " The two ranges of houses, called Glou- 
cester Row, and York Buildings, are very consider- 
able additions to the appearance of the town. 
Every spot of land which fronts the sands has been: 
snatched up with the greatest avidity, and appro- 
priated to the purpose of building lotlging -houses, 
which in the summer season are sure to answer 
every expectation of the proprietors. The Espla- 
nade, which is kept in the mo.st perfect repair, is a 
beautiful raised terrace, of considerable length and 
breadth, with a slope gradually descending to the 
sands : and near the centre of the bathing machines, 
(3 and 



DORSETSHIRE. 



269 



and opposite the royal residence, are flights of steps 
of- Portland stone. Here is likewise a handsome 
battery, mounting' twenty-one small guns, which 
are generally fired on extraordinary occasions. The 
Royal Assembly Room is a lofty, "light, and spaci- 
ous building, every way adapted to the purpose for 
which it was intended, and in which up wards of 100 
couples may dance with ease and pleasure. The 
Theatre has within these few years been fitted up in 
a style of elegance that does equal cmlit to the ma- 
nager and the architect. The boxes are capable of 
containing nearly 300 spectators ; and the manner in 
which they are decorated, is little inferior to the 
London Theatres. On the Quay is a most conve- 
nient hot salt-water bath, which has effected many 
cures. The Bridge has been rebuilt in tbe.Chinese 
style." The houses fronting the bay are esteemed 
the best; almost every house in We.ymouth, how- 
ever, is so situated as to afford delightful views. 
The principal Library in the place, which is nearly 
in the centre of the Esplanade, is tilted up in a 
very elegant style, with a card- room over it. Se- 
veral small forts, mounted with about three can- 
non, are around the town for the defence of that 
and the harbour. 

In October, 1815, the foundation of a new church 
was begun, the old one being in a dilapidated state. 
This contained a. tine altar-piece, representing the 
Last Supper, for which 700/. was refused by Sir 
James Thornhill, the painter. To the east of this 
church formerly stood a Dominican Priory, part of 
which is now used as a malt-house. The founda- 
tion of the new church, mentioned above, was laid 
by the Bishop of Salisbury, in the following splen- 
did manner: On the 4th of October, at 12 o'clock, 
the Clergy, Recorder, Mayor, &c. assembled : and, 
attended by the Churchwardens, carrying corn, 
wine, and oil, in silver goblets, the bund of the 49th 
Regiment, two Masonic Lodges, and the Friendly 
Society, marched to the north-east corner of the in- 
tended new church. Here the foundation stone was 
lowered from its suspended situation, aivd the Bi- 
shop of Salisbury being informed by Mr. Hamilton, 
the architect, that it was placed in due order, deli- 
vered the following prayer : " O Eternal God ! 
mighty in power, and of Majesty incomprehensible, 
whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, much 
less the walls of temples made with hands, and who 
yet has bwj graciously pleased to promise thy 



* This gentleman, tlie celebrated painter of the Cupola of 
St. Paul's, and of the Halls of Greenwich Hospital, and Blen- 
heim, was born in 1675. lie practised originally as a House 
Painter, but afterwards applied to historical subjects, and with 
so much success, that he equalled the best painteis ot his tirr.c. 
Jn 1719, he was appointed Historical Painter to George tin- 
First, and a lew months afterwards received the honour of 
kni&hthoo'll. He was employed in several extensive works, 
but the advantages he derived from them was not always equal 
to his merit, or his labour. The taste of the agi- was not fa- 
vourable to genius ; the artist being paid in proportion to 
the space covered, rather than to the value ol the painting. 



especial presence to thy faithful servants who shall 
assemble in thy name, to offer up- their prayers and 
supplications unto thee. Vouchsafe, Lord, to be 
present with us, who are here fathered together with 
all humility and readiness of heart, to fix the founda- 
tion-stone of a temple to be erected to the honour of 
thy great Name, for reading thy Holy Word ; for 
ceiebrating~thy Holy Sacrament ; for offering to <hy 
glorious Majesty the sacrifices of prayer and thanks- 
giving ; for blessing thy people in thy Name ; and 
for the performance of all other thy ordinances. 
Accept, O Lord, this service at our hands, and bless 
it with success ; grant that it may resemble that 
Rock upon which the founder of our Christian faith 
hath built his Church. May it be the means of pro- 
moting thy true religion and virtue, and of keeping 
us in unity of spirit, and in the bond of peace. May 
it tend to thy glory, and the furtherance of our 
happiness, both spiritual and temporal, through Je- 
sus Christ, our blessed Lord and Saviour." After 
this the 65th Psalm was sung by the choristers, and 
the corn, wine, and oil were poured on the stone. 
Coins of the present reign were then deposited, and 
the following inscription, graven on a marble tablet, 
was fixed : 

" Oct. 4, 1815. This foundation stone was laid at 
the command of her Royal Highness the Princess, 
Charlotte of Wales, by the Right Rev. John, LortJ , . 
Bishop of Salisbury, in the 55th yrar of the reign 
of our Sovereign Lord King George the Third." 

The borough of Weymouth and Melcombe Regis^ 
contain, according to the Population Returns of 
1811, 1021 houses, inhabited by 4738 persons. 

At Melcombe was born Sir James Thornhill, 
lustorical painter to Georgfl I.* 

WIMBORNE MINSTER.] The ancient market-town 
of Wimborne or Wimborne Minster, is in the Shas- 
ton division, 28 miles east-north-east from Dor- 
chester, and 100 south-west by west from London. 
It lies near the confluence of the Allen with th 
Stour, in a delightful vale, of a dry gravelly soil. 
The Romans, alluding to its situation on a river, 
called it Vindogladia or Ventageladia ; and, it is 
conjectured, formed it as a station to Badbury 
Camp. The name of Wimborne is a Snxon appel- 
lation, derived from the Wim, a rivulet which flows 
near the town, and Bourne, signifying a brook or 
running water. It takes the additional term of 



Thus, for the dome of St. Paul's, Sir James was paid 40.5. per 
square yard ; and for the Hall ot Blenheim, ','5*. While 
painting that of St. Paul's, he approached so i. early to the edge 
ot the scaffold, to observe the eli'ect of his work,' that he was 
saved from being dashed to pieces by his servant, who, seeing 
his danger, instantaneously cast a po'i of colour at the figtirrt'j 
which caused him toru-li iorward tor their prex-rvalion ; and was 
thus the means ot preserving him from destruction. He died 
ai his seat at Thornhill, near Weymouth, in 1734, leaving a son 
and a daughter; the latter of whom was married to the cele- 
brated Hogarth. 

Winstar 



260 



DORSETSHIRE. 



Minster from the church, merely to distinguish it 
from other places of the same name. Camden re- 
lates that Wimborne was a place of considerable 
importance in the Saxon times, and that it retained 
much of the Roman grandeur. In the former ac- 
eount he is borne out by old historians, who record 
it as a place in which several contests occurred be- 
tween Edward the Elder and Ethelwald, and that 
at the nunnery here Ethelwald left his wife, wlu-u 
he retired to Normandy. Certainly Wimborne is 
much more remarkable for what it was, than for 
what it is ; as it possesses little to boast either of 
its streets, or of the generality of its buildings. It 
has very little trade, and what little it has, consists 
chiefly in the woollen manufacture, and the knitting 
of hosiery. Local advantages, however, in some 
degree counterbalance these defects ; the town is 
large and populous, the air salubrious, and the soil 
and situation pleasant ; it is well watered, and the 
views around are extensive and picturesque. The 
object for which Wimborne was anciently celebrat- 
ed, and to which it owes its present reputation, is 
the Nunnery. This was among the earliest founda- 
tions of the kind in the kingdom ; and was erected, 
ficcording to Leland, by St. Cuthburga, daughter of 
Kenred, and sister to Ina, King of the West Saxons, 
tvho was divorced from her husband Egfrid, that 
he might dedicate herself to religion. This event, 
and the building of the monastery, took place about 
723. In the reign of Edward the Confessor, or 
perhaps anterior, this Nunnery, having been de- 
stroyed by the Danes, was dissolved, and the house 
converted into a college of secular canons, consist- 
ing of a dean, four prebendaries, three vicars, four 
deacons, &c. 

This college, with all the chantries and chapels, 
continued till 1547, when it was valued at 131/. 14?. 
and its revenues vested in the Crown. Most of the 
lands belonging to it were granted to Edward Duke 
of Somerset, and afterwards to Edward Lord Clin- 
ton. Part of the remaining revenues, in the pos- 
session of the Crown, were afterwards vested by 
Elizabeth, in the corporation of the college, towards 
the foundation of the Grammar- School; reserving 
to herself a certain annual rent, which was, how- 
ever, released by her successor. In the succeeding 
reign, the corporation surrendered their charter to 
the King, who, in consideration of 1000/. re-granted 
all the tythes, possessions, lands, &c. belonging to 
the church and school, into the hands of twelve 
governors. These, besides other conditions, were 
to find for the service of the collegiate church, three 
priests or ministers, three clerks, four choristers, 
two singing-men, and an organist. This establish- 
ment is still kept up, and the present revenues 
amount to upwards of 300/. 

The Church, on account of its age, its venerable 



* Translation. In this place rests the body of Ethclrcd, 



appearance, and the peculiarities of its style and 
architecture, deserves particular notice. Gilpin 
supposes it to be one of the earliest species of Saxon 
architecture, but Dr. Stukeloy was of opinion, that 
the eastern tower, and most part of the church, waff 
built after the Conquest. Many parts are apparent- 
ly Saxon, particularly the semicircular arches on 
the eastern tower, and the. false windows in the south 
transept. This structure is in the form of a cross, 
with two towers ; one in the centre, and the other 
at the west end. The former had anciently a spire, 
said to have been higher than that of Salisbury. The 
building is divided in the manner of a cathedral, and 
composed of a chancel, nave, and choir, and side 
aisles, a transept, or cross aisle, and three porches. 
Its length, from east to west, is 180 feet. The 
ascent to the chancel is by a flight of twelve steps, 
which give it a very noble appearance. The chan- 
cel and choir are each supported by eight pillars, 
over which are five windows on the north, and three 
on the south side, much smaller than those of the 
nave. In the choir are sixteen stalls, which are 
covered with canopies of carved oak. On the south 
side of the altar are four large handsome niches, in 
one of which is a bason for holy-water, At the west 
end is a fine organ. The length of the choir and 
chancel is upwards of twenty-one feet. The nave 
is supported on each side by six massy irregular 
pillars, above which are pointed arches, with zigzag 
mouldings. 

This Church was the burial-place of numerous 
royal and noble persons who were commemorated 
by suitable monuments. Of these, though many 
have been destroyed by time, and more by violence, 
there are considerable remains. The tomb which 
attracts most attention is that of Ethelred, situated 
on the north side of the altar. It consists of a brass 
plate, on which appears an effigy, three quarters 
in length, in royal robes, with a crown on his head, 
and a sceptre in his hand. Beneath is the following 
inscription : 

IN HOC LOCO QUIESCIT CORPUS 

S. ETHELREDI REGIS WEST SAXONUM 

MARTY1US QUI ANNO DOMINI DCCCLXXIt. 

XXIII. 

APRILIS PER MANUS DANOKVM PAGAN- 
ORVM OCCVBVIT.* 

Mr. Gilpin remarks, that the effigy of Ethelred, 
though but of miserable workmanship, is better than 
the times of Alfred could produce, and must, no 
doubt, have been frequently repaired, if of that date. 
Leland, however, completely settles this point, for 
he expressly mentions that King Ethelred' s " tumbe 
was lately repaired, and a marble stone there layid 
with an image of a King in a plate of brasse." Mr. 
Gough also states, that Roman capitals were not 



the Martyr, King of the West Saxons, who fell by the hands of 
the Pagan Danes, on the 23d of April, A. D. 872. 

adopted 



DORSETSHIRE. 



261 



adopted till near the Reformation. This monu- 
ment, therefore, it may be concluded, is not very 
ancient. 

On the south side of the choir lie the Duke and 
Duchess of Somerset, the ancestors of Henry the 
Seventh. The tomb is of grey marble, with five 
quatrefoils parted by niches. The effigies are of 
alabaster. That of the Duke is dressed in very rich 
armour, a pointed helmet, encircled by a coronet, a 
collar of S S round his neck, a dagger on his right 
side, and a sword at his left : a garter is on his 
knee : his head is supported by two angels, and his 
feet by a lion : his left hand holds his gauntlet on 
his breast ; his right clasps that of his Duchess. 
Her effigy is dressed in a straight garment, with a 
veil and collar of S S, her robes of state, and a co- 
ronot on her head, which is supported by two an- 
gels, and her feet by an antelope : in her left hand 
is a string of beads. The inscription is torn off. 

An altar-tomb of grey marble, nearly similar, but 
without any figure, was erected, on the opposite 
side, to the memory of Gertrude, Marchioness of 
Exeter, mother of the unfortunate Edward Courte- 
nay, the last Earl of Devonshire. On the fragment 
of the brass plate which still remains, is this imper- 
fect inscription : 

donfuj; quonuam H?enriei (lourttnej 

(Ejron, ct mater CcUurui 
Courtmtg nupjr So. . . . 

This tomb was opened some years since, when 
the body was found wrapped up in cere-cloth ; but, 
through an attempt of some persons present to place 
it erect, it tumbled to pieces. 

The south aisle is distinguished for a variety of 
handsome monuments. One, to the memory of Sir 
Edmund Uvedale, dated 1606, is of excellent work- 
manship, considering the period. Not far from this 
is a wooden coffin, painted with a variety of bear- 
ings, clamped with iron, and bearing the date of 
1703. It contains the remains of an eccentric old 
gentleman, of the name of Ettricke, and was placed 
here, because, in his life-time, being offended with 
the inhabitants of Wimborni 1 , he solemnly protested 
that he would never be " buried" either in their 
church or church- yard. 

In the north aisle, towards the end, is the figure 
of a Knight, armed in mail, and cross-legged. 
Near this figure stands the tomb of a Mr. Collet, a 
great benefactor to the poor. Several ancient tomb- 
stones have been removed from the church, and re- 
main in places near it. " Descending a flight of 
eight steps from the north aisle, you come to a cha- 
pel directly under the area of the chancel, commonly 
called the Dungeon. It is neatly arched over head, 
and supported in the middle by four strong regular 
pillars, and twelve small circular ones on the sides, 
with stone seats round the walls, and a piscina. 
This chapel was formerly adorned with an organ, 
and with the images of the Virgin Mary, and other 

VOL. II. NO. 04. 



Saints, finely painted and gilt ; as also a handsome 
pavement of Mosaic work, now quite broken to 
pieces." The crypt beneath the choir formerly used 
as a chantry, hns pointed arches, with bold circular 
groins. 

Wimborne Church formerly contained no fewer 
than ten altars for the celebration of divine service, 
all of which were composed of the most costly ma- 
terials, and the greater part of them had pictures or 
silver images of their patron Saints. The high air 
tar was, however, more particularly splendid and 
costly, as may be conjectured from the following 
account of its furniture : 

One great cross of silver gilt ; two other crosses, 
with the images, ot silver ; a foot, and a staff, of 
copper gilt ; a cross of silver, plated, and the image 
of copper, gilt ; four large candlesticks ; two cen- 
sors ; a ship, or frankincense boat ; a verger's rod, 
six cruets, three paxes, an oil vat, two chalices, two 
basons, twenty-four corporasses, and other vessels, 
of solid silver, or silver gilt. It also had an image 
of St. Cuthburga, the patroness and foundress, with 
a ring of gold, and two little crosses of gold, with a 
book and staff in her hand. The head of the image 
of silver, with a crown of silver gilt. A cross, in a 
case plated with gold ; and two hearts of gold pen- 
dant, or hanging in chains. Two tabernacles of our 
Lady ; one of gold, with pearls on it ; the other of 
silver gilt ; a crucifix, and two Agni Dei, of gold ; 
with a great variety of strings of beads, and other 
things of value. Its relics were equal to its riches, 
of which the most sacred were, a piece of the real 
cross ; part of our Lord's robe, and some of th 
hairs of his beard, together with a piece of his 
manger, and one of the thorns from his crown. Se- 
veral relics of St. Thomas a Becket, with some of 
his blood ; and part of the " thigh" of the blessed 
Virgin Agatha. Some bells of a very great age, 
remarkable for clearness and strength of tone, are iu 
the bell-tower of this church. 

With the exception of its church, Wimborne Min- 
ster has nothing of which it can boast, as the other 
public buildings are few, and ordinary. It has, 
however, the Grammar School, already mentioned : 
two Meeting Houses ; and a large commodious 
Poor House. The town is governed by two Bailiflw. 
It contains, according to the Returns of 1811, 701 
houses ; and 3158 inhabitants. The principal ma- 
nufactory is one for worsted stockings, which era- 
ploys upwards of 1000 women and children. 

There are two hospitals, or alms-houses, in Wim- 
borne Minster, one standing at the east end of, and 
the other about a quarter of a mile from, the town. 
The former was founded by Gertrude, Marchioness 
of Exeter, in 15-37, and endowed with the manor 
and lordship of Caiiford ; but, though ample at first, 
it is very inconsiderable now, only six persons being 
received into the foundation, who have each the 
small sum of fifty-two shillings annually. The 
other, called St. Margaret's Hospital, was founded 
for the relief of persons afflicted with the leprosy. 
3u It 



20* 



DORSETSHIRE, 



It is said to have been erected so early as the reign 
of Kin;? John. It is not now applied to the pur- 
pose for which it was originally built, but simply as 
an alms-house for poor aged persons. In 1785 its 
revenue was 35/. Us. 

Wimborne Minster is said to have had the honour 
of being the birth-place of the celebrated poet 
Prior.* Here also, some years ago, resided a man 
who had the uncommon property of chewing 1 his 
food twice over, in the manner of u sheep or ot.f 

WIMBORNK, ST. GILES.] The little parish of 
Wimbome St. Giles, or Wimborne Malmairs, is 

* Matthew Prior concealed his origin and the place of his 
birth with so much care, that it is uncertain where he was ac- 
tually born. The period appears to have been about 1664. 
He was educated at Westminster School, and patronised by 
the Earl of Dorset, who sent him to St. John's College, Cam- 
bridge, of which he was chosen fellow. In 1687 he wrote, 
in conjunction with Mr. Charles Montague, the Country 
Mouse and City Mouse, by way of burlesquing a piece of 
Dryden's. In 1090 he was appointed English secretary in the 
congress at the Hague. In 1696 he was Secretary at the treaty 
of Ryswick, anil the following year went to Ireland, as princi- 
pal Secretary of State. Soon after this he was appointed Se- 
cretary to the embassy in France, and he had not long been 
there, when going to see the curiosities at Versailles, (lie office* 
in attendance shewed him Le Brim's fine paintings of the vic- 
tories of Louis XIV. and asktd him if King William's actious 
were also to be seen in his palace : " No, Sit," answered Prior, 
" the monuments of my master's actions are to be seen every 
where but in his own house." In 1700 he was made a Com- 
missioner of the Board of Trade, and elected into Parliament 
For East Grinstead. He joined with Swift and others in writ- 
ing the Examiner, in 1710, and in the following year was ap- 
pointed Minister Plenipotentiary to the court of Francel In 
1715 he was arrested by order of the House of Commons ; but 
in 1717 he recovered liis liberty without being brought to trial. 
He died in 1721, at Wimple, 'the seat of the Earl of Oxford. 
Prior wrote a number of pieces, smooth, elegant, and easy. 
They have-not, however, escaped the censure of Dr. Johnson. 

f Richard Gill was one of the singing men belonging to the 
church, and died in 1767, about the age of 67. The following 
particulars of him are extracted from Hutchins: 

" Being examined in 1765, when he was sixty-four years 
old, he said, ' he seldom made any breakfast in his latter days. 
He generally dined about twelve or one o'clock, ate pretty- 
heartily, and quickly, without much chewing or mastication. 
He never drank with his dinner, but some time afterwards, 
about a pint of such malt liquor as he could procure. He had 
an aversion to all kinds of spirituous liquors ; nor did he ever 
taste them in any shape, except a little punch, and was never 
fond of that. lie ate but little hotter ; pease, pancakes, and 
fresh water fish, he could not touch, except a little bit of broiled 
eel ; they all returning greasy into his throat. He ate all gar- 
den-stuff, except carrots. lie usually began his second chew- 
ing about a quarter or half an hour, sometimes later, after din- 
ner, when every morsel came up successively sweeter and 
sweeter to the taste. Sometimes a morsel would prove offen- 
sive and crude: in which case he spit it out. The chewing 
continued about an hour or more ; and sometimes would leave 
him a little while, in which case he would be sick at stomach, 
troubled with the heart-burn, loss of appetite, foul breath, &c. 
Smoking tobacco would sometimes stop his chewing, but was 
aot attended with any ill consequence. About four months be- 
fore he died, this faculty of chewing entirely forsook him, and 
the poor man remained in great agonies till the time of his 
death. He was some years ago examined, as to his case, by 
*Dr. Archer, of Dorchester, and three other persons, to whom 
lie produced a morsel of beef and cabbage, which stuck in his 
tnouth while lie was talking to them about it," 



situated on the banks of the Allen, in the Shaaton 
division, 2f milrs south-west by west from Cran- 
borne. Here is the family seat of the Earls of 
Shaftesbury, whose family has, for many ages, been 
in possession of the manor. J The form of the 
mansion-house, observes Hutchins, " approaches to 
n parallelogram, consisting of three parts, each of 
which are contracted by two inbenchings. The 
eastern part is the narrowest and most ancient, and 
seems to have been the ancient seat of the Ashleys ; 
the western part is broader than any of the rest, and 
was built in the year 1361 ; the whole is embattled. 

J Tlie manor was anciently in the I'lessy family, from 
which it descended to a Cornish family of the name of Hame- 
lyn. In the 1 7th of Edward IV. Egidi.i Tame, widow, sole 
daughter of Sir John Harnelyn, Knt. held the manor of ths 
honor of Gloucester ; her son Edmund Ashley being her heir. 
From Hutchins, we learn, that Egidia Ilaiiielyn (relict of Sir 
Thomas Fane, Knt.) married Robert Ashley, and being a great 
heiress, brought considerable property into the family, in the 
reign of Henry the fourth; and as Edmund, the ion and heir 
of this marriage, was the lineal descendant of both the Plessys 
and Malmairs, (the ancient owners of this estate,) this family 
may be said to have lived there for ages before. " The family 
of Ashley came originally from Wiltshire, and were lords of 
manor bearing their name. Robert, the t'atlwr of the above 
mentioned Edmund, and the first of the family seated here, 
was descended," says Cuker, " by a younger branch, from a 
noble and ancient family." Anthony Ashley wa< knighted at 
the taking of Cadiz in 1597, where he served as Secretary at 
War. Being created a Baroliet by James the First, on the 
third of June, 1622, he was appointed Secre<ary to the Privy 
Council, and died in 1628. This gentleman first introduced 
cabbages from Holland into England. His heiress Anne, 
having married John Cooper, Esq. of Rockbourne, in Hants, 
that gentleman was created a Baronet, and was afterwards 
knighted by King James. His son, Sir Anthony Ashley- 
Cooper, Bart, one of the greatest statesmen in this kingdom, 
was born here, on the 2nd of July, 1621, and aflerwards edu- 
cated at Exeter College, Oxford'. In 1640, he was returned 
to Parliament for Tewkesbury. In the Civil Wars, he at first 
supported Royalty, hut, from chagrin and disappointment, he 
went over to the Parliament, and accepted a commission in it* 
service. However, he opposed Cromwell, and contributed 
greatly to the restoration of Charles 1 1. SMOII after that event, 
he was sworn of the Privy Council, created Lord Ashley, 
appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer, and one of the Com- 
missioners of the Treasury. IB 1672, he was created Earl of 
Shaftesbury, and made Lord Chancellor. This office, which 
he filled with exemplary credit, he resigned in llie year follow- 
ing. He opposed the Tax Bill, brought into the House of 
Lords by the Earl of Dauby, on which account the Parliament 
was prorogued. Next sessions he contended that (lie Parlia- 
ment ought to be considered as dissolved, for which he was 
sent to the Tower, where he remained 13 months. On the 
change of ministry, in 1679, he was made President of the 
Council, but in a short time he resigned. In 1681, he wag 
tried for high treason, and acquitted. He then wont to Hol- 
land, where he died in 1C83. He was a Protestant, and Locke 
considered him to be a true patriot ; but, in general, his prK 
vate life is not thought to havr been answerable to his great 
talents: an opinion which is in some measure sanclioneil by 
the remark of Charles 11. who once said to him, " i believe, 
Shaftesbury, thou are the wickedest fellow in my dominions:" 
to which his Lordslrp gravely replied" May "it please your 
Majesty, of a subject, I believe f am !" Anthony, the third 
Earl of Shaftesbury, grandson of the above, w;i< the author of 
the celebrated " Characteristics." . The grandson of the latter 
is the present owner of the estate. 

The 



DORSETSHIRE. 



SG3 



The apartments below stairs arc esteemed the best 
iu England. Adjoining 1 to it is a park two miles 
round : the garden is pleasant and spacious ; and 
is adorned with several pieces of water, pleasure 
houses, statues, and other ornaments : the river 
Allen runs through it. Here is one of the finest 
grottos in England ; it consists of two parts ; the 
innermost and largest is furnished with a -vast va- 
riety of curious shells, disposed in the most beauti- 
ful manner ; the outer, or ante-grotto, with ores 
mid minerals of all kinds, collected from various 
parts of the world. It was begun in the year 1751 : 
the arrangement took up two years, and, with the 
expettce of collecting the shells, ores, &c. cost 
10.000/." 

Wimborne St. Giles was the birth-place of the 
Rev. Maurice Wheler.* 

Wimborne AH Saints, or Upwimborne Caren- 
tham, is a tythingin Crahborne hundred, from which 
place it is distant about half a mile. 

WINFOBD EAGLE.] Winford Eagle, deriving the 
latter part of its name from its having been formerly 
liolden of the Honor de Aquiln, or the Eagle, is a 
ohapi-lry in the parish of Toller Fratuui, ?- miles 
north-west by west from Dorchester. The manor 
lias long been in the Sydenham family, of which the 
celebrated Sydenham, who was bom here, was a 
member.t Many years ago, on Fern Down, in 
this neighbourhood, a barrow was opened : large 
flints first presented themselves ; but, in pursuing 
their work, the labourers came to a place like an 
oven, curiously clayed round, with an urn, full of 
human bones, and black ashes, in the centre. Fur- 
ther on, sixteen more urns were found, with similar 
contents. 

WINTERBOURNE ABBAS.] Winterboume Abbas, 
or Abbas Winterbourne, is in the Bridport division, 
4$ miles west from Dorchester. About a mile fur- 
ther to the west, is a small circle of nine erect 
tones ; the diameter of which is 28 feet. The 
izes of the stones are unequal ; the largest being 
seven feet high, and three broad ; the smallest 
scarcely one foot, .either in height or breadth : the 
general thickness is about three feet. "In the vi- 
cinity are several other erect stones ; some of which, 
it is supposed, formed part of another circle ; and 
on the surrounding Downs are numerous barrows. 
The adjacent downs are much fuller of Celtic bar- 
rows than Salisbury Plain ; and lead to an endless 
stock of Celtic and Roman inquiries. 



' This gentleman published the tirst Oxford Almanack, in 
1673, in octa'o, of which nearly 30,000 copies werr sold. 
This success so alarmed the society of booksellers for iheir 
profits in other animal publications, that they bought ixtf thr 
copy-right, since winch only the sheet Oxford Almanack, with 
a large copper-plate, has 'been published at the Clarendon 
Press. 

[ Thomas Sydcnham, born in the year 1624, became a 
Commoner of Magdalen Hall, in 1042, 'but left Oxford when 
it was made a garrison, and retired, to London. Dr. Cox, ob- 
terviii hi-, eminent abilities, encouraged him to study |>hvsic ; 
on \\hich, returning to Magdalen Hall, lie was at the Pembro- 



WlNTERBOURNHHERRIN*TON.] 

by west from Dorchester, stands Winterbourne 
Hcr'ringston, the ancient seat of the Williams family. 
The manor belonged to the Syzrarrfs, a Saxon fa- 
mily, who had lands in Dorsetshire before the Con- 
quest. It was conveyed in marriage to the Harang, 
or Herring family, from whom it came to that of 
Williams early in the reign of Henry the Eighth. 
The Manor House is a large quadrangular building, 
the south front of which tradition states to hav 
been erected by the Sywards about the year 1300 : 
the north front was repaired, or built, by Sir John 
Williams, who was twice Sheriff of Dorsetshire in 
the reign of Elizabeth, and one of its representatives 
in Parliament in the time of James the First. In a 
large Hall, on the south side of the quadrangle, are 
whole-length paintings of Charles the Second, King 
William and Queen Mary, and the gallant Duke 
Schomberg, by Sir Godfrey Kneller ; besides many 
family portraits. In the Dining Parlour, at the 
west end of the Hall, is also an excellent likeness, 
i by Sir Joshua Reynolds, of the late Sir Edward 
\Vilmot, Bart. Physician to the King, whose good- 
ness of heart, and amenity of disposition, distin- 
I guished him through a life extended to the length 
! of ninety-four years. Sir Edward was descended 
j from the Wilmots of Derbyshire ; but died here iu 
the year 1786. From the Hall a handsome flight 
of "stone steps leads to the Drawing Room, a spa- 
; cious and well-proportioned apartment, with a 
| coved ceiling, divided into compartments, and or- 
namented with a variety of figures in stucco-work. 
On the divisions of the large window, in the upper 
part, and the space beneath it, is represented the 
History of the Bible, carved in oak, and painted ; 
apparently, from the dresses of some of the female 
' figures, of the age of Queen Elizabeth. 

WOI.VETON HOUSE.] At Charminster, 2^ miles 
' N.W.byN. from Dorchester, stands Wolveton House, 
the ancient and magnificent seat of the Trenchard fa- 
mily. The mansion was erected by John, father of Sir 
ThomasTrenchard, in thereigiiof Henry VI I. "The 
Hall," observes Ilittcliins, " is large, and, as are 
all the principal rooms, is adorned with wainscot 
and fret work. On the wainscot are carved the 
Kings of England, which are said to resemble their 
figures in the first edition of Rastal's History of 
England. Mr. Aubrey, iu his Miscellanies, says, 
that on November the 3rd, 1640, the day the Long 
; Parliament began to sit, the sceptre fell from the fi- 

r-B. '...--- . ' 

chian creat'on, made M. J5. in 1648, though he had obtained 

: no previous degree; and Fellow of Ail Souls College, by the 
Parliament visitors, in place of an ejected Royalist. He af- 

' terwards settled in Westminster, and was presented with the 
degree of M.D. at Cambridge. From the year K56X) to 1670, 
he was the most eminent physician in London. He was par- 

i ticularly celebrated for his cool regimen in the small -pox, for 
his method of giving the bark in agues, and for his admini>tra- 

', tion of laudanum. The high opinion which he entertained of 

j the latter medicine, obtained him the name of QpiofhUvS. 

j Dr. Sydenham died at his house in Pall Mall, on the i.'0th of 

December, 1089. 

* gui-e 



264 



DORSETSHIRE. 



gnre of King Charles I. while the family and a large 
company were at dinner in the parlour. On the 
skreen are the arms and qnarterings of Treuchard, 
near it to the north was a small domestic chapel. 
The dining room, ascended to from the hall by a 
large stone staircase, is a spacious room adorned 
with a noble bow window." The windows, which 
present nearly a complete pedigree of the Trenchant 
i'smily, are objcJHs of great curiosity. It was here 
that the fortunes of the Russel family commenced ; 
Sir Thomas Trenehard having sent for his relation, 
John Russel, Esf r to attend and entertain the Arch- 
Duke of Austria, King of Castile, who had landed 
at Weymouth in a storm ; and who afterwards re- 
commended Mr. Russel to the favor of Henry the 
Seventh. 

WOODLANDS.] Woodlands, the ancient seat of 
the eccentric Mr. Hastings, mentioned in our ac- 
count oi'Horton, in which parish it stands, has been 
entirely rebuilt, with the exception of two wings, 
which still remain. In one of them is the old Cha- 
pel, with the original pulpit and seats. In the other 
is a very large kitchen, and a capacious cellar 
under it, denoting the good cheer which once pre- 
vailed. In the servants' hall are several coats of 
arms. In the year 1778 some labourers dug up, 
near this spot, the fragments of a large earthen ves- 
sel, which contained several brass penates, rings, 
fibulas, &e. but quarrelling among themselves, the 
discovery came to the ears of the Steward, by whom 
the whole was secured. 

WYKE REGIS.] In the churchyard of Wyke Re- 
gis, 2| miles west-south-west from Weymouth, a 
monument has recently been erected, to record the 
melancholy iitte which befel the passengers and 
crew of the Alexander, East Indianmn, in the spring 
of the year 1815. The inscription on this monu- 
ment is as follows : 

To Record 

Tlie melancholy Wreck of 
THE SHIP ALEXANDER, 
This monument is erected, by C. Forbes, Esq. M. P. 
London, and tile Owners of the sai'l ship, which, on 
her vojEcje from Bombay to London, was totally lost 
in tlie" West Hay, on the night of the 26fh March, 
1815; when all the crew and passengers, consisting of 
more than 140 souls, unhappily perished, will) the 
exception of five Lascars. 

Son., ARRICUI.TURB, &c.] By far -the greater 
proportion of the land, in this county, is appropri- 
ated to pasture : the arable is estimated at one third, 
and the waste at about a ninth : the principal sheep 
country is round Dorchester. Great numbers, of 
sheep and oxen are fed in the Vale of Black more, 
which is distinguished for its rich pasture. It ex- 
tends about nineteen miles, from north to south, and 
about fourteen from east to west, and is computed 
to contain upwards of 170,000 acres. Here are 
alsd soinje orchards, which produce excellent cyder. 
Many of the other vales on the south-western side 
are also highly luxuriant. The greatest extent of 



waste land is in the south-eastern part of the coun- 
ty, from below Bere Regis southwards towards 
Lul worth and the sea, extending beyond Corfe Cas- 
tle to the Hampshire border : the greatest part of 
this is a dreary waste, serving only in the summer 
to support a few ordinary sheep and cattle, and to 
supply the neighbouring villages with heath for 
firing. Of late years, however, some few spots 
have been cultivated, and appear like gardens in a 
desart. 

The soils vary in different parts. About Bridport 
the lower lands are mostly deep rich loams : on the 
higher hills, throughout the western district, the soil 
is a sandy loam, intermixed with a. base kind of 
flint, and well adapted to the growth of beech. To 
the north of Shwborne, which affords some of the 
best arable land in the county, it is a stone brack, 
which is the case in the Isle of Portland, and most 
parts of the Isle of Purbeck. In the open parts of 
the country the tillage is much upon a chalk bottom, 
and all the way towards Abbotsbury and Wey- 
mouth' is of an inferior quality. In the centre of 
the county the soil is good, and the land is well 
managed. The open and uninclosed parts are in 
general poor land, scarcely admitting of any im- 
provement by inclosing, as the scarcity of wood, 
and in some places of stone, would make it very 
expensive. Draining, except in the water mea- 
dows, is very little practised ; though in much of 
the tillage land, which is gravelly and springy, it 
might be adopted with success. In some spots, 
appropriated to the growth of underwood, such as 
Duncliff, in the vale of Blackmore, Honeycombs 
Wood, in the vale of Sherborne, &c. the soil is 
chiefly cold and wet. The Downs are mostly of a 
light chalky soil, with a turf remarkably fine. The 
Tale of Blackmore is surrounded with hills of a 
deep rich soil. The hay produced here is excellent, 
and the beasts thrive well on it in the winter with- 
out any other food. The meadow lands, through 
which run the Piddle and the Frome, by which 
they are watered, are enriched with great quantities, 
of lime-stone and pipe-clay. The general practice 
and management of tillage are less attended to here 
than any other part of agriculture ; and though the 
Norfolk husbandry might be very successful, the 
idea appears to prevail, of putting all crops into the, 
ground with as few ploughings as possible. " The 
sowing of wheat is often effected with one plough- 
ing ; and symmetry and neatness are so much dis- 
regarded, that in small pieces of ground, the 
ploughman will vary three or four yards from a 
straight line, and persevere in his vagrant direction 
as a matter of no import. The plough used is call- 
ed a Sit//, and is long, large, and heavy : it lias one 
very small wheel on the side of the beam, and is 
constantly worked by four horses, two a-breast, or 
six oxen in yokes." In most of the towns round 
Dorchester, land lets for a high price. Until the 
recent fall of rents, occasioned by the almost unpa- 
rallelled depression of agriculture, pasture laud let 

from 



DORSETSHIRE. 



from forty to fifty shillings per acre ; and arable, at 
about thirty shillings. Garden ground was also let 
ut to manufacturers and artificers at four pounds 
per acre. 

WATER MEADOWS.] The flooding of meadow 
land, by which an early vegetation is produced, is 
of such consequeHce, that without it, the present 
system of managing sheep would almost be anni- 
hilated ; and the proportion of water meadows is no 
where so great, or better managed. The meadows 
are laid up about Christmas, after all the grass bus 
been fed down by cattle. The water is then caught 
from the river, and by a certain process thrown 
over the meadows, till the surface is covered, and 
this being repeated! several weeks, by the middle of 
March, there is a sufficient supply of the best food 
for ewes and lambs. 

MANURE.] In this county lime is used in great 
quantities as a manure, and in general sells for 
about fourpence-halfpenny per bushel. Sea weed, 
or kdp, and putrid fish, are also used, particularly 
herrings. 

1'nojMJCE.] Corn, cattle, butter, sheep, wool, 
timber, flax, and hemp, constitute the chief produce 
of this county. Barley is very extensively grown, 
and a large portion of malt is made for internal con- 
sumption : ia some towns 10,000 or 12,000 bushels 
are made anuually. The strong beer is remarkably 
fine: the ale is also particularly celebrated, and in 
some respects unequalled. The growth of flax and 
hemp, especially the former, is of great importance, 
< specially about Biidport, the village of Bradpole, 
and towards Beanainster. The best seed is import- 
ed from Riga. The land is frequently lot to a mid- 
dle man, called a flax -jobber, who pays the farmer 
a net sum of four or five pounds per acre, manages 
the crop, iijids the seed and labour, and expects no- 
thing from the farmer, but ploughing, and the dis- 
charge of the parochial taxes. " In managing the 
Hax," observes Claridge, in bis -General View of 
the Agriculture of Dorsetshire, " the stalk is never 
thrown into wate*, as is the common practice of 
Lincolnshire, and other places, but attains its pro- 
per state more gradually by what is called dew ripen- 
ing, which is acquired by exposing it to the air for 
a long time together. From eight to twelve bushels 
of seed per acre is esteemed a good crop. Dry 
seasons suit it best ; and the fanners think, if it 
is not sown more than once in six years, it docs not 
exhaust nor injure the land. This crop is extreme- 
ly; valuable; and besides the seed, it produces from 
lifty to sixty dozen pounds weight per acre of spin- 
ning flax, worth from four shillings and sixpence to 
seven shillings per dozen. Its value is generally 
from eight to ten pounds MI acre, including the 
seed ; but it is a precarious crop, and much depen- 
dent on the seasons. The inferior seed, not good 
enough to be sown, is very valuable from its oily 
quality, which is extracted from it by its being first 
bruised in a mill, ad then put into hair-cloths, and 
pressed by a heavy weight, when, it produces the 

vot. 11. NO. 64. 



oil used by painters. Two gallons may be extract- 
ed from a bushel of seed, which weighs about forty- 
eight pounds. This operation is repeated by heat- 
ing, and pressing again, till all the oil is effectually 
extracted ; and the hull or husk produces the oil- 
cake, which is much esteemed for feeding cattle : 
the oil-cake cold drawn is the first pressed from the 
seed without heat, and is the most valuable." Hemp- 
seed requires a greater depth of soil, should bo 
sown upon a clean fallow, manured very copiously ; 
it is worth from four to five shillings per bushel : 
it is usually sown broad-cast, iu May, at the rate of 
two bushels per acre, and is ripe in September. 
It produces about twelve bushels of seed per acre, 
on an average, worth from S.t. Qd. to 4s. per bushel. 
The hemp stalk is of two kinds though grown to- 
gether (male and female) ; those without seeds in 
the head are the male, aud are ripe in July, about 
nine weeks from the sowing, and are then drawn 
out by the band ; the female stalks are seldom ripe 
till the middle of September, when they are also 
drawn out, and bound in bundles, and set up to 
dry. About ten days afterwards, these bundles are 
united, the head held upon a hurdle by one person, 
whilst another beats the seed out with a threshing 
flail ; it is then laid upon stubble, or pasture ground, 
to be gradually dew ripened, aud to be iu a state fit 
for the use of the manufacturer. The general pro- 
duce of hemp per acre is about thirty-six stone, 
worth from six to seven pounds. The seed is never 
manufactured in this county, but is sold into Somer- 
setshire, or goes, to the London markets. A pecu- 
liar measure is here used for both hemp and flax ; 
eight gallons net make a bushel of flax, and five 
pecks make a bushel of hemp, or a bushel aud a 
quarter to nine gallons measure. 

CATTLE.] The Dorsetshire cattle, particularly 
the sheep, have long been celebrated. The county 
is supposed to contain from 800,000 to 900,000 
sheep, of which upwards of 150,000 are sold an- 
nually, and seat out of tUe county. They are high- 
ly esteemed for the finenes.s., shortness, and close 
texture of their wool, which is much used iu the 
manufacture of broad cloth. The produce of this 
wool annually, is estimated at 90,000 weighs, or 
weights, of thirty-one pounds each. Many of the 
ewes are bought by the farmers within forty miles 
of London, for the sake of their lambs, which coiyo 
earlier than most others, aud are fattened for the 
London markets. There a4 - e no ram fairs, or farm- 
ers who let out rams for hire for the season, in 
this county ; but they arc chiefly bred from the farm- 
er's own stock ; are put with the ewes at about a 
year aiul a half old, and even the better sort of them 
are not of a higher value than three or four guineas 
each. The wether slu-ep are folded all the year 
round, running over the ewe leas or downs by day, 
and penned on the tillage by night : they are penned 
late in the evening, and let out trom the fold before 
sun-rise iu the winter, and not later than six o'clock 
in the summer. The ewes are folded only in the 



3 x 



summer. 



2(56 



DORSETSHIRE. 



summer, when they have no lambs. The mode of 
penning sheep, indeed, varies in some parts of the 
county, as well as the size of the hurdle; but in 
general the size of the hurdle is about four feet six 
inches long, and three feet six inches high, made of 
hazle, with ten upright sticks, and fifteen dozen of 
them, with an equal number of stakes and withs, to 
confine them together, will inclose a statute acre of 
ground, which will contain twelve or thirteen hun- 
dred sheep. The hurdles are shifted every morn- 
ing ; consequently the same number of sheep will 
manure an acre of land daily. One penning is 
never estimated at less than lialf-n-guiuca, or 
twelve shillings per acre, and two at a guinea. 
The hurdles are worth 7?. 6<l. per do/en, includ- 
ing stakes. In addition to the peculiar Dor- 
setshire breed, there is a very small kind, in the 
Isles of Portland and Purbeck, and the neighbour- 
ing coast, inferior in size to the Welsh sheep. The 
flesh of these is sweet and well flavoured ; and they 
are not subject to the rot, or " coath" as it is term- 
ed by the shepherds ; which is apt, in a wet season, 
to infect those fed in richer lands. The small breed, 
even when fat, weigh not more than from 30 to 40 
pounds each. The ewes, in this county, yean at a 
remarkably early season. The breed of horses is 
not particularly regarded. Oxen are frequently 
employed in agriculture ; chiefly the red Devon- 
shire ox, which is in high estimation, and a mixture 
of the Hampshire and Wiltshire. As cattle are 
much used in the dairies, very little account is made 
of the size of the beast, or of its shape or colour : it is 
enough if likely to make a good milker. The oxen 
of the Devonshire breed, when fattened, are es- 
teemed the finest grained meat in the kingdom. 
The pigs of this county are of a light colour, and 
are less esteemed than the Hampshire, and some 
other sorts. 

DAIRIES.] Dorsetshire is a very extensive dairy 
county. Cow calves in general are reared, and bull 
calves afford a supply of veal. The management of 
the dairy, as here practised, is unknown to many 
other parts of the kingdom. The cows are all let 
out by the farmers, to a dairy -man, at a fixed price 
for each cow, according to the quality of the land 
and produce of the beast. In some of the poorest 
parts of the county as low as fifty shillings, or three 
pounds, per head, per annum ; and in others, as 
high as six pounds ten shillings, or seven pounds ; 
and in one parish, near 13eaminster, called Brond 
Windsor, as high as eight pounds ; but the general 
average throughout the county are perhaps, about 
six pounds for a cow of full growth ; four pounds for 
heifers, and four pounds ten shillings, or five pounds, 
for three years old. 

The usual plan for letting a dairy is as follows : 
the farmer finds the dairy-man a certain number of 
cows for one year, commencing at Candlemas, at a 
fixed sum. He supports the specific number 
throughout the year; finds a house for the dairy- 
man and his family to live in ; and allows him to 



keep as many pigs and poultry as he thinks proper, 
and the keep of a mare to carry out his butter, &c. 
This is considered a material advantage to the dairy- 
man, who, perhaps, can sell a foal, when weaned, 
for eight or ten pounds. If the farmer be inclined 
to let his dairy to another man, he gives the dairy-- 
man notice before All Saints' Day. By custom, the 
quarter of a year, from November to February, is 
deemed sufficient, and the dairy-man quits the 
house and gives up his bargain the ensuing Can- 
dlemas. 

The dairies in general are managed by making 
all the cream into butter, and from the skimmed 
milk an inferior sort of cheese, which sells from 25s. 
to 30y. per hundred weight in the county, and the 
butter, which is worth eight-pence or ten-pence per 
pound, is in general salted down in tubs, and sup- 
plies Portsmouth and the London markets. There 
is also made a considerable quantity of the better 
sort of cheese, which produces from a guinea and a 
half to two guineas per hundred weight. 

TENURES.] In many parts of this county, one 
person occupies a whole hamlet, parish, or lordship, 
extending over, perhaps, 1500 or 2000 acres. A 
considerable portion of the land, however, is leased 
out for lives, and generally the land is here inter- 
mixed and confused by copyhold and freehold te- 
nures. The customary terms for the renewal of 
leases for lives are nearly as follows : 

" For Copyhold, 2 years purchase is taken for one life. 

8 ditto for two lives. 

16 ditto for three lives, besides the widow- 
hood. 

" On Leasehold, 2 years purchase for one life. 
7 ditto for two lives. 
14 ditto for three lives." 

TITHES.] The tithes in this county are generally 
settled by a composition of from three to four shil- 
lings in the pound ; but, if set by the crop, the fol- 
lowing are the usual proportions : 

*. d. 

"Wheat 7 per acre. 

Lent Grain 5 ditto. 

Potatoes 4 ditto. 

Water Meadow 3 ditto. 

Dry Meadow .....2 6 ditto. 

Clover.. 2 6 ditto. 

Orchards, besides hay 6 ditto. 

Lambs 8 for every tenth. 

Cows -. 8 to 12." 

MANUFACTURES AND TRADE.] Flax and hemp are 
the principal materials manufactured in this county ; 
and these, chiefly in the neighbourhood of Bridport 
and Beaminster. A similar manufacture, on a 
smaller scale, has been established in the Isle of 
Purbeck. At Shaftesbury is a manufactory for 
shirt-buttons, employing great numbers of womrn 
and children. A sort of flannel, or coarse white 
woollen cloth, is also made at Shaftesbury, called 
swanskin. The chief trade, however, in the latter 
article, is carried on at Stunninster. A large ma- 
nufactory 



DORSETSHIRE. 



Hljfaetory of shirt-buttons is also carried on at 
Blandford ; and at Stalbridge and Sherborne are 
manufactories for spinning' of silk. At Wiinbornc 
Minster considerable business is transacted in the 
worsted stocking branch ; and upwards of 1000 
women and children are employed in knitting. 
Wareham and Poole are places of great trade. To 
the latter, at least 200 sail of shipping? are said to 
belong ; and an extensive trade is carried on to 
Newfoundland, which imports above two thousand 
tons of seal oil annually, besides one thousand tons 
of train oil. 

FAIRS.] Abbey Mi/ton Tuesday after July 22, 
for cattle and toys. 

Abbotsburi/ July 10, for sheep and toys. 
sJitngtoit July 22, a small fair for pedlary and 
cattle. 

lieaminster April 4, September 19, and October 
9, for horses, bullocks, sheep, and cheese. 

lUaiuJford March 7, July 10, and November 8, 
for horses, sheep, and cheese. 

Bridport April 6, for bullocks an/1 sheep ; Holy 
Thursday, for ditto and cheese ; October 1 1, a small 
fair for pedlary and cattle. 

Broadway Wednesday before September 19. 
Broad Windsor Trinity Monday. 
Cenie Abbas Mid-Lent Monday, April 28, and 
October 2, for horses, bullocks, and hogs. 

Coife Castle May 1 2, October 29, for hogs and 
toys. 

Cranborne August 24, and Dec. 6, for cheese 
and sheep. 

Da/wood August 19, cattle. 
Dorchester February 14, for cattle of all sorts 
and sheep ; Trinity Monday, and July 6, ditto and 
lambs ; August 6, ditto, wool and leather. 
Emmergreen May 13, for all sorts of cattle. 
Eversliot May 12, for bullocks and toys. 
Farnbam August 21, cheese. 
Gillinvhum Trinity Monday, and Sept. 12, for 
bullocks, horses, and sheep. 

Hermitage August 26, for bullocks, horses, sheep, 
ami wool. 

Holt-Wood August 5, for horses, sheep, and 
toys. 

Lambert Castle June 18, and August 28, for 
cattle. 

Leigh March 25, May 1, and September 3. 



T.yme February 13, and October 2, for cattle. 

Maiden Netcton March 9, and May 4. 

Martin's Town November 21, 22. 

Mi/borne St. Andieu November 30, for bullocks, 
horses, and cheese. 

Ower-Mai/ne October 10, for horses, cattle, and 
toys. 

Poole May 1, November 2, a free mart for toys. 
Pamphill July 7, and October 29, for hogs, 
cheese, and toys. 

Piddle Town April 8, October 29, for horses, 
bullocks, hogs, and sheep. 

Sli(ifte'>biiryP-&\m Saturday, June 24, and No- 
vember 23, for all sorts of cattle. 

Sherborne May 14, July 18, for wool and cattle; 
20, for wool and lambs ; October 13, for wool and 
all sorts of cattle. 

Shroten September 25, horses, bullocks, sheep, 
and all sorts of haberdashery. 

Stalyfiffge May (5, September 4, for all sorts of 
cattle. 

Stockland June 18, cattle. 

Stourminster May 12, October 24, for cattle and 
toys. 

S'ydfing December 6, for all sorts of cattle. 
Toller Down May 29, 30, for bullocks, sheep, 
horses, and toys ; July 2, for sheep and lambs ; 
September 11, 12, bullocks, sheep, horses ; second 
day toys only. 

Wareham April 17, July 5, and September 11, 
for bullocks, hogs, and toys. 

Wimborne March 28, and September 14, for bul- 
locks and cheese. 

Woodbury Hid September 18, and five followin"- 
days, all sorts of cattle, horses, hops, cheese, cloth, 
haberdashery, and all sorts of goods. 

Woodlands July 5, horses, cheese, and toys. 

Woolbrldge May 14, for horses, cattle, and toys. 

Wonford Eagle August 21, for toys only. 

Yetmintter April 22, and October 7. 

ROADS.] The turnpike roads in Dorsetshire are 
good ; and, in general, the travelling is easy and 
agreeable. The road from London to Dorchester 
passes through Salisbury, in Somersetshire : from, 
Dorsetshire there is one road to Sherborne, at the 
lorthern border of the county ; and another, through. 
Winterbourne Abbas, and Bridport, to Lyme Re- 
is, and Ohannouth, at Us western extremity. 



TABLE 



208 



DORSETSHIRE. 



3_ flp T" 1 (* t H. ^, C- ^ ' f^ 

fiiffklin 

nr " "i - 

?? Ii t-W "-1 



**l 

O 
v; 

3 
> 

r 



. 





















crs "> 
S ' Q. 

I 






3 s >S 2 

f re cr O 



to tO 



i 



1 P 



f 









HI If 



s 



S: 



i,t. 

si 31 r 



s 







Fl 









> 



E 



M 



1 



r 



| 



5 















PI 

rt 

o 
2 

w 











* 

>j 

S3 

S 


S 






C 


~ 






u> 


t/J" 


1 




H 


2 






i^ 




3 




'o 


= 


d 




B 




- 




*T- 





z 




a 




o 


- 
^ 




g 


- 


en 




H 


S 

^1 


H 




r. 


< 









ft 


- 




COM Ml 


1 


^- 

O 
r, 






Z 


% 


= 


h 



^J 


^ 


H 




B 


2 








<- 


^ 


n 


m 
55 


s 


p 


ut 


i 


g; 


^ 


X 







5= 





t 


j; 


X 


^ 


* 


VI 




c- 






Cj 


r 1 


M 


5 


^ 






ui 




tJ 

s 




5 

^ 


f 


r 


s- 




w 


2 


H 


J 


H 


1 




cr 




PI 




c- 


^- 


(fl 


* 


H 








3 


o 





i - 


viationsnf i 


1 

^r- 

N. 


F PLACES ; 


r. 
p 

> 
X 

o 


__ 


J^ 


j* 





o 
a 





i 


X 



X 


1 





C/) 


c 


m 


5s 


si 


[-. 


> 


^. 


p 


r. 


-: 






^j 


(A 


n 
D 


C 




^ 


H 


1_ 




^ 


X 


Z 




2T 


O 


H 







u 


K 









n 




^7" 


!= 
O 







C- 


V 


c 




S 


8 


c 




tT 


^ 


^ 




S- 


O 


_; 




o 


n 


J 




c 


H 


^N 




s 


o 


C 




3 


r- 


^ 






o 

n 


C 
O 






S- 

o 


p 



DORSETSHIRE. 



7. MELCOMB HEGIS to MILBORN POET, ly DORCHESTER. (N.) 



Broadway 
Forthington fields 
Dorchester 


2 
4 

1 


2 
6 

7 


R. Herlingslone House, E. Williams, 
Inns. Antelope, King's Anns. 


Esq. 


Cerne Down 


8 


15 


R. Poole Bathurst, Esq. 




Long Barton 


7 


22 


R. West-hall, Rev. 11. King. 




Sherborne 


3 


25 


Inns Antelope, R .Sherborne Park and Castle, 








Earl of Macclesfield. 




Aborne 


1 


26 






Milborn Port 


1 


27 






8. CO11FE CASTLE to DORCHESTER (N. W.) 




North Down Farm 


1 


1 




Stowborongh 


3 


4 






Wareham 


1 


5 


Inns Black Bear, Red Lion. 










L. Sniedmore, Win. Clavill, Esq. 




Worgale 


1 


6 






Binnegar 


3 


9 






Stoke Green 


1 


10 






Wool Bridge 


1 


11 


L. Lutworth Castle, T. Weld, Esq, 




(Cross the Froome) 










Wool 


I 


12 






Winfrith 


3 


15 






Broad Man 


5 


20 






Main Down 


1 


21 






Dorchester 


4 


25 


Inns Antelope, King's Arms. 





TABLE OF DISTANCES. 

The Names of the respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square inhere both, fiteet gives the distance. 





Abbotsbu 




tance from Lon 








15 


Beaminst 


er 137 








26 


30 


Rlatulforc 


104 








9 

12 


6 


31 


Bridport. 


134 








19 


16 


14 


Cerne A 


[jbas 121 








25 


35 


20 


33 


27 


Corfe C 


stle 120 








38 


42 


12 


43 


28 


27 


Cranbon 


ie 92 








10 


16 


16 


15 


8 


19 


28 


Dorcbesl 


er , 120 








18 


12 


40 


9 


23 


42 
16 


52 


24 


Lyme R 


eaU... ...143 






Pooli 


37 


43 


17 


42 


32 


16 


27 


51 


Pot 


It- 106 








38 


32 


12 


39 


22 


32 


16 


28 
18 
20 


44 


28 
35 


Shaltesburv 101 






ilierljorne 


2(> 


18 


18 


23 
28 


11 


36 


25 


30 








Sturmi lister 


30 


32 


10 


14 


30 


18 


44 


27 


' 8 10 Sturminster Ill 






W arv.-li.un 


24 


34 


14 


33 


26 


6 


22 


18 


42 


10 


26 30 24 VVareham 113 




t 




8 


24 


24 


18 


16 


22 


22 


8 


27 


36 
6 


37 26 28 18 VVeymouth I"S 






\Viinboine 


36 


43 


10 


37 


26 


17 


10 


22 


46 


22 28 20 12 30 j \Vimborne.. .103 





VOL. It. NO. 61. 



3 Y 



DURHAM. 



270 



DURHAM. 



GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY. 



THE Bishopric, or County Palatine, of Dur- 
ham has a triangular form ; the base of the tri- 
angle, towards the east, being formed by the sea- 
coast, which is washed by the German ocean, from 
the mouth of the river Tees to Tynemouth. On 
the south, Durham is bounded by the Tees, which 
divides it from Yorkshire ; on the west, it is divi- 
ded from Cumberland and Westmoreland by the 
Crook-burn, and the Tees ; and, on the north, it 
is separated from Northumberland, by the rivers 
Tyne and Derwent. The greatest extent of the 
county, from Shield, on the north, to Sockburue, on 
the south, is about 36 miles ; its greatest length, 
from the peninsula of Hartlepool, on the east, to 
the mouth of the Crookburn, on the west at the 
junction of Durham, Cumberland, and Westmore- 
land, is about 45 miles ; and its circumference is 
nearly 180 miles. Its superficies have' generally 
been estimated at about 010,000 acres ; but, accord- 
ing to the Table, accompanying the Population 
Returns of 18H, it contains 665,600 acres^ or 1040 
square miles. The general aspect of the county 
is hilly and mountainous ; particularly the western 
angle, which is a bleak, naked, and barren region, 
crossed by the chain of hills termed the English 
Appenines, which, however, do not here rise to any 
considerable height. From the eastern side of these 
hills issue numerous streams, which flow towards 
the *ca ; ami smaller ranges of liills. branching off 
from this district, spread in various directions over 
the county. The eastern and western parts of the 
Palatinate comprise some beautiful and fertile val- 
lies ; and are delightfully varied with hill and dale, 
alternately appropriated to pasturage and the 
growth of corn. 

The air of Durham is considered to be very 
healthy, and although sharp in the western parts, it 
is mild and pleasant towards the sea, the vapours 
from the salt water mitigating the cold, which in a 
situation so far north, would otherwise be very 
severe. 

RIVERS.] This county is exceedingly well water- 
ed, as it possesses sixteen rivers, of which the Tees, 
the Weare, and the Derwent are the principal. The 
first of these rises in the vast moors which separate 



Yorkshire from Durham, Cumberland, Westmore- 
land, and Northumberland ; after issuing from the 
moors, it flows south-eastward, through the roman- 
tic valley of Teesdale, for near 30 miles, when sud- 
denly -turning to the north-east at Sockburne, it 
falls into the German ocean a short distance below 
Stockton. " This river," observes Mr. Skrine, 
" assimilates throughout, with its external atten- 
dants of rocks, moors, and mountains ; being broad, 
shallow, and rapid, frequently ravaging the valley 
with its inundations, and precipitating itself in vast 
cataracts. After emerging from the deep dell be- 
neath the abbey of Egglestone, it flows with ra- 
pidity through the rich demesne of Rokeby, below 
which it receives the Greta from Yorkshire, and 
another small stream from the moors of Durham, 
forming a fine feature in the highly-ornamented 
territory which surrounds the majestic walls of 
Raby Castle. This river receives in its course, be- 
sides several less considerable streams, the Laden, 
the Hade, the Lnne, the Bauder, and the Skern. 
The Tees, being affected by the tide, admits ships 
of considerable burden, as high as Stockton, where 
it is crossed by a magnificent stone bridge. The 
greatest flood ever known in the Tees occurred in 
the year 1772. Near the confluence of t!ie Tees 
and the Bauder, about Midsummer, in the year 
1689, an eruption of water took place, which, in 
forcing its passage from below, carried away such 
a quantity of earth, as left a chasm 160 yards in 
length, eighty in breadth, and six or seven in depth : 
it clioaked up both the rivers, and killed great num- 
bers of fish. The meadows over which the flood 
passed wera spoiled, for a time, by the mass of mud 
which it deposited. In the road from London to 
Durham, a ford crosses the Tees, where the Bishop 
on coming to take possession of his see, is met by 
the county gentlemen : at the same time, the lord 
of the manor of Sockburn, a village on the banks, 
advances into the middle of the stream, and pre- 
sents him with a faulchion, as an emblem of his 
temporal power, which the Bishop returns, and then 
proceeds on his journey. 

The Weare is formed of three small streams, 
called the Kallop, the Wallop, and the Burdop, 
7 whicl 



: !*_- fc 



BL. 




DURHAM. 



271 



which rise near each other, in the western part of 
tl\e county, within three miles of the head of the 
Tees. The Weare, however flows considerahly to 
the north of that river, and crossing the central part 
of the county, passes Bishop Auckland, where it 
assumes a north-eastern direction, and flows onward 
to the city of Durham, which it nearly surrounds ; 
tin nee passing northward, it runs near the walls of 
Lumley Castle, and suddenly turning to the south 
atBirtley, falls into the sea near Sundcrland. The 
hanks of this river are wild and romantic, and, like 
Teesdal, are pleasantly interspersed with towns 
and villages. It is navigable as far as Lumley Cas- 
tle, whence great quantities of coals are conveyed 
to Sundcrland, and other parts. 

The river Derwent rises northward of the Weare, 
in the same range of moors, and at first pursues an 
eastern direction, which afterwards inclines more to 
the north as it advances towards the Tyne, to which 
river it is tributary, falling into it at the southern 
border of Northumberland, a little above Newcastle, j 
It imparts animation and interest to a very wild and ! 
mountainous tract of country. All these rivers 
abound witli fish, especially with salmon, of which 
grot quantities are sent to London, under the de- 
nomination of Newcastle Salmon. 

PLANTS.] Generally speaking, the plants found 
in this county are not remarkably rare ; yet in the 
list given below, are some of considerable medicinal 
virtue.* 

MINERALS.] It has been justly observed by Sir 
William Appleby, that " Durham, taking its small 
dimensions into consideration, is not to be equalled 

* Atistna routine uluidt . Lesser Water Planting; in Hi!! close- 

cxr about two miles west from Darlington. 
Anthemis tinctoria. Common Ox-eye; on a bank near (lie 

river Tees, not tar from Sockbuin. 
Asplenimn Ularinum. Sea Maidenhair; common on the 

rocks near Esington. 
Astragalus urentn -ins. Purple Mountain Milkwort ; in sandy 

arl chalky meadows and pasturages : near 

Scaton. 
. glyfyphyiUt*. Liquorice Vetch ; in meadows, pas- 

ii'rcs ;uid hedges in a lime-stone soil; below 

Low ConnisrlitF. 
Atropa BellftdimiM. Deadly Nightshade or Divale, !>y the 

Were ;it Durham. 

Carex ilivica. Small Carex , in turfy bogs : about Dar- 
lington. 
Cerastium arvense. Corn Mouse-ear or Chickwecd ; in sanely 

i <>m-(ie!ds, meadows and pastures: about 

DarVbigton. 
Chara tomcntosa. Brittle Cliara ; in Hell-kettles near Dur- 

I ing* on. 

Convallaria magnlis. Lilly of the Valley ; in woods and on 
he.-iths : in Castle Edendene. 

Cypripedium calceolus. Lndies' Slipper: in woods and 
atnonqsl bu>he? : in Castle Edendene. 

Equisetum hyemale. Hough Horse-tail, or Shavegrass ; in 
marshy and watery places : in Castle Eden- 
dene. 

Geranium sylvaticum. Mountain Cranes-bill ; in the wood 
near the New Bridge at Durham. 

Ilippuris vulgariut. Mares-tail; in the Skern at Darlington. 

Isaiis tinctora. Woad, by the Were. 

Lcpidium latifelium. Dittander or Pepperwort ; in meadows 



by any other county in Great Britain, except Mid- 
dlesex, for its numerous and important coal, lead, 
and iron -mines ; its large cast metal founderies, 
and iron manufactories, potteries, glass-houses, 
j copperas works, coal, tar, and salt-works, quarries 
of marble, fire, and free-stone ; lime, brick, and 
tile-kilns ; grind-stone, and mill-stone ; linen and 
woollen manufactories ; trade, agriculture, and po- 
pulation." The east and north-east parts of the 
county are much celebrated for their extensive coal- 
mines ; the produce of which is so great as almost 
to exceed calculation. The seams or strata, novr 
wrought, are five in number, extending horizon- 
tally lor many miles, from 20 to 100 fathoms be- 
neath the surface : these strata are from three to 
eight feet thick ; below are several other seams of 
coal. Many of these mines are wrought with the 
aid of steam engines, instead of horses, which are 
more expeditious and less expensive. In the great 
sea-sale collieries, numbers of horses are continually 
kept under ground, for the purpose of drawing the 
coals to the mouths of the pits ; a labour which is 
performed by men, or boys, in the land-sale col- 
lieries. 

Of lead mines, the principal are situated in Tees- 
dale, and Wear-dale : those of the former place are 
not particularly successful ; but the produce of the 
latter is of considerable value. The general method 
of working them is similar to that pursued in the 
adjacent county of Cumberland, as already de- 
scribed. Great improvements of late years have 
hern made by introducing waggon-levels, which, at 
the same time that they carry off the water, save 

anil pastures: near Seaton and by the river 
Were near Durham Al>bey. 

Linum pcrenne. Perennial Blue Flax ; in meadows and pas- 
tures of a lime-stone soil : near Darling- 
ton. 

Lysimachia vulgaris. Yellow Willow-herb ; by the Skeni 
near Darlington. 

Oenanthe crocata. Hemlock Dropwort ; by the Tees below 
Stockton. 

Papaver dubiuni* Long smooth lu-aded Poppy ; in corn- 
fields ; about D.ivlington 

Potamogeton murinmn. Sea Pond-weed ; in the Skern near 
Darlington. 

Potentilla/r/jco*a. Shrub C'inquefoil ; in several places. 

Ranunculus lingua. Greater Spearwort ; in wet pastures and 
at the edges ot Likes ; about Darlington. 

Ribes rubrtim. Red Currants ; in the woods. 

Sumolus Tulerandi. Round-leaved Water Pimpernel ; in 
marslies and moist meadows ; about Dar- 
lington. 

Sclixnuis compressus. Comprest Bastard Cypcrus; in bogs 
about Darlington. 

mariscus. I .ong-rooted Bastard Cyperus ; by Hell- 
kettles near Darlingtbli. 

ScirpUCjfoa'iMW. Floating Club-rush ; in ditches anJ bogs; 

near Darlington. 

sykaticus. Millet Cyperus ; in watery places and in 
damp wood's: by the Skera' near Darling- 
ton. 

Veronica montana. Mountain Speedwell ; in Dinsdale wood 
near Darlington. 

. ' scutdlata. Narrow-leaved Speedwell ; in marches, 

about Darlington. 

the 



272 



DURHAM. 



the more fatiguing parts of manual labour. The 
method of smelting the ore in Wear-dale, is by the 
blast hearth : but in Tees-dale, air furnaces have 
been very successfully introduced. 

In the neighbourhood of Walsingham, a beautiful 
black spotted lime-stone is found, which is used for 
hearths, chimney pieces, and other ornaments ; a 
line mill-stone also abounds here, and many excel- 
lent quarries of slate have been opened in different 
parts of the county. 

MINERAL AND MEDICINAL SPRINGS.] Some years 
ago, a remarkable salt spring was discovered at 
Birtley, in this county, which has been thus de- 
scribed by Sir W. Appleby : " It rises at the depth 
of 70 fathoms, in an engine pit constructed for draw- 
ing water out of coal mines, at the extremity of a 
stone drift, drove 200 yards north-east therein ; 
and what is more extraordinary, springs only in 
such drift in every direction ; though the pit, and 
every other contiguous, has been excavated both 
above and below it many fathoms. Its mixing wilh 
the fresh water in the same pit, would have oc- 
casioned it remaining totally unnoticed, but for an 
accident, which happened to the boiler of the engine 
soon after its erection. One morning the bottom of 
the boiler suddenly dropped out : the engineer, 
amazed thereat, informed the undertakers, who, 
Upon examination, found it incrustcd with a vast 
quantity of strong salt, and the iron wholly cor- 
roded. Upon tasting the water, though incorpo- 
rated with immense quantities of fresh, it was found 
exceedingly brackish and salt, on which the work- 
ings were explored, and the above-mentioned very 
valuable salt spring was discovered to arise in such 
drifts only ; and has for these nine years produced 
20,000 gallons per day, four times stronger than 
any sea-water whatever. In consequence of this 
important discovery, a large and extensive manu- 
factory of salt has been established by a company of 
gentlemen, who, after encountering many difficul- 
ties, have brought it to a very great perfection, the 
quality being most excellent." At Butterby, near 
Durham, is another salt-spring, which issues from 
a rock in the river Weare, and is only visible when 
the water is low : it contains somewhat more of the 
sulphate of magnesia, or Epsom salt, than the 
spring at Birtley ; and it imparts a red tinge to the 
stones over which it flows. 

South Shields has long been famous for its salt 
works ; formerly there were upwards of 200 pans 
in use, for converting the sea-water into salt ; and 
they were said to require 100,000 chaldrons of coals 
annually. Since the discovery of the spring at 
Birtley, these works have been of less importance. 

Near the village of Butterby, already mentioned, 
are some mineral and medicinal springs, which will 
be duly noticed in our account of that place. At 
Hartlepool, also, is a chalybeate water, which is 
employed medicinally. 

ETYMOLOGY.] Durham appears to be a corrup- 
tion of the Saxon words, Dur, a hill, and Holme, a 



river island ; a description applicable to its chief 
town, or city, from which the county takes its name. 
By the Latins, Camden tells us, it was called 
Dvnclmvs ; and by the common people, Durham, 
or Duresme, from the Norman, or French. 

GENERAL HISTORY, ECCLESIASTICAL JURISDIC- 
TION, &c.] This county, as we have already no- 
ticed, in our account of Cumberland, formed part of 
the country of the Brigantes, who progressively 
peopled the vast tract of land, extending north- 
wards from the river Don, in Yorkshire. On the 
conquest of Britain by the Romans, Durham was 
included in the division, Maxima Caesarieusis ; but 
after the establishment of the Saxons, it became 
part of the kingdom .of Northumberland, with which 
it remained connected till the union of the Saxon 
States under Egbert. 

This county, not unusually termed the Bishopric, 
appears to have derived its original privileges from 
the grant made to St. Cuthbert, the Apostle of the 
North, by Egfrid, King of Northumberland, in the 
year 685, of all the land between the " rivers Weare 
and Tyne," to hold in as full and ample manner as 
the King himself held the same. Camden observes, 
that these privileges were first broken through by 
Edward the First, whose award, as arbitrator on a 
dispute between Bishop Anthony Bee and the Prior 
about their lands, not being executed, " he seized 
the Bishop's liberties into his own hands, and made 
strict inquiry, and offered great violence to privi- 
lege. Afterwards, however, the See recovered, and 
held its rights inviolate till the time of Edward the 
Sixth, to whom all its revenues and privileges were 
granted by Parliament. Queen Mary re-establish- 
ed the See in its former authority ; and, though 
many of its rights have since been abrogated, it still 
possesses peculiar immunities and power. 

Gough, in his Additions to Camden, observes that 
" the Palatine right of the Bishop of Durham is 
founded on immemorial prescription, there being no 
record of its being granted by any Princes, before or 
since the Conquest, wherein it is not supposed to 
have been granted also by their predecessors. It 
proceeded at first from a principle of devotion to 
St. Cuthbert, that whatever lands were given to 
him, or bought with his money, he should hold with 
the same freedom that the Princes who gave them 
held the rest of their estates. But this piety to the 
Saint was not without its prudential purposes, both 
for the service of the Crown in its wars against 
Scotland, and of the county, because of its distance 
from the courts above. It consisted of all manner 
of royal jurisdiction, both civil and military, by land 
and sea. For the exercise thereof, the Bishops had 
their proper courts of all sorts held in their name, 
and by their authority ; their Chancery, Exchequer, 
and Court of Pleas, as well as of the Crown, as of 
the County ; and all other pleas and assizes, certi- 
fications whatsoever ; and all officers belonging to 
them, as Chancellors, Justices, High-Sheriff, Co- 
roners, Escheator, and other ministers ; as well 

such 



DURHAM". 



uch as Kings bate teen wont to have elsewhere in 
the said kingdom, and such as the said Kings have 
been wont to depute according to the exigency of 
emergent eases, or for the special execution of acts 
of Parliament. Thus by themselves, and their offi- 
cers, they did justice to all persons in nil cases, 
without the King or any of his officers interfering 
ordinarily in any thing. The King's writ did not 
run in this county, but was directed to the Bishop ; 
or, in the vacancy of the See, to the Chancellor of 
the Palatinate. 

" When Henry the Second sent his Justices of 
Assize hither, on an extraordinary occasion of mur- 
der and robbery, he declared by his Charter, that he 
did it by licence of the Bishop, and pro hac vice 
only ; and that it should not be drawn into custom, 
either in his time, or in the time of his heirs, not 
being done but upon absolute necessity ; and that 
he should nevertheless have the land of St. Cuth- 
bert to enjoy its liberties and ancient customs as 
amply as t?ver. By virtue of these privileges, there 
issued out of the Bishop's courts all sorts of writs, 
original, judicial, and common ; writs of proclama- 
tion, &c. As all writs went out in his name, he had 
a register of writs of as much authority as that in 
the King's courts ; and all recognizances entered 
upon his close rolls in his Chancery, and made to 
him, or in his name, were as valid in this county, as 
those made to the King out of it. But now, the 
Act twenty-seventh Henry the Eighth, for the re- 
continuing of certain liberties taken from the Crown, 
directs, that all writs, indictments, and all manner 
of process in Counties Palatine, shall be made only 
in the King's iiame ; and since that time all the 
difference in the style of proceedings in this county 
from others is, that the testc of writ is in the name 
of the Bishop, according to the directions of that 
act. Still he is perpetual Justice of Peace within 
his territories, (and can sit only as such,) and is also 
perpetual Chancellor, because the chief acts of the 
exempt jurisdiction used to run through his court. 
All the officers of the courts, even the Judges of 
Assize themselves, -have still their ancient salaries, 
or something analogous, from the Bishop ; and all 
the standing officers of the courts are constituted by 
his patents. When he conies in person to any of 
the courts of judicature, lie sits chief in them, those 
of assize not excepted ; and even when judgment of 
blood is given, though the Canons forbid uny cler- 
gyman to be present, the Bishops of Durham did, 
and may, sit in their purple robes on the sentence of 
death, whence is used to be said, Soluin Dunelmense 
stola jus dicit et ense. 

" All dues, amercements, and forfeited recogni- 
zances, in the courts of the Palatinate, and all deo- 
dands, belong to the Bishop. If any forfeits are 
made, either of war, or by treason, outlawry, or fe- 
lony, oven though the soil be the King's, they fall to 
the Bishop here, as to the King in other places : 
and though the first great wound which the Palati- 
nate received, was 'given on the alienation of Bar- 
VOL. ii. NO. 05. 



nard Castle, and Hartlepool, on the forfeitures of 
Baliol and Bruce, yet the Bishop's right was de- 
clared to them on full hearing ; and though the pos- 
session of them could not be retrieved, they still re- 
sort to the courts of Durham as other parts of the 
county do. 

" Lands were held under the Bishop perforinse- 
cuin servitium ; which is defined by Bracton to be a 
badge of regal right, and was a service only belong- 
ing to the Crown : the tenure in capite was common 
under a subject. The former occurs very often in 
the records ; indeed, all the tenures of laud here 
originate from the Bishop as lord paramount in 
chief. Hence he grants charters for erecting bo- 
roughs and corporations, markets and fairs, inclos- 
ing forests, chaces, and warrens ; licenses to em- 
battle castles, build chapels, found chanteries and 
hospitals ; and dispensations, with the statute of 
Mortmain. All inclosed estates, as well as moors, 
or wastes, to which no title can be made, escheat to 
him. He grants the custody of ideots and lunatics ; 
and had the custody of minors while the custom of 
wards and liveries subsisted. Besides the depend- 
ance of leasehold or copyhold tenants on him, if 
any freeholders alienated their land without his li-< 
cense, they were obliged to sue out his patent of 
pardon ; and all money paid for such licenses be- 
longs to him. 

" In the article of military power, the Bishop of 
Durham had anciently his Thanes, and afterwards 
his Barons, who held of him by Knights' service, as 
the rc-st of the Haliwerk folk held of them by infe- 
rior tenures. On alarms, he convened them as a 
Parliament, with advice for them to assist with their 
persons, dependants, and money, for the public ser- 
vice at home and abrflad ; and all levies of men and 
money were made by the Bishop's commission, or 
by writs in his name out of the Chancery at Dur- 
ham : for he had power both to coin money, and! 
levy taxes,- and raisa and arm soldiers, in the Bi- 
shopric, from sixteen to sixty years old. Accord- 
ing as he found thoir strength, he had power to 
march against the Scots, or to conclude a truce 
with them. One of the Bishops built a strong cas- 
tle in his territory, on the border, to defend it against 
them ; though no other person could have done this 
without his leave, nor the greatest person in the 
Palatinate embattle his mansion. As the people de- 
pend on him in these matters, they wwc free from, 
every body else : and when the Lord Warden of the 
Marches would have summoned some of the Bishop's 
men to his court, a letter was sent from the King 
to forbid him, under pain of forfeiting 1000/. But 
now the militia of the county has been long on the 
same looting wilh the rest of the kingdom, under the 
Lord Lieutenant : the only difference here, is, that 
that office has generally, though uot always, beeu 
borne by the Bishop. 

" The admiralty jurisdiction in this county he- 
longs also to the. Bishop, -who holds the proper court 
by his Judges ; and appoints by his patents, a Vice- 
* z Admiral, 



274 



DURHAM. 



Admiral, Register, and Marshal, or Water-Bailiff, 
and other officers ; and has all the privileges, for- 
feitures, and profits, incident to this power, as royal 
fishes, sea wrecks, duties for ships arriving in his 
ports, anchorage, beaconage, wharfage, moorage, 
butterage, ulnage, &.c. To him also belongs the 
conservancy of waters within his district ; in pur- 
suance of which, he used to issue commissions for 
prohibiting, limiting or reducing weirs, or other 
erections in prejudice of his rivers. All ships of 
war were arrayed within the county Palatine by his 
commission, and writs to his Sheriff: and when the 
King issued out writs from his admiralty to the 
Sheriffs of other maritime counties, he addressed a 
particular letter to the Bishop here for his concur- 
rence, who gave commissions to his own Sheriff, 
with express command, that nothing should be done 
by the King's commissions without him. It is but 
lately that any instances have been known of the 
admiralty being separated from the Bishopric, and 
it is now restored, though with some diminution in 
the honour. 

" The great privileges of this Bishopric in tem- 
poral jurisdiction, lead one to imagine that its spiri- 
tual immunities were equally extraordinary. After 
Paulinas departed from York, the Bishops who re- 
stored Christianity in Northumberland, placed their 
See at Lindisfarne, though not with the title of Me- 
tropolitan, yet with all the ecclesiastical power that 
was then in those counties. This occasioned a great 
veneration for their successors among the Saxons, 
besides the particular reverence paid to St. Cuth- 
bert. When the See was established at Durham, 
in the time of the Conqueror, Thomas, the elder 
Archbishop of York, having been miraculously re- 
covered of a fever at the shrine of the Saint, grant- 
ed to this Church several immunities relating to ju- 
risdiction, visitations, &c. which being confirmed by 
the King and Parliament, and the Pope, and by se- 
reral succeeding Kings, could never be recalled, 
notwithstanding many struggles and contests." 

ANTIQUITIES.] Amongst the architectural anti- 
quities in this county, chiefly entitled to notice, are 
Barnard Castle, Bishops-Auckland Palace and 
Church, Brancepeth Castle, Durham Cathedral, 
Palace, &c. Evenwood Castle, Finchale Priory, 

* The following have been Bishops of Durham during the 
present reign: the Hon. Dr. Trevor, 'lying June 9, 1771, 
was succeeded by Dr. Egerton, Bishop of Litchlield awl Co- 
ventry; upon his decease, in 1787, Dr. Thurlow was trans- 
lated from the See ot Lincoln; dying in June, 179', the Hon. 
Dr. Shute Barrington was translated from Salisbury, and con- 
secrated Bishop of Durham. Dr. John Egerton, mentioned 
above, was the son of Henry Egcrton, Bishop of Bristol. He 



Gateshead Monastery, Hilton Castle, Lumley Cas- 
tle, Norham Castle, Raby Castle, Ravensworth 
Castle, Whilton Castle, Yarrow Monastery, &c. 

The grand Roman road, called Watling Street, 
passes the Weare, at Wolsingham, and a branch of 
it passes on to Chester-le- Street, and Shields. The 
remains of some ancient encampments are also visi- 
ble in this county. 

CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL DIVISIONS.] The 
county of Durham is usually divided into four 
wards, viz. Chester, Darlington, Stockton, and 
Easiugton, besides the two districts called Nor- 
hamshire, and Islandshire. These are subdivided 
into seventy-three parishes, and two parts of pa- 
rishes. Most of the parishes contain several town- 
ships. Durham has one city, nine market-towns, 
and about 230 villages. It pays three parts of the 
land-tax, and provides 400 men for the militia. 

The entire county is within the See, and is in- 
cluded in the northern circuit.* 

PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.] Durham re- 
turns only four members to Parliament ; two for the 
county, and two for the city. 

MARKET TOWNS.] The following is a list of the 
market-towns : 

Towns. Market Days. 

Barnard Castle Wednesday. 

Bishop's Auckland Thursday. 

Darlington Monday. 

Durham Saturday. 

Hartlepool Monday. 

Sedgetield Friday. 

Stockton Wednesday. 

Sumlerland...., Friday. 

Wolsingham Tuesday. 

POPULATION.] In the year 1700, the population 
of the county of Durham was 95,300 ; in 1750, it 
amounted to 135,000; in 1801, it had attained a 
further increase, to 160,361 ; and, in 1811, it was 
177,6-25; of which, 83,671 were males, and 93,954 
females : of 39,288 families, 10,288 were employed 
in agriculture, 17,094 in trade, &c. and 11,906 in 
other pursuits. The details will be seen by the 
following Table. The annual number of marriages 
in this county are as 1 to 128 ; of baptisms, as 1 to 
33 ; ami of deaths, as 1 to 50. 



was born in London in 1721, and educated, iiist at Eton, and 
then at Oriel College, Oxford. In 1745, he obtained the liv- 
ing of Ross, in Herefordshire, and the yeur following a pre- 
bend in Hereford Cathedral. In 1750 he obtained the deanry 
of Hereford, and altewards was successively Bishop ofBangor, 
Lichlieid, and Durham. His charities were large, and he 
contributed to several important public works in his diocese. 
He published some sermons on public occasions. 



Summary 



DURHAM. 



275 



Summary of the Population nf the County of Durlutm, as published by Authority of Parliament in 1811. 





HOUSES. 


OCCUPATIONS. 


PERSONS. 


HUNDREDS, &c. 


Inhabited. 


> 3 

3 u 
u 
. 

S 0> V 

2=a. 

*I 




bi> 

_c 

is 

S3 


Uninhabited. 


n, 

<y 
1-.= I,' 

1353 

'/! i>-,~ 

H.2 S 

ifi 

c2 "^ 


>, 

?.S g o 
-5-3 <* 
o S 

.! 

- Q--0 a 
p P p* o 
| S^J 


All other Fami- 
lies not comprised 
in the two pre- 
ceding Classes. 


Males. 


Females. 


Total 
of 
Persons. 


Chester Ward, three Di- 


9974 
7184 
3870 

3414 
1264 
733 
932 
1662 


14565 
8679 
4907 

3728 
1611 
765 
1495 
3538 


55 
40 
22 

16 
12 
2 
5 


369 
169 

112 

104 
49 
41 
24 

22 


2941 
2971 
1585 

1705 
485 
438 
144 
19 


7600 
3150 
2231 

1092 
412 
186 
927 
1496 


4024 
2558 
1091 

931 

714 
141 

424 
2023 


33124 
18725 
10690 

7423 
3205 
1670 
2997 
5007 
830 


36503 
20276 
11904 

8742 
3627 
1854 
3766 
7282 


69627 
39001 
22594 

16165 
6832 
3524 
6763 
12289 
830 


Darlington Ward, three 


Easington Ward, two 


Stockton Ward, two 








Town of Sunderland 




















Totals 


29033 


39288 


152 


890 


10238 


17094 


11906 


83671 


93954 


177625 





CHIEF TOWNS, PARISHES, &c. 

AUCKLAND, ST. ANDREW'S.] The parish of St. 
Andrew's Auckland, is situated in the north-west 
division of Darlington Ward, three quarters of a 
mile south by east from Bishop's Auckland. This 
place is celebrated from the church having been 
made collegiate by Bishop Beck, although it is pro- 
bable, that there was some foundation here before 
the time of that prelate. The edifice is situated on 
a rising ground, in a valley near the banks of the 
Gaunless, and has the form of a cross, with a tower 
at the west end. In the inside is a curious wooden 
figure, said to be an effigy of one of the family of 
Poliand, which represents a knight sitting cross-- 
legged, and dressed in a coat of mail ; with his 
hands raised, and his feet resting on a lion. At the 
time of the Dissolution, it had a Dean, and eleven 
Prebends, whose estates were valued at 179/. 13. 
\0d. Most of which, however, were granted away, 
by Edward VI. during the first year of his reign, 
which has reduced the living to a mere donative, or 
curacy, with a small income. 

AUCKLAND, BISHOP'S.] Bishop's Auckland, also 
in the north-west division of Darlington Ward, is 
lOf miles south-west of Durham, and 257 north by 
west from London. It is a market-town and a 
borough by prescriptive right. It enjoys a beauti- 
ful, and commanding site on an eminence, which the 
river Wear bounds to the north, and the Gaunless 
to the south-east, the latter of which runs into the 
former at no great distance above the town. It is 
situated on a pieqe of ground about 140 feet higher 



than the level of the plain ; each side of its declivity 
is laid out in hanging gardens, and the remaining: 
part of it is built upon. The Bishops of Durham are 
Lords of the manor ; and their seat, a beautiful 
palace, is here. Bishop Beck was the first who 
made choice of it for a residence, and the conse- 
quence which the town at present enjeys, may per- 
haps be ascribed to that circumstance. The Bi- 
shop's Palace, or Castle, stands at the north angle 
of the town, and together with the courts and offices 
covers about five acres. " It stondetli," says Le- 
land, " on a little hill betwixt two rivers. Ther 
was a very auncient manor-place longing to the Bi- 
shop of Duresme at Akeland : Antonius de Beke 
began first to encastellate it ; he made the great 
haulle : ther be divers pillars of black marble, 
speckled with white, and the exceeding faire gret 
charnbre, with other three. He made also an ex- 
ceeding goodly chapelle ther, of ston well squarid, 
and a college with Dene and Prebends yn it, and a 
quadrant on the south west side of the castelle for 
ministers of the college. Skirlaw, Bishop of Du- 
resme, made the goodly gate-house at entering into 
the castelle of Akeland. There is a faire park by 
the castelle, having fallow deer, wild bulls and 
kine." Nearly the whole of the buildings, here 
mentioned by Leland, have been destroyed ; chiefly 
by Sir Arthur Haselrigge, on whom this place was 
bestowed by the Parliament, in the Civil Wars. 
Attracted by the beauty of the situation, he deter- 
mined to make it his principal residence, and erect- 
ed a magnificent house with the materials. On th 
Restoration, the former Bishop, (Cosin) was re- 
called 



DURHAM. 



called to his diocese. " He had a palace," observes 
Pennant, " ready for hte reception ; but by BB ex- 
cess of piety declined making use of it, from the 
consideration, that the stone of the ancient cha,pel 
had beep sacrilegiously applied towards the build- 
ing of this late habitation of fanaticism. He there- 
fore pulled it down, and restoring the materials to 
their ancient use, built the present elegant Chapel ;" 
beneath the floor of which lias the pious re-founder. 
The other parts of the Castle wre erected at dif- 
ferent times, and, consequently the whole pile bears 
tan irregular form. The entrance from the town is 
'through a new Gothic gateway and screen, extend- 
ing 310 feet, designed by Mr. James Wyatt, and 
thence to a Gothic porch and vestibule, 8-1 feet in 
length, and 40 in breadth, which conducts to the 
Chapel on the right. The roof of the chapel is sup- 
ported by rows of clustered pilhirs. A few years 
ago, it was decorated with a new altar-piece, and 
>a picture of the Resurrection, by Sir Joshua Rey- 
nolds. The picture is said to be thy. original de- 
isign which was made by Sir .Joshua for the new 
I'jmtrfed window .at the rt end e.f Salisbury Cathe- 
dral. The chapel contains ako a handsome momi- 
BiHt by Nollekeu*, to the memory of Bishop Tre- 
vor, who is represented sitting, with a book. On 
the left, the vestibule leads into the Hall, a very 
legaut apartnaent, and to the staircase of the Auti- 
lloom, and Great Drawing Room, which is sixty 
feet loog, and thirty broad ; its internal finishing, 
with part of the Anti-Room, staircase, ajjd vesti- 
bule, was executed from designs by Mr. Wyatt, Jn 
the Dining Parlour, fifty-four feet by twenty-four 
are fine full-length paintings of Jacob aud tike 
twelve Patriarchs, by Spaguoletto. Here are also 
four heads of the Evangelists, by Lanfranc ; a paint- 
ing of the Four Fathers of the Latin Church, by 
Blocemart ; and another of the Cornaro family, by 
Titian ; containing representations of three full- 
grown persons arrayed in flowing mantles, and of 
six children, all kneeling, and adoring the cross. 
In the Breakfast Room is a good portrait of Tycho 
Brahe. The park and lands connected with the 
Castle contain 800 acres. The ground near the 
mansion has been laid out in slopes and terraces, so 
as to command a great variety of prospects. The 
nearer landscapes are composed of wild and irregu- 
lar woodlands, bold cliffs and eminences, mingled 
in a picturesque manner ; the more distant views 
are composed of rich cultivated grounds, animated 
by the windings of the Wear. The river Gaunless 
flows at the bottom of the lawn, and is crossed ;it 
Borne distance by a stone bridge, at the building of 
which, in the year 1757, a Roman urn of greyish 
clay was discovered, filled with ashes, earth, human 
bones, &c. 

It appears from an inquisition po*t tlo>'t<-m, of 
the llth year of Bishop Skirlaw, that Dionesia 
Polland died seized of certain land, held here in 
socage by the tenure of presenting a iiiulchion to 
the Bishop on his first coining hither after attaining 
3 



that dignity. The ceremony is still continued, and 
accompanied with the following address : " My 
Lord, I, in behalf of myself, as well as soiae ether 
possessors of the Pol land's lands, do humbly pre- 
sent your Lordship with this faulchion at your first 
coming here, wherewith, as the tradition goeth, he 
slew of old a venomous serpent, which did much 
harm te man and beast, and by performing this ser- 
vice we hold oar lands." 

On the north-west side of the town, is Newton 
Cap Bridge, a stately fabric, crossing the Wear. 
It was erected by Bishop Skirlaw about the yer 
1300. It consists of two arches ; one of a circular 
form, 101 feet in the span ; the other a pointed arch, 
of ninety-one feet span. The elevatUm oi' the 
bridge above the river, is considerable. On the 
north banks of the river, beyond the bridge, is New- 
ton-Cap, a seat of the Rankes family : the situation 
is lofty, and the surrounding prospects are remark- 
ably fine. 

St. Helen's Auckland, a chapelry to St. Andrew's, 
lies about three miles south-south-west, from Bi- 
shops Auckland, and \\Yst Auckland lies at tlia 
distance of .'3 '- miles south-west by south, from the 

Samn town. 

AXWELL PARK.] Axwell Park, between Swall- 
well and Winlaton Mill, is the principal seat of Sir 
Thomas Claveriug, Bart, whose aoeertor, Serlo de 
Burgh, came into England with the Conqueror. 
The surname of Clawing wan given to this family 
by Edward the First. The mansion, which is ele- 
gant and modern, was built by Payne : its site is 
elevated and pleasant, and its grounds, delightfully 
varied with irregular swells, are ornamented with 
great judgment by plantations of forest trees. To 
the east, the Tyne, with Newcastle and Gainsbo- 
rough, presents a delightful view, whilst the wood- 
lands of Gibsid^e, with the adjacent country, afford 
a fine prospect to the south. During the reign ef 
Queen Elizabeth, the family of Clavering were first 
seated here. 

AYCLIFIE.] The ancient village of Great A-JT- 
cliffe, six miles north from Darlington, formerly 
belonged to the see of Lindisfarne, but was after- 
wards assigned by Biishop Aldune to the earls of 
Northumberland : a sypod was held bore, accord- 
ing to the Saxon Chreuicie, in -the year 782, and 
another in the year 7-89. The Church, dedicated 
to St. Aeca, occupies an elevated site, at some 
distance from the village southward. The m#ks 
of the Conqueror's devastation ;ire evident within 
a mile from this village ; for when the grass is cut 
the foundation of a town is apparent. 

BAII, HILL.] The summit of this hill, which 
stands on Barnard Castle Moor, commands a very 
fine and extensive prospect. It has been fortified 
by a breast-work, and dec]) trench, terminating in 
a morass. Many coins of Edward the First, and 
some of Alexander, king of Scots, have been found 
near this spot. 

BARNARD CASTLE.] The market-town of Bar- 
nard 



DURHAM. 



277 



nard Castle, distant 25 miles south-west by west 
from Durham, and 246| north-north-west from 
London, is situated on the southern acclivity of an 
eminence, rising with a steep ascent from the river 
Tees. The castle, from which the town appears to 
have derived its name and origin, was founded hy 
Barnard son of Guy Biiliol, who accompanied Wil- 
liam the Conqueror to England, and to whom Wil- 
liam Rufus granted the forests of Keesdale, and 
Marwood, with the rich lordships of Midtlleton, and 
Gaiasfonl, their royal franchises, liberties, and im- 
munities ; the inhabitants of which had free burgage 
granted them by Barnard, son ol the former Bar- 
nard, which were confirmed with additional liber- 
ties by his son and successor Hugh Baliol, at which 
period Alexander, King of Scotland, made an in- 
cursion into England, and after conquering all the 
fortresses in Northumberland for Louis the Freuch 
monarch, sat down before this castle, at which time 
Eustace de Vesey, the brother-in-law of Alexander, 
and who was out with a reconnoitring party, lost 
his life by an arrow from a cross bow. The castle, 
however, seems not to have been assailed. An 
hospital, which survived the Dissolution, and still 
receives three alms-women, was founded by John 
Baliol, the next possessor, who was the successful 
claimant to the crown of Scotland, adjudged to him 
by Edward the First. The estates of Baliol, whose 
defection happened subsequently to this, Bishop 
Beck laid claim to as belonging to the jure regalia, 
of his palatinate ; Edward, however, to humble the 
haughty prelate, as well as to diminish the too great 
power of a subject, seized the palatinate. Upon 
being restored to the see, it'was found to have been 
deprived of many of the privileges which it had 
received, by the forfeitures of Baliol and Bruce. 
We find by Bishop Godwin, that the castle under- 
went considerable repairs, whilst he possessed it. 

Edward, determined to mortify the Bishop, and 
abridge his power, gave the Castle, and its members, 
to Guy Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, in whose 
family it continued. for five generations. Tt after- 
wards came to the Crown ; and Richard the Third, 
who took great delight in the place, contributed 
much to its embellishment : his armorial bearings 
still appear not only in the walls of the castle, but 
in several parts of the town. It lias been a crown 
domain ever since. The castle, honour, and pri- 
vileges, with the parks, lands, and appurtenances, 
were purchased by an ancestor of the. present Karl 
of Darlington ; and King Charles the First, 1010, 
granted to Sir Henry Vane, sundry privileges an- 
nexed to his manor of Raby, and honour of Castle 
Barnard. William the Third, in 1090, created the 
latter a barony ; and it is now the second title in the 
Earldom of Darlington. 

Hutchinson, in his history of this county, de- 
scribes the remains of the castle as covering about 
six acres and three quarters of ground : the parts 
of chief strength stand on the brink of a steep rock, 
bout eighty perpendicular feet above the Tees, on 

vol.. n. NO. 6-5. 



the north-east corner of the principal area, com- 
manding a most beautiful prospect up the river. 
The area on the side of the market-place appears 
not to have had any communication with the chief 
strong-holds and bulwarks of the fortress; and is 
separated from the interior buildings by a deep 
fosse, which surrounds the rest of the castle. Thi 
area is fenced with a high wall along the edge of 
the rocks behind Brig-gate. The gateway to th* 
Flatts opens from a large area to the ancient road, 
which communicated with the ford. This area, to- 
gether with that already mentioned, were anciently 
used to receive the cattle of the adjacent country, 
in times of invasion or danger. The gateway is 
defended by a demi-bastion, and in the broken walla 
are appearances of maskings r.nd out-works. At a 
turn of the wall, southward, was a tower which 
flanked the wall towards the gate, from which over 
the fosse was a draw-bridge. This area contains 
the remains of some edifices, one of which is called 
Brackenbury's Tower. The chief strong-holds 
stand on more elevated ground than any within th 
arens described ; they were surrohnded by a dry 
ditch, or covered way, with small gateways through 
the intersecting walls : this ditch is terminated on 
one hand by a sally-port, which commanded the 
bridge to the west ; and on the other by a sally-port 
to the north ; the covered way almost surrounding 
the inner fortress. The area, in which the chief 
erections were arranged, is nearly circular ; the 
buildings are of different ajras. Northward, the 
walls are of modern and superior architecture, sup- 
ported by strong buttresses, and defended by a 
square turret towards the east : to the south, the 
wall appears very ancient and thick, and has been 
strengthened, by trains or lines of large cak beams, 
disposed iu tiers in the centre of the wall, at equal 
distances, so as to render it firm against battering 
engines : on each side of the sally-port to the 
bridge, within the gate, was a semicircular or demi- 
bastion, loaded with earth to the top, very strong', 
and of rough stone-work, chiefly blue flints : the 
greatest part of one of these bastions still remains : 
here are some of the most ancient parts of the castle. 
The west side of the area contained the principal 
lodgings, in some parts six stories high ; the state 
rooms stood in this quarter : two large pointed 
Windows, looking upon the river, seem to be the 
most modern ; together with a bow-window, hung 
on corbies in the upper ceiling : here is the figure of 
a boar passant, relieved, and in good preservation. 
Adjoining to these apartments, and on the north- 
west corner of the fortress, is a circular tower, of 
excellent masonry, in ashler work, having a vault, 
the roof of which is plain, without ribs or central 
pillar. This vault is tbjrty feet in diameter ; the 
stairs of the ascent to the upper apartments are 
channelled in the wall. In the adjoining grounds, 
called the Flatts, is a large reservoir, cut in swampy 
ground, called the Ever : water was collected and 
conveyed thither iu pipes, to supply the garrison 
4 A and 



278 



DURHAM. 



and cattle inclosed within the walls of the outer 
areas in times of public danger ; for which protec- 
tion the adjacent lands paid a rent, called Castle- 
guard rent, for the castle land. The outer area" of 
the Castle is now used as a pasture for sheep ; and 
other parts inclosed by the walls have been long 
converted into orchard ground. The wall which 
surrounds the circular area, has a narrow passage 
tunning' through the middle, of scarcely sufficient 
extent to admit one person to creep through. Many 
portions of the ruins are richly mantled with ivy, 
and present, very fine views, particularly from the 
eouth bank of the river, which washes the foot of 
the rock on which the Castle stands, and whose 
ides are cloathed with fine wood. Sir George 
Bowes, of gtreatlam, on the rumour of the rebellion 
of the Earls of Westmoreland and Northumberland, 
in the reign of Elizabeth, possessed himsslf of this 
fortress, and resisted the whole power of the insur- 
gents for eleven days, when he surrendered on ho- 
nourable terms. The bridge, which then crossed 
the Tees, was destroyed in the contest : the pre- 
sent bridge, consisting of two elliptical arches, was 
built in 1596. 

The whole of the district in which Barnard Cas- 
tle is situated appears formerly to have borne the 
name of Marwood, and to have belonged to the 
Wapentake of Sadberg ; in consequence of which 
it was exempt from the jurisdiction of the Bishop, 
until Sadberg was united to this see. Marwood 
seems to have been the name of a town, which was 
distant half a mile from the Castle, no other vestige 
of which but an old building now remains, said to 
have been the church, but at present used as a 
barn. 

The town of Barnard Castle, which contains 457 
houses, and 2986 persons, is about a mile in length, 
and possesses one of the largest corn markets in 
the north of England. The Market Cross, Tol- 
booth, or Town House, however, and the shambles, 
are situated very inconveniently, in the middle of 
the road. The Market Cross, which is neat, is built 
of free-stone, and its sides are open for the accom- 
modation of the people. The church, or chapel, of 
Barnard Castle, forming part of the parish of Gains- 
ford, is only remarkable for its base bell which is 
rery ancient, and 'is said to have been brought from 
Eggleston Abbey ; and an octagonal font of black 
marble, with devices symbolical of the Trinity, on 
four of its sides, and on the other four, shields in- 
scribed with Saxon characters in cyphers, express- 
ing its dedication Pater Fitius et Spiritus Sanctus. 
The houses are disposed in several streets. The 
labouring classes of the inhabitants are chiefly em- 
ployed in the manufacture of Scotch camblets, or 
tammies, and in the tanning and stocking businesses. 
Of late years, the woollen trade has greatly de- 
clined, through the rise of the cotton manufactures. 

The environs of Barnard Castle are extremely 
beautiful ; the vale of the Tees affording pictu- 
resque and romantic views. In fact, the whole of 



the river, from the place where it takes its rise to 
Winston and Gainsford, yields such a rich combi- 
nation of delightful objects, that the most melan- 
choly person could not but be amused and interest- 
ed by their appearance. 

BKARPARK.] This place, anciently called Beau- 
repaire, lies about two miles north-west from Dur- 
ham, on a pleasant eminence rising over the river 
Brune or Browney. Here are the ruins of an old 
mansion, which belonged to the priors of Durham 
Monastery. Bcaurepaire formerly belonged to the 
see, but Prior Bertram, who built a hous and 
chapel here, in 1250, received it in exchange. The 
buildings were improved and inclosed in a park by 
Hugh de Darlington, but were plundered and de- 
stroyed by the Scots in the reign of Edward the 
Ilnd. and afterwards in the year 1346, previously 
to the battle of Neville's Cross, when Beanrepaire 
was in the possession of Prior Fossour, wlo is sup- 
jwsed to have rebuilt the house and chapel. After 
the Dissolution, the manor was assigned for the 
maintenance of the Dean and Chapter, and at pre- 
sent is a part of the Dean's estate. The ruins of 
the chapel aro the most perfect, and present the 
remains of some neat ornamental architecture : parts 
of the refectory and dormitory still exist. Beaure- 
paire became celebrated, from. David King of Scots 
encamping here with his army, previously to the 
famous battle of Red Hills, or Neville's Cross, so 
called from an elegant stone cross erected by Ralph 
Lord Neville in remembrance of the victory. The 
battle, which took place on the 17th of October, 
1346, though only of three hours' continuance, 
proved dreadfully destructive. The groond where 
the battle was fought is about a mile west from 
Durham ; it is hilly, and in some parts very steep, 
particularly towards the river. Near it, in a deep 
vale, is a small mount, or hillock, called the Maiden's 
Bower, on which the Holy Corporex Cloth, where- 
with St. Cuthbert covered the chalice when he used 
to say mass, was displayed on the point of a spear, 
by the monks of Durham, who when the victory 
was obtained, gave notice by signal to their bre- 
thren stationed on the great tower of the Cathedral, 
who immediately proclaimed it to the inhabitants of 
the city, by singing Te Deum. From that period 
the victory was annually commemorated in a simi- 
lar manner by the clfbristers, till the occurrence of 
the Civil Wars of Charles I. when the custom was 
discontinued ; but again revived on the Restora- 
tion, and observed till within the last five and twen- 
ty or thirty years. The cross erected by Lord Ne- 
ville stood near the road side : it was defaced and 
broken down in the year 1589 ; some steps, and 
part of the base, are yet to be seen. 

BINCHESTER.] Bincliestcr is situated in the 
north-west division of Darlington Ward, one mile 
north by east from Bishop's Auckland. The manor 
belongs to the Wren family, in which it has been 
since the timo of James I. at the commencement of 
whose reign, the manor-house, a venerable struc- 
ture 



DURHAM. 



279 



turc -with 'Wings, appears to have been erected. Bin- 
cherter is a place of' great antiquity, the undoubted 
site of a considerable Roman station called Vino- 
vium by Antoriiuus, and Binovium, by Ptolemy. 
The exact dimensions and form of this station are 
difficult to ascertain, the walls having been destroy- 
ed, and the area having been inclosed and cultivated. 
It occupies the brow of an emiirence, and com- 
mands an extensive prospect, -particularly to the 
north and south. From the numerous antiquities 
found at this station, it was deemed by Mr. Cade an 
inexhaustible repository ; end in the collection of 
Mr. Wren, the proprietor of the manor, are se- 
veral elegant intaglios, which were found here, with 
a variety of silver and copper coins, both of the 
Upper and Lower empire, to the time of Valen- 
tinian and Theodosius. It is remarked in the Ar- 
ehaeologia, that " perhaps the Roman pottery at 
Vinovium has been equal, if not superior, to most 
in Britain. I have seen some fragments of bowls 
and vases, enriched with vine branches, and others 
entire, which appear to have been used as sacrific- 
ing vessels ; together with a vast variety of speci- 
mens of different compositions, some resembling 
terra cotta, and others of glass." 

BisHOpfon.] Bishopton, a small village in the 
south-west division of Stockton Ward, six miles 
west- north- west from Stockton, is entitled to notice 
as the place where the brave Roger Coniers, of the 
Comers family of Stockburn, opposed with success 
the soldiers of William Cumin, who usurped the 
see in the l-2th century. A little plain, east of the 
village, which an adjacent eminence overlooks, was 
the spot fixed upon by Coniers for his strong hold. 
There still remains a mount of a conical shape, en- 
vironed with trenches, and rising with a steep ac- 
clivity. It is marshy to the north, and is able to 
furnish the ditches with water, bat rises gradually 
to the south. The mount measures two hundred 
paces in circumference, and is sixty feet high per- 
pendicularly : its summit is almost level, and from 
north to south is ten paces wide, and sixteen from 
east to west, but no traces of buildings are visible 
on its top. 

BLACK HALLS.] Situated about five miles to the 
north of Hartlepool, this forms one of the most sin- 
gular and romantic clusters of rocks in the north of 
England : it derives its imme from the various ca- 
verns, of which some go many yards beyond day- 
light, whilst others are open, and rest on natural 
pillars. The waves, by their constant force and 
motion, have fashioned them, and have likewise se- 
parated from the shore immense masacs, some of 
which they have entirely washed away, whilst they 
have left others standing, which resemble the large 
towers of a cathedral : in some places the rock is 
perforated in such a manner as to appear like a fine 
pointed arch gateway. 

BOLDON.] East and West Boldon, situated about 
four miles north-west from Sunderland, are de- 
serving of notice only from having given title to the 

6 



provincial Doomsday Book, styled the Bolden Buke, 
from its numerous references to services within this 
manor. The villains hold under several tenures, 
and wore compelled to labour three days in the 
week, Easter and Whitsuntide weeks' being er- 
cepted, also thirteen days at Christmas, and were 
obliged to make different payments. 

BRADLEY HALL.] This mansion, belonging to the 
Bowes family, but now neglected and in a state of 
ruin, is situated in a delighful valley, 'on the bor- 
ders of Houslip Park. Bishop Langley, in the 
reign of Henry Vlth, embattled it by licence, and 
strengthened it with deep moats and a curtain wall. 
There is a projection in the front which appears to 
be of the time of James I. with large windows, and 
is better finished than the other parts of the edifice. 
Its lower apartments are vaulted. 

BRANDON.] Brandon, divided into East and 
West, lies 3| miles west-south-west from Durham. 
To the right of the road is Brandon village, in the 
neighbourhood of a high hill, commanding an ex- 
tensive view, and from which eight castles, and an 
immense range of country may be seen. There is 
a remarkable oblotig tumulus on the summit of the 
hill, 120 paces round at its base, and 24 feet in 
perpendicular height, bat it has the appearance of 
having never been opened. In the Church, which 
is an old bailding, are several tombs of the Ne- 
villes. 

BRANCEPETH.] Brancepeth lies 4f miles west- 
south-west from Durham. The Chnrch, dedicated 
to St. Brandon, is an ancient structure, of the 
conventual form, but apparently of different ages. 
The inside is neatly decorated ; particularly the 
chancel, which is divided from the nave by a pointed 
arch, closed with gates, and stalls, canopied and 
finished to the roof with tabernacle work. In the 
middle of the chancel is the monument and burial- 
place of MARGARET, daughter of Hugh, first Earl 
of Strafford, and first wife to Ralph, the first Earl 
of Westmoreland. The tomb displays the effigies 
of the Earl and his lady in wood : the former is 
represented in a helmet and coat of mail, the hands 
elevated with gauntlets, a collar studded with gems 
round the neck, and on the breast, a shield with 
the arms of Neville. The latter has a high crowned 
bonnet, and a mantle drawn close over the feet, 
which rest on two dogs eouchant. On the south of 
the chancel, is a porch, or chapel, wherein several 
of fue Nevilles have been interred, and in which 
two table monuments of (haft family yet remain, but 
withetrt inscriptions. " Ther lyoth in that c'hapille," 
says Leland, " a Countess of Westmorland, sister 
to Bouth, Archbishop of York : also the Lord Ne- 
ville, father of the Erie that now in. This Lord 
Neville died, bis father the Krle yet lyving, where- 
upon the Erie tok much thought, and died at Hor- 
neby Castelle, in Richmondshir, and tber is buried 
in the paroch chirch. The Erie of Westmerland 
that is now, had an elder brother, and he lyeth in a 
little tombe of marble, by the high altar, on the 

south 



280 



DURHAM. 



south side, and at. the feete of hym be buried four 
children of the Erie's that now lyveth." At the 
end of the north transept -is a recumbent effigy, 
supposed to be one of the Roberts de Neville, of a 
colossal size, finely cut in stone. The figure ap- 
pears in a coat of mail, and hood of chain work ; on 
the left arm is a shield with the arms of Neville, and 
a label of five flambeaux; the legs are crossed, and 
supported on a lion ; and beneath the cushion which 
sustains the head is a group of lions : on the left 
side is a bear muzzled. In this transept are also 
two ancient tombs, supposed to belong to the Bul- 
mers, Lords of the manor, by whom Brancepeth 
Castle was built. Ralph Lord Neville and Isabel 
his wife, by licence granted by Bishop Dudley, Sep- 
tember 20th, 1-183, founded a chantry here ; a se- 
cond chantry was also founded in this church, but 
by whom has been long since forgotten. 

Brancepeth Castle, already alluded to, as having 
been erected by the Buhner family, is an irregular, 
but stately pile. It is supposed to have been built 
during the early part of the usurpation of Stephen, 
when, to strengthen his own cause, he gave the 
Barons permission to build fortresses, and embattle 
their mansions. " Emma, daughter and heiress of 
Bertram Buhner, married Robert Nevill, grandson 
of Gilbert de Nevill, who came into England with 
the Conqueror ; by whom she had two children, a 
son and daughter. Henry, the son, assisted the 
confederate Barons against King John, to whom, 
in the seventeenth of his reign, he gave 100 marks 
to be restored to favor, and, as a pledge of future 
fidelity, delivered two hostages, and his castle of 
Brancepeth, into the King's hands, to be held at 
his pleasure. Henry dying without issue, in the 
eleventh year of Henry the Third, his sister Isabel, 
became his sole inheritrix, and was married to Ro- 
bert Fitz-Maldred, Lord of Raby, by whom she 
had a son, called Geoffrey, who, in honour of his 
mother, assumed the name of Nevill : from this 
marriage sprang the famous Earls of Westmore- 
land. On the rebellion of the Nevills, in the reign 
of Queen Elizabeth, the castle and lordship of Bran- 
cepeth became forfeited, and were vested in the 
crown by a special act ; but in the eighth of Charles 
the First, they were sold, under the authority of 
Letters Patent, to Lady Middleton, and others. 
Three years afterwards, they were made over to 
Ralph Cole, Esq. of Newcastle, in trust for his son, 
afterwards Sir Nicholas Cole. His son, Sir Ralph 
Cole, in consideration of the sum of 16,800/. and 
annuities on the lives of himself and wife, conveyed 
them, in April 1701, to Sir Henry Bellasyse, Knt. 
whose grand-daughter dying in 1774, devised them 
to the Earl of Fanconberg. Soon afterwards the 
Earl sold them to the late John Tempest, Esq. but 
they have since been purchased by William Russel, 



* " fP'on," a term employed by the miners, to signify the 
actual "possession" or working of the ore. 



Esq. The whole estate consists of about 4600 
acres, all of freehold tenure." 

BURNHALL.] This manor, formerly the seat of the 
Smith's, one of whom G. Smith, Esq. made many 
improvements to it, is at present possessed by Bryan 
Salvin, Esq. The house is situated in a low and 
retired spot on the banks of a rivulet named the 
Browney, which falls into the Wear not far from 
Sunderland Bridge. 

BCTTERBY.] The manor of Butterby, or Beau- 
trove, about 2| miles south from Durham, consti- 
tuted part of the ancient possessions of the Lum- 
leys, of Lumley Castle ; from whom it is supposed 
to have passed, in marriage to Sir John Clervaux, 
whose daughter was wedded to Christopher Chay- 
tor, who held it in the eighth year of Elizabeth. It 
was sold, in 1713, to Thomas, John, and Humphrey 
Doubleday ; and soon afterwards, by purchase, it 
became the sole property of the latter ; save one- 
third of the produce of the salt springs, which, was 
reserved to the use of John and his heirs. Hum- 
phrey's widow devised the manor upon trust to be 
sold ; and about twenty or twenty- five years ago, it 
was purchased by Mr. Ward, of Sedgcfield. The 
mansion, which stands in a low and recluse situa- 
tion, near the banks of the Wear, is encompassed by 
a walled moat, which though dry, can be filled with 
water to the depth of fifteen feet. In this moat, 
some years ago, a coat of mail, with other armour, 
was discovered in a large stone trough ; and in an. 
adjacent field, in which an ancient hospital, dedi- 
cated to St. Leonard, is supposed to have stood, 
many stone coffins, aud jars for holy water, have 
been dug up. The grounds belonging to this ma- 
nor are remarkably fertile : " the river near the 
house," observes Hutchiuson, " falls swiftly over a 
rough channel, under high rocky shores and hang- 
ing-woods, forming a canal a mile in length, where 
the adjacent lands make a considerable plain. There 
is not a sweeter rural scene in the whole country, 
unadorned, and in simple nature ; for art has not 
yet extended her hand hither, further than in the 
ordinary course of agriculture. This place is as 
remarkable for its natural curiosities as its beauty : 
surrounded with, the river, from the fissure of a rock 
in the bed of the channel, about forty feet from the 
shore, flows a considerable spring of salt water, 
mixed with a mineral quality. The situation of the 
spring subjects it to a mixture of fresh water, so 
that it is difficult to know how much salt it contains 
in its purest state : on several trials, it has yielded 
double the quantity produced from sea-water. The 
shore, for a considerable distance, shows many 
ouzings, or small issues of salt-water ; and by a 
dyke, or break in the rocks in the channel of the 
river, a little above the spring, it is presumed a rock 
or bed of salt might be won* of some value. ru: " 



This 



water 



DURHAM. 



water is reputtd to be an effectual remedy for dis- 
eases caused by the deleterious fumes arising in 
smelting and rt fining-houses belonging to the lead- 
works. Half a pint is sufficiently purgative for the 
strongest person." Nearly opposite the salt-spring, 
about two hundred yards distant, is a sulphureous 
spring, a chalybeate spring, and a spring of fresh- 
water, all issuing through the fissures of the neigh- 
bouring rocks. The two first were discovered by 
some workmen employed ill boring for coal. At 
the depth of 80 feet they discovered the sulphure- 
ous spring : they tried the rock about 300 feet dis- 
tant, and at nearly the same depth found the spring 
of fresh water. Both these springs issue through 
the holes which were made by the instruments. The 
chalybeate spring was opened more recently, when 
a narrow road was cut for the use of a stone quarry. 
On a rising ground between Butterby and Durham, 
is a modern Plantation, belonging to the Dean and 
Chapter, covering an extent of nine or ten acres. 
This spot forms a nursery for the supply af the pre- 
bendal estates, some millions of young trees being 
annually sent away, and re-planted. Trees of al- 
most every variety of oak, beech, larch, pine, fir, 
ash, &c. are here produced ; and the attention paid 
to their growth, to the arrangement of the beds, 
and to every concern necessary to the improvement 
of the Plantation, reflects the greatest praise on 
those who have the care of the concern. 

CAULDON SNOUT.] This is one of the cataracts 
on the Tees, about four miles from another named 
High Force. It forms, with ttye wild aud romantic 
parts adjacent, a spectacle of immense and colossal 
sublimity. The river which issues from a deep and 
drowsy lake, named the Weeld, precipitates itself 
over an immense quantity of whin, or basaltic rock, 
and is dashed from steep to steep in sheets of foam, 
which constitute a chain of cascades through a de- 
clivity of 600 yards. A beam of timber, which an- 
swers the purpose of a bridge, and which the most 
daring cannot pass without shuddering, hat been 
thrown across the deepest and most dreadful part 
of the gulph, where the rocks are nearest to each 
other. This river is a mile and a half long ; into 
which the waters of the Tees run, on their descend- 
ing from the deep and narrow gleus which attend 
them as they advance from the rising- grounds of 
Cross-fell. 

CAUSEY BURNE.] Near Tanfield, in the middle 
division of Chester Ward, is a deep and romantic 
glen, called Causey Burne ; over which a remarka- 
ble arcli was thrown about the year 1729, to obtain 
a level for the passage of coal waggons. The span 
of the arch measures 103 feet ; it springs from 
abutments nine feet high ; and from its semicircular 
form, its entire elevation is sixty feet. Embank- 
ments of earth, forty feet high in several places, 
preserve its level. The sum of l?,000/. was ex- 
pended in its construction, which was paid by the 
associates, locally called the Grand Allies. Ralph 
Wood, a common mason, is said to have beea the 
. n. jio. 65. 



architect. He had before constructed an arch, 
which from its deficiency in weight fell down ; and 
he committed suicide, from a dread that this might 
meet "with a similar misfortune, 

CHESTER-LE-STREET.] This ancient and respec- 
table village lies in the middle division of Chetor 
Ward, miles north by east from Durham. It is 
pleasantly situated in a valley to the west of the 
river Wear, on tiie Roman military way, leading to 
Newcastle. Camden supposes it to be the Coiuler- 
cum of the Romans ; but to all appearance, with- 
out proper evidence, as no inscriptions, nor other 
data, are found to warrant the infereHce. The 
Saxoiis gave it the name of Cuncestre, or Cune- 
agester, and under that name it became the episco- 
pal see of Durham ; Eardulph, at that time Bishop, 
removing to this place from Crake Minster about 
the year 883, and erecting a church for St. Cuth- 
bert's body. Egebric, fourth Bishop of Durham, 
displeased with the meanness of the church which 
his predecessor had built of wood, erected a more 
splendid edifice. Whilst it was building, a great 
treasure was discovered. This the Bishop made 
use of for the purpose of enriching the monastery of 
Peterborough, of which he had been a monk. On 
the see being transferred to Durham, this place, 
stripped of its state and authority, became a paro- 
chial rectory, until Bishop Beck made the church 
collegiate, and appointed a Dean, seven Preben- 
daries, five Chaplains, and three Deacons, &c. In 
this state it remained until the time of the Dissolu- 
tion, when that which had been estimated in the 
time of Edward the First, at 146/. 1 3s. Id. was not 
valued at more than 111. 12s. 8d. in the twentieth of 
Henry VHIth. The present church consists of a> 
handsome stone edifice, with a nave, side aisles, 
and tower : the latter of which is square at the base, 
but above it is octagonal; and more modeqp, and 
has an elegant stone spire, one of the finest in the 
north of England, which measures altogether 156 
feet in height. Its inside is neat, and in good pre- 
servation, and has a set of monuments of the bu- 
ried ancestry of the noble family of Lumley, ar- 
ranged in a peculiar manner. 

The Deanery House, at present the seat of the 
ancient family of Hedworth, is delightfully. situated; 
it commands a beautiful view of Lumley Castle, 
aud is surrounded by fine meadows : the manor, 
which is a copyhold, is the property of the Bishop, 
and has a very extensive jurisdiction, it has a co- 
roner, and the ward derives its name from it. 

Chester-le- Street being on the great post road 
from London' to Edinburgh, and contiguous to nu- 
merous coal works, is very populous. The houses, 
mostly of stone, are chiefly arranged in one street, 
nearly a mile in length. On the adjoining moor is 
a race course, which at certain seasons, is well at- 
tended. 

COCKEN HALI..] -Cocken Hall, the beautiful but 

neglected mansion of Carr Ibbctson, Esq. about 

2$ miles south from Luuiley Castle, has been much 

4 B celebrated 



282 



DURHAM. 



celebrated by travellers, for its variegated and pic- 
turesqus scenery, but the uncultivated state of its 
grounds, and the cutting down of the woods of late 
years, have greatly taken from its former beauty. 
The Hall is built oil an eminence, which is bounded j 
on the cast by deep dells, and on the other three j 
sides by the Wear, which runs through a low j 
rocky channel, with different degrees of rapidity. \ 
The cliffs in some places rise in a perpendicular j 
manner to the height of a hundred feet, whilst in 
others the grounds slope gradually to the brink of 
the river. The ruins of Finchale Priory form a 
very interesting and grand view, from the terrace 
at the bottom of the cliff. Vines and fruit trees 
were formerly planted on the southern aspect of ! 
the rocks. 

COCKFIELD.] The village of Cockfield lies eight 
miles north by east from Barnard Castle. On 
Cookfield Fell are many Hues, and ancient en- 
trenchments, of unknown origin ; but the dyke, or 
break in the strata, which " throws up to the 
southward, three fathoms," the seams of stone, and 
of coal (with which this district abounds) presents 
a most singular appearance. It is about fifteen or 
sixteen yards in width, and, according to Hutchia- 
son, is filled with the same kind of substance as Der- 
byshire toadstone, and otherwise has a similar ap- 
pearance to that of the dislocated strata of that 
county. Shot are cast here in one of the shafts of 
a colliery. To perform this operation, they " poison" 
the lead, when sufficiently heated, with arsenic, and 
pour it through an iron sieve, with various sized 
holes, into a large tub of water, placed to receive 
it at the bottom of the shaft. By this process the 
shot receive their round form, and are afterwards 
shaken in a barrel with black lead dust, by which 
means they become polished for use. The depth of 
the fall is 150 feet ; between two and three tons of 
shot are easily made by this method in one day. 

CORNHILL.] Cornhill, a township and chapelry 
belonging to the parish of Norham, in the district 
of that name, lies 12 miles north- west by north from 
Wooler, at a small distance from the river Tweed, 
over which it has a large bridge, of six arches, of 
white free-stone. A small but neat Chapel stands 
in the centre of the village. It formerly liad a cas-r 



* Darlington is thus particularly noticed, in the Boldon 
Buke: " It then contained forty oxgangs of land in the hands 
of villain tenants, for each of which the lord received five shil- 
lings; their service consisted of mowing the Bishop's meadows, 
winning and leading the hay, for which work they received a 
corody ; inclosing the limits of the court, whence the term, 
" Verge of the Court." They were also to work at the mill, 
to bring one load of wood for every oxgang, to carry the Bi- 
shop's baggage on his circuit, and also to convey to him yearly 
three loads of wine, herrings, and salt. Twelve other tenants 
held each an oxgang of land, and paid rent as villains, but 
only served as attendants on the Bishop's embassies. The 
Smith held eight acres, for iron-work about the carts of Little 
Walton, and for small iron-works within Darlington Court. 
The Cottage-men served to make the ricks of hay, bear in the 
orn, and repair the mills, The Finder held nine acres of land, 



tie, which owing to its situation, used frequently to 
betaken and pillaged by the Scots. In the neigh- 
bourhood of this village are some springs, said to 
possess considerable medicinal virtue. 

CROXDALE HALL.] Croxdale Hall, about 3| 
miles south by west from Durham, is the seat of the 
Salvin family, in whose possession it has been ever 
since the year 1474. The pleasure grounds are 
beautiful, and the adjoining wood and plantations 
render it a very desirable residence. A small rivu- 
let, named Croxdale Beck, flows round the western 
extremity of the grounds, whose channel is in a ro- 
mantic dell, so deep and narrow as scarcely to be 
penetrated by the rays of the sun ; and in the days 
of superstition it was thought an abode well adapted 
for evil spirits. This idea occasioned a cross to be 
erected, which afterwards gave name to the lands 
adjoining, styled Croixdale, 411 many ancient writ- 
ings. Croxdale Scarr, a cliff which is in the neigh- 
bourhood, enjoys a most beautiful and extensive 
view of the valley towards the west, through which 
the river meanders for several miles. From this 
spot may also be seen the vale of Butterby, watered 
by the crystal streams of the Wear. Other plea- 
sant views are contemplated on its different sides. 

CONISCLIFF.] High, or Church Coniscliff is 
situated four miles west by north from Darlington. 
From the numerous antiquities which have been 
found at this place, and in its immediate vicinity, 
it was evidently a considerable station in the time 
of the Romans. The military way from Binchester 
is visible near the town. The Church stands on a 
bold cliff of lime- stone. 

DARLINGTON.] This large and populous market- 
town, which is also a borough by prescription, is 
situated in the south-east division of the Ward to 
which it gives name ; 19 miles south from Dur- 
ham, and 243 north-north-west from London. It 
is of very remote origin.* The town is situated on 
the side of a hill, gently inclining to the east, at the 
foot of which flows the river Skern, over which is a 
bridge of three arches. If the circumstance is true, 
that the Skern was anciently called the Da/', or Der, 
the name of the town may have been derived from 
that word, from the Saxon Inge, signifying a mea- 
dow bordering upon a river, and from Ton, a viilje 



and had his thraves, like others, in that office, and provided 
fire score hens, and five hundred eggs, for the household. 
The mills of Darlington, Haughton, and Kclton, paid thirty 
marks. The burgagers, dyers, and farmers, rendered ten 
marks." Theferme, or firma, our law expositors define to 
be a royal tribute, for the sovereign's entertainment for cue 
night on his journies, and it was the badge of a royal borough 
or.ville. In the Survey taken by BMiop Hntficld, it appear? 
that the tolls of fairs and markets, with the profits of (he mills, 
suits of the tenants of Whestow, bakehouse, assize of breai! 
and beer, profits of the borough court, and of the dyers, pro- 
t'uced no less a sum than 90/. and the fanners of tin- borougl 
rights, with other receipts, paid a rent of fourscore and four- 
teen pounds, six shillings. Bishop Beck inclosed a park be- 
longing to the manor; and several persons of high rank hek 
lauds in Darlington. 

o 



DURHAM. 



283 



or towu. It consists of several streets, branching 
from an extensive square in which the market is 
held ; and has a clean and respectable appearance. 
Soon after the episcopal See was established at 
Durham, iu the time of King- Ethelred, Stere, a 
nobleman, obtained permission from the King, that 
DerJiiigton, with its appendages, should be restored 
to St. Cuthbert, to which restitution, the King, 
Wulston, Archbishop of York, and Bishop Aldwine, 
became witnesses. When Bishop Carilepho re- 
moved the Seculars from the Cathedral at Durham, 
this towu was appointed one of the places for their 
reception. 

The Church is the principal ornament of the town. 
It stands at the south-west angle of the Market 
Place, and was erected by Bishop Hugh Pudsey, 
about the year 1160. Between that period and 
1164, the same Prelate built a mansion-house near 
the church ; and also instituted a Deanery, with 
three secular Canons or Prebendaries. These 
works he is supposed to have effected with the vast 
sums of public money which he had rigorously ex- 
torted for the alledged purpose of redeeming the 
King from captivity. When the College of Pre- 
bendaries was dissolved in the reign of Edward the 
Sixth, A. D. 1550, notwithstanding the opulence of 
the foundation, and the extent of the parish, only a 
small portion was reserved for the maintenance of a 
minister ; the annual net produce amounting to no 
more than 22/. 6*. Sd. 

Darlington Church is a spacious structure, in the 
form of a cross, with a tower and spire rising from 
the centre, to the height of 180 feet : the stone of 
which it is built, is supposed to have been brought 
from Cockfield-fiell, about twelve miles distant. 
The west-door is highly finished with archings and 
pilasters, alternately cylindrical and octagonal. 
Previously to the Dissolution, here were four chan- 
tries ; one of which, called Marshall's Chantry, was 
amply endowed ; and the endowments having been 
vested in the Crown, were, in the reign of Queen 
Elizabeth, granted for the foundation of a Grammar 
School, through the solicitations of Henry, Earl of 
Darlington, and Bishop Pilkington. The charter 
was granted on the 15th of June, 1567 ; and a por- 
trait of the royal foundress, with the charter in her 
hand, was placed in the School, by the late George 
Allan, Esq. F. S. A. as a memorial of his gratitude 
in having received part of his education there. The 
School, as well as the building formerly the Bi- 
shop's Palace, is situated near the margin of the 
river ; the latter having become very ruinous, was 
repaired by Bishop Cosin ; but having since his 
time been totally neglected, is now farmed of the 



* This gentleman painted, designed, and etched ; and was 
"likewise a good mrzzotinto engraver. With Ins professional 
skill lie blended much scienlihc knowledge, and Thoresby, in 
his Ducatus Leodiensis, informs us that he discovered an earth, 
and a method of making porcelain, which he first btgan to 
jjiaimiacture at the niaiiiion-house at York ; and of which ina- 



Bishop's housekeeper, who holds it by patent for 
life, as a Workhouse for the poor. Numerous cha- 
ritable donations have been made in this parish. 

The eligible situation of Darlington, its large 
market, which is abundantly supplied with corn, 
cattle, sheep, wool, &c. and the cheapness of pro- 
visions, render it a sort of emporium for manufac- 
tures. The woollen business is very flourishing ; 
particularly the ordinary kind of stuffs, as tamrneys, 
moreens, &c. Here is also a large manufactory 
of linens of different descriptions : particularly, 
diapers, huckabacks, and checks. The cotton ma- 
nufacture was introduced some years ago, and is 
in a very flourishing state. Near the town a mill 
has been erected for the grinding of optical glasses; 
the first of the kind ever constructed in Great Bri- 
tain. This, and another mill for the spinning of 
hemp and flax, were invented by the late ingenious 
John Kendrew, a native of Darlington. Here is 
also a third mill for the spinning of wool, by which, 
and the various manufactories, the labouring poor 
are well supplied with employment. Agriculture 
has been successfully pursued, iu the environs of 
Darlington, chiefly through the patronage of a re- 
spectable society, which holds its meetings in th 
town, and votes premiums according to merit. Dar- 
lington, including the townships of Archdeacon- 
Newton, Blackwell, and Cockerton, according to 
the last returns, contains 1012 houses, and 5820 
inhabitants : of the latter 2695 are males, and 3125 
females. 

DINSDALE.] Dinsdale, situated five miles south- 
east by east from Darlington, was the ancient seat 
of the Surtees, who settled here soon after the Con- 
quest, and in all probability, took their name (Sur- 
Tees) from the river's banks, on which their residence 
stood, i. e-. upon Tees ; they held the manor of the 
Lord of Castle Barnard, on condition of perform- 
ing military service. A moat was drawn round th 
Manor House, the remains of which have been 
converted into a farm-house. The family of Place 
obtained two parts of the manor by marriage, of 
which family Mr. Francis Place, an artist of great 
celebrity, lived about the latter end of the seven- 
teenth or beginning of the eighteenth century.* 

DURHAM, OLD.] This place, supposed, by Hut- 
chinson, to have been occupied by the Saxons pre- 
viously to the foundation of the present city, from 
which it is situated about three-quarters of a mile 
to the eastward, is thought by some to have been a 
Roman station. Some deep trenches, and earthern 
banks, may indeed be seen ; but the evidence of their 
Roman origin is by no means distinct. An en- 
campment, less impaired by the ravages of time, 



mifacture he gave Thoresby a beautiful mug. Me was fond of 
a rambling lite, and although in the reign of Charles If. he 
had 50(W. per annum, offered to him for his assistance in naval 
drawings, he revised it, being averse both to confinement and 
dependence. He died in 1728; many of his skelches and 
drawings of different parts of England are still preserved. 



2S4 



DURHAM. 



presents itself at a little distance, on the opposite 
bank of the river. This encampment, denominated 
Maiden Castle, occupies the summit of Maiden 
Castle Scar, and is considered by Dr. Stukeley, in 
his Ittr Boreale, to be Roman. " It is encom- 
passed," he remarks, " by a rivulet falling into the 
river from the east. It is of an oblong form, 500 
feet long, and very steep on three sides ; the neck 
is guarded by a rampart, and without that, at some 
little distance, by a ditch." The prospect, espe- 
cially to the eastward, is very extensive. Hutcbin- 
son is more specific in his description of this spot. 
" The Castle," says he, " is inaccessible from the 
river by reason of the steepness of the cliff, which 
is almost perpendicular, and about 100 feet in height. 
On the right and left the steep sides of the mount 
are covered with a thick forest of oaks : the crown 
of the mount consists of a level area or plain, 40 
paces wide on the Scar, on the front or north-east 
side; IbO paces long, on the left-hand side; and 
170 paces on the right. The approach from the 
south-west is fortified with a ditch arid breast- work : 
the entrance, or passage over the ditch, is not in the 
middle, but made to correspond with the natural 
rise of the outward ground : the ditch is 12 paces 
wide, and runs with a little curvature to each edge 
of the slope, now covered with wood, as before 
noted, on one hand 50 paces in length, on the other 
80 paces. After passing the ditch, there is a level 
parade or platform, 20 paces wide, and then a high 
earth fence, now nine feet in perpendicular, which 
it is apprehended was faced with masou work : a 
breast work has run from the earth-fence on each 
side along th brink of the hill, to the edge of the 
cliff or scar. The earth-fence closes the whole neck 
of land, aud is in length 100 paces, forming the 
aouth-west side of the area." 

DURHAM.] The city of Durham, distant 259| ' 
miles north by west from London, is seated on a 
remarkable rocky eminence, which rises near the I 
centre of the county, and is almost surrounded by I 
the river Wear. The approach to this city is emi- 
nently pleasing ; as from every point of view, its 
appearance is unique and striking : its public edifices 
exhibit a degree of magnificence unexpected at so 
remote, a distance from the metropolis ; and its si- j 
tuation and figure are so peculiar as to have pro- 
cured for it the emphatical denomination of the En- 
glish Zion. The centre of the eminence is occu- 
pied by the Cathedral, and the Castle, which com- 
mand a most beautiful and extensive prospect. 
These, with the streets called the Baileys, are in- 
cluded within the remains of the ancient city walls. 
Below the walls on one side, the slope is ornament- 
ed with hanging gardens, and plantations, descend- 
ing to the river ; the acclivity on the other side is 
rocky, steep, and high. The beauty of the scenery 
is much enhanced by the various seats in the vi- 
cinity, by the rich meadows, and by the cultivated 
sides of the adjacent hills. The topography, &c. 
of this city are thus curiously described in an an- 



cient Saxon Poem, supposed to have bacu written 
some centuries before the Conquest : 

This cily is celebrated 

In the whole empire of the Britons^ 

The road to it is steep. 

It is surrounded with rocks, 

And with curious plants. 

r \ lie Wear flows round it, 

A rivr of rapid waves; 

And there live in it, 

Fishes of various kinds 

Mingling with the floods. , 

And lliere grow 

Great forests ; 

There live in the recesses 

Wild animals of many soiU ; 

In the deep valleys 

Deer innumerable. 

There is in this city 

Also well known to men 

The venerable St. Cudberlh ; >,-jj 

And the head of the chaste King 

Oswald, the lion of the Angli ; 

And Aiden, the Bishop ; 

Aeduert and Aedfrid; 

The noble associates. 

There is in it also 

Aethelwold, the Bishop ; 

And the celebrated writer Bede ; 

And the Abbot Boisil, 

By whom the chaste Cudberth 

Was in his youth gratis instructed; 

Who also well received the instruction*. 

There rest wi:h these saints, 

In the inner part of the Minster, 

Relicks innumerable, 

Which perform many miracles, 

As the Chronicles tell us, 

And (which) await with them 

The judgment of the Lord. 

' " j ' JO r; . , . , . 

The monkish legend of St. Cuthbert contains the 
earliest historical account of Durham ; all the cele- 
brity and riches of which were derived from the vo- 
taries of that holy man. St. Cuthbert, accordin- 
to the legend, died on the twentieth of the calends 
of March, 687, and was buried in the Church at 
Liudisfarue, than the see of a Bishop. The body 
was afterwards inhumed in a new sepulchre on re- 
building the Cathedral, where it lay unmolested for 
a considerable time. In the year 876, however, 
Halfden having brought over a reinforcement of 
Danish adventurers, ravaged this part of the coun- 
try in a most inhuman manner ; and E;irdulf, then 
Bishop of Liudisfarue, having 1 remarked the savage 
practices of the invaders, especially to the clergy, 
consulted with Eadred, the Abbot, and the other 
members of the monastery, what measures they 
should pursue for common safety ; when several 
joined the Bishop and Abbot in a resolution, not 
only to quit the place, the peculiar sanctity of which 
among Christians only excited proportionable cruel- 
ty in the Danish Pagans, but also to remove the re- 
mains of their beloved Saint, that his reltcs might 
not be exposed to the rude insults of the profane. 
In pursuance of this resolution, they gathered the 
holy relics, sacred vessels, ornaments and jewels of 

tli* 



DURHAM. 



28J 



the altars and shrines, together with St. Ethelwold's 
stone crucifix, and fled from the Island of Lindis- 
farne, where the episcopal see had continued 211 
years. With their holy charge, the Bishop and his 
company passed into the mountainous parts of the 
country, still changing their ahode, as intelligence 
of the enemy's progress seemed t.) threaten their 
safety. " Their pious ardor," observes Hutchin- 
son, " must have been equal to any toil, and su- 
perior to every danger, encumbered as they were 
with the remains of St. Cuthbert ; the head of St. 
Oswald ; the bones of Saints Aidan, Eadbert, Ean- 
fred, and Ethelwold, inclosed in one ark or shrine ; 
and the ponderous cross of St. Ethelwold borne be- 
fore them."* On the removal of St. Cuthbert's 
relics, the inhabitants of .Lindisfarne left their lauds 
and goods, and followed the Bishop and his train, 
who, wearied with travelling, endeavoured privately 
to depart to Ireland, that they might deposit the 
Saint's bones in greater safety ; but a sudden storm 
arose, and the ship wherein they had commenced 
their voyage, was driven back, and forced upon the 
shore ; the tempest being so strong, that " three 
waves were miraculously converted into blood;' 1 '' and 
the ship heeled so much, that the Book of the Holy 
Evangelists, which was curiously written, and 
adorned with gold and precious stones, fell out of 
the vessel, and sunk to the bottom of the sea. In 
the midst of their perplexity, St. Cuthbert, unwill- 
ing to see his devotees in such sorrow, appeared to 
Hundredus, one of the monks, and commanded that 
the book might be sought for on the neighbouring 
coasts. At three miles distance it was recovered ; 
and, so far from being injured by the salt-water, 
it appeared more beautiful than before. Gladly did 
the company receive back this precious memorial : 
the patron Saint, however, was determined not to 
oblige them by halves : a bridle appeared upon a 
tree, and a horse prancing to receive it, for the pur- 

Eose of carrying the relics, gave a joy inexpressi- 
le to the wearied travellers. This horse conducted 
the chest to Crake Minster, where it rested four 
months ; thence it was taken to Cuneagester, (now 
Chester-le-street,) -and rested during the Danish 
wars, a period of forty-three years. At the end of 
that time Aidune, the last Bishop of Chester-le- 
street, upon the Danes again infesting the northern 
coast, removed the relics to Ripon. In an interval 
of peace, the holy community intending to return, 
left Ripon, with all their paraphernalia, after an i 
abode of four months. In their progress, another 
miracle happened : the holy relics would not move 
forward ; this was at a place then called Wardelau. 



* Ethelwold, as we also learn from Hutchinson, w:is Abbot 
of Metro*, the intimate friend of St. Cnihbert, and one of 
his successors in the Bishopn. k. He caused a ponderoui cross 
of stone to be erected in Ihe nmund adjoining the Church of 
Lindisfarne. The socket, or foot -stone, in which it was mor- 
tised, rein linsst II ;i few paces to the east of the ruined church. 
It was held in such veneration, that, after being broken by the 

VOL. II. NO. 66. 



At last, after much fasting and prayer, and the as- 
sistance of an old woman and her cow, Dunholine, 
(now Durham) " a place strong by nature, but not 
easily rendered habitable, as it was overgrown by 
a thick forest, in the midst of which was a small 
plain, which had been used in tillage," was the 
pluce fixed on for the lasting abode of St. Cuth- 
bert's relics, and the further establishment of his 
holy fraternity. The first work in which the pioun 
labourers engaged, was to erect a wicker taber- 
nacle, as a reliquary for their sacred deposit : this 
was denominated the Bongli Church, but such a si- 
tuation not suiting the wishes of the devout, another 
temple, called White Church, was constructed in the 
year 995, also of wicker. In the course of three 
years from the date of the first tabernacle, a church 
of stone- work was begun, and dedicated by Bishop 
Aldun, wherein the Saint's remains were deposited; 
but it was not till after the foundation of Aldun's 
Church was laid, that the forest by which it was 
surrounded was cut down, and the skirts of the hill 
rendered fit for habitation. Much labour was ex- 
pended ; and all the inhabitants between the rivers 
Coquet and Tees, to the extent of fifty miles, are 
said to have been employed at the command of 
Uthred, Earl of Northumberland. From these cir- 
cumstances, we are led to date the rise of the town 
of Durham in the opening of the eleventh century. 
It seems to have been sufficiently fortified when 
Duncan, King of Scotland, attacked it in 1040 ; for 
the townsmen sustained the enemy's assaults for a. 
considerable time ; and at length, by means of a 
vigorous sally, totally routed the assailants, and be- 
headed the leaders, which were their prisoners, in 
the market-place. William I. in the year 1069, 
sent Robert Cumin, Earl of Northumberland, and 
700 veteran Norman soldiers, to Durham, to enforce 
his authority ; but these warriors degrading them- 
selves into freebooters, committed many enormities,, 
and reduced the inhabitants to extreme despair. In 
this temper, they formed associations, which coming 
to the Bishop's knowledge, he acquainted Earl 
Cumin of his apprehensions of an insurrection. The 
Earl treated the Bishop's caution with contempt ; 
and agreeably to the Monarch's writ, Cumin pro- 
scribed and executed several of the landholders. 
The death of the peasants acted as a summons to 
unsheath the sword ; and though this was in the 
severe season of February, at the decline of day, 
the town was girt round with multitudes of armed 
men. " The Earl's guards" says Hutchinson, 
" had taken forcible possession of the houses, as 
their wantonness incited ; and being dispersed 



Danes, in their first descent on the island, the scattered parts 
were carefully put together, by skilful workmen, with lead and 
cement. This is now called ' The Petti ng Stone ;" and when- 
ever a marriage is solemnized at the church, after (he cere- 
mony, the bride is to step upon it, and if she cannot stride t 
the end, it is said that the marriage will prove unsuccessful. 

* c through* 



286 



DURHAM. 



through the town, in contempt of danger, gave 
themselves up to ease and enjoyment. Just at the 
dawn of day, the assailants broke open all the gates 
of the town, and flying in parties through every 
street, made a dreadful slaughter of the Normans ; 
insomuch, that, Symeon says, the streets were filled 
with blood and carcasses. Many were shut up in 
the house where the Earl lodged, and defending 
it bravely, the enraged populace could not force an 
entrance ; therefore throwing in firebrands, they set 
the edifice in flames. When those within saw the 
imminent peril to which they were reduced, they 
forced open the doors, and attempted to escape the 
fury of the fire, but were slain as they came out. 
. At length the building was reduced to ashes, with 
every thing within its walls. The fire was so vehe- 
ment, that the flames were seen to take hold of the 
western tower of the Church. This afflicting cir- 
cumstance alarmed the multitude : the religious in- 
habitants of the city, and even those in arms, ceas- 
ing from slaughter, fell upon their knees, with eyes 
filled with tears, and elevated hands, petitioning 
heaven, that, by the assistance of their holy Saint, 
and through his interposition, the sacred edifice 
might be spared from destruction. Quickly the 
wind shifted, and bore the flames from the Church. 
Thus the Earl, on the 2nd of the Calends of Febru- 
ary, A. D. 1069, with his 700 guards, (one man cx- 
cepted, who escaped with his wounds,) were put to 
death." Determined on revenge for Cumin's death, 
the King detached a party of his troops to scour 
the country ; but they had not proceeded farther 
than Alverton, when a thick fog surrounded them ; 
so that, instead of pursuing their journey, they could 
scarcely see each other: this operating upon super- 
stitious minds, and adding to the reports of St. 
Cutlibert's miracles, so alarmed them, that they 
returned with precipitation, lest they sheuld incur 
the malediction of the Saint. William, however, 
was not to be so intimidated : he marched forward, 
and desolated the country in such a manner, that 
for sixty miles, between York and Durham, he did 
not leave a house standing ; reducing the whole 
district, by fire and sword, to a horrible desart, 
smoking with blood, and in ashes. Neither churches 

* It is related by Symeon Dunelmensis, " that the King, 
whilst he abode in Durham, entertaining a doubt of the incor- 
ruptible state of St. Cutlibert's body, enquired diligently con- 
cerning it ; and, notwithstanding the asseverations of several 
of the most pious and venerable men there, he still pretended 
to disbelieve it, and insisted on having an inspection of the se- 
pulchre himself Several Bishops and Abbots then present as- 
sented to his will, and thought it proper the King's pleasure 
should be complied with. Whether provoked by the delay, 
or his suspicion of fraud was increased by the reluctance of the 
ecclesiastics to comply with his desire, is not pointed out ; but 
the King solemnly vowed, if he was deceived in the relations 
he had heard, if the incorruptibility of the Saint's remains was 
merely a talc to work upon the superstition of (he vulgar, and 
|he body .was not found in the state represented to him, he I 
would put to death all those of superior rank throughout the | 
city, who had presumed to impose on him. A terror fell on I 
3ui.li us heard his menaces, and they devoutly implored the I 



nor monasteries were spared ; and it is impossible 
to describe the miseries in consequence of this wan- 
ton act of cruelty. A dreadful famine ensued ; and 
a mortality, unequalled in the annals of this coun- 
try. The people were reduced to eat the flesh of 
horses, dogs, and cats, and at last human carcasses. 
The lands lay untilled for nine years, infested by 
robbers and beasts of prey ; and the poor remnant 
of the inhabitants spared from the sword, died over- 
whelmed with want and misery, in the fields. Hove- 
den relates, that on the tyrant's approach to Dur- 
ham, he found the town evacuated, the ecclesiastics 
fled, and the Church left without a minister to per- 
form any sacred office. The King's army being 
dispersed in destructive parties over the country 
between the Tyne and the Weare, beheld the vil- 
lages deserted, the whole country a dismal waste ; 
and the inhabitants, with then' flocks and other pro- 
perty, fled into the most secret recesses of the 
forests and mountains. Not moved to compassion 
by a scene so truly wretched, the barbarians set fire 
to the monastery of J arrow, and made rejoicings 
over its ashes. These calamities occasioned ano- 
ther disturbance of St. Cuthbert's bones, which had 
now reposed for seventy-five years. The Bishop, 
with the concurrence of the principal inhabitants, 
removed them to Lindisfarne ; where another mira- 
cle is reported to have occurred. " On the fourth 
day, in the evening, the Bishop, with a vast con- 
course of people, arrived on the shore opposite to 
the Holy Island, when they found the sea at high- 
water. The severity of the winter rendered the 
night air intolerable to the aged as well as the ten- 
der, and caused great lamentation ; when, by a 
particular interposition, the sea retired, and left a 
dry passage for the poor wanderers, who, with loud 
thanksgiving, and holy joy, passed over to the 
Island. But what completed the miracle was, as 
Symeon asserts, those who carried the Saint's re- 
mains, gave evidence, that as soon as the multitude 
had passed, the sea returned, and closed up the 
vacancy, which a few moments before had divided 
the water."* On the restoration of tranquillity, 
and the King's departure, the Bishop, and his com- 
panions in affliction, after an absence of four months, 

mercy of God, through the merits of the blessed St. Cuthbert, 
whilst the Bishop, whom the King had appointed, performed 
the service of high mass. The King, determined to satisfy his 
curiosity immediately after the ceremony, commanded the 
officers of the Church to open the sepulchre ; and whilst he 
stood by, he found hi:nself smitten on a surtden with a burning 
fever, which distracted him in an intolerable manner. Seized 
with such anguish and disease, he rushed out of the Church, 
leaving untasted a sumptuous banquet, which the ecclesiastics 
had prepared for him ; and instantly mounting his horse, he 
fled from the city with the utmost haste, never abating the 
speed of his couiser, till he arrived on ihe banks of the fees. 
An indication of preternatural interference, at such a time, 
overawed the people, and greatly contributed to the veneration 
paid to the Saint's shrine." Tradition says, tbat the King, hi 
his hurry, took his way down the narrow street called King's 
Gale, leading to the Bailey, and now called Dun Cow 
Lane." 
6 returned 



DURHAM. 



287 



returned to tlieir desolated country, and replaced 
the sacred remains of St. Cuthbert in his shrine. 
In"their flight they had left a rich and massy cru- 
cifix, formerly given by Earl Tosti and his wife, in 
the hope that common veneration might preserve it 
inviolable ; but the crucifix was thrown down by 
the Normans, and stripped of all its ornaments of 
gold, silver, and jewellery. On the partition of 
I ;in da by the Conqueror, the Church of Durham 
suffered its share of peculation ; but the Bishop 
having secured the most valuable articles of the 
treasury, retired to Ely, and joined the English 
who were' there in arms against the King. Soon 
afterwards, by the treachery of the Abbot, whom he 
deemed his friend, he was delivered to the King, 
who confined him in prison, where he died misera- 
bly ; and the See continued vacant about a year, 
when Walcher, a person of noble birth, from Lor- 
raine, was appointed Bishop. On William's return 
from his expedition against Malcolm, King of Scot- 
land, he considered that Durham was a proper bar- 
rier against the Scottish incursions ; and resolved 
to erect a Castle here, which might serve also to 
awe the neighbourhood : or, as he explained it, " to 
secure his Earl of that province from tumults and 
insurrections, as also to protect the Bishop of the 
See and his Church." After the defection of Wal- 
theof, Earl of Northumberland, and his consequent 
execution at Winchester, Bishop Walchr purcha- 
sed of the King, the earldom of Northumberland. 
This being the first instance of the ecclesiastical and 
temporal power of the See being vested in one per-, 
son, excited the utmost malevolence in the people. 
They regarded with abhorrence a prelate, who, un- 
like their patron, St. Cuthbert, subverted the mild 
mandates of Christianity, by a union of temporal 
severity ; and from their abhorrence of his latter 
character, they lost all reverence of his episcopal 
office : at length an act of injustice, to which he 
does not appear to have been privy, but which he 
did not exert his authority to punish, raised such 
an insurrection in his territory, as was only allayed 
by his murder in the most savage and cruel manner. 
The King, highly incensed, sent his brother Odo, 
Bishop of Baieux, into the North, with orders to 
punish the insurgents, and to take vengeance for 
the massacre of the Bishop and his retinue. Odo 
performed bis task not as a Bishop, but as a Nor- 
man soldier, (he being at that time Earl of Kent,) 
and made Durham feel the extent of hi* power, by 
robbery, desolation, and murder. He stained his 
sacred vesture by the innocent blood of the rela- 
tions of the rebellious : tie robbed the church of 
Durham of a rich pastoral staff, which he pretended 
was taken by the soldiery ; and he reduced the pro- 
vince to a solitary desart. 

The Domesday Book was made about this time ; 
and as Durham does not occur in the survey, it has 
been conjectured, that the county was so wasted, as 
not to be worth the expense of statistical examina- 
tion. Malcolm, King of Scotland, now entered the 



county, to revenge on Odo, the enormities which he 
had committed ; but William, sending his eldest 
son Robert, against Malcolm, a scene of dreadful 
warfare commenced. William de Carilepho, tin* 
next Bishop, in 1080, was amongst the malcontents 
on the accession of William Rufus, and flying into 
Normandy, his temporalities were seized into the 
hands of the crown. John de Tailbois, and Erne- 
sins de Burone, were made governors of the Castle 
and Palatinate ; and it was not till the year 1091 
that the Bishop was restored. Soon after the re- 
sumption of his dignity, he granted to the convent, 
Elvet, in the order of a borough, where the" monks 
should have forty merchants' houses, or tradesmen's 
shops, distinct and separate from the Bishop's bo- 
rough of Durham, that they might trade there, freed 
from duties payable to the Bishop and his succes- 
sors. Though we have no previous account of the 
borough of Durham, yet, by inference, we may de- 
termine, that such borough existed, with exclusive 
privileges, even till the institution of the borough of 
Elvet held an entire trade. 

Durham sustained great injury by fire in the time 
of Bishop Flambard, whilst the temporalities were 
in the hands of the crown, in consequence of his 
flight to Robert, Duke of Normandy. This Bishop, 
to ingratiate himself at Court, oppressed the bi- 
shopric with taxes, but without success, King Hen- 
ry having an invincible hatred to the principles of 
the Prelate. In 1112, the Bishop founded the hos- 
pital of Kepier, which he dedicated to St. Egidius, 
or Giles, and amply endowed it : after his restora- 
tion to the See, he unproved the fortifications, by 
extending the walls between the Cathedral and Cas- 
tle, removing the houses on the area between those 
edifices, and levelling the ground ; he also fortified 
the Castle with a moat, improved the banks of the 
river, and built Framwell-gate Bridge. Wheu 
Stephen usurped the Crown, David, King of Scot- 
land, having takeu an oath on behalf of his niece 
.Matilda, daughter of Henry the First, levied an, 
army, and took possession of several fortresses in 
Northumberland. Stephen then came to Durham, 
and concluded a peace, which not being lasting, the 
country was again subjected to the horrors of war. 
The King of Scotland, after committing the grossest 
enormities, advanced to the neighbourhood of the 
city ; but his army, composed of the refuse of the 
surrounding nations, proving seditious, he was com-, 
pelled to retreat ; taking in his way, the Bishop's 
Castle of Norham, on the banks of the Tweed. By 
the interposition of Albvric, Bishop of Ostia, and 
legate from the Holy See, a peace was established 
between the two nations ; and the city of Durham 
was honoured with the presence of the members of 
this Convention, in April, 1139; Maud, Queen of 
England, with many southern Barons, on {lie part 
of the English crown ; and Prince Henry, with se- 
veral Scottish Barons, on the part of David. About 
this period a coinage was established at Durham. 
The Bishop, Gallrid Rufus, is not said to have taken 



288 



DURHAM. 



any active part during these troubles ; but father to 
have occupied his time in the ornament and defence 
of his See. During his last illness, his chaplain, 
William Cumin, gained the confidence of his house- 
hold, and particularly such as had the custody of 
the castle, who entered into a confederacy to deliver 
up to him the palace and tower, immediately upon 
the Bishop's decease. Having obtained also the 
assistance of the King of Scotland, to whom he 
styled himself Chancellor, he induced the people 
to submit to his authority, which, by most iniquitous 
methods, he endeavoured to establish ; but being 
foiled in his measures, he resorted to the sword. 
After desolating the country, his soldiers reduced 
the hospital and church of St. Giles, with the whole 
village to ashes ; and hating burnt a part of the 
borough of Elvet, the Earl of Northumberland, 
with whom the Bishop, William de St. Barbara, was 
in league, completed the destruction, by burning 
the remainder of the borough. After Henry the 
Second succeeded, he had a dispute with Bishop 
Pudsey ; during his displeasure, he took posses- 
sion of the castle and city of Durham, and on va- 
rious pretexts, deprived the Bishop of the custody 
of so strong a post. This Bishop granted to the 
burgesses, that they should be for ever exempt from 
the customs called in- toll and out-toll, and from 
marchets and heriots ; and to have the like free cus- 
toms as Newcastle. This charter he got confirmed 
by Pope Alexander the Third, when he assisted, 
with three other English Bishops, at the council of 
Lateran, A. D. 1176. Besides his elegant additions 
to the cathedral, he also took great pains to orna- 
ment the city by several public structures : he built 
Elvet Bridge, and rebuilt the borough of that name, 
which had been destroyed by Cumin and his ad- 
herents : he constructed the city wall from the Gaol 
Gate to the Water Gate, part of which is still re- 
maining ; and re-edified the castle, which had been 
destroyed by fire : the Boldon Buke, MOW remaining 
in the auditor's office, was compiled by his order, 
and has been admitted as evidence in all cases, to 
ascertain the ecclesiastical property of the diocese. 
The Castle seems to have remained in the crown ; 
for when Henry the Third granted his consent to 
the election of Richard Poore, Bishop of Sarum, 
to this See, he excepted the possession of the Cas- 
tles of Durham and Norham. This pious and 
learned Prelate, by an agreement with the convent, 
made several regulations concerning the privileges 
of the two boroughs of Durham and Elvet, with 
respect to civil authority, weights, measures, &c. 
In the reign of Henry the Third, it appears, that 
Durham had a royal and palatinate mintage within 
itself, which Edward the First, on his accession to 
the crown, made a point of reforming. After the 

* Bishop Ilatfield, successor to De Bury, was a great bene- 
factor to the church ami city. In 1377, he granted a toll on 
certain merchandize brought to Durham, to defray the charges 
of paving, and repairing the city walls. Letters patent were 



death of Robert de Insula, Bishop of the See from 
1274 to 1283, William Wickwane, Archbishop of 
York, during the vacancy, attempted to harass the 
convent by visitorial pretensions, which he carried 
to such a height of arrogance, as to scandalize his 
office and character. On his arrival at the city, -th& 
eighth of July, to exercise his supposed right of 
visitation, the cathedral doors were shut against 
him ; and he proceeded to the church of St. Nicho- 
las, to pronounce excommunication against the 
Prior and his brethren ; but some youths of the city 
having intelligence of his proceedings, resorted to 
the church, and opposed him in so clamorous and 
violent a manner, that the Archbishop, in terror, 
receded from his purpose, and was put- in such ap- 
prehension for his person, that escaping from the 
pulpit, he fled down the stairs which led to the 
schools, and used every expedition, till he got to 
the river side near Kypier. The Archbishop car- 
ried his resentment so far, that at the consecration 
of Bishop Beck, on the ninth of January following/ 
he obliged the Prior to leave York Cathedral ; and 
enjoined the new Bishop, upon his declaration of 
canonical obedience, to excommunicate the Prior, 
and the heads of the convent : but Beck refused ; 
observing, I was consecrated their Bishop yester- 
day, and shall I excommunicate them to day ? No * 
profession of obedience shall induce me to so incon- 
sistent an act. 

In the reign of Edward the Second, a party of 
Bruce's army surprised the suburbs of Durham 
whilst the inhabitants were in their beds, and totally 
destroyed them. 

Durham exhibited a singular scene of festivity on 
the promotion of Richard de Bury, or Aungerville, 
to the Bishopric in 1333. He entertained, on this 
occasion, in the great hall of his palace, Edward 
the Third, and his Queen, the Queen Dowager, King 
of Scotland, the two Metropolitans, and five Bi- 
shops, seven Earls and their ladies, all the Nobility 
north of Trent, with a vast concourse of Knights, 
Abbots, Priors, &c. It was in this year that Ed- 
ward gained the famous battle of Hallidown Hill. 
This monarch again visited" the city in 1356, and 
issued summonses lor the military tenants to attend 
him, previously to the siege and surrender of Ber- 
wick.* In the third year of the reign of Henry the 
Sixth, Durham again became a scene of festivity, 
on the marriage of James, King of Scotland, with 
Jane of Somerset, grand-daughter of John of 
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, as well as James's 
cousin, in 1424. In March, this year, the royal 
pair arrived, attended by a number of the English 
nobility of the first rank, and were met by a vast 
train of the most illustrious personages from Scot- 
land. The King and Queen staid here till the be- 



likewise granted by him to William de Elmedon, gaoler and 
purler ot the Castle, with certain profits annexed to the office, 
among which are fees for sealing the measures lo be used in 
the city. 

ginning 



DURHAM. 



ginning of April. Ou the anniversary of the instal- 
lation ol Bishop Fox, July '23d. Io03, he enter- 
tained, in his palace at Durham, the Princess Mar- 
garet, daughter of Henry the Seventh, wlio was 
on her progress into Scotland, to espouse King 
James. 

The suppression of the rebellion of (he Nevilles, 
in the reign of Elizabeth, occasioned a scene of hor- 
ror in Durham ; sixty-six persons being- executed to 
satisfy the brutality of Sir George Bowes, who 
boasted, that in a tract of country, sixty miles in 
length, and forty in breadth, between Newcastle and 
Wetherhy, there was scarcely a town or village 
wherein he had not sacrificed some of the inhabi- 
tants. 

In the years 1416 and 1589, Durham was visited 
by the plague, which raged for a considerable time. 
In 1597, it again returned, with- such violence, that 
the poorer inhabitants were compelled to live in huts 
on Elvet Moor, and the adjoining commons, where 
the marks of arrangement of the cells were to be 
traced till within a few years of the present time. 

In 163)*, Charles the First resided at Durham, 
on his progress to Scotland, and was entertained 
by the amiable and pious Bishop Mortou, whose 
expences in one day amounted to 1500/.* 

Whilst the Commonwealth and Protectorate 
flourished, an attempt was made to establish a 
University at Durham ; the particulars concerning 
which have been thus related by Pennant. " On 
the thirteenth of April, 1619, the Parliament passed 
an act for abolishing of Deans, Deans and Chap- 
ters, Canons, Prebends, and all other titles and 
offices of or belonging to any Cathedral or Colle- 
giate Church, or Chapel, within England and 
Wales : and the name and function of Dean, Sub- 
Dean, Chapter, &c. are thereby taken away ; and 
all their honors, manors, hinds, &c. together with 
their charters, deeds, books, court-rolls, &c. ad- 
judged and taken to be in the real and actual pos- 
session and seizure of Trustees, therein named, in 
trust, to be disposed of by Parliament. May the 
seventh, 1650, a petition was presented to the Par- 
liament, from the gentlemen, freeholders, and in- 
habitants of the county of Durham, praying, that 
' an establishment of Courts of Justice might be had 
there ; and that the College or Houses of the Dean 
and Chapter, being then empty, and in decay, might 
be employed in erecting a College, School, or 
Academy, for the benefit of the Northern Counties, 
which were so far from the Universities ; and that 
part of the Lands of the said Dean and Chapter near 
the city, might be set out by Trustees for pious 
uses.' Besides this petition, others of a similar 
kind were sent from the county of Northumberland, 

* The virtuou; lire, anil extensive charities of this excellent 
Bishop, art; still remembered wiili respect and gratitude. After 
a vanets of Mil'I'trin^s, uml unjust accusations, b}' the Parlia- 
ment adherents, during the Civil Wars, he found an asylum in 
the family of Sir Christopher Yelverton, his political enemy, 
to whose son lie became tutor. 

VOL II. NO. 66, 



and from the town and caunty of Newcastle upon 
Tyne ; which were referred to a Committee, to state 
the business, and to report their opinions touching 
the desires of the county. The Committee report- 
ed, ' that they so far approved thereof, as that they 
were of opinion, that the said Houses were a fit 
place to erect a College, or School, for all the 
sciences and literature ; and that it would be a piou> 
and laudable work, and of great use to the northern 
parts.' In 1656, an order was made, by Oliver 
Cromwell, the Lord Protector, and his Privy Coun- 
cil, for founding and endowing a College at Dur- 
ham, out of the Dean and Chapter's Lands there. 
Of this scheme Oliver had been a strenuous pro- 
moter, as appears by a letter of his yet extant, dated 
March the llth, 1650, addressed to William Lent- 
hall, the Speaker, in which he greatly and earnestly 
recommends the prosecution of the business to him. 
The Letters Patent for founding the College, are 
dated May the loth, 1657, by which the Houses late 
belonging to the Dean and Prebendaries, are con- 
verted into a University, to be called by the name 
of ' the Mentor, or Provost, Fellows, and Scholars, 
of the College of Durham, of the Foundation of 
Oliver, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of 
England, Scotland, and Ireland, &c.' By the same 
Letters Patent, rent charges, to the annual amount 
of 900/. were assigned for the support of the per- 
sons belonging to the foundation ; and leave was 
also given them to purchase and enjoy lands and 
revenues to the amount of 6000/. a year ; and to 
take and use all the manuscripts, library books, and 
other books and mathematical instruments, and all 
other instruments whatsoever, late belonging to the 
Dean and Chapter, &c.f Scarcely was the new 
University settled, when Oliver died ; and that they 
might not be wanting in gratitude to the memory 
of their benefactor, they presented an address to 
Richard, immediately after his accession,' in which 
they compared Oliver to Augustus, and gave him 
the prowess of Henry the Fifth, the prudence of 
Henry the Seventh, and the piety of Edward the 
Sixth ; and recommended to the vital beanos of the 
piteous aspect of the son, his new erection, an or- 
phan scarce bound up in its swaddling clothes. The 
new University soon began to thrive so much as to 
excite the jealousy of her sisters of Oxford and' 
Cambridge, who both presented petitions against it 
to the new Protector, and sent some persons from 
both places to give reasons against a third Univer- 
sity, and especially against conferring any degrees 
there. But in a short time after, Richard, being 
deprived of the Protectorate, the ill-pieced machine 
of government fell to pieces, and involved in its 
ruins this new seminary of learning." 

f "The original charter is yel in the Dean and Chap- 
ter's library, beautifully written on vellum, and adorned 
with Oliver's picture and arms, and several emblematical de- 
signs," 

4D Mr. Brand, 



DURHAM. 



Mr. Brand, in Ms history of Newcastle, observes 
that George Fox, the founder of the Quakers, lias 
assumed to himself the consequence, and, what he 
thought, the merit, of having been the means of sup- 
pressing this laudable institution.* 

The Cathedral of Durham is indebted for its origin 
to Bishop William de Carilepho, who, having pro- 
jected a change in the government of this church, 
which had hitherto been directed by the secular 
clergy, and their Provost, obtained under the au- 
thority of tlie crown, and by permission of the Pope, 
a license to introduce regular canons. Conceiving 
also, that tlie church built by his predecessors was 
unsuitable to the dignity and increasing power of 
the See, he formed a plan for erecting a structure 
similar to the superb fabrics which he had seen 
during his exile on tlie Continent. In pursuance of 
this design, the foundation was laid on the eleventh 
of August, 1093, with a solemnity suitable to so 
vast an undertaking ; Malcolm, King of Scotland, 
and Tin-got, Abbot of Durham, assisting at the 
ceremony. Tlie Bishop compelled tire Monks to 
labour in the holy work daily, excepting at meal- 
times, and during prayer and Divine service ; but 
no considerable progress had been made at the time 
of his death, which happened within two years after 
the commencement of the structure. His successor, 
Ralph Flambard, who enjoyed the Bishopric twenty- 
nine years, and was equally an encourager of the 



work, finished the building nearly to the roof. This 
Prelate, before his promotion to the See of Durham, 
had given proof of his ability in architecture, by the 
erection of the Collegiate Church of Twinambourne, 
or Christ Church, in Hampshire. t 

Bishop Flambard translated the remains of St. 
Cuthbert into the New Church, and erected a stately 
shrine, called the Feretory, near the choir ; this 
was formed with great elegance, of costly marble, 
lined and gilt : and by the additional donations of 
the numerous pilgrims, it was rendered one of the 
richest altars in England. " Considering that, in 
the diligence, of his predecessors, to immortalize the 
memory of their favourite and beneficent Saint, they 
had forgotten due homage to the Virgin Mary, Bishop 
Hugh Pudsey, Patriarch of Jerusalem, began to 
erect, at the east end of the Cathedral, a Chapel 
to her honour, to which females might have free ac- 
cess for devotional exercises : but the work had not 
proceeded very far, when it was discovered that vast 
clefts appeared, which threatened an early demoli- 
tion. This manifestation, as it was considered, of 
the patron Saint's displeasure at the innovation, in- 
duced the Bishop to relinquish his purpose, as to 
that part of the church ; but he appropriated a part 
at the west end for the Virgin's Chapel, which ho 
named the Galilee : into this sanctuary females were 
allowed to enter without offence ; but they were not 
on any account to be admitted within the Cathedral." J; 

The 



* " We came to Durham," says Fox, " where was a man 
come clown from London, to sel up a College there, to make 
ministers of Christ, as they said. I went with some others to 
reason with the man, and to let him see, that to teach men 
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and the seven arts, which was all 
hut the teachings of the natural man, was not the way for to 
make them ministers of Christ; for the languages began at 
Babel : and to the Greeks, that spoke Greek as their mother- 
tongue, the: cross of Christ was foolishness; and to the Jews, 
that spake Hebrew ns their mother-tongue, Christ was a stum- 
bling block; and as for the Komans, who had the Latin and 
Italian, they persecuted the Christians ; and Pilate, one of the 
Romans, set Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, a-top of Christ when 
he crucified him : and John the Divine, who preached the 
word that was in the beginning, said, that the beast and the 
whore had power over tongues and languages, and they an.- as 
waters. Thus I told him he might see the whore and beast 
have power over the tongues and the many languages which 
are in Babylon. Now, said I to the man, dost thou think to 
make ministers of Christ, by the natural confused languages 
which sprang from Babel, are admired in Babel, and set a-top 
of Christ by a persecutor ? Oh, no. So the man confcst to 
many of these things; and when we had thus discoursed with 
him," he became very loving and tender; and after he had 
considered further of it, he never set up his College." 

f Tlie Cathedral erected by these Prelates, was of the form 
universally Adopted by the Norman architects; a long cross, 
with two turrets at tlie west end, and between them, a large 
and richly ornamented arched door of entrance; the east end 
probably terminated in a semicircular form, as the lines of 
union of the original work with the Chapel of the Nine Altai's 
strongly indicate. The side aisles, both of the nave and chir, 
,were vaulted with semicircular arches, groined, and the ribs of 
the gn.ins carved ; but the nave and the choir were open to 
the limber roof. The nave exhibits the ne\t change of style. 
Bishop Poore having already given a specimen of his taste in 



the construction of Salisbury Cathedral, induced Prior Mel- 
sonby to conform to a more ornamental mode of architecture 
in the roof, which he was then building. Under his direction 
the whole vault was accommodated to the pointed arch, though 
the Norman zig-zag is used along the ribs of the groins. Suc- 
cessive additions have rendered this Church as it now appears ; 
not only an enlarged specimen of Norman building, but a 
" Most instructive series of examples, illustrating the gradual 
change of style which took place during the reigns of the three 
first Henries, till, by degrees, the pointed had completely 
superseded the semicircular arch ; and the heavy clusters of the 
Norman pillars were polished into the light shafts of the early 
English." 

J Davis, in his extract of the coming of St. Cuthbert into 
Scotland, assigns the following as the reason of female exclu- 
sion : " Blessed St. Cuthbert, for a long time, led a most 
solitary life in the borders of the Picts, at which place great 
concourse of people daily used to visit him ; and from whom, 
by the providence and grace of God, never any returned with- 
out great comfort. This caused both young and old to resort 
unto him, taking great pleasure both to see him, nod to hear 
him speak. In which time it happened, that the daughter of 
the King of the province, having illicit commerce with one of 
her father's domestics, its effects were perceived by the King, 
and lie examined her concerning the author of her disgrace. 
She, instigated by an evil mind, instantly answered, " The 
solitary young man, who cKvellelh hard by, is he who hath 
overcome me, and by whose beauty I am thus deceived." 
Whereupon the King, furiously enraged, presently repaired 
to the hermit's place, with his daughter, attended by several 
knights, where he instantly accosted theservant of God in the 
following manner : 'What art thou he, who, under the colour 
i of religion, profanest the temple and sanctuary of God? Art 
thou he, who, under the cloak and profession of ?,n J.ermit, 
fxercisesl thyself in nil filthiness ? Behold my daughter, whom 
thou by thy'wiles hast corrupted : therefore now, at last, con* 

fess 



DURHAM. 



The strength of the prejudice by which females were 
precluded admission, may be estimated from the fol- 
4owing anecdotes. " In the year 1333, on Thursday 
in Easter week, Edward the Third came to Durham, 
and lodged in the Priory. On the Wednesday fol 
lowing, Queen Philippa came from Knaresborough 
in one day to meet him, and being- unacquainted 
with the custom of this church, went through the 
Abbey gates to the Priory, and, after supping with 
the King, retired to rest. This alarmed the Monks, 
one of whom went to the King-, and informed him, 
<hat St. Cuthbcrt had a mortal aversion to the pre- 
sence of a woman. Unwilling- to give any offence to 
the church, Edward immediately ordered the Queen 
to arise, who, in her under garments only, (her man- 
tle, &c. being 1 buried,) returned by the gate through 
which she had entered, and went to the Castle ; 
after most devoutly praying' that St. Cuthbert would 
not avenge a fault which she had through ignorance 
committed." " In the year 1417, two women ol 
Newcastle, being determined to approach the Shrine 
of St. Cuthbert nearer than was legally permitted, 
disguised themselves in man's apparel, but were un- 
fortunately discovered in the attempt to complete 
their purpose, and taken into custody. By way of 
punishment for their intended prophanation, they 
were adjudged to walk, on three festival days, be- 
fore the procession in St. Nicholas's Church, New- 
castle, and on three other holidays, at the Church 
of All Saints, in the same town, habited in the dresses 
in which they committed the offence ; proclamation 
being first made, as to the cause of this penance. 
The muster and mistress of these curious females 
W-TC at the same time ordered to attend the Spiritual 
Court at Durham, to answer the charge of being 
counsellors and abettors in this misdemeanor."* 
The great, or central Tower, is more modem than 
the other parts of the Cathedral, it having been pro- 
jected, and partly built, by Prior Melsonby, who 
acceded in the year 1-233. His successors, Prior 
Middleton, and Prior Hugh, of Darlington, who 
was elected in 1258, finished the work. Prior Mel- 
sonby is also the reputed builder of the stone roof of 
this noble structure ; and the commencement of the 
Chapel of the Nine Altars has been also attributed to 

fcss this thy fault, am) plainly declare here before this company, 
in what sort tliou hast seduced her.' The King's daughter 
marking the line speech of her father, impudently stepped for- 
ward, and boldly affirmed, ' that it was he who had done the 
wicked fact.' At wliich the young man, greatly amazed, and 
perceiving UW tliis calumny proceeded from the instigation of 
the devil, (wiierrwith he was brought into great perplexity,) 
applied his *hole heart unto Almighty God, saying as followeth : 
My Lord, my God, who only knowest, and art the discoverer 
of all scret>, make manifest also this work of iniquity, and by 
some token disprove the same, which, though it cannot be 
done by human policy, make it known by some divine token.' 
\V lien the young man, with great lamentation, and tears un- 
utterable, had spoken these words, even suddenly, and in the 
same place where she stood, the earth making a hissing noise, 
presently opened, and swallowed her up in the presence ol all 
the spectators. As son us the King perceived this miracle to 



him ; though iu completion is ascribed, by Hutchin- 
son, to Richard de Hotoun, who acceded to the 
priory in 1389. No material alterations, or addi- 
tions, were made in the Cathedral, from this time 
till about the year 1770, when a survey having- been 
taken, and the fabric adjudged in a state of inso- 
curity, and rapid decay, a system of repair was 
commenced, under the patronage of the Dean nnd 
Chapter, and lias been ever since continued, with 
little intermission. By the original benefactors, the 
woods growing 1 on the Church lands were appro- 
priated for its preservation ; and since the present 
alterations were commenced, a considerable quantity 
of timber has been felled, and its produce vested in 
the funds, in order to provide a constant revenue for 
the necessary reparations. The munificence of the 
Dean and Chapter has also been evinced by the dona- 
tion of 300/. annually subscribed in aid of the sums 
deemed requisite to defray the charges of the latc\ 
and projected improvements. 

This venerable pile bursts on the sight with un- 
common grandeur ; the base of the rocks which sup- 
port its west end, being laved by the waters of the 
Wear. From the square called the Place Green, by 
which it is generally approached, the whole of the 
north front is at once seen. This entire range pre- 
serves its original Norman character, with occa- 
sional introductions of windows and tracery in tht 
pointed arch manner. Various incongruities in th 
style and ornaments are observable : the Porch, 
forming the principal entrance, may, in particular, 
be remarked as one of the most barbarous commix- 
tures of the Saxon and pointed styles that ever dis- 
graced modern architecture. On the door within ih 
Porch is a curious metallic ring, or knocker, sculp- 
tured with a terrific visage, in bold relief, and well 
executed, with wliich persons claiming sanctuary iu 
the night-time were accustomed to alarm the inmate* 
of the Cathedral. Above the great window of the 
north transept, were formerly, iu two roundels, the 
figures of Benedictine Monks, carved in relief: 
these, which displayed the state of the art at the 
period when that division of tbe building was erected, 
have been removed, and their places occupied by 
two new figures ; one, a Prior, seated in Ins instal- 



happen in the presence of all his company, he began to be 
greatly tormented in his mind, fearing lest, for his furious 
threats, he should incur the same punishment. Whereupon he 
with his company, humbly craving pardon of Almighty God, 
with a further petition to that good man St. Cuthbert, that by 
his prayers he would crave 6f God to have his daughter again ; 
which petition the holy father granted, upon condition, that 
from thence no woman should come near him. Whence it 
came to pass, the King did not suffer any woman to enter into 
any Church dedicated .to that Saint, which to this day is duly 
observed in all the Churches of the Picts, which were dedi- 
cated to that holy man." 

| * " A copy of the mandate, directing thr chaplains of the 
| above Churches to see the penance performed, is preserved in 
Bourne's History of Newcastle ; and also a copy ot the return 
made by the chaplain of All SaiuU." 



292 



DURHAM. 



lation chair ; the other, an effigy of Bishop Pudsey, 
as portrayed on tlu: episcopal seal attached to his 
charter to the city of Durham. " On the octangu- 
lar Tower, at the we.st angle of the Chapel ol' tlie 
Nine Altars, which forms the eastern extremity of 
the Cathedral, is the memorable basso relievo re- 
presenting the event which occasioned the latter to 
be founded on this spot. According to the legend, 
the Monks who had removed St. Cuthbert's relics 
from Ripon, in hopes of discovering a more peace- 
ful residence, were by a vision directed to Dunholmo, 
a placethey were then unacquainted with ; but while 
travelling through the country with uncertain steps, 
a woman, in quest of a strayed cow, was informed, 
in their hearing, that she would find it in Dulholme, 
(Durham,) whither, with grateful hearts, they ac- 
companied their female guide. The figures which 
represent the oow, the woman, and some other per- 
sonage, appear in a recess of the stone-work ; bul 
were re-sculptured a few years ago, and their ori- 
ginal forms somewhat altered." The cast front has 
been repaired and modernized : the windows, form- 
ing a double range, are all of the lancet shape, ex- 
cepting the centre window of the upper tier, which 
is circular, and radiated with stone-work. These 
windows were originally ornamented with a profu- 
sion of painted glass, which, from various accidents, 
became so defaced and mutilated, that the subjects 
could not be traced; it has been entirely removed. 
The south front preserves much of its ancient cha- 
racter, though some parts have been chisseled over 
to make way for the new facings. Only a partial 
view can be obtained of this side of the Cathedral, as 
the cloisters, dormitory, and other buildings, con- 
ceal nearly the whole of the lower part. The west 
front, consisting of two highly ornamented square 
Towers, with the Galilee between, appears to great 
advantage from the opposite side of the river. The 
basement line of the elevation presents the projecting 
Chapel of the Galilee, flanked by huge buttresses 
and arches, springing out of the rock, to contribute 
due support to its walls, which form one vast com- 
bination of security to the main edifice. Above the 
Galilee is the great west window, with various en- 
riched compartments springing up to the roof. The 
architectural adornments of the towers are modern ; 
and the attempt to make, them accord with the origi- 
nal forms, has, in many instances, proved unsuc- 
cessful : their summits are bounded by pinnacles and 
open worked battlements. The great centre tower 
rises from the intersection of the nave 'and transept, 
and is singularly rich and elegant. Round it is a 
profusion of fine tracery, pointed arches, and other 
ornaments ; and its buttresses are graced witli niches, 
canopied, and decorated with tracery, within which 
various statues are placed, representing the original 
founders and patrons of the See. The height of 
this tower is 214 feet. 

The interior of the Cathedral is highly interesting 
to those who" wish to trace the connection between 
Saxon and Norman architecture, or to observe the 



latter in, perhaps, its highest stage of perfection. 

i The comparison of these orders with the .English, 
or pointed styles, may also he made ; as the Cuapel 
of the Nine Altars partukes, in Us general enrich- 
ments and proportion, of the architectural character 

; of Salisbury Cathedral; and, from its singularly 
light appearance, forms a striking contrast with the 
massive Norman work prevalent in the other parts 

; of the fabric. In the middle of the nave, between 
the four western pillars, is the Bnptisterium, or 
font ; a rich piece of tabernacle work, of red oak, 
in an octangular form, terminating in a pinnacle, 
ornamented by a dove with expanded wings. The 
upper part is supported on columns : the whole is 
about thirty feet high. At a little distance further 
to the east, and forming part of the pavement, is a 
long cross, of blue marble, marking the boundary 
beyond which females were not allowed to pass, evea 
many years after they had been permitted to enter 
the Cathedral from the Galilee. The Galilee, or St. 
Mary's Chapel, is divided by clustered columns, and 
semicircular arches, into five aisles ; the most nor- 
thern of which is now inclosed as the Registrar's 
office. The singular combination of the Normau 
and pointed styles displayed in this building, arose 
from the repairs directed by Bishop, afterwards Car- 
dinal Langley, about the year 1400. Here were 
formerly three altars, now wholly removed : that in 
the centre was dedicateil te the Holy Virgin. Be- 
fore the steps, which approached it, is the tomb of 
the Cardinal, who died in 1 438 ; and near it, to the 
south, a large marble stone, covering the remains 
of the venerable Bede, the most learned man of his 
time. A few other memorials of persons buried here 
occur, and among them the following iiacs : 

John Brimleis body here dolh ly. 

Who praysecl God with hand and voice ; 

By musickes heaveniie harmonic 

Dull inyncles he made in God rejoice : 

His soul into (he Heavenes is lyft, 
To prayse him still that gave the gyft. 

From east to west, the breadth of the Galilee If 
fifty feet ; its length, eighty feet. The original en- 
trance was on the north, from a small yard, adjoin- 
ing the church-yard ; but it is now entered from the 
side ailes of the Cathedral. On the south side of 
the nave lie the remains of the great Ralph, Lord 
Neville, who was chiefly instrumental in obtaining 
the battle of Red Hills, or Neville's Cross, in 1346. 
The tomb of his son, Lord Jolm, is placed near. 
Ralph, Lord Neville, was the first layman who was 
permitted to be interred within the Cathedral. These 
monuments were formerly ornamented with incum- 
bent figures of the great personages inclosed within 
them, and surrounded by smaller carved figures in 
alabaster, finely cut ; but they are now mutilated, 
and nearly defaood ; an outrage which is to he at- 
tributed to the general disrespect paid to religious 
edifices during the civil wars. In those lamentable 
:imes, the Cathedral was converted into a place of 

i) confinement 



DURHAM. 



293 



confinement for the Scottish prisoners after the bat- 
tle of Dunbar ; and they destroyed or mutilated 
wfit-tever came within their reach. The great 
tower, or lantern, which rises at the intersection of 
the nave and middle transept, is supported by clus- 
ters of columns, rising to the springing of the groins, 
the great arch springing from them is crowned by 
an open gallery of communication round the inside 
of the lantern : the space from the gallery to the 
window is filled with rich compartments, which, 
with the window itself, are well imagined : groined 
arches form the termination of the lantern ; and when 
viewed from below, the magnitude and grandeur of 
its several parts are extremely striking." At each 
end of the middle transept, on the east side, is an 
aisle separated from the body of the transept, by 
one clustered and two round pillars ; one of the lat- 
ter is grooved in the spiral form ; the other, in the 
xig-7,ag manner : in each aisle were formerly three 
altars. The windows of this transept were once 
richly ornamented with painted glass, of which little 
remains, but a figure of St. Bede in a blue habit, 
and some imperfect memorials of the crucifixion. 
At the south end of the transept is a curious clock, 
erected by the Dean and Chapter in the year 1632. 
The choir is divided from the transept by an oak 
screen, decorated with festoons of fruit and flowers, 
carved in a very bold style, and having an entabla- 
ture of a rich foliage pattern. Over the screen is a 
large and fine toned organ. The length of the choir 
is 120 feet : the floor is paved with black and white 
marble. The prebendal stalls are finished with ta- 
bernacle work, in which the ancient style is but in- 
differently imitated, but their general effect is not 
unpleasing. On the south side is the episcopal 
Throne, an elegant structure, erected about the 
year 1730, by Bishop Hatfield, over the vault 
wherein he lies interred. The throne is considera- 
bly elevated ; in the centre is a chair of state, hav- 
ing a canopy of ornamental tabernacle work : it was 
repaired by Bishop Crewe in the year 1700, and 
new-painted and gilt by Bishop Egerton in 1772. 
The pulpit, which is on the north side, is adorned 
with figures of some of the Apostles, neatly inlaid 
on the pannels, and nearly as large as life. The 
choir comprehends four pillars on each side ; two of 
them clustered, and two round ; the latter are cut 
in the spiral figure. The roof was repaired, or ra- 
ther new vaulted, by Prior Hotouu, who acceded 
in 1289 : it is of elegant Gothic work, the ribs of 
the arches terminating in points ornamented with 
roses ; the fillets pierced in roses and crosses : some 
of the decorations of the centre roses are singular ; 
one next to the organ contains a human figure, with 
three round balls in an apron. From the altar-rail* 
eastward, the whole work appears nearly of the 
same date ; and by the architecture of this part, it 
seems that the building originally terminated here, 
and was opened further eastward to form a connec- 
tion with the east transept, or Chapel of the Nine 
Altars. The columns which rise at the attar- rail, 

VOL. II. NO. 66. 



are little more than the plain facing of a common 
wall, ornamented with long small pilasters, single, 
and belted in the middle-; their capitals pierced, de- 
corated with figures of animals, and finished above 
with tabernacle work. The opening of the gallery 
in this part is different from the rest of the church, 
and consists of three pointed arches, supported by 
columns, whose capitals are richly pierced ; the fil- 
lets of the arches are pierced, and highly decorated j 
and there is also an interior pillar supporting a 
groined vaulting. Here the building appears to 
have been broken off, and the east wall removed ; 
yet the vaulting of the roof is continued, and over 
the altar-table finished with a fine pointed arch, 
supported on clustered pillars, ranging with the side 
of the east transept : the capitals, and the fillets or 
mouldings of the arch, are highly finished with 
pierced work, and bear no degree of similitude to 
any of the more western parts of the edifice. With- 
in the altar-rails are four seats on each side ef the 
altar-table, for the officiating priests to rest, formed 
of pillars supporting pinnacle work, of the same 
materials and design as the work behind the altar, 
and most probably were erected at the same time. 
The Screen, which forms the eastern termination of 
the choir, and divides it from the Feretory, and 
Chapel of the Nine Altars, is of very elegant work- 
manship, but has been greatly mutilated at various 
periods since its erection. It was given by John 
Lord Neville at the expence of 400/. (a vast sum in 
those times ;) the Prior and Convent contributing 
largely, by giving towards its completion 123A 6s. 
Sd. the work of it having been previously wrought 
in London, and sent hither by sea. Robert Ber- 
rington, the Prior, employed seven expert masons, 
who were almost a year in erecting it, and to whom, 
besides their wages, he allowed meat and drink till 
the work was finished, in 1380. The design is di- 
vided into three tiers, or stories. The lowest, or 
basement, is solid ; the second and third are open, 
so that the statues which filled the niches, or rather 
canopies, were seen through in a back view from 
the east side. The light and airy pinnacles, rising; 
in a pyramidical form, tier above tier, in splendid 
confusion, cannot be too much admired. Under 
throe grand centre canopies on the west side, were 
originally whole length statues of our Lady, St. 
Cuthberi. nii'l St. Oswald ; and all the' others were 
likewise ornamented with statues- of great and holy 
personages. The various niches on the east side 
were also filled with historic statues. 

Behind the Screen, projecting into the Chapel of 
the Nine Altars, and on a level with the choir, is 
the Chapel called the Feretory, where the gorgeous 
shrine of St. Cuthbert was anciently deposited. 
This shrine was once the richest in the kingdom ; 
but its ancient splendour has vanished, and the only 
marks of its former reputation, are to be found in 
the hollow impressions worn in the stone flooring, 
by the feet of the numerous pilgrims who visited the 
shrine in the ages of superstition. ,S meritorious 
4 E , 



294 



DURHAM. 



was this last act considered, that, in the year 1281, 
William, Bishop of Dumblain, granted a remission 
of forty days' penance to every votary who perform- 
ed it. The remains of St. Cuthbert are said to have 
been deposited here, in a " chest well fortified with 
nayles and leather,"* which was afterwards inclosed 
in a marble sepulchre at the expence of John Lord 
Neville, but these have long been removed ; the 
shrine having been defaced and plundered by the 
Commissioners of Henry the Eighth, who himself 
ordered the sanctified relics of St. Cuthbert to be 
buried in the ground under the place where his 
shrine was exalted. A large blue stone, placed in 
the centre of the floor, is reported to cover the 
often-removed bones of the venerated Saint. 

The Chapel of the Nine d/tars, terminating the 
Cathedral eastward, is entered from the side aisles 
of the Choir, by a descent of several steps. Its 
length is 130 feet ; its breadth, from the screen of 
the high altar, 51 feet ; thus making the entire 
length of the building 411 feet. The pilasters of 
this transept, from which rise the "groins of the roof, 
are of an angular projection, light and elegant : on 
each side of the great window the pilasters consist 
of a cluster of small circular columns, one of larger 
dimensions in front, and six on each side, to form 
the projecting angle. The several columns com- 
posing the clusters, are beautifully contrived to re- 
lieve the eye from the general mass ; as they stand 



* In Hegge's Legend, is the following relation of the in- 
corruptibility of St. Cutlibert. " Before the clay of translation 
came Prior Tin-got, with some of his brethren, determined to 
open his tombe, with intent to show his body to the people, 
if they found it entire. Alt night, therefore, they meet at his 
Sepulchre, and reverently taking off the stone, they found a 
chest well fortified with nayles and leather, and in it another, 
wrapt in cloth thrice double, in which they found the Booke 
of the Evangelists which had fallen into the sea ; a little silver 
altar, a goblet of pure gold, with an onyx stone, and an ivory 
comb ; lastly, opening the third chest, they found the body of 
the Saint (which the grave in so many years had not digested) 
lying upon the right side, to give room to the rest of the re- 
Iiques : for in the same coffin were the bones of the venerable 
Bede ; the head of St. Oswald ; part of the bones of Aldanus, 
Eadfrid, and Ethelwold, Bishops of Lindisfarne : all which 
reliques they placed with due reverence in other parts of the 
Church ; and laying St. Cuthbert on his back, they placed St. 
Oswald's head between his hands. At the day of his transla- 
tion, Ranulphus, the Bishop, published in his sermon to the 
people, the incorruption of St. Cuthbert's body, which was 
flexible, and now might plead prescription with the grave to be 
immortal. And thus in great solemnity they enshrined him 
beneath the high altar, in the presence of the Abbot of St. Al- 
bans, the Abbot of St. Maries, in Yorke, the Abbot of ^ St. 
Germans, Prior Turgot, with thousands of people spectator? of 
the miracle." The Book of the Evangelists, mentioned 
above, was originally written by Edtrid, a monk, who in 693 
was advanced to the See of Lindisfarne, and during his retire- 
ment in that monastery translated the Gospels into Latin. 
After his decease, it was decorated with golfl and jewels by 
Elhelwold, his successor ; and with some curious paintings bv 
Bilfrid, an Anchorite. Prefixed to it, are the Prefare* and 
Canons of Eusebius and Hieronymus ; besides an interlineary 
Saxon Version by Aldred the Priest. This truly venerable 
piece of antiquity was preserved in the Cathedral till the Re- 
formation. It afterwards fell into the bands of Sir Robert Cut- 



in part clear of the body of the cluster, but are con- 
nected with it by their bases, bands, and capitals, 
which, with the ribs of the groins springing from 
them, are enriched with foliage and flowers. Every 
other column is of black marble, the intermediate 
ones of white free-stone, which had a beautiful ef- 
fect before they were, from the mistaken zeal of 
Reformation, daubed over, and concealed as they 
now remain, with washing and oker. This portion 
of the Cathedral received its name from the Nine 
Altars erected beneath the windows on the east side, 
and dedicated to various saints. The decorations 
of these altars, as they appeared previously to the 
Reformation, have been thus described. " The 
Nine Altars had their several screens, and covers 
of wainscot over-head ; having likewise between 
every altar, a very fair and large partition of wains- 
cot, all varnished over with fine branches and flow- 
ers, and other imagery work, containing the several 
lockyers and amberies for 'the safe keeping of the 
vestments and ornaments belonging to the altar, 
with three or four little amberies in the wall, for 
the same use and purpose. Before the great centre 
window, nine cressets, or lamps, were suspended, 
whose light was so great, as to make every part of 
the church visible during the whole time they were 
kept burning. Many distinguished prelates, and 
other eminent persons, have been interred in this 
Cathedral, and their remains covered with beautiful 



ton, and is yet preserv-d in his Collection in the British Mu- 
seum. The tale of the incorruptibility of St Cuthbert's body 
is also preserved by Davies, in his Ancient Rights and Monu- 
ments, as followr, : " The sacred shrine of holy St. Cuthbert 
was defaced at the visitation which Dr. Lee, Dr Henley, and 
Mr. Blithman, held at Durham, for the subverting such monu- 
ments, in the time of Henry the Eighth, at his suppression of 
the Abbeys. There were found innny worthy and goodly 
jewels, but especially one precious stone, which, by the esti- 
mate of those then visitors, and their skilful lapidaries, was of 
value sufficient to ransom a prince. After the spoil of his or- 
naments and jewels, coming near unto his body, thinking to 
have found nothing but dust and bones, and finding the chest 
that he lay in very strongly bound with iron, the goldsmith, 
taking a great forge hammer of a smith, broke the said chest ; 
and when they had opened it, they found him lying whole, tin- 
corrupt, with his face bare, and his beard, as it were, of a 
fortnight's growth, and all his vestments about him as he was 
accustomed 10 say mass, and his metwand of gold lying by him. 
When the goldsmith perceived he had broken one of his legs, 
as he broke open the chest, he was troubled at it, and cried, 
" Alas ! I have broken one of his legs." Dr. Henley .Jiearing 
him say so, called upon him, and bid him cast down his bones. 
Whereto the other answered, that he could not get them asun- 
der; for the smews and the skin held them so that they would 
not come asunder. Then Dr. Lee stepped up to see whether 
it were so, and turning about, spake in Latin to Dr. Henley, 
that he was entire ; yet Dr. Henley seemed not to give credit 
to his words, but stilf cried to have his bones cast down. Then 
Dr. Lee made answer, " If you will not believe me, come up 
yourself, and see him." Whereupon Dr Henlev^did step up, 
and handle him, and found that he lay whole. Then he com- 
manded them to take him down ; and so it happened, contrary 
to their expectation, that not only his body was whole, and 
uncorrupted, but also that the vestments, wherein his body 
lay, and wherein he was accustomed to say mass, were fresh, 
safe, and not consumed." 

tombs 



DURHAM. 



295 



tombs and brasses, which have mostly been swept 
away by the hands of sacrilege or fanaticism, since 
thp days of Henry the Eighth : the principal monu- 
ment now remaining, is that to the memory of Bi- 
shop Hatiield, on the south side of the choir. The 
basement story -of the episcopal throne serves as a 
canopy to the altar-tomb of this prelate, whose 
elli^y is in fine preservation, and has been thus de- 
scribed by Mr. Carter. " This beautiful statue has 
fortunately been preserved in a nearly perfect state 
to thistime ; a few of the most prominent parts hav- 
ing only suffered. The Bishop is habited in his 
episcopal dress, richly adorned with sculpture, 
painting, and gilding, in imitation of embroidery. 
The outer garment is the chasuble in its ancient am- 
ple form, and much ornamented. On his hands are 
the episcopal gloves, embroidered on the back ; on 
his left arm is the maniple. Beneath the chasuble 
is the linen alb, or surplice; and under that appears 
another garment or tunic, on which are richly em r 
broidered three shields of arms. On the central 
shield are, the arms of Cnglana ; in the two lateral 
ones, the Bishop's own coat. The honor of bearing 
the arms of England in this manner, seems a proof 
of the high estimation in which this magnanimous 
prelate was held by his sovereign, and perhaps might 
have been granted to him in consequence of the dis- 
tinguished part he bore in the signal victory of Ne- 
ville's Cross. The feet of the Bishop are covered 
with rich, embroidered shoes ; and on his head is 
the mitre, of its ancient low form." The painting 
and gilding which adorned the statue, as well as the 
emblazonments and arms which ornamented the 
whole tomb, are now entirely hidden and defaced 
by a thick coat of light yellow. Some beautifully 
ornamented door-ways, in the Norman style, are 
connected with different parts of the Cathedral. 
The proportion of the door entering into the north 
cloister, from the west end of the south aisle, is very 
striking, and it has much the air of a Roman arch. 
The second door opens from the north side of the 
cloisters into the east end of the south aisle of the 
nave, and is equally rich and singular in its decora- 
tions with the former.. 

The Cloisters, which adjoin the Cathedral on the 
south, were erected between the years 1389 and 
1438, at the expence of 838/. 17s. &d. 600/. of which 
was paid by Bishop Skirlaw, and the remainder by 

* The Cemetery, or Centry Garth, which extended east- 
ward trom the Chapter House, and in which was placed the 
Stone Cross of St. Ltlielwold, said to h ive been remored from 
the church at Lindisfarne, was the general burial-place of the 
Monks. In the Cathedral church-yard, which ranges on the 
north side, among numerous other memorials, is an altar tomb 
to the memory of Dodsley, the respected author of The 
Economy of Human Life, and other esteemed works; with 
this inscription, composed by Joseph Spence, A. M. Professor 
f Modern History at Oxford. 

If you have any respect 

For uncommon Industry and Merit, 

Regard this Place ; 



Cardinal Langley. They form a quadrangle of 147 
feet, having eleven open windows in each front, the 
mullions and tracery of which were repaired in the 
pointed style some years ago. They are ceiled with 
pannels of Irish oak, originally ornamented with 
emblazoned shields of the arms of various illustri- 
ous personages who contributed to enrich the church 
by their benevolence or piety : scarcely any of these 
embellishments are now distinguishable. On the 
west side of the cloisters is the Dormitory, which is 
entered by a flight of stone steps. This is an apart- 
ment of very large proportions, but ill lighted, and 
desolate in its aspect. Under the dormitory were 
the song school and treasury ; in which, according 
to Hutchinson, are lodged, about ninety royal char- 
ters and grants, fifty-two deeds by nobles and 
barons, and 206 by interior gentry ; about 131 by 
popes, bishops, priors, &c. and 130 other original 
deeds and copies : altogether 670. On the east side 
of the cloisters was the Frater-house, or Monk's 
Hall, which Dean Sudbury converted into an ele- 
gant Library for the Dean and Chapter about the 
year 1680. This apartment was repaired a few 
years ago, and the excellent collection of books re- 
arranged. Various Roman inscriptions, found in 
the bishopric, and in the adjoining county of Nor- 
thumberland, are here deposited ; as well as many 
records and curiosities, and among them a copy of 
Magna Charta, dated 12th November, 1216 ; ano- 
ther dated llth February, 1224 ; a manuscript copj 
of the Bible, in four volumes folio, upwards of 600 
years old ; and Bede's five books of History, of 
the same date. 

The great part of the Chapter House, which, 
stood on the east side of the cloisters, was pulled 
down during the late repairs of the Cathedral : its 
form was an oblong square, terminating in a semi- 
circle towards the east. Its internal arrangement 
is spoken of as bearing a striking resemblance to 
the most ancient Christian churches. In this build- 
ing many of the ancient Prelates were entombed ; 
and against the east end was the stone chair or 
throne in which the new Bishops were installed.* 

From the cloisters, a passage leads to a spacious 
oblong square, called the College, which occupies 
the most pleasant part of the city, and is chiefly 
inhabited by persons whose offices attach them to 
the Cathedral. Here are the Deanery and Preben- 

ln which are interred the Remains 
Of 

MR. ROBERT DODSLEY: 

Who, as an Author, raised himself 
Much above what could have been expected 

From one in his Rank of Life, 

And without learned Education . 

And who, as a Man, was scarcely 

Exceeded by any, in Integrity of Heart, 

And Purity of Manners, and Conversation. 

He left this life for a better 
September 23d, 1764, in the 6 1st Year of his Age. 

dal 



296 



DURHAM. 



dal houses : the latter are well built, partly modern, 
and have a very respectable appearance. The 
Deanery was formerly the Prior's lodgings ; but 
scarcely any of the apartments remain unaltered : 
the kitchen was originally the kitchen of the mo- 
nastery, and has been characterized as a master- 
piece of masonry : its form is octangular, and its 
dimensions very large. The roof is vaulted, in its j 
general construction resembling the Abbot's kitchen i 
at Glaetonbury. At the upper end of the square is : 
a neat fountain, or reservoir, for supplying the ' 
neighbouring families with water, which is brought [ 
m pipes from Elvet Moor, at the distance of about 
a mile. 

The stone Gateway at the entrance of the College 
from the Baileys was erected by Prior Castell, about 
the year 1515. Above it was the Chapel of St. 
Helen, and the old Exchequer, where all the rents 
reserved in the chapter leases are made payable. 
When the possessions of the Benedictine Priory, es- j 
tablished here by Bishop Carilepho, were surren- 
dered to Henry the Eighth, in the year 1540, the 
whole endowment of the See* amounted to upwards 
f 2821/. annually ; and though in the time of the j 
Commonwealth, episcopal estates to the amount of 
68,121/. \5s. Qd. were sold by the Parliament's 
Commissioners, the revenues of this church are still 
of greater value than those of any other bishopric 
in England. In 1541, Henry the Eighth granted a 
new foundation charter, directing that the Cathedral 
Church, instead of being dedicated, as before, to the 
Blessed Mary the Virgin, and St. Cuthbert the 
Bishop, should thenceforth bear the denomination 
of the Cathedral of Christ and Blessed Mary the 
Virgin ; and that it should be governed by a Dean 
and twelve Prebendaries. The establishment, be- 
sides the Dean and Prebendaries, consists of two 
Arch-deacons, twelve minor Canons, a Deacon, 
Sub-deacon, sixteen Singing-men, a Master of the 
Choristers, ten Choristers, a Divinity Reader, eight 
Alms-men, two Masters of the Grammar School, 
eighteen Scholars, two Vergers, two Porters, two 
Sextons, and two Barbers. In the seventh of Ed- 
ward the Sixth, an act of Parliament was obtained, 
through the influence of the Duke of Northumber- 
land, by which the Bishopric of Durham was dis- 
solved, and all the lands and possessions thereof 
were given to the King, with authority, by Letters 
Patent, to erect two new bishoprics ; one at Dur- 
ham, with 2000 marks revenue ; and the other at 
Newcastle, with 1000 marks revenue ; together 
with a deanery and chapter there. This act was 
procured by the Duke under the plea, that the Bi- 
shopric was too large, and that one Prelate was in- 
sufficient for its proper government ; but the King 
dying soon afterwards, it was never carried into 
execution ; and after the accession of Queen Mary 
it was repealed, and the Bishop reinstated in his see, 

* According to Dugdale, the annual revenues of the Con- 



and all the county palatinate regalities, and juris- 
dictions, both ecclesiastical and temporal. 

From the Cathedral on the north extends an open 
area, called the Place, or Palace Green, on the north 
side of which is the CASTLE, now the residence of 
the Bishop whenever he visits Durham. This 
structure occupies a portion of the rocky eminence 
on which the Cathedral is built, and from its upper 
apartments, commands some very fine views of the 
city, and surrounding country. Whether this spot 
were fortified before the time of William the Con- 
queror, is uncertain ; but probability favours the 
opinion. The fortifications which originally sur- 
rounded the city included the whole summit of the 
hill, the outward wall extending along the brink of 
the eminence, and forming an elliptical figure, ab- 
ruptly terminated at its northern extremity by the 
Castle. The most ancient part of this structure is 
the keep, or tower, which occupies the top of an 
artificial mount, and is supposed to have been of 
Norman construction ; though Hutchinson, from the 
roses which ornament the summits of the buttresses, 
and the form of the windows, is more inclined to 
refer its erection to Bishop Hatfield. The form of 
the keep is that of an irregular octagon ; its diame- 
terj in the widest part, sixty-three i'eet, fix inches ; 
and in the narrowest, sixty-one feet. It is now a 
mere shell ; but appears to have contained origin- 
ally, four stories, or tiers of apartments, exclusively 
of a series of vaults, which rise from the foundation. 
The angles are supported by buttresses ; a parapet, 
defended by an embattled breast-work, ran round 
the summit of the whole building ; but, having be- 
come very ruinous, it was taken down by the direc- 
tion of Bishop Thurlow, in the year 1789 : the 
principal entrance was on the west side. The per- 
pendicular height of the mount on which it stands, 
is forty-four feet : round this space three pleasant 
terraces have been formed, each ten feet wide, and 
communicating with each other by (lights of steps. 
The buildings which now constitute the Castle, 
have been erected at various times, and by different 
persons, and have consequently but little uniformity. 
Some parts, which had suffered by fire, were re- 
stored by Bishop Pudsey, who acceded to the Bi- 
shopric in the year 1153. He is also supposed to 
have erected the first hall ; which, with other parts 
of the Castle, having t>'oneto decay, anew and more 
magnificent hall was built by Bishop Hatfield, the 
original length of which is recorded to have been 
360 feet. On the enthronization of Bishop Bury, 
that Prelate entertained the King and Queen of 
England, the King of Scotland, the two Metropo- 
litans, and five other Bishops ; seven Earls, with 
their Ladies ; all the Nobility north of Trent ; with 
a vast concourse of Knights, Esquires, and other 
people of distinction ; among whom were many 
Abbots, Priors, and other religious persons. From 

vent, were valued at \36Gl, \0t, 5d. according to Speed, at 
161 si. 14*. lOrf. 

this 



DURHAM. 



287 



this apartment the present Hall was formed ; the 
length of which is 180 feet, its height thirty-six, 
ami its breadth fifty. Within it are some casts of 
busts from the antique ; and whole-length portraits 
f the Archbishops, Cramner, Parker, Wbitgil't, 
Bancroft, and Laud ; and of John Overall, Bishop 
of Norwich; John Cosiu, Bishop of Durham ; and 
Launcelot Andrews, Bishop of Winchester. Many 
additions and alterations were made by succeeding 
prelates, particularly by Bishop Tunstall, who erect- 
ed a gateway and tower on the side of the Palace 
Green, and flanked it on each side with a strong 
wall : he also built a. small chapel, and made va- 
rious other improvements. Additional apartments 
were erected by Bishop Cosin ; and further altera- 
tions have been since effected, by which the internal 
arrangement and appearance of the building have 
been much amended. Under the direction of the 
present Bishop, new improvements have been made, 
and a beautiful Archway in the gallery, supposed 
to have been stopt up several centuries, again open- 
ed, and repaired. This is one of the most admira- 
ble specimens of Anglo Norman architecture extant. 
Numerous paintings are distributed on the staircase, 
and through some of the apartments, but not auy 
of them merit particular notice. 

Adjoining the keep on the east, is the great North 
Gateway, a strong fabric, erected by Bishop Lang- 
ley, and now used as the gaol. The outward, or 
lower part, was defended by a gate and portcullis ; 
within which is a recess, constructed with sallyports 
and galleries, for the annoyance of assailants, who 
might force the first gate : the upper part was se- 
cured by double gates. All the other gates of the 
city have been removed. 

On the western side of the Palace Green is the 
Exchequer, a strong square stone building, erected 
by Bishop Neville, about the year 1450. Adjoining 
it is the Bishop's Library, built by Bishop Cosin, 
who also greatly contributed towards erecting the 
Law Courts, south of the Library, where the assizes, 
quarter sessions, &.c. are held. The court for the 
trial of crown causes was much enlarged in the year 
1791. On the opposite side of the Green is an 
Hospital, or Alms-house, for eight poor men and 
women, founded by Bishop Cosin in the year 18b'tt ; 
and adjoining it, at euch end, is a School-house, re- 
built about the same period by the above Prelate, 
but originally endowed by Bishop Langley. From 
the Palace Green is au avenue leading to the public 
walks, called the Banks, which skirt the river. 
These were made, and are kept in ivpair, by the 
munificence of the Dean and Chapter. These cele- 
brated walks, observes Warner, *"' accompany the 
bending of the stream, and command several inter- 
esting peeps at tin* city, and its august ornaments, 
the Castl and Cathedral. The banks rocky and 
abrupt, on one hand, and sloping ge:itiy to the river 
on the other, darkened by a solemn deptii of shade, 
sequestered and retired, in the immediate neigh- 
bourhood of a busy scene oi society, afford a retreat 
YOL. 11. .NO. 66. 



of the most beautiful and agreeable nature. The 
variety of the scenes which they open also is re- 
markable ; deep glades, and solemn dells ; scarred 
rock, and verdant lawn ; sylvan glades, and proud 
castellated edifices. From the elegant new bridge, 
the last-mentioned feature is seen to great effect ; 
the Castle and Cathedral blend their battlements 
and turrets together, and rise with inconceivable 
majesty from the sacred groves which clothe their 
rooky fouiuftitions. The combination here of trees 
and buildings, water and rock, home sylvan scenery 
and fine distance, is at once beautiful and grand." 
The Bridge mentioned by Mr. Warner, is an ele- 
gant structure, which was erected between the years 
177-2 and 1777, from the designs of Mr. George 
Nicholson, then architect to the Dean and Chapter. 
The old bridge, which stood at some distance higher 
up the river, and was only of sufficient width for 
the crossing of foot passengers and horses, was car- 
ried away by a dreadful flood, that commenced ou 
the afternoon of the sixteenth of November, 1771, 
and continued to rise till about one o'clock the next 
morning. By this time the body of water had be- 
come so immense, that the arches of Elvet Bridge, 
being partially choaked up with rubbish, would not 
admit of its flowing off; and its weight forced down 
a long wall nearly adjoining. The torrent theft 
rushed forward with such a vast impetus, that 
scarcely auy thing could withstand its pressure. 
Four arches of the bridge were swept away, a'ud all 
the lower buildings of the city, garden walls, &c. 
were either destroyed, or left in a very ruinous con- 
dition. When the flood abated, in the course of the 
day, all the low lands about Houghall, ShincJiffe, 
&c. were strewed with the carcasses of drowned 
cattle, and the hedges covered with corn and hay, 
that had been washed down by the water ; which 
rose eight feet ten inches higher, than had ever 
been recorded in the annals of Durham. As scarce- 
ly any rain had fallen during several days, within 
many miles of the city,- various reasons were as- 
signed for this extraordinary inundation ; but the 
most probable was, that it was occasioned by a vio- 
lent, and almost incessant run, which had deluged 
the western parts of the county, and its neighbour- 
hood, near the sources of the river. 

There are two other bridges at Durham, called 
Framwcll-gate Bridge, and Elvet Bridge : the for- 
mer was erected by Bishop Flambard, about the 
year I ISO, and is a very excellent piec-e of masonry. 
it consists of a pier, and two elliptical arches, of 
ninety feet space, so flat as to be constructed on the 
quarter section of a circle, calculated to suit the low 
shores on each side. Elvet Bridge consists of nino 
or ten arches ; it was built by Bishop Pudsey, and 
repaired in the time of Bishop Fox, who granted an 
indulgence to all who should contribute towards the 
expence : upon or near it were formerly two chapels 
dedicated respectively, to St. James, aud St. An- 
drew. 

Durham contains six churches, independently of. 
* t the 



29* 



DURHAM. 



the Cathedral. The principal of these, dedicated 
(o St. Nicholas, is an ancient structure, on the south , 
siile of the market-place. It consists of a nave 
and side aisles, with a square tower at the south- 
west angle. Here are the seats for the bodycor- 
porate, and various city companies. The whole 
building was repaired some years ago. In the old 
register book of this parish, under the year 1592, 
is the following remarkable entry : " Simson, 
Arington, Fetherstone, Fenwicke, and Lancaster, 
K'e/'e handed for being Egyptians.""* 

St. Mary-le-Bow, or Bough Church, is situated 
on the east side of the North Bailey ; according to 
tradition, on the same spot where St. Cuthbert's 
remains were lodged, in a tabernacle of boughs and 
wands, when they were first brought by the monks 
lo Durham. The present edifice was built about 
the middle of the seventeenth century, and opened 
for divine service in the year 1885 : it is a neat, uni- 
form building, without aisles, and furnished with a 
good organ. 

The church of St. Oswald's is an ancient struc- 
ture, occupying a fine elevated situation on the 
eastern banks of the river, in that part of the I 
suburbs, called New Elvet : it consists of a nave, j 
chancel, and side aisles. The roof is of wood, cu- j 
riously vaulted, jointed with rose knots ; the rafters j 
sustained on brackets, ornamented with cherubs, 
bearing shields : this is supposed to have been con- 
structed by William de Catten, who was vicar in 
the year 1411 ; but the body of the edifice must 
have been built long before that period, as one Dol- 
siuus occurs as priest here so early as 1156. The 
windows contain a great quantity of painted glass, 
but in a very dilapidated state. 

St. Giles's Church appears to be of remote ori- 
fiii ; having no aisles, and much resembling the 
old church at Jarrow, being narrow, long, and lofty ; 
its length is thirty paces, and its width seven. On 
the south side are six irregular windows ; and on 



the north side, two. In the chancel is a recumbent 
effigy, cut in wood, traditionally said to belong to 
one of the Lleath family, buried here in 1591. It 
represents a male figure in complete armour, the 
hands elevated, and the head resting upon a helmet, 
with a bear's paw for the crest. On one of the lells 
is said to be an inscription in Saxon characters. 
" The traveller who is conducted to this church," 
observes Mr. Hutchinson, " should be admitted at 
the north door, and depart from the south door, 
where a noble prospect opens to the view, too ex- 
tensive for a picture, and too rich for description. 
The inadequate ideas which language can convey, 
are to be lamented by the reader who has a taste for 
rural beauties, and the elegance of landscape. The 
Church of St. Giles stands upon very elevated 
ground, open to the south, where the view is un- 
obstructed. In front, the meadow grounds form a 
steep descent to the river ; on one wing closed by 
the wood called Pelaw Wood ; on the other, by the 
buildings of the street. At the foot of the hill the 
river Wearforms a beautiful canal, almost a mile in 
length, terminated by Elvet Bridge to the right, 
and by the wooded inclosures of Old Durham on 
the left. On the opposite shore is the Race Ground 
consisting of an extended tract of level meads, from 
whence, by a gradual ascent, rise the two Elvets ; 
the street of Old Elvet running parallel, the other 
obliquely, bordered with gardens, and terminated 
by Elvet Church ; a handsome structure. The 
channel of the river lying between New Elvet and 
the Bailies, affords an agreeable break or change in 
the objects ; the sloping gardens being seen over 
the buildings of Elvet, softened to the eye with that 
pleasing tint which the distance produces. On the 
brink of the ascent stands the Bailies, object rising 
gradually above object, guarded with the remains 
of the town wall, and crowned with the cathedral 
church, which in this view presents the north and 
east fronts, like the mitre which "binds the temples 



* The- causes of this, apparently, detestable procedure, can 
only be understood from a retrospective view of the different 
acts under which they suffered. By the first, passed in the 
22nd ot Henry VIII. the Egyptians are thus described: 

" Forasmuch as before this time, divers and many outland- 
ish people, calling themselves Egyptians, using no craft, nor 
feate ot merchandise, have commt-n into this realm, and gone 
from shire to shire, and place to place, in great companies, and 
used great Mibliltie and craftie meanes to deceive the people, 
bearing them in hand that they, by palmestrie, could tell mens' j 
and women 1 ;' fortunes, and so many times, by craft and sub- i 
tiltie, have deceived the people of their money ; and also have ' 
committed many and hammis felonies, and robberies, to the ! 
great hurt and deceit of the people that tliey have commen j 
among : Bee it," &c. It is then enacted, that no such persons j 
be permitted lo enter the realni, under the penalty ol forfeiture j 
of all property, and ot subsequent imprisonm- nt, should they ; 
remain in the kingdom longer than fifteen days alter tht co- 
tnaundcinent. This act being inadequate to its purpose, as ap- 
pears from the preamble ot the sl.ttuie ol tlie first ami second of 
Philip and Mdi'v, cap. 4 which commences thus : " Foras- 
much as divers, calling themselves Egyptian*, not fearing (be 
penal! ie of the ntatute 2v! Heiirj 8, c;,p. 10, have <i>me over 
again Uilo Ibis realm, using their old, accustamcd, dtvellisk, 

8 ' 



and naughty devices, with such abominable living as is not in 
any Christian realm lo be permitted," &c. it was then ordained, 
that any one " transporting, bringing, or conveying in, any 
such persons," should forfeit forty pounds for every such 
offence; and that every Egyptian so brought into this realm, 
who should continue " by the space of one moneth," should 
suffer death. The same punishment was also decreed against 
all Egyptians, or persons commonly called Egyptians, that 
should be found within England and Wales forty days after 
proclamation of the .act ; unless the said persons should " leave 
that naughty, idle, and ungodly life and company." Early in 
the time of Elizabeth, a doubt had arisen, whether the penal- 
ties of the statute of Philip and Mary extended to persons 
" borne within the Queene's dominions, and being of that 
fellowship, by disguising their apparell, and counterfeiting their 
speech and behaviour;" to remove which, it was enacted, 
(anno 5 Eliz. cap, 20,) (hat every person who shall associate 
" in any compame, or fellowship ol vagabonds, commonly 
called, or calling themselves Egyptians, &c and doe continue 
and remaine in (he. same, either at one lime, or several times, 
by the space of one moneth, shal therfore suffer paines of 
death " No further particular" ol the persons mentioned in, 
the reg Mer are known ; though their names warrant the sup- 
position of tliea' having been born in England. 

of 



DURHAM. 



299 



of its prelate ; giving the noblest supreme ornament 
to" the capital of the principality. To the right, 
Elvet Bridge with seven arches, receives the 
stream, and intercepts a further view of the pro- 
gress of the river : over it, tier ahove tier, rise the 
buildings of Sadler Street, the gloomy and solemn 
towers of the gaol, and the battlement and octago- 
nal tower of the castle ; the trophies of civil juris- 
diction wearing the aspect of old secular authority, 
and the frowns of feudal power. Between the chief 
object-!, the cathedral and castle on the nearer back- 
ground, South Street, with its hanging gardens, 
makes a fine curvature ; behind which Brandon 
Mount, with a spit of high land, extending towards 
Auckland, form the horizon. Further to the right, 
from the banks of the river, rise the buildings of 
the market-place, crowding the tower of the church, 
from whence the streets of Claypath and Gillygate 
extend. Thus far description has proceeded with- 
out much faultering ; but in the other divisions of 
the scene it is faint, and totally inadequate : who- 
ever would know the rest, must come and view it. 
Over the meadows, in the centre, a precipice rises 
nearly one hundred perpendicular feet in height, 
called Maiden Castle Scar, or Cliff; the steep sides 
of the hill to the right and left are covered with a 
forest of old oaks, and the foot of the cliff is wash- 
ed by the river, whose stream appears again at this 
point. The lofty ridge of hills clothed with oaks, 
stretching away, forms a zigzag figure ; at the most 
distant point of which, the great southern road, up 
the new inclosed grounds of Elvet Moor, is seen 
climbing the hill for near a mile, beyond which very 
distant eminences form a blue-tinged horizon. To 
the left of Maiden Castle Cliff you look upon a rich 
valley, highly cultivated, extending nearly five miles 
in length, and two in width, bending to the south- 
west, through which the river winds its silver 
stream, in the figure of an S. Hanging woods shut 
in each side of the nearer vale, where are finely 
disposed, the pleasant village of Shincliff, its bridge 
of three- arches, the. villa of the late William Rudd, 
Esq. and Houghall House. The extreme part of 
the valley is closed by the woods of Shincliff, But- 
terby, and Croxdale, forming an elegant amphi- 
theatre ; over these rise distant hills, lined out with 
ihclosurcs, giving the yellow and brown tint to the 
landscape over the richer coloured woods. The 
whole finished with an elevated horizon, on the 
wings of which are scattered the villages of Ferry- 
hill and Merrini; ton ; the tower of Merrington 
Church forming a beautiful and lofty obelisk. One 
of tlie greatest excellencies of this landscape is, 
that the ground rises gradually before you, and just 
suoh a distance is maintained as preserves all the 
objects distinct ; not like the landscapes painted by 
the Flemish and Dutch masters. To the Ict't you 
look down upon Old Durham House, its terraces 
and hanging gardens, with a fine bend of cultivated 
country slrotclisng away through another opening of 
the hills towards the cast, bounded by the high 



woods of Quarrington, and the cliffs of Coxhoe 
lime-kilns ; more rustic than the other views, and 
being in simple nature, affords a pleasing variety 
to the eye of ths man of taste, who stands (if we 
may be allowed the extravagant expression) on this 
enchanted groutut" 

St. Margaret's Church, situated in Crossgate, 
and that of Little St. Mary, in the South Bailey, 
present nothing remarkable. The Meeting Houses, 
occupied by the respective denominations of Inde- 
pendauts, Presbyterians, Quakers, Methodists, and 
Roman Catholics, are six in number. 

The Market Place is a small square, having a 
Guildhall, or Tolbooth, on the west side ; a Pajjt, 
or Conduit, to supply the inhabitants with water, 
near the centre ; and a Piazza, where the corn mar- 
kets, &c. are held, on the south. The Guildhall 
was originally built by Bishop Tunstall, about the 
year 1-555, but it has since been repaired, and much 
improved : in the Dining-room are portraits of 
Charles the Second, and Bishop Crcwe. The Pant 
is a stone building, of an octagonal form, sur- 
mounted with a statue of Neptune. The water is 
brought from an inclosed spring, about half a mile 
distant, originally given for the use of the city, in 
March, 1451, by Thomas Billingham, of Choke- 
hagh, Esq. to John Lauud, Alderman of the Guild 
of Corpus Christi, in the Church of St. Nicholas, 
and his successors, with leave " to convey the water 
to the pant, or reservoir, in the market-place, for 
the use and benefit of the inhabitants, paying for the 
use thereof to the said Thomas, and his successors, 
thirteen pence annually, on the feast of St. Martin ; 
provided that no water should be drawn from thence 
to any other part of the city, except to the grantor's 
house, in the market-place." On the twenty-first 
of July, in the same year, Bishop Neville confirmed 
the above grant, by letters patent, and gave .per- 
mission " to the grantees to dig in his manor, for 
the purpose of laying and repairing the pipes, &c." 
When the inhabitants had enjoyed the benefit of the 
spring nearly 186 years, Cuthbert Billingham, a 
descendant of the donor, broke up the pipes which, 
conveyed the water to the pant, and directed its 
course to his own mills, at Crook-hall, alledging, 
that " the citizens had injured his corn and grass 
in coming to the spring, and also had withheld the 
annual payment of the thirteen -pence." On this, 
a bill of chancery was filed against him by the citi- 
zens, and the cause finally argued before Sir Ri- 
chard Ilutton, Knt. Chancellor of the Diocese, who 
confirmed the right of the citizens by a decree, dated 
March 30, 1037. 

The I'iazzn, or Corn Market, was constructed 
with the materials of an old cross, which stood near 
the conduit, and was removed in the year 1781. A 
Dispensary was established here by subscription, 
in 1785 ; and the contributions becoming v>ry li- 
lu ral, the trustees determined to extend the charity, 
by converting it into an Iit/irtaary, where the sick 
poor should be admitted without cxpencc, and a 

large 



300 



DURHAM. 



large and more convenient building for that purpose, 
was completed about twenty years ago, on a piece 
of ground in Allergate, given by Thomas Wilkin- 
son, Esq. of Coxhoe. In 1790, an act was ob- 
tained for lighting, paving, and otherwise improving 
the city ; and various judicious alterations have been 
effected under its clauses. In 1791, a small Theatre 
was built by subscription, in Sadler-gate ; and 
about the year 1803, a Subscription Library, was 
founded. The recreation of the inhabitants is fur- 
ther provided for by a Race Course ; which, from 
the following curious entry in the Parochial Regis- 
ter of St. Nicholas, appears to have been established 
as jgarly as the reign of Charles the Second : " April, 
1083. It is ordered, that Simon Lackenby is to 
keep, in lieu of his Entercommon Ground, one suf- 
ficient Bull for the use of the city and Borough 
Kyne, for three years next ensuing" ; and to give 
ten shillings towards a silver Plate for a Course." 

Durham, after its civil establishment, was origin- 
ally termed a Borough : and its local polity was ex- 
ercised by a Bailiff, whose appointment remained 
with the Bishops. In the first charter of incorpora- 
tion, which was granted by Bishop Piulsey, besides 
other considerable privileges, the inhabitants were 
discharged from the custom of Marchet, or right of 
the lord of the manor, to pass the first night with 
every new-made bride. Under Bishop Neville, the 
diiet' officer was styled, Bailiff of the City of Dur- 
ham ; and in the year 1565, by a new charter, grant- 
ed by Bishop Pilkington, the civil jurisdiction wag 
vested, in an Alderman, and tvyelve assistant Bur- 
gesses. In 160-2, Bishop Matthews, by another 
charter, vested the government in a Mayor, twelve 
Aldermen, and twenty-four Common Conncilmen ; 
the latter to be -chosen yearly by the Aldermen, from 
the twelve incorporated companies, in equal propor- 
tions. This charter was confirmed by James the 
First, and continued in force till 1684, when it was 
surrendered to Bishop Crewe, who immediately 
granted a new charter, but some informality having 
been discovered in the forms of surrendering the 
former one, that was again restored ; and continued 
to direct the actions of the body corporate till the 
year 1761, when some election stratagems occasion- 
ed such divisions among the corporate officers, that 
the parties refused to act with each other ; by which 
means the prescribed number of members could not 
be kept up, and the'charter became vacated. From 
that time the city was governed by a Bailiff till the 
year 1780, when Bishop Egerton granted a new 
charter, dated October the second, in which its for- 
mer government by a Mayor, Aldermen, and Com- 
mon-Councilmen, with some inferior officers, was 
re-established, and the rights of the citizens ex- 
plained and confirmed. Neither the county, nor the 
city of Durham, was represented in Parliament till 
the reign of Charles the Second ; a circumstance 
Ascribed to the vast power and influence of the Bi- 
shop ; as returning members to Parliament was an- 
ciently considered as more grievous and inconve- 



nient, than either useful or honourable. In the year 
1673, an act was passed, by which the city and 
the county were each authorized to send two mem- 
bers, and from that period the returns have been re- 
gularly made. The right of election for the city is 
vested in the Mayor, Aldermen, and Freemen : the 
number of voters is about 1000. Some illegal pro- 
ceedings in the admission of freemen during a con- 
tested election, in the year 1762, occasioned the 
passing of the famous Durham act, by which all 
persons were restricted from voting who had not 
been " possessed of their franchise twelve calendar 
months before the day of election ;" excepting those 
entitled to their freedom by the custom of the bo- 
rough. 

The trade of this city is not extensive ; some 
years ago it had a woollen manufactory, which fur- 
nished employment to several hundred persons, but 
that has been wholly abandoned. It also possessed 
a large cotton manufactory, established by the 
Messrs. Salvin in the year 1796 ; but, after greatly 
suffering by the war, it was entirely destroyed by an 
accidental fire, which commenced on the morning of 
the seventh of January, 1804, and in a few hours 
consumed the very extensive factory that had been 
built for carrying it on near St. Oswald's Church. 
The woollen business originated in a bequest made 
to the city of Durham by Mr. Henry Smith, on the 
twentieth of July, 1598, of all his coal-mines, then 
of the annual value of 100/. and a personal estate 
worth 600/. The cause of this bequest, to use the 
words oi' the Will, was, " that some good trade 
may be devised for setting of the youth, and other 
idle persons to work, as shall be thought most con- 
venient, whereby some profit may arise to the bene- 
fit of the said city, and relief of those that are past 
work." Some years afterwards the trustees com- 
menced a cloth manufactory, which was discontinued 
in 1619; and a scheme was devised to increase the 
value of the donation, by applying it to the purchase 
of land. In 1759, the proceeds were again appro- 
priated to establish a cloth manufactory, and various 
buildings were erected for the convenience of the 
workmen, and the reception of the machinery ; but 
the establishment ultimately failed. The collieries 
have also been many years abandoned. 

Amongst various other bequests for charitable 
uses in this city, are those of Bishop Crewe, and 
Bishop Wood, of Lichfield, the former left 100/. per 
annum, for apprenticing the children of the poor ; 
the latter 20/. annually, i'or tlio relief of small debt- 
ors ; and 100/. to be laid out upon a rent charge, 
for the maintenance of (he indigent inhabitants. 

The Sunday School system has made great pro- 
gress in this city ; from th<? benevolent' attention of 
the Ladies in particular, whose visits have produced 
the most beneficial effects in the improvement of the 
scholars, of whom about oOO, or upwards, are thus 
educated. 

In the month of August, 1809, this city WMS visit- 
ed by an awful storm of lightning and thunder, ac- 
companies 



DURHAM. 



301 



accompanied by torrents of rain and hail. Several 
houses were struck by the electric fluid, and a bark- 
mill, near fit. Andrew's church, was set on fire. 
Some personal injury was sustained, in different 
quarters, but no lives were lost. 

The population of the city of Durham, as returned 
under the act of 1811, was 2997 males, aud 3700 
females. 

Dr. Grey, author of the Meuioria Technica, &c. 
was a native of Durham.* 

EBCHESTER.,] The little irregular village of Eb- 
chester, 14 miles north-- west from Durham, occupies 
the brow of a steep declivity, which overhangs the 
Tync. This was beyond all doubt the site of a 
Roman station ; although no mention of it has been 
made by Camrien, who has noticed a monastery said 
to have been founded here by Ebba, daughter of St. 
Ethelfrtd, King of Northumberland, before the year 
000, which the Danes afterwards demolished. It 
has been supposed by Gale to have been the Epia- 
curn of Ptolemy ; but Horsley, apparently on better 
grounds, considers it to hare been the Viudomura of 
Antoninus. Vestiges of the vallum are yet discer- 
nible, but so obscured by buildings, that the exact 
dimensions of the camp can hardly be ascertained, 
though it seems to have been a square of 160 paces. 
The Church, and several cottages are within its 
area. Many Roman inscriptions and other remains 
found here have been described by Dr. Hunter in 
the Philosophical Transactions. The Great Roman 
Road, which led to this station from the southward, 
is remarkably perfect where the inclosures of com- 
mon lands had not been made. It is formed in 
three distinct parts, with four ditches ; a centre 
road, probably for carriages and cavalry, forty-two 
feet in width, with a narrow road on each side, for 
foot passengers, twelve feet wide. There are also 
some vestiges of a square watch tower, between 
one and two miles to the south. 

EDEN, CASTLE.] Castle Eden, the name of 
which is traditionally derived from " Castle in the 
Dean" the Saxon word " Den," or " Dene," sig- 
nifying a valley, or woody place, which sinks sud- 
denly from the common level of the country, and 
cannot be seen till the spectator is close upon its 
borders is situated in the south division of Easing- 
ton Ward, 10{ miles east by south from Durham. 
It is the seat of Rowland Burdon, Esq. formerly 
one of the parliamentary representatives for this 
county ; a gentleman to whom a considerable por- 
tion of Durham is indebted for its improvement in 
trade and agriculture. It originally belonged to the 
See -of Durham, from which, at an early "period, it 
was usurped x by the Earls of Northumberland. Af- 
ter the Conquest, it came into the possession of 



* Richard Grey, born in 1693, was educated at Lincoln 
College, Oxford, and became M. A. in 1718. He obtained 
successively, the livings of Kilncote, in Leicestershire, and 
Hinton, in Northamptonshire ; and a fprebend in St. Paul's 
Cathedral. He died in 1771. His principal works ar - 

VOL, II. KO. 67. 



Robert de Brus, who gave it to the prior and con- 
vent of Gisburne, by whose successors it was re- 
tained till the period of the Dissolution. Mr. Bur- 
don purchased it from Mr. Bromley, of the county 
of Warwick. The mansion, which was rebuilt by 
Mr. Burdon, is a spacious and handsome castellated 
edifice, beautifully situated on the top of the woody 
precipice, which forms the southern boundary of 
the romantic defile, called Castle Eden Dean, aud 
commanding u fine land and sea prospect. The 
Dean extends about three miles from its entrance on 
the sea shore, and taking a waving course, consti- 
tutes some of the finest scenery in the county ; being 
deep, woody, and rocky. In many parts of the 
Dean, the rocks so exactly correspond in their stca- 
ta, and respective angles, as to impress the idea of 
their having been torn asunder by some great na- 
tural convulsion. Various detached masses, that 
seem to have been rent from the summit, lie in the 
bottom of the Dean, witli trees and brushwood 
growing upon them. At the head of the dell is a 
natural cascade, which issues from the crevice of a 
rock, and falls into a bason called Gunner's Pool ; 
and near the entrance is a sequestered cottage^ 
where a small society of French emigrant priests 
found a happy asylum during the troubles of the 
revolution. A safe road has been made through the 
Dean, by which its most beautiful features have 
been displayed. 

To the south, on au eminence, separated by a 
deep and narrow valley from the site of Mr. Bur-' 
don's mansion, is the village church, a very neat 
structure, which was erected by Mr. Burdon in the 
year 1704. Under his patronage also, two spacious 
squares of brick were built. A cotton manufactory 
was likewise commenced at Castle Eden in 1792 ; 
but it was soon afterwards removed to Durham, and 
a sail-cloth manufactory established in its place. 
At the entrance of the road leading to the Castle, 
near the manufactory, is a handsome castellated 
lodge, built from the designs of Mr. Atkinson. 
Some years ago, a new road was opened from Nor- 
ton to Bishop-Wearmouth, which, from several 
points, commands grand and extensive views of the 
sea. The agriculture of the district has been great- 
ly improved ; and what was recently a bleak and 
barren country, now wears the loveliest aspect of 
fertility. 

EGSLESCLIFF.] The pleasant village of Eggles- 
cliffe occupies an elevated point of land rising over 
the Tees, aud commanding a fine view of the oppo- 
site town of Yarm in Yorkshire. Until within the 
last ten or twelve years, the river here was crossed 
by a bridge of five arches, which, in wet seasons, 
occasioned such a stoppage of the water that the 



Memoria Technica, or a New Method of Artificial Memoir; 
A System of English Ecclesiastical Law, tor which Oxford 
conferred on him the decree of D. D. ; A New and Easy 
Method of learning Hebrew, without Points; Liber Jobi in 
Versiculos Metric* divisus ; The Last Words ef David, Sic. 
4 a low 



302 



DURHAM. 



low lamls were frequently overflowed, and great 
damage was done, particularly on the Yorkshire 
side. To prevent the continuance or repetition of 
this injury, an elegant cast iron bridge of one arch 
has been erected by Messrs. Walker, of Rotheram, 
under the direction of Mr. Thomas Wilson. The 
span of the arch is 180 feet, its height 34, and its 
breadth 27. The expence, amounting to about 
8000/. was conjointly defrayed by the counties of 
Durham and York. 

EBGLESTON.] The manor of Eggleston, about 
5| miles north-north- west from Barnard Castle, an- 
ciently formed part ef the possessions of the Earls of 
Westmoreland, but is now in possession of W. Hut- 
chinson, Esq. whose family purchased it in the be- 
ginning of the last, century. Lead mines, which 
have been worked since the reign of Edward the 
Sixth, are in this district ; the traces of different 
ancient workings are also to be met with here, sup- 
posed to have been worked by the Romans. A fo- 
ther (22 cwt.) of lead produced in Teesdale, yields 
by extract, on an average, 10 ounces of silver. Eg- 
gleston house, the residence of Mr. Hutchinson, is 
situated on an eminence on the banks of the river, 
and is sheltered from the north by plantations on 
the slopes of the hills. The garden may boast of 
one of the best botanical collections in England, 
consisting of upwards of 700 various plants. Many 
pleasant walks have been cut through the rocks 
which border on the Tees. Mr. Hutchinson has 
inclosed and planted the waste in the neighbourhood 
of the village ; and the silver fir is eminently thriv- 
ing. The Chapel of Eggleston is most remarkably 
situated in the centre of this gentleman's botanical 
garden. Extensive works for smelting, refining, 
and reducing lead lie near Eggleston, on the north. 
Here are also some very ingenious machinery and 
mills, for breaking and cleansing the ore and slag, 
the invention of the active Mr. Hall, now of Ar- 
kendale, Yorkshire. They are the property of the 
Quakers, and London Company. One of the most 
extensive and variegated prospects in the county is 
that from Newal Edge, to the north of the mills : 
on the east it commands the whole variegated vale 
of Cterelaud, with the sea near Huuscliff Point, and 
on the. south-west, the delightful windings of the 
Tees, with the distant mountains of Yorkshire, 
Westmoreland, and Cumberland. 

An ancient ruin, called the Standing Stones, is 
situated a mile to the north of Eggleston. It for- 
merly consisted of a Cairn in the centre, surround- 
ed by a trench ; and that again encompassed by a 
circle of rough stones, with many of which the roads 
have been repaired. A large barrow, crossed from 
east to west by a row of stanes, stands near a brook, 
at no great distance. 

ELSTOB.] Elstob, eight miles north-north-west 
from Stockton-upon-Tees, was the place where 
Ella, a Dane, first encamped after landing at the 
entrance of tha Tees. This circumstance appears 
to have given name to it ; Stob, in the Saxon lan- 



guage, signifying a stake, op tent, hence Ella's 
Stob; contracted into Elstob. Tradition affirms, 
that he fought a battle at Shotten ; that one of his 
chieftains died at Monien ; and that his men rested 
alter the fatigues of a battle, and were again " trim- 
med," at Trimdou, a village to the north. 

FINCHALB.] Finchale, a secluded spot on the 
western side of the Wear, four miles north-north- 
west from Durham, appears to have been a place 
of some note, in the Saxon times, several synods 
having been holden here. Early in the twelveth 
century it became the retreat of (Joilric a native of 
Walpole in Norfolk, who had been twice on a pil- 
grimage to Jerusalem ; and, according to the le- 
gend, having been directed by a vision to retire 
hither, he erected a chapel and hermitage, in which 
he resided during 63 years, and prac'ised unheard- 
of austerities : " he wore an iron shirt next his skin, 
day and night, and is said to have worn out three ; 
he mingled ashes with the flour, from which he 
made his bread ; and lest it should be then too good, 
kept it three or four months before he ventured to 
eat it. In winter as well as in summer, he passed 
whole nights up to his chin in water, at his devo- 
tions. Like St. Anthony, he was often haunted by 
fiends in various shapes ; sometimes in the form of 
beautiful damsels ; and so was visited by evil con- 
cupiscence, which he cured by rolling himself naked 
among thorns and briers. His body grew ulcerated ; 
but, to increase his pain, he poured salt into his 
wounds." By the severity of his discipline, by his 
uncommon austerities, and by the miracles which he 
is said to have wrought, he obtained so much re- 
nown that he was admitted into the calendar of 
Saints. Soon after he had settled here, " Bishop 
Flambard (about 1128) granted to the monastery of 
Durham, in free alms, the hermitage of Finchale, 
with its waters, fishings, rights, and privileges, sub- 
ject to Gedric's life, who should hold of them ; and 
after his death, that it might be the habitation of 
such of their brethren as they should appoint." He 
died in the year 1170, about sixty years after he had 
first retired to this hermitage. Bishop Pudsey, 
about ten years afterwards (A. D. 1180) granted a 
charter for founding a cell at Fine-hale ; but it 
never appears to have been curried into execution 
till 1196, when Henry, the Bishop's sou, founded a 
Priory here for Benedictines, subordinate to the mo- 
nastery at Durham. At the period of the Dissolu- 
tion, its possessions were valued at 146/. 19.*. 2d. 
per annum. Soon afterwards it was granted to 
the See of Durham ; and has been appropriated to 
the support of one of the Preben<ls. 

The ruins of the Priory are delightfully situated 
in a low vale verging on the river, which flows in a 
circular direction beneath the cliffs of Cocken. 
These remains cover an extensive space of ground ; 
but they are so much dilapidated, that the original 
appropriation of their respective parts can hurdly 
be traced. In many jxjaces, they are covered with 
ivy, and in conjunction with the rocky bauks of the 
7 Wear, 



DURHAM. 



303 



Wear, partially fringed with wood, compose some 
interesting landscapes. St. Godric, and Henry de 
Pudsey, the founder, are reported to have been bu- 
ried within the church. The appendages of an ad- 
joining farm-house occupy various portions of the 
ruins of the Priory. 

FULLWKLL HILLS.] On these hills were dis- 
covered, rather more than half a century ago, a gi- 
gantic skeleton, two Roman coins, and a small urn 
of unbaked clay ; the particulars of which were 
thus related by Mr. Collinson, the historian ot So- 
mersetshire, in the Gentleman's ftlagazine for Oct. 
1763 : 

" A few weeks ago, a gentleman from Durham 
showed me soaie large teeth and two Roman coins. 
The teetii he said, he took out of the jaw of a gi- 
gantic skeleton of a roan, and the coins were found 
in a grave near it. The account he gives is in sub- 
stance as follows : Upon Fulwell Hills, near Monk 
Wearmouth, within a measured mile of the sea, 
there are quarries of lime, which he rests of the 
proprietor. In the year 1759, he removed a ridge 
of lime-stone and rubbish, upon one of these quar- 
ries, which was about 25 yards in length from east 
to west, its perpendicular height about a yard and 
a half, its breadth at the top was near six yards, 
and the sides were sloping like the ruins of a ram- 
part. In tli* middle of this bank was found the 
skeleton of a human body, which measured nine feet 
six inches in length ; the shin-hone measuring two 
feet three inches from the knee to the ancle ; the 
head lay to the west, and was defended from the 
superincumbent earth by four large flat stones, 
which the relator, a man of great probity, who was 
present when the skeleton was measured, and who 
himself toot the teeth out of the jaw, saw removed. 
The coins were found on the south side of the skele- 
ton, near the right hand." 

GAINSFORD.] The village of Gainsford, nine 
miles east-south-east from Barnard Castle, is situa- 
ted in a delightful valley, watered by the Tees. 
The buildings, which inclose a green, form a square. 
The manor, which is" extensive, is mentioned by an- 
cient writers to have comprised great part of that 
side of the county. In the reign of Edward the 
First, the Baliols, owing to the marriage of Hugh 
Baliol with Agnes de Valencia, obtained possession 
of it ; and besides other privileges of a royal fran- 
chise, they had a free warren here. Sir Samuel 
Garth, of some of whose family there are monuments 
in the church, was born at Bolaiu in this parish.* 

GATESHEAD.] Gateshead, the Gaetsheved of the 
Saxons, and supposed, by Catndeu and Baxter, to 
be the Galtrosentum of the Romans, is situated in 
the oust division of Chester Ward, 13 miles north 



* Sir Samuel Garth, an English poet and physician, was 
educated at Peter House, Cambridge, where he took the de- 
gree of M. D. in 1691. He greatly contributed to the carry- 
ing imo execution the- establishment of dispensaries, but was 
opposed by the apothecaries, whom lie severely lashed for their 



by east from Durham, and 276* north by west from 
London. It principally consists of one long street, 
ranging along a steep descent, and terminated by a 
handsome stone bridge leading over the Tyne to 
Newcastle ; to which in some respects, it may be 
regarded as a suburb. On the middle of the bridge 
is an iron gate, which bears the arms of Durham on 
one side, and those of Newcastle on the other ; thus 
forming a boundary between the bishopric and the 
county of Northumberland. The Roman name of 
the to vn (Gabroseutum) is said to be derived from 
two British words, Gajfr, a goat, and Pew, a head ; 
the ancient historians have called it Caprae Caput^ 
?'. c. Goat's head, a name which Camden supposes to. 
have originated from some neighbouring inn, known; 
by the sign of the Goat's Head. Brand, how- 
ever, derives it from the Saxon Gaetsheved, the head 
or. termination of a military road, or way, which in, 
these parts is usually denominated gaet. Being im- 
mediately on the Roman road leading from Chester- 
le-Street, there is scarcely a doubt of its having 
been occupied by the Romans ; an opinion which 
is corroborated by the discovery of an urn full o 
Roman coins, on widening the main road leading 
to the Tyne Bridge some years ago. Most of the 
coins were distributed among the workmen, and are 
lost ; but several of them, ia good preservation, oC 
the Emperor Adrian, were recently in the hands ol 
David Stepheuson, Esq. of Newcastle. 

Gateshead, though a borough by prescription, i 
not privileged to send members to Parliament. Bi- 
shop Pudsey, in 1164, granted by charter, to his 
burgesses of Gateshead, the liberty of his forest ; 
and " that each shall have in right of his burgage 
similar liberties to those enjoyed by the burgesses 
of Newcastle in right of their burgages ; and that 
they shall have free passage within the liberties of 
the palatinate with their goods, clear of all dues 
and exactions." Several succeeding- prelates had 
their keepers of the park and castle here. In 1557, 
Bishop Tuns tall granted a charter to the company 
of Glovers, within the borough of Gateshead ; ia 
1602, Bishop Matthew incorporated sundry trades ; 
and in 1661, Bishop Cosiu incorporated them into 
one commonalty. In the time of Edward the Sixth, 
this borough was united to Newcastle ; but in the 
succeeding reign it was re-uuited to the See of 
Durham. Previously to the act of the seventh of 
Edward the Sixth, by which Gateshead was an- 
nexed to Newcastle, it appears from Strype's An- 
nals, that the Mayor and Burgesses of the latter 
place, had obtained a right by purchase, from Tho- 
mas Sutton, founder of the Charter House, in Lon- 
don, for 12,000/. to " the manor of Gateshead, with 
all the manors, coal-pits, and coal-mines, in Gate*- 

venal spirit, in his poem of the Dispensary. In 1697 he spoke 
the Harveian oration before the college. At the accession of 
George I. he was knighted, and appointed King's physician in 
ordinary, and physician- general to the armv. He died in 
1719. 

head 



804 



DURHAM. 



head and Wickham, with the common wastes, &c." 
These had been alienated by Bishop Barnes to 
Queen Elizabeth, who gave them to the Earl of 
Leicester, aud by him were sold to Mr. Sutton. In 
'the reign of Queen Mary, when an act was passed 
for the re-incorporation of the dis-severed lands 
with the Bishopric, the opposition of the corpora- 
tion of Newcastle, to the restoration of Gateshcad, 
was taken off, by a grant made to the Mayor and 
Burgesses, dated March the seventeenth, 1554, by 
Bishop Tunstall, of a lease of the Salt Meadows 
for " ninety years, and so from ninety till the ex- 
piration of 450 years, with a way to be assigned for 
all persons, and the conveyance of wares and mer- 
chandize, and other things, to and from the Salt 
Meadows, and the high street of Gateshead, at a 
reserved rent of 2/. 4s. annually ; with a discharge 
from all tolls for that term, that had formerly been 
taken by the Bishop, or his lessees : reserved rent, 
4/, 6s. per annum." The Salt Meadows, (contigu- 
ous to the rivr) comprehend about eighty-three 
acres of very fine land. About half a mile from the 
bridge, on the east side of the main street, are the 
ruins of St. Edmund's Hospital, or Monastery, sup- 
posed to occupy the site of a monastery, established 
here before the year 653, and probably destroyed at 
the time of the murder of Bishop Walcher, when 
the populace set fire to the Church. In 1247, Bi- 
shop Farnham founded the " Hospital of St. Ed- 
mund, in Gateshead," arid endowed it for a Master 
and three Brethren : soon afterwards he united it 
to the " Chapel or Hospital of the Holy Trinity in 
Gateshead," and framed ordinances for its govern- 
ment. Bishop Laiigley, about 1438, on the peti- 
tion of the Prioress and nuns of St. Bartholomew, 
in Newcastle, appropriated its revenues to the sup- 
port of that house, to whom it belonged at the Dis- 
solution. In J610, James the First refounded it 
by letters patent, for the reception of three poor 
men, and ordered that it should thenceforth bear 
the name of the " Hospital of King James," &c. 
In the garden are the ruins of a mansion, Which, j 
from its containing a Catholic Chapel, was set on j 
fire by the populace, at the time when the Duke of i 
Cumberland was marching with his army through 
Gateshead, on his way to combat the forces of the 
Pretender, in the year 1745. 

Gateshead Church, dedicated to St. Mary, is an 
ancient and spacious building, in the form of a 
cross : the aisles are separated from the nave by 
pointed arches, supported on light aud well pro- 
portioned octagonal columns, without capitals : it 
contains a good organ and galleries. The tower j 
was rebuilt in the year 1740 ; but the upper part has 
since been altered. In the church-yard is a singu- 
lar monument, said to have been erected by Robert 
'Trollop, the architect of the Exchange at Newcas- 
tle, to cover his own intended place of interment : 
it is a square, heavy building, the upper part strew- 
ed with " many a holy text," in gold letters on a 
black ground ; but partly obliterated. It is record- ! 



ed, that originally there was a statue, on the north 
side of this monument, pointing towards the Ex- 
change, which is nearly opposite, arid having the 
following lines below the feet : 

" Here lies Robert Trollop, 
Who made yon stones roll up ; 
When death took his soul up, 
His body fill'd this hole up/' 

On the cast side of the church-yard, on a spot of 
! ground called the Anchorage, or Anchoritage, is a 
; Free School, founded in the year 1701, by the Rev. 
Theophilus Pickering, rector of this parish ; in 
which the children are taught arithmetic, naviga- 
tion, Greek, and Latin. 

The trade of this town is less extensive than its 
favourable situation would indicate ; in this respect 
its contiguity to Newcastle is, perhaps of disadvan- 
tage. It, however, possesses several manufactories, 
particularly of cast and wrought iron, whiting, &c. 
The population, as stated in the last returns, was 
3975 males, and 4807 females ; the number of houses 
was 1252. A great improvemewt was made here 
some years ago, by forming a new $ud wide street 
from the head of the narrow and steep descent called 
the Bottle Bank, and carrying it round in a curve 
line to the bridge ; by which means the former dan- 
gerous, and in winter, almost impassable road for 
carriages, may be entirely avoided. Ilutchinson 
states that Daniel De Foe resided at Gateshead, 
when he composed his celebrated Adventures of 
Robinson Crusoe. 

, The view of the Tyne, and the town of Newcas- : 
tie, from the brow of the eminence a little to the 
north of the Hexham road, on the Gateshead side, 
is uncommonly grand and beautiful. 
- Gateshead Fell, a bleak and elevated ridge, whieh 
extends southward from the town, has long been 
famous for its grindstone quarries. Here, in the 
year 1068, a victory was obtained by William the 
Conqueror over the combined forces of Edgar 
Atheling, heir to the crown of Scotland, with Mal- 
colm, King of Scots, and some Danish pirates. The 
Conqueror, after the battle, marched to Newcastle, 
and almost levelled it with the ground, that it might 
not again become a place of refuge to his enemies, 
or oppose his arms. 

GIBSIDE.] This place, now the principal sent of 
the Earl of Stratkmore, whose ancestor, Sir Win. 
Bowes, acquired it by marriage with the heiress of 
Sir Francis Blackstone, at the conclusion of the 
seventeenth century, was the ancient inheritance of 
the Morley family. The mansion, situated on the 
east side of the river Dement, contains many family 
portraits, with some excellent paintings of other 
kinds. The principal is a fine picture of Rubeus's 
Wife, whilst pregnant, in-a fruit-shop ; the expres- 
sion is extremely fine ; as is that of the lynx-eyed 
curiosity of an old woman, to whom she is address- 
ing herself; the collection of fruit is immense, and 
very finely coloured. The approach to the house is 

' by 



DURHAM. 



305 



bj^a serpentine road, nearly a mile in length, wind- 
in" 1 through a forest of venerable oaks, sometimes 
extending along the brink of a deep valley, at others 
descending on the easy inclination of an eminence. 
The iirst view, on leaving the wood, opens upon a 
Bauquetting House, occupying au elevated site at 
the extremity of a spacious avenue. After passing 
a piece of water, the prospect becomes more inte- 
resting ; and a noble hanging wood is seen to-fhc 
right, covering all the inclining ground from a lofty 
summit to the very skirts of the vale ; in the tnidst 
of which, and forming a termination to the grand 
vista, is an elegant Ionic column, upwards of 120 
feet in height, surmounted by a gilt statue, of Bri- 
tish Liberty ; on the left a fine terrace is seen, ex- 
tending above a mile in length, at the end of which 
is a handsome modern Chapel, with a richly embel- 
lished portico and dome. Various other beautiful 
views occur in different parts of the grounds, par- 
ticularly from a walk near the back of the house, on 
the brink of a steep descent, whence the Derwent is 
seen flowing through a deep vale, enclosed on the 
north by hanging woods ; but on the south, bound- 
ed by cultivated lands, rising from the river in ir- 
regular swells. The park is about four miles in 
circumference ; and .altogether, the grounds are very 
extensive. 

GRANGE HAL-I..] About a mile south from Dar- 
lington, stands Grange Hall, or Blackvvell Grange, 
the seat of George Allen, Esq. commanding some 
very fine views of the adjacent country. The house, 
which is a respectable modern structure, contains 
an extensive museum of Natural History, and other 
curiosities, which the late possessor, and learned 
antiquary, G. Allen, Esq. purchased for 700/. of 
Mr. Tunstall, formerly of Wickliff, in Yorkshire, 
by whom it had been collected at a vast expence. 
The Library is also very valuable in topography and 
antiquity, and possesses numerous manuscripts that 
throw much light on this county, the history of 
which the late Mr. Allen took great pains to inves- 
tigate. He was the original promoter of Mr. Hut- 
chinson's valuable work. A small collection of 
paintings, of great value, are to be seen in the dif- 
ferent apartments. 

GREATHAM ] The village of Greatham lies about 
6 miles north-east by north from Stockton-upon- 
Tces. It is very pleasantly situated on an eminence 
two miles west from the sea. The Parish Church, 
which was much decayed, and contained no memo- 
rials of antiquity worthy of note, was pulled down, 
and rebuilt in a plain and neat manner, and a square 
embattled tower raised at the west end, in 1792. 
Two rows of pillars, which divided the church into 
a nave, and two aisles, were the only parts of the 
old church which were preserved. There is a mu- 
ral monument of black and white marble in the 
chancel, \vith the following inscription : " In me- 
mory oi Riili>ii Bradley, Ksq. an eminent Counsel- 
lor at Law, bom in this parish, \vlio bequeathed a 
large fortune, acquired in a great measure by his 

VOL. 11. NO. 07. 



abilities an, I integrity, to the purchasing of books 
calculated to promote the interests of virtue, and 
religion, and the happiness of mankind. lie died 
December 28th 1788, in the seventy-second year of 
his age." Owing, however, to the undefined man- 
ner of the legacy, and its execution having been 
left to the Court of Chancery, Mr. Bradley's will 
was set aside by a decree of that Court, August 2d. 
1794, in favour of the next heir. The property 
amounted to above 40,000/. 

Greatham Hospital, which adjoins the village of 
Greatham, a little to the west, was founded by Ro- 
bert dc Stichill, Bishop of Durham, in the year 
1272. The lands which he appropriated to this 
purpose, were a part of those forfeited by the fami- 
ly of Montford, in the reign of Henry HI. This 
worthy Bishop, " knowing that no comforts equall- 
ed those of religion, in rocking the cradle of de- 
clining age, united with his charitable foundation a 
religious establishment, and enjoined that the mem- 
bers of this Hospital should live together, according 
to the habits of the times, in the manner of Monks, 
that they should live in one house, and mess at one 
table ; and that they should consist of one Master, 
five Priests, and forty poor persons. This Hospital 
was dedicated to God, St. Mary, and .St. Cuthbert. 
The foundation and grant of Bishop Stichill were 
confirmed by the Edwards Third and Fourth ; and 
the latter granted the master and brethren a weekly 
market, and two annual fairs. In the time of James 
the First, this Hospital was re-founded, and a new 
charter granted, dated 20th July, 1610. It is theve 
called the Hospital of God in Gretham : the five 
priests of course were not re-established, and the 
number of brethren was reduced to thirteen. Tho 
establishment at present consists of one Master, 
(who is a layman,) one Chaplain, six Brethren, 
maintained wholly in the Hospital, six out Pension- 
ers, and one Bailitf of the Manor. Besides the 
maintenance and pensions of the brethren, a certain 
quantity of dough, ready prepared for the oven, is 
distributed monthly to poor persons of the village. 
The original buildings of the Hospital, now no 
more, formed a quadrangle, at least three sides of 
one, a little to the north and west of the parish 
Church. The habitation of the brethren was taken 
down during the year 1803, and another, on an ele- 
gant plan, drawn by Jeffrey Wyat, has been erected 
at the sole expence of the Earl of Bridgewater, the 
Master. The Lodge, or Mansion House of the 
Master, is pleasantly situated in a garden surround- 
ed by trees, and commanding a fine view of the 
river Tees, and the Cleveland hills. Within the 
garden, on a rising ground to the left, is the Chapel 
of the Hospital, rebuilt also by the Earl of Bridge- 
water in the year 1788. 

The brethren of this Hospital are celebrated for 
their longevity. The ages of the six brethren in 
the year 1803, were as follows : 96, 8->, 8-2, 80, 80, 
03. The Rev. James Horseman, Chaplain of the 
Hospital, and Vicar of the parish, died iu the year 

4 ii 17 DO, 



DURHAM. 



1790, aged 88, having filled those offices during 60 
years. Dormer Parkhurst, LL. B. and his father, 
John Parkhnst, LL. B. having enjoyed the master- 
ship of the Hospital from 1676 to 1761, the latter 
built, (1761) at ins own expence, and endowed an 
Hospital in the same village for six poor females, 
" who shall be widows, or unmarried, and upwards 
of fifty years of age, settled in, or belonging to, 
the town of Greatham, if fit objects of charity, if 
no woman in Greatham be found of this description, 
then to be elected from some town or place in the 
neighbourhood." Six neat apartments of brick, 
with a small garden annexed to each, are appro- 
priated to this purpose. The endowment consists 
of lauds situated in the parish of Stockton, the 
rents of which are thus applied : " 4/. 16.. Od. a 
piece, by twelve monthly payments ; 4s. at Christ- 
mas ; 2s. at Easter; and 2s. at Whitsuntide; on the 
first day of October, a gown ready made, to be all 
of the same colour, and decent ; a reasonable and 
sufficient quantity of coals and fuel ; and when any 
are visited with sickness, or incapable of taking 
care of themselves, a fit person of their own sex is 
to be employed and paid for attending them. The 
women to keep their apartments clean and neat, and 
be quiet and peaceable in their behaviour, and con- 
stantly attend divine service in the church and 
chapel. The residue of the funds of this Hospital, 
if any, to place out poor boys belonging to the town 
of Greatham, apprentices to such trades as the 
trustees shall think proper. The appointment of 
the poor women, and the regulations, &c. of the 
Hospital, are in the Master of the Hospital of Great- 
ham for the time being, who has power to vary the 
rules as occasion shall require. 

HARDWICKE.] Hardwicke, the seat of Matthew 
Russel, Esq. half a mile to the west of Sedgefield, 
is greatly celebrated in the north, for its beautiful 
pleasure grounds, and its elegant ornamental build- 
ings. They originated with the late Jno. Burdon, 
Esq. who commenced his improvements in the year 
1750, previously to which, the grounds were a mere 
bog, and the lower side even now presents a marshy 
appearance. The present proprietor, in a taste 
which does him the greatest honour, has made various 
alterations. He has removed the inclosures of an 
estate, which he purchased of the school of Riving- 
ton in Lancashire, and joined it to the grounds of 
Hardwicke, which he has also thrown open towards 
the east, and embellished the western side of Sedge- 
field with several clumps of trees, and a serpentine 
plantation. He has also improved, and rendered 
more salubrious and cheerful, the entrance to the 
pleasure grounds. A fine gravel walk, about 560 
paces in length, forms a descent from the terrace to 
a circular bason of water. A Bathing House, of 
the Doric order, with an open portico in front, and 
apartments at the sides, for breakfast and repose, 
stands at the bottom. The path, taking a winding 
direction, leads to the Lake, a sheet .of water which 
covers nearly forty-font- acres, and unites with a 

8 



serpentine river or canal, that winds through the 
grounds. The Library stands near the side of the 
canal, in front of which is a cascade, tunned by art, 
but of little consequence, as the da*:;ing of the fall 
is scarcely heard, though close to tlie feet. The 
library boasts of a splendid collection of books, and 
its windows are of painted glass, displaying, 

" The likeness of things so foul lo behold, 
That what they are is not lit lobe told." 

The Temple, which is built on a circular emii 
nence, in an agreeable meadow, forms a quadran- 
gle, and has an open colonnade. Columns of the 
Ionic order support the entablature, and eight busts of 
the most celebrated poets stand in niches on the out- 
side. The interior is eighteen feet square. It has 
an octagonal dome, ornamented with paintings by 
the Bortiese, both father and son. Apollo, present- 
ing to Pallas a laurel wreath, stands in the centre ; 
with the arts and sciences at her feet. In large 
compartments below, appear the Cardinal Virtues, 
with appropriate emblems ; and in the corners the 
four arts of Music, Painting, Sculpture, and Ar- 
chitecture. Medallions of the four Seasons in stuc- 
co, by Cartisi, hang up in recesses between the 
windows. The floor is of mosaic work, inlaid with 
marbles of various colours. The ruin consists of 
an artificial semblance of a demolished castle, with 
a circular tower entire, from the top of which is an 
extensive prospect. A statue of Neptune on a pe- 
destal in the middle of the river, is placed opposite 
the ruin. The Banquetting House, built after the 
Corinthian order, is superb, and contains one prin- 
cipal apartment, measuring sixty-two feet in length, 
and twenty-six in height and breadth. Various 
compartments divide the ceiling ; in the centre of 
which is an oval, representing an assembly and ban- 
quet ef the Gods, by Hayman. The petition of 
Thetis to Jupiter, and Venus presenting the cestus 
to Juno, attended by the Loves and Graces, are 
painted in squares at the sides. Two paintings, by 
Hayman, representing the marriage of Cupid and 
Psyche, and a procession of Bacchanals, are over tho 
doors. A full length of J. Burdon, Esq. by Quadel, 
a German, esteemed a correct likeness, decorates 
the chimney-piece. Elegant stucco work, and rich 
gilding, with busts of Palladio, Vitruvius, Inigo 
Jones, &c. ornament the remainder of the room. 
The view between the Banquetting House and the 
Ruin is singularly beautiful, and various points in 
the grounds afford many charming prospects. The 
Mansion, which is irregular, was erected by Mr. 
Russel, but is more commodious than elegant. 

HARTLEPOOL.] The city or town of Hartlepool, 
anciently called Heortn, Heorthn, and lleortnesse, 
is situated in the north-east division of Stockton 
Ward, 12| miles north-east by north from Stockton, 
and 261 north by west from London. It stands on 
a promontory, nearly surrounded by the north sea, 
which, on the south side of the town, forms a capa- 
cious 



DURHAM. 



807 



cious bay, very commodious for the reception of 
vessels, and the landing of troops from the con- 
tinent ; circumstances which render it a place of/ 
great importance to the Normans, and the family ' 
of Brus were thence induced to secure it by fortifi- 
cations. According to the Chronicle of Lindis- | 
fame, Hartlepool was built ~ by Ecgrig, Bishop of] 
the Holy Isle, and given to the see for ever, sonic- ' 
what before Eadulf fled the isle. Before this, how- i 
ever, about the year 640, a monastery had been 
founded " at or near this place, by a religious wo- i 
man, named Hieu, or as some copies have it, St. 
Bega, whereof St. Hilda was sometime Abbess." 
This establishment, of which no farther traces can 
be discovered, is supposed to have been destroyed , 
in the year 800, when Tyncmouth and Hartuess 
were burnt by the Danes. 

The family of Brus, already mentioned, obtained 
possession of Hurtlepool, with many other manors, 
by the marriage of Robert de Brus, or Bruce, an 
attendant of William the Conqueror, with Agnes, 
daughter of Fulke de Paganell. William de Brus, 
grandson of Robert, obtained the grant of a mar- 
ket, and King John, by charter, in the second year ,' 
of his reign, " granted and confirmed to his sub- j 
jects of Hartlepool, that they should be free bur- j 
gesses, and hold the same liberties and privileges | 
as the burgesses of Newcastle." Thus Hartlepool j 
gradually advanced to importance. When Bishop ' 
Pudsey purchased Sadberge, of Richard the First, j 
in 1189, Hartlepool was included; and the pur- I 
chase having been confirmed by King John, this ' 
place was held of the Prelates of Durham, as chief 
Lords of the See. The manor appears to have been 
afterwards holden by the Clifford family, under the 
Bishops, as Lords paramount. The Lumleys suc- 
ceeded the Cliffords ; and in ' the time of Bishop 
Matthew, " Lord John Luraley pretended, that it 
was not within the royal liberty, but had a right to a 
special franchise, as being a county or liberty dis- 
tinct from the palatinate." These disputes were at 
length settled by arbitration in favour of the See. 
It remained in possession of the Lumleys till 1770, 
when the whole manor, towu^ &c. were purchased 
by Sir George Pococke, and is still hold by his 
heirs. 

In the year 133"5, when the Scots ravaged all the 
country on the banks of the Tees, the terrified in- 
habitants of Hartlepool Hew to thsir ships with such 
effects as they could readily remove, and put to sea 
for safety. How the town could be so easily sur- 
rendered is surprising, except by treachery, the ap- 
pearance of the fortifications indicating that a long 
siege might have been sustained : however, the ene- 
my were satisfied by a large contribution, which 
saved the whole neighbourhood from destruction. 

The town of Hartlepool is built on the western 
side of a hill, and for the most part consists of one 
principal street, and a few smaller ones, which run 
in a cross direction. During the summer it is much 
resorted to by bathers ; and additional buildings, and 



other accommodations, have lately been erected for 
the reception and convenience of those occasional 
visitants. The surrounding prospects are agree- 
able; and the rocks, which line the coast north of 
the town, being for a considerable distance exca- 
vated, by the violence of the waves, present plea- 
sant and romantic retreats at low water. Hartle- 
pool cannot boast of a very extensive trade, owing 
perhaps to the neglected state of the harbour, and 
to its distance from the places where the great sta- 
ple commodities of this county, coal, and lead, are 
abundant. The Slake, (a broad expanse of water,) 
on the west side of the town, might by due exer- 
tion, be made productive of much benefit; as its 
waters could be applied to cleanse and deepen the 
extensive bason below the town, and vessels of a 
large siza be admitted to the very walls. The fish- 
ing business here is considerable, and great variety 
of fine fish are caught, and sent into the inland parts 
of the country-. 

The Church, or rather Chapel, (the town of Har- 
tlepool being included in the parish of Hart,) is an 
irregular structure, of different ages and styles of 
architecture : the tower and nave are the most an- 
cient. Some very old, mutilated monuments re- 
main in the church-yard ; reported, but apparently 
without foundation, to have belonged to the Bruces, 
one of whom, before the year 1275, established a 
monastery for Grey Friars, the ruins of which may 
yet be traced at some little distance from the church. 
The other public buildings are a Town Hall, a Freft 
Sehool, and a Custom House. The civil govern- 
ment is vested in a Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder, 
and Common Council. Very near the Water Gate, 
on the south side of the town, is a Chalybeate 
Spring, covered every tide by the sea : it is slightly 
impregnated with sulphur, which evaporates very 
quickly, leaving a sediment, with salt of tartar. 

The persons employed in the fishery, who, except 
during the bathing season, are almost the only resi- 
dents at Hartlepool, are a rude, but athletic and 
courageous race, very expert in their profession, 
and ever ready to brave the violence of the storm to 
rescue their fellow-creatures, in the numerous cases 
of shipwreck, which occur upon this coast. A sub- 
scription Life-boat was established here some years 
ago. 

HAWTHORN.] The little village of Hawthorn, 
9 miles east by north from Durham, is pleasantly 
situated on a hill about a mile from the sea, and 
contiguous to Hawthorn Dean, on the south side of 
which is an eminence called Beacon Hill, where 
fires were formerly lighted to warn mariners from 
this coast. The shore is rocky, and broken into a 
multitude of deep caverns ; and the Oifing is full of 
rocks ami shoals. In the mouth of a deep and nar- 
novv cre,ek, where the rocks are the most broken, 
rugged, and romantic, the late Admiral Milbanke, 
some years ago built a summer retreat, which h<! 
named Sailors' Hall. At high-tide it almost over- 
hangs the waves, and looks over the most stormy 

and 



308 



DURHAM. 



ever, 



gland and Wales, " of supposing them to have been 
marie pits, or of deducing their etymology from the 
old German Nie-Hel, with the above gentleman, 
(Hutchinson), we should incline to refer it to the 
British ///, an alkali, whence ha/en, salt ; and kid- 
dle, or kidle, a dam: Hal-kiddles ; /'. <\ salt-pits." 
In addition to this it seems worth while to remark, 
that, in the records of Bishop Skirlaw, who entered 
upon the see of Durham in die year 1389, there is 
mention of certain lands called " Hell," which, af- 
terwards became the possession ol the Evers family; 
and it does not seem the most improbable conjec- 
ture, that the pools took their name from this land. 
HIGH FORCE.] The cataract of liiu'h Force, 
three miles from Wynch Bridge, on the Tecs, 



and shaken part of the shore. lu this part of the 
country are retained some ancient customs, evident- 
ly derived from the Romans ; particularly that of 
dressing up a figure of Ceres during harvest, which 
is placed in the field whilst the reapers are labour- 
ing, and is brought home on the last evening of 
reaping, with music, and great acclamation, after 
this a feast is made, called the mell supper, from the 
ancient sacrifice of mingling the new meal. 

HELL KETTLES.] At Oxenhall, 2 miles south 
Irein Darlington, are four remarkable cavities of the 
earth, denominated Hell Kettles, the origin of which 
is involved in fabulous conjecture. By some they 
are supposed to have been sunk by an earthquake ; ! 
because from an ancient book, intituled the Chroni- 
cle of Tinemouth, it appears that on Christmas-day, 
1179, the earth at this place rose to a great height 
above the level, in the manner of a lofty tower, and 
remained all that day till the evening (as it were 
fixed and immoveable), when it sunk down, with 
&uch a horrid .noise, that it frightened all the vicini- 
ty ; when the earth absorbed it, and there formed a 
deep pit. The people here have an opinion that 
these pits have a communication with the river Tees 
by means of subterranean passages. Tliis opinion, 
Camden seems to have adopted ; and he relates, 
that Cuthbert Tonstall, a bishop of Durham, hav- 
ing put a goose, which he marked for the purpose, 
into one of these pits, afterwards found it in the 
Tees. This story, however, is not now much cre- 
,'litod. Among other conjectures respecting the 
origin of these pits, it has been supposed that they 
are ancient coal- pits, rendered useless, by the rising 
of the water in them. Hutchinson thinks they 
.might have .been marie pits, as they resemble the 
workings in other countries where marleing is still 
practised ; .though he acknowledges that most marie 
and alum pits .are wrought much deeper than six 
yards, while the depth of the largest pit here is only 
19 feet and a half; the next 17, the next 14, and the 
least five feet and a half. The properties ascribed 
to the water of these pits, are, however, similar to 
those acquired by water standing in hollows from 
whence marie has been obtained, which tastes pun- 
gent, and curdles milk and soap. " Instead, how- 
observe the Editors of the Beauties of En- 



and four from Cauldron Snout, already described, 
hurls its waters over a huge rock of black marble, 
seventy feet high. Above the fall, the river is close- 
ly pent up, and swelling into rage, here precipitates 
in awful crash into a reservoir more tliau sixty feet 
deep. In the language of Burns, 

" Full swift it Cashes on the rocky mounds, 
Where through a shapeless break Ihe stream resounds. 
As high in air the bursting torrents flow, 
As deep recoiling surges loam below : 
Front: clown the rock the whitening sheet descends. 
And viewless Echo's ear, astonish'd, rends. 
F.ir seen through rising mists, and ceaseless show'rs. 
The hoary cavern, wide-surrounding, low'rs ; 
Still through the gap, the struggling river toils, 
And still below, the horrid cauldron boils." 

The vast clouds of spray, which arise from the 
descending waters, assume, when enlightened by 
the beams of the sun, all the brilliant beauties of the 
rainbow. In winter, although it has a different, vet 
it has not a less interesting appearance. The pro- 
jecting points of the rocks arc at that time orna- 
mented with an infinite variety of large icy stalac- 
tites, and fringes crystallized ill a curious manner, 
which form an endless variety of prisms, acted on by 
the rays of the sun, like so many chrystal lustres, 
beaming in ten thousand directions in the most bril- 
liant manner. The violence, together with the boil- 
ing of the waters at the bottom of the fall, has form- 
ed several caverns in the solid marble ; but they 
are difficult of access, except in the time of severe 
frosts. The mineralogist and botanist may enjoy 
great satisfaction in their rambles here ; the regular 
order of. the rocks, with the many curious plants 
which grow on them will present a variety of ob- 
jects, wherewith their researches may be gratified. 
That beautiful flower the Burnet Rose is to be found 
here ; and not far off the Gentiana Verna, which 
was not known formerly to have grown in Britain, 
has been discovered. The noise of the fall has been 
heard many miles round : at some distance below it, 
the rocks rise in square columns, to 100 feet in per- 
pendicular height. 

HILTON CASTLE.] The township of Hilton, in 
the parish of Monk Wearmouth, lies three miles 
west-north-west from Sunderland. Hilton, in the 
parish of Staindrop, is 8{ miles east by north from 
Barton Castle. Hilton Castle, in the former town- 
ship, was the ancient baronial residence of the Hil- 
tons. It is situated in a pleasant vale, on the north 
side of the Wear. The Hilton family became pos- 
sessed of the manor in the reign of King Athelstan, 
and held it till the year 1716, when Jno. Hilton, 
Esq. the last male heir, died, having bequeathed his 
estates to his nephew Sir Richard Musgrave, of 
Hay ton Castle, Cumberland. This gentleman died 
in tiic year 175-5; but the Castle, and almost the 
whole of the family estates, had been previously 
sold, under a h-gal decree, to pay the debts of Mr. 
Hilton. Afterwards, in the year 1758, the Castle 
arid mottor of Hilton, with other lands, were pur- 
chased 



DURHAM. 



309 



chased by Mr. Bowes, relict of George Bowes, of 
Gibside and mother of the late famous Countess of 
Strathmore, and they are still in possession of | 
her descendants.* When, or by whom, the castle j 
was founded is unknown. Its present form is an 
oblong square ; its centre is clearly the most ancient : 
its sides are modern ; and its general appearance is i 
that of a fortified mansion. " The centre of the j 
west front consists of the great entrance and gate- 
way, defended by square projecting turrets, crowned ! 
with hanging parapets, which cross the angles trans- ! 
versely, like those on the old towers at JLumley, so ' 
as to make an aperture on each face of the square, i 
for the purpose of annoying assailants : the centre j 
is flanked by circular turrets ; and the battlements 
of the ancient part ornamented with figures. On 
this front are several shields of arms, hut disposed 
so irregularly, as to testify that this front did nt 
originally receive them. In the highest place are 
the royal arms, three fleurs de Us quartering three 
lions passant ; and beneath, in a confused form, the 
arms of Graystocke, Lumley, Brabant, Percy, Ogle, 
ConyerSi and others. The east front has an ancient 
tower in the centre, with a square projecting front, 
without turrets : it is ornamented with the arms of 
the Hiltons, without quarterings." The interior of 
the building consists of five stories ; the rooms of 
which are chiefly small, unfurnished, and in a state 
of decay. The saloon, the only spacious apartment, 
was once finely ornamented with representations of 
various kinds offish, and other figures. On a little 
eminence near the castle, is a ruined chapel, beneath 
which several of the Hiltons lie buried ; licence 



* It is observed, in a MS. account of the former proprie- 
tors of this Castle, in the possession of the Mnsgraves of Hay- 
ton, that several names occur in the pedigree of the Hiltons, 
remarkable for their learning and piety ; but those highly re- 
nowned for their martial deeds are almost innumerable. " War 
seems to have been their peculiar genius, and recreation ; nor 
has any family been more lavish of their blood in defence of 
their country's cause. Since the time of the Conquest, it is 
remarked of the Hiltons, that one was slain at Feversham, in 
Kent ; one in Normandy ; one at Mentz, in France ; three in 
in the Holy Wars, under Richard the First ; one in the same 
under Edward the First ; three at the battle of Bourdeaux, 
under the Black Prince; one at Agincourt ; two at Berwick 
upon Tweed, against the Scots ; two at the battle of St. Albans ; 
five at Market Bosworth, and four at Flodden Field." This 
family was not only one of the most eminent, but also one of 
the most opulent in the Bishopric of Durham. 

f This estimable person, the descendant of a very respect- 
able family, was born at Kentmire, in Westmoreland, in the 
year 1517. His early years were passed at a public Grammar 
School, whence, at the age of sixteen, he was removed to 
Queen's College, Oxford, where his talents attracted general 
attention, and occasioned his appointment to supply the col- 
lege newly founded by Cardinal Wolsey. Bred to the belief 
of the Roman Catholic religion, he for some time continued 
steady in Ins adherence to that faith; but the eloquence and 
superior knowledge of jPeter Martyn, with whom he argued, 
induced him to give U p the cause: In; owned publicly that he 
could not maintain it, and determined to enter into no more 
controversies till he gained full information of the subject. He 
afterwards communicated his doubts to Bishop Tunstall, his 
VOL. u. no. 67. 



having been procured for that purpose from the 
Prior and Convent of Durham. 

HOUGHALL.] The ancient manor-houseof Hough- 
all, opposite to Shincliffe Hall, on the banks of the 
Wear, was erected by Prior Hotouu, and formed 
part of the prebendal estates of Durham. It has 
been surrounded by a moat, and otherwise fortified. 
Sir Arthur Hasilrigge is said to have been in pos- 
session 'of it during the Civil Wars, and Oliver 
Cromwell for some time made it his residence. 

HouGHTON-LE-SpRiNG.] The extensive village 
of Houghtou-le-Spring, B3J miles N. E. from Dur- 
ham, is situated at the head of a beautiful vale open- 
ing to the west, and is sheltered from the black 
winds of the north and cast by a chain of hills. It 
forms a part of the great possessions of the See of 
Durham, and is inhabited by many families of great 
opulence and respectability. The rectory is one of 
the richest in the county, containing fourteen vil- 
lages ; yet such was the general ignorance, and so 
small was the communication between this and the 
other parts of England, that on the accession of 
Quen Mary, the proclamations which had been 
issued by Edward the Sixth, ordering a change of 
worship in the respective churches, are said to have 
been unheard of by the inhabitants. The first mate- 
rial advances towards improvement, were made by 
the benevolent and pious Bernard Gilpin, who was 
presented to the rectory by Bishop Tunstall, and 
whose boundless charity, and meritorious exertions 
to enlighten his fellow creatures, obtained him the 
pre-eminent appellation of the Northern Apostle.f 
The church stands on an eminence in the centre of a 

square 



great uncle by the maternal side, and as they were in no de- 
gree undiminished after some years further study, he deter- 
mined, by the advice of that prelate, to Tisii the Continent, 
that he might satisfy his mind by conversing with the most 
eminent Protestant and Catholic professors. His principal 
objection to the scheme was, that it would prove too expen- 
sive ; but as to that, Tunstall wrote to him, that his living 
(Norton, in this diocese) would do something towards his 
maintenance, and he would supply deficiencies. This, how- 
ever, did not remove the difficulty: Mr. Gilpin's notions of 
clerical duty were so strict, that he thought no excuse could 
justify non-residence for the considerable time that he intended 
to be abroad. He could not, therefore, think of supporting 
himself with any part of the income of his living; and resolved, 
if he staid the shorter time, to rely upon his own frugal man- 
agement of the little money he had, and to leave the rest to 
the Bishop's generosity. Accordingly, he resigned his living, 
and set out for London, to receive his last orders from the 
Bishop, and to embark. His resignation gave Tunstall great 
concern. " There are your friends," he said, "endeavouring 
to provide for you, and you are taking every method to frv- 
trate their wishes ; but be wan.ed, by these 'courses, you wilt 
presently bring yourself to a morsel of bread." Mr. Gilpin 
begged the Bishop would attribute what he had done to a scru- 
pulous conscience, which would not permit him to act other- 
wise. On the Continent, he became acquainted with the most 
celebrated controversialists of the age, and, by attending the 
most distinguished colleges and schools, he obtained a thorough 
acquaintance with polemics. As his researches, however, 
were directed solely to the cause of truth, and not to the sub- 
stantiation of received opinioH, he now became a convert to the 
4 I principles 



310 



DURHAM. 



square area, formed by the buildings in ibe lower 
part of the village ; it is constructed in the form of 
a cross, and embattled, with a low tower, termi- 
nating in a spire, rising- from the centre. Amongst 
the monuments is an altar tomb, on which lies the 
effigy of a Knight in armour, with clasped hands, 
bearing a shield on his left arm, and reposing his 
head on a pillow. This is traditionally said to re- 
present Sir John le Spring, the head of an ancient 
resident family ; but Collins refers it to Sir Row- 
land Belasise, of Bewley ; knighted at the battle of 
Lewes, in Sussex, 48th of King Henry the Third, 
when the King was taken prisoner by Simon Mont- 



principles of the reformation. In 1556, he returned to Eng- 
land, though the persecution against Protestants, under Mary, 
vas still raging. Soon after his arrival, Bishop Tunstall ad- 
vanced him to the arch-deaconry of Durham, to which the 
rectory of Easington was annexed ; but these benefices ha was 
compelled lo resign, thruugh the strong opposition raised by 
the Catholic clergy, by whose influence a charge of heresy, 
consisting of thirteen articles, was preferred against him, but 
dismissed through the friendship of Tunstall, who soon after- 
wards presented him with the rectory of Houghton le Spring. 
His assiduity in the discharge of the duties of his function was 
exemplary. He set out with making it his endeavour lo guin 
the affection of his parishioners; to succeed in .which, how- 
ever, he studied that his means should he good, as well as his 
end. His behaviour was free, without levity ; obliging, with- 
out meanness ; and insinuating, without art. He condescended 
to the weak, bore with the passionate, and complied w ith the 
scrupulous; and in a truly apostolic manner, became all things 
to all men. To his humanity and courtesy, was added an un- 
wearied application to the instruction of those under his care. 
Is'ot satisfied with the advice he gave in public, he used to 
teach in private; and induced his parishioners to come to him 
with Iheir doubts and difficulties. His manner towards those 
he thought well disposed, was most engaging: and even his 
reproof was so conducted, thai it seldom gave offence. By 
these means, in a few years, he made a greater change in the 
neighbourhood, than could well be imagined. Assiduous to 
prevent all law-suits, his hall was often thronged with people, 
who came lo submit their differences to his judgment. 

During the early part of his residence at Houghton, his reli- 
gious opinions, though unfolded with great reserve, were made 
the foundation of a second charge before Bishop Tunstall, who 
again, however, found means to protect him : but his enemies 
were not to be thus silenced, and thirty-two articles were ex- 
hibited agaiust him before Bonner, Bishop of London, who 
gave orders for his immediate apprehension, and conveyance 
to the metropolis. Mr. Gilpin, who knew (he implacable zeal 
of this bigotted prelate, prepared for martyrdom ; but an ac- 
cident, by which his leg was broken, retarded his journey ; 
and before he was again able to travel, the death of Queen 
Mary occasioned him to be liberated, and thus released him 
from persficuJtoM. The hospitality and charity of Mr. Gilpin 
were only bounded by his means ; and the latter, regulated 
by the most exact economy, enabled him to execute more 
than less strict accomptants could imagine possible. His hos- 
pitable manner of living was the admiration of the whole coun- 
try. Every Sunday, from Michaelmas till Easter, was a sort 
of public day with him; and during this season, he expected 
to see all his parishioners and their families. He had three 
tables well covered: ihe first, for gentlemen; the second, 
for husbandmen, and farmers; and the third, for day labour- 
ers. When he was absent from home, no alteration was ra;;de 
in his family expem-es: the poor were fed as usual, and his 
neighbours entertained. He spent in his family, every fort- 
night, forty bushels of corn, twenty bushels of malt, and a 
whole on ', besides a proportionable quantity of other kinds of 



fort, Earl of Leicester, and other Barons. Th 
Belasise family inhabited Morton house, in this* 
parish, in the time of Cardinal Langley. Some 
other memorials of them remain in the Church ; one 
of which is a brass plate, displaying engraved por- 
traits of Margery Belasise, and her twelve children: 
the former died at the age of ninety, in the year 
1587. Another inscription records the memory of 
Major Thomas Lilburn, who died in the year 1665. 
In this Church was formerly a chantry, and two 
guilds. 

The parsonage is a handsome stone edifice, form- 
ing one side of a court, having a lodge at the en- 



provision. Strangers and travellers found in his house a cheer- 
ful reception ; all were welcome that came ; and even their 
horses had so much care taken of them, that it was humorously 
said, that, 'if a horse was turned loose in any part of the coun- 
try, it would immediately make its way to the rector of 
Houghton's.' The great Lord Burleigh Condescended to visit 
him, on his return from transacting some state business in 
Scotland ; and when taking his leave, told him, in all the 
warmth of sincerity, " He had heard great things in his com- 
mendation, but had now seen what far exceeded all that he 
had heard." The endeavours of Mr. Gilpin, to promote and 
establish the happiness of his fellow creatures, were not, how- 
ever, confined to his cure. At the period in which he lived, 
Redesdale and Tynedale, in Northumberland, of all barbarous 
places in the north, were looked upon to be the most barbarous; 
being the common theatre where the Scots and English were 
continually acting their bloody scenes. Inhabited by a kind 
of desperate banditti, rendered fierce and active by constant 
rapine, warfare, and alarms, they lived by theft, and used to 
plunder on both sides of the barrier. In this dreadful country, 
where no man would then even travel that could help it, be 
never failed to spend some part of the year ; the success ol his 
disinterested exertions was very great ; as his readiness to per- 
form good offices was equal to his ability to give advice, and 
his person became revered and sacred, among the most des- 
perate of the ferocious bands amidst whom he ventured. 
Among the various benevolent purposes to which he appropri- 
ated his income, was the building and endowment of a Gram- 
mar School in this village; which still flourishes, and has given 
education to many eminent men. He also lifted up part of his 
own house for the reception and tuition of scholars; and was 
at the expcnce of paying for the education and maintenance of 
others, whom he placed at the houses of different parishioners. 
Many of the children, whose early instruction he had thus pro- 
vided for, he afterwards sent to the universities, and there either 
wholly supported them, or furnished whatever assistance the 
circumstances of the students required. The death of this 
truly estimable mp.n was preceded by an unfortunate occur- 
rence, which considerably added to the infirmities of declining 
age. WhilecrossingthemarketpIaceatDurham, he was run 
at by an ox, and so greatly bruised by the violence with which 
the animal pushed him down, that his life was for some time 
in extreme danger; and .though he recovered sufficiently to 
leave his chamber, yet he never regained his former strength, 
and continued lame till the end of his days. He died in 
March, 1583, in the sixty-sixth year of his age. At the west 
end of his monument, in Houghton Church, is the following 
inscription in raised characters, divided by an escutcheon, dis- 
playing a boar resting against a tree, with a crescent cut on the 
side of the boar. 



BERNERD 
GILPIN KE 
CTOR HV 
JVS ECCLUE 



OBIT QUA 
RTO DIE M 
ARTII AN. 
DOM. 1585. 



trance, 



DURHAM. 



311 



trance, and being flanked by a chapel on one side, 
and an ancient tower on the other. The latter was 
erected about the year I 483, by the then incumbent, 
John Kelyng, who began (o fortify " and embattle 
a- house above the lower porch within his rectory 
with a wall oi' lime and stone, and to make a fortress 
of it without license." This offence, however, was 
pardoned by Bishop Dudley; and, in considera- 
tion of a fine paid, liberty was granted by that pre- 
late, " to embattle the house, and make it a fortress 
for himself, and successors for ever." The rectory 
was afterwards repaired by Mr. Gilpin ; but having 
again become ruinous, it was rebuilt, with the 
Chapel, by the Rev. George Davenport, rector be- 
tween the years 1664 and 1667. The south front 
commands a fine and extensive propect.* 



* Amongst the eminent Rectors of this parish, may be enu- 
merated, Emamiel Barnes, a person of great erudition, and 
son of Bishop Barnes; Augustin Lindsell, afterwards Bishop of 
Hereford, noticed in Fuller's Worthies, under Essex ; Dr. 
Peter Heylm; Dr. Sancroft, afterwards Archbishop of Can- 
terbury ; Dr. Bagsliaw, a famous preacher in London, in the 
seventeenth century ; Sir George Wheler, an antiquary and 
traveller; Dr. Seeker, afterwan's Archbishop of Canterbury ; 
and Mr. Rotherham, a celebrated polemical writer. 

f William Emerson was born in May, or June, 1701. The 
preceptor of his early years WHS his own father, of whom he 
learned writing and arithmetic, and probably the rudiments of 
Latin. When hi-* attachment to the amusements of childhood 
had subsided, which, according to his own report, was not till 
lie had nearly attained the age of twenty, he began to study 
mathematics with much diligence, under the direction of able 
masters at Newcastle and York. On his return to Hurworth, 
he again profited by the instruction of his father, who was a 
tolerably good mathematician. A portion of Emerson's cele- 
brity may, perhaps, be attributed to the contemptuous treat- 
ment which he received from Dr. Johnson, Rector of Hur- 
worth, and Prebendary of Durham, whose niece he had mar- 
ried. The Doctor had engaged to give five hundred pounds 
with his niece, who lived with him, as a marriage portion ; 
but when reminded of the promise, he those to forget that it 
had been n'.ade, and treated the young mathematician as a 
person beneath his notice. The pecuniary disappointment, 
Emerson (who had an independent spirit, and who>e patri- 
mony, though not large, was equal to all his wants) would easily 
have surmounted, but the contemptuous treatment slung him 
to the very soul. He immediately went home, packed up his 
wife's clothes, and sent them to the Doctor, saying, that he 
would scorn to be beholden to such a fellow for a single rag; 
and swearing at the same time that he would be revenged, and 
prove himself to be the " better man of the two." His first 
publication, however, did not meet with immediate encourage- 
ment ; ad probably his other works would never have appeared 
if Edward Montagu, Esq. his great admirer and friend, had 
not procured him (lie patronage ot Mr. John Noiirse, Book- 
seller and Optician, who beim; skilled in the more abstruse 
sciences, could comprehend, and reward the mmt of another. 
He immediately engaged Emerson to furnish a regular course 
of Mathematics for the use of youthful students ; and in the 
summer of 1763, Emerson made a journey to London, to 
settle and fulfil the agreement. His classical learning was not 
extensive; ytt Ihe mottos to some of his volumes evinced 
that he sometimes dipped into ancient authors. At one lime, 
also, he conceived an intention ot translating the Jesuits' Com- 
ment on the Principia of Sir Isaac Newton, for whom his de- 
votion was so uncommonly strong, that every oppugner of his 
philosophy was treated by Emerson, as " dull, blind, bigotted, 
prejudiced, or mad." 1 he fire and impetuosity of his temper, 

8 



The Grammar School, founded by Mr. Gilpin, is 
a convenient building, standing in the Church-yard, 
with the Master's house adjoining. On a line with 
the School to the south, is an hospital for the recep- 
tion of six poor people, who have each a certain sum, 
arising from different bequests annually allowed for 
their maintenance. 

HPRWORTH.] Hurworth, 3| miles S. E. by S. 
from Darlington, is a pleasant village, situated on 
the acclivity of a steep hill, rising from the Tees, 
and commanding a beautiful, though not extensive, 
view into the adjoining county of York. It is en- 
titled to notice, chiefly as the birth place of Emerson, 
the celebrated mathematician. f 

JARROW.] Jarrow, or Yarrow, anciently called 
Gyrwy, or Girvy, in the East division of Chester 

Ward, 

would frequently on these occasions betray him into improprie 1 ' 
ties of language. 

In person Mr. Emerson was rather below the common size, 
but firm, compact, well made, active and strong. He had a 
good open, expressive countenance, with a rudely complex- 
ion, a keen and penetrating eye, and an ardour and eager- 
ness of look, that was very demonstrative of the texture of his 
mind. His dress was frequently grotesque: sometimes mean 
and shabby. A very few hats served him through the whole 
course of his life ; and when he purchased one, (or indeed any 
other article of dress,) it was perfectly indifferent to him, whe^ 
ther the form and fashion of it were of the day, or of half a cen- 
tury before. One of these hats, of immense superficies, had, 
by length of time, lost its elasticity, and its brim began to 
droop, so as to prevent his being able to view the objects be- 
fore him in a direct line. This was not to be endured by an 
optician: he therefore took a pair of sheers, and cut it off by 
the body of the hat, leaving a little to the front, which he 
dexterously rounded into the resemblance of the nil) of a jockey'* 
cap. His wigs were made of brown, or of a dirly flaxen* 
coloured hair, which at first appeared bushy .incl tortuous be- 
hind, but which grew pendulous through age, till at length it 
became quite straight, having probably never undergone the 
operation of the comb : and cither through the original mal- 
conlonnation of the wig, or from a custom which he had of 
frequently thrusting his h. nd beneath it, the back of nis head 
and wig seldom came into very close t ontact. His coat, or, 
more properly, jacket, or waistcout with sleeves to it, which 
he generally wore without any other waistcoat, was of a drab 
colour: his linen was more calculated for w.irniih and duration 
than for show, being spun and bleached by his wife, and woven 
at Hurworth. In cold weather he had a custom of wearing his 
shirt with the wrong side before, and buttoned behind the 
neck. This, however, was not an affectation of singularity 
(lor Emerson had no affectation, though his customs and man- 
mers were singular:) he seldom buttoned more than two or 
three of the buttons of his waistcoat, leaving all the rest open : 
in wind, rain, or snow, therefore, he must have found the 
aperture at the breast inconvenient, if his shirt had been put 
on in the usual manner. When he grew aged, in cold wea- 
ther, he used to wear what he called shin-covers; these were 
pieces of old sacking, tied with strings above the knee, and 
pending down to the shoe, to preserve his legs from being 
scorched when he snt too near the fire. This singularity of 
dress and figure, with his character for profound learning, oc- 
casioned the illiterate and ignorant to consider him as a cun- 
ning man, or necramancer, and various stories have been re- 
lated of his skill in the black art. His diet was as simple and 
plain as his dress; his meals giving little interruption either 
10 his studies, employments, or amusements. He catered for 
himself, and generally went to Darlington to make his own 
markets; yet, when he had provided all the necessary articles, 

he 



512 



DURHAM. 



Ward, 2J miles S. W. by \V. from South Shields, 
was formerly a place of considerable note ; but, 
through the changes of time, it consisted, until 
lately, of only a few mean cottages, an old Church, 
and the ruins of a monastery. The fortunate alter- 
ation which has recently been effected, arose from 
the discovery of a coal miuc in the neighbourhood, 
supposed to be the most extensive and considerable ; 
one of the kind, ever known in this part of the coun- j 
try. The shaft branches into tour pits, and opens 
out into three collieries, via. East Wall's End, j 
Jarrow Main, and Chapter Main. The Northern.! 
boundary goes under a portion of what is called j 
Wall's End Estate, in the county of Northumber- 
land, and takes a southern direction beneath several j 
townships in the county of Durham. 

This mine, which was opened in the month of 
September, 1803, is the sole property of Simon 
Temple, Esq. who has erected a handsome mansion 
for his own residence, and a row of low houses, ex- 
tending 1 in a curve line for upwards of half a mile, 
on the Newcastle road, for the abode of the pit-men. 
The opening of the colliery was accompanied by a 
grand fete, to which Mr, Temple invited all the 
workmen employed in his various concerns, as well 
as friends, so that more than a thousand persons par- 
took of the entertainment. The fete commenced by 
a procession headed by Mr. Temple, and his three 
sons ; and the early part of the day was passed in 
the benevolent acts of laying the foundations of three 
buildings ; viz. a School for boys, another for girls, 
and a Fever-house, and Hospital ; all for the benefit 
of the families of those employed by Mr. Temple, 
and to be supported at his expence. Several coal 
waggons were then filled at the pit, and conveyed 
on ship-board, under the banners of the South Shields 
Volunteers, and a general discharge of artillery, 



he not unfrequently neglected to return for a day or two, seat- 
ing himself contentedly in some public house, where he could 
procure good ale, and company, and passing the hours in various 
topics of coversation. " The last time he made an excursion 
to Darlington witli his wallet, he made a figure truly conspi- 
cuous : this was, perhaps, the only time he ever rode thither; 
he was then mounted on a quadruped, whose intrinsic value, 
independent of the skin, might be fairly estimated at half a 
crown. Being preceded, and led by a boy hired for that pur- 
pose, he paced in solemn state, at the rate of a mile and a half 
in an hour, till in due time he arrived at Darlington, and was 
conducted in the same state, to the great entertainment of the 
spectators, through the streets to the inn, where he wished to 
refresh himself and his beast. What idea Emerson himself en- 
tertained of tho velocity with which the animal could move, 
appears from this, that, when a neighbour asked him, towards 
the evening, if he was going home ;" " Damn thee," said he, 
" what does thou \iaiu with my goins^ home ?" " Only," re- 
plied the man, " because I should be glad of your company." 
"Thou fool, thou!" rejoined the other, " thoul't be home 
long enough before me, man: thou walks, and I ride." His 
style of c'Miver ation was generally abrupt and blunt, abounding 
in similar expletives to the above, and often vulgar and un- 
granimatical. This induced a supposition that his prefaces 
were not written by himself; an opinion that was one day men- 
tioned to hin), and the disparity of hi conversation and writing 



with appropriate music ; the remainder of the day 
was spent in feasting and rejoicing. 

The monastery of Jarrow, already mentioned, 
was founded about the fifteenth year of Egt'rid, King 
of Northumberland (A. D. 085.) through the in- 
fluence of Benedict Biscopius, who had before built 
the monastery at Monk Wearmouth. In the fifth 
year after the restoration of King Ethelred, it was 
burnt by the Danes ; and again in the seventh year 
of King Osbert. Having been a third time restored, 
it again was frequently pillaged, and laid under con- 
tribution, whilst the Danish and Saxon sovereigns 
were contending for mastery. On the irruption of 
the Normans, into the northern parts of the king- 
dom, it was once more destroyed by fire. Soon 
after the appointment of Bishop Walcher, who was 
presented to the See by William the Conqueror, 
that prelate invited the Monks Aldwin, Elfevy, and 
Reul'rid who had fixed their abode at Monkchester, 
(now Newcastle,) to take up their residence within 
his diocese. Having accepted the invitation, they 
were received with great respect, and had Jarrow 
given to them for a place of residence. Here, ac- 
cording to William of Malmsbury, they found walls 
without roofs, and scarcely retaining any vestiges 
of former splendour ; these, however, they quickly 
covered with a roof of unhewn timber, thatched with 
straw, and again commenced the celebration of 
divine ordinances. Being joined by several brethren 
from different parts of the kingdom, they formed a 
design to rebuild the Church, and restore the ruined 
monastery, and several adjacent manors were granted 
by Walcher, to enakle them to fulfil their intentions. 
Earl Walcher afterwards enlarged their possessions, 
by the gift of Tinemouth Priory, and permitted them, 
to remove the remains of St. Oswin to their own 
establishment. The increase of the society after the 



pointed out as the reason of it. After a momentary pause, he 
exclaimed, with some indignation, " A pack of fools ! whs 
could write my prefaces but myself?" Mr. Emerson often 
tried in practice the effect of his mathematical speculation, by 
constructing a variety of instruments, mathematical, mechanical, 
and musical, on a small scale. He made a spinning-wheel for 
his wife, which is represented by a drawing in his book of 
mechanics. He was well skilled in the science of music, the 
theory of sounds, and the various scales, both ancient and 
modern. He had two first strings to his violin, which he said 
made the E more melodious when they were drawn up to a 
perfect unison. His virginal he had cut, and twisted into various 
shapes in the keys, by adding some occasional half tones, to 
regulate the present scales, and to rectify some fraction or dis- 
cord that will always remain in the tuning. This he never 
could get regulated to his mind, and generally concluded in a 
passion, by saying, " It is a damned instrument, and a foolish 
thing to be vexed with." During the greatest part of his life, 
his health h..d been strong and uninterrupted ; but as he ad- 
vanced into the vale of y.-ars, internal complaints allowed him 
but littlr intermission of pun, and at length deprived him of 
breath on the 21st of March, 1782, in his eighty-first year. 
He was bur.ed in the church yard at Hurvvorth. About a 
twelvemonth before his decease, he was prevailed on, to sit 
for his portrait, which was taken by Mr. Sykes, for his friend 
Dr. Cloudsley, of Darlington. 

expulsion 



DURHAM. 



313 



etpulsion of the Monks from Wenrmouth, occa- 
sioned a division of the brethren. Aldwin, with his 
followers, departed to Melross; Renfred, with ano- 
ther party, went to Whitby, in Yorkshire (whence, 
after a short residence, hut many sufferings, they 
removed to York, and founded the Abbey of St. 
Mary,) and Elfwy, with his associates, continued 
at Jarrow. Bishop William de Carilepho, who had 
confirmed the grants of his predecessor, Walcher, 
soon afterwards removed the inmates of this esta- 
blishment to Durham, and thenceforth it was only 
a cell to that monastery. On the dissolution, its 
revenues were valued, according to Speed, at 40/. 
7s Sd. The monastery was dedicated to St. Paul, 
and appropriated to the reception of Benedictines. 
Its remains, together with the Church, occupy the 
summit of an elevated ridge, but they display little 
that is worthy of notice. The windows were small 
and narrow, and irregularly scattered at different 
heights ; some relics of Saxon sculpture occur on 
the mouldings of a round arched window. The 
Church appears, from the situation of the tower, 
to have been in the form of a cross. The present 
edifice is formed by part of the ancient buildings, 
connected with a portion, rebuilt in the year 1783. 
In the north wall of the old Church, cut on a stone 
which passed quite through it, was an inscription, 
which Camden, and other antiquaries, have noticed, 
but not accurately. It is thus described by Mr. 
Hutchinson : 

P. DEDICATIO BASILICA 
SCI PAVLt VIIII KL .UAI 
ANNO XV ECFR1D1 REG 



CEOLFRim ABB ElVSDEM Q 
Q. ECCLES DO AVCTORE 
CONDITORIS ANNO Hit 

The first character, observes that gentleman, 
" Has been omitted by all the copyists : we presume 
it is a compound, meant for an invocation, and sig- 
nifies Propitietur Dens. Below the third line the 
stone is rough, as if it had suffered an obliteration. 
The whole inscription is in Roman characters, ex- 
cept one Saxon E, and two square or black letter 
O's ; from which, and the situation of the stone, 
one readily determines the inscription to be of equal 
date with the repairs that were made after the Nor- 
mans destroyed the monastery, and that it was only 



* It should be observed, that the great churches were called 
Basilicz, because the Basilica: of the Gentiles, which were 
stately edifices, in which the magistrates held their courts of 
justice, were, on the spreading of Christianity, converted into 
churches. It ought not to be inferred from this inscription, 
that Ceolfrid was the founder of this monastery ; since it ap- 
pears from Bede's account that he was only constituted first 
Abbot of the place by Benedictus Biscopius, who sent him 
hither from Wercmouth, with a colony of about seventeen 
Monks. 

f His birth occurred, A. D. 672. At the age of seven, ho 
was brought to the monastery of St. Peter, and committed to 
the care of Abbot Benedict, under whom, and his successor 

VOL. II. NO. 68. 



a modern memorial of the antiquity of the founda- 
tion."* Since the repairing of the Church, the in- 
scription has been replaced in a situation to preserve 
it from further dilapidation. 

A large and ancient chair of oak, traditionally 
said to have been the seat of Venerable Bcde, the 
pre-eminent boast of this monastery, is carefully 
preserved in the vestry. It is very rudely formed, 
and, with the exception of the back, is undoubtedly 
of great age. There is, however, no authentic tes- 
timony of its ever having belonged to that learned 
writer. The exact place of the nativity of Bede has 
not been ascertained by historians, though Jarrow 
is generally considered as having that honour. That 
he was born in a part of this county, contiguous to 
the river War, is certain ; but the precise spot is 
not known. About a mile west of Jarrow, is a 
well, still called St. Bede's, to which it was cus- 
tomary, almost as late as the middle of the last cen- 
tury, to convey diseased children, and after drop- 
ping in a crooked pin, to dip them for the recovery 
of their healths : round the well, also, on every 
Midsummer eve, was a great resort of the neigh- 
bouring people, with bonfires, music, and dancing. 
Bede was first buried in his own monastery ; but 
his relics were afterwards removed, and interred in 
Durham Cathedral. f 

Jarrow Slake, extending on the north-east to- 
wards Shields, and uniting with the Tyne, appears 
at high water like a capacious bay ; but when the 
tide is down, it is left dry. This is said to have 
been the principal port of Egfrid, King of Northum- 
berland, where his entire navy lay moored. It has 
since been washed full of sand, and is not now of 
any use ; though various schemes have been pro- 
jected to render it of service. Its extent from east 
to west is nearly a mile ; its breadth about half a 
mile. A small rivulet, called by Leland the Done, 
rising in the Bolden hills, flows through the midst 
of it, into the Tyne. 

KEPIER HOSPITAL.] Kepar, Keprey, Kypiar, or 
Kepier Hospital, (so called from a family of the 
same name) on the banks of the Wear, about three 
quarters of a mile north-east by north from Durham, 
was founded, A. D. 111-2, by Bishop Flambard, 
and endowed for the maintenance of a master and 
twelve brethren. The endowments were confirmed 
by Bishop Pudsey, who also restored the buildings 
which had been consumed by fire in the reign of 

Ceolfrid, he was carefully instructed in the learning of the 
times; in which he made such a rapid progress, that he soon 
outshone all his cotemporaries. He was the author of several 
works, particularly of an Ecclesiastical History of England, 
which, as well as all his other tracts, he composed in Latin, 
and which is said to have been translated into English or Saxon' 
by King Alfred the Great. Such was. the fame of this great 
man, that the Italians, and the Scots, in their turn, have seve- 
rally contended for the honour of his birth ; but their preten- 
sions are considered, by the most judicious antiquaries, at 
altogether groundless. He died of a consumption at the 
monastery of St. Peter, on the 26tl of May, 735. 

* * Stephen. 



314 



DURHAM. 



Stephen. At the dissolution, its revenues were 
valued at 168/. I Os. Od. and it was then granted to 
Sir William Paget, by Henry the Eighth. It 
afterwards passed through the families of Heath, 
Cole, Tempest, Carr, and Miisgrave ; the last of 
whose descendants are the present owners. The 
only remain of the monastic buildings now standing 
is the gateway, a strong and not unhandsome piece 
of masonry, with pointed arches. 

LAMBTON HALL.J Lambton Hall, now, or lately, 
the residence of Lady Ann Lambton, occupies an 
elevated site on the north bank of the Wear, be- 
tween one and two miles N. E. from Lumley Cas- 
tle. It was formerly called Haraton Hall. The 
D'Arcys were once in possession of this estate^ 
and conveyed it to the Headwortha, the last male of 
which family died in 16>i8, leaving two daughters 
co-heiresses ; one of whom was married to Ralph 
Lambton, Esq. a younger branch of the Lambtons, 
of Lambton Hall, on the opposite side of the Wear : 
the other was married to Sir William Williamson, 
Bart, of Mouk-Wearmouth : but William Lambton, 
Esq. in 1714, purchased her moiety of the estate; 
the whole of which has since that time remained in 
this family. The late William Henry Lambton^ Esq. 
who died of a consumption at Pisa, in Italy, in the 
year 1796, was one of the most estimable of men ; 
and although cut off at the early age of thirty-two, 
had given proof of possessing so many rare quali- 
ties, that his memory will be cherished as long as 
virtue shall find admirers. The Hall is built in the 
modern style: it was erected by Bononi ; but con- 
siderable incongruities appear both in its design and 
execution. The library is a well proportioned, quad- 
rangular apartment, with a neat gallery around it : 
it contains a few family paintings ; among which is 
a fine full length portrait of the late General John 
Lambton,' by Sir Joshua Reynolds. The grounds 
are pleasant ; and the ride through a hanging wood 
on the southern bank of the Wear, is extremely 
beautiful. Tradition states, that an enormous worm, 
or serpent, which infested the river near this spot, 
was destroyed by one of the Lambtons, by means 
of a coat of razors ; and a mutilated statue is pointed 
out, in support of the tale. A conical eminence in 
the neighbourhood is also called Worm-Hill, with 
reference to the same story ; but no records of any 
real event, on which it could have been founded, 
are extant. 

LANCHESTER.] This is a long straggling village, 
situated in the west division of Chester Ward, 7| 
miles N. W. by W. from Durham. Anciently it 
was of great celebrity, from its contiguity to the 
Roman station Glannibauta, on the Smallhop beck, 
which, at the distance of about half a mile, unites 
its waters with the Browney. The parish is very 
xtensive, and was formerly a rectory, having seven 
chapelries, and a revenue sufficient for the mainte- 
nance of a Dean and seven Prebends, who were 
established here about the year 1283, by Bishop 
Beck. The College was dissolved at the suppres- 



sion of religious houses ; and its possessions were 
so dissipated, that a very scanty allowance is now 
all that belongs to the officiating minister. The 
statutes for the government of the Dean and Pre- 
bends were drawn up by Bishop Beck, and. con- 
firmed by Edward the First, A. D. 1293. The 
Church is a handsome fabric, with a square tower 
and battlements. The interior was repaired a few 
years ago : the windows display various fragments 
of painted glass. In a recess in the wall of the 
north aisle is a recumbent figure of an ecclesiastio 
clasping a chalice ; supposed, by Hutchinson, to be 
the effigy of Dean Austell, who died in 1461. An 
inscription in black letter, on a brass plate that was 
formerly fixed to a stone in the middle of the chan- 
cel, records the memory of Dean Rudd, whose 
death occurred in September, 1490. The cover of 
the sacramental cup is a Roman patera, tradition- 
ally reported to have been found at the station, but 
at what period is unknown ; unless the date, 1571, 
engraven on it, may be presumed correct. The 
common lauds of this parish, to the supposed ex- 
tent of 20,000 acres, were inclosed under an act of 
the twelfth of his present Majesty, and great im- 
provements in cultivation have since been effected. 
The Roman station occupies a fine eminence about 
half a mile south-west from the village ; but the 
outline of the prospect from it, is bounded by still 
higher grounds at the respective distances of two, 
three, nnd four miles. Horseley has remarked, 
that this sort of situation is observable at Elsdon, 
in Northumberland, and several other places ; and 
it has the advantage, that an enemy could not come 
over the rising grounds, without immediately ap- 
pearing to the garrison. This station, which has 
survived the ravages of cultivation in an extraordi- 
nary degree, and is one of the most perfect in the 
kingdom, is no otherwise mentioned by Camden, 
than to notice, that he " once thought it Longovi- 
cus." Horseley, however, refers that station to 
Lancaster, and affirms this to have been Glanni- 
banta, as it is called in the Notitia, and which cor- 
responds with the Glanoventa of the Itinerary. "I 
am apt to think," says he. " that the first name of 
this town (village) has been Glanchester ; composed 
as usual, of the first syllable of the old Roman name, 
with the word Chester annexed to it : the G, for 
the sake of an easier pronunciation, might be drop- 
ped. If Glanoventa signify a bank, or hill, near a 
river, ven, or veiitjn the British tongue, signifying 
a river, the situation of the station is not unsuitable 
to this etymology ; for it stands on a high ground, 
with a river (the Browney ) on <ne side, and a rivulet 
(the Smallhop) on the other, and not far from either." 
The Watling Street passes the station within a few 
yards on the west side ; and numerous monuments, 
altars, coins, and other relics, have at various times 
been found here ; but it does not appear that the 
store is even yet exhausted, as scarcely a year passes 
without some memorable vestige of Roman piety, 
either to the gods, or to the dead, being turned up 

by 



DURHAM. 



313 



by the plough. The station, observes Hutchinson, 
"is of an oblong figure, 174 paces from north to 
south, and 160 from east to west, with the vallum. 
It has survived many ages less mutilated than any 
structure of the kind in the northern counties ; but 
of late many of the stones have been removed, to 
iriMose the adjacent lands, and make the roads. 
In some parts the wall yet remains perfect ; the out- 
side is perpendicular, 12 feet in height, built of 
ashler work, in regular courses, each stone being 
about nine inches deep, and twelve long : by some 
large stones which lie near the foot of the wall, it 
is evident there was a parapet, with a walk, nearly 
three feet wide at the top. At the west entrance a 
stone was dug up, which shews that such fortifica- 
tions had more ornament than is commonly appre- 
hended. The inside of the vallum is built of ashler 
work ; but, from the ground-work upwards, at the 
distance of about UO inches, it diminishes gradually 
in thickness, in steps running parallel through the 
whole structure, by which those within might ascend 
the wall, and instantly Hue the parapet with troops 
on the approach of an enemy. The wall thus broken 
through is eight feet thick at the present surface, 
diminishing to somewhat more than lour at the top ; 
the interior part between the facings, is formed of 
thin stones, placed inclining, feather-wise, tier above 
tier, run through with mortar mixed with rough 
gravel. What is remarkable, there appear no 
' throughs,' as the masons call those stones which 
bind the buildings toy going through from face to 
face, or into the heart oi the wall. There was an 
entrance in the ceutre of each side of the square, 
and to the west a wide ditch : the ground has been 
cultivated many years on the other sides, as well 
as within the vallum." The site of the Pretorium 
is still clearly distinguishable, and also a reservoir 
near the station, into which the stream was con- 
ducted by a channel, or aqueduct, that may be 
traced winding along the rising ground, to the dis- 
tance of about two miles and a half north-west ; 
where are five small springs, whose waters appear 
to have been collected into a capacious bason, formed 
for the purpose, whence they are at first conveyed 
towards the station by two channels, which are 
afterwards united. Many remains of buildings have 
been discovered in and around this station ; and 
among them the floors of what is supposed to have 
been a Balneum. These were formed with square 
stones, supported on pillars, about two feet five 
inches high, and more than a yard distant from each 
other. Upon the square stones was a plastering, 
about four inches thick, of lime and small pieces of 
brick : here the marks of fire and smoke were very 
visible. Below the first floor was another, on which 
the upper pillars rested ; the intervals between the 
lower pillars being filled up with earth and rubbish. 
Above the former was an apartment, four yards 
square, at the east end of which was an inscribed 
altar, whinh, with some others, is now in the Dean 
and Chapter's library. Amongst the altars de- 



scribed by Ilorsley, as belonging to this- station, is 
one, to the local god Vitires ; three, to the god 
Mars ; and three, without inscriptions : on one of 
the latter, is a rude sculpture, supposed of the- 
Dew Matrcs ; on the second, a toad, with the usual 
sacrificing instruments ; and on the third, two ruda 
pilasters, supporting a pediment. On the opposite, 
sides of another altar, of which the capital was 
broken off, were the remains of inscriptions, in 
Greek and Latin. That the back, as well as th 
front of an altar should be inscribed, is regarded as 
a curiosity ; and that the inscriptions should be in, 
two different languages is still more remarkable. 
This is the second instance of the Greek character 
used in such inscriptions in Britain : the other ifr 
the famous altar at Corbridge : they are supposed 
to have been erected by some auxiliaries that cam* 
from Greece, or its neighbourhood. In ploughing 
a field on the north-east side of the station, in the 
year 1794, a plain votive altar, twenty inches in. 
height, lately in the possession of Captain Ormsby, 
of Lanchester, was discovered, with an inscription 
neatly cut. Some time ago, two other altars, found 
at this station, were in the possession of the editors, 
of the Beauties of England and Wales : one of 
them, about ten inches and a half high, and six 
inches wide, was much ornamented, but had no in- 
scription ; the other, nearly the same size, had been, 
inscribed with three lines, but the letters were too 
illegible to be made out. The latter was discovered- 
on the wall of the station, about the year 1802, by 
Mr. T. W. Greenwell, of the Ford, whose father is 
the owner of the land ; and has had several rud 
sculptures that were found here built up in his gar- 
den wall. Several Roman coins, one of them, an, 
Antoninus in good preservation, and other antiques, 
found in the area of the station, or the adjacent- 
fields, are in the possession of the same family. 

At a little distance from the village, within the- 
limits of the parish, is Greencroft, a deserted seat of 
Sir Thomas Ckwering. It occupies an elevated 
and commanding site, whence the view of Lanches- 
ter, and the winding vale, is extremely beautiful. 
The mansion is a ipacious but plain structure, shel- 
tered by plantations. Against the western wall 
stands a large Roman altar, which was found at the 
adjoining station ; and amongst some other relics,, 
is a sculpture exactly resembling one upon a stone 
in the vestry wall of Lanchester church. It repre- 
sents a male figure naked to the waist, with a cor* 
uucopia in one hand, and an altar in the other. 
Ilorsley supposes it to be a Genius. 

At Crooke Hall, the ancient estate of the IliHons, 
about a mile and a half north-west from Green- 
croft, was born Mr. Thomas Baker, the celebrated 
Historian of St. John's College, Cambridge, of 
whose life some particulars will be found in our. first, 
volume, page 230. 

LUMLEY CASTLE.] Lumley Castle, one- of the 
seats of the Earl of Scarborough, occupies a fine- 
elevated situation, between five and six miles uorth- 

aortb- 



SI 6 



DURHAM. 



north-cast from Durham. It is bounded on the 
north by Lumley Beck, the eminence rising gra- 
dually on the south and west from the river Wear. 
The east front of the Castle is near the hrow of a 
very deep, well-wooded valley, through which the 
Beck winds towards the river. The building forms 
a quadrangle, with an area in the centre ; at each 
angle are projecting turrets, or observatories, of an 
octangular form, which overhang the face of each 
square of the base, and are machiolated, for the 
purpose of annoying assailants. The whole is com- 
posed of a yellow free-stone, which gives a bright 
and beautiful tint at a distance. The chief entrance 
to the Castle is at the west front, by a fine double 
flight of steps, and a platform filling the whole 
space between -the towers: the front to the soutli 
is modern, and almost parallel with the tower, being 
sixty-five paces in length : the front to the north 
is obscured by offices ; but towards the east, the 
Castle retains its ancient form, and has a truly no- 
ble appearance. Over the gate are six shields, with 
armorial bearings, carved in stone, with their crests, 
cotcmporary with the building. The original fa- 
bric was constructed by Sir Robert Lumley, in the 
reign of Edward the First, and enlarged by his 
son, Sir Marmaduke. There are three stories of 
apartments in this front, having mullioned windows, 
guarded with iron : a narrow space, for a terrace, 
between the walls and the brink of the precipice, is 
guarded by a curtain. The uniformity of this front, 
the arrangement of the arms, and the whole appear- 
ance of its masonry, testify this to be a part of the 
original structure, and a grand model of the taste 
-of the age. A beautiful prospect presents itself 
from the platform, at the entrance into the Hall. 
At the bottom of the avenue which leads to the 
house, is a fine bason of water, a salmon lock, and 
a fisherman's cottage ; and on the opposite elevated 
land, the view of the town of Chester, the Deanery 
House, and Church, compose a pleasing distance ; 

* Among -these is the portrait of Sir Thomas Lumley, who 
received knighthood as a reward for his military prowess, and 
was employed by government in several momentous negocia- 
tions: in theSSth, 29th, and 31st, of Henry the Sixth, he was 
guarantee for'the King of England in the Scottish treaties ; in 
the 33d year of the same reign, he was made governor of 
Scarborough Castle for life ; a most distinguished trust ; ami 
was entrusted in many other appointments of government. He 
was equally a favourite with King Edward the Fourth ; in the 
first year of whose reign he obtained a reversal of his grand- 
father's attainder ; had summons to Parliament for the remain- 
der of his life ; and was employed in various confidential mat- 
ters by his.Sovereign, particularly in the negociations with King 
James of Scotand, touching his marriage. 

f Sir John Lord Lumley was in high estimation at Court, 
during the respective reigns of Edward the Sixth, Mary, and 
Elizabeth. By Edward, he was restored in blood. In 1553 
he was created a Knight of the Bath, and, with his lady, at- 
tended Mary at her coronation ; he was one of the noblemen 
who introduced the first Russian Ambassadors to Court ; and 
was in employ during the early part of the reign of Queen 
Elizabeth ; but being suspected of some intrigue concerning 
-the Queen of Scots, he and his father-in-law, the Earl or 
Arundel, with whom he was a great favourite, were arrested. 



but the more extended landscape comprehends the 
house of Flatts, Pelton Village, and the great Nor- 
thern Road ; whilst the back scene displays broken 
and irregular grounds, interspersed with cottages. 
To the left, cultivation brightens the prospect, and 
the winding stream of the Wear adds beauty to the 
picture, which, on one hand, presents the view of 
the town of Great Lumley, and on the other, Wai- 
ridge, with the Hermitage, and several hamlets in 
the vale. The distant landscape is terminated by 
Plawsworth, the plantations above Newton Hall, 
&c. 

The great Hall of Lumley Castle, ninety feet in 
length, is ornamented with a gallery for minstrelsy ; 
and it exhibits a striking feature of ancient times, 
feudal performances, and old English manners. A 
Knight in full armour, on horseback, graces this 
apartment ; and the walls are decorated with an 
arrangement of imaginary family portraits.* 

In the south-west tower, is the Great Dining 
Room, elegantly stuccoed, with a vaulted roof. 
The view from the windows, commanding the ad- 
jacent meadows, the banks of the Wear, and the 
canal formed by the curvature of the stream ; and 
from another part of the room, the avenue prospect, 
with Chester and other objects, are eminently beau- 
tiful. 

The Little Dining Room contains several fine 
portraits, particularly that of John Lord Lumley, 
1563, a three-quarter piece.f Two other por- 
traits of this nobleman are in the Music Room ; 
one dated 1588, the other 1591. In this room is 
also a portrait of Joanna Fitz Alan, first wife of 
John, Lord Lumley, and daughter of Henry, Earl 
of Arundel. She is clothed in a black dress, grace- 
fully ornamented with strings of jewels. J 

The Music Room contains a fine full-length of 
Thomas Ratcliflf, Earl of Sussex, arrayed in white 
armour, and gold brocade breeches : in his right 
hand is a staff, his left is resting upon a sword : 

Regaining the royal favor, he was again admitted into confi- 
dence, and was one of the Lords Commissioners on the (rial 
of the unhappy Queen in whose cause he had suffered ; and, 
to the surprise of his hearers, delivered his opinion, that " the 
sentence was justly pronounced." He was one also who con- 
demned Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex. King James, how- 
ever, bestowed on him many marks of royal condescension 
and favor. Camden states " that he had so great a veneration 
for the memory of his ancestors, that he caused monuments 
to be erected for them in the collegiate Church of Chester-in- 
the-Street, in order, as they succeeded one another, from 
Liulphus down to his own time, which he had either picked 
out of the demolished monasteries, or made new." This 
Nobleman had collected an extensive library, with the assist- 
ance of the celebrated antiquary, Humphrey Lhuyd. The 
books were afterwards purchased by James the First, and novr 
form a very valuable part of the British Museum. 

J This lady's learning was uncommon ; she translated the 
Iphigenia of Euripides into English, and some of the orations 
of Isocrates into Latin : the MSS. of the latter in her own 
writing, -are preserved in the Royal Library at Westminster. 
She was interred in the chancel <rf the church at Cheam, in 
Surrey. 

near 



DURHAM. 



317 



near him, on a table, is placed his helmet, with an 
enormous plume.* Robert, Earl of Salisbury, 
Minister in the last years of Elizabeth, and first of 
.James the First. He is dressed in black, with the 
George suspended from his neck by a green ribband. 
Above his head is the family motto, Sero sed serin 
late, but seriously ; and on a table, a letter directed 
to him by all his titles. 

The Drawing Room contains a fine three-quarter 
length, on wood, of Andrew Doria ; with the in- 
scription Pater patriot. He is pourtrayed in black, 
with a cap on his head, a long' beard, and round his 
neck, a collar of the Order of the Fleece, pendant ; 
a truncheon in his hand, and a dasher in his girdle. t 
Sir Anthony Browne, Master of the Horse to Henry 
the Third, and one of the executors to his will. 
This is a very curious half-length. He is portray- 
ed with a bushy beard, a bonnet, and the insignia 
of the Order of the Garter. Sir George Saviile, 
ailianced to the Lumleys by the marriage of his 
sister Barbara with Richard late Lord Scarborough, 
whose second son inherits the Saville estates, and 
bears the family name. Lady Sydney ; Holbein : 
This lady was daughter to Secretary Walsingham, 
and wife to Robert, Earl of Essex. Henry Howard, 
Earl of Surry, half-length.! Robert Dudley, Earl 
of _ Leicester ; throe-quarter length, dated 'iSS?. 
He is arrayed in a very splendid dress, ornamented 
with a profusion of point-lace, according to the fa- 
shion of the times : round his neck is the collar of 
the Order of the Garter. Henry Fitz-Alan, the 
last Earl of Arundel of that name. Various other 
portraits are scattered through different apartments ; 
hut the curious old picture of Chaucer, mentioned 
by Dr. Stukeley, in his Iter Borealo, as being pre- 
served in this Castle, is not now to be found. 

MARSTON ROCK.] The sea shore, between the 
north pier of Sunderland Harbour, and South 
Shields, is bounded by lofty rocks, in some places 
of a singular and grotesque appearance, particular- 
ly about a mile from Suter Point, where au immense 
craggy mass of the above name, has been separated 
from the coast by the violence of the sea. At high- 
water, it is now fifty or sixty yards from the shore, 
though within the memory of man, it has been 
known to have been reached by a plank. The 



* This Nobleman seems to have been a favourite both with 
Mary and Elizabeth ; and was, in both reigns, Lord Deputy 
of Ireland. By Mary he was also appointed President of the 
North ; and in that capacity, he suppressed the rebellion of the 
E-.irls of Northumberland and Westmoreland. In the reign ol 
Ulizabeth, he was the spirited rival of Leicester, but his death 
determined the contest. 

j Dori.i was of an ancient Genoese family, and appears 
literally to have been a warrior by profession, having been 
equally engaged for and against Francis the Firs', and Charles 
(he Filth, to both of whom he successively proved of service 
and injury. He nobly refused the sovereignty of his own 
country, and preferred to have his name recorded as its de- 
liverer, by repressing the conspiracy of Lewis de Fiesco. He 
ilied at Genoa 1560, st. 94. 

\ This accomplished nobleman was among the numerous 
VOL ii. NO. 68. 



whole of the intervening part has been washed away 
>y the waves, which have indeed made so large au 
opening iti the body of the rock, as to admit the 
>:issage of sailing boats, at certain times of the tide. 
This rock has been visited by great numbers of sea- 
owl who have built their nests on it, and have left 
such a quantity of manure, that every five or seven 
years, it has fetched, when heaped together, from 
>ighty x to a hundred pounds. A circular hole, hav- 
ng been made in the roof of a cavern in the rocks, 
t is drawn up through it in baskets to the top of the 
rock. Other largo and irregular masses which have 
l>eeu separated from the shore, anil which raise their 
gigantic forms with great dignity, adjoin Marstou 
Rock. 

MERRINGTON.] The long irregular village of 
Merrington occupies a lofty situation on the ridge 
of a hill, four miles east from Bishop's Auckland. 
The church, which was built in the form of a cross, 
with a tower rising from the centre of four aisles, 
appears to be very ancient. " The prospect from 
Merrington Church, 11 observes Hutchinson, " is at 
once wonderfully extensive and beautiful : the hill 
on which it stands is a ridge, or long mount, rising 
with a gradual ascent from the north and south, so 
as to command the finest landscapes within the 
county of Durham, expanded to the eye in a kind 
of bird's-eye view, by reason of the loftiness of the 
mount. The eastern end of the ridge, being bound- 
ed with hills of almost equal eminence, affords but 
a short prospect ; the western termination is at the 
village of Westerton, distant about a mile. The 
valley through which runs the river Wear, lies open 
to the .view, graced with the elegant scenes near Bi- 
shop's Auckland, extended up to Witton, and along 
the winding channel of the river almost as far as 
Wolsingham : to the right is Brancepeth Castle, 
audits environs ; to the left, the prospect is bound- 
ed by the distant eminence of Cocktield-fell, above 
Raby. On the north, in the bosom of the vale, with 
majestic aspect, rises the city of Durham, graced 
with a variety of woodlands ; on every side the city, 
villages, neat houses, and hamlets, ,are scattered ; 
and the view is terminated by the mounts of Pen- 
shaw and Warden-low, which make an elegant, 
break on the horizontal line. To the south-west, 



victims who fell by (lie tyranny of Henry the Eighth. Tli- 
suspicion of tlie Monarch was excited by his having quartered 
the arms of Edward the Contessor with his own ; and the crime 
imputed to his charge from that simple act, was aspiring to the 
throne : for this he was condemned, and beheaded in the year 
1546. 

This nobleman greatly distinguished himself by his valour 
in the reign of Henry the Eighth, when he ran with his squad- 
ron close under the walls of Boulogne, and occasioned its sur- 
render. Attached to the Princess Mary by the ties of religion, 
he was particularly instrumental in fixing her upon the throne, 
and was afterwards appointed Steward of the Household : an 
oflice which he retained under Elizabeth ; but finding that 
Leicester had supplanted him in the Queen's favour, he retired 
to France. On bis return from that country, he introduced the 
use of coaches into England. He died in the year 1579- 

4i th* 



DURHAM. 



the Yorkshire liillg above Barminghnm, form the 
horizon, southward of which, is the spacious plain, 
-wherein Northallerton and Thirsk lie; and with a 
glass it is said, Crake Castle and York Minster are 
discoverable : Hamilton, and Cleveland hills extend 
eastward, stretching their cultivated skirts into the 
Tale of Tees : the pike of Roysbury, all the chain 
of mountains to Hunscliff, anil the environs of 
Flamborough-head, are comprehended in the pros- 
pect, together with the Tees mouth, and a wide ex- 
panse of sea. On the intermediate ground, Sedge- 
field, Hardwick, and theswcep of country to Ehvick 
and the Beacon are distinctly seen ; the scene nar- 
rows towards the north, yet many other objects are 
beautifully disposed of in the valley." 

MIDDLETON.] The little market town of Middle- 
ion, or Middleton in Teesdale, is situated in the 
south-west division of Darlington Ward, 9 miles 
north-west by north from Barnard Castle. It oc- 
cupies a singular situation among hills, and extends 
"in somewhat of an oval form, round an extensive 
.green. The inhabitants (nearly 1000 in number) 
are chiefly engaged in mining ; and almost every 
house is either used as an ale-house, or for the sate 
of some sort of goods. The Church is an ancient, 
small building ; but the living is worth 1500/. per 
annum. The parish extends nearly twenty miles 
from west to east, and between two and three from 
north to south. The whole of the northern half 
consists of lead-mines. Some horse levels have 
been carried beneath the hills to an extent of five 
miles. The west side of the parish was anciently 
part of the extensive forest called Teesdale, or 
Marwood Forest, and was well stocked about 1459, 
when the Bishop made John Nevill, Earl of West- 
moreland, its forester. IB the winter of 1673, four 
hundred deer perished in the snow. There is a 
free-school in the town. 

NEWTON HALL.] Newton Hall, a seat of Sir 
Thomas Liddel, Bart, is now, or was lately, in- 
habited by the Rev. John Fawcett, M. A. It occu- 
pies a lofty site, between one and two miles south 
of Fincuale. The mansion is a plain modern edi- 
fice, sheltered by plantations, and commanding a 
line prospect of the City and Cathedral of Durham, 
with other interesting views to the south and east. 

PIERSBRIDGE.] Piersbridge, or Priests'-bridge, 
supposed by Gibson to have been so called either 
from two Priests' who here built a stone bridge over 
the Tees, instead of a wooden one, which they 
found here, or from the Priests who were appoint- 
ed to officiate in a chapel, the ruins of which are 
still to be seen near the bridge, is situated 5f miles 
west by north from Darlington. The village stands 
near the entrance of the Watling Street, from 
Yorkshire, and occupies some portion of the site of 
m considerable Roman station, which Horsley con- i 
jectu.res to have been the Magte of the Notitia. ] 
The north and west sides of (he vallum, and part , 
of the south side, are plainly to be distinguished. 
The Roman road passes it a few yards to the east ; 



and the foundations of the ancient bridge, already 
mentioned, which crossed the river in the same di- 
rection, were visible till the great flood in the year 
1771, when they were entirely washed away. The 
present bridge, a stone fabric, is between two and 
three hundred yards to the west. Many Roman 
coins have been, and are still, met with at this sta- 
tion, particularly after rain : the foundations of 
buildings are every where found when the earth is 
opened ; and an aqueduct, which supplied the gar- 
rison with water from a rivulet on the north side, 
was discovered about the beginning of the last cen- 
tury, finely arched, about three feet wide, and four 
! deep. An onyx, with a figure of Psyche, and a 
fine silver Otho, now in the Pembroke collection, 
have also been found here ; as well as a Roman 
altar, and other antiquities. The chapel, mention- 
ed above, was founded by Baliol, King of Scotland. 
During the Civil Wars, a skirmish took place here 
between the Royalists, commanded by the Marquis 
of Newcastle, and a party of the Parliament's 
forces, in which Colonel Howard, and many of th 
inferior ranks, were slain. 

RABY CASTLE.] About six miles east-north-east 
from Barnard Castle, on the east side of an exten- 
sive park, stands Raby Castle, the magnificent seat 
of William Henry Vane, Earl of Darlington, and 
Lord Lieutenant of the County of Durham. This 
noble pile owes its splendor to John de Nevill, Earl 
of Westmoreland, who in 1379, obtained leave to 
make a castle of his manor of Raby, and to embattle 
and crcnellate its towers. A part of the building 
appears to be of a more ancient date : and different 
possessors have made several alterations, although 
not particularly with regard to its exterior form. 
The Castle in general has a very imposing effect ; 
and a striking idea of the magnificence of the feudal 
ages may be formed by its extent, grandeur, and 
well preserved state. The situation is truly delight- 
ful, though not lofty. The Castle is situated on an 
eminence, with a rocky foundation, and is environed 
with an embrasured wall and parapet, inclosing 
about two acres. The outward area of the Castle 
has but one entrance, which is on the north side, by 
a gateway defended by two square towers, and 
flanked by a parapet with turrets. The inner area 
has two entrances ; one modern, opened by the late 
Earl ; the other ancient and grand, forming the 
principal entrance to the Castle, from the west, by 
a double gate, and covered way, strengthened by a 
square tower on each side, which are connected by 
a hanging gallery extending above the gate : here 
are three shields of arms of the Nevill , quartered. 
The covered way is about 42 feet in length, with a 
groined roof, and circular arches : each gate has a 
portcullis. This entrance is flanked with square 
towers at irregular distances ; between the most 
northern of which, is a communication by a gallery 
with Clifford's Tower, a large square bulwark op- 
posite the outward gate. From Clifford's Tower, 
eastward, is a hanging gallery, which coaimunic.ites 

with 



DURHAM. 



819 



with a smaller square tower, strengthened with tur- 
rets : from this extends a curtain wall, which con- 
ceals a recess, and adjoins to the new entrance 
formed between two small square towers, and lead- 
ing to the hall. Hence a modern curtain wall con- 
nects this part of the Castle with a lofty tower, 
apparently of more ancient origin than any other 
part of the building. Its figure is that of an ancient 
arrow-head, with the sharp edge or point to the 
louth: it has four tiers of apartments, or floors, and 
the southernmost angles are furnished with turrets. 
The masonry is excellent ; the front is chisscled, the 
joints are compact, and the interior parts of the wall 
are run with hot lime. From the top is a most ex- 
tensive prospect ; and near the summit, raised in 
the stone-work, are two B's, in the old character, 
from which, and the name the tower now bears, it 
has been inferred, that it was built by Bertram Bul- 
mer. Hutchinson, however, conjectures it to be of 
yet greater antiquity, even of the age of Canute, 
and to have formed part of the mansion given by 
him to the Church, with Staindrop, and other lord- 
ships. Some intermediate buildings, between this 
tower and the main pile, are said to have been de- 
stroyed by fire. The interior of the Castle is dis- 
tributed into a great number of apartments ; many 
of them handsomely fitted up. The Entrance Hall 
is uncommonly grand ; its vastness, and apparent 
stability, never failing to excite admiration. The 
roof is arched, and supported on six pillars, with 
capitals, diverging and spreading along the ceiling. 
Here his Lordship's visitors quit their carriages, 
which are admitted into the Hall, and afterwards 
pass off on the opposite side, through the inner area 
and covered way. At one end is a flight of steps, 
leading to the Presence Chamber, Music Room, 
Billiard Room, &c. all which are very neatly de- 
corated. Over the Hall is another spacious apart- 
ment, ninety feet in length, thirty-six in height, and 
thirty-four in breadth. This was the room where 
the ancient baronial festivals were celebrated ; and 
700 Knights, who held of the Nevilles, are recorded 
to have been entertained here at one time. The 
west end is crossed by a stone gallery, whence the 
minstrels poured forth their animating strains in the 
hours of revelry, or of dreadful preparation, in war. 
Several of the smaller apartments have been hollow- 
ed out from the walls, which are of great solidity 
and strength. The Kitchen is a square of thirty 
feet, with an arched roof, and cupola lights in the 
centre; it has also five windows, from each of which 
steps descend ; but only in one instance to the floor, 
and before them a gallery running round the whole 
interior of the fabric : it has three chimnios, besides 
narrow passes channelled in the walls, through 
which the provisions are supposed to have been an- 
ciently served up in the great Banqueting Room. 
The ancient oven, proportioned to the magnificence 
displayed by its princely possessors, is mentioned 
by Pennant as having been converted into a wine 
cellar, " the sides being divided into ten parts, each 



holding a hogshead of wine in bottles." The park, 
pleasure-grounds, and plantations, of Raby, cor- 
respond with the extent and dignity of the Castle. 
Many parts command very beautiful and enlarged 
prospects, where the woods sweep over the rising 
grounds of a diversified tract of country, and the 
distant eminences blend with the horizon : one of 
the terraces is upwards of 2-250 feet in length. On 
the estate is an extensive farm ; to which particular 
attention was given by the late Earl, who intro- 
duced every agricultural improvement, and erected 
many useful buildings. The farm-yard is excluded 
from the Castle by an embattled screen, over the 
gateway of which is a rude sculpture of a bull, 
bearing an ensign and mantle, adorned with the 
Neville's arms : this was removed hither from Bul- 
mer's Tower. The dog kennels, and stables, are 
built in an ornamental style, and judiciously situated 
so as not to detract from the grandeur of the Cas- 
tle : from particular points of view, they form good 
objects in the different prospects. This seat con- 
tinued to be the grand residence of the Nevilles 
till the reign of Elizabeth, when Charles, the sixth 
and last Earl of Westmoreland of that family, en- 
gaged in a weak conspiracy to dethrone his Sove- 
reign. Obliged to abandon his country, he fled to 
the Netherlands, where he died a miserable exile, 
in 1584. His immense estates were declared for- 
feited ; and in the reign of James the First, were 
consigned by grant to certain citizens of London 
for sale : of them the Castle and demesnes of Ra- 
by were purchased by Sir Henry Vane, Knt. from 
whom they hare descended to the present noble 
possessor. In the autumn of the year 1806, his 
Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, visited this 
Castle, and was received with feudal splendour and 
hospitality. 

RAVBNSYTORTH CASTLE.] Ravensworth Castle, 
the seat of Sir Thomas Henry Liddel, Bart, is si- 
tuated about a mile to the west of the river Team, 
from which the ground gradually rises, to a consi- 
derable extent. The present mansion is built on the 
site of an ancient castle, which appears to have 
formed a quadrangle with a square tower at each 
angle, joined by a curtain wall ; two of the towers 
are built up in the offices ; the others are almost in 
ruins, and cloathed with ivy. Its origin is uncer- 
tain, but Ilutchinson supposes it to be Danish, from 
its name, which, in various old writings, is styled 
" Ravenshelm," and " Raffensweath." The Danish 
standard was named " Raffen," from which he con- 
jectures that the term " Raft'enshelm," signified th 
strong hold of the Danish standard ; and " Raffens- 
weath," the " Danes' woe," from some defeat 
which that people met with here ; " weath," in the 
north country dialect being expressive of sorrow. 
To corroborate this opinion of its antiquity, he ob- 
serves, that " it must have been a fortress before 
any records now extant ; as there is no licence to 
embattle and crennelate this house, found in the 
Bishop's archives, though of erery other castle, in 
7 the 



320 



DURHAM. 



the county, there is that evidence." The saloon is 
spacious ; but the apartments are in general small. 
A fine forest of oaks affords it a shelter to the north 
and west ; to the east it commands an agreeable 
riew over Lamesley Vale ; and immediately oppo- 
site in the distance is Gateshead-fell, wild and 
shaken, yet covered with a number of rude huts, 
the habitations of the families of the quarries, and 
pit-men. 

Bishop Flambard made a grant of Ravensworth, 
and some other manors, to his nephew Richard, 
who was to hold them by homage, and the service 
of half of a knight's fee. It afterwards passed 
through different families to a branch of tiie Lum- 
leys, which became extinct in Isabell, who married 
Sir Henry Boynton abont the beginning of the reign 
of Henry the Seventh. Their daughter and heiress 
married Sir Henry Gascoign, v/hose descendant, 
Sir William Gascoign, in the fifth year of James 
the First, sold it to Thomas Liddell, Esq. ancestor 
of the present Baronet. 

RYTON.] Ryton, seven miles west-north-west 
from Gateshead, a village in a thriving state, is de- 
lightfully situated in the vale near the banks of the 
Tyne, and contains many handsome buildings in- 
habited by opulent families. The church, which is 
spacious, consists of a nave, side aisles, and chan- 
cel, with a square tower, terminated by an octangu- 
lar spke, 108 feet in height, presenting a good ob- 
ject from the river, and several parts of the vale. 
A large harrow, twenty feet in perpendicular height, 
and planted with trees, is near the north wall of the 
church-yard, but does not appear to have been 
6pened. A similar one, near Bradley Hall,- in this 
parish, inspected 30 years ago, was found to contain 
a square cavity formed by stones placed edgewise, 
in which a humap body had been buried. This vil- 
lage was burnt by the Scots, in 1297, when Warren 
and Cressengham commanded the English forces. 

SADBERGK.] Sadberge, 4J miles east-north-east 
from Darlington, though now a very insignificant 
place, was anciently a county in itself, having its 
proper Sheriffs, Csroners, and other civil officers. 
In the time of Bishop Bury, it was divided into two 
wards, and had the privileges of a wapentake. " In 
the 'time of Bishop Langley," says liutchinsou, 
" it was asserted, that Barnard Castle, Marwood, 
Cleathan, Eggleston, Langton, Middleton in Tees- 
dale, Newbiggin, Stainton, and other places in the 
western extremity of Durham, were members of.this 
wapentake. There was a gaol forprisoners in Sad- 
berge ; and sundry manors and lands were held by 
the special service of maintaining the same, and 
supporting the prisoners." The eminence on which 
Sadberge stands, rises on each side with' an easy 
ascent, and commands a fine view over the south- 
east part of Durham, and up Tees-dale as far as 
the high grounds of Barnard Castle. The Chapel 
is built oi stones apparently taken from the mate- 
rials of more ancient structures. All the lands in 
Sadberge were formerly held by military service. 



SEAHAM.] At Seaham, a little village on the 
coast, 4| miles south by east from Sunderland, is 
a summer residence, formerly occupied by the late 
Admiral Sir Ralph Milbanke, Bart, some time one 
of the representatives in Parliament for this county. 
It is said that Seaham WHS restored to the see of 
Durham by King Athelstan ; but by what means it 
was afterwards alienated, is not recorded ; it is now 
freehold. A stone coffin was dug up in the church- 
yard a lew years ago, and from the inscription, 
" Hie jacet Richardus vie de Sehaim" on the lid, 
it was conjectured to have contained the remains of 
Richard de Overton, whose name is among the list 
of incumbents in the year 1293. 

SEATON.] Seaton Carew, 10-| miles north-east 
by north from Stockton, deriving its name from a 
family by whom it was held in the reign of Richard 
the First, is a pleasant well frequented bathing vil- 
lage, on the borders of the sea. It consists chiefly 
of cottages, forming three sides of a quadrangle. 
The accommodations are reasonable; and a respect- 
able inn was built a few years ago for the reception 
of company : a row of convenient lodging-houses 
communicates with the inn, both on the ground and 
second floors. The prospects to the north ar>d 
south are very fine. 

SEDGEFIELD.] The ancient town of Sedgefield, 
11J miles south-east by south from Durham, was 
invested with the privilege of a market, by a grant 
from Bishop Kellawe in the year 131-2. It is one 
of the most pleasant and healthful spots in the coun- 
ty ; and it is so famed for its salubrity, and the 
longevity and hardiness of its inhabitants, that the 
late celebrated Dr. Askew denominated it the Mont- 
pelier of the North. Its site is elevated, on a gra- 
velly soil, and open to every aspect : the surround- 
ing country is in a high state of cultivation, and 
very productive. The prospects are extensive and 
grand ; embracing a great variety of interesting 
objects. The centre of the town forms a large 
square, in which is a market cross ; and on the east 
side stands the Church ; the length of which from 
the tower to the chancel, is about 72 feet ; the length 
of the transept is nearly equal to that of the nave. 
The aisles are formed by rows of- three pillars, light, 
and elegantly shaped ; each pillar being composed 
of four perfect cylinders, not placed in a square, but 
in a lozenge east and west, so as to present a broad 
front towards the centre of the nave ; the columns 
are belted in the middle ; the bases have few mem- 
bers, and those of the Saxon order ; but the capitals 
are variously ornamented, with fillets of palm 
branches, vine leaves, wreaths of flowers mingled 
with birds and other figures ; in many parts deli- 
cately pierced. The arches are pointed, and orna- 
mented with mouldings ; the outward one, zigzag : 
they spring from pilasters on the side walls, and 
rise from grotesque heads on the capitals of the 
pillars. The chancel is inclosed from the nave by 
a rich screen of tabernacle-work in oak, with three 
stalls on each side, divided by beautiful light co- 
lumns, 



DURHAM. 



321 



s, and canopied. The chancel is nearly thirty- 
six feet in length. The transepts appear to have 
been added to the original building at different 
times ; probably on the foundation of two chantries, 
established here long prior to the Dissolution. The 
organ was given by the Rev. Theophilus Pickering, 
who was rector between the years 1705 and 1711. 
Various ancient inscriptions are on brasses, in dif- 
ferent parts of the Church. Before the altar-rails, 
on a slab in the pavement, is represented a crosier 
supported on the back of a lamb, a chalice in the 
middle of the staff, and the cross at top pointed in 
the form of the fleur de lis. In the north aisle is a 
curious monument, on a slab inlaid, representing 
two skeletons in shrouds, apparently male and fe- 
male ; the latter having a winding-sheet folded 
over the middle : above is the place for a label, 
which has long been removed, and the inscription 
is unknown. The ancient Rectory House, a cas- 
tellated edifice, was burnt down in 1792 : the pre- 
sent building Avas erected by the Rev. George Bar- 
rington, in a plain neat style. It is deserving of 
remark, that the common inhabitants of Sedgefield, 
previously to the destruction of the old rectory, 
were under great terrors of an apparition, denomi- 
nated the Pickled Parson, which for many years 
was presumed to infest the neighbourhood of the 
Rector's Hall, " making night hideous." The 
supposed origin of the tale is attributed to the cun- 
ning of a rector's wife, whose husband having died 
about a week before the tythes (which are generally 
let off to farmers, and the rents paid on the 20th 
of December) became due, she concealed his death, 
by salting his body in a private room. Her scheme 
succeeded ; she received the emoluments of the liv- 
ing, and the next day made the decease of the Rec- 
tor public. Since the fire the apparition has not 
been seen ! 

nan; small donations have been made to this 
parish for charitable purposes. On the east side of 
the market square is an Hospital, or Alms-house, 
for ten poor men and women, founded in pursuance 
of a bequest by 31 r. Thomas Cooper, a Surgeon, 
who died in 1703. Adjoining the hospital is a Free 
Grammar School, for the education of six poor 
children. The appearance of the houses in Sedge- 
field has been much improved of late years ; many 
of them, which were previously thatched, having 
been tiled, and rough-cast. A small Linen Manu- 
factory has been established here ; and about 100 
hands are constantly employed in shoe-making. 
Some additional employment is furnished by a mill, 
erected on a small stream near the town, for forging 
spades, axes, and various sorts of agricultural im- 
plements. 

A remarkable Ice Storm occurred here on the 
17th, of July, 1792, between the hours of eleven 
and one in the day. It was preceded by an almost 
total darkness, and a noise resembling reverberated 
thunder. The streets of the town were filled to the 
depth of two feet, with pieces of rugged ice, vary- 

TOt. II. O. 68. 



ing in size, from that of a marble to a man's head. 
AH the windows which had a southern aspect, were 
broken ; and many houses presented a dreadful pic- 
ture of violence and devastation. The storm began 
near Preston, and continued to rage in a south-east 
direction to beyond Kelyoe. All the corn exposed 
to its fury was destroyed ; the trees were stripped 
of their leaves, numerous birds were killed ; and 
the cattle broke from their pasture's, and, with visible 
expressions of terror, fled to the habitations of man 
for security. The cause of this uncommon kind of 
tempest does not appear to have ever been ade- 
quately 'investigated or ascertained. 

SELLABY HALI..] 'Sellaby Hall is a beautiful villa 
of free-stone, and blue slate, which was rebuilt by 
the late Earl of Darlington, who purchased it of 
the Freemans. The grounds are laid out with 
much taste and judgment, and present a rare variety 
of pleasing views, its stables are well arranged, lofty 
and embattled. The view, on leaving the high- 
road at Grandbank, on the way to Sellaby, is sin- 
gularly rich and extensive. It takes in nearly the 
whole vale of Teesdale, from this point to the cloud- 
capt blue mountain of Cross-fell, in Cumberland. 

SHERBOURN HOUSE.] Sherbourn House, or Hos- 
pital, is situated 2| miles east-south-east from Dur- 
ham. It was founded by Bishop Pudsey, about the 
year 1180, for sixty-five poor lepers, a Master, and 
other officers. The Scots destroyed the old build- 
ings ; but they were restored by Thomas de Hesse- 
well, who was Master between the years 1330, and 
1339. Having gone to decay, the whole were re- 
built by Dr. Gregory, who was appointed the Mas- 
ter in 1759. They stand on a very healthy spot, on 
the respective sides of an inclosed area, which com- 
prises an acre of ground. The Master's House i 
a commodious dwelling, with pleasant gardens. 
The body of the Chapel is thought to be as ancient 
as the foundation, " it is lighted by three narrow 
windows on the south, under circular arches, and 
ornamented with small round pilasters, belted and 
capitalled like those in the east part of Durham 
Cathedral." It appears, that Bishop Pudsey de- 
creed, that the Hospital was to receive both male 
and female lepers, that each were to have their 
respective dwellings on the opposite sides of the 
area ; and the brethren to have the privilege of 
electing their prior, and the sisters their prioress. 
" Each leper was to have a loaf and a gallon of 
beer daily ; three days in the week flesh meat, and 
four days fish ; so that one dish of meat, fish, cheese, 
or butter, should serve two ; but on groat days, 
two dishes were to be provided, particularly on 
Quadragesima day, when they were allowed fresh 
salmon, or other fish, if they could be had, for one 
dish ; and on Michaelmas-day, they were to have 
geese, a goose to every four. They were allowed 
yearly three yards of woollen cloth, russet, or white, 
six yards of linen, and six yards of canvass, with 
other necessaries, as trusses of straw and bundles 
of reed, with four yule clogs for the vigils of our 
4 M Saviour." 



322 



DURHAM. 



Saviour." By these and similar rules, the institu- 
tion was governed till the time of Cardinal Lang- 
ley, who finding that the revenues had been mis- 
applied, obtained a faculty from Pope En genius the 
Fourth, by which he was empowered to make new 
regulations. A considerable change in the original 
foundation was effected by his decrees, which were 
dated July 22d, 1434 ; though not more, perhaps, 
than necessary ; as at this period, the leprosy ap- 
pears to have been nearly eradicated ; and two 
lepers only, " if they could be found," are directed 
to be admitted upon the establishment. To these 
thirteen poor people were to be added, " to be pro- 
vided with meat anil drink of ten-pence value every 
week ; or ten-pence in ready money, at their own 
option, and have yearly the sum of six and eight- 
pence for fuel and clothes." On this foundation 
the hospital continued till the year 1584, when an 
act was passed for incorporating the brethren, and 
their successors, by the name of " The Master and 
Brethren of Christ's Hospital in Sherborne, near 
Durham," the number of brethren was by the same 
act enlarged to thirty. Bishop Chandler, in the year 
1735, made some additional statutes, which now 
govern the hospital. Each of the in-brethren, to the 
number of fifteen, has a neat room, a sufficient quan- 
tity of wholesome food, a suit of cloaths annually, 
and forty shillings in money ; the out-brethren, who 
are also fifteen in number, enjoy a similar sum. 

SHIELDS, SOUTH.] Next to the City of Durham, 
South Shields is the principal town in the county, 
with respect both to trade and population. It is 
situated in the parish of Jarrow, in the east division 
of Chester Ward, 21 miles north-north-east from 
Durham, and 278f north by west from London. It 
ranges along the southern bank of the Tyne, near 
its junction with the sea, and, with North Shields, 
on the opposite side of the river, in Northumber- 
land, forms a very considerable maritime port. The 
eminence on the south point of the harbour, was 
unquestionably the site of a Roman station. Hors- 
ley supporting the opinion of the Tyne having been 
the f'fdric of Ptolemy, observes, that the Ostia I'e- 
dr<z of that author may as well be the " name of the 
station as of the river's mouth," and that unless it 
is, it does not seem to be named either in Ptolemy, 
the Itinerary, (Antoninus's,) or the Notitia ; but, 
had he seen the Itinerary of Richard of Cireucester, 
published by Dr. Stukeley, in 1757, he would have 
discovered the appellation Ad Tinam, and have re- 
ferred it to its proper place, South Shields. Amongst 
the proofs of this having been a Roman station, may 
be mentioned its situation at the end of the road, 
named the Wreken Dyke, its importance towards 
the defence of the mouth of the Tyne, and the Ro- 
man altars, coins, and other relics of that people, 
which have frequently been dug up here. The re- 
mains of a Hypocawt, or Sudatory, were dug up 
here in the beginning of the year 1798. Nicholas 
Fairies, Esq. of Shields, had a slight drawing of it, 
as well as some fragments of the building, and se- 



veral coins ; particularly a small gold one, in very 
high preservation, of Marcus Aurelius Antoni- 
nus. 

At what period the station was abandoned, is un- 
certain ; but evidently not so early as the time of 
Yalentinian. The site comprehends several acres: 
part of it is now occupied by a building called the 
Law House. In the adjacent grounds, broken pot- 
tery, and foundations of houses, are frequently dug 
up. Whatever might have been the splendor of Ad 
Tinum, it probably vanished soon after tiie departure 
of the Romans : even its name was forgotten ; and 
the present appellation of the town must be sought 
in more humble sources. It most probably origi- 
nated with the fishermen who frequented the Tyne, 
and who, on both sides of the river, erected a lew 
miserable huts, or sheds, called Shields, or Wheels, 
almost universally in the northern district, to screen 
themselves from the severity of the weather. The 
present importance of the place has principally 
arisen from its very favourable situation for com- 
mercial purposes. Its appearance has been much 
disfigured, and rendered very singular, by a vast 
number of high artificial hills, extending on the east 
and south sides of the town, formed by the cinders 
from the salt-works, the refuse of the glass-houses, 
and the Thames gravel, that has been taken up as 
ballast by light colliers, and afterwards thrown out 
near the river's banks. Some of the hills have been 
built upon ; and present a very curious aspect when 
viewed from the south on the road near Westoe. 
Most of the streets are narrow, and inconvenient, 
and the houses are indifferently built, with the ex- 
ception of those in the Market Place, and on the 
Bank Top. The whole town, three houses, and a 
Meeting House excepted, is held by lease under the 
Dean and Chapter of Durham, a tenure by no means 
favourable to improvement, either architectural or 
agricultural. 

About a century ago, South Shields was famous for 
its salt-works ; nearly 200 large iron pans have been 
there constantly employed in the manufacture of that 
article. This trade, however, has been declining 
for many years ; the manufacturers having lost the 
London market, which is now chiefly supplied from 
the works at Liverpool. The number of pans is 
now not more than eight or nine : these are sup- 
plied with sea-water from reservoirs filled by the 
tide, and the water being evaporated by boiling, 
the salt remains, and is afterwards refined for use. 
The ground formerly occupied by the pans, lias 
been converted into yards and docks for building 
and repairing ships ; and from Shields Harbour 
(or Tyuemouth Haven) being the great rendezvous 
for shipping taken up in the coal trade, these docks 
are constantly employed : the dry docks, are nine 
in number, are convenient, and sufficiently capa- 
cious for thirteen vessels. Another principal branch 
of trade arises from the glass-works ; of which 
here are three for the manufacture of crown glass ; 
four, for that of bottles ; and oue for that of white 

glass, 



DURHAM. 



32S 



glass.* The augmentation in the trade of (lie town 
was particularly great during the last century ; even 
so late as sixty or seventy years since, the number 
of ships belon;in;* to Shields is said to have been 
only tour ; though they now amount to upwards of 
500. The harbour might still be greatly improved ; 
but although the port dues are extensive, and have 
much increased, very little money seems to be ap- 
propriated to this purpose. The increase of popu- 
lation rendering a market necessary, a charter was 
granted in 1770, by Bishop Trevor, empowering 
the inhabitants to hold a market weekly, and two 
fairs annually. The market-place is a spacious 
square, built, with the exception of the Chapel, 
which forms the south side, about the year 1768 ; 
the houses are mostly good : in the centre is a re- 
spectable Town House, with a colonnade beneath, 
erected at the expence of the Dean and Chapter. 
When the chapel was founded is unknown ; no part 
of its antiquity can be traced in the building, as it 
has been twice altered, and much enlarged, within 
the last sixty years. The interior is neatly fitted 



* A new mode of insurance, termed Afutual, was intro- 
duced at Shields, some years ago, by the ship owners; a cer- 
tain number of whom agree to insure a given sum on each 
other's ship ; and when a loss happens, the sufferer receives the 
amount insured on his ship from the other members, who pay 
in the same proportion as their own ships are insured : no pre- 
mium is given ; the consideration being, ' the risk each takes 
upon the other.' These are called Insurance Clubs; in some 
of them every member takes 1200/. upon each ship ; while in 
others, various sums, from 200/. to 1500/. are taken upon each 
ship by the individuals of the society, who contribute to any 
loss, in the same ratio as their own insurance.- Speaking gene- 
rally, it may be affirmed, that all the ships of the Tyne, now 
amounting to some hundred vessels, and averaging about 250 
register tons each, are insured in this manner. '1 he greatest 
part of the ships registered at the Newcastle Custom House, 
belongs to North and South Shields, and, besides carrying on 
the coal trade, are much employed in the Baltic trade ; and in 
war time, in the royal transport service. The seamen and 
pilots are reckoned among the most skilful and expert in the 
kingdom." 

T That excellent invention, the LIFE BOAT, is indebted 
for its origin to a society of gentlemen, who held their meetings 
at the Law House, in South Shields. It was suggested by the 
loss of the crew of the Adventure, of Newcastle, in September 
I7S<), who dropped off from her rigging, one by one, as she 
lay stranded on the Herd-sand, near the entrance of the har- 
bour, " in the midst of tremendous breakers, in the presence 
of thousands of spectators, not one of uhom could be prevail- 
ed upon, by any reward, to venture out to her assistance, in 
any boat or coble of the common construction. On this the 
gentlemen of South Shields (subscribers to the Nfws llootti at 
the Law House) called a meeting of- the inhabitants, at which 
a committee was appointed, and premiums were offered for 
plans of a Boat, which should be the best calculated to brave 
the dangers of the sea, particularly of broken water. Many 
proposals were presented : but the preference was unanimously 
given to Mr. Greathead's, who was immediately directed to 
build a Boat at the expence of the committee." The utility 
of the new vessel WHS first experienced on the 30lh of January, 
1790, when it put to sea, for the " glorious purpose of rescuing 
some unfortunate mariners, who were the sport of the tempest 
in the offing ; :i number of cork jackets being provided for the 
crew, in case their boat disappointed the expectations of the 



up ; and on the chain above the chandelier, is pre- 
served a very elegant model of the LITE BOAT, 
presented by Mr. Henry (jreathead, the inventor, 
who, we believe, resides in this town, where the first 
boat of the kind was constructed. t The following 
inscription, commemorative of the fate of an entire 
family, is recorded on a neat tablet, within the- 
chapel : 

To the Memory of GEO : YEOMAN of llarton (in 
this County) Esqr,>. who died January ?3 1785, aged 52 

Years, Also nf I. si m it his Daughter an infant, 
And of ANN his Daughter, who died on ilie 1 lih. Nov. 1193, 
Aged 18, Cut off by the- rurrod.ng influence of a consumption. 

Just as she was entering a World in which her Beauty 

her Gentleness and Accomplishments would have attracted 

universal esteem. Likewise ol George, John and Henry liis Sons. 

Who returning from.Quthec were shipwrecked 

On the Lands End on ihe 17' 1 '. Deer. 1797. 

GEORGE aged 23. JOHN JO. HNRY 18 Years. 

Which unhappy Catastrophe while it filled the Heart 

of their surviving Parent with ihe most Poignant Sorrow, 

difius'd a Global over the whole Circle of the neighbourhood j , 

for the pleasing Expectations wit t h the Manhood of 

George had already confirmed, the loss mature 

Years ot his brothers piomised to fulfill. 



inventor, and failed in its object but the precaution was un-< 
necessary ; floating like a feather upon the water, it rode 
triumphantly over every raging surge, and smiled at the horrors 
of the storm. The wreck was approached in spite of the ele- 
ments ; and the wretched crew, equally affected with astonish- 
ment and extacy, beheld the Life Boat (never was name more 
happily imagined, or more appropriately bestowed) alongside 
of their shattered vessel, ami offering refuge from the tremen- 
dous abyss, that was opening to swallow them up for ever. 
Restored to life and hope, they were removed, and conveyed 
to hind, to the unspeakable joy of the benevolent proprietors 
of the plan ; who had thus the double gratification of seeing 
that the vessel was calculated to answer its intention in the com- 
pletes! manner, and of rescuing, at the same time, several 
fellow creatures from inevitable destruction." Since the above 
period, the Life Boat has been the me.ms of saving the lives of 
many hundreds of persons ; and so confident have the men 
employed in the management of the lioat become of its per- 
fect security, that the cork-jackets which were provided for 
them to wear as a precaution against any possible accident, have 
long ceased to be used. For some years, Mr. Gi cathead was 
by no means sufficiently remunerated ; for lie not only neg* 
lected to secure his invention by patent, but even furnished 
plans and models, from which Life Boats might be con- 
structed by others. The attention of the legislature was at 
length, however, attracted by the grand utility of his scheme, 
and on the report of a committee, appointed, in February, 
1802, to enquire into the utility and originality of the inven- 
tion, 12QOI. was voted him as a reward by the House of Com- 
mons. Subsequently he was presented with a Medallion from 
the Royal Humane Society, one hundred guineas from the 
Corporation of the Trinity House oi Dc-ptford Strond ; a gold 
Medallion, and fifty guineas, from the Society of Arts ; one-- 
hundred guineas from the subscribers at Lloyd's (who also 
voted 2000f for encouraging the building of Life Boa' 8, on- 
different parts of the coast) ; an elegant diamond ring from the 
Emperor'of Russia, &c. On his examination before the Com- 
mittee of the House of Commons, hi- stated, that he had con- 
ceived Ihe principle of the invention, from the properties of a 
spheroid, which " if divided" into quarters, each quarter is 
elliptical, and nearly resembles the half of a wooden bowl, 
having a curvature with projecting ends : this, thrown into the 
sea, or broken water, cannot be upset, nor lie with the bottom i 
upwards." 



324 



DURHAM. 



Also to the Memory of an afflicted Parent's last 

remaining hope, THOMAS, wliodied March 19- 1799 Aged 18 Years, 

This Monument, the sad Memorial of no common devastation, 

Is consecrated by the Widowed Wile, and childless MOTH KR. 

Stranger, if thou hat met with Affliction, 

Pearler o'er the rapid Destruction of this once flourishing Family ; 

A:id, ia contemplating the Soriows of a forloru Mother, 

Forget for a while thine own. 



On the 19th. of March 1803, 

having borne with the meek and resigned Spirit of a Christian 

the repeated deprivations of her Husband and Children, 

it pleased God to call from this Trial 

of her Fortitude and Submission 

ANN YEOMAN, 

The Wife and Mother of the ahovc recorded deceased, 

Aged 60 Years : 

fcy whose Death no vestige of the existence of this Family remains. 
Save this poor Mercurial. 

At a short distance from the tower of the chapel 
was interred the body of Sir William Hamilton, 
Knt. and Bart, sou to the Earl of Abcrcorne, and 
servant to Henrietta, the quean-mother of King 
Charles the Second. He died on the 28th of June, 
in the year J681. In the cemetery are several me- 
morials of longevity ; particularly a record of the 
deaths of Ralph Harrison, and Dorothy, his wile ; 
the former at the age of ninety-eight, the latter at 
that of ninety-three ; after " living man and wife 
together, seventy-four years." Another inscription 
mentions the death of Mrs. Dorothy Watson, wife 
to W. Watson, Esq. Sheriff of York, who died in 
1705, aged eighty-three ; having " lived to see the 
fourth generation, to the number of 116 children, 
sprung from herself." The south-west prospect 
from the chapel includes a view of Jarrow, its 
ruined monastery, &c. The children of the poorer 
classes receive education at a Charity School, es- 
tablished iu 1769, for forty boys, and twelve girls. 
For the recreation of the more respectable inhabi- 
tants, a neat Theatre has been built ; and subscrip- 
tion Assembly Rooms are opened during the winter 
season. 

The population of South Shields, agreeably to 
the returns of 1811, was 9001. 

SHINCLIFFE HALL.] Shincliffe Hall, the seat of 
Robert Scott, Esq. two miles south-east from Dur- 
ham, is sheltered by a beautiful amphitheatre of 
hanging woods, excepting towards the south-west, 
which opens upon the river Wear, and a rich ex- 
panse of meadows. On the opposite side of the 
river stands Houghall, already described. 

SHIPLEY HOUSE.] Shipley, situated about three 
miles from Barnard Castle, formerly abounded with 
furnaces, and vast heaps of iron scoria yetjreuaain 
on the land. 

Shipley House, now belonging to the Earl of 
Stratbmore, was a hunting seat of James the Se- 
cond's, nnd extremely well chosen for the purpose, 
as the neighbourhood abounds with foxes. It was 
then the residence of Simpson, the King's Hunts- 
man, who left his country to share the fate of his 
7 



Royal Master. Its celebrity is still great ; and the 
Earl of Darlington, who has some of the best 
hounds in England, frequently resorts hither. 

SOCKBURNE.] The little parish of Sockburne, 
comprehending only the manor of the same name, 
though it. extends into the Wapentake of Allertoii 
Shire, in the county of York, is situated seven 
miles south-east from Darlington. Leland describes 
it, as of " a mile cumpare, of exceeding pleasant 
ground, almost made an isic, as Tese ryver windeth 
about it. The house and laud of Sokburn hathe 
beue of auncient tyme the very inheritance of the 
Coniers." It is probable, observes llutchinsou, 
" that the manor of Sockburne was granted out 
early to one of the Coniers for some valiant action, 
as the following ceremony denotes, which is per- 
formed at this day on the Bishop of Durham's first 
entrance into the county. The manor is held under 
the Bishop of Durham, by Knight's service, and 
the following ceremony. At the fust entrance of 
the Bishop, the Lord of Sockburne, or his agent, 
meets him in the middle of the river Tees, at Nee- 
sham, when the water is lordable, (otherwise on 
Croft Bridge,) when he presents a falchion to the 
Bishop, as an emblem of his temporal power, and 
repeats the following words : ' My Lord Bishop, 
I here present you with the falchion wherewith the 
champion Conyers slew the Komt, dragon, or Jiery 

flying serpent, winch destroyed man, woman, ajid 
child ; in memory of which, the King then reigning 
gave him the manor of Sockburne, to hold by this 
tenure, that, upon the first entrance of every Bishop 
into this county, this falchion should be presented.' 
The Bishop then takes the falchion in his hand, and 
immediately returns it to the person that presented 
it, wishing the Lord of Sockburne, health, and a 
long enjoyment of the manor. In the ancient pedi- 
gree of the family of the Coniers, it is set forth 
that, " Sir John Conyers, Knt. who slew the mons- 
trous, venomous, and poysonous wyveron, ask, or 
worm, which overthrew and devoured many people 
in fight, and the scent of the poison was so strong 
that no person might abide it, and hee, by p'vidence 
of Almighty God, overthrew it ; and lyeth buried 

i at Sockburn, before the Conquest ; but before lie 

! did enterprise, went to the Church in complete ar- 
mour, and offered up his sonne to the Holy Ghost ; 

' which monuments are yet to see ; also the place 
where the serpent lay is called Greystone." How 
far the reader will give credit to this relation is not 

' enquired ; but certain it is, that the family was set- 
tled here about the time of the Conquest, and were 
Barons of the palatinate ; for Roger Coalers then 
held the same, and was by the Conqueror made 
Constable of Durham Castle, and Keeper of all the 
soldiers' arms therein ; and which office was settled 
on him and his heirs male for ever, by grant under 
the great seal of William de Carilepho, Bishop of 
Durham. They continued to hold the manor till 
issue male failing in Sir John Conyers, his daughter 

, and heiress, Anne, married Francis Talbot, Earl of 

Shrewsbury. 



DURHAM. 



325 



Shrewsbury, whose daughter and heiress married 
Stoner, of Stoncr, in the county of Oxford, who 
sold Sockburne, with the manor of Bishopton, to Sir 
Edw.ird Blaekett, in wliose family tliose possessions 
still continue. Bishop Bury grunted free warren to 
ir John Coigniers, in his land* at Sockburn, &c. 
aiid Bishop Booth granted his licence to Sir Chris- 
topiirr Corners, for fortifying his mnnor-house of 
Sockburn, "and embattling and strengthening the 
same. A farm-house stands on or near the place 
where Sockburn-house formerly was : and the grey 
stone mentioned as the monument of Corner's vic- 
tory over his dreadful enemy, (generally supposed 
to be some Danish rover, or pirate, who infested 
and plundered the country) is shown to the traveller 
in a field adjoining the Church, but without any 
other evidence than tradition, that there a dragon 
died. The tombs of the Coniers, lie in a porch 
on the north side of Sockbnrne Church. On one 
is u recumbent effigy in stone, supposed to repre- 
sent Sir John Coniers who married Elizabeth, eldest 
daughter of Bromflete, Lord St. John, and Broin- 
flet." The legs of the figure are crossed ; the feet 
rest on a lion contending with a winged dragon : 
the right hand is in the act of unsheathing the 
sword ; on the Veft is a shield, without device ; the 
coat and helmet are of chain- work. Several other 
memorials of this family remain here. 

STAINPROP.] The ancient town of Staindrop, 
situated in a beautiful vale, five miles east from 
Barnard Castle, was originally a Royal viHe, as 
appears from Canute having granted his mansion- 
house here to the monastery of Durham, with many 
other manors, as an offering at the shrine of St. 
Cutlibert. Bishop Flambard, indignant that tle 
monastery should possess such a rich gift, seized 
the possessions into his own bands, but restored 
them on the approach of death. Soon afterwards 
Algar, the Prior, granted Staindrop, and Stain - 
dropshire, to Dolphin, great grandson of Uchtred, 
and ancestor to the Nevills, to be hoJden of him in 
capite. Ralph Nevill, Earl of Westmoreland, was 
empowered by Bishop Hatfield, in 1878, to erect a 
College fora Master or Warden, eight Chaplains, 
to be continually resident, four secular Clerks, six 
Esquires-, six decayed Gentlemen, and six other 
poor persons. At the Dissolution, this excellent 
establishment was bereaved of its possessions, and 
totally destroyed. Its annual revenues were then 
estimated at 170/. 4s. 6d. By a charter from Bi- 
shop Hatfield, A. D. 1378, John de Nevill, Lord 
of Rnby, was privileged to hold a weekly market at 
.Staindrop, which of late years has been revived. 

Staindrop Church is an ancient fabric, with an 
embattled tower at the west end. " In the south 
aisle, as I heard," says Leland, " was buried the 
grandfather and grandedam of Rate Raby, and 
they made a canticarie here. In the waul of this 
isle appere the tumbes and images of 3 ladys, 
whereof one hath a cronet, and a tumbe of a man 
child, and a flat tumbe varii raanonoris. T her is a 

TOL. n. iro. 68. 



flat tumbe also, with a plaync image of brasse and a 
scripture, wher is buried Richard suu and Lei re to 
Edward Lord ot Burgevenny. John by Rafes, 
first wife was Lord Neville. Richard by JoLtm his 
2 wife was Erie of Suresbyri. Robert was Bishop 
of Duresuie. George was Lord Latimer. Edwaixl 
was Lord Burgevenny ; and, as 1 remember, Rule 
had William that was Lord Falconbridge. Rale 
Neville, the first Erl of Westmorland of that name, 
is buried yn a right stately tumbe of alabuster yu 
the quire of Stanthorp College, and Margarete bis 
first wife on the lift hond of hym : and on the right 
J ioi id lyith the image of Johan his 2 wife ; but site 
is buried at Lincoln by her mother Catariue Swines- 
ford, Duchess of Lancaster." On the totnb of 
Ralph, Earl of Westmoreland, mentioned in this 
extract, lie the effigies of the Earl ami his two 
wives ; but bis first wife, Margaret, was buried at 
Brancepeth, and not, as Leland states, in this struc- 
ture. Tlie Earl is represented in armour, with his 
head resting on his helmet ; his feet on a lien. 
Here also is a table monument of wood, highly de- 
corated, to the memory of Henry, fifth Earl of 
Westmoreland, and his three wives, two of whom, 
with himself, are represented by recumbent figures. 
Round the sides of the tomb, within a colonnade 
formed by small carved pillars, are ill-executed fi- 
gures of tlreir children. Other ancient memorials 
aire yet preserved here ; and near the altar is a. sti*- 
perb white marble monument for the late Henryt, 
Earl of Darlington, who died in September, 1792. 
He is sculptured in a reclining attitude ; beneath is 
a fine representation of Raby Castle. In the 
.church-yard is a neat free-stone monument to the 
memory of the late Honourable Mrs. Raby Vane, 
of Staindrop, whose benignant disposition, and ex- 
tensive charities, procured her the general blessings 
of the poor. The population of Staindrop tovvn- 
ship, as returned under the late act, was 1087 ; the 
number of houses 213. Many of the houses are 
well built ; they are chiefly disposed in one wide 
street, extending from east to west, about half a 
mile. 

STANHOPE.} The little town of Stanhope, on the 
north hanks of the Wear, is 21 j miles- west by north 
from Durham, and 264| north-north-west from 
London. The parish of Stanhope is very extensive, 
and the population, consisting chiefly of miners, 
amounted, by the last returns, including the forest 
and park quarters, to 54(M> : the number of houses 
was 1011. 

The grant of a market to this towu, by Cardinal 
Langley, A. D. 1421, was revived by letters patent 
in 1609, through the influence of Dr. Basire, the 
rector. The Church, which is a plain and ancient 
building, is situated on an eminence to the north of 
the town. On the west side is an eminence, called 
Castle Hill, washed to the south by the Wear, from 
which it rises 108 feet in perpendicular height. Its 
sum. nit is of an oblong figure, thirty paces wide, 
divided into two irregular parts by a lutcli ; another 
4 n ditch 



326 



DURHAM. 



ditch protects it to the north and east, where its as- 
eent is easiest. From the remains of foundations 
discovered a few years ago, it is supposed that an 
ashler wall had surrounded its summit. It bears 
the name of Castle Stanhop, in a "-rant of lands 
made by Bishop Beck ; but there are no other re- 
cords concerning it extant. Tradition affirms it to 
have been a fortress of ancient standing, but de- 
stroyed by the Scots. A spacious ancient edifice, 
known by the name of Stanhope Hall, formerly the 
manor-house of the family of Feathcrstouhangh, 
the last of whom was killed at the battle of Hock- 
stet, is situated a little to the west of the town. 
The living of this extensive parish is worth 2000/. 
per annum. A cavern of considerable length, 
abounding' with stalactites, and near a mile in ex- 
tent, is a short distance to the north of the town. 

Stanhope Park, a large tract of rising land, the 
property of the See of Durham, between Stanhope, 
and St. John's Weardale, and the hills on the oppo- 
site side of the river, is supposed by historians to 
be the places where the armies of Edward the Third, 
and of Douglas the Scotch Chieftain, lay encamped 
fifteen days in sight of each other, without any de- 
cisive engagement taking place. The English army 
amounted to 60,000 men, principally infantry ; the 
Scotch, which, according to their own historians, 
numbered 24,000, consisted chiefly of cavalry. The 
Scots at last evacuated their camp in the night, and 
retreated towards their own country with such se- 
crecy and celerity, that the English could only come 
up with part of the rear guard whom they took pri- 
soners. It is said that Edward " wept much," 
when he found they had got off with such small loss. 
The Bishop of Durham used formerly to hold his 
great forest hunts in this park : the tenants were 
obliged to erect a tabernacle, to supply him and his 
suite with necessaries, to maintain his dogs, &c. he 
had also his master of the forest, his bow bearer, 
and other inferior officers. It is twelve miles in cir- 
cumference, and it is mentioned by Leland as being 
rudely inclosed with stone. 

STOCKTON-UPON-TEES.] The town' of Stockton- 
upon-Tees is situated in the south-west division of 
Stockton Ward, 21 -J miles south-east by south from 
Durhaln, and 248| north by west from London. 
" It is a place of antiquity," observes Hutchiuson ; 
and although a member of the Wapentake of Sad- 
berge, was part of the possessions of the Bishops of 
Durham before the grant of that Earldom, and 
claimed the attention of our Prelates. Stockton is 
a town corporate by prescription, governed by a 
Mayor, Recorder, and six Aldermen ; it is also one 
of the four Ward towns of the county. This place 
is divided into two distinct constableries, one of 
which consists of the Borough of Stockton, govern- 
ed by the Mayor and Burgesses, who held their 
Borough Court with a Court Leet. Within the 



* An old song relative to this castle, has the following 
lines; 



limits, the proper officers of the Borough collect tho 
rates and duties. The manor hath a Copyhold 
Court, a Greve or Bailiff, a Constable, and other 
officers, who collect distinct rates, and duties with- 
in their district. It is said, the Port of Stockton, 
though it has a Collector and inferior officers of the 
Customs resident there, is a member of the Port of 
Newcastle. In the 12th of Queen Anne, 1711, an 
act of Parliament was obtained to make Stockton, 
with East Hartburne and Preston, a distinct anil 
separate parish from Norton, which is a pleasant 
little village, ahout two miles to the north. 

It has been observed, that, " during the turbu- 
lent ages, wl'.r-n national jealousies, and feudal ani- 
mosities, created intestine warfare, the Bishops of 
Durham, having been invested with palatine dig- 
nity, considered themselves as guardians of the lives 
and properties, as well as the religion and morals, 
of the province committed to their care ; and with 
this view, persons able from iiilluer.ce and authority, 
were appointed to the Bishopric of Durham, that 
they might act as shepherds to their flock in both, a 
religious and a civil capacity. In the hitter charac- 
ter, they had to prevent the inroads of the Scots, 
who made it a part of their constant policy to dis- 
tress and levy contributions on their southern neigh- 
bours : hence arose the various fortresses betwixt 
the Tyne and the Tees, and among them Stockton 
Castle, which stood to the south of the town, on the 
northern bank of the latter river, and commanded 
an extensive prospect. In after ages, it became the 
occasional residence of many of the prelates, and 
was improved and strengthened, as circumstances 
required. During the Civil Wars, in the reign of 
Charles the First, it was garrisoned for the King, 
and particularly excepted in the treaty of Rippon^ 
when all the rest of the county, but Eggscliffe, was 
given up to tho Scots. Previously, however, to the 
year 1645, it fell into their hands, and was after- 
wards surrendered to the Parliament, which or- 
dered it to be ' slighted and dismantled ;' and so 
effectually was this executed, that not a stone re- 
mains as evidence of its former splendor. The only 
relic is a barn, (long since converted into cow- 
houses,) which appears to have stood within the 
area. On three sides, the castle wqs defended by * 
moat, the channel of which is yet visible ; the fourth 
was protected by. the river : the demolition took 
place in the year 1652.* The site is still a part of. 
the possessions belonging to the Bishops of Dur- 
ham." It is probable that the manor was a parcel 
of the See of Durham before the Conquest. As 
early as the year 1325, Stockton is mentioned 
among the places destroyed that year by the Scots : 
it however, soon recovered importance, as appears 
from an instrument, addressed by the Mayor and 
Bailiffs of Newcastle, to " their dearly beloved 
friends in Christ, the. Mayor, Bailiffs, and other 



Old Noll in. his day, out of pious concern, 
Tim Castle demolished, sold all, but tttti barn." 



honest 



DURHAM. 



3*7 



honest men of the town of Stockton." The privi- 
lege of a market was granted by Bishop Beck, A.D, 
1310 ; but it afterwards sunk into obscurity, as ap- 
pears from the petition of the Mayor and his Bre- 
thren, in lt>02, to Bishop Matthew, praying for a 
Gpnewal of the market, which had been discontinued 
many years. About this period some attention 
seems to have been given to promote the trade of 
the town ; and in 1620, a decree of the " Bishop's" 
Court of Chancery, determined in " his" favour, the 
right of receiving duties from ships coining into the 
port for anchorage and plankage. During the Civil 
Wars, the growing prosperity of Stockton expe- 
rienced a great check : its languishing state may be 
easily conceived, from the report made to Parlia- 
ment of the possessions of the See. " The Bpp. 
has the royalties of the river of Tease, as whales, 
sturgeon, porposes, or the like, taken on that side 
of the river next the county of Durham, within the 
manor of Stockton, and all wrecks of the sea, but 
know not what they are worth : not 5/. per annum. 
That the works, customs, and service of the copy- 
holders are little worth ; and we know of no cotta- 
gers within this man r . That the living at Stockton 
is a poor pencon, and not worth above per aim. 30/. 
or 35'. or thereabouts." In 1666, the town only 
contained 136 families, and none of the dwellings 
were of brick. On the return of tranquillity, Stock- 
ton again began to flourish, and in twenty-six years, 
the population was increased to 214 families. In 
1725 it contained 430 families, "besides 100 more 
that were paupers." Since that time its population 
has more than doubled ; the number of inhabitants, 
as returned under the Population act of 1801, was 
4009; of houses 533. In 1811, the former had in- 
creased to 4229, the latter to 812. The entire po- 
pulation of the parish, including the townships of 
East Ilartburn, and Preston, amounted to 4400. 

In the Borough part of Stockton, the land is all 
freehold ; in the Town part, it is copy or leasehold, 
held under the vicar and vestry-men. The Mayor 
is elected by a majority of the Burgesses ; but it is 
not necessary, as in most corporations, that he 
should have first been an Alderman : having been 
chosen into the Mayoralty, he is styled an Alderman, j 
and so continues as long as he remains in posses- I 
sion of his Corporation right. 

The situation of Stockton, on the northern banks 
of the river, at a convenient distance from the sea, 
is extremely favourable for maritime trade, though 
it has not yet derived all the advantages which 
might have been expected from that circumstance. 
The commerce of the town began to revive soon af- 
ter the Restoration, and having considerably in- 
creased, the principal officers of the customs were 
removed hither from Hartlepool in 1680 ; and law- 
ful or free quays were set up under a commissioner 
from the Exchequer in 1683. Below the town the 
Tees flows in a very circuitous course ; and as it 
approaches the German Ocean, expands into a large 
kay, upwards of three miles wide, within which 



many vessels, not concerned in the trade of the river, 
seek shelter in tempestuous weather. The vessel* 
belonging to this port, a few years ago, were about 
50 in number, averaging 122 tons each. 

Stockton is considered to be the handsomest towa 
in the north of England, as well for the breadth of 
its principal street, as for the general neatness of 
its buildings. This street is about half a mile in 
length, and upwards of 180 feet broad at the market 
place,-which is in the centre ; and it continues near- 
ly as wide to each extremity of the town. This 
gives the entrance, whether from the north or south,, 
a very fine effect. Several smaller streets branch 
off in different directions ; and at the north-east 
side is a spacious square, which contains some good 
buildings. It was inclosed a few years ago, and 
planted, by a subscription raisad among the inhabi- 
tants. The Town Hall stands near the middle of 
the principal street : it is a large square building, 
partly occupied as a tavern, and containing a court- 
room, a handsome suite of assembly rooms, and va- 
rious other apartments The arms of the town are 
sculptured over the south entrance. Tlte order of 
court for its erection is dated March the ninth, 1735. 
At a small distance is a handsome column, thirty- 
three feet high, of the Doric order, where the mar- 
ket is held, on the spot formerly occupied by an open 
cross. Below this arc the shambles, which, thougU 
neat in themselves, are from their situation, offensive 
to the eye. 

During the episcopacy of Bishop Poore, who died 
in 1234, a chapel of ease was erected at Stockton, 
which becoming ruinous, and too small for the in- 
creased number of inhabitants, was taken down. A 
Church was at length erected, the foundation of 
which was laid June the fifth, 1710 ; and the build- 
ing was opened for divine service on the twenty- 
first of August, 1712. It is a handsome brick fa- 
bric, the doors and windows cased with stone, the 
roof covered with Westmoreland slate : its length,, 
including the tower and chancel, is 150 fieet: the 
tower is eighty feet high. The church contains a, 
fine organ, erected in the year 1759 ; and the whole 
interior view is neat and uniform. A collection of 
old divinity books, in the vestry, served, a few years 
ago, as the foundation of a parochial Library, and 
various books on religion and morality are occasion- 
ally added to the stock, by. annual subscription 
amongst the parishioners. The Presbyterians, 
Quakers, Methodists, and Roman Catholics, have 
each a meeting-house in this town ; which also con- 
tains a Grammar-school, Charity-school, Sunday- 
school, and an Alms-house or Hospital for poor 
people. 

Manufactures of sail-cloths and ropes, for go- 
vernment and the merchant service, are carried on 
here to a considerable extent. Here is also a manu- 
factory of damasks, diapers, huckabacks, towelling, 
checked linens, &c. Two docks for ship-building 
are situated on the banks of the Tees ; which busi- 
ness might be rendered of incalculable advantage. 

Stockton 



328 



DURHAM. 



Stockton Bridge, an elegant structure of five 
arches, was erected over the Tees, below the town, 
between the years 1764 and 1771, at the expence of 
8000/. 

Amongst the remarkable events which have oc- 
curred at Stockton, may be mentioned the shock of 
an earthquake, which was felt on the 9th of De- 
cember, 1780, at a quarter before five in the after- 
noon. On the 2nd of August, 1783, a severe storm 
of thunder and lightning occurred, accompanied by 
a shower of irregular pieces of ice, some of them 
measuring from three to five inches in circumference. 
The tempest came from the west, and most of the 
windows that fronted it were broken. Various sil- 
ver coins were found here in pulling down an old 
house in the year 1702. Many of them were in 
excellent preservation, and in a regular series from 
Edward the Sixth to James the Second. They 
were claimed as treasure trove, and 846, weighing 
9 Ib. 4 ez. were delivered to the Bishop of Durham 
as Lord of the Manor. 

On the river, near Stockton, a salmon fishery is 
carried on to a considerable extent ; and near the 
mouth of the Tees, is a fishery for cockles, which 
are mostly gathered by women from a ridge of sand 
left dry at low water in the middle of the stream. 
On Sea ton and (ireatham marshes, near the mouth 
of the Tees, hi former times were some very con- 
siderable salt works. " Traces of these works," 
observes Brewster, in his History ef Stockton, 
" are still to be seen, and have the appearance ef 
breast-works and fortifications. By an inquisition, 
post moitem, an". 36 Hatfield, (1380,) it appears 



* Joseph Rudd, author of the Register Office, and other 
dramatic pieces, was born in the year 1722. He was a rope- 
inakcr at Stockton, but afterwards removed to London, and 
settled in Sun Tavern Fields, Shadwell. Strange as it may 
appear, Mr. Rudd courted the muses with great success: and 
whilst he was winding cordage, he constructed dramas with 
ability and ingenuity. His first production was that of " Ma- 
drigal, and Truletta, a mock tragedy, acted under the direc- 
tion of Mr.Cibber, at Covent Garden, with notes by the author, 
Dr. Humbug, critic and censor General," in 175'8. A review- 
er of this piece observes, " it is impossible to read his comic 
scenes, without partaking of the diversion which the author 
must have ftlt in writing them." Mr. Rudd's next production, 
the Register Office, was brought out in 1761, and still holds a 
respectable rank among dramatic performances. Besides these 
he wrote the Tragedy of" Dido," and the comic opera of " Tom 
Jones." He died on the 15th of August, 1787, aged 63. 

f- Brass Cro,<by, Esq. kc-rn in 1726, rose from a very in- 
ferior station in life at this town, to the highest civic honours in 
London. He was placed with an attorney at Sunderland, and 
removing to the metropolis, followed that profession in the 
Little Minories, and afterwards in Seething Lane. Having 
married the rich widow of a taylor and- salesman, who to his 
other business, had added that of dealing in sailor's tickets, he 
pursued the same line, and accumulated an immense fortune. 
After his wife's death, he married the widow of Mr. Cookp, 
who had acquired a handsome competency as Collar Maker to 
the Ordnance Office He was now in rotation elected Com- 
mon Councilman for Tower Ward, City Remembrancer, 
Sheriff, Alderman, and Lord Mayor of London, and Member 
of Parliament for Honiton, in Devon. He was committed to 
the Tower, duriug his Mayoralty, in 1770, by the House of 



that Reb. son of Marm. de Lumley, Knight, died 
seized of 25s. rent, ancl one quart of salt issuing out 
of three messuages and one salt-work, in the tenure 
of John de Carrowe, in Seaton : and by another 
inquisition of tJia same kind, an". 15 Langley (11-21) 
that Amisia, the widow of Thomas de idinedon, 
died seized of a quarter part of the manor of Sea- 
ton, consisting, among other things, of a salt-work, 
value 2s. another salt-work, and a fourth part of a 
salt-work. The farms in the parish oi' Greatham. 
bordering upon the marshes, held by leases under 
the master and brethren of Greatham Hospital, are 
covenanted to pay a stipulated number of bushels of 
salt, as an acknowledgment to the hospital : these 
are now commuted for money." 

The town of Stockton upon Tees has had the 
honour of giving birth to several eminent men ; 
amongst whom may be mentioned Joseph Rndd, a 
dramatic writer of some celebrity;* Christopher 
Allison, a gentleman who greatly distinguished him- 
self in an engagement between the Adventure armed 
ship, and the Machault French privateer, in Dunge- 
ness Road, in the winter of 1757; Brass Crosby, 
Esq. a political character of some note, in the mid- 
dle of the eighteenth century ;t and Joseph Ritsoi:, 
Esq. author of several respectable literary per- 
formances. J 

STREATLAM CASTLE.] Stroatlam Castle, the seat 
of the Earl of Strathmore, stands in a secluded but 
romantic vale, surrounded by lofty and irregular 
hills, 2J miles north-east by east from Barnard 
Castle. It was erected on the foundation of the old 
Castle at the beginning of the eighteenth century. 



Commons, respecting the affair of Wheble and other printers. 
At his going out of office the thanks of the Corporation, with 
a cup value 100/. were voted to him ; and tl* Obelisk in St. 
George's Fields, was dedicated to his memory. His third 
wife, the widow of the Hev. Mr. Tatteral, survived him. 
With this lady he received the manor of Chellesfield Court, 
Kent, and a jointure of 1000/. per annum. He died at his 
house in Chatham Square, February 14th, 1793, aged 68, and 
was buried with great pomp at Chellesfield Church. 
- J Joseph Ritson, Esq. a man of uncommon talents, but sin- 
gular character, was born on the 2nd of October, 1752. He 
was bred to the law, and became distinguished for his profes- 
sional acquirements, but was equally celebrated for other lite- 
rary attainments; and he was perhaps, the most successful of 
those persons who turned their minds to the investigation of 
old English literature and antiquities in the latter part of the 
ISth century. He had an exceedingly retentive memory, his 
researches were comprehensive; but his pagers are disfigured by 
an affected phraseology. In moral conduct he was unexcep- 
tionable ; as his candour would never permit him to act con- 
trary to the decisions of his understanding. On this principle 
he abstained from animal food for the last twenty years of his 
life; a potatoe, a biscuit, or an egg, with lemonade or tea, ge- 
neral! v being his onl> food. This peculiar abstinence contri- 
buted to destroy a constitution naturally weak, and at the age 
of fifty he exhibited every mark of premature decay. He 
died delirious in October, 1803. His works are numerous and 
valuable. His collections of English and Scotch Songs, and 
of Metrical Romances, are perhaps equal to any in pi int. His 
last publication was a treatise on his favourite topic, abstinence 
from animal foad. 

Several 



DURHAM. 



329 



Several of the old apartments nrc retained ; hut the 
general arrangement is very different. The first 
castle that stood here is supposed to have been built 
in the thirteenth century, by Sir John Trayne, who 
married Agnes, daughter and heiress of Ralph de 
le Hay, Lord Percy, and niece to Bernard Baliol, 
grandfather to the King of Scots of that name, by 
whom Streatlam, Stainton, and other estates, were 
given to her in dower. Alice, the issue of this 
marriage, and sole heiress, married Sir Adam 
Bowes, from whom the present Earl inherits in 
right of bis mother, the late celebrated Countess of 
Strathmore. Streatlam Castle was rebuilt in the 
fifteenth century, by Sir William Bowes, who was 
knighted for his valour at the battle of Vernoyle, in 
France, in 1424. The park, which displays some 
rich natural scenery, is stocked with fine deer : it 
has been considerably enlarged by the present Earl, 
who has re-united the Stainton estate, by purchase 
from the Hutton family, for 24,000/. The Buttons 
obtained H as a marriage portion with one of the 
Bowes. The great oaken stairs in the present 
mansion were added by the late Andrew Robinson 
Stoney Bowes, Esq. who was closely besieged here 
for some days after he had stolen Lady Strathmore 
from London. Mr. Bowes died a few years ago, in 
the rules of the King's Bench prison. 

STUB HOUSE.] Stub House, in the neighbour- 
hood of Winston, is the seat of Mr. Harrison. It 
is a respectable modern building, the adjacent 
grounds of which are pleasant, and ornamented 
with thriving plantations. 

SWAI.WELL.] Swalwell, a place much celebrated 
for its iron works, lies four miles west from Gates- 
head, and about a mile from the junction of the 
Derwent and the Tyne. The iron- works were es- 
tablished here about the year 1691, by Mr. Ambrose 
Crawley, who, from the humble condition of a com- 
mon blacksmith, raised himself to affluence, by his 
industry, invention, and vigorous perseverance. All 
this part of Durham, comprehending Swalwell, 
Winlaton, Winlatou Mill, High, and Low Team, 
&c. may be said to have been colonized by him ; for 
the situation, on the Derwent, being favourable for 
the purpose, he removed hither his manufactories 
from Sunderlaud, and, by the multitudes of work- 
men employed was the district peopled. Anchors 
of the largest size, moorin->--chaiiis, saws, nails, 
mattocks, hoes, spades, cast-iron pots, kettles, &c. 
are among the goods manufactured ; and conveyed 
to the various dock-yards, the East and West In- 
dies, and many other parts of the world. To the 
metropolis, the goods are conveyed in vessels be- 
longing to the Company that now carries on the 
business, the Crawley family having become extinct 
in the year 178-2. The iron imported is said to be 



* Richard Lilburn, mentioned above, was father to the 
celebrated Lieutenant Colonel Jolin Lilburn, who was born on 
this ebtate in the year 1618 ; aucl being a younger son, was bred 

VOL. 11. NO. 69. 



duty free ; Mr. Ambrose Crawley having had the 
address to obtain an exemption from toll, with other 
privileges for his factory, of the Corporation of 
Newcastle, on the payment of 6/. 13s. -irl. annually. 
The name of this gentleman is remembered with the 
utmost veneration ; the regulations which he framed 
for the government of the workmen, and the esta- 
blishments which he formed for their benefit, hav- 
ing been attended by the most salutary effects. His 
laws, indeed have, to a certain extent, superseded 
the general law of the land. " To put those laws 
in execution," observes Hutchinson, " a court of 
arbitrators (chosen from the superior classes of those 
employed) was constituted at Winlaton, to beholden 
every ten weeks, for hearing and determining cases 
among the workmen, to which all have an appeal : 
the fees are fixed beyond innovation, at a moderate 
rate. This institution has the most happy and ex- 
tensive use : it quiets the differences of the people, 
settles their claims to justice in an easy and expe- 
ditions manner, preserves them from the expences 
and distress of common law, and the noisome mi- 
series of a prison. As a further protection to civi- 
lization, schools are established at Winlaton, Win- 
laton Mill, and Swalwell, for the sole benefit of the 
Workmens' children, where they are instructed in 
reading, writing, and accounts. The poor and dis- 
tressed were also the objects of the founder's soli- 
citude ; and he appointed a surgeon for the relief 
of all persons employed, by whose timely assistance 
many lives and limbs have been preserved to the 
public. When a workman is ill, he has money ad- 
vanced by the agent ; when superannuated, or dis- 
abled, he has a weekly maintenance ; and when he 
dies, his family is provided for." The workmen 1 
are allowed convenient houses, with plenty of coals, 
and small pieces of ground for gardens. Som 
new steel- Works were established here a few years 
ago. 

SUNDERLAND.] (See WearmouthJ 

THICKLEY.] East Tliickley, or. us it is sometimes 
called, Old Tliickley, is 4| miles south-east from 
Bishop's Auckland. This place, which was an- 
ciently the inheritance of the Lilburn family, oc- 
casioned a remarkable law-suit between Ralph 
Clenton and Richard Lilburn, in 1688, when, on a 
question of right prosecuted in the Court of Pleas 
at Durham, battle was waged, but in consequence 
of a point "which arose in the proceedings, and oc- 
casioned a reference to be made to the King in 
council, and subsequently to the twelve Judges, it 
was fnspended. Each champion with batoou on, 
and bags, appeared in array, and cast their gaunt- 
lets. Any further trial of the cause was put nn end 
to, by the dissentiotis in Parliament, and the Civil 
Wars'* 

WALWQRTH. 



a clothier, but abandoned his profession in 163f5, and became 

assistant to the notorious Dr. Bastwick, who lost Irs ears in the 

pillory. 'Under his direction he went to Holland, and supr- 

4 o intended 



DURHAM. 



WALWORTH.] Walworth Hall, or High Wai- 
worth, 3| miles north-west from Darlington, was 
anciently a seat of the Nevills, from whom it passed 
by marriage, to Sir Gilbert Hausand, Knight, whose 
family, after several generations, sold it to the Jen- 
nisons. Thomas Jennison, Esq. Auditor General 
to Queen Elizabeth, made great improvements here, 
and erected a manor-house in the ornamental style 
of that age ; the south front, flanked by circular 
turrets, and the windows decorated with painted 
glass, displaying the arms of the then Knights of 
the Garter. The widow of Kalph Jennison, master 
of the stag-hounds to George the Second, sold the 
estate, about the year 1759, for 1G,000/. to Matthew 
Stephenson, Es<}, of Newcastle, who, some time af- 
terwards, again sold it to John Harrison, Esq. 

WEAKDALE.] St. John's Weardale is a chapelry 
to the parish of Stanhope, from which it is distant 
7f miles west-north-west. It has a market, which 
appears to have been established for the benefit of 
the workmen employed in the neighbouring lead- 
mines. The Chapel, a handsome building, was re- 
built by the late Sir Walter Blacket. The town is 
seated o.n the south of the Wear, in a narrow part 
of the vale. The ascent from the river is rapid, and 
at about the distance of two miles northward, it 
rises into mountains. " Near Hare-hope Bourne, 
(in this neighbourhood) is a singular piece of anti- 
quity called The Castles. This is an iuclosure of 
an oblong figure at the foot of a high ridge of hills : 
the interior space, an inclining plane, is in length, 
on the south side, "90 paces, and on the north, 83 j 
the width is 70 paces : it is defended on every side 
by a lofty m'ound, or vallum, of loose pebbles, with 
an outward ditch : large oaks and birch trees now 
grow among the pebbles ; and what is remarkable, 
juniper-trees are come to a vast size and strength 
of stature upon it. The interior space appears to 
have been ploughed." 

intended the printing of the Merry Liturgy, for which, and 
other presumed offences, he was, on his return, pilloried, 
whipped, fined, imprisoned, and loaded with irons, by order 
of the Star Chamber. In the year 1641, having been released 
by the Parliament, and presented with 200/. from the confis- 
cated estates of the royalists, lie became a distinguished soldier, 
and in 1644 was advanced to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel, j 
liis undaunted spirit distinguished itself in the battle of Mars- j 
ton Moor. From the bosom friend of Cromwell, he became I 
his accuser and enemy. Unbending in his politics, he was 
twice tried for high-treason, but acquitted. After his second 1 
trial, he was ordered to leave the kingdom, but obtained per- i 
mission to remain, on his brother becoming security for his 
peaceable behaviour. He afterwards settled at Eltham, where 
he attached himself to the Quakers, and died at the age of 
thirty-nine. Hume represents him as the " most turbulent, 
but most upright and courageous of human kind;" and Sir 
Henry Martin, as of such a contentious disposition, that, " if 
there were none living but him, John would be against Lilburn, 
and Lilburn against John." 

* William Paley was born at Peterborough, in Northamp- 
tonshire, in 1743, and educated under his father, who was Mas- 
ter of Giggleswick school in Yorkshire. Afterwards he was 
sent to Christ's College, Cambridge, where, in 1763, he took 
the degree of B. A, Soon after Ibis he became assistant in the 



WEARMOUTH AND SUNDMILAND.] Bishop Wear- 
mouth, Monk Wearmouth, and Sunderland, are 
so intimately connected that they may be considered 
as forming only one town, though the parishes are 
distinct. Sunderland, 12* miles north-east from 
Durham, is comparatively of modern origin, having 
arrived at its present importance from the conve- 
nience of its port ; but Bishop Wearmouth is a 
place of remote antiquity ; and though its history 
is obscure, it clearly appears to have been of con- 
. sequence in the Saxon ages, as it was restored to 
the See of Durham by King Athelstan at the be- 
ginning of the tenth century, under the appellation 
of the " delighful villa of South Wearmouth." The 
more ancient part of Bishop Wearmouth occupies 
the southern acclivity of an eminence south of the 
Wear, about a mile and a half distant from its junc- 
tion with the sea. On the summit of the eminence 
stands the Church, beyond which, to the north-cast 
on the Pans-fields, is a range of modern and hand- 
some buildings, connecting with Sunderland, which 
extends along the southern bank of the river, al- 
most to the sea shore. The upper part of Sunder- 
land occupies the side of a hill, having a quick de- 
scent both to the river and to the sea. 

The Church of Bishop Wearmouth is a very old 
structure, supposed by Hutchinson to have been, 
founded soon after the restitution made by Athel- 
stan. Its original architecture, however, has been 
nearly obliterated by alterations. It is a low build- 
ing, embattled, with a square tower ; the interior 
consisting of a nave, aisles, and chancel. The rec- 
tor of Bishop Wearmouth for the time being, is 
Lord of the Manor, and holds his courts, the cus- 
toms and copyholds of which, are of the same na- 
ture with the customs and copyholds of the Bishop's 
manors. The celebrated Dr. William Paley,* 
Archdeacon of Carlisle, author of the " Evidences 
of Christianity," and several other justly popular 

school at Greenwich, where he continued three years, and then 
returned to his college, of which he was elected fellow. He 
distinguished hi.iiself as a tutor, and had for a coadjutor Dr. 
John Law, now Bishop of Elphin, by whose recommendation 
Mr. Paley was patronized by his father, Dr. Edmund Law, 
Bishop of Carlisle, who gave him a living in Cumberland, and 
afterwards that of Appleby in Westmoreland. He also obtain- 
ed a prebendal stall in the cathedral of Carlisle, with the living 
of D.ilston. About 1780 he became Chancellor of Carlisle. 
In 17S5 he published his Elements of Moral and Political Phi- 
losophy, in one vol. 4to. since frequently printed in 2 Vols. 
8vo. His next work was Uora; Paulina;, or Observations upon 
the Epistles of St. Paul, in 1 Vol. 8vo. In 1789 the Bishop of 
Ely ottered him the mastership of Je-^us College, Cambridge, 
which he declined ; but in gratitude to his Lordship he dedi- 
cated to him in 1794 his incomparable work on the Evidences 
of Christianity, 2 Vols. 8vo. After this Dr. Paley obtained a 
prebend of St. Paul's from the Bishop of London ; the sub- 
deanery of Lincoln from the: Bishop of that diocese ; and the 
valuable living of Bishop Wearmouth from the Bishop of Dur- 
ham. To the last mentioned prelate he dedicated his book, 
intituled Natural Theology, in one Vol. 8vo. Besides the 
above excellent productions Dr. Paley published several ser- 
mons and tract:,. 

and 



DURHAM. 



331 



and esteemed works, diad rector of Bishop Wear- 
mouth, which is one of the most opulent livings in 
Durham, in the year 1805. Near the church is an 
Hospital, or Alms House, erected and endowed for 
the maintenance of twelve poor men or women, by 
tvo sisters, Mrs. Jane Gibson, and Mrs. Euphemia 
Redman, A. D. 1727. At that time, the produce of 
the endowment amounted to only 3/. annually to 
each person ; but from the increase of the value of 
land, 96/. is now distributed among them every 
year. Another Alms House, for twelve indigent 
men or women, was built and endowed by the Rev. 
Dr. John Bowes, in the year 1725 ; but the endow- 
ment is very small. The latter building stands at 
the end of a square called Wearmouth Green, which 
before the division of the parishes, was used as the 
market-place ; the market has sine*; been removed 
to the High Street, in Sunderlaud. The principal 
structure, however, on the Bishop Wearmouth side, 
and the greatest curiosity in this part of the coun- 
try, is the magnificent Iron Bridge, of a single 
arch, over the Wear, connecting with the new road 
leading to Newcastle and Shields. This noble fabric 
originated with Rowland Burdon, Esq. of Castle 
Eden, who, assisted by Mr. Thomas Wilson, En- 
gineer, invented, and obtained a patent for the plan 
on which it is constructed. " The principles of this 
plan are essentially different from those employed 
in any former bridge, attempted with similar ma- 
terials ; as it does not consist of long ribs of metal, 
approaching towards the centre, and sustained upon 
the abutments, but is constructed with arch-pieces, 
or ' blocks,' as they are technically termed, an- 
swering to the key-stones of a common arch, which 
being brought to bear on each other, gives them all 
the firmness of the solid stone arch ; whilst, by the 
great vacuities in the blocks, and their respective 
distances in their lateral position, the arch becomes 
incomparably lighter than that of stone ; and by the 
tenacity of the metal, the parts are so intimately 
connected, that the accurate calculation of the cx- 
trados and intrados, so necessary in stone arches of 
magnitude, is rendered of much less consequence. 
The blocks are wholly of cast iron ; each of them 
five feet in height, four inches in thickness, two feet 
four inches and a half in length at top, and two feet 
four inches at bottom. The blocks are all cast in 
one piece. The Arch is the segment of a circl 
about 114 feet in diameter, and is 230 feet eight 
inches in its_chord, or span ; it is formed by six ribs, 
each rib cons'isting of 105 blocks, which butt on each 
other in the same manner as the voussoirs of a stone 
arch. The ribs are respectively placed at six feet 
distance, but are connected and braced together, by 
hollow tubes or ' bridles' of cast iron, with project- 



ing shoulders at each end, into which the bolts that 
fasten the bars of malleable iron to the cross-pieces 
of the blocks, are also driven, and made fast by 
keys, or forelocks, that pass through the tails of the 
bolts and shoulders of the bridles. The versed sine, 
or spring of the arch, is only thirty-four feet ; of 
course the spandrils require but little filling up ; 
yet this is effected in the most light and elegant 
manner, by iron circles, placed upon the ribs, and " 
gradually diminishing from the abutments to the 
centre of the bridge : these support the platform, 
which is a strong frame of timber, covered with 
marie, lime-stone, gravel, &c. with foot-paths of 
free-stone, and bounded by a neat iron ballustrade ; 
above which, on each side, is the following inscrip- 
tion, chosen as a pious record of the successful 
completion of the work : ' NIL DESPERAN- 
DUM AUSPICE DEO.'* The entire weight of 
the iron that forms this immense structure, is 260 
tons ; of which 4b are malleable, and 214 cast. The 
piers, or abutments, are piles of almost solid ma- 
sonry, twenty-four feet in thickness, forty-two in 
breadth at bottom, and thirty-seven at top. The 
south pier is founded on the solid rock, and rises 
from about twenty-two feet above the bed of the 
river : on the north side, the ground was not so fa- 
vourable, so that the foundation was obliged to b 
carried ten feet below the bed. The first stone was 
laid on the twenty-fourth of September, 1793; with 
the following inscription, written by Srr Peter Ar- 
den, afterwards Lord Alvanley, Lord Chief Justice 
of the Court of Common Pleas : 



Quo TEMPORE/ 
CIVIVM GALLICORUM AKDOR VESANUS. 

PRAVA JUBENTTUM 
GENTIS TURBAVIT EUROPEAS 

FERRES BELIO. 

Rolandia Burdon Armiger. 

MEI.IORA COLEXS. 

VEDRA: 

RIPAS, SCOPULIS PR;ERUPTAS 

PONTE COKJI;NXIT FLRRFO. 

FE.LICITKR FUNDAMINA POSUIT 

OCTAVO CALENDAS OCTOBRIS, 

ANNO SALUTIS HUMANJE 

M.DCCXCIII. 

GEORGII TERTII XXXIII. 

AUSTANTK 

GuiJEI.MO IlkNRICO L.AMBTON, Ap.MIGERO 

PROVIS'CIALI SUMMO MACISTKO 

FRATRUMUUE SOCIETATIS ARCHITECTONICS 

Er PROCKRUM COMITATUS DUNELMENSIS 

SPECTABILI CORONA, 

FOPUU QUOQUE PI.UHIMA COMITANTE CATERW 
MKNEANT VESTIGIA Diu 
NON IRRITJE 



' The iron-work was cast by Messrs. Walker, of 



* Despair not under the auspices of God. October, in the year 1793, the thirty-third of the reign of 

t Translation: At a time when the mad and depraved j George lit. On this occasion was pre-cnt a worthy company 

ardour of the French disturbed the nations of Europe by war, I of gentlemen ; consisting of William Henry Lambton, Esq. 

Rowland Burdon, E<q. cultivating the milder arts of peace, \ the High Sheriff of the county, part of the Society of Free 

united the shores of the Wear with its rugged rocks, by a Masons, the nobility of Durham, and a vast concourse of 

bridge of iron ; the foundation of which he laid on the 8th of people. Long may its yestiges remain I 



I 



Rotherain ; 



332 



DURHAM. 



Rotheram ; and the arch was turned upon a very 
light but firm scaffolding, so judiciously constructed 
that not any interruption was given to the passage 
of the numerous vessels which navigate the busy 
river of Sunderland. The mode of bracing the ribs 
was so simple and expeditious, thai the whole was 
put together, and thrown over the river in ten days, 
and the scaffolding immediately removed. The 
bridge was opened for general use on the ninth of 
August, 1796, after a very splendid ceremony and 
procession, in which the provincial grand lodge of 
Free Masons in the county of Durham, sustained a 
distinguished part ; Mr. Burdon being for that day 
appointed Grand Master ; the number of spectators 
was computed at 80,000. Thus was this important 
undertaking brought to a successful conclusion ; 
though during the progress of the work, the, malig- 
nant and illiterate had endeavoured to impede its 
execution by direful forebodings. The expence' 
amounted to 27,000/. of this sum Mr. Burdon sub- 
scribed 23,000/. and the remainder was raised by 
subscription among the neighbouring gentlemen. 
To defray this expence, a small toll is levied on all 
passengers, which produces considerably more than 
the interest ; and the overplus being applied to li- 
quidate the principal, when that is effected, the 
bridge is intended to be thrown open. The centre 
of the arch is nearly 100 feet from the surface of the 
river at low water, so that vessels of from 200 to 
300 tons burthen can pass under it without striking 
their masts. The utility of this structure may in 
some measure be estimated from the increased in- 
tercourse it has occasioned between the inhabitants 
of the opposite sides of the river, which is rendered 
strikingly apparent by the receipts taken at the ferry 
below the bridge : these, previously to its erection, 
did not amount to 200/. per annum ; but have since 
progressively increased, and now produce upwards 
of 500/." 

On the Bishop Wearmouth side, but originating 
with the inhabitants of Sunderlaud, is the Sunder- 
land Subscription Library, the foundation of which 
was laid on the sixth of May, 1801. The principal 
room is about thirty-one feet in length, twenty broad, 
and fifteen in height : on the same floor are two 
smaller apartments, for the accommodation of meet- 
ings of the members, committee, &c. The ground- 
floor is disposed into two shops, one of which is 
occupied by the Librarian, as a bookseller. 

The Bolden Buke mentions the borough of Wear- 
mouth ; and a charter of privileges was granted to 
the Burgesses by Bishop Pudsey, about the com- 
mencement of the reign of Richard the First. In 
another grant by the same prelate, dated Hot, are 
the words, De Burgo dc Weremue, alias Were- 
inouth, modo Sunderland juxta mare. Henry the 
Third also granted some privileges to the bur- 
gesses. 

* " Hynden Lodge is nearly midway between Sunderland 
and Ilynilen Bay, on the sonttli." 



As Sunderland was originally a part of Wear- 
mouth parish, it is not mentioned by historians as 
a distinct place, till its increasing commerce forced 
it into notice. Hutchinson observes, that " various 
conjectures have been made touching the derivation 
of the name of Sunderland ; some insisting that it 
j is the ancient Saxon Sondertand, signifying a par- 
ticular precinct, with privileges of its own ; others, 
that the name is expressive of a peninsula, severed 
and separated from the main land j and this latter 
appears the most probable ; for we see, by the an- 
cient records, that in Bishop Hatfield's time, Hyn- 
den* was a place held by Thomas Menvyll for the 
plying of ships : if the sea, in the beginning of the 
! fourteenth century, formed a creek or bay there, the 
land on which Sunderland now stands, would, at 
| high water, be almost totally dissevered from the 
main ; and the deep gullies shew a probability that 
such was the case. The shore has greatly changed 
its figure in the course of 400 years ; and perhaps 
some art was used to exclude the sea from that 
course, when the haven of Sunderland grew jnto 
fame, and the coal trade began upon the Wear." 

The Bishops, in right of their palatine authority, 
leased out the ferry-boats and passage of the river ; 
but no grants of anchorage or beaconage appear to 
have been made prior to the time of Bishop Tun- 
stall, during whose prelacy, it may therefore be sup- 
posed to have obtained consequence. After the 
statute of Henry the Eighth, by which the palatine 
jurisdiction was restrained and mutilated, Sunder- 
land acquired municipal importance, having its of- 
ficers of distinction and police. Desirous of en- 
couraging its rising trade, Bishop Morton, A. D. 
1644, incorporated the burgesses and inhabitants, 
by the title of Mayor, twelve Aldermen, and Com- 
monalty of the Borough of Sunderland, and grant- 
ed the privilege of a market and annual fairs. This 
charter, through the distractions of the times which 
followed, was suffered to expire ; but though the 
corporation lost its authority, the inhabitants con- 
tested tiieir rights in various law-suits, particularly 
touching the herbage of the town moor, and its 
soil ; and it was affirmed, that " Sunderland is an 
ancient borough, &c. that the twelve inferior bur- 
gesses are called stallingers; and that each freeman, 
occupying a house, had commonage for two horses 
and four cows, and each stallinger for one cow ; 
and that the widow of a freeman, or stallinger, being 
an inhabitant, had the like commonage after the 
husband's death." When the regal jurisdiction of 
the Bishops of Durham was curtailed by Henry the 
Eighth, the conservatorship of the river Wear, and 
of the port of Sunderland, was vested in the Crown. 
Since that period, various acts have been passed for 
the preservation and improvement of the river and 
haven, and certain commissioners appointed as con- 
servators. On the restoration of Charles' the Se- 



cond, 



DURHAM. 



303 



cond, that Monarch directed a commission to the 
Mayor, and four senior Aldermen, of Sunderland, 
and to Walter Ettrick, Esq. to administer the oaths 
of supremacy and obedience to the inhabitants ; and 
iu the twentieth year of his reign, lie granted his 
letters patent, for erecting a light-house, piers, &c. 
mid for preventing 1 injury to the harbour, by heav- 
ing out ballast under severe penalties. The harbour 
is formed by two piers, situated on the south and 
north sides of the river : that on the south side is of 
long standing, and has undergone several repairs, 
having been much damaged by the high flood in 
November, 1771. The other has been constructed 
sinee the year 1788, and greatly contributes to the 
security of the shipping, by enabling the ebbing tide 
to acquire greater force to scour away the sand, 
which forms a bar at the entrance of the harbour. 
Formerly, the navigation of the river was much im- 
peded from the want of a sufficient depth of water 
to admit ships of any considerable burthen to put to 
sea with their whole lading ; to remedy which, such 
vessels were obliged to take in part of their cargoes in 
the open road, hy which the keel-men, who bring 
down the coals from the staiths, were often exposed, 
in sudden storms, to danger, and sometimes lost. 
The danger was, indeed, so great, that many of the 
larger vessels belonging to this port were obliged to 
take in their cargoes at Shields, though their voyage 
was not unfrequently delayed by the? bar at the 
mouth of that harbour ; and a fleet of colliers has 
been known to leave Sundcrlaud, deliver their car- 
goes in London, and afterwards return, before ano- 
ther fleet at Shields, which was laden when the for- 
mer departed, had been able to get over the bar. 
These inconveniences are, by the erection of the 
north pier, and other recent improvements, in a 
great measure removed : the tide now flows sixteen 
feet, and admits vessels of 300 and 400 tons bur- 
then. Near the extremity of the north pier, an ele- 
gant circular light-house was built, from the designs 
of Mr. Pickersnel, engineer, in the year 1802. 
Previously to that period, the only signal to enable 
mariners to enter the mouth of the river during the 
night, was a lantern hoisted on the flag-start. The 
wreck of a very valuable vessel at the mouth of the 
harbour in the year J799, gave rise to a subscription 
for the building or a Life Boat; and one, ou a simi- 
lar plan to Mr. Greathead's, was accordingly con- 
structed by Mr. W. Wake, of Monk Wearmouth. 

Sunderland had long been in a state of progres- 
sive improvement with respect to trade ; the aug- 
mentation of which, during the latter part of the 
eighteenth century, was very rapid. The principal 
imports are corn, flour, wines, spirituous liquors, 
timber, tar, deals, flax, iron, &c. The exports are 
coal, lime, glass, glass bottles, grind-stones, and 
copperas. The coal trade is the chief, and fur- 
nishes employment for nearly 5-20 vessels, inde- 

* The Newcastle chaldron is 53 cwt. equal to 134.4 cubic 
VOL. II. NO. 69. 



pendent of the keels, which convey the coal from the 
staiths to the ships, and are 492 iu number. The 
\eels are flat-bottomed'craft, each made to contain 
ten Newcastle chaldrons, (about 2b tons,) and 
marked with nails at the head and stern, that it may 
!je readily known when they have their proper lading 
aboard. " Their name," observes Brand, in his 
History of Newcastle, " .is very ancient, and of 
Saxon origin, for a ship or vessel. On the first ar- 
rival of the Saxons in this Island, they came over 
in three long ships, styled by themselves (as Vers- 
tegan informs us) keeles, or kittles. In the chartu- 
lary of Tynemouth monastery, the servants of. the 
Prior, who wrought in the barges, are called (A. D. 
1378) kelers; an appellation plainly synonimous with, 
our keelmen." 

The Sunderland coal is so remarkable for burning 
slowly, that it is said to make three fires. It is 
chiefly conveyed to the metropolis ; but great quan- 
tities are sent to the different ports of the Baltic, 
and in time of peace, to France and Holland : the 
whole quantity annually exported from Sunderland, 
amounts to about 315,000 Newcastle chaldrons.* 
The number of persons dependant on this trade is 
very great ; several years ago, when the consump- 
tion was by no means so considerable as at present, 
they amounted to upwards of 26,000, on the Wear 
only. The lime is principally sent to Yorkshire, 
Scotland, &c. 

Sunderland was parochially separated from Bi- 
shop Wearmouth, and established as an indepen- 
dent rectory, by an act of Parliament passed in the 
year 1719. The preamble states, " that Sunder- 
land contains 6000 souls and upwards ; and that a 
beautiful Church had been erected, together with a 
vestry room, and dwelling house for the minister.'* 
By this act also, a " vestry, or association of in- 
habitants, was instituted, consisting of twenty-four 
persons, having freehold estates of the yearly value 
of 10/. to be chosen by the parishioners, and to con- 
tinue in office three years ; and so a succession to 
be chosen every three years. In these officers was 
vested a power to make ordinances and bye-laws 
for the regulation of the parish, to be ratified by the 
justices ; to appoint a scavenger, and to assess oa 
estates, real and personal, and stock in trade, a suf- 
ficient sura for the purposes therein mentioned, and 
particularly for paying the rector a yearly stipend 
of 80/. and to the clerk 10/." The Church is a 
spacious and handsome fabric : the east end has a 
particularly light and elegant appearance, the altar 
being placed in a circular recess, surmounted by a 
dome. A new roof was built, a few years ago, un- 
der the direction of Mr. Wilson, the architect of 
Wearmouth Bridge ; theexpence of its construction, 
with nineteen new windows, was defrayed by the 
money obtained for tlie lead that was removed from 
the old roof, which appears to have originally cost 



feet; the London chaldron is equal to about 28 cwt. or .71 



cubic feet. 
4r 



only 



334 



DURHAM. 



only 24/. This building not being sufficiently large 
fof the increasing population of the town, about the 
year 1770, a spacious Chapel of Ease was erected 
under the patronage of John Tbornhill, Esq. a re- 
spectable neighbouring gentleman. Here also are 
several meeting-houses for the Methodists, Presby- 
terians, Independents, Baptists, Quakers, etc. The 
principal Methodist meeting was opened in August 
1753 : it is a handsome building, and capable of 
containing 1500 people. 

Several benevolent institutions exist in different 
parts of the town ; particularly, a Dispensary, esta- 
blished in 1794 ; a Humane Society, begun about 
the year 1790 ; a Charity for decayed seamen, and 
seamen's widows ; a School for girls, founded about 
the year 1770, in pursuance of a bequest made by 
the late Mrs. Donuison ; and a Blue Coat School 
for boys : for the latter a new school-house was 
lately erected by subscription : the expence of edu- 
cation is chiefly defrayed by the money collected 
from communicants at the times of administering the 
sacrament. 

During the war, consequent on the French Revo- 
lution, on the moor eastward of the town, very ex- 
tensive and commodious Barracks were erected, to- 
gether with a guard-room, and other accommoda- 
tions : they are sufficiently capacious for 1800 men, 
independent of officers, &c. 

At a short distance to the south, on the very' edge 
of the sea banks, is a strong chalybeate spring, said 
to be scarcely less powerful than the chalybeate 
spring at Harrowgate. From its situation, it is ex- 
tremely probable, that it will, ere long, be destroyed 
by the sea, the encroachments of which are rapid 
and extensive. 

A large Assembly room and Theatre were built 
here some years ago ; the former under the inspec- 
tion of the directors of the Muster Roll for seamen, 
who use it for their own meetings on particular oc- 
casions : the latter was. the property of the late 3Ir. 
Stephen Kemble . it is a neat edifice, and, when 
full, will contain about 80/. There are two Banks 
iu the town. 

The population of Sunderland, as returned under 
the act of 1811, was 12,289: viz. 5,007 males, and 
7,282 females: the number of houses, 1,684. Of 
Bishop VVearmouth, the population was 7,000 : yiz._ 
3,021 males, and 4,039 females ; the number of* 
houses, 1,120. Of Bishop Wearmouth Pans, the 



* Biscopius was an Englishman, and has the credit of having 
been one of Ihe first persons who introduced the useful and 
ornamental arts into this kingdom. Bishop Lambarde, who 
seems to regard the fine arts with sovereign contempt, thus 
mentions him ; " This man laboured to Rome five several 
tymes, for what other thinge I find not, save only to procure 
pope-holye privileges, and curious ornament for his monas- 
teries, Jarrow and Weremouth ; for first he gotte for theise 
houses, wherein he nourished 600 monks, great liberties ; then 
brought he them home from Rome, painters;- glasiers, free- 
masons, and singers, to th' end that his buildings might so 
shyne with workmanshipe, and his churches so sounde with 



population was 476 : viz. 220 males, and 256 fe- 
males : the number of house*, 44. The population, 
therefore, of the whole place, as appears from these 
returns, was 19,8-25: the houses, 2848. The num- 
ber of persons actually residing here, is thought 
however, to be considerably greater, as no sailors, 
nor others employed on the water, were included in 
the returns. 

The most respectable buildings are in Bishop 
Wearmouth, and the High Street of Sunderland ; 
but the lower part of the latter is much disfigured 
by the stalls and shambles which are suffered to stand 
on each side the high-way. Many of the inhabi- 
tants derive employment from a patent Ropery, 
which was established here in 1795, on the banks of 
the river, about a mile from Bishop-Wearmouth ; 
from the manufacture of bottles, and broad glass ; 
and that of white and brown earthen-ware. Em- 
ployment is also furnished by a copperas manufac- 
tory ; and various free-stone quarries in the neigh- 
bourhood. An amusing scene to a stranger, is dis- 
played by the number of the lower class of inhabi- 
tants, who attend the rising of the tide on the sea- 
shore below the town, and with small hand-baskets 
catch the small coals that are thrown in by the waves. 
Different parties, of, from ten, to thirty, or forty, 
chiefly women and girls, may be seen entering the 
water, and exhibiting considerable dexterity, in ad- 
vancing or receding, according to the strength of 
the waves, which frequently cover them from the 
middle downwards. As the coals are caught in the 
baskets, they are thrown in heaps on the sand, and 
afterwards carried away, either to burn at home, or 
to be sold. Previously to the establishment of the 
various manufactories in the town and neighbour- 
hood, upwards of 500 poor people are said to have 
been engaged at one time in this employment. 

Monk Wearmouth may be considered as holding 
nearly the same relation to Sunderland, as South- 
wark does to London. It is situated on the north 
and opposite banks of the Wear. Its antiquity is 
remote, and is supposed to be connected with a re- 
ligious society, which was established here by the 
same St. Bega, who founded the monasteries at St. 
Bees, in Cumberland, and at Hartlepool in this 
county. This establishment was probably merged in 
a more splendid foundation by Benedict Biscop, or 
Biscopius,* who, in the fourth year of Egfrid, King 
of Northumberland, (A. D. 074,) obtained a grant 

of 



melodyc, that simple souls ravished therewithe, should fantasie 
ot iheime nothinge but heavenly holynes ! In this jolitiu con- 
tinued theise houses, and other by theire example embraced 
the like, till Ilinguar and Aubba, the Danish pyratcs, (A. D. 
870,) weare raised by God to abate their pride, who not only 
fyred and spoyled them, but also almost all the religious houses 
on the northeast coast of this island. And of these thinges 
Bed;i, and others, note him the first author, ascribinge fondlye 
to his praise, that whiche worthelye may be written to his 
discommendation ; for by theise and suche other vanities of 
will worship, Hit' spiritual service of God began first to be 
weakened." Though Lambarde is thus severe upon the con- 
duct 



DURHAM. 



SOS 



of sixty hides of land, on which he built an abbey, 
and dedicated it to St. Peter. The abbey appears 
to have been destroyed by the Danes, in the year 
870. Nothing further occurs relating- to the anti- 
quity of this foundation, nor how it was restored, alter 
rt destruction by the Danes, but that it was restored, 
is evident, from its having beena second time destroy- 
ed during the irruption oi the Scots uivdcr King Mal- 
colm, in the year 1070, when many parts of the 
palatinate were ravaged by fire. The expedition 
of Malcolm was, probably in some degree, planned 
to favour the retreat of Edgar Athelin*-, who, with 
his mother, sisters, and principal adherents, was 
lying in the haven, waiting wind and tide for his 
voyage to Scotland. The Monks, thus expelled 
from Weariuouth, appear to have taken refuge at 
Jarrow, which probably becoming too crowded from 
this increase, sent forth a colony that settled at 
Melross, in Scotland, but soon afterwards returned, 
by the invitation of Bishop Walcher, and was by 
him fixed at Wearmouth. Here, however, the 
Benedictines did not remain ; for Bishop William 
de Carilepho, A. D. 1083, removed them to Dur- 
ham ; and from this period Wearmouth became a 
subordinate cell to the monastery in that city. Its 
annual value, at the dissolution, was only 26/. 9s. %d. 
Several remains of the monastic buildings occur in 
the parts adjacent to the Church, which is an irre- 
gular building, consisting of a tower, nave, and one 
aisle : the tower is thought ta be the most ancient 
of the eleventh century : it is supported on heavy, 
low arches. On the north wall of the chancel is a 
monument oi the Hilton family, to which appears to 
have belonged a mutilated effigy of a man, in a coat 
of mail, with elevated hands, and a sword sheathed 
at his left side. 

The population and buildings of Monk Wear- 
mouth have greatly increased within the last fifty 



duct of the English Saint, (whose followers, from his name, 
obtained the appellation of Benedictines,) posterity must res- 
pect his memory, ;m<l revere the man h<> at such an early 
period, ventured U> combat the prejudices of ignorance, and to 
introduce into his country, useful and elegant improvements. 
According to Bede, soon after Biscopiu* had laid the founda- 
tion of his abbey, he went to France, and engaged a great 
number of jnasons, and brought them over to build his church 
with stone, after the manner of the Romans, which he admired. 
"The Churrh," as we find it stated in StnUt's Chronicle, 
" was dedicated to St. Peter; and he urged the workmen to 
labour so diligently, that in a year after mass was said in it. 
When the work was far advanced, he sent agents in France, 
to procure, if possible, some glass makers; a kind of work- 
men altogether unknowH to the Saxons at that period. His 
agents succeeded, and several of these artizans came over into 
Britain, and not only glazed the windows in the church and 
monastery which Benedict had built, but also instructed the 
Saxons in the art of making glass, for windows, lamps, drink- 
vessels, and other uses." Monk Wearmouth thus had the 
honour of being the earliest glazed Church in F.ngland. Be- 
fore this time, the windows were either latticed, or filled up 
with fine linen cloths, stretched upon wooden frames. 

* SirHebworth Williamson, who married (1794) a daughter 
of Sir James Hamilton, Knt. of Monaghaii/in Ireland, was the 
descendant of an ancient family, seated in Nottingham as early 



years. Th number of inhabitants, Under tin; late 
act, was 5355; of which 10JH were returned us 
residents in the part called Monk Wearmouth town ; 
and 1564 as inhabitants of Monk Wearmouth shore. 
The total number of houses was f>73. The labour- 
ing class of males derive their chief employment 
from ship building, and its dependant branches j 
several yards having long been established here. 

WESTOE.] Westoe, in the parish of Jarrow, ft 
mile and three quarters S. S. E. from South Shields, 
is an exceedingly pleasant village, sitviated on aa 
eminence, and commanding a fine view of the Ger- 
man Ocean. It consists chiefly of one respectable 
street, inhabited by successful maritime adventurers,, 
who have retired hither from active life. 

WHITBURN.] The little village of Whitburn, three 
miles N. by W. from Sunderland, is delightfully 
situated on the southern acclivity of an eminence, 
rising near the sea shore between that town and 
Shields. From its pleasantness, it has become the 
residence of several respectable families. The 
labouring class of its inhabitants are chiefly employ- 
ed in the fishing trade ; great quantities of fine fish 
being caught off the coast here, and conveyed to the 
Sunderland and Shields markets. Several copper 
coins have been found at this place ; of which most 
were of Constantinus, with the sun on the reverse, 
and the words soli invicto comiti : one of them was 
a Maxentius, with a triumphal arch on the reverse, 
and these words, Conservator! urbis : there were 
also one or two of Licinius's, and as many of Max- 
itnianus's. Part of the manor of Whitburn was 
amongst the possessions of the late Sir Hebwortli 
Williamson, Bart. High Sheriff of the county, who 
died here, on the 14th of March, 1810.* 

WHITWELL.] At Whitehill, or WhitweH, in the 
neighbourhood of Chester-Ie- Street, as we learu 
from Hutchinson, is a blast furnace, which makes 



as the time of Edward IV. The sherifjfalty of Durham an 
office in the appointment of the Bishop had been in the Wil- 
liamson family upwards of 80 years. The following sketch of 
Sir ilebwortii's character is from'a funeral sermon, occasioned: 
by his death: " In his private character, no man could pos- 
Mbly exhibit a more affectionate, kind, or generous disposition 
than he always did. A more tmly attentive husband, a more 
warmly attached parent, or a kinder and sinccrer friend, I 
uercr knew. His public character, in the high and important 
station-, which he so long held in this county, he tilled with tlw 
greatest honour to himself, and the most essential advantage to 
his country, always acting from the dictates of an excellent 
heart, of a most able and accomplished mind, with inflexible, 
.and upon all occasions, uncorrupted integrity. No undue in- 
fluence, or interested motives, could ever bias him to act in 
any manner that he conceived incompatible with the real good, 
the dignity, honour, or independence of the county over 
whose civil interests he so ably presided. As a Christian, he 
was sincere in his belief of the Gospel, and rationally influenced 
by its prospects; disclaiming, with that liberty which ever 
formed a prominent trait of his character, the narrow and con- 
tracted prejudices of the bigoted, on the one hand ; and equally 
despising on the other, the temporizing and too popular cant 
of sanctimonious zeal." Besides his residence at Whitburn, 
Sir Ilebworth Williamson had a seat at Monk Wearmouth, 
and another at Millum Castle, in Cumberland. 

iroo-raetal 



330 



DURHAM. 



iron-metal from iron-stone, dugout of pits in the 
neighbouring fells. These fells have been very much 
worked for iron-stone, (supposed by the Danes 
when they were in possession of the kingdom,) as 
appears from the great quantity of scoria, or cinder 
which is found upon the fells, and extends many 
miles westward. The method in those times had 
been to melt the iron-stone with charcoal in a large 
smithy hearth, called a bloomery, and then in ano- 
ther hearth to melt it do\vn again, and reduce it to 
bar-iron for all manner of country uses : and when 
the wood failed, they removed their hearths to where 
it was more plenty ; so that evidently they must have 
blown their bloomery bellows either by hand or with 
horses, or have known the use of air-furnaces, as 
the most scoria or cinder is found upon the high 
grounds, where no water could be obtained. About 
three miles west of Chester, is a place called the 
Old Furnace, where very lately was to be seen the 
bottom of a furnace hearth, according to the usual 
mode of building them now, but of much smaller 
dimensions. They had blown the bellows with a 
water-wheel, as appears by the cut of a water-race 
to convey it to the wheel from an upper part of the 
bourne. On the opposite side of the bourne is a 
place called the Alum Well, from the water having 
a strong aluminous smell and taste. The method 
of making metal is by putting into a large furnace, 
about 34 feet in height, and 12 or 13 wide in the 
broadest part, but contracted at top and bottom, a 
certain number of baskets of coal or cinders, to a 
certain number of boxes of iron-stone, calcined for 
the purpose, and a quantity of lime-stone sufficient 
to flux it : when a sufficient quantity is melted into 
the hearth, or bason, at the bottom of the furnace, 
it is then tapped with an iron bar, and run off into 
metal pigs, or large vessels prepared in loam, (a 
composition of sand, clay, &c.) for different uses, 
such as brewing vessels, soap pans, engine pumps, 
cylinders, cannon of all sizes ; and the iron-stone 
and coal used here, are allowed by the best judges 
at his Majesty's Warren at Woolwich, to make the 
strongest and soundest cannon that are proved 
there. 

WINDLESTONE.] At Whidlestone, in the parish 
of St. Andrew's Auckland, a mile and a half W. N. 
W. from Rushy Ford, is a seat of Sir John Eden,' 
Bart, whose ancestors were resident here in the time 
of Queen Elizabeth. The mansion is situated on a 
gentle ascent, with an eastern aspect : it contains 
rarious antiquities, forming a small though valuable 
collection. 

WINL.VTON.] Winlaton, some mention of which 
has been made in our account of Swalwell, is situ- 
ated on a high ridge of land, inclining to the Der- 
went and Tyne rivers, 5|; miles from Gateshead. 
Previously to the introduction of the iron works, it 
only consisted of a few deserted cottages, but now 
it contains about 490 houses, and 3063 inhabitants ; 
most of whom are employed in the manufacture of 
nails, &c. Winlaton mill was originally built for 



grinding corn ; but having been appropriated to the 
use of the iron works in 1591, has since given rise 
to a pleasant village of the same name. The chief 
branches carried on here, arc the making and grind- 
ing edge tools, manufacturing files, and slitting 
bars of iron into long, narrow pieces, proper for 
making nails. Here is a private chapel, lor the use 
of the families connected with the iron works. 

WINSTON.] The village of Winston lies 6{milos 
E. S. E. from Barnard Castle. It occupies the 
ridge of a hill rising from the Tees, over which is a 
noble stone Bridge of one arch, erected in the year 
1704, from a design by the late Sir T. Robinson. 
The span is 111 feet. Here the Tees quits the 
romantic scenes which had accompanied it from its 
source, and, instead of hurrying its waters over 
craggy rocks, and thickly wooded banks, flows into 
a level country, and assumes a more placid, though 
scarcely less beautiful, character. The view from 
the Rectory house is exceedingly fine. The manor, 
which belonged to the late Duke of Bridgewater, 
was, in the reign of Henry the Fifth, parcel of the 
estate of the Scroops of Masham, of whom Henry, 
Lord Scrope, was beheaded for treason against that 
monarch. 

At .this place, as far back as the year 1 708, in 
consequence of a suggestion by the Bishop of Dur- 
ham, a friendly society for the aged poor was esta- 
blished ; the object of which is to promote among 
them the due observance of the Sabbath, the study 
of the Scriptures, and of other good books, and 
also frugality and good neighbourhood. The mem- 
bers of the society, all of whom are upwards of 
sixty years of age, meet every Sunday evening at 
each others houses, for religious improvement, and 
they make it a general rule, to lay by every week, 
something of their earnings, to accumulate till the 
end of the year ; allotting, however, a tenth part 
thereof, and of the benefit they derive from the 
society, towards the relief of any of their necessitous 
neighbours, who, though not belonging to the 
society, should appear to deserve their charitable 
assistance. Amongst various other regulations of 
this society, the following appear to be particularly 
deserving of notice. 

The subscription, from each member, is one 
penny per week. Those of sixty years of age, and 
under seventy, at the end of the year, receive 
double the amount of their subscription ; those of 
seventy, and under eighty, receive treble the amount 
of their subscription ; those of eighty, and under 
ninety, receive four times the amount of their 
subscription 4 and so in proportion for every in- 
crease of ten years. Honorary members are ad- 
mitted by subscribing half a guinea or a guinea, 
annually, or not less than two-pence per week. 
The honorary members thus have it in their power, 
not only to enlarge, and improve the means of as- 
sisting the poorer members of the society, but 
to contribute to the amusement and instruction of 
their own children, and servants, by distributing 
7 amongst 



DURHAM. 



amongst them the tracts of the Society for Promoting 
Christian Knowledge, and other moral and religious 
publications. Such of the members as attend church 
an- provided gratis with a cheap but comfortable 
Sunday dinner at the Rectory. The Rev. T. Bur- 
'gess, who was translated from this Rectory, a few 
years ago, to the see of St. David's, was very ac- 
tive in his attentions to, and support of, this truly 
benevolent institution ; the plan of which we have 
noticed at some length, in the hope, that it may be 
followed in different parts of the island. A society 
of a similar nature has been instituted at Bishop's 
Auckland, by the Bishop of Durham, who has the 
Sunday dinner provided for them, and supplies the 
extra food, without the contributions of any hono- 
rary members. 

WINYARD HALL.] Winyard Hall, the scat of the 
Tempest family, situated at a short distance from 
(Jreatham, was, in the reign of Edward the First, 
the property of Sir Hugh Capel, Knt. from whom 
it passed, through various families, to John Tem- 
pest, Esq. maternal ancestor of the present owner. 
The mansion, which has been rebuilt on the old 
foundation, now forms an elegant residence. The 
walks and pleasure grounds are exceedingly plea- 
sant, and, by the intermixture of wood and water, 
the scenery, from some points of view, is uncom- 
monly beautiful. 

WITTON CASTLE.] On the south bank of the 
Wear, opposite to the village of Witton-le-Wear,* 
five miles W. N. W. from Bishop's Auckland, stands 
Witton Castle, formerly the baronial mansion of 
the Lords de Eures, or Evers, who held it of the 
See of Durham by military service. From them it 
has passed through various possessors to the Hop- 
per family. The old Castle, built about the year 
1410, was burnt down, a few years ago, while 
undergoing a thorough repair. The present man- 
sion is a handsome and convenient residence. 

WOLSINGHAM.] The irregular little market-town 
of Wolsingham, sixteen miles S. E. by E. from 

* The Rev. John Farrer, Vicar of Slanwix, in Cumber- 
land, who died at Carlisle in the year 1809, was master of the 
school at - Witton-le-Wear. He was a man deservedly res- 
pected as a teacher of youth, and parish minister; the former 
of which he became when very young. He was master of the 
Grammar School at Bishop's Auckland, and for some timc.during 
which lie took holy orders, he performed part of the parish 
duty. He was appointed to the perpetual curacy of Witton-le- 
Wear, and of Hamsterley, both in the vicinity of Bishop's 
Auckland, by J. Cuthbcrt Esq. At the former place he raised 
and kept a reputable school; and not only improved his 
scholars in literary knowledge, but in moral and religious 
principles : a great number of them he had the satisfaction to 
see respectably situated in life. In 1793 he was appointed by 
the Bishop of Durham to the rectory of Sunderland, and in the 
following year he resigned his school and retired to the cure 
of one ot the most populous villages in England. After re- 
siding there about a year, he exchanged this living for that of 
Stanwix, near Carlisle, which Dr. Paley had vacated on beina 
appointed to Bishop-Wearmouih, to which nomination -the 
Patron the Bishop of Carlisle yielded in favour of the BMiop 
of Durham. There he passed the remainder of his life in 
VOL ii. NO. 69. 



Stanhope, and 259-*- N. N. W. from London, is 
very agreeably situated in the vale of the Wear, on 
a point of land formed by the confluence of that 
river and the Weserow. The Church which pre- 
sents nothing remarkable, stands on a rising ground 
Near it are some remains of a considerable building, 
surrounded by a deep moat, supposed by some 
writers, to have been part of a monastery, founded 
by Henry de Pudsey. Hutchinson, however, refers 
them to the ancient manor house of the Bishops. 
The views down the Wear from the hill above Wol- 
singham, embrace a very extensive and beautifully 
diversified tract of country. Between this town and 
Stanhope, the commencement of the lead district i* 
every where intimated by large parcels of lead lying 
near the sides of the road, and from the blue un- 
wholesome vapours arising from the smelting mills 
in Bollihope. 

On Bollihope Common, in this neighbourhood, 
in the year 1740, was found a Roman altar, with an 
inscription, to this purport : Silvano invicto sacrum 
C. Tctius Veturius Alicianiis pro?. Ala? Sebosiene, 
ob aprum eximioe forma; capturn, quern multi ante- 
cessores ejus prxdari non potuerunt. Votum soW 
vens lubenter posuit.f 

WOODLANDS.] -Between three and four miles 
N. W. from Lanchester, stands Woodlands, a name 
very happily conferred on the seat of Thomas White, 
Esq. by whose exertions several hundred acres of a 
dreary and bleak tract of country have been covered 
with flourishing woods. The land was purchased of 
the commissioners appointed under an act for in- 
closing the common lands of this parish. The plan- 
tations comprehend both forest and fruit trees, many 
hundreds of thousands of which are now growing 
on the estate. For his attention to planting, Mr. 
White has been honoured with several silver and geld 
medals by the Society of Arts. The mansion is a 
neat structure, of his own building : before it, is a 
pleasant lawn, and some small pieces of water, the 
terminations of which are so judiciously concealed 



tranquillity, but never lost sight of the interests of education, 
which he exercised in a manner beneficial both to masters and 
scholars. He gave gratuitous instruction to the young people 
of his neighbourhood, and drew up little elementary iracts tor 
the use of beginners in Greek and Latin, and in English,- which 
have been distributed through various seminaries, from Eton 
College to the Sunday Schools. He provided masters- for the 
school at Witton, which he had the satisfaction to see in a 
flourishing state, previously to his death. He formed aii asso- 
ciation of Protestant school masters throughout Durham, Nor- 
thumberland, Cumberland, and Westmoreland, to raise a pro- 
vision for infirm and decayed members, which became esta- 
blished at Newcastle upon Tyne, of which he was elected 
President. His scholars out of respect for him raised a monu- 
meii' to him in the village church of Witton-le-Wear. II 
married a daughter of Sir William Richardson, Bart. 

\ Translation C. Tetius Veiiirius Meciamis, governor of 
Als Sebonisene, in consequence of a vow which he made, has 
with heartfelt pleasure raised this monument to the memory of 
the invincible Silvanus, who slew a' boar of uncommon beauty, 
which many of his predecessors had hunted in vain. 

4 by 



038 



DURHAM. 



by woods, as to excite the idea of considerable ex- 
tent. The aqueduct which supplied the station at 
Lanchester runs through the grounds. 

WYNCH BRIDGE.] At a short distance from Mid- 
dlcton, a little market town, already described, is 
the ford into Yorkshire, call Step Ends, where 
many accidents have happened in crossing the river 
Tees, which is at times very rapid ; old and young, 
male and female, being obliged to wade through it, 
though rising above the waist. Wynch Bridge, 
constructed with wood, and suspended on two iron 
chains, which reach from side to side, and are se- 
cured in the rocks, is two miles higher up the river. 
It is sixty-three feet in length, though scarcely more 
than two feet broad : its height above the river, 
which falls in repeated cascades, is fifty feet. The 
tremulous motion of the bridge, and the dashing of 
the waters beneath, excite considerable terror in the 
passenger. 

AGRICULTURE.] In Durham, the farms are gene- 
rally of a middling size, few of them exceeding 200 
acres. The largest portion of each farm is gene- 
rally appropriated to tillage ; but towards the west- 
ern extremity of the county, the whole is applied to 
pasture. The farm houses are in general well 
situated, and commodious ; but the fold-yards are 
too few, and small ; and, for want of granaries, the 
corn is frequently threshed before it is dry. Thresh- 
ing machines, and machines for the drill husban- 
dry, have been lately introduced, with considerable 
effect. 

SOIL.] The Palatinate comprises a great variety 
of soil. Granger, in his General View of the Agri- 
culture of Durham, observes, that, " near the river 
Tees, and in some spots bordering on the other rivers 
and brooks in this county, the soil is loamy, or a 
rich clay ; at a farther distance from these rivers and 
brooks, the soil is of a poorer nature, commonly 
termed water-shaken, with here and there spots of 
gravel interspersed ; but often are of a small extent, 
the middle of none of them being half a mile from 
clay. The hills between the sea, and an imaginary 
line drawn from Barnard Castle, on the Tees, to 
Allen's Ford, on the Derwent, are for the most part 
covered with a dry loam, the fertility of which varies 
in proportion to its depth : from this line westward, 
the summits as well as the sides of the hills are 
moorish wastes." 

MANURE.] In Durham, the manures are chiefly 
lime, and the produce of the fold-yard ; and though 
abundance of sea- weed might be collected on the 
sea coast, and, properly applied, would constitute 
valuable manure, the tanners in general neglect, 
or remain unacquainted with, its excellent proper- 
ties. 

PRODUCE.] From its diversity of soil, the pro- 
duce of this county is necessarily various. -The 
usual rotation of crops is, after summer fallow, 
wheat, oats, beans, or peas ; or in lieu of the three 
last, occasionally a crop of broad clover. On some 
few spots of gravelly soil, turnips and barley are 



grown, in almost perpetual succession, a crop of 
clover being sometimes interposed. The produce 
of wheat on good land, is from twenty to thirty 
bushels per acre ; on inferior land, from ten to 
twenty bushels per acre ; the produce of barley i* 
from thirty to forty bushels ; of oats, from twenty 
to forty. 

WOOD LANDS.] Notwithstanding the pleasant- 
ness of this county, the woodlands are not of any 
considerable extent ; and they are chiefly confined tt> 
the parks and seats of the nobility. The bauks of 
the rivers and brooks, however, particularly in the 
vicinity of the city of Durham, are fringed with wood 
of long growth, and of much value. 

WASTE LANDS.] In the western parts of Dur- 
ham, the waste lands are supposed to occupy nearly 
130,000 acres. In the lower parts, many hundred 
acres have been inclosed, and cultivated, within the 
last forty years. The common fields, excepting in 
the western district, are but few ; the lands belong- 
ing to townships having been principally inclosed 
soon after the restoration. What are termed the 
" water shaken" grounds cover a very large pro- 
portion of the county : those bordering on the Tees, 
and other rivers, are drained by means of wide 
ditches, provincially called 'stells.' " In other 
parts," observes Granger, " where springs burst 
from the sides of the hills, endangering the ground 
below, oblique cuts are made to intercept the water ; 
and conduits of stone, or brick, laid along the bot- 
tom of them to convey it to a main conduit, which 
carries it down the hill : the earth is then thrown in 
again, and the surface levelled for the purpose of 
culture." Sometimes, in the flat grounds, under - 
drains are made ; and when half filled with pebble 
stones, are levelled again with earth and turf. 

CATTLE.] The Durham cattle are thought to be 
not inferior to any in England, either for form, 
weight, produce of milk and butter, or quickness of 
fattening. The sheep, are generally large, and 
covered with long wool. Those denominated the 
Tees-water breed are the most celebrated ; being, 
according to Cully's Observations on Live Stock, 
the largest in this island. " These sheep," he ob- 
serves " weigh from 25 to 45 pounds per quarter; 
some have been fed to 50 ; and one in particular 
was killed, which weighed 62 pounds, 10 ounces, 
per quarter, averdupois a circumstance never be- 
fore heard of in this island. The ewes of this breed 
generally bring forth two lambs each season, some- 
times three, four, and even five. As an instance of 
extraordinary fecundity, it deserves to be mentioned, 
that one of these ewes, at the age of two years, 
brought forth four lambs at one time ; the next sea- 
son five, both within 1 1 months." The sheep in 
Weardale are small ; the quarters seldom weighing 
more than from 14 to 18 pounds each; the meat, 
however, is finely flavoured. The estimation in 
which the horned cattle of Durham are holden, may 
be further seen, by the following remarkable list of 
the prices which were given, at the sale of stock, 



beloui 



ing 



DURHAM. 



330 



belonging to Mr. Colling, of Ketton, in the month 
of October, 18JO: 

Hull*. 

Comet, six years old, sold for 1000 guineas, pur- 
(T.nisod by four eminent gentlemen Farmers and 
Jireederst, on the banks of the Tees. 

Petrarch, 2 years old* 305 

Major, 3 ditto 200 

May Duke, 3 ditto 145 

Alfred, 1 ditto 110 

Duke, 1 ditto 405 

And five others of inferior note, from 50 to 70 
guineas each. 

Bull Calves. 

Cecil 170 

Young Favourite 140 

George 120 

one 20 guineas one 60 

one 50 guineas one 15. 



Lily, 3 

Countess, 9 
Laura, 4 
Lady, 14 
Celina, 5 
Peeress, 5 
Magdalene 5 
Ca*halene 8 
Daisy 6 
Johanna, 4 
Beauty 



Cows. 

years old 410 

ditto 

ditto 

do 

do 

do. 

do 

do : 

do 

do..., 



400 
210 
266 
200' 
170 
170 
150 
150 
130 
UO 



And five others, from 45 to 83 guineas, of inferior 
note. 

Heifers. 

Young Countess, 2 years old 206 

Dticliess 183 

Charlotte, 1 year old 136 

Lucy, 1 do 132 

Young Laura, 2 do 101 

Shock, 3 do 105 

Johanna, 1 do 35 



* The respective prices were all in guineas. 



Hnifer Calves. 

One sold for 106 guineas, one for 75 guineas, 
two for 50 guineas each, and one for 25 guineas. 

TENURES AND LEASES.] It is estimated, that 
about one third of the laud in this county is of ec- 
clesia&tical tenure : the remainder is possessed by 
various proprietors : the leases seldom exceed six 
years ; and are too frequently rendered of little 
value by injudicious restrictions. The leases held 
of the See of Durham are for longer terms ; gene- 
rally for lives, or for twenty-one years, renewable 
every seven years, on payment of an arbitrary 
fine. 

FAIRS.] Barnard Castle. Easter Monday, Wed- 
nesday in Whitsun week, St. James's day, July 25, 
for cattle, horses, and sheep. 

Bishop's Auckland. Ascension day, for horned 
cattle, swine, and all sorts of wares ; day following, 
sheep and horses ; Corpus Christi, ditto ; three dayt 
before October 10, ditto. 

Cornhiil. December 6, for mercantile goods, and 
shepherds' curs. 

Darlington. Easter Monday, Whitsun Monday, 
Monday fortnight after Whitsun Monday, Novem- 
ber 22, for cattle, horses, and sheep. 

Durham. March 31, three days ; first day horn- 
ed cattle ; second day, sheep and hogs ; third day, 
horses. Whit-Tuesday, September 15, the same. 

Hartlepoot. May 14, August 21, October 9, No- 
vember 27, for toys and fish. 

Norham. Third Tuesday in May, and second in 
October, cattle and pedlary. 

SedgeJie/d.Mny 12. 

Stockton. January 27, July 18, and Monday af- 
ter October 13, for cattle, sheep, toys, and fish. 

Wolsingham. May 18, September 21, for linen 
cloth. 

ROADS.] The public roads in this County are 
generally good ; but the cross-roads chiefly be- 
longing to the townships are in many parts ex- 
tremely narrow, irregular, and dangerous. 



TABLE 



340 



DURHAM. 



I ^l 3 "! I 

g" s- 

CO 

1-1 


Gateshead 


Durham Moor 

Plansttorlh 

Chester-le-Street 
Birtley 


r> d- ** 

^^ 
to 


>oo 
?"5 

fr y 
1 e 


* 
^H 

n > 
SO W 

2 ' 

r 1 e. P 


Ol 'O 4* t Co<-- to t* ~~ 


en 


*" 


to to 


Co 

d * 


$*&&. 


-4, CO 


o 


d 


"J 
i^' 





^*^*H +* H~ ^ 


I 


to 


O) OJ N} 


53 

g ^ . 




JM* 


IOFT to DURHAM. (N. N. W.) 


TANCES FROM THE COMMENCEMENT OP THE JOURNEY; 

the letters R. and L. are the abl 


a 

c 

i 

: 

1 

tt 

IT 

t 
2_ 
g~ 
3 

6ft 



S 
Z 

Z 




OURNEYS THROUGH THE PRINCIPAL TURNF 


K^*^ 


r s-gg EC s- 

I, ftt^ a:? 3 ^ 
K fi * > 

p P"^ r- 

JT 1 ^' "? 
H 

^5= 2 

f r 
g ~ 

E> ^ 
fp 


o: Scarborough. 
Inn Lion and Cock. 
R. Ravensworth Castle, Sir M. T. Liddell, Bart. 


B 

P 

! 

"l 

g 

JiT 

n 

V 

M 




Inns Queen's Head, Red Lion, Wheat-sheaf. 
VM to GATESHEAD. (N.) 


i J D D "i D *i 

T 1 IT 

r| * ' iP 

SS 3 H 

.2 " E. 

<' D" 

^ 

a_ 
5' 

?1 

5 


llllilflll^?^! 




S B 
3-0. 
T re 
s 3> 


|ff! 


S* D- 

n ft 

' ^ 


c 

>3 
e 
n 


M 

y 


" g. g S" "-< iS ', "* S 


Hi ^H 5" S* I. <? 3- "* U .>! "^ -^ 


S, Z 


W 

M 


O 


s a * s" 




to 




3 


8* 


1 If^ 3 


gfi 





2 1 


^* 





. g C.^ g ^ 


o> 


sL 








C ^ " *c 


2-g 


* 


a "> 





o 


<3 ! -3 

V v ^ 


W 








is 

SO 


3" *"* Mt 

<jq 


n =u 


Z 


H 


| 


(/J 
So 


*. (0 to to CO COCOK;CO~ (0 - 


r 1 


W rfb. 


CO w 


*h 


M to K, 


CO 10 W 


CO-^J JO 4k <J 


so 


S 


ft 





B t-H-w-<* H rt- W-NH 


B 
O 


*** 


*'"** 




H * M *" 


BH*V> 4H~**- 


JH^^l.t.MKf-h 


O 


I 1 r\ 


S- 


M 


















Co tOtCtOfO ^~^-^- 
tO CCO-COO -->* 00 C- 4 





O V| 


$#< 


J>U 
tin 


1 g 

03 >|u4^ui4>f*- 


tS ^42" ~^ 


>. Co O Ol *J 


^ 


Z 





y; 




n 














en 


5 


-J 


S 










,_^ 






_! 


f . ?[l 

C jO "^ 

c e J o rt 

n t -i rfl 

S =.^3 
"** "^ , l ^~* 


^ 

o 

en 

en 

O 

o 


3 

(SI 

1 
P 

-C 
(/> 


R.-Windleston 


ta 

3 
^ 

&> 
5" 


o 

0| 

o 

C 
so 


1 



I 

M 

ft 


tr r^rr so 

S w 
KIT cr 

JOS J^ O 
10 O ^ 


'LE <o SOUTI 
R. Streatlam C 


R? 

B 

S- 


n 

I 



THE COUNT 


S r='_, 
c. P- B 


B 


n 
& 


&p 


o 


1 


ET , 
K 


it 1 


tf\ 


O 

o_ 


H 

H 





a 3 

& g 

a- 5 

t! >c - S 1 


j*-x 


H 
Ei. 
cr 


M 

D. 
O 

a 


B 


-2 : . 


t- 1 

O 

3 


HH ^ W 

n '~r' "1 

c-. =-. 


i 1 p 

o 

* co 


i 

c 
w 


) PLACE 


nj 

G 


^1 o * 


^ 


^ 


C3 
v 


S 


- 21 




g 


en 




M 


t I 


^ fr 




CT 


p. 


^_! 


^ 




^ 


5- ^ 




A 





1-1 ~ 








,n 


*-^ 






3 '^, 




s< 




O 2 




er 












o S 
3. 




3 




C i 




H 

;* 










1 






E. 




6--" 














r> 






* 





DURHAM. 



341 



7. STOCKTON to SUNDERLANU. (S.) 






Norton 


i 


4 






Billingham 


i 


*| 






Wolveston 


2 


4i 






Sheraton 


6i 


11 






Shotton 


4| 15f 


R. Crow, Esq. 




Easington 


H 


18 






Dalton le Dale 


3 


21 






Hyhope 

Bishop Wearmouth 
Sunderland 


3J 24f 
2* I 27 
"i 27* 


R. Seaham, Sir R. Milbanks, Bart. 
Inn Bridge. 
Inns George, White Lion. 




8 STAINDROP to EARLS BRfDGE, by BARNARD CASTLE 


and 


WOLS1NGHAM. (N.) 




Barnard Castle 


5* 


5| 


R. Streatlam, Earl of Strathmore. 




West Pitts 




12i 


R. Lynsach, J. Coates, Esq. 




(Cross the Wear) 










Wolsingham 


7 


l&i 


Inn Queen's Head. 




(Cross Wokinghum 










Common) 










Gold Hill 


6 


25| 






Muggleswick 


24 


28 






Earls Bridge 


1 


29 




9. EGGLESCLIFFE to DURHAM, by STOCKTON. (N.N.W.) 


Stockton 


4 


4 


Inns Black Lion, Red Lion. 




(Cross the ffartburn 










Beck) 










Halfway House 


1* 


f 






Norton 


1 


<H 






(Cross the Billing- 










iuim Beck) 











Thorpe 


21 


M 


R.-Winyard Hall, Sir H. T. Vane, Bart 




Layton Chapel 


IT 


12} 






Sedgefield 


2} 


14| 


L.- Hardwick Hall, M. Russel, Esq. 




(Cross the Skern) 










Black Gate 


Si 


20 


R. Coxhoe Hall, J. Fusler, Esq. 




Four mile Bridge 


1* 


21j 






Shinclit'fe 


2 


23| 






(Cross the Wear) 










Durham 


2 


25^ 


Inns Queen's Head, Red Lion, Wheatsheaf. 



TABLE OF DISTANCES. 

The Namet of the respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square where both meet gives the distance. 





Barn. 
15 


ird Castle Distant 






Bishop's Auckland 


057 








18 


12 


Darlingtc 


)n . .. 243 








24 





19 


Durham 


260 








42 


24 


26 


17 


Hartlepo 


Dl 261 








5 


9 


14 


19 


33 


Stai 










29 


25 


11 


22 


13 


25 


Stockton 248 






South Shields 


44 


36 


39 


20 


28 


39 


34 South Shields 283 






Sunderland 


37 


23 


32 


13 


21 


32 


27 7 Sunderland 275 








14 


9 


21 


15 


32 


14 


32 35 28 Wolsingham 261 







YOL. 11. NO. 70. 



ESSEX, 



342 



ESSEX. 



GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY. 



THE County of Essex bounded by Suffolk 
and Cambridgeshire on the north, by Hert- 
fordshire and Middlesex on the west, by the Thames 
on the south, and by the sea on the east composes 
part of that tract of country on the eastern side of 
England, which is the largest piece of level ground 
in the whole island ; there being not one high emi- 
nence, or rocky ridge, throughout this, and several 
adjoining counties. Essex, however, is not alto- 
gether flat, since there are many gentle hills and 
dales in it ; the country rising, and presenting a 
continued inequality of surface, to the north-west, 
whence most of the rivers derive their source. The 
southern and eastern hundreds present the most 
level tracts. The sea coast forms a series of isles, 
And peninsulas, deeply cut in by arms of the sea, 
and exhibiting evident marks of the violence of that 
element. The coast is lined by extensive salt 
marshes, of which the greater part are embanked. 
The banks of the Thames, and the lower part to- 
wards the sea, are also low and marshy. This 
county is proverbially unhealthy ; but, in reality, 
only a small part of it is so, as the middle and north- 
ern districts are well known to enjoy a fine dry soil, 
and a wholesome clear air. The hundreds of Essex, 
which are on the south coast, from their low and 
marshy situation, and from their being exposed to 
the easterly winds, and sea fogs, are by no means 
healthy, and intermitting fevers frequently arise 
from these causes. The greater part of the land in 
this county is enclosed, and rendered highly pro- 
ductive by agricultural exertion. Its extent, from 
east to west, is estimated at 60 miles ; and from 
north to south, at about 50 ; its circumference has 
been generally computed at 225 miles : according to 
the last population returns, it contains 1525 square 
miles, or 976,000 acres. 

FORESTS.] There is strong presumptive evidence 
that the whole or greater part of Essex was an- 
ciently one extensive forest. Although many parls 
must have been cleared, for stations, roads, and cul- 
tivation, in the time of the Roman government, in 
the reign of King Stephen the greater part of the 
ountry was either forest, or subjet-t to lores! laws. 
8 



A large tract in the north-east part of the county 
was disafforested, and cultivated in his reign ; and 
the remaining part, north of Stane Street, by King 
John. Henry the Third, in the 12th of his reign, 
ordered circuits of Waltham Forest to be taken, in 
order to ascertain its extent and value ; and about 
the same time had large tracts cleared for the 
plough. Edward the First, in the 26th and 28th 
years of his reign, followed the same plan ; yet a 
great part of the forest still remained; and Paul 
Viscount Bayning, with many other gentlemen of 
the county, purchased of the crown, and disafforest- 
ed many parts of it. By these means, and the de- 
cisions of several subsequent monarchs,- the boun- 
daries of the forest were contracted, and became 
less injurious to the public. During the time the 
forests belonged to the crown, and were under the 
local government of foresters and stewards, the 
person whose estate was contiguous, was repeatedly 
oppressed. This grievance was in some degree re^ 
dressed in the reign of King John, from whom the 
Barons wrested the Charter of Forests, when many 
of these royal districts were disafforested, and de- 
prived of their oppressive privileges ; and more 
lenient regulations were adopted in the government 
of those remaining. Epping and Hainault Forests 
still retain the name, and feed a few deer, &c. The 
office of Chief Forester for Essex was considered 
very honourable, and was generally conferred on 
some illustrious person. The stewardship was also 
an office of great consequence, and in general be- 
stowed on a nobleman. The De Veres, Earls of 
Oxford, enjoyed it for many generations ; but Ed- 
ward the Fourth deprived them of it, in conse- 
quence of their adhering to the House of Lancaster. 
Henry the Seventh restored it by grant to John 
Earl of Oxford. The Steward had power to de- 
pute a Lieutenant, one riding forester, and, three 
yeomen foresters, in the three bailiwicks of the fo- 
rest. He also possessed many lucrative privileges, 
was Keeper of llavering-at- Bower, and of the 
house and park there. 

RIVERS.] The rivers in this county are very nu- 
merous ; for besides the Thames, which washes it 

to 



m 

mmto&.l&l u *<H~t*2L%:* <k ,&3fi$-y&g* & 



it It .-- .-, V Sf ?* /V^d V 

rffjC*i*-l.''S 'iS^slCv r 
SBf^J'Sit^Uii 




ESSEX. 



3J3 



tcf the south, there are the Stour, the Lea, the Stort, 
the Coin, the Chelmer, and the Black Water. The 
Stour, which rises in the north-west part of Essex, 
runs south-east, and separating 1 this county from 
..Suffolk, falls into the German ocean at Harwich. 
The Lea rises in the north-west part of the county, 
and running almost directly south, separates Essex 
from the counties of Hertford, and Middlesex, and 
falls into the Thames at Blackwall. The Coin also 
rises in the north-west part of Essex, and running 
south-east to Halsted, runs parallel to the Stour, 
and passes by Colchester, where, forming an angle, 
it takes its course south-south-east, and falls into 
the German ocean. The Chelmer likewise rises in 
the north- west part of Essex, and passes to Chelms- 
ford, where it forms an angle, and running directly 
east, receives the Black Water, and falls into the ; 
German ocean, near Maiden. The Black Water , 
rises within two or three miles of the source of the [ 
Chelmer, and running nearly parallel to it, passes ' 
by Braintree, and tails into the Chelmer at Maiden. ! 
The sea and rivers yield the inhahitants plenty of . 
fish of all sorts, as seals, plaice, flounders, pike, 
perch, maids, lobsters, eels, and large quantities of j 
fine oysters, of which those of Colchester sent to ! 
London in barrels, are in the greatest request. 

PLANTS.] The most important plant cultivated 
in Essex, is the saffron, crocus sativus verus au- 
tumnalis, which is extensively grown near Walden, 
from thence called Saffron Walden. This curious 
plant rises from a bulbous root ; and the usual way 
of propagating it, is, by planting the bulbs, of which 
every year produces a new succession, in trenches, 
at about five inches distant ; they produce only 
leaves the first year, but in September or October 
ot the following year they flower. It has narrow 
grass-like leaves, that have a white line running 
along the middle ; the stalk is short and undivided, 
and bears on the top a purplish blue flower, deeply 
cut into six segments. In the middle of the flower 
arises, among the stamina, a whitish pistil, divi- j 
ded at the top into three chives or fleshy filaments, j 
the lower part of which is slender and pale coloured, j 
the upper broader, of a deep orange red, and very j 
finely indented about the sides ; the flowers being j 
gathered in a morning before sun-rise, and the | 
chives, which are the saffron, being picked out, are 
dried in sieves by a gentle fire, or on a small kiln 
made for that purpose, and then pressed together 
into cakes. At the end of October, when the flow- ! 
wing season is over, the bulbs are taken out of the 
ground, and hung up in a dry place, and in spring j 
they are put into the earth again. The produce of j 
this plant i so great, that though the quantity of 
saffron yielded by a single flower is extremely small, 
yet an acre of gnmiiu will produce eighty or a hun- 



Acarmi Calamus. Tlio sweet smelliiii; Hag or Calamus ; 
in Hie Gravel-pit pond opposite Hurls, Wood- 



| dred weight of wet saffron, which will weigh 20 
: pounds when it has been dried. The saffron pro- 
duced here, is greatly superior to that brought from 
i abroad, and may be distinguished from it by its 
'. blades being broader. It should be chosen fresh, 
|.not above a year old, in close cakes, neither dry, 
nor yet very moist, tough and firm in tearing, of a 
high, fiery colour, and of the same colour within 
as on the outside. 

The coriander, teasel, and carraway, are also 
cultivated, to a considerable extent in this comity. 
Of these, the seeds are sometimes sown together 
early in the spring, upon a strong old lay, once 
ploughed, and often prove very profitable to (lie 
proprietors. The mode of cultivating these plants 
is rather singular, the farmer giving a moiety of 
the profits to a labourer, for hoeing and managing 
the crops. The farmer provides the land, ploughs 
it, pays all parish rates, and also for the seed. The 
labourer sows ft, keeps it clean by frequent boeings, 
cuts, threshes, and prepares it for the market, when 
the produce is equally divided. This connection in 
general lasts three years, sometimes longer. " In 
the first," ns we learn from Grigg's General View, 
" the several seeds come up, and when of sufficient 
growth, are set out with a hoe ; and the coriander, 
which is annual, is ripe before harvest, and produces 
a return of from ten to fourteen hundred weight 
an acre : on the second year, the teasel, most of 
which will run now, yields a load., or six score staffs, 
of fifty heads each staff; and the carraways, from 
three to six hundred weight of seed : the third year t 
the teasel declines, and the carraway is in perfection, 
and will yield an equal bulk with the coriander, and 
most of the teasel that did not run last season, will 
produce heads this, and afford a fourth or fii'th part 
of the crop it did the preceding season ; by which 
time the plants are generally exhausted ; though a 
fourth, and even fifth, year of carraway has been 
known to succeed." Great care is requisite, when 
handling the coriander, or col, as sorii- call it, and 
the carraway, when ripe : women ami children are 
employe;! to cut it, plant by plai.t, which are after- 
wards plaofd iu cloths, and commonly threshed on 
s:iil cloth, in the field. The teasel is also cut by 
women, and left with a stalk with the hoad six or 
eight indies long, by which it is bound in hunches 
or gleans, of twenty -five heads each, which consti- 
tute half a staff. The woollen manufacturers, who 
make use of the teasel, fix them on frames, and ap- 
ply them to the surface of cloths, to raise the nap, 
which is cut off by the shears of the clothier. The. 
general list an unusually numerous one of what 
are termed rare plants, in this County, are given in 
the note below. 

MINES, MINERAL SPRINGS, &.C.] Scarcely any 

district 



lord Row ; in a panel in a lane leading from 
(lie On[;ar rcud lo Chiywell Row, and I-IM;- 
uhcif. 

Actta 



3-14 



ESSEX. 



district in the island has so few minerals as Essex ; 
which is also nearly exempt from quarries, and 
rocks > but there are some mineral waters, though 



Actea spicata. Herb Christopher or Baneberries; in a thick 
wood two miles from Tliormlon. 

Adoxa Moschetialina. Tuberous Moschalel, or Musk-wood 
Crowfoot ; under hedges in a field leading from 
Wood Street to Chapel End, Walthauistow. 

Agaricus aurantius. Little Orange-coloured Agaric, in a 
field at Walthantstow. 

campamt/atus. Bull Agaric ; in hedges at Waltham- 

slow. 

Chanterdlus. Yellow Agaric, or) in ' w d y 

Chanterelle C l^t of Epp.ng 

-inttgtr. Equa.gil.ed Agaric: J WaUh'a.ns.o^ 

Idterutis. Short-stalked Agaric : on trunks of felled 

trees, in Clay Street, Waltliamstow. 

veluccsus. Warry Agaric : in the woody part of 

Kpping Forest. 

umbeltiferus. l/ittle delicate Umbrella, or Wood 

Agaric : on dead sticks in hedges at Waltham- 
stow. 

Alisma Damasoniu.ni. Star-leaded Water Plantain, in a pond 
at the town's end at Rumford, towards London, 
in a pond near I. ford, and in many ponds on 
Epping Forest, near Walthamstow. 

.lllium oleraceum. Wild Garlick, with an herbaceous striated 
flower : in a corn-field called West field be- 
longing to Black Notley Hall, adjoining to 
Lnez-lane, plentifully. 

. ursinum. Ivamsons : in a wood near the lane leading 

from Walthamstow to Chingford, and on the 
Hawk's-eye hill on Epping Forest. 

i-ineale. Crow Garlick : in the marsh, near the foot- 

path leading from Walthamstow to Lea Bridge. 
Alopecurus aristatus Monspeliensis, Bearded Fox-tail grass; 

in moist ditches near the river Thames. 
aristatus $ paniceus. Bearded dog-tail grass ; 

over against the mill at Purfleet, towards 

Raynham, on the other side the great ditch. 
ventricosus. Red Bent-grass ; in the corn-fields 

about 1 horndon. 
Anasthum Fceniculum. Finckle or Fennel ; on the shore of 

the Thames, in the chalk-pit at Purfleet, and 

on the bank between Harwich and the Cliff. 
Antirrhinum orontium. The Least Snapedragon, or Calf's 

Snout ; in corn-fields of a sandy soil : at 

Woodford. 
Apium graveolens. Smallage; in the marshes below Eastham 

and 1'laistow, plentifully. 
Arenaria peploidfs. Sea Chickweed : on the sandy shores at 

Harwich. 
rabra / marina. Seu Spurrey ; in the salt marshes 

at Harwich. 
Aristolocliia Clematitis. Climbing Birthwort : in a wood two 

mik's from Thomdon. 
Artemisia maritima a. and ft. English Sea Wormwood, and 

a variety of it : on the marsh bank on the West 

side of Harwich. 

maritinict <S. French Sea Wormwood ; on sea- 
shores ; in Mersey island and about Harwich. 
Arundo arenuria. Sea Reed Grass, English Sea Matweed, 

Martram, or Helm ; on the sandy banks by 

the sea at Harwich. 
Asparagus njficinalis. Sparagus or Sperage ; in meadows and 

on rocks ; about Harwich. 
A<peri<go procumbens. Small Wild Bugloss, Great Goose- 

gras, or German Madworl ; on rich rubbish 

at Purfleet. 



of little repute, in the County. A spring, at Til- 
bury, impregnated with earthy and muriatic salts, 
is thought to possess considerable medicinal virtue. 

ETYMOLOGY. 



Asperula odorata. Woodroof; in shady parts of Epping 
Forest near Woodford. 

Asplenium Adiantum nigrum. Common black Maidenhair ; 
on the buttresses on the north side of Loughton 
Church. 

Ceterach. Spleenwort or Miltwast ; on an old 

tomb in East Horndon church-yard. 

Asptenium Ruta mururia. White Maidenhair, Wall-rue or 
Tentwort ; on Widford Bridge, near Chelras- 
ford, and on the cast wall of the Forest-house 
garden near Leighton. 

Scelopendrium. Hart's tongue ; in lanes at Chip- 
ping Ongar, against the north side of Lough- 
ton church, and elsewhere. 

' Trichumanes. English black Maidenhair, in a 

shady lane between Ongar and Kelvedon, on 
a wall in Wood Street, near Whips Cross, 
Walthamstow, and on a wall in a garden at 
Low Ley ton. 

Aster tripolium. Sea Starwort ; in the marsh ditches at Har- 
wich, plentifully. 

Astragalus Glyciphyllos. Wild Liquorice, or Liquorice 
Vetch ; in the corn-field between the wood 
and the Thames at Purfleet. 

Atriplex laciniata. Jagged Sea Orache : on the sandy shores 
in Mersey Island, in Little Holland, between 
the town of Harwich and the Cliff, and else- 
where. 

portulacoides. Common Sea Purslane: on the 

marsh banks at Harwich, plentifully. 

serrttta. Indented Sea Orache: by the river and 

on the banks of the marshes at Maldon, plenti- 
fully, and on the sea banks on the west side of 
Harwich. 

Herberts vulgaris. Berberry or Pipperidge bush : in woods 
and hedges; at Littlebury, Saffron Walden, 
and elsewhere. 

Seta maritima. Sea Beet : in the sea marshes on the west of 
Harwich, plentifully. 

Betula alba. The Birch-tree ; on Epping Forest, between 
Highbeech and Golder's Hill, in the parish of 
Loughton. 

Alnus. The Alder tree : on the banks of the river 

Rhodon, between Chigwell and Loughton, 



Boletus albus. 



plentifully, and elsewhere. 
While Boletus : on stumps of 



I 



about 

trees, 5- Waltham- 

coriaceut. Tough Boletus : on trees, J stow. 
hepaticus. Liver Boletus : on trunks of trees ; about 
Walthamstow, and elsewhere, on Fairlop, in 
Hainault forest. 

squamosus. Scaly Boletus ; on elm " 
trees, 

villosus. Hairy or Spongy Boletus ; 

on apple and other trees, 
Brassica camptstus. Field Cabbage : - 



elm} 

tus ; ( 

s, * 



about Wal- 
thamstow, 

and 

elsewhere, 
in corn-fields and cliffs 



of rocks near Harwich. 
Briza media. Middle quaking grass, Cow-quates," 

or Ladies'-hair ; in fields, meadows, I 

and pastures ; 
Bromus giganteus. Tall Brome grass ; in moist- 

woods and hedges ; 
nemoralis. Wood Brome-grass ; in woods 

and hedges ; 
Bryum pellucidum. Pellucid Bryum ; in marshes I 

and wet shady places ; ) 

serpyllum uadulatum. A variety of Thyme-leaved 

Bryum ; 



at 

Wal- 
tham- 
stow. 



ESSEX. 



344 



ETYMOLOGY.] This county evidently received its 
name from its situation, to distinguish it from the 
country inhabited by the West aud South Saxons. 



distans. 

divisa. 



Bryum; in moist woods and heaths; at Lam- 
bourn parsonage, and elsewhere. 

Bunias Cakile. Sea Rocket ; on the shore in Canvey island, 
and between the town of Harwich and the 
Cliff. 

Bupleurumrotundifolium. Throw- wax; among the corn at 
Notley, and elsewhere. 

_ tennistimum. The least Hare's ear ; by (he road 

side nearThorndon, and in the marshes by the 
river side at Maldon, plentifully. 

Sutomus umbellatus. The flowering Hush; or Water Gla- 
d:ole ; in many parts of the river Rhodon, and 
elsewhere. 

Campanula hybrida. The Lesser Venus Looking; Glass, or 
codded Corn Violet ; in a corn-field between 
Ribton Lane and Woodford Bridge, and be- 
tween the Thames and the Wood at Purrleel. 
glomerata. Little or lesser Throat-wort or Can- 
terbury Bells ; in afield near Muncombe near 
Woodford. 
Cardamine amara. Bitter Cresses, or Ladies' Smock; in 

moist meadows and pastures ; at Braintree. 
Carduus nutans. Musk Thistle ; in the chalk-pits at Pur- 
fleet. 

Carei arenaria. Sea Carex ; on the sandy shores at Har- 
wich. 

Loose Carex ; in a meadow at Panfield, and 
by Machin's mill at Witham. 
Marsh Carex; in the meadows near the Hithe 
at Colchester. 

pendula. Pendulous Carex ; in moist woods and hedges ; 

at Braintree and in the ditches in Walthamslow 
marsh near Lea Bridge. 

pulicaris. Flea Carex; in a ditch near Chapel End, 

Walthamstow. 

strigosa. Loose Carex ; in a lane at Black Notley. 

vericaria. Greater Bladder Carex ; in the marsh-ditches 

near Lea Bridge. 
vesicuria, $. A variety of the last; in the river near 

the Red Bridge. 

Centimrca Calcitrapii. Star Thistle ; by the way-side in the 
marshes below Plaistow and Ear,tham, and 
elsewhere. 
CAara tomentosa. Brittle Chara ; on a bog near Smith's Hall, 

Blakemoor. 
Chelidonium Glaucium. Yellow-horned Poppy ; on sandy 

sea-shores ; at Landguard fort and Harwich. 
Chenopodium hybridum. Maple-leaved Elite; on rich rubbish, 
on dung hills, anJ in corn-fields ; at Colchester 
and Woodford. 

maritimum. Sea Blite or White Glass-wort ; on 

sea shores ; at Harwich. 

murale f>. A variety of Common Goose-foot 

or Sowbane ; on dung-hills and rubbish ; at 
Bock ing. 

Clacarta digituta. Fingered C'lavaria; at the bottom of a 
post in Wood Street, and elsewhere at Wal- 
tliamstow. 

Hyporylon. Flat-horned Clavaria ; a curious va- 
riety was found on an elm log in a cellar at 
Wahhzm Al>l>ey. 

pistillaris. Simple Clavaria; in woods and on 

heaths at Booking. 
Clematis ritalba. Great Wild Climber, Traveller's Joy, or 

Hethwyne; in hedges and woody places. 
Ctinnpodium -culgare. Great Wild B>>sil ; under hedges over- 
grown with brambles at Woodford. 
VOL. II. NO. 70. 



They called it East Deaxa, and East Dexscire, 

which were changed by the Normans into Exssesa. 

GENERAL HISTORY.] Essex, with the whole of 

the 



Cochlearia Anglica. English or Common Sea Scurvy grass; 
in the marches near Maldon and Harwich. 

Danira. Danish Scurvy '-grass; on a bank by the 

sea side about two miles from Manninglree. 
Conferva bullma. Silken Wrack ; ^ in the marsh ditches 

littora/is. Green hairy Sea > near 

Weed; J Harwich. 

rupestris. Fine Green hairy Sea Weed ; on the 

stones before Harwich Cliff. 

sctacea. Setaceous Conferva ; upon the shores 

which are overflowed by the tide near Har- 
wich. 

Convalluria majalis. Lily Convally, or May Lily; on Ep- 
ping Forest near The King's Oak opposite 
Highbeech. 

Crambe maritima. Sea Colewort ; on the sandy shore be- 
tween the town of Harwich and the Cliff. 
Cratargus Oxyamtha. Hawthorn or White Thorn ; a variety 
of this without thorns and with a large leaf, 
found in a hedge, by the side of the Rhodon, 
between W ray-house and Luxborough-house. 

torminalix. The common wild Service tree, or 

Sorb ; in woods and hedges. 

Crepis fictida. Stinking Hawkweed ; in a field called Stan- 
field belonging to Black Notley Hall. 
Crocus sativus. Saffron ; planted and cultivated at Walden, 

plentifully, thence called Saffron Walden. 
Cuscuta Eur :pcca. Dodder Hell weed, or Devil's Gut; on 
Epping Forest near Snaresbrook ponds, and 
near Walthamstow windmill, 'climbing about 
the Erica vulgaris, &c. 

Cynoglossum qfficinale f>. A variety of Hound's tongue with 
green leaves; on rubbish and on waysides; 
frequent. 
Datura Stramonium. Thorn Apple ; on dunghills and rich 

soils near Woodford. 

Dianthiis Armeria. Deptford Pink ; in the upper end of 
Snake's l.anr, Woodford, in a field between 
the end of Horn Lane and Woodford Bridge, 
and in the lane leading from Chingford Hatch 
to Fryday Hi'l. 

Dipsacus pilosii*. Shepherd's Hod, or Small wild Teasel; 
in the lane leading from Fryday Hill House 
to Chingford Church, and elsewhere. 

Drosera rotundifolia. Rosa soli>, or Round leaved Sun-dew ; 
on a bogt;y part of Epping Forest, a little way 
in the wood opposite the Bald-faced Stag, and 
on a bog on the right hand of the road from 
Leytonsione to Snareshrook. 
Epitobium angustifalium Rosebug Willow-herb; in a mea- 
dow near the river Rho4ofi ( not far from 
Luxborotigh House near Cliigwell. 
Erica cinerea. Fine leaved heath ; 1 on Epping Forest, near 

Tetralir. Cross leaved > Snaresbrook pond, and 

heath; \ elsewhere. 

Erigenun acre. Blue flowered Fleabane ; in a field near 

Warley Common. 
Enjngium maritimum. Common Eryngo, or Sea Holly; on 

sandy sea shores. 

Eupatorium Cannuhinum. Common Hemp Agrimony, or 
Dutch Agrimony : on the sides of the river 
Rhodon. 

Euphorbia exigua. Small annual Spurge; in cornfields; be- 
tween the lower end of Ribton Lane and 
Woodford Bridge, and elsewhere 

paralias. Sea Spurge; on the sandy shores be- 
tween' the town of Harwich and the Cliff. 
4 s Euphorbia 



340 



ESSEX. ' 



the county of Middlesex, was inhabited, at the Ro- 
man invasion, by the people called Trinobantes, or 
Trinovantes ; an appellation given to them from 



at 

Harwich. 



Euph-jrbia plalypliyllos. Broad-leaved Spurge ; in corn- 

nckib ; at Black Notify, and in lields between 

Woodfoid Row and VVuodfurd Bridge. 

rerracosa. Rough fruited Spurge ; in corn fields. 

Fagus Castunea. The Chesuut Tree ; in Stour Wood near 

Harwich. 
Fontinalis antrpyrttiea. Greater Water Moss ; on rotten 

wood in a pond at Walthamstow. 
Frankcnia litvis. Smooth Sea Heath ; in sea marshes of a 

clay soil ; frequent. 
Fucus cartilagineui. Scarlet Fucus ; on rocks and stones ; 

in Convey Island, and in Maldon river over 

against Tollesbuiy. 
ceranoides. Buck's horn Fucus ; cast up by" 

the sea, 
digitatus. Sea Girdle, or Hangers ; on 

tiie shore, 
fastigiatus. Forked Fucus ; on the sandy 

shores, 
" Filum. Sea Laces ; near the dock-gates of 

the King's Yard. 
furcellatus. Long- forked Fucus ; on the 

sandy shores. 

lorcus. Sea Thongs ; on stones below the 

Cliff. 

nodosus. Knotted Fucus ; on stones be- 
fore the Cliff, frequent, 

pinnatifidus. Jagged Fucus ; on sea rocks 

and stone-. 
plicutus. Matted Fucus ; on the sandy 

shores. 
saccliarinus. Sea Belts : on sub-marine 

rocks and stones. 
. . . serratus. Sea Wrack ; on the stones before 

the cliff. 

iiliquosus. Podded Fucus : upon the 

stones before the Cliff. 
. spiralis. Twisted FUCKS ; 011 the shore, 

frequent. 
. tomentosus. Woolly Fucus ; on submarine 

rocks and stones, 

-Desiculosus. Sea Oak ; on sea rocks and 

stones ; floating in the Thames, and 1 

Fumaria claviculata. Climbing Fumitory ; in a wood called 
Little Shrubbish at Snaresbrook near Wan- 
stead, plentifully. 

Galeopsis Tetrahit i. Fair flowered Nettle Hemp, or Hemp- 
leaved Dead Nettle with a parti-coloured 
flower; in a corn field at the bottom of Rib- 
ton Lane near Woodford. 

Genista tinctorea. Woodwaxen, Dyer's-weed, or Green- 
wood ; in meadows and fields about Wood- 
ford. 

Gentiana Centaurcum Lesser Centaury ; in dry barren pas- 
ture-land about Woodford. 

Geranium molle ?>. Small flowered Dove's-foot Crane's-bill ; 
on a bank near Low Leyton. 

. rotundijolium. Round-leaved Crane's-bill ; on 

walls, roofs, and pastures of a sandy soil; near 
Temple Mills, near Lay ton. 

Geum rivale. Water Avens; in a bog about a mile from 
Sudburv 

Glaux maritima Sea Milkwort or Black Salt-wort; in the 
salt marshes at Harwich. 

Cnaphalium . Gatlicum. Corn Cudweed ; among corn in 
sandv grounds about Castle Hemngham. 

margaritaceum. American Cudweed ; in a mea- 
dow neai Bocking. 6 



at Har- 
wich. 



their country being situated on the borders of the 
broad expanse of water formed by the Thames ; for 
instance, the tribe which inhabited the low peninsula 

of 



Hedysarum Onobrychis. Medick Vetchling, Cock's Head 

or St. Foin ; in meadows and pastures of a 

chalky soil, at Purfleet, 111 a field near Mun- 

combe near Woodford. 
flelleborusfcttidus. Great Bastard black Hellebore, Bear's 

Foot, or Setterwort ; in meadows, woody 

places, and hedges; opposile a farm-house at 

Muncombe near Woodford, and in a lane 

near High Laver Church. 

Hitracium umbellatum. Narrow-leaved bushy Hawkweed ; 
on Epping Forest near the south side of 
, Snaresbrook pond. 

Ilippophae Rhamnoides. Sallow Thorn or Sea Buckthorn ; 

on sandy shores ; near Canvey Island, 
Hordium marinum. Marsh Rye-grass ; on the mar:h banks 

at Harwich, plentifully. 
Hydrocharis Morsus Ranee Frogbit ; in the marsh ditches 

near Lea Bridge, near Walthamstow. 
Hyoseris minima. Small Swine's Succory ; in Mark's House 

common field at Walthamstow. 

Hypericum Androsxmum. Tutsan or Portleaves ; in Snake's 
, Lane, Woodford, and in the woody part of 

Epping Forest. 

elodes. Marsh St. Peter's Wort; on Epping 

, Forest. 

Iberis nudicuulis. Rock Cress, or Lesser Shepherd's Purse; 

in a gravel-pit about half a mile on the left- 
hand from Great Ilford. 

Inula Helenium. Elecampane ; in many marshy grounds. 
crithmoides. Golden Sampire ; on the bank of the 

river just above Fulbridge at Maiden. 
Iris foetidissimus. Stinking Gladdon or Gladwyn ; in woods 

and hedges : at Black Not ley, Walthamstow, 

PurnVet, ai;d elsewhere. 
Jasione moiitana. Hairy Sheep's Scabious; in Iligham Hill 

common field, at Waltliamstow. 
Juncus acutus /3. A variety of Sea hard Rush ; in the marshy 

grounds about Walden, plentifully. 
Juniperus cummunis. Common Juniper ; on Epping Forest 



between Waltliam Abbey and Epping. 
Rough-codded Chickling Vetch 



among 
fields about 



Lathyrus hirsutus, 

brambles at Hockerel, in the 
Hockley and Raleigh, and elsewhere. 

Nissolia. Crimson Grass Vetch ; near a well in 

Iligham Hill common field, Walthamstow, 
near Milkwell field betwien the end of Horn 
Lane and Wocdfprd Bridge road, in a field 
near Chingford church, and elsewhere. 

Lepidium latifoiium. Ditlander or Pepperwort ; in the 
marshes near Grays, on the causey leading to 
the Hithe Bridge at Colchester, by the water- 
side at Heybridge near Maldon, plentifully, 
and at the lime-kiln near Knlbriflge. 

ruderale. Narrow leaved Cress <,r Dittander ; on 

rubbish near the ^e;. : near South Benfleet, at 
Maldon, and on ihe west side of Harwich 
near the river. 

Lichen pyxidatus t cocciferis. Red Liver- 
wort ; 
xcornucopides. Radiated 



on heaths, hilly 
pastures, and in 

woods. 



Liverwort ; 

f* deformis. Serrated Liverwort ; on heaths, 

Lilly pastures and woods ; at Thermion. 

olii'aceus. Olive Liverwort ; on trrcs and pales about 

Walthaimtrw, and elsewi.ere. 

tartareus. Welsh Liverwort; entrees) on Epping 

unciatis. Short Liverwort, t Forest. 

f Flax or Mill 
Mountain ; 



Linum catharticum, l'urg : i>g or wild dwarf 



ESSEX. 



347 



of Galloway in Scotland, was termed Nov->ntes. 
The name Trenovant would have b:v-u given by the 
Britons to the country beyond the stream, and its 



inhabitants called Tronovanti, Tranovantery, Trano- 
vnntys, &c. The Triiiolmntes, as appears from <he 
testimony of ancient writers, were in possession of 

two 



Mountain ; on a bank mar Muncombe near 
Woodford, and elsewhere. 

Linum Radiola. The. lea-.t Rupture-wort or All-seed ; on a 
boggy si il on kpping Forest, a little way in 
the wood opposite the Bald-faced Slag. 

Lithospermum officinal*. Groiuwe!, Groinill, or Gtaymill ; 
in the rhalk pits at Purfleet. 

Lysimai'hia tenelta. Purple Moneywort; on wit heaths and 
meadows, and on bogs ; on Epping Forest. 

Mendicago polymorplici Arahica. Heart Trefoil or Claver; 
on the bank between thetown of Harwich and 
the Cliff. 

/3- The smallest Hedge-hog Trefoil ; 

on the sandy shore at Harwich. 

Mentlia pipertita. Peppermint ; in the lane leading from 
Woudford to the windmill. 

Pulegium. Pennyroyal or Pudding grass ; in wet 

heaths and pastures and on bogs ; on Epping 
Forest. 

rotundifolia. Round-leaved Horse-mint ; by the road 

side between Thorndon and Canvev island, 
in a meadow adjoining to Paulkburn Ilall, and 
in a meadow behind the Alms house at Great 
Ycldam. 

rubra. Red-mint ; in the Hop grounds at Bocking, 

and by the road side between Bocking and 
Gosfield. 

syhestris. Long-leaved Horse- mint ; in marshes and 

, ., wet plates : at East Horndon, and in a mea- 
dow behind the Alms-houses at Great Yel- 
dani. 

syhestris $. A variety of the last ; on the river side 

a little above the Fulling Mill, and in a ditch 
near the Corn Mill at Bocking. 

villosa. Spear-mint; in watery places and on banks 
of rivers ; about Bocking, and by the side of 
a pond in a field two miles from Thorndon. 

(3. A variety of the last ; in a meadow on the 
right hand of the way from the Fulling Mill 
to Harries Mill at Bocking. 

y. Another variety ; in a meadow on tUe right 

at Bocking. 

Menyanthes Nymplwides. The Lesser yellow Water Lily, 
with a fringend flower ; in the river Rhodon, 
almost opposite the eighth mile stone in the 
Woodford Bridge road, near the bridge, and 
between that and Luxborough House. This 
was planted by Mr. Warner. 

. Trifoliata. Buck Bean or Marsh Trefoil ; in a 

bog on Epping Forest on the right hand of the 
road from LaytonMone to Snartsbiook. 

Jtfcrcurialis annua. French M< nury, the male and female; 
on rubbish and cultivated land about Wood- 
ford. 

Myosotis scorpoidcs ft. A variety of Mouse-ear Scorpion 
Grass; by the road side from Kidgeweil to 
Batham End. 

Narcissus Pseudo Narcissi^. Wild English Daffodil ; in 
fields and orchards. 

Nardus itricta Mat Grass; on Epjvng Forest between Wan- 
stead and Walthamslow. 

Nepeta Cataria. Nep or Cat-mint; in pastures and hedges of 
u chalky -nil ; in the chalk-pi'.s at Purlleet and 
near Abridge. 

Nymphaa alba. White Water Lily ; in the river Rhodon, 
and in the castle ditcli at Chipping Ongar. 

lutea. Water Lily with a yellow flo'.vtr ; in the 

river Rhodon. 



Oenanthe crocatu. llnniock Waier I>cojmvrt; on (he banks 
of the river Thames near Plaistow, and of 
the river Khodoii near Luxborui^h House 
ni-ar Chigwell. 

--- pimpinclloides. Pimpernel Drnpwort ; in Bulvan 
fen. 

Origanum Onites. Pot Marjoram ; on the left hand of the 
road from Braimree to Raine beyond the 
bridge. 

- vulgare. Wild Marjoram ; in the chalk-pits at 
Purfleet plentifully, and in the fields under 
hedges, and in bushy places at Woodford. 

Ophioglossum vulgatuta. Adder's tongue ; in a field at 
Woodford 

Onhrits aranifcra. Humble 

Satyrionwith green 
or Spider 



e^\ . 

n ) !" a " okl 
r Vl"& to "- 
/"ders of so 



. 

!" a " okl S^ayel-p, at Ba- 

"- all<1 ^^ or - 
some corn-fields at 

-- anthiopohora. Green Man Belc , ha " ) . St ; Paul to ' 
Orchis. ^ wards Ovmgton. 

-- Monorchis. Yellow Sweet or Muk Orchi; in a field 
called Wairfield belonging to Black Notlev 
Hall. 

- muscifera. Fly Orchis ; in meadows and pastures of 

a chalky soil. 

-- Nidus A-cis. Bird's nest ; found once on Epping 
Forest near a gate of a wood called The Sale 
near HaleEnd, Walthamstow. 

- ovata. Twayblade : on Epping Forest between 

Woodford Row, and Chingford hatch, and 

elsewhere near Woodford. 
-- spiralis. Triple Ladies Traces ; on Epping Forest 

near the Bald faced Stag, on (he right hand of 

the road not far from the ten mile stone, and 

near a bog not far from Sailer's Buildings, 

Walthamstow. 
Orchis bifolia. The Lesser Butterfly Orchis ; on Epping 

Forest between Laylonstone and Walthamstow 

windmill, arid in moist meadows about 

Woodford. 
-- latifolia. Male handed Orchis or Male handed Saty- 

rion Royal ; in moist meadows and on boggy 

grounds about Woodford. 

- pyramidalis. Purple lale-flowering Orphis ; at the 

chalk-pils at Purfleet. 

Orubanche major. Broom-rape : on roots of the common 
broom at Hale brinks, near Walthamstow, 
and on Epping Forest, and elsewhere. 

Oimunda Spied/it. Rough Spleenwort ; in a little running 
stream between Woodford and Woodfom 
Bridge, and in a lane near Warley common. 

Oialis Ace tosella. Wood Sorrel; in' woody parts of Epping 
Forest. 

Papaver dubiam. Long smooth-headed Poppy ; in corn-fields ; 
at Bocking. \ 

Pellitoria officinalis. Pellitory of the Wall ; on a wall be- 
longing to Tony Hall, in Shernal Street, 
Walthamstow, on the town-wall at Harwich, 
and el-ewhere. 

Paris qwdrifolia. Herb Paris, True Love, or One-berry; 
in oods and shady places; in a little wood 
called Lampit Grove, belonging to Bl ick 
Notley Hall, in Chalkney wood, seven uvles 
from Colchester, and at Saffron Walden. 

Parnassia palustrts. Grass of Parnas-us; in woods and shady 
places ; between High and Chipping Ongar, 
and in a mnrshj meadow at Chipping Onar. 

Paitinaca sativa. Wild Partnip; near (he river Lea by" Lea 

Bridge 



348 



ESSEX. 



two considerable cities, on fortified stations, one of 
which was situated on the eminence between the 
Thames, and the Fleetbrook, the centre of modern 



Bridge near Walthamslow, and in the chalk- 
pits at Purrleet. 

Pedicularis palustris. Great Marsh Red Rattled Coxcomb 
or Lousewort ; in marshes and moist meadows 
at WoodfoH. 
Pcplis Portulaca. Water Purslane ; in marshy and wet places 

on Epuing Forest. 

Peucedanum ojicinale. Hogs Fennel Sulphurwnrt or Hare- 
strong ;. in the marsh ditches at Walton not 
far from Harwich, and in a wood belonging to 
Walton at the Nase. 

Pesiza Cyathoidcs Smooth Peziza; on rotten wood; at 
Walthamstow. 

Lentifera. Seeding Cup Mushroom ; in wood*, fields, 

and on garden borders and rotten wood ; at 
Braintree. 

scutellata. Hairy Peziza ; on cow-dung at Walthain- 

stow. 
Phellandrium amtaticutn. Water Hemlock ; in the riv 

Bhodoo, and elsewhere. 
Plantago maritima ?> ttrflingia. Sea Plantain ; on the sides of 

the marsh bank 1 ; at Harwich, plentifully. 
Paa maritima. Sea Meadow Grass ; in the sea marshes at 

Harwich. 

Polygonum amphibium. Perennial Willow-leaved Arsmart ; 
on the hanks of ditches and rivers, often 
floating on their waters, sometimes in dry 
fields about Woodford. 

Polypodium actileatum. Prickly Auriculate Male Fern or 
Female Polypody ; in woods and shady places, 
about Black Motley, Braintree, Woodlord, 
and elsewhere, common. 

acuhatum ft. A variety of the last ; in woods 

and shady places ; at Black Notley. 

cristatum. Great branched Fern with indented 

leaves or crested Polypody : in moist woods 
and shady places ; about Black Notley, Brain- 
tree, and nrar Woodford. 

Filix famina. Female Fern with thin-set deeply- 
indented leaves, or Female Polypody ; in 
marsh v and shady places ; at Black Notley 
and Braintree. 

Filix mas. Common Male Fern ; in woods, 

heaths, and stoney places ; about Black Notley, 
Braintree, Woodford, and elsewhere. 

fragile. Fine-cut Stone Fern with slender and 

britile stalks, or Brittle Polypody ; on a wall in 
the lane leading from Lea Bridge road to Ley- 
ton church. 
Potumoge(onpectinatum. Fine Fennel leaved ) 

Pondweed, f in the river 

> pcrfoliatum. Perfoliated Pond- f Rhodon. 

weed, * 

Potentilla reptaits ft. Creeping Tormentil ; in some pastures 

at Braintree. 
Pnteriur* Stmguisorba. Burnet ; in a field at Purfleet, and in 

Royden church yard. 

Primula vulgaris ft. Great Cowslips or Oxlips ; in a field 
leading trom Wood Street to Chapel End, 
Walthamstow, and in a field leading from 
Lamhorn parsonage to the church, and else- 
where. 

Prunis communis insititia ft. A variety of the Bullace-tree ; 
in some hedges. 

Padus. Wild Cluster Cherry or Bird Cherry; in the 

lane leading to Temple Mills near Leyton and 
between the London rad and Westliam 
Abbey, turning oft' near the three mile slone. 



lK>ndon ; the other appears to have been at Col- 
chester, in this county. The Trinobantes by their 
own dissention payed the way to the conquest of 

Britain 



Quercus Robur. The Oak-tree; a variety with acorns on 
short footstalks on Epping Forest between the 
Bald faced Stag and Muncombe. 

Ranunculus parvijlorus. Small-flowered Crowfoot ; in a lane 

leading from Clay Street to Higham Hill field, 

and in Sherna! Street under the wall belonging 

to Tony Hall at Wallhamstow. 

Peseda lutea ft. A variety of Base Rocket ; in Broad Oaks 

meadows nearThaxted. 

Rhamnus catharticus. Buckthorn or common Purging Thorn; 
in a hedge by the side of the river Rhodon 
not far from Luxborough House near Chigwell 
in Hagger Lane, Walthamstow, and else- 
where. 

Frangula. Black berry -bearing Alder ; on Epping 

Forest near Snaresbrook. . 

Ribtt nigrum. Black Currants or Squinancy berries ; by the 
river side near the Hoppet Bridge near Brain 
tree. 

Rosa Eglanteria. The Sweet Briar or Eglantine ; in a lane 
which leads from Chigwell to Chigwell Row, 
and elsewhere. 
Ruppia maritima. Sea Grass; in the marsh ditches and on the 

side of Hie wav from Maldon to Golelhanger. 
Ruscus Aculeutus. Knee ifolly or Butcher's Broom ; in 
bushy places and on heaths ; at Black Nolley, 
and in the woody part of Epping Forest, plen- 
tifully. 
Salicornia Europcca. Jointed Glasswort or Marsh Sampire ; 

in the marshes at Harwich, plentifully. 

Salix trinndria. Smooth Willow ; in an osier holt at Black 
Notley near the house in which Mr. Ray the 
naturalist lived. 

Salsolufruticosa. Shrub Stonecrop or Blite ; on the marsh 
bank at Harwich, plentifully. 

Kali. Prickly Glasswort : on the sandy shore going 

to Harwich Cliff. 

Salvia prate nsis. Meadow Clary. Bobart in Hort. Ox. III. 
393, mentions this plant to grow in Sepre 
Cobbamiano, in Essex, D. Watsio observata, 
Syn. 23. 

verbenacea. Common English wild Clary ; in Wood- 
ford church-yard, at Purrleet, and on the earth 
woiks at Stansted Montfitchet. 

Sambucus Ebulus. Dwarf Elder, Wallwort, Danewort, cr 
Dane's blood ; by the road side near Upton 
House, in a lane between S u wardstone, and 
Waltham Abbey, and about Harklow. 

Samolus valerandi Round-leaved Water Pimpernel ; on a 

little bog two miles from East Horndon church, 

and on the bank of the river Rhodon near the 

eight mile stone on the Woodford Bridge road. 

Saponaria qfficinalis. Sopewort or Bruisewort ; on Laindon 

hills and elsewhere. 
Satyrium viride. Frog Satyrion or Orchis ; in Broad Oak? 

meadow near Thaxted. 

Saiifrnga granulata. White Saxifrage ; in meadows and dry 
pastures; on the earth works at Stansted Mont- 
fichet, and on Pleshy mount. 
Scirptis lacustris. Bull Rush ; in the river Rhodon near 
Woodford Bridge. 

ft. A variety of the last ; in ponds, rivers, 

and lakes ; at Brick>ley and in Mersey Island. 

maritimus ft. A variety of Round-rooted Bastard 

Cyperus ; on banks of rivers and on sea shores ; 
about Maldon, plentifully. 

sykaticus. Millet Cyperus Grass ; by the river Black 

Water at a mill below Becking. 

Sedum 



ESSEX. 



319 



Britain by the Romans, Mandubratius, a Prince of 
this nation, having been the first to invite Cassar to 
invade the country. With this intention he went to 
Gaul, and returning with the Romans, became in- 
strumental by his influence, to the subjugation of 



Sedum album. White flowered Stone-crop ; on a wall at Bark- 
ing, Plaistow, and elsewhere. 
' Telephium. Orpine or Livelong; in a field near 

Wood Street at Wallhamstow, in Bishop 
Hall's Lane at Lamburn, on the side of a field 

between Muncombe and Luxborough House 

near Chigweli, and elsewhere. 
Senecio sarracenicus. Broad-leaved Ragwort ; in the warren 

at Smith's Hall, Blakemore. 
. latifolia y. Broad-leaved Bastard Hellebore ; by the 

great fish-pond at Heron House near Thormlon. 
Sherardia arvensis. Little Field Madder ; in a corn-field be- 
tween the wood and the Thames at Fen-fleet. 
Sikne Anglica. Small Corn Catch-fly or Campion ; in the 

corn-fields near Colchester. 
Sison inundatum. The least Water Parsnip 'j in gravel-pits 

and ponds on Epping Forest. 
Sisymbriunt Irio. Broad-leaved Rocket or Hedge Mustard ; 

on rubbish and old walls ; at Faulkbourn. 
Smyrnium Olutatrum. Alexandus ; upon the bank leading 

from the town of Harwich to the Cliff, and on 

the right hand of the road from Dovercourt. 
Solidago firgaurea. Common Golden Rod; in the wood at 

Purfleet, and in a hedge near Warley Common. 
Spiraea Filipendula. Common Dropwort ; in a hilly field 

near Chingford church. 
Statice Armeria. Thrift or Sea July-flower; in the marshes 

at Harwich. 

Limonium. Sea Lavender; on sea shores; at Col- 
chester, and in the marsh ditches at Harwich. 

- /3. A variety of the last ; at Harwich. 

Stettana graminea ft. A variety of the Lesser Stitchwort ; 

in marshy places; near Luxborough House 

near Chigweli. 

Long leaved Water Chickweed ; on a 

bog between Snaresbrook and the VVoodford 

Bridge road. 
Taxus baccata. The Eugh or Yew-tree ; on Epping Forest, 

between the King's Oak ami Epping, near the 

fourteenth mile-stone. 

Teucrium Chamaipytis. Groundpine ; in the corn-field be- 
tween (he wood and the Thames at Purfleet. 
Tilia E'uropaa f>. Small-leaved Lime or Linden-tree, Baste 

or Pry ; in the hedges frequent. 
Tremella Auricula. Jew's Ear; on stumps of "J 

dead trees, 
grunulata. Bladder Tremella : in 

moist ditches, 
^ Juniperina. Yellow Tremella ; on at 

rotten sticks ^ Waltham- 
Nostoc. Jlly Tremella ; on a bog stow. 

on Epping Forest near Sailer's 

Row. 
purpur-cu. Purple Tremella; on 

dead sticks very common. J 
Trifolium arvense ft. Small or Sea Hare's foot Trefoil : on 

the sandy shore between the town of Harwich 

and the Cliff. 
fragiferum. Strawberry Trefoil ; in fields and moist 

woods about Woodford. 
1 ocKroleucum: Yellow-flowered Trefoil ; in a close 

near the great fish-pond at Herons near Thorn- 
don. 
ornithopoides. Bird's -foot Trefoil ; on sandy banks 

by the sea side at Tollesbury, plentifully. 

VOL II. NO. 70. 



the Britons ; the base example of submitting to 
their invaders having been set by the Trinobantes. 

Essex was included in that part of the island 
named Flavia Caesariensis, on its being subdivided 
by the Romans, under Constantino the Great. 

From 



Trifolium repens $ hybridum. White Trefoil with a codded 
umbel ; in the road from London to Wood- 
ford Bridge, between the seven and eight mile- 
stones. 

scabrum. Oval-headed Trefoil ; in Broad Oaks 

meadows near Saffron Waltlen. 

' stellutum. Teasel-headed Trefoil ; in sea meadows 
and pastures; on the shore in Canvey Island, 
by the water side a Leigh, at Little Holland, 
and at Tilbury Fort. 

striatvm. Knotted Trefoil ; on Laindon Hills. 

subterraneum. Dwarf Trefoil ; in the road between 

Brentwood and Brook Street, plentifully. 

Triglochin maritimum. Sea Spiked Grass; in the salt marshes' 
at Harwich, plentifully. 

Triticum junceum y. Sea Wheat Grass ; on the shore in 
Mersey island near Colchester. 

rejiens y. Sea Dog's Grass : on the sandy banks at 

Harwich. 

Turritis glabra. Great Tower Mustard; on the banks by the 
highway side up the hill from Lexden towards 
Colchester, and in fields and on a dry bank 
in the lane which leads from High Beech to 
Waltham Abbey. 

Faleriana diocia. Small Wild or Marsh Valerian ; on the 
sides of the marsh in the Lea Bridge road. 

ft. The other small wild or marsh Valerian; 

in moist meadows about Woodford. 

officinalis. Great Wild Valerian ; in moist places 

and near water ; sometimes in woods and bushy 
places about Woodford and elsewhere. 

Verbascum nigrum. Sage-leaved black Mullein ; in gravelly 
places'and on way-sides ; at Audley Inn, and in 
a lane leading from Chigweli to Chigweli Kow. 

Viburnum Lantana. The Pliant Mealy Tree, or the Way- 
faring tree ; in the woods at Purfleet. 

Opulus. Water Elder or Cherrywood ; in moi*t 

places in (he woody parts of Epping Forest, 
near Woodford, and on the bank of the Hho- 
don near the Red Bridge near Wanstead arid 
elsewhere. 

Vinca major. The Greater Periwinckle ; in woods and hedges, 
near Colchester, under a hedge in Itibton 
Lane, Woodford, and elsewhere. 

minor. The Smaller Periwinckle ; in the hedges and 

. among bushes in some fit-Ids by the road side 
leading from William to Kelvedbn, in one of 
the woods called the Larks near Chingford, 
and elsewhere. 

Viola hirtu. Violet with Throatwort leaves, or Hairy Violet : 
in woody places and hedges of a chalky soil ; 
in several places. 

Viscum album. Missel or Missclio"; on several trees on Ep- 
p'rng Forest, in an orchard in Loughton, and- 
elsewhere. 

Ulmus campestris y. The Wych Hasel, or Broad-leave<V 
Elm, in hedges in the lane leading from lll'ord 
( to Ben try heath. 

Ulva diaphana. Sea W rigged Staff ; N 

iterti,<,> Sea Ch.tterling or Gut I cast ^ ^ 

Lactuca. Oyster Green, or Green C Harwich shore. 

Laver, ) 

pavonia. Turkey Feather ; on submarine rocks ami 

stones, at Harwich, 
4 T 



350 



ESSEX. 



From the Itinerary of Antoninus, five principal 
stations appear to have been either formed, or oc- 
cupied by the Romans in this county. These were 
Purolitum, Cresaromagus, Canonium, Catnulodu- 
num, and Ad Ansam. These places were all seat- 
ed on the road which formed the fifth Iter, from 
Londunum to Venta Icenorum. Camulodunum 
was unquestionably the principal station in Essex ; 
but its site has been much contested by different 
writers. 

During a certain period of the Saxon Heptarchy, 
Essex constituted a separate and distinct kingdom, 
by the name of East Seaxa ; but we have no au- 
thentic account of its first establishment and termi- 
nation as a Saxon Heptarchy. Turner, in his ad- 
mirable History of the Anglo Saxons, states that 
this and East Anglia were originally occupied by 
the Saxons at nearly the same time, and that Er- 
kenwin was the first King of the former; com- 
mencing his reign in 527, and dying in 587. Rapin 
observes, that historians take less notice of Essex, 
than of any other of the kingdoms of the Saxon 
Heptarchy. 

CASTLES, &c.] It appears, from the Domesday 
Book, that ninety land-owners of this county were 
deprived of their lands by the Conqueror. Essex 
was then governed and tyrannized over by Norman 
Borons, who constructed castles on their estates 
for personal security, and to awe their dependent 
vassals. In the Civil Wars between the houses of 
York and Lancaster, and in those of Charles's time, 
this county suffered much from the interference of 
the De Veres in the former, and during the long 
siege of Colchester in the latter. Formerly there 
were twelve castles, or fortified buildings, in this 
county ; four of which have been denominated 
Royal Castles, as built for national security. These 
t, are Colchester, Hadleigh, Languard Fort, and Til- 
bury Fort. The other eight were castellated man- 
sions ; but formed for great strength and security. 
These were, Canfield and Hedingham, belonging 
to the De Veres, Earls of Oxford ; Clavering and 
Raleigh, belonging to Suene, of Essex, who pos- 
sessed besides these, fifty-three other Lordships in 
this county ; Ongar, belonging to Richard de Lucy ; 
Fleshy, first possessed by the Duke of Gloucester, 
High Constable of England ; Stanstead Montfi- 
chet, belonging to De Montfichet ; and Walden, to 
Geoffrey de Maodeville at the time of the Domes- 
day Survey. These very formidable fortresses, 
though once the pride of the nobility, and terror of 
the peasantry, are mostly razed to the ground ; the 
only parts remaining are their wide fosses, and high 
keeps. Some parts of the walls remain, at Walden, 
Hedingham, Colchester, and Hadleigh. 



umbilicalis. Navel Laver; on submarine stones and 

rocks, in Canvey Island. 

Urtica pilulifera. Roman Nettle; on rubbish, in several 
parts ot Cam ey Island and at Harwich. 



RcUGiousHousES.] This county contained, pre- 
viously to the Dissolution, forty-seven religious 
houses ; of these two were mitred abbies ; Walthana 
Holy Cross, and St. John's, Colchester : six com- 
mon Abbies ; Biley, Coggeshall, St. Osyth, Strat- 
ford- Langthorn, Tiltey, and Walden : twenty-two 
Priories ; Burden, Blackmore, St. Botolph, Byck- 
nacre, Maiden, Chelmsford, Dnnmow, Grey Friars 
Colchester, Earls Colne, Hatfield Broad Oak, Hat- 
field Peverell, Horkesly Little, Latton, Lees Little, 
Mersey West, Pantfield, Prittlewell, Stansgate, 
Takeley, Tiptree, Toby, and Thremhall : three 
Nunneries ; Barking, Hedingham, and Wickes : 
three Colleges ; Halstead, Pleshy, and Layer Mar- 
ney ; two Praeceptories of Templars ; Creasing, 
and Maplested Little : nine Hospitals ; Bocking, 
Brook Street, South Weald, Crouched Friars, He- 
dingham Castle, Horuchurch, Ilford Great, New- 
port, St. Giles's at Maiden, and St. Alary Magda- 
len at Colchester. 

ARCHITECTURE.] In consequence of the scarcity 
of stone, in this county, most of the houses are 
built with brick ; and many of them present singu- 
lar and curious specimens of brick architecture. In 
constructing the castles, the monastic buildings, 
and many of the old mansion-houses, the builders 
endeavoured to render them not only durable monu- 
ments of their skill, but also examples of their 
taste, displayed by a variety of ornaments in the 
cornices, doors, pilasters, and particularly in the 
chimnies. The latter are studiously varied in their 
shape and workmanship, and are seen with zigzag 
grooves running round them, with spiral and with 
diamond and square grooves, and several other 
whimsical decorations. 

ANTIQUITIES.] Various British and Roman re- 
mains have, at different times, been discovered in 
this county ; those chiefly entitled to notice will be 
described in their respective places. The ruins of 
the castles, and religious houses, already mentioned, 
are the principal architectural antiquities. 

CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL DIVISIONS.] Essex 
is divided into the following twenty parts ; fourteen 
of which are, hundreds ; five, half hundreds ; 
and one, a royal liberty : Barstable, Beacontree, 
Chafford, Chelmsford, Clavering, Dengie, Dun- 
mow, FreshwGll, Ilarlow, Havering Atte Bower, 
Hiuckford, Lexden, Ongar, Rochford, Tendring, 
Thurstable, Uttlesford, Waltharn, Winstree, and 
Witham. These divisions are subdivided into four 
hundred and four parishes, and four parls of 
parishes. Essex is in the diocese of London, and 
comprises three archdeaconries, and fifteen dean- 
eries. 

PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.] Essex re- 



Ut ricularia vulgaris. Hooded Water Milfoil; in the great 
lish-pnndat Herons near Thorndon. 

Zostera marina. Grass Wrack : cast up at Harwich, and on 
all shores. 

y. The Lesser Grass Wrack ; on the Har- 
wich shore. 

turns 



ESSEX, 



351 



turns eight members to Parliament, two for the 
county ; and two for each of the boroughs of Col- 
chester, Harwich, and Maiden. 

MARKET TOWNS.] The following are the mar- 
ket-towns in this county : 



Towns. 



Market Days. 



Barking Saturday 

Billericay < Tuesday 

Braintree Wednesday 

Brentwood Thursday 

Chipping Ongar Saturday 

Chelmsford Friday 

Coggeshall ; Saturday 

Dunmow , Saturday 

Epping Friday 

Grays Thurrock Thursday 

Halsted , Friday 

Ingatestone Wednesday 

Mann'mgtree Thursday 



Market Dayt, 

Rayleigh. .. ... .. .. ... . . .1 .................. Saturday 

Rochford Thursday 

Rumford Wednesday 

Thaxted Friday 

Walden Saturday 

Waltham Tuesday 

William Tuesday 

POPULATION.] The population of Essex, in the 
year 1700, was 159,200 ; in 1750, 167,800 ; in 1801, 
226,437; of whom 111,356 were males, and 
115,081 females. At that time, the number of 
houses was 39,398. In the year 1811, the total 
number of houses was 44,396 ; that of inhabitants, 
252,473 ; of whom 124,839 were males, and 127,634 
females. The average number of deaths, in this 



county, is 1 in 44 ; of baptisms, 
marriages, 1 in 128. 



1 in 33: and of 



Summary of the Population nf the County of Essex, as published by Authority of Parliament in 1811. 





HOUSES. 


OCCUPATIONS. 


PERSONS. 


HUNDREDS, &c. 


Inhabited. 


It 

E . 

s S"2 
J|a 

" 


6O 

e 
3 




"3 

V 

1 

iB 
a 

'a 


x 

c ... 

- - s s 

"""?! 
.S.FO 

III 


>> 

l.Sgo 

: = T3 <* 
"* S - 

ll-ss 

= = 2 u 

"f-^ 


All other Fami- 
lies not comprised 
in the two pre- 
ceding Classes. 


Males. 


Females 


Total 
of 
Persons. 




1715 
4377 
1479 
3758 
590 
1259 
1936 
970 
1133 
924 
5654 
2901 
1905 
1658 
2592 
777 
1779 
1318 
506 
1739 
2111 
504 
505 
669 


2000 
5003 
1680 
4469 
733 
1602 
2154 
113,2 
1387 
1156 
6662 
3423 
2197 
2088 
3505 
918 
2153 
1407 
707 
1894 
3093 
910 
565 
729 


16 
39 
9 
26 
2 
8 
3 
1 
3 
2 
28 
13 
20 
12 
9 
5 
7 
6 
1 
9 
24 
1 
1 
10 


30 
136 
34 
121 
15 
15 
52 
7 
27 
33 
162 
50 
42 
29 
32 
20 
32 
37 
5 
45 
57 
14 
10 
7 


1519 
1988 
874 
2447 
562 
1087 
1390 
873 
940 
521 
3865 
2047 
1384 
1262 
2262 
699 
1627 
554 
513 
1143 
480 
72 
101 
307 


372 
1785 
605 
1408 
98 
367 
541 
198 
324 
541 
1877 
776 
463 
563 
954 
164 
381 
280 
97 
553 
1152 
178 
290 
215 


115 
1230 
201 
614 
73 
148- 
223 
61 
123" 
94 
920 
600 
350 
2G3 
349 
65 
145 
573 
97 
198 
1461 
600 
174 
207 


5233 
12705 
4288 
10886 
1603 
4330 
5124 
2576 
3384 
2509 
14031 
7809 
5058 
5612 
8786 
2251 
4930 
3627 
1741 
4442 
5400 
1519 
1243 
1617 
3558 


5010 
13970 
4183 
11388 
1693 
3914 
5212 
2794 
3313 
2546 
15783 
8452 
5553 
5066 
9027 
2260 
5031 
3572 
1733 
4555 
7144 
2213 
1436 
1786 


10243 
26675 
8471 
22254 
3296 
8244 
10336 
5372 
6697 
5055 
29814 
16261 
11211 
10678 
178)3 
4511 
9961 
7199 
3474 
8997 
12544 
3732 
2679 
3403 
3553 




Chafford 










Freshwell 




Havering-atte- Bower 








Rochford 






Utilestbrd ' 








Jvruugh of Colchesler 




Town of Saffron Walden ... 




Totals 


42829 


51643 


255 


1012 


28517 


14182 


8944 


24839 


27634 


252473 





CHIEJ 



352 



ESSEX. 



CHIEI TOWNS, PARISHES, &c. 

ALBYNS.] Albyns, the seat of J. R. Abdy, Esq. 
supposed by some to have been built by Inigo Jones, 
is a large and convenient structure, standing in the 
p'arish of Stapleford Abbots ; but Walpole conjec- 
tures it to have been the work of one of his scholars. 
The family of Abdy purchased the manor in the reign 
of James the First. Sir Robert Abdy, Bart, the 
-representative of this county in several Parliaments 
between the years 1727 and 1748, possessed consi- 
derable knowledge as an antiquary and natural his- 
torian. 

ALDBCRY.] Aldbury, Aldborough, or Aldbro' 
Hatch, situated in Hainault Forest, is a large and 
handsome mansion, built about the year 1730, by 
Martin Bladen, Esq. one of the Lords of Trade, at 
the expense of 14,000/. The Middletons, who ob- 
tained it by marriage about the middle of the last 
century, are the present possessors. 

ALDERSBROOK.] Aldersbrook, in the parish of 
Little Ilford, eight miles east-north-east from Lon- 
don, was celebrated, in the last century, as the re- 
sidence of the late antiquary Smart Lethieullier, 
Esq. who improved the grounds considerably, and 
erected a small hermitage, which became the depot 
of many of the antiquities he collected in his tra- 
vels, and through his influence. The edifice has 
been levelled, together with the manor-house, which 
was pulled down after the manor had been sold, by 
Edward Hulse, Esq. to the late Sir Jamts Tylney 
Long, Bart. A farm now stands on its site. 

AMBREY'S.]- On the south-east side of Copped 
Hall Park, the seat of John Conyers, Esq. are the 
traces of an ancient camp, called Ambreys, or 
Ambersbury Banks, which are conjectured to have 
been of British origin. It is thus noticed in Gough's 
Cainden, from a communication by Mr. Lethicul- 
]j cr : " This intrcnchment is now entirely over- 
grown with old oaks, and horn beams. It was for- 
merly in the very heart of the forest, and no road 
near it, till the present turnpike road from London 
to Epping was made, almost within the memory of 
man, which now runs within an hundred yards ; but 
it-cannot be perceived from thence by reason of the 
wood that covers it. Its figure is irregular, rather 
longest from east to west, and on a gentle declivity 
to the south-east. It contains nearly twelve acres, 
and is surrounded by a ditch, and high bank much 
worn down by time, though where there are angles, 
they are still very bold and high. There are no re- 
nilar openings or entrances, only in two places, 
where the bank has been cut through, and the ditch 
filled up very lately, in order to make a strait road 
from Debdeii Green to Epping market. The boun- 
daries between the parishes of Waltham and Epping 
run exactly through the middle of this entrenchment." 
ASSINGDON.] This place, memorable in the early 
periods of our history, lies 2| miles north by west 
from the town of Rochford. " Nothing is more 
surprising," observes Gough, in his Additions to 



Camden, " than the error all antiquaries have hi- 
therto lain under with respect to the scene of the 
battle between Edmund Ironside and the Danes. 
Though they had the authority of Mr. Camden 
against them, they have carried it quite across the 
country to the northern extremity as far from the 
sea as possible, and in defiance of every circum- 
stance that could fix it there. In a marsh in Wood- 
ham Mortimer parish, on the Chelmsford side of the 
river Buruham or Crowch, are 24 barrows grouped 
in pairs, and most of them surrounded by a ditch. 
At Canewdon, which Weever was for rendering 
Canuti domus, is the Danish camp. Hocklic on 
the hill, on the other side of the river, has the me- 
morial of slaughter in its name from Haccan, cae- 
dere ; the church is supported by the ancient mas- 
sive round pillars, and in the parish is a rery large 
single barrow. Battle Bridge, four miles lower 
down, may have taken its name from this action, 
though Hull Bridge (now only a ford and ferry, the 
piles remaining in the river,) is close to the marsh 
where the. barrows are. The Danes had 1 been ho- 
vering about this neighbourhood for 20 years be- 
fore. They probably landed at Bradwell. How 
much more obvious the resemblance between As- 
sandune and Assingdon, than between Assaudune 
and Ashdown ; not to mention that Simeon Dunel- 
mensis expressly says Cnute and Turkill built the 
church in monte qua Assandune dicitur. This is 
the exact situation of Hocklie church ; but is it so- 
ot' that at Bartlow r" 

AUDLEY END.] Audley End, or Audley House, 
with its demesnes, situated in a finely wooded park, 
about a mile west from Saffron Walden, was the 
property of the Earls of Suffolk, who derived it 
from Lord Audley, till James the third Earl, sold 
the house and park to Charles the Second for 50,000/. 
Great part of this sum remained on mortgage ; and 
the hearth tax is reported to have been pledged to 
the Earls of Suffolk as collateral security ; but in 
consequence of this tax having been taken off after 
the Revolution, the family by paying the value of 
the mortgage recovered the premises. Henry, the 
tenth Earl, dying without issue in the year 1745, 
Henry Bowes Howard, a descendant of Thomas the 
first Earl, obtained the title ; and th Essex estates, 
including the house, were some time in litigation 
between the late Earl of Effingham, and the repre- 
sentatives of the two daughters of James, the third 
Earl, who made an act of settlement in their favour 
in the year 1687. Richard Aldworth Nerill Griffin, 
Lord Braybrook, its present proprietor, obtained 
the inheritance, by the bequest of the late Lord 
Howard, in 1797 ; he being the nearest relation by 
the female line. 

The present mansion, though a large and mag- 
nificent structure, consists only of a small part of 
the original building, owing to different curtailments 
of it at various times. When in its perfect state, it 
was esteemed one of the most splendid and capa- 
cious mansions in the country ; and if not superior, 

8 was 



ESSEX. 



353 



was nrerly equal to the palaces of Hampton Court, 
Nonsuch, and Richmond. At the, time when it was 
first built, large, rnther than comfortable or hand- 
some houses, and magnitude, in preference to beauty 
or elegance, vrere the fashion. Influenced by these 
v-ntiments, Thomas Howard, the first Earl of Suf- 
folk, determined to have " an immense pile of build- 
ing 1 ," as Walpole observes ; and vast sums wer** 
expended in the erection and embellishmciiJ of this 
structure. This Earl sold an estate of 10,000/. a 
year, to complete this undertaking 1 ; besides being 
assisted largely by his uncle, the Earl of Northamp- 
ton. Five bjirrtired pounds were paid for a model of 
this IniiMing, which was procured from Italy, and 
190,000/. was expended on its erection. It appears 
that different architects, or builders, were employ- 
ed : John Thorpe, and Bernard Janson, n re men- 
tioned by Walpole, as two persons of equal pre- j 
tensions to (his honour. It is said that, when the 
house was finished, King James was invited to see 
it. Having surveyed the structure with great asto- 
nishment, the Earl asked him " how he liked it r" 
" Very well," replied James. " But troth man," ; 
continued he sarcastically, " it is too much for a ; 
Ring, but it may do for a Lord High Treasurer !" 

Whoever may have been the chief architect, it 
is probable that the works at Audley End were exe- ; 
cuted under the direction and snperiutendance of > 
the noble proprietor himself. " When the mansion 
was completed, it consisted of various ranges of 
building, which surrounded two quadrangular courts. ' 
That to the west was very spacious, and was ap- ' 
proached through a grand entrance gateway be- ' 
tween four round towers. On the north and south i 
sides were corridors, supported by columns of [ 
alabaster ; and on the east side was an entrance in- ' 
to the Great Hall. Passing through this, there 
was a smaller square court, three sides of which 
remain, and constitute the present mansion; In t 
its perfect state, the entire pile appeared like a large 
college, with numerous turrets, cupolas, and pin- 
nacles. The rooms were larg", inconvenient, and 
many of them unpleasant ; and to keep the whole 
in good repair, required an immense fortune: great 
part was in consequence pulled down., and the ma- 
terials sold. The marble pillars of the Chapel were 
purchased by Lord Ouslow ; and King William 
bought some pieces of tapestry, now preserved at 
Windsor, for which lie paid 4500/. At the east 
end of the building was a gallery measuring 2-26 
feet in length, thirty-two feet in width, and twenty- 
four feet in height. This, with some other apart- ' 
ments, was taken down by the Countess of Ports- 
mouth in 1710. ' The western quadrangle,' says 
Mr. Walpole, ' was destroyed by the advice of that 
injudicious architect, Sir John Vanbrugh, who de- j 
signed the uncouth screen at the south end of the 
Hall." The western, or grand entrance front of 
the present mansion, is ornamented with two uni- ' 
form projecting porches, each having seventeen ' 
marble columns at the angles. Some of these are 

VOL. n. NO. 70. 



white, with black bases and capitals : the others are 
of dark veined marble, with white bases and capi- 
tals. The ballustrade of these, and of the house, 
is perforated, and variously ornamented ; and the 
summit is adorned v,-iih eight turrets, and several 
clustered cbimnies. All the windows are large, and 
squsrc headed, with numerous stone mullious ; and 
many of them project from the rooms. Attached 
to the west front are two leaden water spouts, which 
were probably placed there when the house was in 
the possession of the Crown, being inscribed thus : 
" I. R. 1086." (for James Rex.) and " W. M. 
1689." (for William and >lnry.} The various 
apartments were furnished and decorated, in a cost- 
ly and elegant style, by the late Lord Howard. 
The Hall still preserves part of its ancient charac- 
ter; and though some injudicious alterations have 
been made, it presents an interesting specimen of 
the magnitude and ornaments which characterized 
these apartments in old baronial mansions. It ha 
a double fli<rht of stone stairs at one end ; and a 
curiously carved and ornamented wood screen, with 
hatch, and music gallery, at the other ; it is lighted 
by five windows, the largest projecting from /the 
centre, and reaching nearly from the ceiling to the 
floor. In this recess is a large handsome marble 
pedestal, with basso-relievos in the plinth. At the 
top of the Hall stairs is the Saloon, or as it is some- 
times termed, the Fish Room ; so called from a 
stuccoed ceiling, ornamented with pendantives, and 
numerous fish, in compartments. The frieze, cor- 
nice, pilasters, and other parts, are richly decorated 
with carving and gilding; and the chimney-piece 
contains some beautiful miniature paintings, with 
arms of the Howard family, &c. In this elegant 
apartment are also full length portraits of the fol- 
lowing distinguished personages (copied from Hol- 
bein, Kneller, &c.) all of whom are in some degree 
connected with the history of this estate and man- 
sion. These paintings are let into the panncls, OH 
one of which is the following inscription : 

" HENRY vin. A. D. 1539, GRANTED THE MONAS- 
TERY OF WAI.DEN, ON THE SITE OF XIHICH THIS 
HOUSF. NOW STANDS, TO I.ORD CHANCFU.OR Au- 

DF.I.F.Y. Kl.lZABETH, A. D. I 597, BY SPECIAL WRIT, 

SUMMONF.D TO PARLIAMINT THOMAS LORD HOW- 
ARD DE WALDEW, IN THF. NEXT KEION GREAT F,D 
EARL OF SUFFOLK. HE BUILT THIS HOUSE A. D. 
1616. AFTER MANY REDUCTIONS, IT- DKSCKKD- 
ED, A.I). 17ti2, TO SIR JOHN GRIFFIN GRIFFIN, 

K. 15. CONFIRMFD LOR D HOWARD DE VV'ALDEN, 

GF.O. 3, A. I). 1784. HF, AMONG OTHKR ADDI- 
TIONS AND ALTERATIONS, REFITTED (THE CEILING 
EXCEPTED) THIS SALOON, TO COMMKMORATE THK 
NOBLE FAMILIES THROUGH WHOM, WITH GI-.ATI- 
Tl'DE, HE HOLDS THESE POSSESSIONS." 

Henry the Eighth; from an original, by IloIIvin, 
at Kensington Palace. Queen Elizabeth ; from an 
original, by Zuccaro, at Hutfield House. Lord 
Chancellor Audley, K. (i. from Holbein. Marga- 
ret, daughter and heiress of Lord Chancellor Aud- 
ley, second wife to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk ; from 
4 v a portrait 



354 



ESSEX. 



& portrait in the possession of the Norfolk family. 
Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, K. G. 1572. 
Thomas, Earl of Suffolk, Lord High Treasurer to 
James the First, and youngest son to Thomas, 
Duke of Norfolk, by Margaret, his second wife ; at 
Knole, the seat of ths Duke of Dorset. The ori- 
ginal was pointed at the time lie was Lord Cham- 
berlain. Theophilns, Earl of Suffolk, K. G. eldest 
son of Thomas, Earl of Suffolk ; from an original 
in the family. All the above were copied by Re- 
becca. James, Earl of Suffolk, K. B. eldest son of 
Theophilus ; from an original late at Dingley, in 
Northamptonshire, the ancient seat of the Griffin 
family ; copied by Zeeman. Susannah, daughter 
of Henry, Earl of Holland, first wife of James, 
Earl of Suffolk ; by Zeeman, from the original at 
Dingley. Lady Essex, sole daughter of James, 
Earl of Suffolk, by his first wife, and the eldest of 
his tvTo co-heiresses, married to Edward, the first 
Lord Griffin, of Dingley ; original, by Sir Peter 
Lely. Edward, first Lord Griffin ; by Zeeman, 
from Sir Peter Lely. James, Lord Griffin, only 
son of Edward, Lord Griffin ; by Zeeman, from Sir 
Godfrey Kneller. Elizabeth, Countess of Ports- 
mouth, eldest daughter of James, Lord Griffin ; 
by Jervis. Honourable Ann Whitwell, youngest 
daughter of James, Lord Griffin ; by Rebecca, from 
Degarr. John Griffin Griffin, Lord Howard de 
Walden, and Baron Braybrooke, son of William 
Whitwell, Esq. of Northamptonshire, and of Ann, 
his wife ; by Rebecca. 

The Anti Room contains some curious old por- 
traits, amongst which is a half-length'of Lord Chan- 
cellor Audley ; presumed to be by Holbein. Por- 
traits of Algernon Percy, Earl of Northumberland; 
represented at full length, resting on an anchor ; 
Vandyke. A small head of Thomas, Duke of Nor- 
folk ; supposed to be painted by Mytens. Sir Ben- 
jamin Rudger ; by the same master. 

The State Dressing Room contains a valuable 
full length portrait of George the Second, by Pine ; 
acknowledged to be the most correct likeness ex- 
tant of this monarch ; his present majesty has had 
it copied for his own collection ; and it has been en- 
graved in mezzotinto by Dickinson. Prince Fer- 
dinand, and the Prince of Brunswick ; half-lengths. 
The State Bed Room is fitted up in a very sump- 
tuous and elegant style, with blue silk bed furniture, 
ornamented with gold lace, &c. 

The Library, though not large, contains a col- 
lection of choice books. This apartment is embel- 
lished with portraits of the late Lord Howard, and 
his two wives, by West, who has not only per- 
petuated a good likeness of his Lordship, but has 
given interest and value to the picture, by the style 
of composing it, and the historical emblems in the 
back ground, &c, Here is also a portrait of Lord 
Braybrooke, by Roniney ; and another of General 
Hervey, by Abbot. 

Over the cloisters is a long Gallery full of pic- 
tures ; and among them, a sweet little Landscape, 



with figures, by N. Goyen, dated 1642. A pair of 
Landscapes, by Vernet. A Winter Scene, view in 
Holland, with figures by Berkeley. A House on 
Fire ; Vanderneer. And the inside of a Church, 
P. Neefs. 

An elegant domestic Chapel, constructed, and 
highly ornamented, by the late Lord Howard, oc- 
cupies the north-west corner of the house. It is 
fitted up with clustered columns, pointed arches, 
and fan gro:.'ed tracery ; and, in imitation of a ca 
thedral, it has a niiye, side aisles, and transepts. At 
one end is the family seat, or gallery, the roof of 
which is decorated with the family arms, combining 
all the quarterings. The windows are S.'.'eU with 
painted glass, by Pickett of York, who executed 
them in 1771, 1'roin Biaggio Rebecca's designs. 

The grounds of this estate are pleasingly diversi- 
fied with hill and dale, the summits and sides of the 
former are richly adorned with wood ; the hitter is 
enlivened with the clear waters of the river Granta. 
which forms a wide canal in front of the house. A 
handsome bridge of three arches was built across 
this river by the late Mr. Adams. 

BADDOW.] Great Baddow, and Little Baddow, 
are both in the hundred of Chelmsford, the former 
is 11 miles south-east by east from the town of that 
name ; and the latter is two miles north by west 
from Danbury. The extensive, populous, and gen- 
teel village of Great Baddow, from its delightful 
situation, has become the residence of a large num- 
ber of respectable families. The manor was, pre- 
viously to the Conquest, part of the possessions of 
Algar, Earl of Mercia ; but in consequence of the 
rebellion of his son and successor, Earl Eadwine, 
who was slain in battle, this lordship, along with 
other valuable estates, was granted by William to 
the monastery of the Holy Trinity at Caen in Nor- 
mandy. In the reign of Henry the First, the crown 
was again possessed of it, and about that time the 
Earls of Gloucester became its proprietors ; and af- 
ter having been vested since in many noble families, 
is now in the possession of the family of Houblon. 
Two chantries of some value were formerly, in the 
church. 

The Church of Little Baddow contains a rich 
ajul splendid monument to the memory of Sir Henry 
Mildmay, Kiit. who died in October, 1639. He is 
represented iu a full suit of armour, reposing under 
a dome, which rests upon black marble pillars ; two 
female figures kneel at his feet ; the one, elderly, 
and dressed in a scarf and hood ; the other, young, 
and magnificently attired in the fashion of the times. 
The head of the knight is supported by a pillow. 
From a Latin inscription, upon an oval tablet, we 
learn that Sir Henry, having served as a soldier in 
the Irish wars, was for his gallantry knighted in the 
field. The carved effigies of two female figures, 
said by tradition to have been sisters and founders 
of this church, occupy recesses in the south wall of 
the centre aisle. Upon examining the two graves 
iu which it was supposed the corpses of the persons 

whose 



ESSEXi 



355 



whose figures stood in the niches were interred, in 
one of the.n were found three skeletons, and two in 
the other, but without the slightest vestige of wood, 
linen, coffin, or any other covering to the bodies. 
UN hard de Baddou, who founded University Hall, 
lu Catr.bridge, on the site now occupied by Clare 
Hall, sprung from a family which derived its name 
from one of these manors. 

BARKING.] The ancient, but now comparatively 
insignificant market town of Harking, is situated in 
the hundred of Becontree, nine miles E. N. E. from 
S.t. Paul's Cathedral, London. It. is supposed to 
have derived its name from B".rghing, signifying in 
Saxon the fortress in the meadow ; some consider- 
able intren.'hments being still visible in the fields ad- 
joining a farm called Uplmll, about \ mile N. from 
the town. Consideri" 1 * *!;t '!; !*T*M>e!H Ja< ?* would 
be too large lor a crimp, l\Ir. Lethieuller thought 
that it was the site, of a Roman town. That no 
traces of buildings Ivave been found on the spot, he 
accounts for, from the supposition that the mate- 
rials were used for building Barking Abbey, and for 
repairing it after it had been burnt by the Danes. 
When viewing the ruins of the Abbey Church, in 
the year 1750, he discovered the foundations of one 
of the great pillars composed partly of Rom an bricks: 
among the ruins was also found a coin of Magnen- 
tius. 

It is certain that, whatever may have been the 
origin of this town, its consequence, in after times, 
was derived from its Abbey, the establishment of 
which naturally caused an increase of population. 
In the H-irleian collection, at ttie British \luseum, 
is an ancient survey of the manor of Barking, with- 
out date, and imperfect. In this survey, the ser- 
vices due from the inferior tenants to the Abbess and 
Convent are stated at large. One of the tenants, 
named Robert Gerrard, was, among other services, 
to gather a full 'measure of nuts, called a pybot, 
four of which should make a bushel ; to go a long 
journey on foot, once a year to Colchester, Chelms- 
ford, Ely, or the like distances, on the business of 
the Convent, carrying a pack ; and other shorter 
journeys, such as Brentwood, &c. maintaining him- 
self upon the road. He was to pay a fine for the 
marriage of his daughter, if she married beyond the 
limits of the' manor, otherwise to make his peace 
with, the Abbess as well as he could ; and if his 
daughter was to have a bastard child, he was to 
make the best terms that he could for the fine called 
Kyldwifte ; it appears also, that he could not si II 
his ox, fed by himself, without the Abbess's permis- 
sion. Some of the tenants were obliged to watch, 
and guard thieves in the Abbess's prison. 

Barking Church, which is dedicated to St. Mar- 
garet, consists of a nave, a chancel, a south aisle, 
two north aisles, running parallel to each other, 
the whole length of the building ; and a square em- 
battled tower. Against the south wall of the chant- 
eel is a monument to the memory of Sir Cnarlca 
Montagu, brother of the first Earl of Manchester, 



who died in the 'year 16-25, aged sixty-one. Sir 
Charles is represented silting in a tt-nt, with his 
head reclined upon a desk, on which are liis helmet 
and gauntlets; the eiitmuv of which is guarded by 
centinels ; and iif-ar him stands a page with his 
horse. In this slnirtuiv aiv to he seen various other 
monuments, and funeral inscriptions. 

Previously to the Dissolution, three chantries 
were founded here. The Church itself was appro- 
priated to the Abbey ; and, as appears from the fol- 
lowing curious statement, copied by Lysons, from 
an ancient writing in the possession of the Vicar of 
Barking, the Vicar was dieted by the Lady Abbess : 
"In the year 14-52, after several disputes be- 
tween Catherine de la Pole, and Sir John Green- 
ing, then Vicar, an award was made to the follow*- 
iiiir effect : that, instead of a hog, a goose, a cheese, 
and a lamb, which the Vicarhad heretofore received 
of the Lady Abbess, he and his successors should 
have three yards of good cloth, two ells broad ; pro^ 
vision every day in the Convent for himself, and his 
servant, so long as he should not be of a litigious 
and contentious disposition, he sitting at the Chap- 
lain's table, and his servants with the domestics of 
the Convent : but if the said Vicar should, without 
licence of the Lady Abbess, or her deputy, have 
any familiarity or discourse with any one or two 
of the nuns, he should, for the first offence, (after 
proper admonition,) lose his diet for a week ; after 
a second admonition, forfeit a month's diet ; and if 
he should offend a third time, he should be excluded 
the Convent during life, unless restored by the 
Lady Abbess's special grace and favour. In all 
other respects he was to be satisfied with the profits 
of the vicarage; which were then valued at 27/. 55. 2rf. 
per annum." 

In the year 1787, a spacious and convenient work- 
house was built at Barking ; within which are apart- 
ments appropriated to the education of poor children. 

Queen Elizabeth built the Market House ; which, 
with the market place, Charles the First, in the 
year 1616, granted to Samuel and John Jones, who 
in the same year made them over to Thomas Fan- 
shaw and others. In 1679, the profits of the mar- 
ket, and of an annual fair, held on the 22d of Octo- 
ber, were made a present of to the poor of the parish, 
by Sir Thomas Fanshaw ; but the tolls are now of 
little value, being let, for 10/. per annum, since the 
market has declined. 

Barking parish is divided into four wards, each 
of whii-h has di.stinct officers. 

There is a wharf at Barking Creek, on the river 
Roding, which was made navigable to Ilford in the 
year 1730 ; from which the neighbourhood is- sup- 
plied with coals, timber, &c. A large flour mill, 
formerly belonging to Barking Abbey, is situated 
near the wuarl. The river, which flows in two 
branches on the west side of the town, unites with 
the Thames about two miles below it. The fishing 
trade is carried on upon an extensive scale, and 
furnishes employment for many of the inhabit auU. 

6 At 



ESSEX.' 



At Barking, and in the neighbourhood, large 
quantities oi' potatoes arc grown for the London 
markets. 

In the early part of the List century, several 
Saxon coins, amongst wlnVh was one of King 1 Bur- 
gred, were found towards the S. E. part of the 
town. 

BARKING ABBEY.] Of this onee flourishing esta- 
blishment, scarcely any vestiges now remain ; nor, 
within the memory of man, have any of its buildings 
been standing. It was dedicated to the Virgin 
Mary, and is said to have been the first Convent for 
women established in this kingdom. It was founded 
about the year ti70, in the reigns of Sebbi and Sig- 
here, Kings of the East. Saxons, by St. Erkenwald, 
Bishop of London, at the earnest desire of his sister 
Etheiburgh, the first Abbess. The monastic writers 
speak in high terms of this prelate's piety and zeal 
in the discharge of his episcopal functions ; and tell 
us, that, when he was grown weak through age 
and infirmities, he was carried about in a litter from 
place to place throughout his diocese, constantly 
teaching and instructing the people till his death, 
which happened about the year 685, whilst he was 
on a visit to his sister Etheiburgh, at Barking. 
After his death, great disputes are said to- have arisen 
between the Nuns at Barking, the Convent of Chert - 
sey, and the Citizens of London, about the inter- 
ment of his body, each claiming an exclusive right 
to his bones. This dispute was terminated by the 
intervention of a miracle, which declared in favour 
of the Londoners, who, having obtained the body, 
bore it off in triumph. The Bishop was canonized, 
and frequent miracles were said to be wrought at 
his tomb. In the reign of Stephen, a magnificent 
shrine was erected against the east wall of St. Paul's 
Cathedral, into which his bones were translated with 
great solemnity ; and vast sums were expended, 
from tune to time, in adorning it with gold, silver, 
and precious stones. The time of Ethelburgh's 
death is uncertain ; but she was buried at Barking, 
and received the honour of canonization. Her suc- 
cessor was Ilildelitha, who had been sent for by the 
founder out of France, io instruct his sister Ethel- 
burgh in the duties of her new station : she also ob- 
tained a place among the Romish Saints. Several 
Abbesses of the royal blood succeeded. In the year 
870, the Abbey was burnt to the ground by the 
Danes, and the Nuns either slain or dispersed. It 
lay desolate about a century, being within the terri- 
tories which were ceded by Alfred to Gormuud, the 
Dunish chief. About the middle of the tenth cen- 
tury it was rebuilt by King Edgar, as an atonement 
for iiis having violated the chastity of Wulfhilda, a 
beautiful Nun at Wilton, whom he appointed Abbess. 
Alter Wtilfhilda had presided many years, some 
(iisscntions arose between her and the priests of 
B.arking, who referred their cause to Elfrida, the 
widow of Edgar, and mother of Ethelred, whom 
tli'.'y requested to eject Wulfhilda, and assume the 
government herself; a proposal to which she readily 



assented. Wulfhilda retired to a religious house*' 
which she had founded at Horton, in Devonshire ; 
and the Queen putting herself at the head of this 
monastery, continued to preside oror it, twenty 
years; at the end of which term, a violent sickness 
seizing her at Barking, she repented of the injury 
she had done to Wulfhilda, and reinstated her. 
Wulfhilda, seven years afterwards, died at London, 
whither she had retired to avoid the Danish array, 
then invading England, and was enrolled among 
the Romish Saints. Carte and Brady relate, that 
William the Conqueror, soon after his arrival in 
England, retired to Barking Abbey, and thrre con- 
tinued till the fortress he had begun in London was 
completed. Maud, Henry the First's Queen, held 
the government of the Convent ; and it is not im- 
piYfiiftijle thnt Thi* rornrftion with Barking induced; 
her the more readily to build the bridge at Bow. 
Maud, wife of King Stephen, followed the example 
of her aunt, on the death of Agnes, the Abbess, in 
1136 ; but she soon resigned the charge to Adcliza, 
sister of Paris Fitz-.John, a Baron of considerable 
note, who was slain in a battle near Cardigan. 
During her government, Stephen, with his Queen, 
and the whole court, were entertained for several 
days at the Abbey. Her successor was Mary, sister 
to Thomas a Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, 
whose appointment is said to have been intended, by 
Henry the Second, as an atonement for the injus- 
tice he had done her family, who were banished the 
kingdom as a punishment for the Prelate's insolence. 
From the time of Mary a Becket, but few remark- 
able occurrences, except occasional inundations, are 
connected with the history of this Abbey. In the 
years 1380, and 1382, the Abbess and Convent 
state, that their income was diminished 400 marks 
per annum, by inundations, and that they had scarcely 
sufficient left to maintain them. In consequence of 
petitions, they obtained frequent exemptions from 
taxes, and other burthens ; writs to impress labour- 
ers to work at their banks, and licence to appropriate 
certain churches to the use of the Convent. Eleanor, 
Duchess of Gloucester, retired to Barking Abhry 
after the murder of her husband in 1397, and died 
there in 1399 ; having, as some say, professed her- 
self a Nun. During the time of the Queen Dowager, 
Catherine de la Pole, Edmund, and Jasper Tudor, 
her sons by Owen Tudor, were sent to be educated 
at this Abbey, a certain salary being allowed to the 
Abbess for their maintenance. The Nuns of Bark- 
ing were of the Benedictine order. The Abbess was 
appointed by the King till about the year 1-200, when 
by the interference of the Pope, the election was 
vested in the Convent, and confirmed by the royal 
authority. The Abbess of Barking was one of the 
four who were Baronesses in right of their station ; 
for being possessed of thirteen Knights' fees and a 
half, she held her lands of the King by a barony ; 
and, though her sex prevented her from having a 
seat in Parliament, or attending the King in the 
wars, yet she always furnished her quota of men, ' 

and 



ESSEX. 







357 



and had precedency over the Abbesses. In her 
convent she always lived in great state; her house- 
hold consisted of chaplains, an esquire, gentlemen, 
gentlewomen, yeomen, grooms, a clerk, a yeoman 
cook, a groom cook, a pudding wife, &c. 

This famous Abbey was surrendered to Henry the 
Eighth in November, 1539, when an annual pen- 
sion of 200 marks was granted to Dorothy Barley, 
the last Abbess, and various smaller pensions to the 
Nuns, then thirty in number. The site of the con- 
ventual buildings, with the demesne lands of the 
Abbey, were granted, by Edward the Sixth, to 
Edward Fynes, Lord Clinton, who the next day 
conveyed them to Sir Richard Sackville. Since 
that period they have passed through various fami- 
lies. The manor of Barking, which probably formed 
part of the original endowment of the Abbey, con- 
tinued in the crown from the Dissolution till the 
year 1628, when Charles the Second sold it to Sir 
Thomas Fanshaw, for the sum of 200/. reserving a 
fee farm rent of 160/. which is now payable to the 
Earl of Sandwich. The manor has become the pro- 
perty of Edward Hulse Esq. in right of Mary, his 
wife, niece to the late Smart Lethieullier, Esq. who 
obtained it by purchase in the year J754. The 
annual revenues of the Abbey, according to Speed, 
were valued, on the suppression, at 1084/. 6s. 2</. 

The Abbey Church with the whole of the conven- 
tual buildings, occupied an extensive plot of ground. 
The site of the church is apparent just without the 
worth wall of the present church yard. Mr. Lethieul- 
lier, by employing persons to dig amongst the ruins, 
procured a ground plan of this edifice, from which 
it appears, that the length, from east to west, was 
170 feet; the length of the choir, sixty feet ; the 
length of the transept, 150 feet ; the breadth of the 
nave and side aisles, forty-four feet ; the breadth of 
the transept, twenty-eight feet ; the diameter qf the 
bhse of the columns which supported the roof, was 
eight feet and a half. Amongst the ruins, an ancient 
fibula, and a gold ring, have been found ; both of 
which (the former from its legends, the latter from 
the salutation of the Virgin Mary, engraven on it) 
seem to have belonged to some of the inmates of the 
Convent. At the entrance of the present church- 
yard is an ancient square embattled gateway, with 
octagonal turrets, also embattled, rising from the 
ground on each side. The entrance arch is pointed ; 
above it is a niche, with a canopy and pinnacles. 
The apartment over the entrance is, in an old record, 
named, "The Chapel of Holy Roodlofte atte-gate, 
edified to the honour of Almighty God, and of the 
Holy Rood." Against the wall in this Chapel is a 
representation of the Holy Reod, or crucifixion, in 
alto-relievo. This structure is generally called Fire- 
Bell Gate, from having anciently contained a bell, 
supposed to have been that of the curfew. 

BARRINGTON.] (See Hatfield Broad Oak.) 

BARTLOW HILLS.] In the parish of Ashdown, 
(four miles north-east by east fro-n Saffron Walden) 
separated from Bartlow, in the adjoining county of 

TOL. n. no. 71. 



Cambridge, only by a rivulet, are four large con- 
tiguous barrows, called the Bartlow Hills, from 
their situation with respect to Bartlow church. 
These are vulgarly, though erroneously, regarded 
as the tumuli raised over the slain in the battle 
fought between Edmond Ironside, and the Danish 
King Canute, in the year 1016. It is evident, in- 
deed, from our account of Assingdon, in a preced- 
ing page, that the place of action should be sought 
for rather in the vicinity of the sea, than at the 
northern extremity of the county. Camden states, 
that three stone coffins, with broken human bones 
in them, were found in one of these barrows ; and 
Ilollingshed affirms that two bodies were found in 
one stone coffin. Upon this, Mr. Gougli remarks, 
that we do not find the use of stone coffins amongst 
the northern nations, in their Pagan state ; and the 
Danes were not converted till long after the time of 
Canute. The origin of these barrows, therefore, 
cannot now be traced. 

BASSINGBOURNE HALL.] Bassingbourne Hall, the 
residence of the late Sir Peter Parker, is a large 
and handsome building which derives its name from 
the ancient family of Bassingbourne, some of whom, 
were settled here in the time of Henry the Third. 
After being in the hands of various families, it was 
purchased in the year 1745, under a decision of "the 
Court of Chancery, by Francis Bernard, Esq. who 
erected the present mansion. The house, which 
has an elegant front, stands on an eminence, from 
which there is a delightful view of the adjacent 
country. 

BAYTHORNE HALL.] Baythorne Hall, an ancient 
building, which was modernized, and considerably 
improved a few years ago, is pleasantly situated in 
a large park, near Ridgewcll, and is the property 
and residence of George Pyke, Esq. 

BEMFLEET.] North Bcmfleet, or Benfleet, an- 
ciently Beamflete, lies oj miles west from Rayleigh. 
South Bemfleet is 3| miles south-west by south 
from Rayleigh. At the latter was a castle, built 
by Hastings, the celebrated Danish pirate, and 
which Matthew of Westminster described, as hav- 
ing deep and wide ditches. This fortress, Alfred 
the Great took and destroyed, in the year 894; 
ilastings's wife and two sons, taken therein, were 
sent to London. The creeks entering the Thames 
round Bemfleet, are celebrated for their oysters. 

BELCHAMP.] Belclmmp, or Bc-lchamp Walter, 
in the hundred of Hinckford, is 1| miles north-east 
by north from Castle lledingham. The Church, 
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, is lofty and neat, 
and contains an orchestra, with a fine toned organ. 
Here is a capacious vault which belongs to the Ray- 
mond family ; and an elegant marble monument 
dedicated to them in the chancel. Mrs. Raymond 
has established in this village, a Sunday School, for 
fifty children belonging to the poor. 

Belchamp Hall, in this parish, is the residence 
of the Rev. Samuel Raymond, one of whose an- 
cestors came into England with the Conqueror, and 
4 x whose 



358 



ESSEX. 



whose family have resided in this neighbourhood 
upwards of two centuries. The house is a sub- 
stantial and commodious building, whose principal 
or south-eastern front, is lor the most part com- 
posed of foreign bricks. It is situated on a pleasant 
lawn, sloping gradually to a small river, within 200 
yards of the front. A spacious and extensive ter- 
race, skirted with lofty trees, at the end of which 
is an ancient building, ornamented with painted 
glass, lies to the south. At the other end is a lofty 
mount, with another ornamental building on its 
summit. This mansion contains an interesting col- 
lection of pictures by some of the most esteemed 
masters ; among them are the following : The 
Wise Men's Offering, an altar-piece ; Albert Durer. 
This picture, with a large gun, some pistols, and 
powder llasks, inlaid with gold and irory, were 
presented to the Raymonds, by Sir William Harris, 
a sea officer, who took them, with other property, 
on the defeat of the Spanish Armada, in 1588. A 
three-quarter portrait of Sir Hugh Middleton, 
Bart, in whose public spirit the New River origi- 
nated ; another of his wife ; both by Cornelius Jan- 
sen. Goldingham Hall, in the parish of Buhner, 
adjoining Belehamp, was the residence of Sir 
Hugh. 

BELLEVUE HOUSE.] Bellevue House, near the 
western boundary of the parish of Walthaiustow, 
and adjoining that of Woodford, was the seat of the 
late Mr. Charles Cooke, bookseller, of Paternoster 
Row, London. " The house is an elegant brick 
building, with stone dressings ; the principal front 
has a semicircular portico of Portland-stone, sup- 
ported by columns twenty-two feet high, of the 
loaic order. Mr. Edward Gyfford was the archi- 
tect." " The ground was laid out by Mr. Sandys, 
Pownall Terrace, Lambeth, who practised under 
the late celebrated Mr. Ernes. Mr. Sandys has in- 
creased the beauty of this enchanting spot by a lake 
he has formed, which from the house has a delight- 
ful effect ; nor are the extensive walks, which wind 
in easy and pleasant directions, less attractive ; the 
shrubs, clumps, &c. are arranged with such infinite 
judgment, that they exhibit much practice and ex- 
quisite taste. The house stands on such an emi- 
nence that from the upper rooms may be seen the 
horizon over London. The west front commands a 
beautiful diversified prospect over the vale of the 
Lea, and into the counties of Middlesex and Hert- 
fordshire ; the south into Surry and Kent ; the 
north and east into Epping Forest, and a.great part 
of Essex. The ground comprises about 75 acres, 
principally woodland ; which, with the irregularity 
of the surface, add much to the grandeur of the 
scene ; in short, nature and art have done so much, 

* This gentUman was born in the year 15S6, In 1602, he 
became a student of Christ College, Cambridge, and was af- 
terwards cliosf n Fellow. He was noted for his intense appli- 
cation. So great was his thirst for knowledge, that he refused 
several valuable preferments, from an apprehension that his pur- 
6 



that its collective beauties arc not to be equalled 
within the circuit often miles of London." 

BELL HOUSE.] In the parish of Alveley, 1 
miles north-east from Purfleet, is Bell House, one 
of the seats of the baronial family of Dacre. The 
mansion is a spacious edifice, situated in a pleasant 
park, about three miles in circumference, covered 
with fine oaks, and other trees. This edifice was 
erected in the time of Henry the Eighth, but was 
altered, and highly improved, by the late Lord. 
The decorations, which are exceedingly neat, were 
made after designs of his own. The Belhus family 
gave name to the manor, which, by marriage, de- 
scended to the Barrets, in whom it remained for 
200 years ; their last descendent, Sir Edward Bar- 
rett, Knt. Chancellor of the Exchequer in the reign 
of Charles the First, bequeathed all his estates in 
this county to his cousin, Richard Lennard, Esq. 
an ancestor of the Lords Dacre. A peculiar privi- 
lege of excluding any person, however high in rank, 
from entering it in pursuit of game, belongs to this 
manor. 

BERDEN.] At Berden, in the half hundred of 
Clavering, 5| miles north-west from Stansted 
Mountfiehet, is the site of a small priory of Augus- 
tine Canons, founded by the de Rochfords who held 
lands here in the time of Henry the Third, and de- 
dicated to St. John the Evangelist. At the Disso- 
lution, its possessions were valued at 29/. 6s. 4rf. 
The learned Joseph Mede, A. M. was a native of 
this place.* 

BERGHOLT. Near the village of West Bcrgholt 
(situated four miles north-west from Colchester) 
upon the north side of the Colne, and a few miles 
north-north-west of Lexden, are the remains of a 
circular intrenchment, exactly corresponding with 
the account which Cassar gives us of the British op- 
piila, and which is supposed by Dr. Stukeley, to 
have been the palace of Cunobeliue, whose tumulus 
he found on Lexden Heath. These remains at Lex- 
den, and Bergholt, are conjectured by Morant, to 
have been the Roman castra and cs/e//</, which 
Boadicea stormed and razed during the short-lived 
vigour of her opposition to these unwelcome and 
oppressive enemies. 

BYCKNACRE.] On the west side of the road lead- 
ing from Danbury to Woodham Ferry, are the. ruins 
of Bycknacre Priory, founded for Black Canons by 
Maurice Fitz-Geffery, Sheriff of Essex in the reign 
oi Henry the Second, who added much to its en- 
dowments, and granted to the Canons, the site of a 
hermitage which formerly stood here. In the reign 
of Henry the Seventh, the possessions of this house 
had been so much diminished by inattention, that it 
was nearly abandoned ; and was granted by the 

suits in the path of literature, would be interrupted by attending 
to their duties. He died in the year 1638. His most valuable 
work is generally considered to be his Comments on the Apo- 
calvpse, 

King 



ESSEX. 



359 



Kins; to the priors and monks of Elsing Spittle, 
London. After the Dissolution, the manor ol 
Bycknacre, with the site of the Priory, was given by 
Henry the Eighth to Henry Pulsted, who, in 1548, 
sold it to Sir Walter Mildmay, of whose grandson 
George Barrington, Esq. of Little Badow, pur- 
chased it, and his descendants are still its pro- 
prietors. 

BILEIGH ABBEY.] Bileigh Abbey, situated in 
the hundred of Dcngey, a mile and a half north- 
west by west from Maiden, was founded in the year 
1180, by Robert de Martcll, for monks of the Pre- 
moustratensian order. Their possessions were af- 
terwards increased by various benefactions, the an- 
nual value of which, at the Dissolution, according 
to Speed, amounted to 196/. Qs. 5d. when nine Ca- 
nons were maintained on the foundation. Some 
parts of the building now remain, which are con- 
verted into a farm-house ; and the Chapel, the most 
perfect, serves the purpose of a hog-stye, &c. 
This apartment, which was handsome, was only 
thirty-six feet long, and eighteen broad. The roof, 
which is supported by three slender Purbeck co- 
lumns, is composed of very tine grained lime stone, 
and has groined arches. In this chapel were buried 
Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex, who died April 
ith, 1483; and Isabel, his lady; and the Lady 
Mary Nevill, of Essex. 

BILLERICAY.] Billericay, 9| miles south-south- 
west from Chelmsford, and 23 east-north-east from 
London, is a chapelry attached to Great Burgh- 
stead. Edward IV. granted it the privilege of 
holding a market, in 1476. In Camden's time, it 
was a market-town of considerable note and opu- 
lence ; but it has fallen to decay, in consequence of 
its trade being taken by the Romford and Chelms- 
ford markets. The chapel is conjectured to have 
been built in the 14th century. 

BIRCH.] In the parish of Great Birch, five miles 
south-west from Colchester, is the artificial mount, 
or keep of a castle, said to have been fortified against 
Henry the Third, by Sir Ralph Geruon, who then 
held the manor ; but supposed by Morant, to be a 
continuation of the stupendous Roman works on 
Lexdeu Heath, which may be traced still further 
than this spot. 

BIRDBROOK.] In the parish of Birdbrook, 6-*- 
miles north-west from Castle Hedingham, stands 
Birdbrook Hall, which, with other estates in the vi- 
cinity, is the property of Sir W. B. Rush, of Wim- 
bledon, in Surrey. 

BISHOP HALL.] This mansion, the site of which 
is surrounded by a moat, inclosing an area of about 
200 yards square, in the parish of Lamborne, was 
the residence of Henry Spencer, the warlike Bi- 
shop of Norwich, who suppressed Ket's rebellion, 
in the 14th century. 

BLUNT'S WALLS.] Under this denomination, 
about one mile from Billericay, are some earth 
works, which according to Morant are the remains 
of a ditch and rampart, of about four acres ; part 



of which constitutes a farm-yard ; the rampart is 
much above the level of the fields. The same au- 
thor makes mention of several artificial mounts, timt 
were within the. enclosure, as being nearly levelled. 
Various fragments of urns, patera?, and other earth- 
en vessels, about three feet below the surface of a 
high hill near Billericay ; together with Roman 
copper coins, and two silver ones, of the Emperors 
Trajan and Adrian, are mentioned by Morant, as 
having been discovered. And for these reasons, he 
thinks that a Roman villa, or small station, was ill 
this neighbourhood. 

BLACKMORE.] The village of Blackmore is si- 
tuated 3j- miles north-west by west from Ingate- 
stonc. Near the church is the site of a priory of 
Austin Canons regular, founded about the reign of 
Henry the Second, by Sir John de Saundfort, or 
Sampford, and dedicated to St. Lawrence. After 
the Dissolution, the manor and site of the priory 
were granted by Henry the Eighth, to John Smyth, 
and his heirs. The Church is a small ancient build- 
ing, supposed to have been appropriated to the use 
of the priory. The Manor House of Blackmore 
is called Jericho ; it was the scene of the illicit 
pleasures of Henry the Eighth. 

BOCKINO.] The extensive village of Bocking is 
situated in the hundred of Hinckford, two miles 
north from Braintree, to which it forms a suburb. 
It principally consists of one long street, extending 
along the high road, and containing several good 
houses, occupied by families of respectability. In 
the reign of King Ethelred, the manor was possess- 
ed by /Ethelric and Leoswine, two noble Saxons, 
who, in the year 1000, granted it, with other lands, 
to St. Saviour's Priory, Canterbury, for the sup- 
port of the monks. It continued attached to that 
See till the Dissolution, when Henry the Eighth 
alienated it, in the year 1540, to Roger Wentworth, 
Gent, and Alice, his wife, for the sum of 875/. 11s. 
3d. In the year 170 J, it was bequeathed by Prisca 
Cobourne, widow, of Stratlbrd-le-Bow, to the 
Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy, towards the 
maintenance of the poor widows and orphan chil- 
dren, seeking relief from that establishment. 

The manufacture of baize forms the principal 
trade of Bocking, in addition to what arises from 
the passage of goods between the metropolis, and 
die more eastern counties. There are several foiling 
and corn-mills on the river Pant, named the Black- 
water, in the lower part of its course. 

Bocking,, which is a peculiar of the Archbishop 
of Canterbury, is subject only to his jurisdiction, or 
to the Dean of Bocking, his Commissary. It is 
considered the chief of the four peculiars in this 
county, as well as of the three in Suffolk, belong- 
ing to the See of Canterbury. 

On an eminence, two miles north-west from Bock- 
ing, stands the Church, a spacious structure, dedi- 
cated to the Virgin Mary. It is supposed to have 
been built in the 14th century. It contained three 
altars, and five chantries, previously to the reforma- 
tion. 



360 



ESSEX. 



tion. The effigies of a man ami woman, supposed 
to represent some of the Doreward family, the pro- 
prietors of a subordinate manor in this parish du- 
ring the greater part of the 14th, and 15th centuries, 
are to be seen in the south aisle of this chapel. In 
the reign of Henry the Sixth, one of them, John 
Doreward, Esq. founded and endowed an Hospital 
here for seven poor people. This Hospital still 
exists, as well as a Charity School for the educa- 
tion of 30 poor boys, which Dr. Gauden, Bishop 
of Worcester, endowed. 

BOREHAM.] The pleasant village of Boreham, 
Sf miles north-east by east from Chelmsford, is 
supposed, by Morant, to have been a market-town 
in the time of the Saxons. At the period of the 
Domesday Survey, the whole manor was held by 
Eustace, Earl of Bologne, Suene, of Essex, and 
William de Warrenne ; it is now divided among 
various families. In the Church, is a part called 
the Sussex Chapel, from its having been huilt -at 
the expence of Sir Thomas 'Radcliffe, afterwards 
Earl of Sussex, who, with his father, grand-father, 
and nine other persons of this noble family, lies bu- 
ried in the vault beneath. In the Chapel are the 
mutilated remains of a splendid monument, erected 
by Earl Thomas, to perpetuate the memory of him- 
self and his noble relatives, which cost him near 
300/. Robert Iladcliffe, first Earl of Sussex of that 
family, who died in 1512 ; Henry, his son, who 
died in 1556 ; and Thomas, his grandson, who 
built the Chapel, and died in 1583, clad in armour, 
appear on the top in a recumbent posture. Con- 
formably to the will of Earl Thomas, the remains 
of the two former, with those of their ladies, were 
removed hither from the church of St. Lawrence 
Pountney, in London. The titles and conduct of 
these exalted personages, are inscribed in Latin, on 
tablets of black marble. At one end of the vault, 
bricked up, are the leaden coffins which contain the 
bodies ; several of them conform to the human 
shape, on which are inscribed the names, &c. of the 
persons within. A neat stone, and white brick oc- 
tagonal mausoleum of the Waltham family is in the 
church-yard, in which lies the late Lord Waltham, 
of New Hall. The following inscription is on its 
front : 

Mausoleum 

Gentis Wa'lthamianas 

M.DCC.LX1V. 

BORLEY.] The village of Borley,^ situated 6J 
miles north-east by north from Castle Hedingham, 
suffered considerably by fire,' in the summer oi 1810. 
The Church contains a splendid monument to the 
memory of several individuals of the Waldegrave 
family, who have held the manor from the time of 
Henry the Eighth. This monument is fourteen feet 
in height. Under a rich cornice, supported by Co- 
rinthian pillars, are incumbent figures of iSir Ed- 
ward Waldegrave, and his Lady Frances ; the for- 
mer of whom died in lool ; the latter in 1599. Near 



them are the effigies of their five children, two sons 
and three daughters ; at the top of the canopy are 
the family arms ; and round the edge a Latin in- 
scription. The whole is gilt and painted, and in- 
closed by palisadoes of iron. 

Bow BRIDGE.] This once celebrated bridge, 
crosses the river Lea, near the village of Stratford, 
about two miles east from London on the great Es- 
sex road. All our ancient historians concur in as- 
cribing the first erection of this bridge to Maude, 
or Matilda, the Queen of Henry the First, and 
Stowe, in particular, thus records the origin of its 
foundation : " This Matilda, when she saw the 
forde to be dangerous for them that travelled by the 
old foord over the river of Lue, (for she herself had 
been well washed in the water,) caused two stone 
bridges to be builded, of the which, one was situated 
over Lue, at the head of the towneof Stratford, now 
called Bow, because the bridge was arched like a 
bow, a rare piece of worke, for before that time the 
like had never been seen in England. The other 
over the little brooke commonly called Chavelse 
Bridge. She made the King's highway of gravel 
between the two bridges," and gave certain manors 
to the Abbess of Berking ; and a mill, commonly 
called Wiggon or Wiggen Mill, " for the repayr- 
inge of the Bridges and highwaie. But afterwards 
Gilbert de Mountfichet founded the Abbey of Strat- 
ford in the marishes, the Abbot whereof, by giving 
a piece of money purchased to himself the manors 
and mill aforesaid, and covenanted to repair the 
Bridges and way, till at length he laid the charge 
upon one Hugh Pratt, who lived near the Bridges 
and causeway, allowing him certain loaves of bread 
daily ; and by the alms of passengers he kept them 
in due repair, as did his son William after him, who 
by the assistance of Robert Passelew, the Chief 
Justice in the time of Henry the Third, obtained 
these tolls of every cart carrying corn, wood, coal, 
&c. one penny ; of every one carrying tasel, two- 
pence ; and of one carrying a dead Jew, eight- 
pence : and put up a bar with locks on lockkebreggs ; 
but Philip Basset, and the Abbot of Waltham, hav- 
ing broke the bar, rather than pay the tole, the 
bridges and causeway remained unrepaired. In the 
mean time Eleanor, Queen of King Henry the 
Third, caused them to be mended at her own charge 
by William the Keepef- of her Chapel ; and Wil- 
liam de Carleton kept them afterwards in repair, 
till a new agreement between the Abbess and Abbot 
took place for that purpose." In the 17th century 
the tenants of the Abbey lands seem to have been 
unwilling to fulfill their agreement ; but it was de- 
cided by a court of law, that they must abide by the 
tenure by which they held the lands. The nume- 
rous repairs which the bridge has necessarily under- 
gone, render it impossible to say what part of the 
original structure at this time remains. The pre- 
sent Bridge, which has three, arches, is evidently of 
great antiquity. About 130 years ago a new cut 
across the meadows and low grounds, was made 

from 



ESSEX. 



361 



from the river Lea * by which several miles of th 
navigation to Ware, in Hertfordshire, are saved. 

BOWER HALL.] Bower Hall, pleasantly situatec 
in a small park, with contiguous gardens, in the pa- 
rish of Steeple Bumstead, 8 miles N.W. by W. from 
Cattle Hedingham, was, in the reign of Edward III. 
amongst the possessions of Sir John Knevet, Lord 
Chancellor, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court 
of King's Bench. It was subsequently alienated ; 
and, about the 14th of Henry VI. it came to the 
Bendish family, ancient landholders in the parish of 
Steeple Burastead.* Since the death of Sir Henry 
Bendish, Bart, the estate has been in the Ander- 
sons. The house is very handsome and conve- 
nient. 

BRADFIELD.] Great Bradfield, 21 miles E. S. E. 
from Manningtree, was formerly a market-town. 
In the church was a chantry, founded and endowed 
with the sum of 6/. l'3s. id. annually, by William 
Bendlowes, sole serjeant at law, for seventy-three 
days, in the reign of Queen Mary. This gentleman 
died in the year 1584, and was buried in the chan- 
cel, where his virtues and talents are recorded in a 
long Latin epitaph. 

BRADWKLL.] In the little Church of Bradwell, 
2 miles W. from Great Coggeshall, is a sumptuous 
monument, of various coloured marble, to the me- 
mory of Sir Anthony Maxey, and his Lady, to whom 
this manor belonged, in the reign of Queen Eliza- 
beth. Pillars, of the Corinthian order, support the 
cornice. The effigies of Sir Anthony, and his lady, 
kneeling, are beneath an arch on the left ; and 
those of his son and daughter-in-law, in similar 
postures ou the right. This is the place of inter- 
ment of several others of this family. 

BRADWELL LODGE.] This elegant villa, formerly 
the seat of the Rev. Sir II. B. Dudley, Bart, the 
incumbent of the living of Brad well -juxta- mare, in 
which parish it stands, is situated nearly in the cen- 
tre between the rivers Blackwater, Crouch, and 
Colno, which here join the German Ocean. The 
lodge, which was erected by J. Johnson, Esq. the 
architect of the Shire Hall at Chelmsford, between 
the years 1781, and 1786, is a very elegant build- 
ing. A beautiful observatory, ornamented with 
Ionic columns, which have been so contrived as to 
form the chimnies of the whole building, has been 
constructed on its top. Many decoys for catching 
wild fowl, are in the vicinity. 

BHAINTREE.] The market-town of Braintrce, for- 
merly Great Raine, is situated in the hundred of 



* Of Urn family, Sir Thomas fiendish, Bart, who was born 
here, was a distinguished partisan of Charles the First, in whose 
cause he was sometime imprisoned by the House of Commons; 
but, after his liberation, he obtained so much renown for his 
integrity and talents, that, in 1647, he was sent, by connivance 
of the Parliament, as Ambassador Extraordinary to the Otto- 
man Porte. He continued in Turkey fifteen years, transacting 
the business of his embassy with great address and spirit ; and, 
though letters for his recal were sent to Constantinople, by the 
Protector, Oliver, he refued to obey the mandate, or to resign 

VOL. II. NO. 71. 



Hinckford, 11 miles N.E. from Chelmsford, and~4f) 
N.E. from London. It is an extensive straggling 1 
place, on a rising ground, connected, on the north, 
with Bocking, a village already described. Origin- 
ally a hamlet to Raines, it became a distinct parish 
about the commencement of the 13th century ; and, 
through the interest of William de St. Maria, Bi- 
shop of London, it was constituted a market-town, 
by King John. The manor, it should be observed, 
was held by the Bishops of London, till the time of 
Edward VI. The old manor bouse, or palace of 
the bishops, has long been destroyed. 

The rise of Braintrce has been attributed to the 
convenience of its situation on the high road from 
London into Suffolk and Norfolk, and to the build- 
ing of inns, &c. for the accommodation of the nu- 
merous pilgrims from the south, who, in the days of 
Catholic superstition, were continually travelling to 
the shrines of our Lady of Walsingham, and St. 
Edmund. Subsequently to the Reformation, the 
town was comparatively deserted ; but, in the reign 
of Elizabeth, the Protestants, who fled from the 
persecution of the Duke d'Alva, came for refuge to 
England, and many of them settled here, where they 
carried on a considerable trade in the manufacturing 
of baize, and other sorts of woollen cloth, by which 
the place again beeivnie rich and flourishing. Of 
late years this place has greatly decreased. The 
government of the town is in a select vestry, com- 
posed of 24 parishioners, who were styled gover- 
nors of the town, and town magistrates ; as early 
as the year 1584. 

On the south side of the town, stands Braintree 
Church, a spacious structure, occupying a high spot 
of ground, apparently the site of a camp. It has 
a lofty spire rising from a tower at the west end, 
cased with slate ; the body of the edifice is mostly 
flint. This Church was founded in the reign of 
Edward the Third ; but it has since been greatly 
enlarged, particularly in the reign of Henry the 
Eighth, when the roof was heightened, nnd the 
south aisle built. The expeuce of these alterations 
was partly defrayed by receipts arising from the 
performance of three plays acted in the Church ; 
the first of which, intituled St. Swithin, was acted 
in 1523 ; the second, St. Andrew, on the Sunday 
before Relique Sunday, in 1525 ; and the third, 
Placy Dacy, alias St. Ewestacy, in 1534. After 
;he Reformation, flu; players' robes were sold by 
:he churchwardens for fifty shillings, and the play- 
jooks for twenty shillings. In the chancel is an 



)is commission, without the king's onlrr. On this rrfusal, lie 
ivas impeached for high treason ; and probably only escaped 
leatl), by his determination noi to return 10 lin^land while tltrr 
enemies of royalty held supreme power. Alter the Restoration 
le was recalled by Charles the Second, with many promises of 
eward for his services ; though they do not appear to have l>een 
ulfilled. He died here, in his own mansion, in 16*4, and was 
>uried in the Church, where many others of his family lie in- 
ombed ; and some of whom are commemorated by elaborate 
monuments. 

4 Y inscription 



362 



ESSEX. 



inscription to the memory of Dr. Samuel Collins, 
who was the son of a minister of this parish, and 
for some years principal physician to Peter the 
Great. 

The town of Braintree has, many years, abound- 
ed with dissenters. The streets are mostly narrow, 
and incommodious , and many of the building's are 
of timber, and very old. The number of houses, as 
returned under the last act, was 518; of inhabi- 
tants, 2-298. Numerous bequests have been made 
for the service of the poor ; the most celebrated of 
which, was that of Henry Smith, Esq. Alderman 
and Salter, of London ; who, in the reign of Charles 
the First, left 2800/. to purchase an estate in this 
county : the proceeds to be distributed among the 
poor of the five parishes of Braintree, Terling, 
Tolleshunt-D'Arcy, Dover-Court, and Henham. 

BRAXTKD LODGE.] In the parish of Braxted, 
near Witham, stands Braxted Lodge, formerly the 
seat of Peter du Cane, Esq. Occupying a gentle 
eminence, in the centre of a small park, it com- 
mands some very pleasing- prospects. The house is 
very handsome. 

BRENTWOOD.] Brentvvood is situated in the hun- 
dred of Chafford, 11 miles S.W. from Chelmsford, 
and 18 E.N.E from London. Camden conjec- 
tures this to be the site of Antouiuus's Caesaro- 
magus ; but in this opinion he is unsupported by 
other antiquaries. Salmon, however, informs us, 
that pateras, and other Roman relics, have been 
found on the military road which leads from Bille- 
ricay towards Ongar ; he further observes, that in 
the vicinity of Shenfield, a village a little to the 
north of Brentwood, two Roman lares were dug up. 
Traces of what is conjectured to have been a Cas- 
trum Exploratum, have also been observed at South 
Weald, a small village south-west of Brentwood, 
and on the verge of Weald Hal! Park. The form 
of this camp was circular ; it occupied about seven 
acres, and was surrounded by a single ditch. 

The present town, vulgarly pronounced Burnt- 
wood, is a chapelry in the parish of South-weald. 
It is situated on a commanding eminence, on each 
side the high road from London to Colchester. It 
contains many inns, aiul public houses; but the 
buildings are irregular and mean. The Crown Inn 
is of very ancient, foundation ; as, even in Salmon's 
time, it was reputed to have had that sign for three 
centuries. The assizes were once held here ; and, 
m the High Street, are the remains of a town-hall 
and prison > the occupants of which hold them, on 
condition of.putting them in repair, when the assizes 
are again removed thither. Here is a good Gram- 
mar School, endowed by Sir Anthony Brown, in 
1537. The Chapel was founded about the year 
1221, at the intercession of David, Prior of St. 
Osyth, for the use of the tenants of a manor be- 
longing to that monastery : it is a small ancient 
structure, consisting of a body and chancel. The 
number of inhabitants, as returned under the late 
act, was 1238 ; that of houses, 231. 



BROOK STREET.] This is another chapelry, or 
hamlet, appertaining to South Weald, situated on 
the high road, a mile and a half W. S. W. from 
Brentwood. An hospital, for lepers, was founded 
here before the year 1300, by the Bruyns, of South 
Okendon, whose family retained the presentation of 
the master or warden. This was granted under the 
name of a Free Chapel, to Sir Anthony Brown, but 
has since been parcelled out. 

BURGHSTED.] Burghsted Grange, or Great Burgh- 
sted, is in the hundred of Barstable, 2 miles S.S.E. 
from Billericay. In ancient times, it formed part of 
the possessions of the Abbey, at Stratford Lang- 
thorne. Henry the Third granted to its abbot and 
monks, the privilege of keeping a market and fair ; 
but, before the time of Camden, the former had been 
discontinued. The manor was granted to Sir Ri- 
chard Riche, by Henry the Eighth, sometime after 
the Dissolution, but is now the property of Lord 
Petre, one of whose ancestors purchased it in the 
year 1600, of Sir Richard. Handsome monuments 
to the memory of Felton Neville, Esq. and Joseph 
Fishpoole, gentleman, are to be seen in the Church. 
On the south side of the communion table, is a small 
niche, neatly ornamented ; and another in the south 
wall. The doorway, on the north, has a pointed 
arch ; an angel is on each side of the spandrils ; one 
of which bears a scroll ; the other a book. The 
head of a King is at the head of the outer- moulding 
on the east side ; and that of a Bishop on the west : 
an ornamented niche is below the latter ; but that 
on the other side has been filled up. 

BURES.]- -There are two villages of this name : 
Bures St. Mary, 6| miles E. N. E. from Halstead ; 
and Little Bures, or Bures ad montem, (6 miles E. 
by N. from Halsted) so called from a high keep near 
the Church, probably belonging to a Castle of some 
of the noble family of Sackville ; which was settled 
here at an early period. Kach of these villages is 
partly in the county of Suffolk. The following ex- 
tract from a letter, dated Bures hamlet, in Essex, 
December 6th, 1721, contains an account of a re- 
markable draught of fish, which was taken in this 
neighbourhood : " According to your desire, wee 
acquaint you, that about twenty-five years since, 
there was taken out of the river Stower, which parts 
fc]ssex and Suffolk, at the bridge belonging to Buers 
Parsonage, in a Blacksmith's yard, on the Suffolk 
side, at one draft of about forty poles or perches 
in length, with a drag and Hew net, full forty 
bushells of fish, eight gallons to a bushell, most part 
of them Roach, the other Pikes and Perch ; and 
two or three mouths after, in the same place, were 
taken, at one single draft, ten bushells more of the 
same sort." 

Sir Philip Stephens, Bart, many years Secretary 
at the Admiralty was a native of one of these vil 
lages. 

CANEWDON.] This village is situated 3| miles 
N.E. by N. from Rochford. The following curious 
extract is from the parish register : 

6 " John 



ESSEX. 



3(53 



" John Jonson the Quaker died the 18th of 
October 1667. 

" James Innraan the Quaker died the sixt of 
Nouember 1667. 

" lonson th' Quaker on th' tenth of October 
^ ' Spoiled for a Speaker Faint*t give over 

TV Spirit moved him with a new found greeting 

To meete with Death at a Silent Meeting, 

Where tis fear'd for Speaking too much before 

He must Sit Silent there For ever-more. 

He liv'd without th' Church without th' Church he died, 

And of Church Reites is justly now deni'd, 

And without Sighth orTeare ; or Prayer said, 

lieast like in Earth lohn lohnson now is lai'd. 

Post after him goes Iiinman lames another 

Of the Quaking crue ; a Speaking Brother 

Whose Wife went before ; that Holy Syster 

All in such hast; as if th' Deuil mist her. 

Next with like speed (For there could be no less) 

Post hast goes Thorn Fritton, to nuke up th' Messe. 

If slie Death, thus robes -f- thee of thy Quakers, 

Poor Deuil what wilt doe, for Speakers. 

Thy Chappel sure will downe, thy Trade decay ; 

Oh that Gods Church, may Hue to see that Day." 

CANFIELD.] Little, or Child's, Canfield, lies 2| 
miles W. by S. from Great Dunmow ; and Great 
Canfield, or Canfield ad Castrum, is 3f miles S.W. 
from the same place. It obtained its latter appella- 
tion from a Castle, belonging to the De Veres, 
Earls of Oxford, by one of whom it is generally 
supposed to have been built : the mount, or keep, 
still remains, and is planted with trees ; a deep 
moat surrounds the area on which -it stands, in- 
cluding about two acres. This place has, without 
any sufficient reason, been considered the ancient 
Canonium, from a similitude of names, and from 
the river Can being at no great distance. 

CANVEY ISLAND.] Canvey Island, 4{ miles 
W. S. W. from Leigh, is formed by the channel 
which runs from Leigh up to South Bemfleet. It 
contains about 2600 acres of marsh laud, chiefly 
appropriated to the depasturing of cattle. About 
the year 1622, it was embanked ; notwithstanding 
whicu it is occasionally overflowed : in 1735, half 
the cattle was destroyed by a flood. A Chapel, and 
about 50 houses, are all the buildings on the island. 
From the main land, into the island, is a causeway 
over the creek, called Hadleigh Roy. The follow- 
ing statement, while it amuses by its incorrectness 
and absurdity, displays the general opinion which 
is entertained of the unhealthfulness of this part of 
the country : it is from the pen of the credulous 
author of " A Tour through Great Britain" : 
" One thing deserves mention here ; which is, that 
all along this county, it is very frequent to meet 
with men, that have had from five or six, to four- 
teen or filteen wives ; and I was informed, that in 
the marshes, over against Candy Island, was a far- 
mer, who was then living with the five and twen- 
tieth ; and that his son, who was but thirty-five years 
old, had already had about fourteen. Indeed, this 



Fain to. 



f Robs. 



part of the story I only had by report, though from 
good hands : but the other is well known, and will 
beattested about Fobbing, Curringham, Thundersly, 
Benfleet, Prittlewell, Wakering, Great Stambridge, 
Cricksea, Burnham, Dengy, and other towns of the 
like situation. The reason, as a merry old fellow 
told me, who said he had had about a dozen, was 
this, that they, being bred in the marshes them- 
selves, and seasoned to the place, did pretty well ; 
but, that they generally chose to leave their own 
lasses, to their neighbours, out of the marshes, and 
went into the uplands for a wife : that when they 
took the young women out of the wholesome fresh 
air, they were clear and healthy ; but when they 
came into the marshes, among the fogs and damps, 
they presently changed complexion, got an ague or 
two, and seldom held it above half a year, or a year 
at most. And then, said he, we go to the uplands 
again, and fetch another. So that, marrying of 
wives, was reckoned a kind of good farm to them. 
Nor do the men, in these parts, hold it out, as in 
other countries ; for we seldom meet with very an- 
cient people among the poor ; insomuch, that hardly 
one half of the inhabitants are natives of the place, 
but such as come from other parts for the advantage 
of good farms.-" 

CHELMSFORD.] Chelmsford, anciently Chelmers- 
ford, the county town, is situated in the hundred to 
which it gives name, 29 miles N. E. by E. from 
London. It occupies a very pleasant site, near the 
centre of the county, at the confluence of the rivers 
Chelmer and Cann, from the ancient ford over the 
former of which, it evidently derives its name. 
Camden, without any due authority, places Cano- 
nium here, though it is known that there was not 
even a road near this town, till Henry the First's 
time, when Maurice, Bishop of London, built a 
bridge over the Chelmer, about the year 1100. To 
this bridge the town owed its importance, as it occa- 
sioned the great road, which before passed through 
Writtle, a village two miles to the west, to be 
brought to Chelmsford, and from that time the lat- 
ter increased both in houses and population. In 
1 199, \Villiam dc Sancta Maria, Bishop of London, 
procured the grant of a weekly market, and other 
privileges, which were confirmed in the latter part 
of the 13th century. The town and manor of 
Chelmsford were granted by Bishop Bonner to 
Henry the Eighth in the year 1545. Queen Eliza- 
beth, in July 1563, bestowed them on Thomas 
Mihlmay, Esq. whose family have continued pro- 
prietors from that period. 

The appearance of the town, which is chiefly 
composed of four streets, is respectable, and even 
handsome. Near the centre is the Shire Hall, an 
elegant, commodious, and well-designed structure, 
which was erected at the expence of the county, 
from designs, and under the immediate direction, 



of 



ESSEX. 



of J. Johnson, architect, who having completed it 
at an expCnce less than the original estimate, was 
presented, agreeably to a vote passed at the quarter 
sessious in 1792, with an elegant silver cup. The 
front of the building is of white stone, with a rusti- 
cated basement, and ornamented with four three- 
quarter Ionic columns, supporting a pediment. The 
upper part of the facade is further ornamented with 
three basso-relievos of justice, wisdom, and mercy. 
In the basement of this building is an open space for 
the corn exchange, and apartments for the courts 
of assize, sessions, &c. which are constructed with 
singular propriety and convenience. Above is au 
elegant assembly or county room, which extends 
the whole length of the building, and is furnished 
with a music gallery, two handsome chandeliers, and 
sculptured marble chimney-pieces. Behind this is 
a jury room, and several other convenient offices. 
From the upper apartments of this building, the 
views are very extensive. 

Nearly adjoining to the Shire Hall is a neatly 
sculptured Conduit, having the- figure of a Naiad at 
the top. On the different sides above the pipes 
whence the water issues, are the following appro- 
priate inscriptions : ' Betiigitus BenigiiisS Bounti- 
ful to the Bounteous. ' ft PC parent pains.'' Liberal 
to the Covetous. ' Nee DiininwtM largiendo. Not 
diminished by bestowing. ' &ic Charitus a Deofonte.'' 
Thus Charity from tlie Heavenly fountain. The 
water is brought from a spring about a quarter of a 
mile from the town. When the original Conduit 
was built is unknown ; the present was erected some 
years ago, chiefly from subscriptions of the inhabi- 
tants, and gifts of 100/. each, from the Snn and 
Royal Exchange fire offices. It formed a hand- 
some specimen of Coade's artificial stone; but, un- 
fortunately, it has been subjected to much mis- 
chievous dilapidation. 

The Church, dedicated to St. Mary, is A spacious 
and handsome building. The body is modern, and 
was erected from designs by Mr. Johnson, in place 
of the more ancient part, which fell to the ground, 
with a tremendous crash, on the night of the 17tli 
of January, 1800. At the west end is a square flint 
tower, with pinnacles. The period when the ori- 
ginal Church was founded is uncertain ; but from an 
inscription which was placed on the south side of the 
centre aisle, it appears to have been repaired by 
subscription, in the year 1424. It anciently con- 
tained four guilds or chantries. The burial place of 
the Mildmays is on the north of the chancel : Ben- 
jamin, Earl Fitzwalter, and Frederica, his Coun- 
tess, daughter to the gallant Duke of Schomberg, 
are among the number of that family who lie here 
interred. In rebuilding the body of the Church, the 
ancient character of its architecture has been pre- 
served ; but the interior is elegantly ornamented in 
a modern style. It was opened for divine service 
in Septembe'r, 1803. At the west end is a gallery, 
in which is a fine organ, erected by Hancock, in 
1772 ; but since improved by Russelk 



Here is a Free Grammar School, which was found- 
ed, and liberally endowed, in the year 1552, by Ed- 
ward the Sixth, on the petition of the principal gentry 
of the neighbourhood. The School house was rebuilt 
in the year 1782, by R. Benyon, Esq. then acting 
Governor, on the site of a more ancient one, erected 
by Sir John Tyrrell, Bart. The education of youth 
is further provided for by two Charity Schools, sup- 
ported by subscription ; one founded on the 17th 
of August, 1713, for fifty boys; the other in April, 
1714, for twenty girls. The school house stands 
at the north-east corner of the Church yard; adjoin- 
ing to it are three Alms Houses for decayed fami- 
lies. 

Chelmsford Bridge, erected by Bishop Maurice, 
over the Chelmer, having greatly decayed, was re- 
' built with one arch in the year 1787, from a design 
by Mr. Johnson. This bridge unites the hamlet of 
Moulsham with Chelmsford. Near it, on the Moul- 
sham side, stands the County Gaol, a spacious and 
well arranged stone building, which was commenced 
in 1773, and since much improved by Mr. Johnson. 
The front is formed by a commodious house occu- 
pied by the gaoler : from this, westward, extends a 
large paved yard, terminated by the Hospital, or 
ward for female criminals, and a very neat and con- 
venient Chapel. On the north side, next the river, 
is a double range of cells ; and beyond, another 
large yard, secured by a wall and iron palisadocs, 
appropriated to the use of the convicts employed in 
picking oakum, and making ropes. On the south 
side, from the house, extends a range of separate 
cells for condemned criminals, behind which, on the 
opposite side of a paved yard, are apartments for 
debtors, conveniently disposed. Every yard is pro- 
vided with excellent spring water, which, with the 
general attention paid to cleanliness, greatly con- 
tributes to the Iwultli of the prisoners. Here is also 
a well conducted House of Correction. 

Within these few years, the whole town has been 
greatly improved. On the banks of the river are 
numerous pleasure gardens, agreeably laid out, and 
adorned with temples, summer-houses, &c. The 
town has many public amusements, such as balls 
and concerts. Here is also a small, and very in- 
commodious theatre, which has long been under the 
management of Mr. Thornton. A good reading 
room, is amongst the desiderata of Chelmsford. 

A calamitous fire occurred in this town, on the 
evening of the 24th of October, 1804 ; by which 
fourteen unfortunate Hanoverian soldiers were de- 
stroyed, from the distressing circumstance of being 
unable to open the door of the building, in which 
they slept. The devouring element again commit- 
ted its ravages here, on the morning of March 19, 
1808. Three young women, inmates with Mrs. 
Smith, a milliner, in whose house the conflagration 
commenced, perished in the Hames. Their remains 
were deposited in the Church ynrd, where a monu- 
ment was erected to their memory, with an inscrip- 
tion, recording the fatal event. A subscription of 

between 



ESSEX. 



between 700/. and SOO/. was also raised for the re- 
lief of the surviving sufferers.* 

On Gallywood Common, near the town, is a 
Race Course, on which three plates are run for, annu- 
ally. One of them, of the value of 100 guineas, is 
given by the Queen ; the others, of fifteen guineas 
each, are provided by the subscriptions of the in- 
habitants, and of the neighbouring nobility and 
gentry. 

In the year 1813, through the judicious and in- 
defatigable exertions of F. II. Child, Esq. one of 
the inhabitants of the town, the course, which had 
been much neglected, was rendered one of the best 
in the kingdom. 

The support of the labouring classes about Chclms- 
ford, is chiefly derived from the general business of 
the county, and from the multitude of carriers and 
passengers that take this road to the metropolis. 
The number of inhabitants of Chelmsford, with 
Moulsham, as returned under the late act, was 
4649; of houses 882. 

The adjacent country is extremely pleasant, and 
fertile : the soil principally consists of a deep rich 
loam, intermixed with veins of gravel. Several 
flourishing plantations of hops are established in the 
neighbourhood. During the war, two extensive 
ranges of Barracks, with accommodations lor up- 
wards of 4000 troops, were erected in this parish : 
the largest is at the west end of the town : the other 
on the southern side. Since the peace of 1814, one 
range has been pulled down, and the materials sold 
by auction. At a short distance west of the southern 
barracks began a line of embankment for defending- 
the approach to the metropolis, consisting of star 
batteries and parapets. It ran in a south-east direc- 
tion. This was one among the numerous works 
undertaken to defeat the purposes of the projected 
invasion. It is intended to be levelled, f 

CHESTERFORD.] Great Chester ford, four miles 
N. VV. by N..from Saffron Walden, is a small but 
ancient village, on the east side of the Granta, which, 
in this part of its course, divides Essex from Cam- 



* About the year 1809, or 1810, the following remarkable 
case of abstinence occurred here : a man, named James Jackson, 
was committed to the House of Correction! as a vagrant ; for 
the first five days after his commitment lie was not perceived to 
take any sustenance whatever, or once to open his eyes; on the 
sixth clay, however, he walked in the prison yard, and drank 
plentifully of water at the pump, and continued to do so till 
the seventeenth day, but constantly refused to lake any kind of 
food whatever ; ami from the seventeenth day of his confine- 
ment, to the day of his death, he even discontinued to take 
the water. The constable who had him in custody, three days 
previously to his being committed to the House of Correction, 
states, that during that time he look nothing but one pint of 
beer ; so that it appears, from the 1st of September, to the 
day of his death, the 2d of October, he took no other nourish- 
ment than one pint of beer, except water, of which it is stated 
he drank plentiiully during twelve days of the time he was in 
the House of Correction. 

f Philemon Holland, M. D. the Translator General of his 
age, and the first that rendered Camden into English, was born 
at C'helmstbnl, in 1551. lie was taught the first rudiments of 

VOL. II. NO. 71. 



bridgeshire. This was the undoubted site of a 
Roman station, or city, as is evident from the 
numerous Roman coins, urns, and other antiqui- 
ties, that have been dug up here, as well as from 
the remains of the encampment itself, which, till 
within these few years, might be completely traced, 
and is yet visible in several places. It is generally 
considered to be the Camboricum of Antoninus. 

The manor, now the property of Lord Braybrooke, 
belonged to Earl Edgar, in the time of Edward the 
Confessor. 

CHIGWEI.L.] At Chigwell, 12 miles N. E. from 
London, re two free schools, founded in the year 
It>29 by Archbishop Harsnet, of York, once Vicar 
here, where he was buried in 1631. 

CHINGFORD.] In this parish (9| miles N. N. K. 
from London) observes Morant, is an " estate holden 
of the Rector, called Scotts Mayhews, alias Brind- 
woods, the owner of which, on every alienation, 
with his wife, man-servant, and maid-servant, each 
single on a horse, come to the Parsonage, where 
the owner does his homage, and pays his relief, in. 
manner following. lie blows three blasts with his 
horn ; carries a hawk on his fist ; his servant has a 
grey-hound in slip ; both for the use of the Rector. 
He receives a chicken for his hawk, a peck of oats 
for his horse, and a loaf of bread for his grey-hound. 
They all dine ; after which, the master blows three 
blasts with his horn, and they all depart." John 
Charnock, Esq. author of the Biographia Navalis,. 
a History of Marine Architecture, and several other 
works, was born at Chingford in the year 1756. 
He died in the year 1807. 

CLAVERING.]. The little village of Clavering, 
formerly the head of the Barony of that name, lies 
6* miles N. W. by N. from Stanstead Montfichet. 
Here are the keep and luoat of an ancient castle, the 
walls of which have been long destroyed. At the 
time of the Doomsday survey, the manor was in the 
possession of Suene, the greatest land-holder in this 
county, in which he possessed fifty-five Lordships. 
Henry the Second seized the estates, then in pos- 

learning at the Grammar School, and was then sent to Trinity 
College, Cambridge; in which he was afterwards advanced to 
a fellowship. Removing from the University, he settled at 
Coventry, where he became head Master of the Royal Free 
School, and retained that situation many years. Here also he 
commenced Physician, having taken his degrees at Cambridge; 
but his celebrity appears to have chiefly arisen from the mini- 




He died on the 9lh of February, 1636, in his eighty-fifth year ; 
and was buried in St. Mary's Church, Coventry. "The follow- 
ing epigram, said to have been made on writing a large folio 
volume with a single pen, is attributed to him : 

With one sole pen I wrote this book, 
Made of a grey goose quill ; 
1 it took, 



A pen it was when 
A pen 1 leave it stilt. 



4 7 



session 



ESSEX. 



session of Hugh dc Essex, his grandson, vanquished 
in a due!, on a charge of cowardice, by Robert de 
Moutfort, and granted Clavering to Robert Fitz- 
Roger, the son of Alice, Hugh's wife, and from 
their residing here, his descendants obtained the 
surname of C layering. The estate continued in the 
possession of this family till the latter part of the 
reign of Edward the Third, at which time it was 
conveyed to the Nevilles, Lords of Raby, and 
afterwards passed through different noble families 
to the Barringtons, several of whom have been the 
Parliamentary representatives of this county. The 
family of Barlees, who were proprietors of a manor 
in this parish, have several monuments in the Church, 
and an ancient tomb of some unknown personage, 
clad in armour, with his right hand on his left breast, 
and holding a sword, is under an arch in the north 
wall. 

CLAYBURY HALT,.] Claybury Hall, now, or re- 
cently, the seat of James Hatch, Esq. is situated at. 
a short distance from Woodford bridge, on an emi- 
nence, which commands some fine views of forest 
scenery, and grazing land. Mr. Hatch, who pur- 
chased the estate and mansion of Luxborough house, 
the latter of which he has pulled down, and added 
the former, with some others, to his own demesne, 
has very much improved, and enlarged the ground. 
The house, is neat and modern, and has a projecting 
portico in front ; great quantities of timber are in the 
park. Montague Burgoyne, Esq. who obtained this 
estate by his marriage with a Miss Harvey, sold it 
in 1789, to Mr. Hatch. 

COGGESHALL.] The market town of Great Cog- 
geshall is situated in the Witham division, fifteen 
miles N. E. from (Jhelmsford, and forty-four N. E. 
from London. It stands partly on low ground, near 
the north side of the river Blackwater, and partly 
on the acclivity of a pleasant hill, rising on the same 
side. According to Morant, it owes its existence 
to the Abbey, whose foundation here, drew round it 
a vast number of inhabitants and dependants ; but 
some other antiquaries suppose it to have been of 
Roman origin, and the Canonium of Antoninus. 
"Various remains which have been found here, though 
insufficient to prove that Coggeshall was the actual 
site of a Roman station, are yet admitted as evidence 
of its having been a Roman villa. In the reign of 
Edward the Confessor, the manor belonged to Colo, 
A Saxon ; but at the time of the Norman Survey, it 
was held by Eustace, Earl of Boulogne, whose 
heiress, Maud, conveyed it to the crown by her 
marriage with Stephen, Earl of Blois, afterwards 
King of England. In 1142, Stephen, and his 
Queen, founded an Abbey here, near the river, for 



* At the end of the year 1808, or beginning of 1809, in 
excavating the reservoir for the Colchester water works, some, 
vestiges of Roman baths were found. Since that period, in 
-proceeding with the works, the workmen fell in with a quan- 
tity of Roman pavement, and, what is extraordinary, beneath 
that, some oak framing, almost perfectly sound, although it 



Cistercian Monks ; and, having dedicated it to the 
Virgin Mary, endowed it with this and other manors. 
In 120-3, King John granted the Abbot, and his 
Convent, permission to inclose and impark their 
wood at Coggeshall ; and in 1247, they obtained 
liberty of free-warren from Henry the Third ; who 
also invested them with the privileges of holding a 
market weekly, and an eight days annual fair. In 
the reign of Edward the Third, the Monks founded 
a chantry in their Church, to pray daily for the King, 
the Queen, and their issue ; in consideration of 
which, the sovereign, on the llth of January, 1344, 
granted them a hogshead of Red Wine, to be deli- 
vered in London by the King's gentleman of the 
wine cellar, every year at Easter. In 1538, Henry 
the Eighth granted the manor of Coggeshall, and 
other estates, to Sir Thomas Seymour, brother of 
Edward, Duke of Somerset, who,, in 1541, ex- 
changed them with the King. This manor has since 
' been divided, and passed through various families. 
Only a small part of the Abbey is now remaining : 
near it is a bridge of three arches, originally built 
by King Stephen, over a channel that was cut to 
convey the water of the river nearer to the Abbey. 

This town was formerly celebrated for its clothing 
trade, and particularly for a kind of baize of supe- 
rior fine stuff, manufactured here, and called Cog- 
geshall Whites : but this business has been on the 
decline many years. The population of this town, 
as ascertained under the late act, was 2471 ; the 
number of houses 528. 

Coggeshall Church is a spacious edifice, with a 
large square tower at the west end : near it are 
three un-eudowed alms-houses. 

Little Coggeshall, a hamlet to Coggeshall, was 
formerly a distinct parish, and had two Churches; 
one of them erected by the Monks of St. Mary's 
Abbey, in the field called the Park, for their own 
use; the other as a regular parish church: the 
former has long been demolished ; but the latter is 
now used as a barn. It contains about 72 houses, 
and 336 inhabitants. 

COLCHESTER.] The market and borough town 
of Colchester, the largest and handsomest town in 
Essex, lies 22 miles N. E. by E. from Ghclmsford, 
and 51 N. E. by E. from London. It is of very re- 
mote origin ; and there is the clearest evidence of its 
having been both a British and a Roman city. All 
the public buildings display Roman materials worked 
up in their walls ; and, to the present time, urns, 
pavements, coins, &c. are almost daily turned up 
by the spade, or the plough, in the vicinity of the 
town.* The ancient name oi' Colchester appears to 
have been Camuloduntim, under which appellation 

it 



must have lain there above a thousand years. By inspection, 
it appears that it had been previously charred, as the crust was 
on it when fir^t dug up. Il i* therefore evident, that charring 
of timber, to make it hv>t under ground, was known to the 
Romans. Amidst some fragments of porcelain fount), was one 
vessel of most exquisite workmanship and classical taste, the 

outside 



ESSEX. 



307 



it occurs in Dion Cassius, who expressly mentions 
it as the residence of the British Kin^ Cunobeline, 
and the capital of the Trinobantes. Numerous gold, 
silver, and brass coins have been discovered here, 
having the letters CVNO. or CVNOB. on one side, 
for Cunobeline ; aud CAM. or C AMV. on the other, 
for Ciiiuulodunutn. One, in particular, mentioned 
by Morant, had the words CVNOB . . . REX ; on 
the reverse, a horse feeding ; and below it . . MV. 
At a subsequent period, after Caesar's second expe- 
dition, Claudius established here a colony of Roman 
veterans, consisting of the second, ninth, and four- 
teenth legions. On this occasion, it obtained the 
name of Colonia ; probably as a pre-eminent memo- 
rial of its being the first Roman colony planted in 
this island ; and in the Itinerary of Antoninus, it is 
distinguished both by that appellation, and by its 
original one of Camulodunum. It was also called 
Colonia Camulodunum, as appears from the money 
mentioned by Cainden to have been struck by Clau- 
dius, with the inscription COL. CAMALODVN. 
In another inscription, it is named Colonia Victri- 
ceusis, from the veterans of the fourteenth legion, 
whose gallant conduct had occasioned them to be 
styled, conquerors of Britain. Claudius reduced 
the adjacent country into a Roman province ; and 
having appointed Plautius, Proprsetor, he returned 
to Rome, where a magnificent triumph was decreed 
to him by the Senate ; anniversary games were insti- 
tuted in commemoration of his victory ; he was re- 
peatedly saluted Imperator; triumphal arches were 
ordered to be erected to his glory ; and the surname 
of Britaunicus was entailed upon his family. His 
success was equally the subject of rejoicing at Camu- 
lodunum, where a temple was raised to his memory, 
and himself worshipped as the tutelar Deity of the 



outside of which was highly embossed with basso relievo, di- 
vided into different departments, in two of which were Diana 
and Fauns, on pedestals facing each other. Diana, in her 
left hand, holds a boy, and in the right the two fore feet of a 
leveret, standing in an upright posture against lift. The atti- 
tude of the Fauns is nearly that of the antiqueAntinous ; a wreath 
of a mask and plumes of feathers hang between the two. In 
Uvo other departments are the stags at bay with the dogs. Be- 
tween this department, and the before described, is a long up- 
right one, with a tripod in the centre, and an eagle hovering 
over the flame, with a plume of feathers erect on its back. In 
two other departments are cuoids sacrificing, in the act of 
pouring something from a vessel on the altar ; round the border 
of this department is studded with imitations of diadems; in 
two oilier departments are represented the great wild bear pas- 
sant, capitally executed ; towards the cornice, or towards the 
upper edge or opening of the vessel, is a rich canopy, orna- 
maited all round : on the bottom and sides of the departments 
are plumes ot feathers studded with ornaments like mace. It 
js nearly the colour of dark cornelian, has been hardened by 



fire, and is almost as dense as tlint. Most of the coins dug up 
are of Claudius, C.-esar Augustus, and others of the Emperors 
Trajanus, Antoninus Pins, and Divus Antoninus, and many 
others hardly distinguishable from their state ot corrosion, also 
silver gilt instruments used in the sacrifices. 

* The impending destruction is recorded by Tacitus, as 
having been fore run by fearful prodigies. " 'The image of 
Victory," says this historian, " without any visible cause, fell 



colony. Plautius prosecuted the war against the 
unsubdued Britons with considprable vigour ; but 
being recalled about the year 48, Ostorius Scapula 
was sent by Claudius in his stead. To secure his 
newly-acquired territory, he drew forth the chief 
part of the veteran legions from Camulodunum ; and 
to this measure the destruction of that colony by the 
Britons, under the insulted Bunduica, or Boadicea, 
is certainly to be attributed ; for the Trinobantes, 
no longer over-awed by the immediate presence of 
any considerable military body, united with the Iceni, 
whom the oppression exercised by the Romans had 
again driven to arms. Similar feelings, resulting 
from similarity of cause, inflamed the Trinobantes, 
who began to consider the temple erected to Clau- 
dius as the badge of eternal servitude; and the de- 
mands made by the priests for its support, as even- 
tually tending to the destruction of their estates, 
The cupidity of Catus Decianus, the procurator, 
combined with the other causes of revolt, and the 
insurrection was so sudden and complete, that the 
whole foundation of the Roman power appeared to 
totter. Camulodunum was the first sacrifice to Bri- 
tish vengeance.* Morant, however, on the autho- 
rity of Pliny, and the evidence of the Roman coins 
daily discovered here, assumes, that C:\inulodnnuin 
was very soon rebuilt ; an opinion which is corrobo- 
rated by the many other antiquities of that people, 
that have been discovered within its precincts and 
neighbourhood. Another proof of the continued re- 
sidence of the Romans at Colchester, arises from the 
many strong entrenchments, stretching from north 
to south, westward of the town ; supposed to be the 
remains of the Castra, Casteila, and Prsesidia, 
which according to Tacitus, were formed about the 
ancient Colonia. f 

The 



down, and turned backward, as if yielding to the enemy. 
Enthusiastic women foretold the approaching desolation ; 
strange noises were heard in the court, and howlings resounded 
in the theatre; and an apparition of a colony destroyed, was 
seen in the estuary of the Thames. The sea looked" bloody ; 
and in the ebb, the effigies of human bodies were It-ft upon the 
shore." These fabled prodigies strongly mark the apprehen- 
sion and alarm that prevailed among I he Hoinnns, when the 
Britons bent their force against the devoted colony. Their 
fears had not been excited upon slight grounds : fire and 
slaughter marked the prngress of Bunduica; and Cainnlodu- 
num, the scat of Roman tyranny in Britain, was overwhelmed 
in its own ruins, after a fei-ble resistance from the soldiers who 
remained there, and who defended themselves for two days 
within the temple. 

f " To give any- idea of the magnitude of these works, 
without an accurate survey, is hardly possible. The first ram- 
part crosses the road a little to the eastward of Lexden, and 
extends southward a considerable way ; and northward nearly 
in a strait line, to the river; thence it proceeds to the road 
leading to West Bergholt, beyond which it is defaced by tl>e 
cultivation of the inclosed grounds. The furthest and most 
considerable rampart, is nearly parallel to the fust, and ex- 
tends southward a considerable way towards Mersey island ; 
and northward to the river, where it is continued across Berg- 
holt Heath, beyond which place, though it Diidoubledly went 
much further, it is difficult to trace it with any certainty f in. 
the space between these ramparts, are many others intersected 

at 



ESSEX. 



The Romans frequently entrusted the govern- 
ment of particular districts in conquered provinces, 
to the descendants of the native princes who ori- 
ginally possessed the sovereign power. The dis- 
trict of which Colonia-Camulodununi was the ca- 
pital, is reported to have been among the number ; 
but the evidences of this assertion seem too weak to 
merit confidence.* 

Under the Saxon domination, Colchester, then 
called Colon-ceaster, or Cohie-ceaster, lost much of 
its ancient consequence ; the increased importance 
of the metropolis, and its more favourable situation 
for trade ami commerce, having, iu a great measure, 
contributed to its decay. The Danes afterwards 
obtained possession, and were established here, aud 
in the adjacent country, by the treaty concluded be- 
tween the Great Alfred, and the Danish Chief, 
Gothrum. On the death of the latter, Alfred again 
became the nominal master of the district, but was 
long unable to subdue the Danish forces, who were 
continually receiving supplies by sea. Having, at 
length, constructed a superior navy, the Danes, de- 
prived of their accustomed reinforcements, submitted 



to acknowledge him as their sovereign ; but appear 
to have still kept possession of Colchester, as their 
principal strong hold. On the death of Alfred, the 
Danes recommenced their usual course of destruc- 
tion and plunder, under the command of Ethelwald, 
Alfred's nephew ; who, intending to possess himself 
of the sovereignty of Britain, had assembled a large 
army of Danes and Normans, and landing in Essex, 
became master of Colchester, and the neighbouring 
country. Ethelwald being defeated, and slain, in 
the following year, the Danes returned to their 
allegiance; but, with so little sincerity, that Edward 
found it necessary, within a few years, to establish 
fortifications at Witham and Maiden, to restrain 
their incursions. In 02], Edward, finding the tkne 
favourable for a design he had long meditated, as- 
sembled a large army, and laid siege to Colne- 
ceaster, which appears to have been taken by as- 
sault, as the Danes were all put to the sword, with 
the exception of a very few, who, leaping over the 
walls, lied into East-Anglia. Edward is thought to 
have re-peopled the desolated city, by a colony of 
West Saxons, and in November, 922, he either re- 



at right angles; and soifoe, apparently in other directions : also 
three ramparts, parallel to each other, and to the two above 
described. The area inclosed is very large: from the height 
and strength of the .western rampart, it is conjectured that the 
camp formed here was for tlie defence of Colchester by the 
Romans; and by the ramparts extending northward beyond 
the river Colne, and southward to Mersey island, a line 
was formed, which completely secured the country adjacent 
from the hostile incursions of the Britons. The island itself, 
from its pleasantness, and convenience ot situation, became the 
harbour, or, as it were, the resting place of people passing to 
and from Rome. The several beautiful pavements, and other 
antiquities, yet remaining there, sufficiently indicate how much 
it was frequented. About a furlong to the east of Bere Church, 
is a very high rampart, extending in a direct line between Col- 
ehester and Mersey island : its appearance leads to a conjec- 
ture, that it was thrown up for the easier and more expeditious 
travelling to and from the latter." History of Colchester. 

* The tradition on this point is to the following effect : 
C'oel, the second of thai name, a British Prince, and descended 
t'rom a long line of British ancestors, is said to have been invest- 
rd by the Romans with the government of the district of which 
Camulodunum was tlie chief station, some time about the pe- 
riod when the Roman empire was distracted by the numerous j 
usurpers of the Imperial purple, whom history has stigmatised 
by the appellation of the Thirty Tyrants. This was near the 
middle of the third century; when Coel, taking advantage of 
the general confusion, assumed independence, and having re- j 
paired the buildings and public works, gave to his capital, the 
name of Caer-Coel. As a means ol perpetuating this assump- 
tion of power, he rt supposed to have become tributary to Ca- 
ransius, and the other usurpers of Imperial dignity, who re- | 
nouncecl their allegiance in Britain. Constantius Cnlorus, 
great nephew to the Emperor Claudius, who had been invested 
with sovereign authority under Dioclesian and Maximian, eju- 
barked at Gessonaoum, or Boulogne, with a powerful army, to | 
chastise the revellers and reduce Britain to its former stale of 
dependence. Having safely landed, he commenced the siege 
of Caer-Coel, as being the focus wherein the flame of insurrec- 
tion had been elicited. The resistance opposed to his arms was 
^o determined, that the siege was procrastinated to the unusual 
period of three \ears, and even then seemed very distant from 
a successful termination. In this state of affaifs, Constantius 
Velnrld Helena, Coel's daughter, who was born in this city, and 



who possessed the most fascinating charms of person, as well 33 the 
most uncommon endowments of mind. Struck with her beauty, 
and interested by her acquirements, Coustantius became vio- 
lently enamoured of the British Princess ; and hesitated not to 
make peace with Coel, on condition of receiving the accom- 
plished Helena as his bride. Hitherto the tradition is consistent 
with itself, but it now branches off in different directions : one 
account asserts, that the marriage was immediately celebrated with 
suitablesplendour; another, that Helena was the mistressof Con-- 
stantius before she became his wife. Both, however, again unite 
in affirming, that Constantine, surnamed the Great, was the 
issue of this intercourse, and that he, also, was born at Caer- 
Coel. Even the poets have related the circumstance ; but on 
this ground, they may be allowed to wander, and celebrated 
the birth and birth-place of Constantine in terms of hyperbolism: 
thus Necham : 

From Colchester there rose a starre, 
The rays whereof gave glorious light, 

Throughout the world in climates farre, 

Great CONSTANTINE, Rome's Emperor bright. 

According to Gibbon, the elevation of Constantine to the 
rank of Cresar, and admittance to sovereign power, preceded 
his recovery of Britain from Allectus, who had assassinated 
Carausius, and usurped his dignity. Long previously to that' 
event, therefore, he must have been married to Helena, from 
whom he was divorced on his second marriage with the daugh- 
ter of Maximian, at which period Constantine was eighteen 
years of age. The evidence resulting from this evident ana- 
chronism, is not the only proof of the instability of the tradi- 
tion. Gibbon denies, that a British King as the father of He- 
lena, and gives that honour to an innkeeper; at the same time, 
he observes, the legality of her marnaae may be defended 
against those who have represented her as the concubine of 
Constantine. Eutropius (x. 2,) expresses, in a few words, the 
real truth, and the occasion of the error, ex obscurinri mutri- 
monio ejus filius." The real birth-place of Constantine, who 
was the first Roman Emperor that openly avowed the belief of 
Christianity, is supposed to have been at Naissus, in Dacia. 
After her departure from Britain, Helena made a journey to 
Jerusalem, where she is fabled to have discovered the cross on 
which the Saviour was crucified ; and to this circumstance, the 
arms of Colchester, which display a cross between three coro- 
nets, are attributed, 

built 



ESSEX. 



369 



built or repaired the walls. From this period to the 
Norman Conquest, the annals of Colchester offer 
nothing of a remarkable nature. 

The number of burgesses, who then held houses 
ujjder the King7 was 276 ; the number of houses, in 
their possession, 355 : besides these, the Bishop of 
London held 11 houses here ; Eudo Dapifer, 5 
houses, and 40 acres of laud ; Humo Dapifer, 1 
house and 1 court, or hall ; and Earl Eustace, 12 
houses ; 32 other houses were held by different per- 
sons. Eurto Dapifer, who hud much land in Essex, 
made Colchester his principal residence, and is said 
to have founded the Castle ; though it is probable 
that he only rebuilt it on the site of a more ancient 
fortress. 

In the time of King John, Salier de Quiuey, Earl 
of Winchester, besieged Colchester, (A. D. 1215,) 
with an army of foreigners ; but hearing that the 
Barons assembled in London were advancing to itj 
relief, he retired to St. Edmund's Bury. Soon af- 
terwards, however, Saher, or some of his party, ob- 
tained possession, and having plundered the town, 
placed a garrison in the Castle; which was .quickly 
invested by the King, and obliged to surrender. 
In 1218, Colchester was taken by the soldiers of 
Prince Louis, son of Philip the Second, of France, 
who had been invited into England to assist the Ba- 
rons ; but, instead of remaining faithful to the cause 
they had undertaken, thought the opportunity fa- 
vourable to make conquests for themselves. The 
Castle walls were now disgraced by the banner of 
France ; which, however, was not suffered to wave 
long ; for the Barons having submitted to their new 
sovereign, Henry the Third, consolidated their 
strength, and expelled the French Prince from the 
kingdom. On the raising of the great naval arma- 
ment to blockade Calais, Colchester furnished five 
ships and 170 mariners. In this reign, in the years 
1348, and 1360, many of the inhabitants fell victims 
to the plague. 

On the demise of Edward the Sixth, the inha- 
bitants of Colchester supported the interests of the 
Princess Mary, with so much fervour, that a very 
few days after she had obtained secure possession of 
the crown, she visited the town, purposely to display 
her strong sense of the attachment of its inhabitants. 
She was received with great rejoicings, and on her 
departure, presented with a silver cup, and 20/. in 
gold ; a sum regarded in those times, as worthy the 
acceptance of a sovereign.* Her gratitude, how- 
ever, was less powerful than her bigotry ; and va- 
rious persons, both male and female, were here com- 
mitted to the flames, to expiate the crime of opposi- 
tion to the religious ordinances prescribed by the ex- 
isting laws. Colchester, indeed, at this period, was 
distinguished for the diversity of its religious sects ; 



* The reader may estimate the value of this gift, by an ex- 
tract from the Chamberlain of Colchester's account of the 
charges incurred by the purchase of various articles of food, in 
consequence of this visit. Item. For 38 dozen of bread, 39*. 

VOL. II. NO. 72. 



and the flames of persecution were lighted up by the 
bigoted Queen, to amalgamate the contrariety of opi- 
nions into one uniform belief. The strange and ab- 
surd tenets of the sect named the Family of Love, 
were propagated here by Christopher Vitels, the 
disciple of Henry Nicholas, of Delft, its original 
founder, and obtained many converts. In the reign 
of Elizabeth, many Flemings, whom the barbarous 
policy of the Duke of Alva had expelled from their 
native plains, sought an asylum at Colchester ; and, 
in return for the protection afforded them, intro- 
duced the manufacture of bays and says, which ren- 
dered the town more flourishing than it had been for 
many years. In the autumnal progress of Eliza- 
beth, in the year 1579, that sovereign continued her* 
two days. 

At the commencement of the civil war, the inhabi- 
tants of Colchester took part with King Charles ; 
and, in 1642, petitioned that the town might be bet- 
ter fortified. Soon" afterwards, some unwarranted 
acts of outrage were committed by the lower classes 
against the Lucas family ; but, the horrors of civil 
war were not felt, in all their severity, till the year 
1648, when the memorable siege of Colchester re- 
duced the inhabitants to the greatest distress. 

At this period, the inhabitants, wishing to prevent 
the entrance of the royalists, shut the gates, and col- 
lected a troop of about 60 horse, to defend the pass- 
age ; but, on the approach of Sir Charles Lucas, 
with some companies of cavalry, they thought it 
most prudent to deliver up the town, on a promise, 
that it should be preserved from pillage, and none 
of the townspeople injured. The main force had 
now arrived ; and the approach of Fairfax being 
apprehended, guards were posted at every avenue, 
the walls were strengthened, and every thing as- 
sumed the appearance of a vigorous resistance. 
The next day, June the 13th, the Parliament army 
arrived on Lexden Heath ; and Fairfax summoned 
Lord Goring to surrender the town. To this mes- 
sage, an insolent negative was returned by the Earl; 
an assault was immediately commenced ; the su- 
burbs were forced after a dreadful conflict ; and no- 
thing but the most determined bravery prevented 
the place from being carried. Some foot soldiers of 
the enemy had entered with the retreating Royal- 
ists, but were again driven out by the pikes of the 
Royalist officers, who, in the confusion, closed the 
gate upon many of their own people. The assault 
continued between seven and eight hours ; till at 
length, wearied by the obstinate defence of the be- 
sieged, the troops of Fairfax retreated in much dis- 
order. That General then commenced a regular 
blockade ; and, after a protracted investment of 
eleven weeks, in which many vigorous sallies had 
been made, obtained possession of the town. The 



For 49 gallons of claret wine, 48s. Ten barrels of beer, . 
A quarter of beef, weighing five score and ten pounds, 9*. 2d. 
A side of beef, weighing seven score and five pounds, 12s. \d. 
A veal, 4. Half a veal, 2*. 2rf, Two muttons, 9*. 4d. &c. 
5 A terms 



370 



ESSEX. 



terms of surrender were unusually severe, as the 
Parliamentary General refused to promise quarter 
to any but the common soldiers, and officers, under 
the rank of Captains. The necessity of the case 
admitted no alternative ; every usual kind of provi- 
sion having been long exhausted, and both inhabi- 
tants and soldiers reduced to satisfy the cravings of 
hunger on horses, dogs, and other animals. Soon 
after the troops of Fairfax had entered the town, a 
council of war was held at the Moot-Mall, and Sir 
Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle, and Sir Bernard 
Gascoyne, condemned to suffer death. The three 
unfortunate officers were then conducted to the 
Castle ; but, it having been discovered, that Gas- 
coyne was a Florentine, his sentence was reversed, 
and he was ordered to be confined with the other 
prisoners. Soon afterwards, Colonel Ireton was 
dispatched to inform Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir 
George Lisle, to prepare for death. At seven o'clock 
the same evening, they were led to a green spot of 
ground, only a few paces distant from the north wall 
of the Castle, and there submitted to their harsh fate, 
with the most intrepid bravery. The bodies of the 
two knights were privately interred in the vault of 
the Lucas family, in St. Giles's Church. After this 
execution, the Lord Goring, Lord Capel, and the 
other officers, were assured of " fair quarter as pri- 
soners of war ;" but this promise, the paramount 
jurisdiction of the Parliament thought proper to 
annul, in respect to Lord Capel, who was impeach- 
ed, and brought to trial, when, refusing to acknow- 
ledge the authority of the court, he was condemned 
to die, and suffered the pain of his sentence in 
March, 1649. After the surrender of the town, a 
contribution of 14,000/. was imposed on the inhabi- 
tants ; of which sum, 2000/. was afterwards remit- 
ted ; 2000/. was bestowed to relieve the distresses 
of the poor ; and the remaining 10,000/. distributed 
among the soldiers. During the siege, upwards of 
300 houses, and various other buildings, had been 
burnt, or otherwise destroyed. Before the army of 
Fairfax quitted the town, the walls and fortifica- 
tions were completely dismantled ; the magistrates 
being obliged to supply the necessary tools to effect 
their destruction. 

In the year 1665, the dreadful plague which ra- 
vaged London extended to Colchester, and before 
the contagion had ceased to act, nearly 5000 persons 
had been swept away by its influence. 

This town occupies the summit and northern as- 
pect of a fine eminence, rising from the Colue, which 
flows on the north and east sides, and is navigable 
to the spot called the New Hythe. The space in- 
closed by the remains of the ancient walls, forms a 
parallelogram, having its longest sides towards the 
north and south : the buildings, without the walls, 
are very irregularly disposed, chiefly on the south 
and east. The principal street, which runs nearly 
east and west, within the parallelogram, contains 
rnauy large shops and respectable houses ; but is 
somewhat disfigured by the old market-house, and 



other small buildings, which stand near the middle 
of the street, and obstruct the passage. Part of the 
town was paved as early as the year 1473. In the 
reign of James the First, an act was obtained for 
paving the whole, and its provisions were eniorced 
by another act, passed in 1750 ; by these, the land- 
owners, and proprietors of buildings, are ordered to 
pave, and keep in repair, all the ways contiguous to 
their respective possessions. A new, spacious, and 
very handsome market, was opened here in the year 
1814, 

The walls of this town are now, in a great degree, 
destroyed ; what remains, being only kept in repair 
by those who have gardens, or other grounds, ad- 
joining. They consist of stone, and Roman brick, 
united by a strong cement. The thickness varies, 
but is, in general, from seven to eight feet. The 
inclosed area contains rather more than 108 acres : 
the circumference of the walls being one mile and 
three quarters. When the walls were in their per- 
fect state, the town was entered by four principal 
gates and three posterns ; most of which are now 
destroyed. The walls were strengthened by several 
bastions, and on the west, defended by a small an- 
cient fort, called Colkynge's Castel ; the arches, 
which remain, are formed of Roman brick. On the 
north and west sides were deep ditches. 

To the north of the High Street, on an elevated spot, 
and commanding a fine view of the winding valley 
to the north and east, stands the Castle. The outer 
walls are nearly perfect, and, by their vast thickness 
and solidity, evince the importance which, in the 
early ages, was attached to this situation. The 
whole building is constructed with a mixture of 
stone, flint, and Roman bricks ; but the latter are 
chiefly in pieces, conveying the idea of their having 
been taken from some more ancient building. The 
Castle is built in the form of a parallelogram, the 
east and west sides measuring 140 feet each, the 
north and south sides ] 02 feet each : at the north- 
east and north-west angles are projecting square 
towers ; at the south side, on the west face, is an- 
other square tower , and, on the east face, a semi- 
circular tower ; the external radius of which is 20 
feet. The foundations are 30 feet thick ; the lower 
part of the walls 12 feet thick, and the upper part 
nearly 11. The principal entrance is near the south- 
west tower, beneath a strong semicircular arch, with 
three- quarter col u mns ; having capitals, ornamented 
in the Norman style : this was anciently defended 
by a portcullis. On the right, within the entrance, 
is a niche, where the guard or porter was stationed. 
At a little distance beyond is a square room, at the 
further end of which is a flight of stairs leading to 
the vaults. Beyond the stairs is the entrance to a 
large area, formerly inclosed by a roof, and divided 
by a wall running north and south. This space in- 
cluded, upon its different floors, the principal apart- 
ments of the Castle ; and also a gallery that runs 
between the wall which crosses the area, and that 
which is demolished. At the south end of the gal- 
lery, 



ESSEX. 



371 



lery, on the ground floor, is a strong arched room, 
which receives a scanty portion of light through a 
small aperture in the south wall of the Castle : this 
miserable hold, as tradition asserts, was the last 
lodging of Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle. 
At the extremity oi' a wall which separates this area 
frein a second, is a door above and below, which led 
into apartments that filled the space between the 
east wall of the Castle, and the gallery. At the 
south end of this space, in the south-east tower, on 
the ground floor, is a strong arched room, the walls 
of which are of extraordinary thickness. In the 
south-west tower is the grand staircase, which is 
circular, arched above, and built of stone. This 
leads to a modern room, used for a Subscription 
Library. An arcade of modern workmanship, which 
runs along the north wall of the Library, conducts 
to the ancient Chapel. This is a venerable piece of 
architecture ; the beauty of its proportions strike the 
eye, notwithstanding the massiveness of its con- 
struction. The roof is strongly arched : the light 
enters through five windows ; two of which have 
been enlarged, but the others remain nearly in their 
original state. An arched vault, beneath, is used for 
the confinement of prisoners. In the north-east and 
north-west towers, upon the same floor as the Cha- 
pel, are various small rooms, or recesses ; and, in 
the latter, is also a staircase, which descends from 
the upper part of the tower, and terminates at the 
first floor. At the loot of the stairs, in the north 
wall of the Castle, is a sally-port, now closed up, 
which opened upon an abutment of the north-west 
tower. This sally-port, and the great doorway in 
the south wall, are the only original entrances into 
the Castle. From the principal staircase, in the 
north-east tower, another flight of steps leads to 
what was the second floor : the walls of this story 
were nine feet thick. The dome, which covers the 
staircase, the passage formed upon the west, and 
north wall of the Castle, and the small room upon 
the summit of the north-east tower, are all of mo- 
dern construction. The great door- way in the north 
wall, and the small port in the east wall, are also 
modern, and have been formed with great labour by 
the enlargement of a narrow window in each place. 
The peculiar construction of the windows is worthy 
of observation. An arched niche, about three feet 
deep, formed the inner opening of the window ; in 
the back of which niche, another, of less dimen- 
sions, gradually decreasing in breadth, penetrated 
about seven feet further, at the extremity of which, 
a narrow aperture, only eight inches wide, lined 
with hewn stone, was made through the remaining 
thickness of the wall. From the floor of the rooms, 
an ascent was made to the narrow aperture of the 
window, by a small flight of steps. 

On the north and east sides, the Castle was de- 
fended by a high rampart, raised upon a more an- 
cient wall, and by a deep fosse, now partly filled up. 
On the south and west sides, it was strengthened by 
a massive wall, in which were two gates, the site of 



which is occupied by a range of modern houses. 
The Castle, with its precincts, called the Bailey, 
(Ballium,) is extra parochial, and exempt from the 
jurisdiction of the borough officers. 

The Castle came very early into the power of the 
Crown. The Empress Maud granted it to Alberic 
de Vere, ancestor to the Veres, Earls of Oxford. 
By Edward the First, it was bestowed on Laurence 
de Scaccaris, Sheriff of Essex, for a county gaol ^ 
and its demesnes were ordered to be ploughed and 
sown for the King's use. The next possessor was 
Robert de Benhall, Knt. to whom it was granted for 
life, by Edward the Third ; from whose reign to that 
of Charles the First, it was granted to various no- 
blemeii, during life or pleasure, by successive Sove- 
reigns. Of the latter monarch, James Hay, Earl 
of Carlisle, purchased the reversion to him and 
his heirs for ever. It was then held by Sir John 
Stanhope ; and has since passed through various 
families, chiefly by purchase. One of its possessors- 
was a Mr. John Wheeley, who bought it in the year 
1683, for the purpose of pulling it down, and dis- 
posing of the materials to advantage ; but this in- 
tent was defeated by the solidity of the building, 
and strength of the cement. Much damage was, 
however, done ; large quantities of the Roman 
bricks were taken away, and most of the free-stone ' 
of the door and window cases, and interior of the 
arches. The tops of the towers and walls were 
forced down with screws, or blown up with gun- 
powder ; but the expence of effecting this destruc- 
tion was so great that the idea was abandoned, as 
the price procured for the materials would not defray 
the charges. 

Colchester contains twelve parishes, of which 
eight are within the walls ; but some of the Churches 
are destroyed. The remainder, with the ruins of 
St. John's Abbey, St. Botolph s Priory, and the 
Moot-Hall, constitute the chief of the ancient and 
public buildings. St. John's Abbey, so called, from 
its dedication to St. John-Baptist, was a very mag- 
nificent structure, founded by Etido Dapifer, in the 
year 1097. It occupied a pleasant eminence with- 
out the walls, on the south side of the town; but 
only the entrance, gateway, and some fragments of 
the other parts of the building, are remaining. On 
some portions of its site, a wooden Church had pre- 
viously stood, dedicated to St. John the Evangelist, 
whose influence was reported to have performed se- 
veral miracles near this spot : this occasioned Eudo 
to make choice of it for his intended foundation. 
This Abbey continued in a flourishing state till the 
time of the Dissolution. Its annual revenues were 
estimated at 523/. 17$. I Or/, but this sum is thought 
to have been far below the actual produce. 

St. Giles's Church is near the north-west corner 
of St. John's garden. It is a small building, partly 
in ruins, of which the chancel only is now used for 
Divine service. This was the burial place of the 
Lucas family, several of whom are commemorated 
by inscriptions. Here, also, with his fellow sufferer, . 
8, 



ST2 



ESSEX. 



Sir Charles Lucas, were interred the remains of Sir 
-George Lisle ; the fate of these lamented friends, is 
thus recorded : 

UNDER THIS MARBLE LY THE BODIES 

OF THE TWO MOST VALIANT CAl'TAINS 

Sn. CHARLES LVCAS, AND SR. GEORGE LISLE, KNTS. 

WHO FOR THEIR EMINENT LoVALTY 
To THEIR SOVERAIN, 

WEBE ON THE 28' 1 '. DAY OF AVGVST, 1648, 

BY THE COMMAND OF SR. THO FAIRFAX, 

THEN GENERAL OF THE PARLIAMENT ARMY, 

IN COLD BLOVD BARBAROVSLY MVRDERED.* 

North-east from St. John's, at a little distance, 
are the remains of St. Botolph's Priory, which, like 
the former, owes its principal demolition to the siege 
in 1648. This structure is generally reported to 
have been founded by a monk named Eynulph, or 
Ernulph, in the beginning of the 12th century, for 
regular Canons of the order of St. Augustine. 
This was the earliest establishment of this order in 
England. The possessions bestowed by the founder, 
and other benefactors, were increased by Henry the 
First, who granted the Canons the whole tythes of 
Lis demesnes in Hatfield Regis, or Broad-Oak ; and 
confirmed the sergeantry, and lands given by Hugh 
Fitz-Stephen, on condition, that, on every Welsh 
war, they should find a horse of five shillings value, 
a sack and a spur, for the King's use, for 40 days. 
The site and possessions of the Priory were grant- 
ed by Henry the Eighth, to the Lord Chancellor 
Audley, but have since passed into various families. 
The Priory Church continued perfect till the time of 
the siege, it having been parochial as well as con- 
ventual : it was then, in a great measure, destroysd. 
Its ruins are extremely interesting to the architec- 
tural antiquary, from presenting some curious spe- 
cimens of brick ornaments, and of interlaced arches, 
from which the idea of the pointed arch is thought 
by some to have been conceived. 

Eastward of St. Botolph's, is St Mary Magda- 
len's Hospital, originally founded by Eudo Dapifer, 
in the reign of Henry the First, for persons afflict- 
ed with the leprosy. The endowment was augment- 
ed by King Stephen ; and Richard the First grant- j 
ed the brethren liberty to hold a two-days' fair. I 
After the suppression of this Hospital, in the reign 
of Edward the Sixth, its possessions were much 
dissipated, and the Chapel entirely destroyed ; but, 
in the year 1610, it was refbrinded for a master, and 
fi,ve poor pensioners, unmarried, under the title of j 
the College or Hospital of King James, and the j 
brethren were incorporated. What is now called 



the Hospital, consists of a few old buildings on the 
north of Magdalen Church. 

In the Church of St. Leonard, still further to the 
east, and not very distant from the river, were for- 
merly two chantries. 

On the south-west side of the town, in St. Mary's 
parish, was a monastery of Crouched Friars, found- 
ed about the year 1244, when that order first came 
into England. In 1407, it became the seat of the 
rich Guild of St. Helen, with whose possessions, 
four chantries established here, and in the Church 
of St. Nicholas, were incorporated. In 1637, the 
monastic buildings having been converted into a 
dwelling-house, were inhabited by Sir Harbottle 
Grimston ; but were partly destroyed during the 
siege. The remains were fitted up as a workhouse, 
but have since been entirely removed. 

The principal Church, within the walls, is dedi- 
cated to St. James, and appears to have been found- 
ed about the reign of Edward the Second. In the 
south aisle is a monument to Arthur Winsley, Esq. 
Alderman of the town, who founded Ahus-houses 
for 12 poor persons, in St. Botolph's parish. 

All Saint's Church was built before the year 
1356 : the tower is mostly of flint, having only a 
small quantity of stone work at the angles. Near 
the east gate, in this parish, was a Monastery of 
Grey Friars, founded in the year 1309, by Robert 
Lord Fitzwalter, who, a short time before his de- 
cease, in 1325, is recorded to have assumed the habit 
of this order. 

St. Nicholas Church is partly in ruins, the tower 
having fallen upon the body and chancel some years 
ago, while the workmen, who had been employed to 
repair it, were absent. In this parisli stands the 
Chapel of St. Helen, so named from its dedication 
to Helena, the mother of Constantine ; and tradi- 
tionally asserted to have been founded by her. 
Eudo, founder of St. John's, rebuilt it about the year 
1076. It has been repaired, in the modern style, 
and is now used as a Quakers' meeting-house. 

In Trinity Church, is a monument to the memory 
of Dr. William Gilberd, a native of this town, who 
was principal physician to Queen Elizabeth, and 
James the First : he was author of au Essay on the 
Loadstone, intituled, De Magnete, and some other 
works. 

St. Runwald's is a small building, in the middle 
of the High Street, which, after lying in ruins nearly 
100 years, was repaired at the expence of the pa- 
rishioners, and again opened for Divine service, in 
1760. At a small distance north-west is the Moot- 



* The visitor will not fail to remark, that these letters are cut 
Very deep into the marble: according to tradition, this was clone 
by the command of Charles the Second, from the following 
circumstance. George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, who 
had married the onry daughter of General Fairfax, applied to 
the King for permission to have it erased, as it reflected on the 
memory of his father-in-law. The King mentioned the request 
to Lord Lucas, who replied, that, he would reauiiy accede to 



his Majesty's wish, provided he would permit him to insert in 
its room, ' that Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, were 
barbarously murdered for their loyalty to Charles the First, and 
that his son, Charles the Second, ordered this memorial of their 
loyalty to be erased.' The Km", struck with the observation, 
is said' to have immediately ordered the letters of the original 
inscription to be engravii as deep as possible. 

Hall, 



ESSEX. 



373 



Hall, where the courts are held, and the public bu- 
siness transacted : this building was founded by 
Eudo Dapifer. Adjoining, and partly beneath it, is 
the Town Gaol ; and behind it was the Theatre. A 
new Theatre was opened here, about the year 1813, 
or 1814. 

St. Martin's Church was founded about the year 
1327 : the tower is partly composed of Roman 
brick, but is now in ruins, having been damaged 
during the siege. 

St. Peter's Church was founded previously to the 
Conquest, and is the only Church in this town men- 
tioned in the Domesday Book. 

St. Mary's Church stands near the south-west 
corner of the town, in a high situation : the body of 
this Church was rebuilt in the year 1713; and, in 
1729, the ancient tower was heightened 12 feet, and 
repaired. 

Some of the houses in Colchester are of consider- 
able age ; and two ancient dates remain carved on 
wood in different buildings, which have occasioned 
several disputations among antiquaries, as to the 
time when Arabic numerals were introduced into 
England. Colchester is one of the 24 towns includ- 
ed in the will of Sir Thomas White, of Reading, 
Berks, to receive 104/. in yearly rotation, for ever, 
from lands vested in the Corporation of Bristol, to 
le lent to four necessitous young men, clothiers, 26/. 
to each for 10 years, without interest. Many other 
charitable benefactions have been given, by various 
persons, for the use of the poor. A Free School, 
and several Charity Schools, have been established 
here for the education of youth : and various Meet- 
ing-Houses have been built for different religious 
denominations. 



* The following particulars relating to this fishery, are con- 
densed from the account published by Dr. Spratt, in the His- 
tory of the Koyal Society. The sp.iwn of the oyster, called 
spat, by the fishermen, is ca>t in April and May, and about 
Midsummer and Michaelmas: the stones, oyster-shells, pieces 
of wood, and other substances to which it cleaves at the bottom 
of the sea, they call milch. The spat, when first cast, is like 
the drop of a candle, but no larger than a spangle : in 24 hours 
afterwards, it is conjectured that the shell begins to be formed. 
After the oysters have first spawned, they are sick, but soon 
begin to get well, and in August are perfectly so : the male 
oyster having a black substance in the fin, is termed black sick ; 
the female having a milky substance in the fin, is termed white 
sick. When the oysters are taken, the small brood is separated 
from the cultch, which is then thrown in again; b*ul if the spat 
is so small that it cannot be severed from the cultch, the fisher- 
men are permitted fo take the latter with the spat. The spat, 
and small oysters, thus taken, are spread upon places calltd beds 
or layer;, near the edge of the river, where they grow and fat- 
ten, and in two or three years, the smallest become oysters of 
the legal size, which is known from a standard scale, or oyster, 
cast in brass, which is kept by the magistrates, or water-bailiff, 
and are then removed from their layings, or beds, into pits cut 
in the marshes, where they fatten for sale. In some of the pits, 
in a few days, a green colour is communicated to the fin of the 
oyster : and, though the method of giving this quality to 
the pit, is kept a secret, there seems reason to believe, that it 
arises from sowing the bottom of the pit with the seed of a par- 
ticular vegetable, on which the oysters feed, as it springs up. 

VOL II. NO. 72. 



This town was incorporated fay charter of Richard 
the First, A. D. 1189; and the burgesses wcrr 
invested with many valuable privileges, particularly 
the exclusive right of fishery on the Colne, from thf 
North Bridge to West-nesse. The last charter, by 
which the town is now governed, was granted by 
his present Majesty, in the year 1703. The corpo- 
rate officers consist of a Mayor, Recorder, Town- 
Clerk, 12 Aldermen, 18 Assistants, 18 Common- 
Councilmen, and inferior servants. The right of 
returning the members to Parliament is vested in 
the Corporation and free Burgesses not receiving 
alms : the number of voters is about 1400. The 
earliest return was made in the year 1296. The 
number of inhabitants returned under the act of 
1811, as residing within the walls and suburbs of 
Colchester, was 12,514 ; the number of houses, 
2192. A considerable portion of the trade of this 
town arises from the Oyster Fishery ; Colchester 
oysters having been long celebrated for their good- 
ness and flavour.* 

The town of Colchester had anciently the right of 
probate and enrolling of wills, which it continued to 
exercise till about the year 1 560 ; and, among the pri- 
vileges, which it still enjoys, from prescription, is the 
right vested in a femme-covert, or married woman, 
who, if her estate lies in the town, can convey it, by 
deed, without being obliged to pass a fine, having, 
previously, declared her consent, before the Mayor. 
Dr. Samuel Harsnet, successively Bishop of Col- 
chester and Norwich, and Archbishop of York, was 
the son of a baker, in this town, where he was born 
in the year 1561. t 

COLNE, EARLS.] The several villages distin- 
guished by the name of Colne, in the hundred of 

Lexden, 

As the cultch is so very necessary for the oysters to spat upon, 
it is made felony to carry it away alter the month of May ; and 
penalties are laid, by tl* Admiralty Court, on Ihos'e who 
destroy, or purloin it at any time. The penalties are, however, 
insufficient to prevent the removal of the cultcb, as the lisher- 
men can frequently carry so much out of the river, covered 
with spat, as will enable'them to discharge the fines many times 
over. Though the produce of this fishery has obtained the 
;enerat name of Colchester Oysters, yet these are of several 
;inds. The PyeHeef, which is most in request, is a small (hick 
oyster, with a "deep clear shell. The creek, wherein this spe- 
cies js/ound, extends from the river to the Strode, at the en- 
trance of Mersey Island. The number of oysters, which are 
natives of this creek, cannot be very great; neither can the 
whole produce of the river, with.its various creeks, be anvwise 
adequate to the vast quantities sold under the denomination of 
Colchester Oysters. Hie great demand daily made for them, 
has obliged the merchants to procure oysters from other places ; 
these are strewn upon the Colchester layings, and when they 
have attained a proper degree of fatness, are frequently vended 
as the natural produce of this fishery. 

f At the age of fifteen, he was admitted into King's College', 
Cambridge ; but afterwards he removed to Pembroke Hall, 
of which he was elected fellow, in the year 1583; and, on the 
resignation of Bishop Andrews, in 1605, chosen Master. 
Being a favourer of the tenets of Arminiansm, he was accused 
of various misdemeanors by the Puritan party, in Mav, 1624. 
He died, in the year 1631, and was buried in the Church at 
Chigwell, where he had established a Free School. One of hit 
5 B publications 



374 



ESSEX. 



iiexden, evidently derive their appellative from the 
river Colne. -Earls' Colne, so denominated from 
having heen amongst the possessions of the De 
Veres, Earls of Oxford, lies 3-f miles E.S.E. from 
Halsted. Sometimes it is called Great Colne, and 
Colne Monachoruin. The ancient mansion of the 
De Veres, called Hall-Place, stood near the Church ; 
but it had long been demolished before the time of 
Leland. Aubrey De Vere, who accompanied the 
Conqueror to England, founded a Benedictine 
Priory here, previously to the year 1100, in honour 
of St. Mary, and St. John the Evangelist. Here 
also, he was buried, with Beatrice, his wife. Many 
others of the same illustrious family, were interred in 
the Priory Church : among them, are 13 Earls of 
Oxford, and several of their wives and children. To 
the memory of the former, various costly monuments 
were erected ; which, after the Dissolution, were 
removed into the parish Church, but are greatly 
defaced. The Priory Church was a stately fabric, 
but has long been intirely demolished. 

Earls-Colne Church was built about the year 
1532. On the east and west ides are carvings of 
the arms of John De Vere, the 16th Earl ; and, at 
the east corner, near the top, are mullets cut in free 
stone. In the village, is an ancient Free School, 
endowed by the Earls of Oxford.* 

COLNE ENGAINE.] The little village of Colne 
Engaine, sometimes called Little Colne, is 2* miles 
E. S. E. from Halsted. It received the appellation 
of Engaine from a family of that name, who pos- 
sessed lands here, from the year 1218 to 1367. 
The Church is an ancient fabric, pleasantly situated 
on an eminence ; at the west end is a handsome 
brick tower, built in the reigh of Henry the Seventh. 
The inhabitants chiefly derive sustenance from spin- 
ning wool for the baire manufacturers at Colchester 
and Coggeshall. 

COLNE PARK.] Colne Park, in the parish of 
Colne Engaine, is, or was recently, the seat of 
Philip Hills, Esq. The house, a handsome build- 
ing of white brick, erected in 1775, stands on a 
rising ground, surrounded with woods and planta- 
tions. North from the mansion is a column of Port- 
land stone, of the Ionic order, erected by J. Soane, 
Esq. architect, in 1791. This demesne includes 
about 110 acres. 

The parishes of Colne Wakes, and White Colne 
in the former of which is an old moated build- 
ing, called Creping Hall lie to the eastward of 
Earls' Colne. 

COOPERSALE.] On the acclivity of a hill sur 



publications was intituled, " A Discovery of the fraudulent 
Practices of John Barrel, in his Proceedings concerning the 
pretended Possession and Dispossession of William Somers, at 
Nottingham, and others: detecting, in some Sort, the deceitful 
Trade in these latter Da.ys of casting out Devils." 

* Thomas Atidley, Lord Chancellor of England in the reign 
of Henry the Eighth, was born at Earls Colne in the year I486. 
He was bred to the law; and his abilities very early introduced 
him to the notice of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, who 



rounded -by pleasure grounds, at Theydon demon, 
stands the delightful mansion of Coopersale, which 
has been the seat of the Archer family from the time 
of Henry the Fifth. Tradition states, that from the 
dexterity which Simon de Bois, one of their ances- 
tors, displayed in a shooting match with that monarch 
at Havering Bower, he changed his name to Archer, 
which the family have constantly retained. 

COPFOKO HALL.] In the parish of Copford, 4| 
miles W. S. W. from Colchester, stands Copford 
Hall, the seat of J. H. Harrison, Esq. The grounds 
are pleasantly ornamented with several pieces of 
water. It is said to have been the residence of 
Bonner, Bishop of London, to which see the manor 
belonged, prior to the Conquest. 

COPPED HALL.] One of the greatest ornaments 
of this County, is Copped Hall, the residence of 
Jno. Conyers, Esq. Its grounds express a bold 
irregularity ; and have been greatly improved by 
groves and plantations, which clothe the tops and 
sides of the hills. Many parts afford grand and ex* 
tensive views ; and it may be with truth averred that 
nature has been liberal to the demesne by the many 
beautiful and picturesque views it offers. In the 
centre of an extensive Park, on a knole, stands the 
house, a neat building of fine white bricks. This 
estate, with its contiguous lands consists of 4000 
acres ; 400 of which were, about 40 years ago, a 
mere waste, covered with horsebeans, pollards, and 
brushwood, the resort of gangs of wood and deer 
stealers, who had infested Epping Forest for three 
centuries. These were thrown into a state of culti- 
vation, by the present proprietor, who effected a 
reformation amongst these people, by building small 
cottages, and appropriating to each a piece of gar- 
den ground which he invited them to live in. He 
procured employment for them, and supplied them 
with fire wood. A piece of ground called the War- 
ren, is amongst the other improvements which have 
taken place. About seventy years ago, a specu- 
lating farmer was offered this tract, of 101 acres, on 
a forty years' lease at 2s. Qd. per acre ; which he re- 
fused, from an idea of the land being incapable of 
cultivation. The ground was then ploughed, and 
sown with the seeds of trees of every description, 
leaving the result to nature. The young plants shot 
up ; and without any attention having been paid to 
them, they have thriven with such vigour, that this 
part of the county does not present a finer and more 
valuable plantation. A Cedar of Lebanon, from its 
rapid growth, is particularly deserving of notice. 
The seed was sown in the year 1747. The medium 

recommended him to the King, by whose authority he was 
appointed Speaker in the famous Parliament which met in 
November 1529. In 1532 he was knighted, and made Lord 
Keeper. The following year he was promoted to the Chancel- 
lorship, which he retained twelve years ; and had the priory of 
Christ Church, near Aldiiate, given him by the King, for a 
town residence. In 1538, he was created Baron Audley of 
Walden, in this county, and installed Knight of the Garter, h 
died in April 1544, and was buried in Walden Church. 

girth 



ESSEX. 



girth of the bole is nearly twelve feet ; and its 
branches extend upwards of thirty t'eet on each 
side. 

A Chapel, in which the painted glass now at St. 
Margaret's, Westminster, was first put up after its 
removal from New Hall, was in the old mansion of 
Copped Hall. Mr. James Wyatt, the architect, 
Yery much improved the present house, since its 
erection, which took place between the years 1753 
and 1737. 

CORRINGHAM.] The parish of Corringham is 
situated three miles E. by S. from Horndon-on-the- 
Hill. From the reign of King John, till that of Eliza- 
beth, the Baud family held the manor of the Bishops 
of London. Sir William de Baud, sheriff of the 
county, in 1375, obtained leave to inclose within 
his park, a certain portion of land, of the Dean and 
Canons of St. Paul's, in consideration of present- 
ing them with a fat buck and doe yearly, on the 
days of the conversion and commemoration of St. 
Paul. On these days, says Morant, " the buck and 
doe were brought by one or more servants, at the 
hour of the procession, and through the midst 
thereof, and offered at the high altar of St. Paul's 
Cathedral, after which, the persons that brought 
the buck, received of the Dean and Chapter, by the 
hands of their chamberlain, twelve pence sterling 
for their entertainment ; but nothing when they 
brought the doe. The buck being brought to the 
steps of the altar, the Dean and Chapter, apparelled 
in copes, and proper vestments, with garlands of 
roses on their heads, sent the body of the buck to 
be baked, and had the head and horns fixed on a 
pole before the cross, in their procession round about 
the Church, till they issued at the west door, where 
the keeper that brought it blowed the death of the 
buck, and then the horns that were about the city, 
answered him in lik manner ; for which they had 
each, of the Dean and Chapter, four pence in 
money, and their dinner ; and the keeper during 
his stay, meat, drink, and lodging, and five shil- 
lings in money at his going away ; together with a 
loaf of bread, having on it the picture of St. Paul." 

CRESSING TEMPLE.] This parish, three miles S.E. 
from Braintree, derives its name from the Knights 
Templars, a preceptory of whom obtained a grant 
of the manor about the year 1150. A very ancient 
monument of the Neville family is in the church. 

DAGENHAM.] At Dagenham, on the banks of the 
Thames, 3| miles S. by W. from Romford, in the 
winter of 1707, a destructive breach was made by 
the wind and tide, in consequence of which 100 
acres and upwards of rich land in the adjoining 
levels were laid under water, and nearly 120 washed 
entirely away. After many fruitless efforts, the 
damage occasioned by the continuance of this breach 
to the navigation of the river, rendered the situation 
of the banks a subject for Parliamentary considera- 
tion ; in consequence of which an act was passed, 
and a small tax imposed upon shipping, for the com- 
pletion of this arduous undertaking, which was at 



length accomplished by the ingenious perseverance 
of Captain Perry. A considerable pool, covering 
from 40 to 50 acres, yet remains within the embank- 
ment ; and near it is a small thatched circular build- 
ing, denominated Dagenham Breach House; it is 
upportcd by a number of gentlemen, who, at the 
proper season, form parties, and come here to fish. 
A large quantity of ouk, yew, willow, &c. was 
found at a depth of about four feet below the surface 
of the marshes, in constructing the embankment. 
This stratum, denominated moor-log, was of con- 
siderable extent, about ten feet thick, and had very 
little admixture of earth, consisting almost wholly 
of trees and underwood. Besides timber, a large 
quantity of hazel nuts, and also several horns of 
deer were found. The expence of the embankment 
was 40,472/. 18s. 8|rf. Of this the original contract 
allowed only 25,000/. Parliament afterwards granted 
15,000/. So that afterall his anxiety, care, and fatigue, 
during five years, the spirited undertaker of this 
difficult and highly important work was not only left 
without remuneration for his labours, but obliged 
himself to defray a portion of the cost. 

DANBURY.] The little village of Danbury, con- 
tracted from Danesbury, the town or castle of the 
Danes, by whom it was founded, is situated 5% 
miles E. by S. from Chelmsford, within, and near 
the area of an ancient encampment, about 680 yards 
in circumference. The spot was well chosen for a 
fortification ; Danbury Hill being considered as the- 
highest eminence in Essex, and commanding a very 
extensive prospect. On the south side the glacis is 
still nearly thirty feet deep ; and the lines may be 
traced to a considerable distance on the other sides. 
In the time of Edward the Confessor, the manor 
was held by Arling, a Saxon ; but at the Norman 
survey, it was the property of Geffery de Mande- 
ville. Soon afterwards, it came to- the family of De 
Sancto Claro, or St. Clere, who retained it, at least, 
till the reign of Edward the First, in whose time 
William de St. Clere wai sheriff of Essex, and had 
a park at Danbury. The estate held by this family 
is still called St. Clere's manor. From them it 
passed successively to the Veres, Earls of Oxford ; 
to the Greys, of Wilton ; from whom, for a few 
years, it went to Sir Gerard Braybrooke, who mar- 
ried one of the daughters of Lord Reginald de Grey ; 
and to the Lords D'Arey. Reverting to the crown, 
it was afterwards granted, by Edward the Sixth, to 
William Parr, Marquis of Northampton, by whom 
it was alienated to Sir Walter Mildmay, who built 
the present mansion, called Deenbury Place, about 
half a mile from the Church. It was recently in the 
occupation of L. D. Ffytche, Esq. 

Danhury church stands on the summit of the Hill, 
within the area of the encampment. From its ex- 
posed situation, it has several times been damaged 
by tempestuous weather, particularly in May, 1402, 
when the body, and part of the chancel, were de- 
stroyed. In February, 1749-50, also, the spire was 
set on fire by lightning, and consumed twenty feet 
6 downwards. 



ESSEX. 



downwards. The east end of the north aisle is in- 
closed by a partition, within which, under arches 
formed in the wall, are the wooden effigies of two 
cross -leg a; ed Knights, in good preservation. A 
similar effigy formerly appeared beneath an arch in 
the south aisle ; but when this part was rebuilt, in 
1776, the figure was removed into the north aisle. 
These figures are thought to represent the St. Cleres, 
* whose arms appear emblazoned in several small 
compartments ot the antique wainscot ceiling of the 
chancel. One of the Knights is in a praying atti - 
tude, with his sword sheathed ; another is in the act 
of drawing his sword ; and tbe third, of returning 
his sword to the scabbard. In October, 1779, as 
some workmen were digging a grave just beneath 
one of the arches in the north wall, they discovered 
a leaden coffin, about thirty inches from the surface 
of the pavement. This was opened a few days after- 
wards, through the influence of Mr. T. White, who 
supposed that it might contain the body of the Knight 
Templar represented by the effigy in the arch above. 
Within the leaden coffin was one of elm. The body, 
preserved in pickle, was perfectly sound, and the 
teeth white, though supposed to have been interred 
in the early part of the loth century. In the course 
of the investigation which took place, circumstances 
arose, inducing a belief that instead of the Knight 
himself, it was his son and heir, a youth, whose re- 
mains had been thus deposited. Indeed, there is 
reason to suppose, that the mode of burying in 
pickle is not so ancient as the time of the Knights 
Templars. 

DEBDEN HALL.] The parish of Debden lies 
four miles N. W. from Thaxted. Debden Hall, a 
handsome stone mansion, was erected by Holland, 
for the late R. M. T. Ohiswell, Esq. The gardens and 
plantations are pleasant. In the parish Church, at 
a little distance, are several family monuments, richly 
ornamented in the pointed arch style, which were 
raised by Mr. Chiswell. That gentleman also pre- 
sented the Church with an elegant font, ornamented 
with statues in Coade's artinciul stone. 

DEDIIA.M.] The decayed market town of Dcd- 
liam, 29 miles 1^. E. by E. from Chelmsford, was 
celebrated for its clothing trade as early as the reign 
of Richard the Second, the Church is a large and 
handsome building. A free Grammar School was 
founded and endowed here, by William Littlebury, 
Esq. for the education of twenty scolars, towards 
the latter end of the 16th century. The population 
according to the last returns was 143:2. 

DOVKR COURT.] The village of Dover Court is 
within the liberties of Harwich, \\ mile S. W. by 
\\~. from that town, of which it is the parochial parent 
In the superstitious ages, it was much celebrated 
for a miraculous Rood$ or Crucifix, enshrined in 
the Church, which, from the sanctity it was sup- 
posed to possess, attracted many visitors and pil- 
grims. The vulgar had so great an opinion of its 
power, that they conceived the closing of the Church 
doors upon it would occasion sudden death ; they 



were left open day and night. Three injudicious, 
though well-meaning men, together with a fourth, 
who escaped, fell a sacrifice to this fancied security. 
In the year 1532, they entered the Church by night, 
and removed the Rood a quarter of a mile off, where 
they burnt it. They were induced to commit this 
action from a wish to put a stop to the idolatrous 
worship rendered to jt by the Catholics. They were 
sentenced to death. A Guild dedicated to St. 
George, whose possessions were sold by Queen 
Elizabeth, was also established in the Church. The 
agricultural implements made of the elms which 
grow in this parish, and which are strong, knotty, 
and crooked, are famous for their durability. 

DUNMOW, GREAT.] The market town of Dun- 
mow Magna, or Great Dunmow, is situated 12| 
miles N. N. W. from Chelmsford, and 37| N. E. 
by N. from London. The name of Dunmow, is 
supposed to have been formed of two British words, 
Dunum a gravelly hill, and Magus a town, which 
answers exactly to its situation on the top of a pretty 
steep gravelly hill, that renders the town extremely 
pleasant. This was the Villa Faustini of the Ro- 
mans, as a proof of which the old Roman way is 
very direct, and called by the inhabitants the Street. 
Its remains are still visible in several places ; and 
besides, we find in an old perambulation of the forest 
in King John's time, that it was said to be bounded 
north by the Street, leading from Dunmow to Col- 
chester. Bishop Gibson, Mr. Drake, and others, 
however, assign the name of Caesaromagus to this 
station. Great numbers of Roman coins, and other 
antiquities have been found in the neighbourhood. 

The government of the town, under a Charter 
granted by Philip and Mary, and confirmed by 
Elizabeth, is vested in a Bailiff and twelve Bur- 
gesses. The poorer classes are employed chiefly in 
the manufacture of blankets and baize. The popu- 
lation of the town, at the last returns, was 2015. 

Great Dunmow Church is a large ancient build- 
ing, with an embattled tower at the west end. Over 
the west entrance, are various shields of arms, carved 
in stone, of the noble families of Mortimer, Bohiin, 
Bourchier, and Braybrooke, who are supposed to 
have contributed towards the erection or repairs of 
the structure. 

At a short distance to the west of the Church, is 
an ancient brick mansion, belonging to Lady Beau- 
mont. 

The manor, which has passed through various 
families, was finally purchased of the crown by 
Lord Maynard, whose family still holds it, in the 
year 1634. 

DUNMOW, LITTLE.] Dunmow Parya, or Little 
Dunmow, lies two miles E. S. E. from Great Dun- 
The ancient and well known custom of this 



mow. 



manor, of delivering a gammon or flitch of bacon, 
to any married couple who would take a prescribed 
oath, is supposed, by some writers, to have origi- 
nated, in the Saxon or Norman times ; others attri- 
buted its institution to the Fitz-Walters, but with 

what 



ESSEX. 



377 



what propriety is uncertain. The earliest delivery 
of the bacon on record, occurred in the year 1441, 
when Richard Wright, of Bradbourge in Norfolk, 
having been duly sworn before the Prior and Con- 
vent, had a flitch of bacon delivered to him, agree- ' 
ably to the tenure. The ceremonial established for 
these occasions, consisted in the claimant's kneeling 
on two sharp pointed stones in the church yard, and 
there taking the following oath, after solemn chant- 
ing, and other rites, performed by the Convent : 

" You shall swear by custom of confession, 
That you ne'er made nuptial transgression ; 
Nor since you were married man and wife, 
By household brawls or contentious suite, 
Or otherwise at bed or at board. 
Offended each other in deed or in word ; 
Or since the parish clerk^saul Amen, 
Wished yourselves unmarried again; 
Or in a twelvemonth and a day, 
Repented not in though! any way ; 
But continued true in thought and desire, 
, As when you join'd hands in holy quire, 
If to these condition^ without all fear, 
Ot your own accord you will freely swear, 
A whole Gammon of Bacon you shall receive, 
And bear it hence with love and good leave ; 
For this is our custom at Dunmow well known ; 
Tho' the pleasure be ours, the Bacon's your own." 

Three persons are recorded to have received the 
baeon previously to the suppression of the religious 
houses. Since that period, the bacon has been 
thrice delivered ; when the ceremonies were per- 
formed at a court-baron for the manor held by the 
steward. The last persons who received it, were 
John Shakeshanks, woolcomber, and Anne his wife, 
of Wjthersfield, who established their right on the 
'20th of June, 1751. Mr. Gough mentions the cus- 
tom as abolished ; but we understand it is only dor- 
mant, either through the want of claimants, or from 
their neglect to enforce the demand. 

A priory of Augustine Canons was founded here 
to the honour of the Virgin Mary, in the year 1104, 
by the Lady Juga, sister of Ralph Baynard, from 
whose family Baynard's Castle, in London, obtained 
its name. Henry the Eighth granted the site of the 

Criory, and the manor, to Robert Earl of Sussex ; 
ut they have since been in the possession of various 
families. The monastic buildings were situated on 
a rising ground, south west from the Church, but 
are now entirely raised ; and some part of the site is 
occupied by tl '>iv-sent manor house. 

TliL- priory Ciiure!> was a large and stately fabric ; 
the roof was sustained on rows of columns, having 
capitals ornamented with oak leaves, elegantly 
carved; some of these remain in the part now used 
as the |t;irisii Church, winch includes only the east, 
end of the choir, and .the north aisle. "Here," ob- 
serves Grose, " under ila arch in the south wall, is 
an ancient chest-like tomb supposed to contain the 
body of the foundress Lady Juga. Near the same 
spot fs a monument said to have be n that of Walter 
Fitz-Wiilter, the first of that name, who died anno 
VOL. n. NO. 72. 



1 198, and was buried with one of his wives in the 
middle of the choir, whence it has been removed to 
its present situation ; at least the alabaster figures of 
Sir Walter and his Lady, which are now laid on att 
altar tomb, are considerably too short for them. 
These figures are well executed for the time in which 
they were clone, but are much defaced, probably by 
the removal, particularly the man, whose legs are 
broken off at the knees. The Lady has on a tiara, 
or mitred-like head dress, ornamented with lace, 
ear-rings, and a necklace ; at her feet, on that side 
next her husband, is a small dog, so- much defaced 
as to be scarce distinguishable. Sir Walter is re- 
presented in plate armour, under it a shirt of mail, 
which appears at his collar, and below the skirts of 
his armour. There is something remarkable in the 
appearance of his hair, which seems to radiate from 
a centre somewhat like the caul of a wig, but curling 
inwards. This fashion hair, or wig, (for it appear*) 
doubtful which was intended) observable on divers 
monuments of the same age, was also the head dress 
of the Lady. 

" Opposite this monument, between two pillars, 
on the north side of the choir, is the tomb of the fair 
Matilda, daughter of the second Walter Fitz-Wal- 
ter, who according to the Monkish story, unsup- 
ported by history, is pretended to have been poisoned 
by the contrivance of King John, for refusing to 
gratify his illicit passion. Her figure is in alabaster, 
and by no means a despicable piece of workmanship. 
Her fingers are stained with a red colour, which, 
according to the Ciceroni of the place, was done to 
represent the effects of the poison : but, in all likeli- 
hood, is the remains of a former painting. Both this 
I figure, and that of the Lady Fitz-Walter, afford 
| accurate specimens of the necklaces, ear-rings, and 
' other ornaments -worn by the Ladies of those days." 

Dr. Sims, of the Society of Friends,, who died 
here in 1812, was passionately fond of his garden, 
which though only about an acre in extent, was 
justly admired as an ornament of Dunmpw. 

EASTBURY HOUSE.] This ancient brick-built 
mansion, situated about a mile S.E. from Barking, 
is associated by tradition with the gunpowder-plot : 
j one account asserting, that the conspirators held 
their meetings here ; and another, at the residence 
of Lord Mpntegle, when he received the letter 
that led to the discovery. The house, which, witli 
the manor, belongs to the Sterry family, has octan- 
gular towers, and curiously ornamented chimneys. 
Some of the rooms are painted in fresco. 

EASTON.] Great Easton, or Easton-upon-the- ' 
Hill, lies' 3 miles ; and Little Easton, or Easton- 
ad-Turrim, 2 miles, N. W. from Great Dunmow. 
The manor of the latter was granted by Queen 
Eliz-.'betti, to Henry iVlaynard, Ksq. ancestor of the 
Lords Maynard. The Church contains various 
monumental records of this family. On the monu- 
ment erected to the memory of Sir Henry Aiay;uird, 
(knighted by James the First) and his Lady, are 



their effigies, lymj 
5 c 



incumbent : on the north sirte 



are 



378 



ESSEX. 



tire the figures of their eight softs, and two daugh- 
ters ; the death of two of the former arc recorded 
by the following inscription : 

" Rare was the roote, the branches bravely spred, 
And some still are, though some be withered ; 
Two of the precious ones, a pitious spoile, 
Were erst transplanted to a foreine soile, 
Where the holt snnne, howe'erit did befall 
Drew up their juice, to perfume heav'n witliail ; 
When will th' heav'n such flowers to the earth repay 
As th'e earlh afforded heav'n two in a day." 

Another monument, of very elaborate workman- 
ship, and finely sculptured, was created to comme- 
morate William, Lord Maynard, who died in 1098 ; 
his wife, Dorothy, daughter of Sir Robert Banastre, 
Rnt and other individuals of the family. Its height 
is upwards of '20 feet, and its width 12. Lord May- 
'nard is represented by a full length statue, standing 
on a pedestal, and surrounded by various medallions 
and busts of his relatives, that are buried in the 
vault beneath. An ancient monument of grey mar- 
ble, neatly ornamented, in this Chapel, marks the 
place of interment of Henry Bourchier, first Earl 
of Essex, of that name, and Isabel Plantagenet, his 
Countess* 

Within the precincts of this manor, stands Eastern 
Lodge, the venerable seat of Charles, Viscount May- 
nard. It is pleasantly situated, on high ground, in a 
spacious park. From the large projecting windows, 
and other peculiarities of the building, it seems to 
have been erected about the latter end of the I'eign 
of Queen Elizabeth. Adjoining the east end, is a 
neat Chapel, built by William, Lord Maynard, in 
the year 1621 : the east window displays the prin- 
cipal events in the History of our Saviour, in six 
compartments of painted glass. The grounds are 
pleasant, and ornamented with canals, shrubberies, 
&c. 

EEPING.] The irregular market-town of Epping, 
lies 174 miles W. by 8. from Chelmsford, and 16| 
N.E. by N. from London. It consists of two parts ; 
one round the Chufch, called Epping-Upland ; the 
other nearly a mile and a half S.E. from the Church, 
called Epping Street. The latter, which is the 
more extensive, forms one wide street, near a mile in 
length, on the high road to Newmarket, &c. Here 



* From a pamphlet, intituled, " The Origirt of Fairlop 
Fair," quoted by Lysons, we learn, that " Mr. Day, who was 
a block and pump maker in the parish of St. John, Wapping, 
had a small estate near Fairlop O;ik, whither he used to repair 
annually, on the first Friday, in July ; when it was his custom 
to invite a select party of his neighbours to accompany him, 
and dine under the shade of the oak, on beans and bicon. In 
the course of a few years, olhrr parties were formed on Mr. 
Day's anniversary, and suttling booths erected for their accom- 
modation : these increasing progressively, booths were erected 
also, by persons who brought various articles for sale ; and, 
about the year 1725, the place began to exhibit the appearance 
of a regular fair. Mr. Day continued to resort annually to his 
favourite spot as long as he lived ; and, in memory of its origin, 
never failed to provide, on the day of tin' fair, several sacks of 
beans, with a proportionate quantity of bacon, which he distri- 



the market is held : the chief commodities exposed 
for sale, are butter, of a superior quality, and poul- 
try, which are mostly purchased for the metropolis. 
At the west end of the street, is a small new Chapel ; 
and, near the middle, are the shambles, which have 
a very mean appearance. The manor was part of 
the endowment, bestowed by Earl Harold, on Wal- 
tham Abbey. 

EPI-ING FOREST.] Epping Forest, deriving its 
present name from the town of Epping, is an exten* 
sive tract of good woodland, formerly called Wal- 
tham Forest, and in more remote ages, the Forest 
of Essex. Many thousand acres of the original 
forest have been grubbed up, and the land cultivat- 
ed. This Forest is under the jurisdiction of a Lord 
Warden, and four Verderers : the former title is he- 
reditary in the family of Sir James Tilney Long, 
Bart. The Verderers are elected by the freeholders, 
and retain their offices during life. This forest, 
though within 1-2 miles of London, contains wild 
stags ; and a stag is annually turned out on Easter 
Monday, under an establishment patronised by some 
of the principal merchants of the city. 

FAIRLOP OAK.] In Hainault Forest, to the S.E. 
of Epping Forest, of which it is conjectured to have 
originally formed a part, is a remarkable oak, called 
FAIRLOP OAK, of such great age, that the tradition 
of the country traces it half-way up the Christian 
era. The stem of this noble tree is rough and fluted^ 
and measures about 36 feet in girth ; the branches 
overspread an area of about 100 feet in diameter. 
Round this oak, on the first Friday in July, a yearly 
fair is held, which appears to have originated from a 
man of singular character, named Day ; who, up* 
wards of 80 years ago, is said to have commenced 
the practice of dining, with his friends, annually, 
beneath the shade of the tree. The stalls, &c. ex- 
tend, in a circle, round t!ie oak ; and, in fine wea- 
ther, the fair is attended by numbers of people, from 
the adjacent country, and also from the metro- 
polis.* 

FAVLKBOURNF. HAJ.L.] Fanlkbouriie Hall, the 
soat of the late Colonel John Bullock (who died at 
the close of the year 180P) one of the representatives 
of the County, is situated somewhat more than a 
mile N.W. from William Church. It is a stately 



bnted from the trunk of the tree, to the persons there assem- 
bled. For several years before Mr. Day's death, the pump 
and block makers of Wapping, went annually to the fair, in a 
boat made of one piece of entire fir, covered with an awning, 
mounted on a coach carriage, and drawn by six horses, attend- 
ed with rlags and streamers, a band of music, and a great num- 
ber of persons, both on foot, and on horseback. T his custom 
is still continued. A few years before Mr. Day died, his fa- 
vourite oak lost a large limb, out of which he procured a coffin 
to lie made fot his own interment. His death happened Oct. 
19th, 1707, aged 84. His remains were conveyed to Barking, 
3) water, pursuant to his own request, accompanied by six 
ourneymen pump and block makers, to each of whom he be- 
quealhed a new leathern apron, and a guinea: there is a tornb- 
itone, in Barking Church-yard, to his mtmory." 

8 and 



ESSEX. 



379 



and magnificent edifice, built at different periods of 
tiin.j; the tower gateway, much admired for its cu- 
rions architecture, is supposed to have been erected 
about the time of Stephen, or Henry 11. by the Earl 
of Gloucester. The place has been much improved 
by the Bullock family. Several of the apartments j 
contain valuable paintings ; the pleasure-grounds 
are beautiful and extensive, and well watered by a 
number of fine, springs. A cedar-tree, which grows 
here, is accounted the largest in the kingdom, being, 
at the distance; of eight inches from the ground, 18 
fe<?t 9 inches in girth, and at 10 feet from the ground, 
It feet 9 inches ; and its height, to the first branch, 
19 feet. Faulkbourue is the supposed site of a Ro- 
man villa. 

FITZ-WALTERS.] This place, now vulgarly call- 
ed the Round House, in the parish of Shenfield, 
one mile N.E. by N. from Brentwood, is the seat of 
Thomas Wright, Esq. but was anciently the pro- 
perty of the Fitz-Walter family ; who appear to 
have held it by the service of providing a pair of gilt 
spurs, at the Coronation. This house has a singu- 
lar appearance ; its form being nearly octangular, 
with the chimnies rising in the centre. 

FCELIX HALL.] This is the seat of Charles Callis 
Western, Esq. one of the representatives for Maiden. 
It is a neat modern building, in a small park, plea- 
santly situated about a mile from Kelvedon. The 
interior of the house is elegantly fitted up ; and the 
gardens are laid out with much taste. 

FOREST HOUSE.] The Forest House, (near Wal- 
thamstow) anciently called Goring House, from having 
been the seat of Charles Goring, Earl of Norwich, in 
the reign of Charles the Second, is a plain square 
building, now the property of the Bosanquet family, 
who purchased it from Sir John Heathcote, Bart. 

FOULNESS, WALLASEA, &c.] The islands of 
Foulness, Wallasea, Rushley, Haven-Gore, New 
England, and Potten, form the eastern part of 
Rochford hundred ; but, with the exception of the 
two first, are unworthy of description. Foulness, 
the largest, exclusively of the tract named the Salt- 
ujgs, not yet embanked from the sea, is upwards of 
20 miles in circumference. It contains nearly 5000 
acres, divided into different farms. A small Church, 
originally built as a Chapel of Ease, in consequence 
of the Moods having frequently prevented the inha- 
bitants from attending the different places of wor- 
f-liip on the main land, stands nearly in the centre of 
the Island. 

Wallasea is about 4 miles long, and rather more 
'lian a mile and a half broad, and, like Foulness, is 
divided into farms and grazing grounds, which dif- 
ferent individuals occupy. The soil of these Islands 
consists of a deep, rich, hazel-coloured loam, upon 
a fine sea sand, or silt ouze, or sea clay. Corn, 
clov-T, mustard, and cole-seed, are grown upon the 
h;ghr parts. Sheep, cattle, and horses, are fed 
upon the lower parts. 

FYFIELD.] In the neighbourhood of Fy field, or 



Fyfhide, 2J miles N.E. by N. from Chipping Ongar, 
numbers of cells, and other antiquities hiive, at dif- 
ferent times, been found. 

GIDDY HALL.] Giddy Hall, about a mile east 
from Rnmford, was erected by Sir John Eyles, 
about the year 17'20. The ancient manor-house was 
began by Sir Thomas Cooke, about the year 1407, 
who obtained a license for fortifying and embattling 1 
it. It was finished by his grandson, the famous Sir 
Anthony Cooke, who entertained Queen Elizabeth 
here, in 1568. Mary de Medicis, mother of Queen 
Henrietta Maria, was also entertained in the man- 
sion, by Lady Cooke, his widow, the night before 
her arrival at London, in 1638. The grounds were 
much improved by Richard Benyon, Esq. M.P. 
whose father purchased the manor, in the year 
1745. 

GOSFIELD HALL.] In the village of Gosfield, 
2i miles W.S.W. from Halsted, stands Gosfield 
Hall, the elegant seat of the Marquis of Bucking- 
ham. Soon after the Conquest, this demesne was 
in the possession of Robert de Clare, Earl of Glou- 
cester ; and it is still part of the honour of Clare. 
After passing through several families, it was pur- 
chased, at the beginning of the 18th century, bj 
John Knight, Esq. who, dying in 1733, bequeathed 
it to Anne, his wife, second daughter of James 
Craggs, Esq. This lady married Robert Nugent^ 
Esq. afterwards Earl Nugent, from whom, in 1788, 
the estate became the property of George, Marquis 
of Buckingham, the present proprietor, who inherits 
ill right of his lady. The mansion, though greatly 
altered, presents an interesting specimen of the do- 
mestic architecture which prevailed in the construc- 
tion of the residences of the. nobility, during the 
reign of Henry the Seventh, who strictly enforced 
the ancient prerogative of the Crown, in prohibiting 
his subjects from erecting Castles. The houses erect- 
ed at the above period, however, though not coming 
within the description of a fortress, were equally as 
strong, and well secured, as many of the baronial 
Castles. Gosfield Hall was a large pile of brick, 
inclosing a quadrangular court ; into which all the 
lower tier of windows opened. There were not any 
windows on the ground floor of the outside ; and 
those of tlie upper stories being strongly barrica- 
doed, no admittance could be forced, but with great 
difficulty. The west side of the quadrangle remain* 
nearly in its original state ; but the north, east, and 
south fronts, are modern. Various alterations were 
made by the late Lord Nugenl ; and additional im- 
provements have been effected under the direction 
of the present noble proprietor. The house, as ori- 
ginally built, consisted of only one room in depth ; 
consequently there was no communication round 
the inside, but by passing through every room. 
The west side is yet in this state ; and the first floor 
is occupied by a long gallery, 106 feet in length, 
and 12 in width : this gallery is called Queen Eliza- 
beth's, in commemoration of that sovereign having 

twice 



380 



ESSEX. 



twice visited the Lady Ryche, at Gosfield. The 
principal paintings that were in this mansion, have 
been removed to Stowe : a few good pictures still 
remain in the breakfast-room ; and, in the dining- 
room, are many valuable original portraits, particu- 
larly of George the First ; John, Duke of Marlbo- 
rough ; Russel, Earl of Oxford ; William, Earl of 
Cadogan ; John, Duke of Argyle ; Frederick, 
Prince of Wales ; the Lord Chancellor Shaftes- 
bury ; Richard, Viscount Cobham ; Sir William 
Wyndham ; and Dr. Halley. In the Library, is an 
ancient sculptured chimney-piece, in stone, repre- 
senting, in bold relief, the memorable battle of Bos- 
worth Field, between Richard the Third and the 
Karl of Richmond, and containing 24 figures on 
horseback, with the King, lying prostrate under his 
own charger. Most of the personages introduced, 
are known by the armorial bearings on the shields. 
At the extremities of the chimney-piece are small 
statues of Henry the Seventh and his Queen, exactly 
resembling those on the monument on Westminster 
Abbey. The Green Velvet apartments contain va- 
rious portraits of the Craggs family. 

Gosfield Park is extensive, well wooded, and con- 
tains a noble sheet of water, of 102 acres, which 
adds much to its picturesque beauty. 

To the eat of the Hall, at a short distance, is 
Gosfield Church, in which is a small neat Chapel, 
and another small private one, containing a large 
marble monument, to the memory of John Knight, 
Esq. This monument was executed by Schee- 
maker, according to the directions of Pope, by whom 
the following epitaph was written : 

'" O fairest pattern to a falling age, 

Whose public virtue knew no party rage; 

Whose private name all titles recommend, 

The pious son, fond husband, faithful friend. 

In manners plain, in sense alone refined : 

Goo3 without show, anil without weakness kind. 

To reason's equal dictates ever true ; 

Calm to resolve, and constant to pursue, lotyi .'< 

In life with every social grace adorned, 

In death, by friendship, honour, virtue mourn'd." 

The Church contains several other monuments, of 
minor note. 

Gosfield Place, about half a mile east from the 
Church, ts the seat of J. G. Sparrow, Esq. It is a 
handsome modern building, surrounded by nearly 
200 acres of land. 

GREENSTED.]--Greensted-near-Ongar, from which 
it is distant only a mile and a quarter, is so termed, 
io distinguish it from Greensted, within the liberties 
of Colchester. It has been much celebrated, on 
account of its ClMirch, which is considered, by some 
of the best informed antiquaries, as one of the most 
ingular an:l ancient in Great Britain. The body, 
or nave, is intirely composed of wood ; the side 
being iormed of the trunks of large chesnut trees, 
split or sawn asunder. These are set upright, close 
to each other, and let into a sill or plate ; at the 
top they are fastened with wooden pins. " On the 



south side," observes Gough, " are sixteen, and two 
doorposts ; on the north, twenty-one and two vacan- 
cies filled up with plaster. The west end is built 
against by a boarded tower, and the east by a chan- 
cel of brick ; on the south side is a wooden porch ; 
and both sides are strengthened by brick buttresses : 
4he roof is of later date, and tiled ;" but it rises to a 
point in the centre, as originally formed. The entire 
length of the original part is 2 feet inches ; the 
width 14 feel; and the height to the spring of the 
root, 5 feet 6 inches. In the account of this Church, 
communicated to the Society of Antiquaries, by S. Le- 
thieullier, Esq. and annexed to a vietf ot it publish- 
ed in 1748, it is said, that the inhabitants have a 
tradition, that the corpse of a King once rested in 
it. This tradition, Mr. L. imagined, to have been 
founded on particulars recorded by some of our old 
writers. In a manuscript preserved in the Lambeth 
Library, intituled, / ita et I'u^sto Saiicti Edutuitdi, 
are passages to this effect : in the year 1010, and 
the 30tb of King Ethelred, St. Edmund, by reason 
of the Danish invasion of Turkil, the Danish chief, 
was taken by Bishop Ail win, to London ; but in the 
third year following, carried back to St. Edmund's 
Bury : a certain person, at Stapleford, hospitably 
received his body, on its return." Another M.S. 
cited in the Monasticon, and intituled; Ilegist-rum 
canobii Sancti JLdmundi, has this sentence : Idem 
apnd AUNGRK hospitabatur ubi in ejus memoria /ignea 
capella peimaiiet nsrjue ftorlie ; i. e. ' His body was 
likewise entertained at Aungre, where a wooden 
Chapel, erected to his memory, remains to this day.' 
In the application of these extracts, Mr. L. ob- 
serves, that, " the parish of Aungre, or Ongar, 
adjoins to that of Greensted, where this Church is 
situated : and that the ancient road from London 
into Suffolk, lay through Old-ford, Abridge, Staple- 
ford, Greensted, Duumow, and Clare, we learu not 
only from tradition, but likewise from several re- 
mains of it, which are still visible. It seems not 
improbable, therefore, that this rough and unpolish- 
ed fabric was first erected as a sort of shrine for the 
reception of the corpse of St. Edmund, which, in 
its return from London to Bury, as Lydgate says, 
in his MjS. Life of King Edmund, was carried in a 
chest : and, as we are told, in th.j Register above- 
mentioned, that it remained, afterwards, in memory 
of that removal, so it might, in process of time, with 
proper additions made to it, he converted into a 
parish Church ; for we find, by Newcourt, that Si- 
mon Feverell succeeded John Lodet, as rector of 
Greenstr-d juxta Ongar, in 18-28. He says, like- 
wise, that Richard de Lucy very probably divided 
the parishes of Urinsted and Aungre, and built the 
Church at Aungre, in the reign of Henry the Se- 
cond." 

GttEENHTEn HALL. This is the seat and pro- 
perty of Craven Ord, Esq. one of the Masters, in 
Chancery. It is a neat modern building, situated 
near Greensted Church. 

HADLEIGH.] 



ESSEX. 



381 



HADLEIGH.] Hadleigh, or Hadleigh ad Cas- 
trum, is 2J miles W. byN. from Leigh. The ma- 
nor appears to have been originally comprehended 
in the honour of Raleigh, and, having passed through 
several families, it is now in that of Barnard. The 
Castle was built by Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, 
in the reign of Henry the Third, and its existing 
ruins shew its original grandeur. In process of 
time, it came to Thomas of Woodstock, who is said 
to have been smothered, with pillows, at Calais, hi 
1397. Only two or three lofty towers remain, to 
attest its ancient magnificence. The site is almost 
overgrown with bushes , but, being situated on the 
brow of a steep hill, it commands a delightful pros- 
pect, across the Thames, into Kent. 

HADSTOCK.] The mean little village of Had- 
xtock, about a mile and a half 8. from Linton, in 
Cambridgeshire, formerly had a market, procured, 
in 1337, through the interest of tbe Bishop of Ely. 
Dr. Salmon, and others, suppose the Ikening Way 
to have passed near this village from Royston. 

HALLINGBURY.] Lord Montegle, one of the an- 
cient possessors of the manor of Great Hallingbury, 
or Hallinghury Morley, (a mile and a half S. E. by 
E. from Bishop's Stortford) was the person to whom 
was sent the mysterious letter recorded to have been 
the occasion of the discovery ofthe Gunpowder Plot. 
From the Montegle family, it was obtained by Sir 
Edward Turner, Speaker of the House of Commons, 
andChief Baron of the Exchequer, after the decease 
of whose son, it was purchased by the Houblons, 
whose descendant, J. Houblon, Esq. is one oi the 
representatives of the county. Several of the Lords 
Montegle, and Morley, its more ancient holders lie, 
buried in the Church. 

Mr. Houblon's scat, called Hallingbury Place, is 
a spacious edifice, occupying the summit of an emi- 
nence, in an extensive park. The grounds are very 
fine. It was purchased by the Houblons, in the 
year 1727, under an act of Parliament, which vested 
the manors of Great Hallingbury, Monkbury, and 
Wallbury, in trustees for the discharge of the debts 
of Sir Edward Turner. 

Upon a steep hill, .in Wallbury manor, is an irre- 
gular oval camp, of about 30 acres, inclosed by a 
bold double bank, and having upon the brow of the 
hill, to the north, some additional fortifications. 
Upon the west, the river Stort flows within a few 
fields, and furnishes it with a barrier upon that side, 
where there is a breach in the inner vallum, and the 
ditch also filled up, while the outer bank is steep, 
and of difficult access. Upon the east side a road 
enters, but does not cross the camp, as does that 
which enters at the north, and goes out at the south 
side. Within the west bank is a farm-house, of 
which the south part is built of rough, but strongly 
compacted work, in which are some Gothic arches, 
sharp pointed. 

HALSTED.] The large and populous market- 
town of Halsted, is 17f miles N.N.E. from Chelms- 
ford, and 46| N.E. from London. It is pleasantly 
VOL. ii. NO. 72. 



situated near the Colne, on the acclivity of a gra- 
velly eminence. It derives its name from two Saxon 
words, signifying healthy place. In Edward the 
Confessor's time, it was held by Earl Godwin ; but, 
on the Conquest, it appears to have been divided 
among several Norman chiefs. The market was 
probably established in the Saxon times, as a hill, 
at the upper end of the town, on which it was held, 
for several centuries after the Conquest, has the 
name of Cheping Hill. It is now kept near the 
centre of the town. 

A Grammar School was founded here, in the year 
1594, by Dame Mary Ramsey, for forty poor chil- 
dren, of Halsted, and Colne- Engaine ; or, in de- 
fault of a sufficient number from these places, the 
number to be made up from the children pf the poor 
inhabitants, within the circuit of eight miles of Hal- 
sted. The population of Halsted, in the year 1811, 
amounted to 3279 ; the houses to 745. At a house 
in this parish, is a Greek inscription, brought from 
a village near Smyrna, where it was erected 150 
years before Christ, to the honour of the musician, 
Crato. 

The spire of Halsted Church is of wood ; and it 
is the third that has been erected on the present 
tower, the two former having been destroyed by 
lightning. The second spire was raised in 1717, at 
the expence of Mr. S. Firke, an apothecary of the 
town ; on which occasion, Prior wrote the following 
lines :-r- 

View not this spire by measure giv'n 
To buildings rais'd by common hands ; 

That fabric rises high as Heav'n, 
Whose basis on devotion stands. 

While yet we draw this vital breath, 
We can our hope and faith declare; 

But charity, beyond our death, 
Will ever in our works appear. 

Blest be he call'tl among good men, 

Who to his God this column rais'd ; 
Tho' lightning shake the spirr again, 

The man who built it shall be prais'd. 

Yet spires nnd towers in duM shall lie, 

The weak efforts of human pain*; 
And Faith and Hope themselves -iiiall die. 

While deathless Charily remains. 

In this Church, a chantry was founded for a mas- 
ter and five priests, by Bartholomew, Lord Bour- 
chier, under a licence obtained from Edward the 
Third, in 1340, by Robert Bourchier, Earl of Es- 
sex, and Lord Chancellor of England, who was 
buried here, and whose monument is supposed to 
be in the south aisle, with another ancient tomb of 
the family, on which are the effigies of a knight, 
cross-legged, and his lady. A third tomb, of a 
similar description, was removed about 70 years 
ago. In the chancel, is a monument, inscribed to 
the memory of Sir Samuel Tryon, Knt. and Bart. 
, a former owner of this manor. The College, for 
the chantry priests, is yet standing near the middle 
of the town. 

5 HAM 



382 



ESSEX. 



HAM, EAST.] The village of East Ham lies 1\ 
miles E. by N. from St. Paul's Cathedral. The 
Church is supposed to be of considerable antiquity. 
It consists of a sanctuary, an anti-temple, and a tem- 
ple ; or, as they are now called, a nave, and two chan- 
cels. The upper chancel, or sanctuary, is semicir- 
cular, at the east end, and has narrow pointed win- 
dows. On the south wall of the lower chancel, are 
several Saxon arches, with zig-zag ornaments. Be- 
hind the communion table, is a handsome monument 
to the memory of Edmund Nevill, Lord Latimer, 
seventh Earl of Westmoreland, of that family. Se- 
veral other distinguished personages have been in- 
terred in the Church, and Church-yard ; and, among 
them, the celebrated antiquary, Dr. Stukeiey : who, 
as appears by the register, was buried in March, 
1765. The spot chosen for his burial-place, was 
fixed on by himself, and, by his own request, the 
turf was laid smoothly over his grave, without any 
monument op memorial of his name. 

About a mile N.W. from the Church, in the ham- 
let of Green Street, is an ancient mansion, adjoin- 
ing to which is a tower, where, according to tra- 
dition, Anne Boleyn, Queen of Henry the Eighth, 
was, at some period, confined. This tale is evi- 
dently untrue, as the tower is of more modern date. 
The mansion is supposed to have been the residence 
of the Nevills. 

HAM, WEST.] West Ham, a larger and more 
populous village than East Ham, is only b\ miles 
E.N.E. from St. Paul's Cathedral. It had, for- 
merly, a market, procured, in 1253, by Richard de 
Montfichet ; whose ancestor, William de Mont- 
fichet, had built an Abbey, at Stratford-Langthorne, 
in this parish, in the year 1135, and endowed it with 
the manor of West Ham, and other estates. The 
Abbey was founded for Cistercian monks, and de- 
dicated to the Virgin Mary, and All Saints. " This 
house," remarks Leland, " first sett among the low 
marishes, was after, with sore fludes, defacyd, and 
removid to a cell, or grauuge, longyuge to it, caul- 
lyd Burgestede, in Estsex, a m,ile or more from 
Billerica. Thes monks remainid at Burgestede 
untyll intrete was made -that they might have sum 
helpe otherwyse. Then one of the Richards, Kings 
of England, toke the ground and Abbay of Strat- 
ford into his protection, and re-edifienge it, browght 
the foresayde monks agayne to Stratford, where 
among the marsches they re-inhabytyd." On the 
Dissolution, the possessions of the Abbey were 
granted to Sir Peter Meautis, who had been Am - 
bassador to the Court of France. Henry Meautis, 
Esq. a descendant of Sir Peter's, alienated the site 
of the Abbey, with the Abbey mills, and 240 acres 
of land, to Sir John Nulls, in the year 1633. Mar- 
garet, Countess of Salisbury, whom Henry the 
Eighth caused to be beheaded, in her old age, oil a 

* This gentleman was born at Stratford-Langthorne, and 
became celebrated for bis acquaintance with Natural History, 
particularly that of birds : besides various papers, in the Philo- 
ophital Transactions, he published seven quarto volumes, on 



charge of high treason, appears to have resided 
within the precincts of the Abbey, about the time of 
its dissolution. The chief remains of the monastic 
buildings, now standing, is a thick gateway, for- 
merly the entrance to the conventual precincts, and 
an ornamented arch, which appears to have been the 
entrance to the Chapel. " The foundations of the 
Convent," observes Lysons, were dug up, and re^ 
moved by the present proprietor, in doing of which, 
no antiquities, worthy of note, were found, except a 
small onyx seal, with the impress of a griffin, set in 
silver, on which is the following legend, ' Nuncio 
vobis gandium et satutem ;' perhaps the Priory seal of 
one of the Abbots. The Abbey stood about three 
furlongs south-west from the present Church. 

The tower of West Ham Church is 74 feet in 
height. Many eminent persons have been buried in 
the interior, which contains several handsome mo- 
numents. In the Church-yard, was interred, 
George Edwards, Esq. F.R.S.* 

Calico-printing is carried on here, to a consider- 
able extent. The West Ham water- works, built on 
the river Lea, are worked by a steam, and a water- 
engine : they supply water to the villages of Strat- 
ford-Langthorne, Bromley, and Bow ; Stepney, 
Bethnal Green, and the lower part of White- 
chapel. 

West Ham parish is divided into the three wards 
of Church Street, Stratford-Langthorne, and Plais- 
tow. A Charity School was instituted here, in 
1723, for 10 boys ; but the endowments having 
been greatly increased, 40 boys, and 20 girls are 
now educated and clothed ; and, on leaving the 
school, receive 5/. each, as an apprentice fee. A 
School for clothing and educating 40 poor girls, has 
also been established, under the will, dated 1761, of 
Mrs. Sarah Bonnell ; who left 3000/. for these pur- 
poses. 

HARE STREET.] At the village of Hare Street, 
3 miles from Brook Street, is the little cottage of 
Humphrey Repton, Esq. well known by his publi- 
cations on landscape-gardening, and by his skill in 
laying out parks, and pleasure-grounds. 

Near this place is Hare Hall, the elegant resi- 
dence of John Arnold Wallinger, Esq. It was 
begun under the direction of Mr. Payne, in 1769, 
on the site of an old mansion. It is built with 
Portland stone, and consists of a centre, with two 
wings, connected by colonnades. The interior is 
handsomely fitted up ; and the small drawing-room 
contains a few pictures, by Angelica Kauffmun, and 
other artists. The large drawing-room, which ex- 
tends the whole length of the house, commands 
some diversified, and pleasant views. Mr. Payne 
has been celebrated for his staircases, and here, as at 
Wardour Castle, and other places, he has displayed 
much taste and elegance, in that part of his struc- 



subjects in Natural History, upwards of 600 of which had 
never been before described. He died, in the year 1775, at 
the age of 81. 

ture. 



ESSEX. 



385 



ture. In a sequestered part of the ground, a por- 
tion ef a petrified tree, brought from the Isle of Port- 
land, is preserved. 

HARLOW.] Harlow, the market of which has 
been discontinued, is 17 miles W. N. W. from 
Chelmsford. It was formerly a place of consider- 
able trade, and had an extensive woollen manufac- 
ture ; but this has long been done away with, and 
the inhabitants now derive their principal support 
from spinning, and agriculture. This town derives 
some advantages from Harlow Bush fair, which is 
held yearly, for the sale of horses, cattle, &c. on a 
common, about 2 miles from the town, and is much 
resorted to. The Church, which was, in part, de- 
stroyed by fire, at the commencement of the last 
century, was soon afterwards rebuilt, and orna- 
mented with painted glass, principally at the ex- 
penca of the Rev. Mr. Taylor, at that time, Vicar, 
and the gentry in the vicinity. The original struc- 
ture \vas in the Cathedral form ; but a cupola has 
been substituted for the tower, which was in the 
centre. 

HARSTED HALT,.] The reputed manor of Har- 
sted Hall, in Birdbrook parish, 6| miles N.W. from 
Castle Hedingham, is remarkable for containing 
some of the finest oaks in Essex. 

HARWICH.] The populous market, and seaport 
town of Harwich, 42J miles N.E. by E. from 
Chelmsford, and 71 1 from London, is situated at 
the north-east extremity of this county, on a point 
of land, bounded on the east, by the sea ; and, on 
the north, by the estuaries of the Stour, and Orwell. 
Its name is derived from the Saxon words, here, au 
army, and wk, a Castle, or fortification ; and, it has 
been supposed, that a Saxon array was stationed 
here, to prevent the descent of invaders. It is also 
probable, that the Romans had a considerable sta- 
tion near this place, as the remains of an ancient 
camp, of great extent, may yet be traced. On one 
side, the rampart is, in several places, from 10 to 
12 feet high ; and the ditch, though in a great de- 
gree filled up, 6 feet deep, and nearly 40 wide. 
The high road, leading to it, and to the town, is 
called the Street : here several Roman coins have 
been found,; and, in a small adjoining farm, belong- 
ing to the vicarage of Dover-Court, a tesselated 
puveinent was, some years ago, discovered. 

In the Saxon Chronicle, a battle is mentioned to 
have been fought, in this neighbourhood, at the 
mouth of the Stour, between the fleet of King Al- 
fred, and 18 Danish ships, in the year 885. The 
. Danes were completely defeated, and every sail 
taken : but the English were, soon afterwards, 
worsted, in a second engagement, with a more 
powerful fleet of the enemy. 

Harwich, which is only a Chapelry to Dover- 
Court, already described, did not attain any im- 
portance, till after the time of the Conquest. Its 
first considerable increase arose from the decay of 
Orwell, which is recorded to have stood on the 
West Rocks, a shoal, now 5 miles from the shore, 



and to have been overwhelmed by the action of th 
sea, with a large adjoining tract of land. Edward 
the Second made it a borough corporate, and mar- 
ket-town, by charter, dated in the year 1318. A 
new charter, with more ample privileges, under 
which the civil jurisdiction is now exercised, was 
granted by James the First, ia 1614. The local 
government is vested in a Mayor, eight Aldermen, 
24 capital Burgesses, a Recorder, and inferior offi- 
cers. The power of returning two members to 
Parliament, which had been discontinued from 1343, 
was, at the same time, restored ; the right of elec- 
tion being vested iu the corporate officers. 

Harwich is composed of three principal streets,., 
and various lanes, branching off in different direc- 
tions. Formerly, it had several gates, and was 
surrounded by ancient walls. Here was also a> 
Castle, with various small forts, or block-houses ; 
but these are entirely destroyed ; and the sites of 
the latter are covered by the sea, which is slowly, 
though constantly, encroaching upon the land. 
Some fortifications, on the laud-side, were formed, 
during the late war, particularly a very large mor- 
tello tower, with a deep dry ditch, the erection of 
which, is said to have cost upwards of 200,000/. 
Several mortello towers are in this neighbourhood. 

St. Nicholas' Church, or rather Chapel, in this 
town, was founded about the beginning of the 13th 
century, by Roger Bigod, Earl of Norfolk. Within 
it, is a table monument of white marble, of good 
workmanship, to the memory of Sir William Clarke, 
Knt. Secretary of War to Charles the Second, who. 
in June, 1666, was mortally wounded, in the memo- 
rable sea-fight, between the fleets, commanded by 
the Duke of Albemarle, and the famous Dutch Ad- 
miral, De Ruyter. It is on the north side, of the 
east window, of the chancel. Of the inscription,, 
which is in Latin, we present the following transla- 
tion : 

" Here lies Sir William Clarke, Knt. and Secre- 
tary at War, to the Most Serene King Charles the 
Second ; and Secretary to the Most Noble George, 
Duke of Albemarle, whose fortune he followed 
through all emergencies, for more than 12 vears; and 
whose efforts, in restoring our monarchy and laws, he 
strenuously assisted. In the famous si'a-fii>ht, with 
the Dutch fleet, in the beginning of June, 1666, which 
continued for four days, successively, as he fought, by 
the Admiral's side, on the second day, he lost his right 
leg, by a cannon hall ; on the fourth, his life : yet, in 
spite of his wound, he would not suffer himself to 
be removed from tbe danger of the hattle; but, while 
the rest of the wounded were carried on shore, he re- 
mained, alone, in the ship, which wa* shattered^ and 
exposed to the fire of the enemy ; and, with surpris- 
ing constancy, waited the doubtful event of the battle,. - 
and iiis own life. His wounded body having, for se- 
veral days, been tossed on the sea, was at length cast 
into this haven. 

" Stay, reader, a moment ; you do not yet know 
the character of this great man ; who, having long 
executed the greatest public employ incuts, had always 
the happiness of the public approbation : who, though 
he attained to riches and honours, yet escaped'infamy 
aw) envy; not by artifice, bi.t.by tin: force of his in- 
6 tegrity ; 



ESSEX. 



integrity ; and, in short, was a shining instance that 
iiinoct- nee does not always forbid a man to engage in 
the afl'airs of a court. You have here, the remains of 
a gentleman, of integrity, honour, knowledge, abili- 
ties, and application ; who supported labours, and sup- 
pressed avarice ; who neither defrauded the rich, nor 
neglected the poor, and observed the strictest since- 
rity in word and action. His life was crowned with 
integrity .\ his death, with fortitude : in both, he was 
equally happy. The period of his life contained but 
three and forty years ; yet, even in that short spare, 
were exerted all the virtues and graces of life. He 
left a sorrowful widow, and a son, five years old; a 
moderate estate, and excellent character ; and a deep 
regret, for the loss of him : his sorrowful widow raised 
this monument, in order to do justice to his memory, 
and alleviate, in some measure, her own sorrow." 

Over this memorial, on a small pedestal, between 
two scrowls of alabaster, sustained by two pillars of 
black marble, are the effigies of Sir William Clarke, 
from the breast, upwards ; and, underneath the ta- 
ble, are the family arms, without colours, viz. Baron 
and Femmc, a bend, three swans, between three 
plates, a Canton sinister, with a bear's claw erased : 
impaled with a coat of arms, viz. a cheveron be- 
tween three mullets of five points pierced. 

The other principal buildings, in Harwich, are, 
the Town-Hall, and Gaol ; the School-House, and 
the Custom-House ; the Town-Hall was rebuilt, 
about 50 years ago. Here is, also, an Assembly- 
Room ; and a small Theatre was opened here, in 
the year 1813. 

The inhabitants of Harwich, amounting, accord- 
ing to the last returns, to 2893, exclusive of Dover- 
Court, are chiefly supported by ship-building, and 
various maritime employments. Several third-rates 
have been built here, besides other large vessels. r- 
The harbour is deep, and spacious, and the anchor- 
age good. Upwards of 100 sail of men of war, 
with frigates, and between 300 and 400 colliers, are 
said to have been riding here, at one time, without 
endangering each other. A Light-House occupies 
a hill below the town. Many smacks, belonging to 
Harwich, are employed iu the North Sea fishery : 
their burthen has been calculated to amount to more 
than 8000 tons, and the number of seamen they em- 
ploy, to about 500. The inhabitants, also, derive 
considerable profit, particularly in times of peace, 
from the numerous passengers, who stop here, on 
their way to and from Holland and Germany ; this 
being the station of the packets. Harwich was the 
usual place of embarkation, and landing, of Wil- 
liam the Third, and the Georges, First and Second, 
on their respective journies to the Continent, and 
return- to Great Britain. Her present Majesty also 
landed here, on her arrival in England. 

Harwich is visited by much company, during the 
season, for sea-bathing. The accommodations are 
respectable, though not equal to those at the more 
fashionable places of resort. Bathing machines 
have been introduced within these few years ; and 
the private baths are very neat and convenient. 
These stand ill a large reservoir of sea-water, which 



is changed, by every tide, and supplied with fresh 
water, every hour, by a contrivance, on the principle 
of a natural syphon. In two of the baths, tlie sea- 
water is made hot, for the use of invalids ; for whose 
further accommodation, a steam, or vapour bath, has 
also been constructed. Parties are frequently made, 
by the visitors, for sailing up the Orwell and Stour, 
and making short trips on the bosom of the ocean. 
The scenery, on the Orwell, is extremely pleasant, 
its banks being studded with elegaut villas, and 
pleasure-grounds, and beautifully wooded. 

To the south of the town, is a cliff which divides 
Orwell haven from the hay that extends to Walton- 
Ness : this contains many acres of land, and its 
greatest height is about 50 feet. At the bottom, is 
a stratum of clay, of a bluish colour, about one foot 
thick, which is succeeded by a stratum of stone, of 
nearly the same colour and thickness ; within this, 
some fossil shells and petrifactions are embedded. 
Above the stone, are various strata of clay, similar 
to that already mentioned, rising to the height of 
somewhat more than 20 feet. The streets of Har- 
wich are mostly paved with masses of this clay, 
which have fallen from the cliff, and become indu- 
rated, by exposure to the air : the town-walls were 
also formed of this substance, which, by lapse of 
time, assumes the hardness and durability of stone. 
Above the clay, are different strata ; as fine sand, 
and stone and gravel mixed with small pebbles, and 
blended with fossil shells, of the bivalve and turbi* 
nate kinds : these are sometimes found separate, 
and sometimes in lumps and masses, intermixed 
with sand, and other adventitious bodies. The up- 
per part of the cliff is common sandy earth, in which 
a few veins of white friable substance, (supposed to 
be talc,) resembling isinglass, have been found. 
Various teeth, of large animals, and bones of an 
extraordinary size, have been discovered, in the 
fallen masses of this cliff. These are, by some 
writers, supposed to have belonged to the elephants 
brought into this country, by Claudius, in the year 
43. In the autumn of the year 1810, lying under 
the cliff, a heap of stones was discovered, possessing 
the property of forming a cement, durable as stone 
itself, and equally as good. The Corporation re- 
fused 15,000/. for the heap, which has since proved 
a very valuable and lucrative possession. 

JLandguard Fort, situated at the south-east extre- 
mity of Suffolk, but still considered as belonging to 
this county, is immediately opposite to Harwich. 
It is a very strong fortification, erected for the de- 
fence and security of Harwich harbour, in the reign 
of Jamas the First. This is built upon a point of 
land, united- to Walton-Colness, but so surrounded 
by the sea, at high water, as to become an island 
nearly a mile from the shore. According to tradi- 
tion, the outlets of the Stour and Orwell, were, an- 
ciently, on the north side, through Walton Marshes, 
in Suffolk, and the place, called the Fleets, was a 
part of the original channel. This is probably true; 
the violence ot the sea, and the strength of the- land- 
floods, 



ESSEX. 



385 



floods, having effected great changes on this coast. 
The soil not being favourable, the laying of the 
foundations of Landguard Fort, was accomplished, 
only after considerable labour, and at a vast ex- 
pense. It completely commands the entrance of 
the harbour, which, though between two and three 
miles wide, at high-water, is too shallow to admit 
the passage of ships, excepting by a narrow and 
deep channel, on the Suffolk side. At some dis- 
tance from the fort, on a spot called, by Bishop 
Gibson, Walton, or Felixstow Castle, various frag- 
ments of urns, coins, and other Roman antiquities, 
have been dug up, at different times. Formerly, 
much copperas was manufactured in this district ; 
but, the decrease of the copperas-stone, occasioned 
the business to be relinquished. 

HATFIELD BROAH-OAK.] Hatfield Broad-Oak, or 
Hatfield-Regis, lies Omiles N.E. by E. from Harlow. 
It was, formerly, a considerable market-town, but is 
now only a scattered village, with very little trade. 
Anciently, it was part of the King's deanesn^, 
whence it derived the name of Regis ; as it did that 
of Broad-Oak, or Brad-Oak, from an oak, of ex- 
traordinary size, supposed to have flourished here, in 
the Saxon times. In Saxon, the word Hat, signifies 
hot ; whence Hatfield, probably from its occupying 
a hot, sandy, soil. 

In Hatfield Broad-Oak Church, carved in wood, 
are the mutilated effigies of Robert de Vere, third 
Earl of Oxford, who was buried here, in the year 
1221. Near the east end of the Church, stood a 
Benedictine Priory, founded about the year 1 135, 
by Aubrey de Vere, father of the first Earl of Ox- 
ford. It was dedicated to St. Melanius Redonensis, 
a British, or Armorican Saint, to whose glory, a 
flourishing Abbey was erected at Rennes, in Bre- 
tagne. The founder enfeoff'ed the Convent, with all 
liis tithes, in the parish, by a grant, to which was 
affixed, by a harp-string, a short black -fiafted knife, 
instead of a seal. Henry the Eighth, granted the 
site, and revenues of the Priory, to Thomas Noke, 
whose son, Robert, sold them, in 1654, to Thomas 
Barrington, Esq. whose family were settled at Bar- 
rington Hall, in this parish, as early as the reign of 
Henry the First. From this mansion, great part of 
which has been pulled down, and the remainder con- 
verted into a farm-house, the Barringtons removed 
to the Priory, and resided there till about the begin- 
ning of the last century, when it was taken down, 
by Sir Charles Barrington, who dying without is- 
sue, bequeathed this estate to his sister, Anne, then 
married to Charles Shales, Esq. John Barrington 
Shales, Esq. her second son, erected the present Bar- 
rington Hall, at a little distance north from the site 
of the Priory. It is a spacious brick mansion : the 
long-room, on the ground-floor, measures 100 feet 
in length, and 20 in breadth. 

HATFIEI.D PEVERELL.] Hatfield Peverell, (3| 
miles S. W. from VVitham) with 35 other manors, in 
Essex, was given, by William the Conqueror, to 
Ranulph Peverell, a Norman soldier, who accom- 
panied him, as a reward for his services. He 

VOL. 11. NO. 73. 



married the beautiful Ingelrica, daughter of a Saxon 
nobleman. This lady, having borne a son to Wil- 
liam the Conqueror, previously to her marriage 
with Peverell, by way of atonement, founded here, 
in the reign of William Rufus. a college for se- 
cular canons dedicating it to St. Mary Magdalene. 
This college was, afterwards, changed, by her legi- 
timate son, William Peverell, into a Benedictine 
monastery, which he greatly enriched, by additional 
endowments, and gave his own mansion, as a place 
of residence for the monks. With other demesnes, 
this was, shortly after the Dissolution, granted to 
Giles Leigh, Esq. from whose family, it passed to 
that of the Alleyus. In 1768, it was sold, by an 
order of Chancery, to Peter Wright, Esq. who 
pulled down the house adjoining to the Church, 
and erected a more elegant mansion, upon an emi- 
nence, at a short distance, and gave it the name of 
the Priory. The ancient Church yet remains. 
Weever mentions an ancient statue, in one of the 
windows, as designed for Ingelrica, the found- 
ress. 

HAVERING-ATTE'-BOWEK.] The Liberty of Ha- 
veriiig-atte Bower, forming part of the demesnes of 
the Saxon Kings, comprises the parishes of Haver- 
ing, Romford, and Hornchurcli. From prescrip- 
tive right, and from a charter, granted by Henry 
the Fourth, it still enjoys peculiar privileges. At 
Havering Bower, 3 miles N. from Romford, are 
some remains of the walls of an ancient palace, re- 
ported to have been built, or improved, by Edward 
the Confessor, and, afterwards, occasionally occu- 
pied, by several Kings. Its situation was uncom- 
monly fine ; the site commanding several extensive 
prospects over parts of Essex, Hertfor.tshire, Kent, 
Middlesex, and Surrey, as well as of the river 
Thames. Havering Park contains about 1000 
acres, and is now let on lease from the Crown. 
Near the site of the Boiver House, is an elegant 
villa, which belonged to the late Sir .1. S. Burges, 
Bart, who lies buried in the parish Church, where a 
neat tablet has been erected to his memory, from a 
design by Wyatt. Morant, quoting several ancient 
and learned authorities, gives the following curious 
origin of the name of Havering : " At the time 
that the Church of Clavering, in this county, was- 
about to be consecrated, Edward the Confessor, 
riding that way, alighted, out of devotion, to be 
present at the consecration. During the proces- 
sion, a fair old man came to the King, and begged 
alms of liim, in the name of God, and St. John the 
Evangelist. The King having nothing else to give, 
as his almoner was not at hand, took the ring from 
his finger, and gave it to the poor man. Some 
years afterwards, two English pilgrims having lost 
their way, as th:>y were travelling in the Holy Land, 
saw a company clothed in white, with two lights 
carried before them, and behind them a lair ancient 
The pilgrims joining them, the old man in- 



mau. 



quired who they were, and whence they came. 

After hearing their story, he brought them into a 

fine city, where was a room furnished with all man- 

5 E ner 



'ESSEX. 



ner of dainties : when they hail well refreshed them- 
selves, and rested there all night, the old man set 
them again in the right way, and at parting, told 
them, he was John the Evangelist ; adding, as the 
legend proceeds, ' Say ye unto Edwarde your ky ing, 
that I grete hym well by the token that he gaaf to 
me this ryng wyth his own handes at the halowyng 
*of my Chirche, which rynge ye shall deliver hym 
agayn ; and say ye to hym, that he dyspose his 
goodes, for wythin sixe rnonethes he shall be in the 
joye of Heven wyth me, where he shall have his 
rewarde for his chastitie and his good lyvinge.' At 
their return home, the two pilgrims waited upon the 
King, who was then at this bower ; and delivered 
to him the message and the ring ; from which cir- 
cumstance this place is said to have received the 
name of Have-ring. The whole story is wrought in 
basso-relievo, in the Chapel at Westminster, where 
Edward the Confessor lies buried, on the back of 
the screen that divides it from the altar. The sta- 
tues of the King and the pilgrims are also over the 
Courts of the King's Bench and Common Pleas, in 
Westminster Hall, and over the gate going into the 
Dean's Yard. His picture was also on the glass of 
the east window of the south aisle of Romford Cha- 
pel, with two pilgrims, and under it, Johannes per 
peregrinos misit Regi Edwardo. The ring, pretended 
to have been given by him, as above, to St. John, 
was deposited among other reliques, in his Abbey at 
Westminster ; and an indulgence for six years, and 
U60 days, was granted to this supposed ring of St. 
Edward. 

HKDINGHAM CASTLE.] The village of Castle- 
Hedingham, the ancient seat of the Veres, Earls of 
Oxford, lies 19 miles N. by E. from Chelmsford, 
aud 49 N. E. from London. The Castle, from 



* At the time of (he contest between the Barons and King 
John, it was several times taken and retaken. John, the 1 2th 
Earl, espoused the cause of ihe Lancastrians, and continued so 
firm in Ms allegiance to Henry the Sixth, that Edward the 
Fourth, at a Parliament held on November the 4th, in the first 
year of his reign, caused him, though then nearly (JO years of 
age, to be attainted, with Aubrey, his eldest son, and afterwards, 
with several others, to be beheaded on Tower-hill. John, his 
second son, during the first part of Edward's reign, was em- 
ployed in the restoration of his deposed Sovereign ; and was 
reinstated in his estates and honours. The superior fortune of 
Edward having regained the ascendancy, the Earl fled into 
France, whence returning with a small force, he surprised St. 
Michael's Mount, in Cornwall, but was soon obliged to yield 
liimself a prisoner, and was sent by (lie King to the Castle of 
flammes, in Picardy, where he was closely confined for about 
12 years; but at length effected his escape. In the mean time, 
his estates were confiscated ; and, in 1483, this Castle, Lord- 
ship, and Manor, were granted for life, to Sir Thomas Mont- 
gomery ; who, however, did not enjoy it long, as, on the acces- 
sion of Henry the Seventh, the act of attainder was repeal-ed, 
and all the EarPs estates and honours restored. This nobleman, 
who appears to have been a wise, magnificent, learned, and 
religious man, lived in great splendour and hospitality. These 
qualities seem to have drawn the jealousy and resentment of his 
waster, at a moment more proper to extinguish, than to actuate 
tUe sordid passions ; at the close of a sumptuous and expensive 



which it derives Us nanrc, occupies an eminence new 
the village. Of this venerable structure, the keep, 
alone, from the massive solidity of its walls, had 
hitherto defied the incroachments of time. This is 
in the purest style of the Anglo Norman architec- 
ture, and it is conjectured to have been erected 
either by the first Aubrey, Earl of Oxford, or by 
his successor : the former was slain by the rabble, 
at London, in 1140 ; the latter died, in 1214. The 
walls, at their busc, are between II and 13 feet in 
thickness, and at their summit between and 10 
feet. The wall upon the east side, is nearly a foot 
thicker than the others, with a view, as it would 
seem, of enabling it better to withstand the injuries 
of the weather. The form of the keep is almost 
square, and it is somewhat about 100 feet in height. 
It was originally entered by a flight of stairs, upon 
the west side, reaching to the principal door in the first 
story, about five feet from which is a circular stair- 
case, of which part descends to the ground floor, 
and part ascends to the upper stories. Every pos- 
sible attention has been paid to strength and secu- 
rity in the construction of this edifice, the walls 
being thickest at the bottom, admitting only a scanty 
portion of light through small loop-holes, the win- 
dows increasing, however, progressively in size, as 
they approached the lop of the building, and reced- 
ed from the danger The Hall of Audience, which 
occupies great part of the second story, is a grand 
apartment, well proportioned, and richly embellish- 
ed. Here the feudal barons were accustomed to 
receive the homage of their vassals, and here was 
displayed all the ostentatious hospitality of the times. 
This Cattle was frequently an object of contention 
in the feudal times.* 

The manor of Castle-Hedingham, was given, by 

William 



entertainment given by the Earl, to Henry the Seventh, at this 
Castle. At the King's going away, the Eafl's servants stood in 
their livery coats and cognizances, ranged on both sides, and 
made a lane. The King called the Earl, and said unto him, 
' My Lord, I have heard much of your hospitality, but I see 
it is greater than the speech : these handsome gentlemen and 
yeomen, which I see on both sides of me, are sure your menial 
servants.' The Earl smiled, and answered, ' It may please 
your Grace, that were not for mine ease : they are most of them 
my retainers, that are come to do me service at such a time us 
this, and chiefly to see your Grace.' The King startled a little, 
' and said, ' By my faith, my Lord, I thank you for your good 
cheer ; but I may not have my laws broken in my sight. My 
attorney must speak with you:' and it is said, that the Earl 
compounded for no less than 15,000 marks for this offence 
against the Statute of Retainers. Edward, the 17th Earl, was 
noted for his profusion, which occasioned him to alienate many 
of the family estates. His first wife was Anne, eldest daughter 
of the Lord Chancellor Burleigh, by whom he had three daugh- 
ters ; his second, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Trentrmm, 
Gent, of Roucesler, in Staffordshire, and maid of honour to 
Queen Elizabeth : by this lady he had one son named Henry, 
who succeeded to the earldom. Tire honour and Castle of 
Hedingham, were secured by Lord Burleigh, probably with a 
view of providing for his three grand daughters. Previously 
to this, however, the Castle was dilapidated, and most of the 
buildings razed to the ground, under the Earl's warrant. The 

Parks, 



ESSEX. 



87 



William the Conqueror, to Aubrey de Vere ; in 
whose family it continued, with little interruption, 
till the year 1625. It was holden immediately of 
the crown, and exclusively of all other lordships. 
It was created an honour by Henry the Second. 

- In this village, Aubrey, or Alberic, the first Earl 
of Oxford, and his wife, Lucia, who became the 
first Prioress, founded a Benedictine nunnery, be- 
fore the year 1190. It was very amply endowed; 
though, at the Dissolution, its revenues were valued 
at only '291. 12s. 10e/. The nunnery, and part of the 
Chapel belonging to it, are yet standing; the former 
has long been converted into a farm-house. An 
hospital, sometimes called the New Abbey, was also 
founded here about the year 1250, by Hugh, fourth 
Ivirl of Oxford, and endowed for two or three chap- 
lains, a clerk, servant, and some poor and decrepit 
people. This building has been long destroyed. 

Castle-Hedingham Church, is an ancient stone 
fabric, with battlements of brick, supposed, from 
the ornaments, and the carvings of the boar and 
mullet, on different parts of the structure, to have 
been erected by the De Veres. The present tower 
was built about the year 161 0. In the midst of the 
chancel is a superb, but somewhat mutilated monu- 
ment, covering the remains of John de Vere, 10th 
Earl of Oxford, who died on the 19th of March; 
1539. This nobleman was Great Chamberlain of 
England, Chancellor of State to Henry the Eighth, 
and Knight of the Garter. On the tomb are incum- 
bent figures of the Earl and bis wife, the Lady Eli- 
zabeth ; together with the arms and quarterings of 
the family, encircled by the Garter. On the south 



Parks, which were three in number, and contained several hun- 
dren acres, were parted, and let to several tenants in allotments. 
Henry, the 18th Earl, was restored to this estate by agreement 
with his three halt-isters, and their husbands. On his death, 
without issue, in 1625, it was held in jointure by his Countess 
Diana, second daughter of William, second Earl of Exeter, 
after whose decease, in 1655, it passed into his mother's family, 
who retained it till the year 1713, when it was purchased by 
Robert Ashhurst, Esq. second son of Sir William Ashhurtt, 
Knt. Lord Mayor of London, in 1693. The Asuhursts were 
succeeded by Sir Henry Houghton, of Houghton Tower, in 
Lancashire ; but the present possessor is Lewis Majemlie, Esq. 
who inhabits the mansion erected in the beginning of the last 
century. 

* This person, whose exploits obtained for their author an 
immortal, though not highly honourable renown, was born at 
Sible-Hedingham, in the reign of Edward the First. His father, 
Gilbert Hawkwood, apprenticed him, at an early age, to a tay- 
lor, in London. The youth, probably disliking his profession, 
entered, as a common soldier, in the army llien raising for the 
French wars. In this service, he behaved so gallantly, that he 
was advanced to the rank of Captain, and knighted by the King. 
He afterwards gave evident proofs of lib valour and conduct at 
the battle of Poitiers, and was held in much esteem, by Edward 
the Black Prince. On the termination of the war, he joined the 
bands called the late comers.'and committed great depredations, 
in the eastern parts of France : these associates were so much 
dreaded, that the Pope, to prevent their expected visit to Avig- 
non, was content to pardon their past offences, and to give them 
also, a large sum of money. The companions separating their 
forces, Sir J Hawkwood assumed the command of a select 
troop, called the White Baud, consisting of about 5000 horse, 



and north sides, are effigies of their children, four 
sons, and four daughters, kneeling, with a book 
open before each. An inscription, engraven ou 
brass, which went round the tomb, was torn off in 
the time of the civil wars. Various banners, gaunt- 
lets, and other warlike remains, belonging to the De 
Veres, are displayed in different parts of the chancel. 
Here are also some monuments of the Ashhursts, 
who possessed this estate in the last century. 

HEDINGHAM, SIBLE.] Sible Hedingham lies one 
mile S. W. from Castle-Hedingham. These two 
places appear to have been connected till after the 
Conquest, as they do not occur as distinct parishes 
till about the commencement of the reign of Henry 
the Third. Their situation is very pleasant, the 
lands being varied with gentle eminences, and wa- 
tered by rills, and small streams. At the time of 
the general survey, Sible-Hedingham was held by 
Roger Bigot, by the marriage of whose second 
daughter, it was conveyed to the De Veres, Earls 
of Oxford, from whom it descended in the same 
manner as Hedingham Castle. 

Hawkwood Manor, in this parish, was holden of 
the Earls of Oxford, about the reign of Edward the 
First, by Stephen Hawkwood, an ancestor of the 
celebrated Sir John Hawkweod.* 

Sible-Hedingham Church is a neat and spacious 
building, supposed from itsornameutsofhawks,carr- 
ed in stone, to have been built by some of the Hawk- 
wood family, about the reign of Edward the Third. 
A Chantry was founded here, by Sir John Hawk- 
wood's executors. The house appointed for the re- 
sidence of the priest, stands at some distance from. 



and 1500 foot. With these he assisted John, Marquis of 
Montserrat, against the Duke of Milan ; yet, on the marriage 
of Lionel, Duke of Clarence, third ton of Edward the Third, 
with the Duke Gallacio's daughter, he changed sides, and ob- 
tained so much renown by his successes, that Barnabas, the 
Duke's brother, gave him his natural daughter, the Lady Do- 
mitia, in marriage, with a revenue of 10,000 florins annually. 
Notwithstanding this alliance, he again became the enemy of 
the Duke of Milan ; according to some authors, in revenge for 
the death of Lionel, who died within five months of his wedding, 
and whom he suspected to have been poisoned. Others 
attribute the change to a design of increasing his fortune, by 
entering into the service of other Princes. He now plundered 
many towns in Lombardy, and sold one to the Marquis of Este, 
for 20,000 crowns. Shortly afterwards, he recovered the towns 
which had revolted from Pope Gregory the Twelfth, in Pro- 
vence, and was rewarded with dominion over five of them. His 
fame was at this period so great, that his assistance was courted 
by several states of Italy, and particularly by (he rival com- 
monwealths of Florence and Pisa, which were then contending 
for sovereignty. The Florentines offering the most advantageous 
terms, he fought awhile in their interest ; but deserting them, 
went over to their enemies. Again becoming a partizan of 
Florence, he rendered its republic such effectual aid, that on 
his death, in 1394, the senate, from gratitude for his services, 
decreed, that his " body should be deposited in the Cathedral 
of Sancta Maria Florida, under a sumptuous monument ; over 
which there is his picture on horseback, armed at all points 
with hawks flying through a wood on his shield, being the rebus 
of his name." John, his son, by the Lady Domitia, was born 
in Italy, but naturalised in England, and knighted in the eighth 
of Henry the Fourth. 

th 



888 



ESSEX. 



the Church, and still bears the name of the Hostage, 
it having been originally built for the reception and 
entertainment of devout pilgrims. Thft cenotaph 
to the memory of Sir John Ilawkv.ood, (vide note) 
has long been demolished : it stood under an arch in 
the south aisle. 

HEMFSTEAD.] Hempstead, 5| miles N. by E. 
from Thaxted, is a Chapelry to Great Samford. 
Hempstead Hall was purchased, in the reign of 
Charles the First, by the celebrated physician, Dr. 
William Harvey, or his brother, Eliab Harvey, Esq. 
The Chapel contains several memorials of this fa- 
mily ; one of which is for Dr. Harvey, displaying 
his bust, and inscribed with a Latin epitaph, record- 
ing his discovery of the circulation of the blood, &c. 
He died, in the year 1057, at the age of 80. Admi- 
ral Sir Eliab Harvey, M. P. the present possessor, 
is one of his descendants. 

HEYBRIDGF,.] The little village of Heybridge, 
is one mile N.N.E. from Maldon, on the north side 
of the Blackwater river. It is conjectured, that it 
derived its name from an old five-arched bridge, 
beneath which the main stream is said to have for- 
merly run, though it now flows through Full 
Bridge. It was originally named TidwaltidUne, 
and with 12 other lordships, was given to the Ga-> 
thedral Church of St. Paul, by King Athelstan : it 
still forms part of the possessions of the Dean- and 
Chapter of that Cathedral. A raised causeway, 
made before the time of Edward the Second, and 
surveyed by his orders, in 1324, runs between this 
place and Maldon. 

HILL HALT,.] In the parish of Mount Thoydon, 
3f miles S.E. from Epping, stands Hill Hall, the 
seat of Sir William Smith, Bart. It is a large and 
handsome building of a quadrangular form, situat- 
ed on an eminence, commanding extensive and in- 
teresting prospects. The front of the building is 
very elegant. Sir Thomas Smith, principal Secre- 
tary to Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, 
who obtained it in jointure with his second wife, 
Philippa, (widow of Sir John Hampden) and who 
afterwards purchased the reversion, began the build- 
ing of this mansion, in 1548. Sir Thomas did not 
live to complete it, hut left provision in his will for 
that purpose. His successors have made many 
alterations. Sf/eral of the family, with Sir Tho- 
mas, are buried in Mount Thoydon Church. The 
monument of Sir Thomas, whose effigies, lying 
recumbent, are under an arched canopy, is placed 
against the north wall of the chancel. 

HOLMES, &c.] To the south west of Harwich 
are three islands, called Holmes, Horsey, and 
Pewet, separated from the main laud only by the 
winding of a stream, and the influx of the sea. 
Upon these islands is found a sea-fowl, which, when 



* In the parishes of Ilford, East Ham, West Ham, Leyton, 
and Wansted, on the level part of Epping Forest, a great mart 
for cattle, brought from Wales, Scotland, and the north of En- 
jlaud, is held aunually, from the latter end of February till the 



fat, is very delicious food. To the south of these 
islands, are three villages, included within a liberty, 
or lordship, anciently termed the liberty of the Soke, 
in which the Sheriff of the County has no power, 
and wherein no writ can be executed but by the bai- 
liff of the liberty, nor by him, without the lord's 
consent. 

HORKESI.KY.] Great Horkesley lies a mile and 
three-quarters S.S.W. and Little Horkesley, 2| 
miles S.W. by S. from Nayland. At the latter, in 
the reign of ilenry the First, Robert Fitz-Gode- 
bold, and Beatrice, his wife, founded a Priory for 
Cluniac monks, subordinate to the monastery of 
that order, at Thaxted. It was suppressed, by 
Cardinal Wolsey, to support his college at Oxford, 
and the buildings have been long destroyed. 

HORNCHURCH.] Tradition states, that the church 
of this village (17| miles S. W. by S. from Chelms- 
ford) was anciently called Whoreehurch, from its 
being built by a lewd woman, by way of atonement 
for-her sins ; but a certain king disliking the name, 
caused a large pair of leaden horns to be fastened to 
the east nd of the church, from which it obtained 
its present name. The manor was given to the 
Great Hospital of St. Bernard de Monte Jovis, in 
Savoy, by Henry the Second ; who founded an 
Hospital, or Cell, here, for a Prior, and poor bre- 
thren. Peter j Earl of Savoy,' having built the 
house in the Strand, called the Savoy, gave it to 
the brethren of this Hospital, which was suppressed, 
to increase the endowments of the New College, 
Oxford ; to which its possessions are yet at- 
tached. 

ILFORD.] Great Ilford lies 8 miles N. E. by E. 
and Little Ilford eight miles E. N. E. from St. 
Paul's Cathedral.* At the former, is an Hospital, 
consisting of a small quadrangle, three sides of 
which are occupied with the apartments of the pen- 
sioners, and the fourth by the Chapel. It was 
founded in the reign of Stephen, for a prior, warden, 
master, two priests, and thirteen lepers. It was 
made dependent on the convent at Barking, and the 
lepers were obliged to subscribe an obligation to 
that effect, and take an oath of celibacy. Thomas 
Fanshaw, Esq. obtained a grant of the site and pos- 
session of this establishment, from Elizabeth, for 
himself, his heirs, &c. upon condition of appointing 
a master, and fitting up apartments for six pen- 
sioners, who were to receive 2/. 5s. per annum. 
After several changes, this property, thus charged, 
came by purchase to the Gascoyne family, in 1739 ; 
and it still continues in their possession. 

At the north-west corner of Little Ilford Church, 
is the burial place of the Lethieullier family, to seve- 
ral of whom handsome marble monuments have been 
erected. On that to the memory of the late anti- 



beginning of May. The business between the dealers is prin- 
cipally transacted at the sign of the Rabbits, on the high road, 
in Little Ilford parish. 

quary 



ESSEX. 



389 



quary, whom we have frequently mentioned, is the 
following inscription : 

In Memory of 

SMART LETHIEULLIER, ESQ. 

A Gentleman of polite Literature and elegant taste, 

An Encourager of Art and ingenious Artists, 

A studious promoter of literary enquiries, 

A Companion, and a Friend, of learned Men; 

Industriously versed in the Science of Antiquity, 

And richly possessed of the curious Productions of Mature ; 

But, 
Who modestly desired no other Inscription 

On his Tomb, 
Than what he had made the Rule of his Life; 

To no JUSTLY, 
To LOVE MERCY, 

AND TO WALK HUMBLY WITH HIS GOD. 

Hewas born Nov. 3d, 1701, 
And died without Ir.sue Aug. 27th 1760. 

INOATESTONE.] This little town, or village, is on 
the high road from London (from which it is distant 
23 miles) to Colchester. It is supposed to have 
partly derived its name from a Roman Miliary, con- 
jectured to have stood near the Red Lion Inn ; and 
partly from the Saxon Ing, a meadow ; thus, Ing- 
atte-stone. Here was formerly a considerable mar- 
ket, which has wholly declined within the last fifty 
years ; but a very large fair for cattle is still held 
here. -In the Church are several elaborate monu- 
ments of the Petre family. Among them is an altar 
monument to the memory of William, Lord Petre, 
and his Lady ; on which are their effigies, finely 
wrought in Parian marble. Another splendid monu- 
ment, composed of various kinds of marble, com- 
memorates the abilities and virtues of John, Lord 
Petre, son to the above, whose effigies, with that of 
his Lady, are represented kneeling. Near the vil- 
lage is an Alms-house for seven women, and three 
men, founded by Sir William Petre, in the year 
1557. 

Ingatestone Hall is a venerable, but irregular pile, 
standing near the village, in a low situation. It was 
the family residence of the Lords Petre, before the 
building of their present mansion at West Thorndon. 
The grounds are stored with fish ponds. The manor 
belonged to Barking Abbey ; but was granted, by 
Hnry th: Eighth, to the Petre family, A. I). 1-539, 
for the sum of 849*. 12s. Qd. 

INW.ORTH.] The Church of this village \\ mile 
S. K. from Kelvedon has a small ancient porch, 
built with a mixture of flints and Roman bricks. In 
the Church are some remains of a mosaic pavement; 
and, near the altar, is the piscina formerly used by 
the Romish priests at the solemnities of the Eucha- 
rist. 

LANGDON HILLS.] These hills 2imilesN. by E. 
from Tiiorndon-on-the-Hill are the most consider- 
able eminences in this part of the county, and they 



* Sir Henry Marney was a man of great talents and bravery : 
he was Privy Counsellor to Henry tl:e Seventh, and Henry 
llie Eighth; Knight of the Garter, and Keeper of the Privy 
VOL. ii. wo. 73. 



afford some extremely fine aid extensive prospects. 
The whole vale of London, the river Thames, the 
metropolis, and the hills and coast of Kent, as far 
as the Medway, are, in clear weather, displayed to 
the view, and compose a scene of almost unequalled 
beauty. 

LANGFORD.] The village of Langford two miles 
N. N. W. from MalHon derived its name from the 
Ix>ng Ford here in the Saxon limes, when the Black- 
water spread over a much wider surface than it does 
at present. The meadow grounds in this neigh- 
bourhood are remarkably fertile. 

Langford Hall, a modern white house, standing 
in a finely wooded park, is the seat of Nicholas 
Westcombe, Esq. whose family obtained it in the 
year 1080, by purchase from the nephew of Dr. 
William Harvey. 

LANOLEYS.] (See Waltham.) 

LATTON. In this parish, which lies l mile 
W. S. W. from Harlow, formerly stood a Priory 
for Augustine Canons, the date and founder of 
which are unknown. The remains of the Priory 
Church are used as a barn. 

LAYER MARNEY.] The village of Layer Marney, 
distant 6| miles S. W. from Colchester, derives the 
latter part of its name from the noble family of Mar- 
ney, who held the manor from the time of Henry the 
Second to that of Henry the Eighth. William dc 
Marney obtained license from Henry the Third to 
inclose a park here, " within the precincts of the 
forest of Essex :" he had also liberty of free warren 
within his manor. John, the second Lord Marney, 
died in 1525, leaving two daughters, who sold this 
manor to Sir Brian Ttike, Secretary to Cardinal 
Wolsey, of whose descendants it was purchased by 
Sir Samuel Tryon, Bart. It has since become the 
property of the Corsellis, a family naturalized in tJTfe 
reign of Charles the Second. 

Layer Marney Hall, supposed to hare been built 
by Sir Henry Murney,* was originally a very large 
quadrangular building, inclosing a spacious court: 
the chief entrance to which was the tower gateway 
that now remains. This is built of brick, and con- 
sists of a lofty centre of two stories, ilankud at each 
angle by an octagonal tower rising from the ground 
to some height above the centre. Each of the octa- 
gonal towers contains eight Boors, lighted by small 
pointed windows : the centre stories are lighted by 
two large square windows. Attached to the east 
and west sides of this gateway are considerable 
remains of the old mansion, now converted into a 
farm-house, and offices. The tower is situated on 
high ground, and from the uppermost stories com- 
mands a very extensive tract of country. 

Layer Marney Church, distant about 150 feet 
from the Hall, is an ancient brick building, in which 
William de Marney, in 1330, founded a College for 



Seal: in 1523, he was also created Lord Marney, but died 
the following year, and was buried in the chancel of J^ayer 
Marney Church. 

5 F a warden 



390 



ESSEX. 



a warden and two chaplains ; the latter to officiate in 
the two chantries, which he had also founded here. 
Henry, the first JLord Marney, established two 
priests here, to pray for the souls of his wives, him- 
self, and ancestors. Several fine old monuments, 
with effigies of the Marney family, are in this Church. 
In the chancel is also a monument to the memory of 
Nicholas Corsellis, Esq. with an inscription, in 
which he is erroneously said to have taught " The 
English the admirable art of Printing." 

LEIGH.] The small port town of Leigh is at the 
entrance of the Thames, 17i miles, S. E. by S. from 
Chelmsford. It is chiefly inhabited by fishermen 
employed in the oyster trade. This fishery is so 
precarious that individuals can seldom afford to risk 
engaging in it. It is, therefore, usually carried on 
by a company, who annually fit out proper vessels, 
and proceed to Cancalle Bay, on the coast of 
France; whence they bring the young brood of the 
oyster in a jelly like form, not larger . than a shil- 
ling, and laying them on the sands or grounds near 
the town, from some peculiar quality in the soil, in 
about three months they acquire their full growth and 
consistence. The nature of this shore, and its 
adaptation for feeding oystws, were accidentally 
discovered by a person of the name of Outing about 
the year 1700, who, taking a lease of this district, 
soon made a fortune. 

The houses of this village are ranged at the foot 
of an eminence, near the summit of which stands the 
Church : the tower is mantled with ivy. The pros- 
pect from this eminence is extremely fine. Here is a 
small Custom-House. 

LEIGHS.] Great Leighs is 5j miles S. S. W. and 
Little Leighs 5* 8. W. by S. from Braintree. At 
the latter was a priory of Augustine Canons, founded 
about 1229, by Sir Ralph Gernon. The site was 
granted by Henry the Eighth, to Sir Richard Rich, 
an eminent lawyer, who, in the reign of Edward 
the Sixth, was promoted to the Chancellorship, and 
created Baron of Leigbs ; but, on the downfall of the 
Duke of Somerset, he was obliged to resign the 
seals. He retired to his seat at Leighs Priory, the 
buildings of which he had enlarged, and formed into 
a magnificent dwelling. In its perfect state this 
mansion consisted of two quadrangles, and was en- 
compassed by a park of 400 acres. Two other parks, 



* Cough's Additions to Cumclen contain the following ac- 
count of the antiquities found at this place : " In the year 
1718, Mr. Gansell having occasion to enlarge his gardens, on 
digging up about two acres of ground, found under the whole 
very large and strong foundations ; in one place all stone, with 
considerable arclies, an arched door-way, with steps down to 
it, but filled up with gravel. In many of the foundations were 
a great quantity of Roman tiles and bricks, mixed with more 
modern materials, and several rough and broken pieces of hard 
stone, some part of which, when polished, proved to be Egyp- 
tian granite ; two large, deep wells covered over vith stone ; 
and in digging a pond, after the workmen had sunk through a 
bed of clay, about 10 feet, they met with a great quantity of 
oak timber, eight or ten inches square, morticed together like a 



of nearly equal extent, were connected with it, by 
Sir Richard. Successive additions so greatly in- 
creased its splendour, that, on the death of Charles 
Rich, Earl of Warwick, in 1673, Dr. Walker, in 
his funeral sermon, called it, " a secular Elysium ; 
a worldly Paradise ; a Heaven upon earth." In 
this building, Elizabeth was confined during part of 
the reign of her sister Mary. The estate now be- 
longs to Guy's Hospital. Two sides of one of the 
quadrangles, and a fine tower gateway, yet remain. 
The other parts now standing are occupied by a res- 
pectable farmer. Near the house are some of the 
large Priory fish-ponds. 

LEYTON.] Near the river Lea,on the high ground, 
stands the pleasant village of Low Leyton, which is 
chiefly inhabited by genteel families, and agreeably 
embosomed in trees. This parish has furnished a 
great variety of antiquities, whence some have been 
inclined to imagine that here was the site of a Roman 
station.* Camden calls it the Durolitum of Antoni- 
nus, but at the same time acknowledges that he can- 
not reconcile the difficulty occasioned by the non- 
agreement of the distances : Durolitum being placed 
at 15, while this village is only six miles N. E. by N. 
distant from London. 

Leyton Church is a brick structure ; the interior 
walls of which are covered with escutcheons and 
monuments ; many of them in commemoration of 
eminent persons, here interred. In the chancel, is 
a memorial of the celebrated historian and antiquary, 
Jehu Strype, who held this vicarage sixty-eight 
years. He was buried here in 1737, at the age of 
ninety-four. In the north aisle, is the monument of 
Charles Goring, Earl of Norwich, who died in 
1670 ; and a marble tablet to the memory of Mr. 
William Bowyer, a learned and eminent Printer, 
whose life, as written by Mr. John Nichols, his ap- 
prentice, partner, and successor, at whose charge the 
tablet was erected, contains many interesting par- 
ticulars of the state of literature, etc. through great 
part of the 18th century. Mr. Bowyer died at the 
age of seventy-four, in 1777. 

Leyton has a Free School for twenty poor boys 
of this, and the adjoining parish of Walthamstow ; 
a School of Industry for thirty girls ; and four Sun- 
day Schools, supported by subscription, in which 
120 children receive education. t 

LEYTONSTONE.] 

floor, grown very hard and black; but uncertain how far it 
reached. Several Roman bfass and silver coins, both consular 
and imperial, to the time of Julius Caesar, were scattered about, 
as well as some silver coins, with Saxon characters. The 
ground where these discoveries were made adjoins the church- 
yard, where some time before, a large urn of coarse red earth 
was found." In 1733, was further discovered, while the 
workmen were digging holes for an avenue of trees to the gar- 
den, a Roman pavement, extending about 20 feet from north 
to south, and about 16 from east to WPS!. 

t Sir Thomas Roe, the first English ambassador to the east, 
was born at Leyton, about the year 1580. In 1604 he was 
knighted, and went on a voyage of discovery to the West 
Indies. In 1614 he was sent, by James the First, on an em- 
bassy 



ESSEX. 



391 



LEYTONSTOME.] The straggling village of Ley- 
tunstonc is achapelry in the parish of Leytoii, seven 
miles N. E. from St. Paul's. It is inhabited chiefly 
hy London traders and merchants. 

LISTON HALL.] This handsome modern building, 
tlte seat of Mr. Campbell, is charmingly situated on 
the borders of the county near the Stow, and en- 
compassed by a small park and gardens. The 
manor was given by William the Conqueror to 
Hugh de Gurnai, one of his officers, who afterwards 
became a monk in the Abbey of Bee, in Normandy. 
From this family it passed to that of De Listen, 
which settled here either in the reign of Henry the 
Second, or King John ; and held the lands here by 
the sergeautry of " making and placing' fi VH wafers 
before the King, as he sits at dinner on the day of 
his coronation." It has since passed through various 
families. 

LITTLEBURY.] The village of Little-bury lies two 
miles W. N. VV. from Saffron Walden. Here was 
an ancient encampment, within the area of which 
stands the present church, a small, but neat struc- 
ture. An Alms-House, and a Free School, are 
at u short distance. This manor, and that of Had- 
stock, were granted, by Queen Elizabeth, to Thomas 
Sutton, Esq. the founder of the Charter House, who 
bequeathed them, in 1611, to Thomas, Earl of Suf- 
folk, on condition of his paying 1 0, <)()<)/. within one 
twelvemonth. In 1745, Littlebury became part of 
the allotment made to the Earl of Bristol, in con- 
sequence of the decision which vested that property 
in the descendants and co-heiresst- s of James, third 
Earl of Suffolk.* 

About five miles W. from Littlebury, at the N. E. 
corner of Christ Hall Park, is a circular earth-work, 
with a ditch five or six feet deep. 

LOUGHTON.] This parish is 13{ miles N. E. by N. 
from St. Paul's Cathedral. Loughton Hall is a 
large irregular building, pleasantly situated, and 
surrounded by beautiful prospects. Queen Anne 
is reported to have retired hither from the court of 
James the Second, previously to his abdication. 

MALDON.] The ancient and populous borough 
and market town of Maldon, lies 10 miles E. from 
Chelicsford, and 37 E. N. E. from London. It 
occupies the acclivity of an eminence south-west 
from the estuary of the Blackwater, or river Idu- 
manum, and has been frequently regarded as the 
Roman Camulodunum ; but neither its local situa- 



bassy to the Great Mogul, from whose court he removed to 
that of the Grand Signior, where he obtained very essential 
advantages for his countrymen. On his return, he was made 
Chancellor of the Garter, and a member of (he Privy Coun- 
cil. He died in the year 1644. The celebrated Alexandrian 
Manuscript of the Greek 'I estament, of which a fac simile 
tpecimen was published by Dr. Woide some years ago, was 
brought by Sir Thomas into this country. In the yoar 1814, 
the sum of 7,339/. 17s. 6d. was voted, by Parliament, for 
printing 250 fac simile copies of the entiit work. 

* Mr. Henry Winstanley, a descendant from an ancient 
family established at Walden, and celebrated from his lament- 
able fate in the light house erected by himself on the Edystone 



tion, nor antiquities, warrant the opinion. Its anti- 
quities, indeed, with the exception of an entrench- 
ment formed by Edward the Elder, are confined to 
two Roman coins ; one of Vespasian, with the legend 
SALVS AVGVSTI ; the other, a gold one, in fine 
preservation, of Nero and Agrippina, with the legend 
NERO CLAVD. DIVI F. C/ES. AVG. GERM. 
IMP. TR. P. COS. On the reverse, the Emperor 
and his mother seated in a car drawn by elephants : 
on an ensign, carried by Agrippina, is the inscrip- 
tion AGRIP. AVG. DIVI. CLAVD. NERONIS 
C.iES. MATER, above EX s. c. The latter is pre- 
served with so much veneration, that it is always 
consigned to the care of one of the hailhTs of the 
corporation for the time being. 

The first historical mention of Maldon is in the 
year 913, when Edward the Elder encamped here 
to impede the progress of the Danes, while a fortifi- 
cation. was constructing at Witham. This entrench- 
ment, or fort, the remains of which are visible on 
the west side of the town, apparently inclosed about 
twenty-four acres. Its strength was probably con- 
siderable, as in 921, a great army of Danes are said 
to have besieged it without effect. In 993, it was 
again attacked by the Danish forces, commanded by 
Unlaf, and the forces of Earl Byrhtnoth, who ad- 
vanced to relieve it, being defeated, and the Earl 
himself slain, was compelled to admit the conqueror. 

The period when Maldon was constituted a borough 
is unknown. Its first charter appears to have been 
granted by Henry the Second. Among the privi- 
leges thereby secured to the Burgesses, was an ex- 
emption from all foreign service, except the finding 
one ship occasionally, for the King's use, for forty 
days. By another charter, granted in 1553, the 
borough was incorporated, and its government 
vested in two bailiffs, to be chosen annually, six Al- 
dermen, eighteen capital Burgesses, &c. The right 
of returning the members to Parliament is confined 
to those who obtain their freedom by birth, marriage, 
or servitude : the number of voters is about 200. 
The first return was made in the year 1329. The 
custom of Borough-English, by which the youngest 
son succeeds to the burgage-tenement on the death 
of his father, still prevails here. The charter last 
mentioned having been forfeited, a new one was ob- 
tained, in the year 1810, confirming to the burgesses 
all their ancient rights and privileges. 

The town of Maldon consists of one principal 

Rock, was a resident in this village. Mr. W. was " Clerk of 
his Majesty's works at Newmarket, and also of those at Audley 
End." Of the latter he published a book, containing twenty- 
one coarsely engraved prints, of plans, elevation, birds-eye 
views, &c. This work is become rare; and, though badly 
executed, yet it is a curious and interesting representation of a 
truly magnificent mansion. Mr. Winstanley invented the 
famous water works near Hyde Paik corner. Winstanley's 
portrait, with prints of the old Edystone Light-houiFj were 
lately in the possession of a bookseller at Walden. The me- 
morable storm, in the year 1703, destroyed both the Light- 
house and its architect. See our account of the Edystone, in 
a preceding page. 

street. 



392 



ESSEX. 



street, extending nearly a mile cast ami west ; a 
cross-street of considerable length, and several 
smaller avenues. The descent from the upper part 
to the river is very steep : many of the houses are 
good, having been rebuilt \vithin the last fifty or 
sixty years. The import trade is considerable ; and 
consists of coal, iron, deal, corn, &c. At spring 
tides, the river will bring up vessels that draw eight 
feet water ; but the coals are brought to the to\vn in 
lighters. The number of houses, as returned in 
1811, was 516: of inhabitants 2679. 

This town had formerly three parishes, but the 
rectories of two of them have long been consolidated. 
The principal Church, dedicated to All Saints, is 
an ancient and spacious edifice, with a square tower, 
terminated by a spire in the form of an equilateral 
triangle. In the south, or D'Arcy's aisle, were 
three chantries, founded in the reign of Henry the 
Sixth, by Robert D'Arcy, Esq. of Danbury ; seve- 
ral of whose family were buried here. On a stone 
of white marble, in the chancel, is a Latin epitaph, 
thus translated : 

The deposit of JOHN VFRNON, Gent. Turkey Mer- 
chant, who hath often crossed the seas, tempted thereto 
not so much by the love of gain, as an ardent desire of 
beholding the wonderful works of God in the deep. 
He boasts of this sepulchral stone, a< not the least re- 
ward of his labors, it being discovered among the 
ruins of Smyrna: he al-o brought to light some 
choice ancient manuscripts, monuments of that anti- 
que city ; with these he enriched his native country. 
He is now safely arrived at the haven ol rest. He 
died January 28th, 1653, aged 84. 

Several other commemorative inscriptions are in 
this Church. 

The Town Hall, a large ancient brick building, 
stands near the Church of All Saints. 

St. Mary's Church, in the lower part of the town, 
is recorded to have been founded by Ingclric, a 
Saxon nobleman, before the year 1056 : it was 
partly rebuilt in the reign of Charles the First. 

St. Peter's, the parish united to All Saints, had 
formerly a Church, of which the tower only is now 
standing ; attached to it, is a building, erected by 
Dr. Thomas Plume, Archdeacon of Rochester, for 
a Grammar School and Library.* 

* Dr. Plume was born at Maldon, in 16.30, and he became, 
in the latter part of his life, a great benefactor to his native 
town. The books in the library were his own collection, and 
they are ordered to he lent out on the value being deposited. 
lie al-o appropriated the rents o( a farm at Itney, to keep the 
school and library in repair. He likewise pave 2fJOl. to build 
a workhouse for the poor ; and abo'it 1000/. more, to i-sta- 
blish the trade of weaving sack cloth to employ them. The 
Plumian professorship of Astronomy and experimental Philo- 
'aophy at Cambridge, was founded through a bequest of 1902/. 
left by him for the put pose. He died in 1704. 

f In the Philosophical Transactions. (Vol. XLVII.) is an 
account of Edward Bright, ashopkeeper of Muldon, who was 
so enormously fat, that his size and weighi are almost unparal- 
leled. At the age. of twelve years and a half, he weighed 144 
pounds: increasing in bulk as he grt-w up, in seven years more 
6 



During the late war, an extensive range of bar- 
racks was erected, at the west end of the town. 

About the year 1291, Richard de Gravesend, 
Bishop of London, founded a small Priory here for 
Carmelites, or White Monks, which continued till 
the dissolution. Several eminent scholars are men- 
tioned as having been inmates of this monastery. t 

MALDON, LITTLE.] At Little Maldon, in St. 
Mary's parish, in the town of Maldon, was an hos- 
pital for the leprous townsmen, founded by one of 
the Rings of England, before the sixteenth of Ed- 
ward the Second, and dedicated to St. Giles. The 
mastership or wardenship of this hospital, was in the 
gift of the crown. King Richard thq Second grant- 
ed the house to the Prior of Bicknacre, near Chehns- 
ford ; but afterwards it was united to the Abbey of 
Bileigh. 

MANNINGTREE.] Manningtree, 31 miles N. E. 
by E. from Chelmsford, though now a small irregu- 
lar town, is called, in the certificate of chantry lands, 
" a great town?, and also a haven towne, having in 
yt to the number of 700 howseling people." It is 
situated on the southern banks of the Stour ; and 
though only a chapelry in Mistley Parish, has the 
privilege of a market. The duration of its present 
name is uncertain : its ancient appellation was Scid- 
dinchou. At the Domesday Survey, it was held by 
Adeliza, Countess of Albermarle, half sister to the 
Conqueror. It afterwards became the property of 
Maud de Clare, Countess of Hereford and Glouces- 
ter, who bestowed the manor on the Nunnery of the 
order of St. Augustine, at Canon-Leigh in Devon- 
shire. Manningtree, called Many-tree, alias Scid- 
inghoo, in the grant, was given, by Henry the 
Eighth, to Sir John Rainsworth. The Stour was 
made navigable from this town to Sudbury, in Suf- 
folk, in 1706. Its principal imports are deals, corn, 
coals, iron, and fish. Here was formerly a Guild, 
dedicated to the Holy Trinity. 

MAPI.KSTEAD.] Great. Maplestcad lies 2| miles 
N. by VV. and Little Maplestead, 2i N. N. W. from 
Ilalsted. These contiguous parishes obtained their 
names from the maple tree, which abounded here in 
the .Saxon times. Grant Maplestead Church is a 
small ancient building, circular at the east end. On 
the south side is a Chapel appertaining to Dynes 

he weighed 336 pounds. The last time he was weighed, which 
was about thirteen months before he died, his weight was 5$4 
pounds: at the lime of his death, his weight is supposed to 
have been 610 pounds. He measured five feet nine inches and 
a half in bright. His body round the chest, was five feet six 
inches; and round the belly, six feet eleven inches; his arm in 
the middle measured two feet two inches, and his leg two fret 
eiaht inches. He died at the age of twenty-iiim , in ll(e year 
1750: after his death, seven men were buttoned in his waist- 
coat. Till a year or two before his ileath. he was compara- 
tively an active iron; but afterwards, his extreme corpulency 
so overpowered his strength, that life seemed burtliensome. 
He left a widow pregnant ot her sixth child: his coffin was sc 
enormously large, that an opening was obliged to be cut in the 
wall and staircase, to let it down into the shop; and it ., 
carried to the grave upon a carriage. 

Hall 



ESSEX. 



395 



Hall, a maner in this parish, formerly possessed by 
the Deanes, but now belonging to H. Sperling, 
jEsq. Within this, are two costly monuments to 
the memory of Sir John Deane, Knight, High 
Sheriff of this county in 1610; and his Lady, Anne, 
daughter of Sir Drue Drury. 

The manor of Little Maplestead, with the whole 
of the parish, was long amongst the possessions of 
the Knights hospitaliers, who had a preceptory here. 
The Church is a small, low structure, resembling, 
in its general form, the Church of the Holy Sepul- 
chre a( Jerusalem, and the Temple Church at Lon- 
don. The principal entrance is at the west end, by 
ft porch, with three doors : this leads into the cir- 
cular part, which is just thirty feet in diameter, and 
has a peristyle, consisting of six clustered columns, 
supporting pointed arches : the roof is of wood. 
The whole length of the Church is seventy feet ; tlnj 
east end is semicircular. This structure is dedicated 
to St. John, of Jerusalem ; and is said to have had 
the privilege of sanctuary. ''' 

MARKS HALL. There are two places of this name 
in Essex : the first that we shall notice lies ahout 
two miles west from Romford. It was the property 
of Thomas Urswyck, Recorder of London, who 
died in 1749. The next owner upon record, was 
Sir George Hervey, Lieutenant of the Tower, to 
whom Queen Elizabeth, in the year 1602, granted 
the right of cutting twelve loads of forest wood, 
twelve loads of rushes, a buck, and a doe, yearly ; 
and free warren for this manor, in lieu of an exten- 
siye sheep walk in the forest. His son, Sir Gawen 
Hervey, who afterwards bequeathed the estate to 
the Mildmays, was similarly favoured by James the 
First, by whom " a good fat buck, and a good fat 
doe," were granted yearly for ever, out of Hain- 
ault Forest, to him and his successors, Lords of the 
Manor of Marks. The Hall, which has been long 
uninhabited, is a very ancient quadrangular fabric. 
The foundations are of brick, but the superstructure 
is of timber and plaster. It is surrounded by a 
moat, the water standing clese to the walls. 

The other manor of Marks Hall, two miles N. N. 
W. from Great Coggeshall, was, at the conquest, 
held by Nigel, whose family afterwards obtained the 
name of Merkeshall, from their place of residence. 
This family possessed the estate till the beginning of 
the reign of Elizabeth ; when it was sold to John 
Cole Esq. whose son and heir again sold it to Ed- 
ward Deraugh, Esq. His youngest son, William, 
succeeding his father, disposed of this manor, in the 
year 1605, to Robert Honywood, Esq. of Charing, 
in Kent, by whose posterity it is still enjoyed. The 
manor-house was partly rebuilt by the latter gentle- 
man, who erected a new and handsome front, over 
the porch of which are various quarterings of the 
family arms. It stands on a rising ground, near the 
Church, in a pleasant park, which has buen much 
improved by Filmer Honywood, Esq. one of the 
representatives for Kent, who having lost his elec- 
tion for that county in 1796, made this his principal 

VOL. ii. NO. 73. 



residence. In the dining room is an original portrait 
of Mrs. Mary Honywood, mother to the first of that 
name who owned this estate. She is- arrayed in a 
widow's habit, with a book in her hand ; and on her 
hat is inscribed in golden letters, JETATIS svm 70 ; 
ANO infi. 1597. This lady became memorable from 
her great age, and the multitude of her lawful de- 
scendants, whom she saw before her death, which 
happened in 1620, in her ninety-third year. The 
number of her own children was 16; of her grand- 
children, 114; of her great grand-children, 228; 
and of those in the fourth generation, nine ; in all 
867. She was much oppressed by religious melan- 
choly ; and a singular story, connected with this 
affection, is related by Fuller, on the authority of 
Morton, Bishop of Durham ; to whom it is said she 
herself told it. He observes, " That, being much 
afflicted in mind, many ministers repaired to her, 
and, among the rest, Mr. John Fox, the Martyro- 
logist ; but that all his counsels proved ineffectual ; 
insomuch, that, in the agony of her soul, having a 
Venice glass in her hand, she burst out into this ex- 
pression, ' I am as surely damned as this glass is 
broken !' which she immediately threw with violence 
to the ground ; but the glass rebounded again, and 
was taken up whole, and entire, being still preserved 
in the family." She was buried in the village church, 
where a monument was erected to her memory. 

MERSEA.] Mersea Island, which is divided into 
the two parishes of East and West Mersea, com- 
prising a population of about 950 souls, lies 9 miles 
S.S.E. from Colchester, at the confluence of the 
Colne and the Blackwater, being separated from the 
main land, by the small creek of Pye-fleet, celebrat- 
ed for its fine flavoured oysters. It is about 5 miles 
long, from north-east to south-west, and about 2 
miles broad. A causeway, called the Strode, a con^ 
traction from L'est Rode, which crosses the creek, 
and is covered by the sea, at high-water, is the only 
road by which it can be entered. Mersea can boast 
of many natural beauties ; is well-wooded, and de- 
lightfully varied with hill and dale. The shore, on 
the sea-coast, is bold and commanding ; but it is 
flat and shelving, and bounded by extensive salt 
marshes, on the north. The application of chalk, to 
the embanked marshes, and high lands, has tended 
much to iniprove them. Thick hedge-rows sepa- 
rate the farms from each other, but the fields which 
have been inclosed, are generally small. A variety 
of springs supply the inhabitants with good water. 

Mersea Island was certainly known to the Ro- 
mans, from the numerous tesselatcd pavements, and 
other antiquities, of that people, Avhich have been 
found here; and a eminence, on the road to Col- 
chester, bears the name of the Roman hill. Dr. 
Cromwell Mortimer, who first described the pave- 
ments, conjectures, that a Roman Prator had a 
villa on the spot, where they were discovered. It 
is said, that the Count of the Saxon shore, resided 
here. During the invasion of the Danes, this was 
frequently their landing place, and retreat : and 
5 tradition 



394 



ESSEX. 



tradition hands down, that a large party of them 
were, for some time, in the year 894, besieged on 
this island, by Alfred : in d'ift'erent parts, several 
tumuli are still remaining. Edward the Confessor 
gave a great part of West Mersey to the Priory of 
St. Audoen, at Rouen, in Normandy ; and a cell of 
Benedictine monks, belonging to that house, was 
soon afterwards founded here ; but, when the alien 
priories were suppressed, Henry the Fifth granted 
it to Archbishop Chieheley, who settled it on the 
Collegiate Church, which he had previously founded 
at Iligham Ferrers, iu Northamptonshire. In the 
reign of Henry the Eighth, Robert D'Acres re- 
ceived a grant, in capitc, of the manor of West 
Mersea, with other estates ; which were afterwards 
given to Thomas D'Arcy, by Edward the Sixth. 
A very line tesselated pavement, 21 feet long, and 
18i broad, was discovered, about the year 1730, by 
some workmen, who were making alterations at 
West Mersey Hall, which is situated near the 
Church. Part of this pavement extended into the 
Church-yard, which is asserted to contain a diversity 
of these pavements, lying contiguous to each other, 
and extending nearly IQO feet from east to west, 
and about 50 from north to south. A pavement of 
^ed tesserae, was also found in the chancel, toge- 
'ther with two ancient brass coins. Various other 
antiquities have been met with in the adjacent lands. 
The tower of East Mersey Church, which serves as 
.a sea mark, had formerly a beacon on its summit. 

MILE END.] This place is so named from its 
situation, which is one mile north from Colchester. 
It is an extensive parish, chiefly belonging to the 
burgesses of that town, to which the estate, an- 
ciently called Kingswood, and Kingswood Heath, 
was granted, either by Henry the First, or Stephen, j 
.It afterwards reverted to the Crown, but was again 
invested in the burgesses of Colchester, by Henry ; 
the Eighth. This estate was originally part of th;> 
Royal Forest, but the greatest portion is now culti- 
vated. A manor, possessed by the Abbots of St. 
Osyth, still retains the name of Abbot's Hall. The 
rector's house, close to the Church-yard, commands 
a fine view of Colchester, and its vicinity. 

MISTLEY HALL.] In the parish of Mistley, half 
a mile E. from Manningtree, stands Mistley Hall, 
the residence of F. H. Rigby, Esq. It occupies a 
pleasant eminence, near the Stour. Edward the 
Sixth granted the manor to Sir John Rainsforth, 
whose heirs sold it to Paul, Viscount Bayning. 
Aune, his grand-daughter, conveyed it, by mar- 
riage, to Aubrey de Verc, the last Earl of Oxford, 
by whom the reversion was sold, about the year 
1080, to E. Rigby, Esq. The house and grounds 
have been much improved by this family. 

* The family of the Mildmays traces its descent from Hugo 
Mildeme, or K'lililme, who lived about the year 1 147: Walter 
Mikimay settled at Wriltle, near Chelmsfcrd, about the end of 
the reign of Henrj the Seventh, and was father of the above 
Sir Thomas, who had four sons, each of whom became the 
head of a respectable family. Sir Walter, the youngest, the 



MOULSHAM.] In Moulsham, a hamlet of Chetms- 
ford, to which it is united by the bridge over the 
Chelmer, are six Alms-houses, which were endow- 
ed by Thomas Mildmay, Esq. in the year 1563 : the 
present, dwellings were erected by William Mild- 
may, Esq. in 1758. Near the river, stood a Domi- 
nican Priory, the site of which still retains the ap- 
pellation ol'tlie Friars. Camdcn, and other writers, 
have erroneously attributed its foundation to Mal- 
colm, King of Scotland. Thomas Langford, who 
lived in the reign of Edward the Second, and com- 
piled a Universal Chronicle from the Creation to 
his own times, besides other curious pieces, was a 
friar in this house. 

The manor of Moulsham, now the property and 
seat of the Mildmay family, was, previously to the 
Conquest, parcel of the possessions of the Abbey 
Church, of St. Peter's, Westminster ; but, becoming 
vested in the Crown, at the Dissolution, it was sold, 
on the 23d of July, 1540, to Thomas Mildraay, 
Gent, one of the Auditors of the Court of Aug- 
mentations. This gentleman rebuilt the manor- 
house, " so that it was then accounted the greatest 
Esquire's building, within the county of Essex." 
Since that, a large modern fabric has been erected 
on its site, by Benjamin, Earl Fitz waiter, from the 
designs, and under the direction, of the Italian 
architect, Leoni. This building, now called Moul- 
sham Hall, is of a quadrangular form, inclosing a 
court in the centre, and commanding a view of 
Danbury Hill from the grand front, which has an 
ornamental pediment, displaying the family arms in 
basso relievo ; abov, are the statues of Apollo, 
Diana, and Mercury. The interior is disposed witli 
great judgment, and an easy access is obtained to 
the apartments on the different sides of the quad- 
rangle, by means of a continued gallery on each 
floor. Amongst (he family portraits, in this man- 
sion, are those gf Sir Thomas Mildmay, the pur- 
chaser ; Sir Walter Mildmay, the founder of Eman- 
jmel College, Cambridge ; Sir Henry Mildmay, re- 
presented as dead, and covered with a black velvet 
pall ; Benjamin, late Earl Fitzwalter, and Frede- 
rica, his Lady ; Robert, Earl of Holdernesse, her 
first husband, and Mainchart, her father, the brave 
Duke of Schomberg. Here is also an ancient paint- 
ing of Matilda, daughter of the Lord Robert Fitz- 
walter, who was poisoned at Dunmow, by King 
John.* 

NAVESTOCK.] Navestock is <1J miles S.S.W. from 
Chipping Ongar. The manor was part of the pos- 
sessions of the Cathedral of St. Paul, so early as 
the reign of Edgar. Henry the Eighth obtained it, 
by exchange, for other lands, in 1544. Nine years 
afterwards, Queen Mary granted it to Sir Edward 



founder of Eraanmiel College, was born at Moulsham, aud 
became Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Privy Counsellor to 
Queen Elizabeth : hi: died in the year 1589. Several others, 
of this family, have held honourable situations under different 
sovereigns. 

Waldegrave 



ESSEX. 



395 



Waldegrave ; and it is now the property of his de- 
scendant, the Earl of Waldegrave, whose seat, call- 
ed Navestock Hall, is a plain brick building, plea- 
santly situated amidst gardens, and pleasure- 
grounds. In the Church, is a neat mural tnonu- 
iirent to the memory of the two first Earls of Wal- 
degrave. 

NETHER HALL.] Nether Hall, in the parish of 
Roydon, 4i miles W. by S. from Harlow, is si- 
tuated near the confluence of the rivers Lea and 
Stort. Jt was formerly used as the seat of the 
Colt family, who settled here as early as the reign 
of Edward the Fourth. The ancient mansion was 
demolished about the year 1773 ; the gateway only 
being left standing, through the strength of the 
work, which rendered its destruction too expensive. 
This remain is of brick, and consists of two floors, 
with a half hexagon tower, on each side the en- 
trance. Each floor is occupied by only one room, 
lighted by large windows. The ceiling of the first 
story, is sustained on wainscoat arches, resting, in 
front, on three blank shields, and a truss, composed 
of a radiant rose ; and, at the back, on four trusses ; 
the first and third of which represent griffins ; the 
second and fourth, a bear and ragged stall : the most 
western of the shields is supported by two horses ; 
the second is held by a spread-eagle, supported by a 
lion and unicorn ; and the third rests on a lioness 
and bull ducally crowned. Near the chimney, is a 
colt's head, in an ornament of the carving. This 
story has teen wainscotted to about the height of 
eight feet : above the wainscot, on the plaster, are 
various figures, in compartments, wretchedly paint- 
ed, to represent the most eminent personages of 
Sacred, Profane, and Fabulous History. On the 
summit of the gateway, are some remains of two 
curiously twisted chimnies ; and, beneath the win- 
dows, above the entrance, is a machicolation, and 
a trefoil ornament, with shields and fleurs-de-lis. 
The whole building was surrounded by a moat ; 
and the moat itself encompassed by a wall. Se- 
veral of the Colt family, who are supposed to 
have erected this mansion, are buried in Roydon 
Church. 

NEW HALL.] This is an extensive manor, in the 
parish of Borcham, 3* miles N.E. by E. from 
Chelmsibrd. It was anciently a part of the pos- 
sessions of Waltham Abbey, but exchanged for five 
other manors, in Essex, with Sir John de Sharde- 
lovv, Knt. It subsequently underwent many changes 
of masters. The spacious building, of which there 
are still considerable remains, was only the east side 
of tin; house, enlarged and embellished, as the in- 
scription informs us, by Henry the Eighth, and his 
daughter, Elizabeth. Henry, enchanted with the 
situation, erected this Lordship into an honour, and 
called it Beaulieu. With some adjoining manors, 
this was given, by Elizabeth, in 1573, to Thomas 
Ratcliffp, Earl of Suffolk, in return for his import- 
ant services, in Ireland and Scotland. This estate 
passed, by purchase, to the Duke of Buckingham, 



whose son, George, having sided with the Royal- 
ists, was attainted, by the Parliament, and his pro- 
perty sold, upon which the estate of New Hall was 
sold, for the sum of "five shillings," to OliverCrom- 
well, in April 1051, at which time, the rent-roll of 
the property amounted to 1309/. Eta 3rf. Hamp- 
ton Court suiting Cromwell's taste better, he soon 
exchanged New Hall for it. Upon the Restoration, 
it became the property of the Duke of Albemarle. 
It has since been the property of various families, 
and is now a convent, occupied by the English 
nuns whom the French revolution drove from their 
sacred retreat at Liege. When at its acme of splen- 
dour, New Hall was one of the largest buildings in 
England ; it consisted of two quadrangles, within 
which were enclosed large courts. A spacious and 
magnificent apartment, called the Great Hall, occu- 
pies part of the building, which has withstood the 
devastations of time ; this room measures in length 
96 feet, in breadth 50, and in height 40. It is em- 
ployed as a Chapel, by the nuns. 

NEWPORT.] The long straggling village of New- 
j port, 3i miles S.S.W. from Saffron Walden, was 
| anciently a market -town. It consists chiefly of one 
j street, on the high road, and nearly uniting with 
j the hamlet of Birchangre, on the north. In the 
i reign of Edward the Confessor, it belonged to Earl 
i Harold, afterwards King, on whose defeat and 
i death, it became the property of the Conqueror. 
! Maud, the Empress, granted lands here to Geoffrey 
] de Magnaville ; and also the privilege of removing 
! the market to the seat of his barony at Walden. 
j Here was formerly a Castle, no particulars of which 
: are known. 

Previously to the year 1353, Newport Church 
1 belonged to the Collegia te Church of St. Martiu-le- 
j Grand, in London ; and, with that, was bestowed 
j on the monastery of St. Peter, Westminster, by 
i Henry the Seventh. An Hospital for a master, and 
i two chaplains, was founded here, by Richard de 
Newport, in the reign of King John. The original 
building is yet supposed to be standing on the 
Birchangre side. A Free Grammar School was 
founded here, in the year 15S8, and endowed with 
rents to the amount of 23/. 10. annually, by the will 
(dated February 20th, 1580) of Joyce Franckland, of 
Stanstead Abbot, Hertfordshire. Of this sum, 20/. 
was bequeathed for the support of a Schoolmaster ; 
2/. to the Master of Gonville and Caius College, 
Cambridge, for his trouble in directing the govern- 
ment of the School, and visiting it once annually ; 
(at which annual visitation, he is directed, by the 
will, to remove three, four, or more of the scholars 
to his own College ; there to place them in the 
scholarships of the foundation of the said Joyce 
Francklin, and William Saxie, her son ;) and the 
remaining I/. ^lOs. for the repairs of the School- 
house. 

NOTLEY.] Black Notley, lies a mile and three- 
quarters S. by E. of Braintree, and White Notley, 
3 miles N.W. from Witham. The former of these 
8 villages 



ESSEX. 



villages is celebrated as the birth-place of the learn- 
ed William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, in Ireland ;* 
and also of the admired naturalist, Mr. John Ray.f 
In the year 1752, several fragments of antiquity 
were dug up, in a field, at Black Notley. 

OKENOON.} North Okendon lies 4 miles E.S.E 
from Hornchurch, and South Okendon, 3J miles 
N.N.W. from Gray's Thurrock. The latter having 
passed through numerous families, came to Sir 
William Brandon, (Standard Bearer to Henry the 
^Seventh) who was killed by Richard the Third, at 
the battle of Bosworth Field. This nobleman was 
father to Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, who is 
reported to have been born here. In the Church, 
is a mural monument to the memory of Sir Richard 
Saltonhall, Knt. who died in 1601. 

ON'GAU.] The ancient market-town of Chipping 
Ongar, lies 10 miles W. by S. from Chelmslbrd, 
and '21 N. E. from London. The population of 
Ongar, the market of which is now but little fre- 
quented, is about 678. The town consists, chiefly, 
of one long and wide street, within the area of an 
extensive entrenchment, which may yet be traced on 
its respective sides. On the east, are the remains of 
a strong Castle, erected by Richard de Lucy, in the 



reign of Henry the Second. Gough supposes the 
Castle to have been formed out of a more ancient 
and extensive work. The keep is surrounded by a 
deep and wide moat, and defended by immense 
fosses. Its sides are now planted with trees and 
1 shrubs : through which a steep winding walk leads 
i to the summit, whereon stood the principal build- 
| ings : these becoming ruinous, were pulled down in 
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and a handsome man- 
sion, commanding some fine views, erected on their 
site. This was demolished, about the year 1744, by 
Alexander, Esq. who had an embattled sum- 
mer-house erected on the spot. 

Chipping Ongar Church is a small neat structure, 
and has many Roman bricks worked into it. Within, 
i is an inscription, recording the family and interment 
! of Jane, daughter of the Lord Oliver Cromwell, of 
Finchinbrook, in Huntingdonshire, and wife of To- 
bias Pallavicine, Esq. 

OSYTH.] The town of St. Osyth, anciently call- 
ed Cice, and Chich, is 1 1 miles S.E. from Colches- 
ter. It derives its present name from St. Osyth, 
daughter of Rcdoald, or Fredwald, King of East 
: Anglia, and virgin-wifej of Sighere, a Christian 
King of the East Saxons, who founded a religious 

establishment 



* William Bedell was educated at Kmamiuel College, Cam- 
bridge, where, at the early age of 23, he was elected a fellow. 
In 1604, he accompanied 'Sir Henry Wolten, in the capacity 
of Chaplain, on his embassy to Vienna, where he formed an 
intimate acquaintance with Antonio de Dominis, thecelebrated 
Archbishop of Spalatro, and Father Paul Sarpi, the no less re- 
nowned author of the History of ihe Council of Trent; who 
presented him with a MS. copy of it. In 1627, he was ap- 
pointed Provost of Trinity College, Dublin, and in the course 
of two years, promoted to the sees of Kilmore and Ardugh, 
the latter of which, from motives of conscience, he resigned. 
His labours, as a divine and a pastor, were unremitting ; he 
lived virtuous and beloved, and died, honoured and lamented, 
in the melancholy year of the Irish Rebellion, in 1641, and was 
interred at Kilmore. It was through h.s influence, the Book of 
Common Prayer, and the New Testament, were translated into 
the Irish language. 

f John Ray, M.A. was born in the year 1624. His father, 
a blacksmith, perceiving that he possessed a vigorous genius, 
sent him to school at Braintree, and thence to Cambridge, 
where he was admitted into Catherine Hall, hut afterwards re- 
moved to Trinity College. Here he became distinguished for 
liis skill in natural history, particularly botany. His industry, 
and application, obtained him much renown ; and, to increase 
his acquaintance with the works of Nature, but especially those 
of the vegetable kingdom, he made several journies through j 
the chief part of Great Britain. He also visited various conn- 
tries of the continent with the same intention, accompanied by'j 
the great Willoughby. Towards the latter part of his life, Mr. ' 
Hay removed from Cambridge to his native place, where he 
died, in 1706. He was buried in the Church-yard; where a 
neat pedestal monument was erected to his memory, at the ex- 
pence of Henry Compton, Bishop of London. It is inscribed 
with an elegant Latin epitaph, of which we present the follow- 
ing translation : 

" The mortal part of the most learned John Ray, 
A.M. is deposited in this narrow tomb ; but his writ- 
ings are not confined to one nation ; and his fame, 
everywhere most illustrious, renders them immortal. 
(Forwerly h was Fellow of Trinity College, iu Cam- 



bridge, and of the Royal Society, in Lmidon, a sin- 
gular ornament ot both. In every kind of science, as 
well Divine as human, most expert. And, like a 
second Solomon, (to whom alone, perhaps, he was in : 
ferior) from the cedar to the hyssop, from the largest 
of animals to the smallest insects, he arrived at a con- 
summate knowledge. And not only did he most ac- 
curately discourse of plants spread over the face of the 
whole earth ; but making a most strict search, even 
into its inmost bowels, whatever deserved discus- 
sion, throughout all nature, he described. While on 
his travels abroad, he diligently discovered what had 
escaped the observation of others, and first brought to 
light, many things most worthy of remark. Further 
than this, he was endowed w ith so unaffected a manner 
of behaviour, "that he was learned, without pedantry ; 
of a sublime genius ; and, at ihe same lime, (which Hs 
rarely known) of an humble and modest disposition. 
IS'ut distinguished by an illustrious extraction ; but, 
(what is greater) by his own virtue. Little solicitous^ 
about obtaining wealth and titles, he chose rather to 
deserve, than possess ihrm. Content, with his own lot, 
he grew old in a private station, worthy a more ample 
fortune. In every other respect, he readily observed 
moderation ; in study, none. 

" To conclude : To all these perfections he added, 
a piely free from artifice ; bearing an entire and hearty 
veneration for the Cmmh of England, which he con- 
firmed with his last breath. Thus, happily, in a vir- 
tuous retirement, lived he, whom the present age re- 
veres, and posterity will admire." 

Amongst the several esteemed works, of which Mr. Ray vas 
the author, those most in request, are ' The Wisdom of God, 
manifested in the Works of the Creation ;' ' Discourses on the 
Chaos,' &c. ' Synopsis Methodica Stirpium Britannicarum ;' 
' Catalogue of English Plants ;' Synopsis Mclhodica Avium 
et Piscium, &c.' 

1 The lady here mentioned, was born at Quarendon, in 
Buckinghamshire ; and, according to the monkish k:gends, 
made a vow of virginity at an early age; but was compelled, 



ESSEX. 



307 



establishment at its place. After the Danes had 
obtained domination, Chieh St. Osyth was given to 
Earl Godwin, who granted it to Christ Church, 
Canterbury ; yet, at the time of the Domesday 
Survey, it belonged to the see of London. About 
(lie year 1118, Richard de Belmeis, Bishop of Lon- 
don, established a Priory for Austin Canons, on 
the supposed site of the nunnery erected by St. Osyth. 
At the Dissolution, the site of the Priory, with various 
manors, was granted to Thomas, Lord Cromwell. 
Edward the Sixth re-granted Cliich St. Osyth to 
Thomas Lord D'Arcy. The family of Earl Rivers, 
which acquired it, by marriage, continued possessors 
till the beginning of the 18th century, when these 
estates were bequeathed, by the Honourable Richard 
Savage, to Bessy, his natural daughter, who married 
Frederic Zuleistein de Nassau, Earl of Rochford. 
The remains of Bishop de Beimels' foundation is 
now the seat of F. Nassau, Esq. The quadrangle 
is almost entire, except part of the north side, occu- 

Eied by some modern apartments. The entrance is 
y a beautiful gateway of hewn stone, with flint, 
having two towers, and two posterns : to the east, 
are three towers, one larger and loftier than the rest, 
commanding an extensive prospect. Among the 
ivy-grown ruins, in the gardens, is a pier, with this 
modern inscription, expressing the ancient magni- 
ficence of the place : 

Vetus hzc 
quam cernis macerie* 

conservata est 

ad Augustiniani coenobii 

limites designandos. 

Tu vero 
inter hujus loci amcenitates 

gratulare, 
kblegata jam ista superstitions. 

qusc 

Domicilium tain superbum 
Segnitiei consecravit 

et 

Socordue 
A.D. 



Sj. Osyth's Church contains several defaced mo- 
numents to the memory of the D'Arcy family. 
Bishop Belmeis was interred in this Church, in 
1127. The population of this parish, is about 
1159. 

OTES.] In the parish of King's Laver, 4| miles 
N.N.W. from Chipping Ongar, stands Otes, for- 
merly the seat of the Masham family. In the 
Church-yard, is a plain marble tomb to the memory 
of the celebrated Locke, many years a guest of the 



by her father, to marry. The marriage, however, was never 
consummated ; for, in 'the absence of her husband, she assumed 
the veil ; and, having afterwards obtained his cousent to the 
fulfilment of her vow, she retired to Chich. and founded a 
Church and Nunnery. This establishment was plundered, and 
destroyed by the Danes, under Inguar and Htibba; and the 
royal foundress herself, beheaded near an adjacent fountain. 
Her remains were first interred before the door of her Chinch, 
VOL II. KO. 74. 



Mashams. Locke wrote his own epitaph, which has 
been translated as follows : 

Stop, Traveller! 

Near this place lieth JOHN* LOCKE. 

If you ask what kind of man he was, 

He answers, that hi; lived content 

With his own fortune. 

Bred a Scholar, he made his Learning 

Subservient only to the Cause of Truth. 

This thou wilt learn from his Writings, 

Which will shew thee every Thing else 

Concerning him, 
With greater Truth than the suspected Phrases* 

Of an Epitaph. 

His Virtues, indeed, if he had any, 

Were too lilt'e for him to propose 

As Matter of Praise to himself, 

Or, as an Example to thee : 

Let his Vices be buried together. 

As to an Example of Manners, if you seek that. 

You nave it in the GOSPEL: 

Of Vices, I wish yon to have one no where. 

Of Mortality, certainly, and may it profit thee,- 

You have one here, and everywhere. 

This Stone, 
Which will itself perish in a short Time 

Records, 

That he was born Aug. 29, 1632 j 

That he died 

Oct. 28, 1704. 

PANTFIELD.] The pleasant little village of Pant- 
field, near the Pant, from which it derives its name, 
is 2| miles N.W. by N. from Braintree. Here was 
formerly a Priory of Benedictine monks, subordi- 
nate to that of St. Stephen, at Caen, in Normandy. 

FLESHY.] The village of Pleshy.Oi miles N.N.W. 
from Chelmsford, though now obscure and unim- 
portant, was formerly of no small consequence, as 
the high constables of England, from the first esta- 
blishment of the office till nearly four centuries ai'tep 
the Norman invasion, made it their place of resi- 
dence. Here still remains the keep of a strong 
fortress, erected by the Normans, within the area of 
an entrenchment, which surrounds the village ; con- 
jectured, by some, to have been of Roman origin. 
In the vicinity of the entrenchment, have been found 
several Roman bricks, and other relics, strongly 
corroborative of the supposition, that the Castl 
was erected by the Romans. The keep is, however, 
indisputably of Norman origin, and its erection is 
ascribed to William, second son of Geoffrey de 
Magnaville, who procured a licence for fortifying 
his Castle at Pleshy, from Henry the Second, and 
was here married to Hawise, daughter, and heiress 
of the Earl Albernarle, in 1 180. Gougli observes, 
that the earth-works may defy the injuries of time 



but afterwards removed to Aylesbury, where they performed 
many miracles. See MODERN PANORAMA. Vol. I. page. 136. 
* Translation. This ancient mound marks the boundary of 
the seat of ihe Augustine monk. Amongst the surrounding- 
beauties, we may congratulate ourselves on the overthrow of 
that superstition, which consecrated to indolence so magnificent 
an abode. A. D. 1760. 

oil and 



098 



ESSEX. 



and cultivation ; but, of the buildings which once 
adorned them, remains only the bridge, leading 
across the moat to the keep. This bridge is of 
brick, of one pointed arch, strongly cramped toge- 
ther with iron, 18 feet high, and 18 wide, and re- 
markable for the singular circumstance of contract- 
ing, as it approaches the basis. Foundations of 
brick run from the end of this bridge to the left 
round the keep ; and on each side of the way to it 
are the foundations of large rooms and angles of 
stone buildings. The site of the Castle has been a 
warren ; and four ragged yews occupy the keep, in 
planting which some foundations were laid open. 
The keep is somewhat elliptical in its form, measur- 
ing upwards of 890 feet in circumference. Here 
formerly stood a college, founded by Thomas of 
Woodstock, with an endowment for a master- warden, 
eight chaplains, two clerks, and two choristers ; it 
stood to the south of the Church, but not a vestige 
of its buildings point out its site, which has long 
submitted to the dominion of the plough, and pre- 
serves the memory of its former services only in its 
name, being still honoured with the appellation of 
the College Field. Of the former importance of this 
village, the only trace which remains, is the election 
of a mayor, annually chosen, from among the free- 
men, upon the court day held for the manor. The 
manor is now the property of John Jollife Tuffnel, 
Esq. 

PRITTLEWEI.L.] The large and respectable vil- 
lage of Prittlewell, 19 miles S.E. from Chelmsford, 
is said to derive its name from a fine well, accounted 
the best in the neighbourhood. It stands princi- 
pally on the declivity of a hill, the summit of which 
is occupied by the Church, a large, and remarkable 
building, which, from its height and situation, forms 
a good sea-mark. About a quarter of a mile north 
from the Church, was a Priory for Cluniac monks, 
founded by Robert of Essex, in the reign of Henry 
the Second. 

PURFLEET.] Purfleet is 23 miles S.W. by S. 
from Chelmsford. In the vicinity, belonging to 
government, is a powder magazine, which is secur- 
ed against fire or lightning. The powder is kept in 
small detached bomb-proof buildings, to provide 
against the danger of a large quantity exploding at 
the same time. 

RAINE.] This village, formerly called Little 
Raine, to distinguish it from Great Raine, or 
Braintree, is pleasantly situated about two miles 
west from the latter. The Church, an ancient 
building, was famous, in the Catholic times, for an 
Altar and Chapel, erected in the south aisle to the 
honour of the Virgin Mary. This altar was much 
frequented by pregnant women ; and, according to 
tradition, witli such great success, that the advice to 
" go ere long, and say your prayers at Raine," be- 
came a common adage. 

RAYLEIGH.] The now inconsiderable village of 
Rayleigh, anciently Raylie, was formerly a market- 
town, and the bead of the Barony of Suene, who is 



reported to have built a Castle here, of which some 
important earth- works still remain. 

In the Church at Rayleigh, is an ancient tomb, 
greatly mutilated, but displaying remains of very 
beautiful workmanship, in the pointed style. The 
person whose memory it was intended to preserve, 
has been long forgotten : the upper part has been 
wholly destroyed. Rayleigh is recorded in the 
Domesday Book, to have " a park, and six arpenni 
of vineyard, yielding in a good season, twenty modii 
of wine." Hearne, in his edition of Leland, ob- 
serves " The mannor of Raylie in Essex hath a 
Custome Court kept yearely the Weddens-day next 
after Michael's day. The Court is kept in the 
Night, and without Light, but as the Sky gives, att 
a little hill without the Towue called the King's 
Hill, where the Steward writes only with Coales, 
and not with Incke : And many Men and Mannors 
of great Worth hold of the same, and do suite unto 
this strange Court, where the Steward calls them 
with as low a Voice as possible he may ; giving no 
notice when he goes to the Hill to keepe the same 
Court, and he that attends not is deeply amerced, if 
the Steward will. 'Tis commonly called the Law- 
less Court." Weever remarks, that he was inform- 
ed " that this servile attendance was imposed at the 
first upon certaine Tenants of divers Mannors here- 
abouts, for conspiring in this place, (Raylie) at such 
an unseasonable time, to raise a commotion." 

RIDGWELL.] (See STURMERE.) 

RING HILL.] Westward of Audley House, al- 
ready described, stands Ring Hill ; on the top of 
which is a circular temple, occupying the site of an 
ancient tower, apparently the remains of a warren- 
house, or belvidere. The entire summit of this hill 
is inclosed with an entrenchment. Salmon supposes 
it to have been the Canonium of the Itinerary, and 
that the Ermine Street passed it from Barkway, in 
Hertfordshire. That a military way was near it is 
evident, from the names of Stretley (now Littlebury 
Green) and Strethall, a neighbouring village; as 
well as from other circumstances. 

RIVENHALL.] The village of Rivenhall, 2| miles 
N. by E. from Witham, formed, previously to'the- 
Conquest, part of the possessions of Queen Editha. 
Having passed through various families, the manor 
now belongs to the Westerns, of Felix Hall. 

ROCHFOBD.] The irregular, ill-built, market- 
town of Rochford, lies 16 miles S.E. from Chelms- 
ford, and 39| E. by N. from London. It is situat- 
ed on the Brownhill river, over which are two small 
bridges. The market-house is of timber, standing 
near the centre of the town, and has the date 1707. 
The Church is about half a mile to the west. The 
population of the town is 1214; the number of 
houses, 190. 

Rochford Manor, which, at the time of the Domes- 
day Survey, was held by Suene, is now the property 
of the Long family. 

RODINGS.] In the neighbourhood of Chipping v 
Ongar, and Dunmow, are the Rodings, or Rooth- 

iugs 



ESSEX. 



399 



ings, eight contiguous parishes, distinguished by the 
various prefixes of Abbess, Aytliorpe, Ueaucbamp, 
Berners, High, Leaden, Margaret, White. Mor- 
rels Roding, formerly a distinct parish, is now con- 
sidered a hamlet to White Roding. This district, 
which appears to have obtained its name from the 
river Roding, which runs through it, is very fruit- 
ful, but was formerly distinguished for the badness 
of its roads, and the uncouth manners of the inhabi- 
tants. 

ROMFORD.] The populous market-town of Rom- 
ford, lies 17 miles S.W. from Chelmsford, and 12 
E.N.E. from London. It is a Chapelry to Horn- 
church ; but its civil jurisdiction is distinct. It is 
generally considered to derive its name from an an- 
cient ford, over a rivulet, which flows through the 
west side of the town. Lysons further derives it 
from the Saxon words, signifying Broad Ford ; and 
Mr. Lethieullier supposes it to be a contraction 
from Roman Ford. The manor, which has passed 
through various families, was purchased, about 1759, 
by Richard Newman, Esq. grandfather to the pre- 
sent proprietor. The town consists, principally, of 
one long and wide street, ranging along the high 
road : near the middle, is the market-house, and 
town-hall. A general market, for corn, cattle, &c. 
is held on Wednesdays ; on Tuesdays is a market 
for the sale of hogs ; and, on Mondays, chiefly for 
that of calves. Romford Chapel appears to have 
been built about the year 1407, when the Pope's 
bull was obtained, empowering the inhabitants to 
bury their dead in an adjoining cemetery, instead of 
carrying them to Hornchurch. In the east window 
of the chancel, is a whole length on glass, of Edward 
the Confessor, to whom the Chapel is dedicated. 
Against the south wall is an alabaster monument to 
the memory of Sir George Hervey, Knt. Lieutenant 
of the Tower, who died in 1605, and his Lady. 
On the north side of the aisle, is the monument of 
Sir Anthony Cooke, of Gidea Hall, with the effigies 
of himself and his Lady, in kneeling attitudes ; and 
various shields of arms. On tkis monument are se- 
veral inscriptions, in Latin, supposed to have been 
funfished by his daughters, who were the most 
learned females of the age : and near it is a tablet, 
with the following " epitaph upon the death of the 
Right Worshipfull Sf- Anthony Cooke, Knt. who 
died the llth of June, 1576." 

You learned men, and such as learning love, 
Vouchsafe to read this rude unlearned verse ; 
For stones are doombe, and yet for inannes behove, 
God lends them tongues sometymes for to rehearse 
Such worth of words as worthiest whtes may pearse ; 
Yea stones oftyincs, when bloode and bones "be rott, 
Do blase Hie brute which ells might be forgott : 

* In the manor of Stewards, in this town, in the year 1592, 
Francis Quarles, the celebrated author of the Book of Em- 
blems, was born. He was educated at Cambridge, and became 
Cupbearer to the Queen of Bohemia, and afterwards Secretary 
to Archbishop Usher. During the Civil Wars, his adherence 
to the Royal cause, occasioned him a considerable loss of pro- 






Ami in that heap of carved stones dotfi lye- 

A worthy Knight, whose life, in learning sliced, 

Did make his name to inounte above the skie. 

With sacred skill unto a King he redd, 

Whose towarde youth his famous praises spredde; 

And he therefore to courtly life was called, 

Who more desyred in study to be stalled. 

Philosophy had taught his learned mynde 

To stand content with contrye quyet lyfe ; 

Wherein he dwelt as one that was assynde 

To guard the same from sundry sturmes of stryfe : 

And yet when persecuting rage was ryfe, 

His helping hand did never fail to stay 

His country's staff, but help it up alway. 

No highe advance, nor office of availe,' 

Could temple his thoughts to row beyond his reache ; 

By broont of bookes he only did assayle 

The forte of Fame, whereto he made his breache. 

With tyre of trewthe, whiche God's goode worde dothe 

teache, 

The wreathe he woore was dewe for his degree ; 
He neyther rose by riche rewarde nor fee ; 
And yet although he bare his s:iyles so lowe, 
The gales of grace did speed hU course so faste, 
That in his lyfe he did righte well bestowe 
His children, all before their pryme was paste, 
And linckte them so as they be "lyke to laste. 
What should I say, but only this in summe, 
Tieutus hie qui timet Dominum ? 
That only skillc, that learninge bearesthe belle, 
And that of skill I thoughte (poor stone) to treate ; 
That such as lyke to use their learninge well, 
Mighte reacle theis lynes, and therewith oft repeate 
How here on earthe his gyfte from God is great, 
Which can employ his learninge to the best ; 
So did this Knighte whiche here with me dothe reste. 

According to Morant, when the inhabitants paid 
their tithes at Christmas, it was customary to treat 
them with a bull and a brawn ; the boar's head was 
wrestled for, and the poor had the scraps : this cus- 
tom has been discontinued. Two Charity Schools 
for 60 boys and girls, were established here about 
the year 1728. The population ot Romford, is 
3244 ; the number of houses, 6-20. Adjoining the 
town, on the west, are barracks for six troops of ca- 
valry, erected during the late war.* 

RUCKHOLT.] In the manor of Rtickholt, about a 
mile S. from Leyton, are some remains of an ancient 
entrenchment, now nearly obscured by trees. It is 
situated on a small eminence, rising from the river 
Lea. Not far distant, on a branch of the Lea, are 
the Temple Mills, said to have anciently belonged 
to the Knights Templars, and afterwards to the 
Knights of St. John of Jerusalem. In the year 
1720, they were used for brass works ; but they 
have since been appropriated to other purposes. 

SANDON.] The little village of Sandou, 2 miles 
W. by S. from Danbury, derives its name from its 
situation, which is on a sandy hill. It is entitled to 
notice, as having been the rectory of the learned Dr. 



perty : he was also plundered of his books and manuscripts, a 
circumstance which is thought to have accelerated his death, 
which occurred in 1644. Besides the Emblems, he wrote a 
comedy, called trie Virgin Queen, and several poems. The 
manor has long passed from this. family, into various hands, and 
it now possessed by different proprietors, 

Walton, 



400 



ESSEX.' 



Walton, editor of the Polyglot Bible. His first wife 
lies buried in the Church ; where her virtues are 
recorded, in an inscription, by her husband, written 
partly in English, and partly in Latin. Vancouver, 
in his Agricultural Survey of Essex, observes, that 
the business of butter-making has been in a great 
measure relinquished in this parish, from the want 
of good spring-water, and, from a smoky taste, 
which is communicated to the butter, when the cows 
feed upon the produce of some particular pastures. 
This circumstance has occasioned the suckling of 
calves to be a preferable object of attention. 

SHOEBURY.] AtShoebury, anciently called Schoe- 
birig, Sceobirig, &c. a little to the eastward of 
Southend, the Danes are recorded to have thrown 
up some fortifications, after their defeat at Bemfleet, 
by Alfred. Traces of the Danish works still re- 
main, and many Roman urns have been found here. 
SHORTGROVE.] About 2 miles S. from Audley 

End, is Shortgrove, the manor and seat of 

Smith, Esq. by whom it was purchased of the Hon. 
Percy Wyndham, a descendant from the Earls of 
Thomond. The house is a handsome building, oc- 
cupying the summit of a pleasant eminence, and 
having, in front, the river Granta, flowing at the 
foot of a lawn, encompassed by plantations. Be- 
hind the house, is a second lawn, with pleasure- 
grounds, and canals, supplied with water from the 
river, by machinery. 

SOUTHEND.] The delightful village of Southend, 
42 miles E. from London, is seated on the declivity 
of a well-wooded hill, at the mouth of the Thames, 
nearly opposite to Sheerness. Fifteen years ago, 
Southend was scarcely known as a bathing-place ; 
but, during the season, several machines are now in 
daily use, and it is accommodated with a very hand- 
eome Assembly-Room, a Theatre, a Library, an 
Inn, a Hotel, &c. At a distance, the village has a 
stately appearance. The houses run in a long line, 
and being handsomely finished with stone pilasters 
and cornices, they might pass for a palace, to a 
stranger sailing up the Thames. The soil about 
this establishment is sandy, and the shore flat and | 
shallow ; but the water, notwithstanding its admix- j 
ture with the Thames, is sufficiently salt, and very 
clear, and for some hours, every day, is not only 
safe, but extremely agreeable. The surrounding 
country is rich and populous. From the upper part 
of the village, a fine moving picture presents itself, 
of the shipping on the Thames. The neighbourhood 
abounds with game. At a . short distance from 
Southend, is a stone, which forms the boundary of 
the extent of the jurisdiction of the London Corpo- 
ration over tlie Thames. 

SPRINGFIELD.] Springfield is a little village, a 
mile and a quarter N.E. from Chelmsford. It is 
called, by Norden, Campus Aquaticus, from the 
number of springs rising in the neighbourhood. 
Springfield Lyons, situated on a fine eminence in 
this parish, is the seat of the Dowager Lady VYal- 

6 



tham. Springfield Place belongs to .' Bor- 
grave, Esq. 

STANSTEB.] Stansted, or Stansted Mountfitchet, 
lies 18 miles N.W. by N. from Chelmsford. It is 
one of the largest parishes in Essex, its circumfer- 
ence being computed at nearly 40 miles. Its name, 
Stausted, or Stone Street, was probably derived 
from a vicinal v,ay, which branched off from the 
Roman road from Bishop's-Stortford, to Colchester, 
and runs through it, in the direction of Stansted 
Street, towards Great Chesterford : the appellation, 
Mountfitchet, appears to have been given in contra- 
distinction to Stansted, in Hertfordshire, aud pro- 
bably arose from a. large artificial mount of earth, 
still remaining, on which stood the keep of a Castle, 
erected here by William Gernon, surnamed Mount- 
fitchet, whose father, Robert, received the lordship 
from the Conqueror. Some remains of the fortress 
are yet visible, about s. quarter of a mile from the 

Church. Stausted Hall, the seat of Heath, 

Esq. is a large brick mansion, on the summit of a 
hill, commanding a fine prospect to the north. The 
gardens are pleasantly laid out, and the grounds 
contain several nurseries and plantations. 

STANWAY.] Stanway lies 4 miles W. by S. from 
Colchester. It is said to have been so named from 
its situation on the Stoneway, or Roman military 
road, leading from Stortford, through Dunmow, 
Braintree, and Coggeshall, to Colchester. It was 
anciently the property of Earl Harold, and at that 
time, the drier of a very extensive district. It has 
since been parcelled into various manors. Here, on 
the south side of the London road, were found, ip 
1764, a number of large vertebrae, and tibia, with 
their joints, lying in a stratum of sea sand, and 
small shells. This bed was about a yard thick ; 
and above it another of ooze or river mud, of three 
inches in thickness, over which were several veins 
of yellow sand, gravel, and mould : the tibiae were 
much corroded, but the other bones were perfectly 
well polished. 

STURMERE.] Sturmere, which derives its name 
from its vicinity to a mere formed by the Stour, is 
9| miles N.W. from Castle-Hedingham. Though 
now only an obscure village, it was formerly of great 
extent and consequence, and is said to have ex- 
tended into both Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire. 
Even the town of Haverhill, in the former county, 
was once a hamlet to Sturmere. 

Sturmere, Birdbrook, and Ridgwell, are the con- 
tiguous parishes through which a Roman military 
way is mentioned, by Salmon, to have passed from 
Colchester, towards Camboricum. Ridgwell ap- 
pears to have obtained its name from the Roman 
ridgeway, a road, which passes near it, on the 
south-west. Nearly midway, between the road and 
the village, in a field, called Great Ashley, many 
Roman antiquities, as coins, tiles, and tesserae, were 
found previously to the year 1791 ; when it was first 
discovered to have been the site of a Routau villa ; 

and 



ESSEX. 



401 



and a very accurate plan of that part which had not 
been previously disturbed, was taken by T. Wai- 
ford, Esq. of Whitley. The entrance of this villa, 
was on the south south-west front, into a narrow 
porticus, between tiO and 70 feet long 1 , and only 
nii.e wide, with a tesselated pavement, nearly en- 
tire. In the centre, were six squares of large brick, 
of which five only, were perfect ; part of the sixth 
having been disturbed by the plough. These 
squares, which were exactly three feet every way, 
and seven distant from each other, were probably the 
foundations of pillars, which formed a colonnade to 
support the roof of the porticus. The tiles or bricks 
iu these squares, were placed, with their edges 
downward, upon a thick bed of sand ; and, upon 
them, was laid a considerable coat of mortar, made 
with pounded bricks and lime, to cement the bricks 
which lay above. From the porticus, an ascent of 
one step led into the crypto-porticus, which was 
paved with red tessene, in straight lines, but liirger 
than the former. This appears to have led to the 
principal room, as a great number of very small 
tesserae, of various colours, were found, and some 
pieces with eight or ten, that had not been separated, 
which had certainly formed part of a beautiful pave- 
ment, formerly broken up by the plough. That 
there were rooms, beyond this, is ascertained by the 
remains of a wall, extending 10 feet further than any 
other part. One of the rooms appears to have com- 
municated with an hypocaust, met with here, about 
70 years ago ; and probably heated by it, as a per- 
fect flue was remaining, which extended 16 feet 
8 inches under the floor ; the arch was turned with 
large bricks abutting upon rubble stone ; the sides 
and bottom were of the same ; its width was 21 
inches, and its height 33 inches clear : the mouth of 
the flue was covered with a large stone ; and near it, 
were found a considerable quantity of wood, coals, 
part of a handmill, two pieces of stag's horn, two 
brass tibulsp, and several copper coins. In Bird- 
brook parish, on different sides of the turnpike-road, 
which appear to have been formed for a considerable 
space, on the Roman military way, various skele- 
tons have been found. With some of them urns 
were discovered ; but the greater number had nei- 
ther urns, nor any ather antiquity. Two skeletons, 
found with two urns, in Oxley Field, belonging to 
Chadwell Farm, lay in a very singular manner ; 
being arm in arm, each clasping the same urn ; and 
the right leg of one laid across the left leg of the 
other, the lower urn being placed between their 
hips. In the year 170-2, at a little distance from 
the turnpike-road, a single skeleton was found, with 
two urns ; the one placed lengthways between the 
feetj the other clasped by the left arm, with the 
mouth downwards. Alittle to the north-west of Wat- 
soe Bridge, which divides the parishes of Birdbrook, 
and Steeple- Bumstead, and immediately above the 
river Stour, is the site of a Roman camp, or sta- 
tion ; part of the west vallum is still remaining. 
Many stone foundations of buildings have been dug 

VOL. II. NO. 74. 



up here ; and several skeletons, with urns and coins, 
discovered in the neighbouring field. In Ford 
Meadow, about a furlong from the camp, a work- 
man employ ed in stubbing of gravcl,in February, 1793, 
discovered a small urn, covered with part of a Ro- 
man brick, containing one gold, and 29 silver coins, 
of the Lower Empire, in very fine preservation. 

TAKELEY.] In the parish of Takely, 3 miles 
S. E. by E. from that of Stansted Montfitchet, was 
formerly a small Priory, forming a cell to the Abbey 
of St. Valery, in Picardy, to which the manor is 
supposed to have been given, by the Conqueror. 

TERLINO PI.ACK.] Terling Place, in the neigh- 
bourhood of I Lit (it-Id Peverel, is the seat and manor 
of J. II. Strutt, Esq. Anciently it was appendant 
to Ely Cathedral, but dissevered from that see by 
the Conqueror, who gave it to Ranulph Peverel. 
In 1269, it was held under the Bohuns, Earls of 
Hereford and Essex, by the Bishop of Norwich, 
who had a palace and park here, and also a Chapel, 
which possessed the privilege of sanctuary; and is 
recorded as having sheltered the celebrated Hubert 
de Bergh, from the indignation of Henry the Third. 
Henry the Eighth, who also had a residence here, 
gave this manor to the Lord Chancellor Audley. 
The Strutt family became possessed of it by pur- 
chase, about 70 years ago. 

TEY.] There are three villages of this name 
Great" Tey, Little Tey, and Marks Tey all within 
4 miles, in an easterly and northerly direction, of 
Great Coggeshall. The manor of Great Tey, 
which is about 17 miles in circumference, was, in 
the 10th century, possessed by the Saxon Earl, Alf 
gar. It subsequently belonged to the monastery of 
Stoke-by-Nayland, in Suffolk ; and, having passed 
through various families, it was purchased, some 
years ago, by the late Thomas Astle, Esq. the cele- 
brated antiquary. The lands, which are mostly 
arable, are remarkably productive*, and in a high 
state of cultivation. The villain, or copyhold te- 
nants, were bound, by their tenures, to plough the 
Lord's land, to mow his grass, to reap his corn, and 
to cut underwood, in his grounds, for firing. They 
were also obliged to make the Lord's fences round 
his woods, within the manor, but were permitted to 
enter one rod within the woods, to out the under- 
wood for that purpose ; the surplus materials being 
allowed them for their own use. Many estates iu 
this manor, were subject to the Marcheta Mulierum, 
which custom has commonly been supposed to be a 
right which the Lord had, of passing the first night 
after marriage, with his female villain. " The best 
historians," observes Mr. Astle, " as well as several 
foreign authors, have given many marvellous parti- 
culars, concerning this custom ; but, on diligent 
enquiry, I am of opinion, that this kind of inter- 
course between the Lord, and his female villain, 
never existed. 1 am persuaded the Marcheta was 
a compact between the Lord of the manor and his 
villain, for the redemption of an offence committed 
by the unmarried daughter of his vassal ; but more 
5 i generally 



402 



ESSEX. 



generally, it was a fine paid by a sokeman, or a -vil- 
lain, to his lord, for a licence to marry his daughter 
and, if the vassal gave her away, without obtaining 
such licence, he was liable to pay a fine. The pro- 
bable reason of the custom appears to have been 
this : persons of low rank, residing on an estate 
were generally either ascripli g/eliff, or were sub- 
jected to some species of service similar to the 
ascripti glcbeE ; the tenants were bound to reside or 
the estate, and to perform several services to the 
Lord. As women necessarily followed the resi- 
dences of their husbands, the consequence was, that, 
when a woman of low rank married a stranger, the 
Lord was deprived of part of his live stock ; he 
therefore required a fine, to indemnify him for the 
loss of his property. In process of time, this com- 
position was thrown into the aggregate sum of quit 
rents, as appears by an ancient survey of this ma- 
nor." 

THAXTED.] The ancient market-town of Thax- 
ted, 19 miles N.N.W. from Chelmsford, and 43| 
N.N.E. from London, is supposed to have existed 
in the Saxon times ; for the Church is recorded to 
have belonged, in the reign of Edward the Confes- 
sor, to the college of St. John the Baptist, at Clare, 
in Suffolk. Having been settled upon Catherine of 
Arragon, the " manor and borough" of Thaxted, 
were granted, by that Princess, in 1514, to Sir 
John Cutts, Knt. to hold during her life, under a 
r$nt of 571. 7s. and soon afterwards, the reversion 
in fee-farm, was granted to the same knight, by 
Henry the Eighth. Early, in the 17th century, 
Thaxted became the property of Sir William 
Smyth, Knt. of Hill Hall, in this county ; and it 
has since continued in the possession of his de- 
scendants. 

The tOMrn was incorporated under Philip and 
Mary, and its government vested in a mayor, bai- 
liffs, and chief burgesses. This charter was con- 
firmed by Elizabeth, but rendered ineffective, by the 
fears or poverty of the corporate officers, who, on 
being served with a quo warranto, in the time of 
James the Second, retired from their offices, in si- 
lence. The corporation had a common seal, but no 
arms. The market has, of late years, been revived. 
The number of houses, in this town, in 1811, was 
390 ; of inhabitants, 1733. 

Thaxted Church, a large and beautiful structure, 
appears, from the various arms and cognizances on 
its several parts, to have been built at different times, 
iu the 14th century. The whole fabric is embattled, 
and supported by strong buttresses, terminated by 
canopied niches, and curiously purfled pinnacles : 
below the niches, on each buttress, is a grotesque 
head, with a spout issuing from the mouth to carry 
off the water. The windows are mostly large, and 



* Samuel Purchas, JJ.D. was born at Thaxted, in 1677, and 
received his education at Cambridge. He was a man of gene- 
ra) learning; and, with great pains and industry, he enlarged 
and perfected Hakluyt's Collection of Voyages and Travels. 



pointed ; many of them are also ornamented with 
tracery, and painted glass; but the latter is much 
broken, and otherwise defaced. The north porch is 
richly ornamented with sculpture ; and the cornice, 
and upper part, charged with various figures : 
above the entrance are t\vo escutcheons ; one con- 
taining the arms of France and England ; the other 
the arms of the house of York : over these arc two 
windows, in the arch of each of which is a crown, 
supported by a hand. At the west end is an embat- 
tled tower, sustained by buttresses. A neat octa- 
gonal spire, rising to the height of 181 fort, termi- 
nated the tower. Unfortunately, in the summer of 
1814, the spire was considerably injured by light- 
ning. A scaffolding was erected, at the expense of 
nearly 400/. for the purpose of taking down the da- 
maged part of the pinnacle: 46 feet of it had beon 
removed ; when, on the 16th of December, follow- 
ing, a violent wind blew down the scaffolding, and 
about 30 feet more of the spire. This occurred in 
the middle of the day, and the body of the Church 
thereby sustained much injury. The damage, we 
believe, has been repaired. The chancel of this 
Church displays various cognizances of Edward 
the Fourth. The expense of erecting this building 
was principally defrayed by the noble families of 
Clare and Mortimer ; with some assistance from 
Edward the Fourth. 

Thaxted enjoys many charitable benefactions. A 
fund, produced by the sale of an estate, called 
Yendleys, (deriving its name from Thomas Yen- 
dale, who resided on it in the reign of Henry the 
Sixth,) is now applied to the support of a school, 
repairing the Church, improving the highways, &c. 
William, Lord Maynard, by will, dated 1698, be- 
queathed 4000/. for purchasing the rectory of Thax- 
ted, or some other of equal value, to be vested in 
trustees, for the purpose of increasing the salary of 
the minister, repairing and beautifying the Church, 
marrying poor virgins, binding out apprentices, re- 
lieving pooV people overburthened with children, and 
for other purposes. The rectory of Thaxted being 
entailed in such a manner, that it could not be ob- 
tained, that of Potten, in Bedfordshire, and some 
estates in Suffolk, were purchased with the above 
sum ; the proceeds of which are applied according 
to the direction of the donor. Alms-houses are 
situated in different parts of the town : one of the 
buildings appropriated to this use, is the ancient 
chantry-house. The ancient Guildhall is now the 
parish workhouse ; and the school is kept in the 
moot-hall.* 

THORNDON.] There are three parishes of the 
name of Thorndon, or Horndon, in this county ; 
viz. East, or Great Thorndon, 4 miles S.E. from 
Brentwood ; West, or Little Thorndon, 3| miles 



He died in 1628, in distressed circumstances, through the 
:liarges of publication. His compilation, called, Purchas his 
?ilgrimage, &c. extends to five volumes folio. 

9 S.S.E. from 



ESSEX. 



403' 



S. S. E. from Brentwood ; aiul Thorndon on the 
Hill, Jt>i S. by W. from Chebnsford. At the last 
mentioned village, says Morant, there "has been a 
custom, time out ot mind, at the churching of a 
woman, for her to give a white cambric handker- 
cfi'.ef to tho minister, iis ;in offering; this is observ- 
ed by Mr. Lewis, in his account ot the Isle of Tim- 
net, where the same custom is kept up." 

In the Church of East Thermion, the chancel 
has an octagonal ceiling of wood, and is ornament- 
ed with carved shields of arms, roses, and other 
figures. On the south side, are Chapels of the 
Tyrell and Pot re families : in the former, on a flat 
stone, is a quaint Latin inscription, in memory of 
Sir John Tyrell, Kitt. who suffered greatly for his 
adherence to Charles the First. On the north side 
are also two (.'Impels, one of which, much orna- 
mented, contains ;m ancient mutilated monument, 
having the date, 1400, on a rim of brass, most of 
which is worn away. This is supposed to have been 
erected in memory of the Tyrells, Lords of the ma- 
nor of Heron, in this parish. Another mutilated 
monument commemorates Sir John Tyrell, and his 
wife Alice, with the date 142-2. The font, a square 
massy stone, is carved with intersecting arches, and 
other ornaments. Heron Hall, the mansion of the 
Tyrells, was pulled down about the year 1790, with 
the exception of two round towers, which yet re- 
main. Its site is now occupied by a spacious farm- 
house, offices, &c. 

West Thorndon manor was the property of the 
celebrated family of Fitz-Lewis, previously to the 
year 1442. In the reign of Henry the Seventh, 
John, the last male heir, married Anne, daughter <>l 
Sir Robert Lovel ; but had the melancholy fate to 
be consumed, with his bride, on the wedding night, 
in a fire which destroyed the manor-house. In the 
time of Queen Elizabeth, or James the First, this 
manor became the property of the Lords Petre. 

Thorndon Hall, the seat of the family, is situated 
in an extensive park, on a fine eminence, at the 
south-eastern extremity of an avenue, leading from 
Brentwood. It commands a delightful prospect, 
over a woody country, of the Thames, and beyond 
it, the blue hills of Kent. The mansion, executed 
from designs by Paine, is built with white brick, and 
consists of a centre, and two wings, connected by 
circular corridors. On the north front, is a small 
portico, supported by six Corinthian pillars, fluted. 
The hall is a noble room, 40 feet square ; the roof is 
supported by 18 columns, covered with a composi- 
tion resembling marble, by Wyatt. In the dining- 
room, are various portraits of the Petre family ; 
Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, appa- 
rently by Holbein ; James the Second ; the Earl of 
Darnley, whole length ; Joan of Arc ; the Duke of 
Buckingham, &c. The state bed-room contains a 
fine painting of St. Catherine, reading, and leaning 
on the wheel of martyrdom. In the drawing-room, 
are portraits of the Dowager Lady Petre, and Mrs. 
Onslow, by Cosway. The library, a particularly 



handsome apartment, is formed over the east corri- 
dor, ami resembles a semicircular gallery : it con- 
tains several models of cattle, executed by Garrard, 
for I/>rd Petre ; and elegant busts of the Hon. 
Charles James Fox; R. J. Petre; and R. E. 
Petre. The saloon contains a great number of 
portraits. The Chapel, which occupies the right 
wing, is elegantly fitted up, and decorated with a> 
fine painting of the Nativity, brought from Rome. 
The park and grounds are well stocked with wood. 
West Thorndon and Ingrave parishes were united 
by Act of Parliament ; on which, in the year 1734, 
a new Church was built by Robert James, Lord 
Petre. This is a plain briok structure, standing 
about midway between the site of the ancient 
Churches. Two ilat monumental stones of the 
Fitz -Lewis's were removed into it from Ingrave. 
One of them, engraven on brass, is an elegant fe- 
male figure of Margaret Fitz-Lewis, who was 
thrice married ; her third husband was John, Duke 
of Exeter : she died in August, 1400. 

THORPE.] Thorpe, or Thorpe- in -le-Soken, 8 
miles S. E. by S. from Manningtree, with the two 
contiguous parishes of Kirkby and Walton, forms 
a district, generally called the Sokens ; a name 
derived from the Saxon word Soc, or Soca, signify- 
ing immunity, peculiar privilege, and jurisdiction. 
The customs, with respect to land, are still particu- 
lar. The lands are mostly copyhold, but nearly 
equal to freeholds. The tenants pay twelvepence 
an acre for a fine, and two shillings for a cottage. 
" They may pull their houses down, without a li- 
cense ; cut down their small trees ; grant a lease, 
even for 50 years ; and, indeed, do most things con- 
trary to the custom of other copyholds." The Lord 
of these three manors, which passed with that of St. 
Osyth, from Thomas Lord D'Arcy, to the Earl of 
Rochford, " styles himself, Lord of the liberty,, 
franchises, dominion, and peculiar jurisdiction, of 
the sokens, in the county of Essex : and appoints a 
commissary, who takes the title of official-principal^ 
and vicar-general, in spiritual causes to the same 
Lord. This commissary keeps a court at Thorpe 
every three weeks, as occasion serves, and proves 
wills and testaments within the sokens, which wills 
are kept in the Church of Thorpe. The Lord of 
the Sokens hath also this peculiar privilege, that no 
bailiff can arrest within them but his own." This 
district was granted to the Cathedral of St. Paul, 
by King Athelstan, before the year 941, under the 
name of Eadult'es-nesa ; from Eadulf, a Saxon. 
Thane ; and the promontory at Walton, called the 
nase, or ness, which juts northward into the ocean. 
This promontory formerly extended much further to 
the east, but has been greatly encroached upon by the 
sea ; and, as stated in our account of Harwich, the 
ruins of buildings have been discovered under the 
water, at a considerable distance, particularly on a 
shoal, called West Rocks. The spot where the 
ruins are found, is distinguished by the appellation 
of " the town." Thewall, thrown up to keep out the 

sea, 



401 



ESSEX. 



sea, gave name to Walton parish ; within which is a 
light-house, of brick, 80 feet high, erected by the 
master, &c. of the Trinity-House. In the winter 
of 1803, by the falling down of a piece of the cliff, 
on Walton shore, the skeleton of an enormous ani- 
mal was discovered, measuring nearly 30 feet in 
length. Some of the bones were nearly as large as 
a man's body, and six or seven feet long ; the cavi- 
ties which contained the marrow, were large enough 
to admit the introduction of a man's arm ; the bones, 
on being handled, broke to pieces. One of the mo- 
lar teeth, which was of a square form, having the 
grinding surface studded with several zig-zag rows 
of lamina?, which seemed to denote, that it belonged 
to a carnivorous animal, weighed seven pounds. 
One of (he other teeth, which were unfortunately 
broken, weighed 12 pounds. The skeleton was 
supposed to belong to an animal of the mammoth 
species. 

In Thorpe Church, between the pillars of the 
south aisle, is the figure of a knight cross-legged, 
apparently of the age of Henry the Third, or Ed- 
ward the First. On his left arm is a shield ; his 
head rests upon a cushion, and his feet on a lion 
couehant : above is a shield of arms, said to be those 
of Salberghe. This figure is traditionally affirmed 
to represent an owner of Landmer Hall, a manor in 
this parish. Good water here, is extremely scarce. 
The population of the Sokeus is about 2080 ; the 
number of houses, 274. Between Walton and Har- 
wich, are several small islands, which have been 
formed by the sea : one of these, already mentioned, 
is called Pewit Island, from the great number of 
pewits to which it artbrds harbour. 

THREMHALL.] At Thremhall, or as it is sometimes 
called, Trenchale, in the parish of Stansted Mont- 
fitchet, was a Priory of Benedictine canons, found- 
ed by Gilbert de Montfitchet, who came into En- 
gland with the Conqueror. Several of the Mont- 
fitchet, and De Vere families, were buried here. 

THURROCK.] The market town of Gray's, or 
Great Thurrock, lies 22 miles S.S.W. from Chelms- 
ford, and 24i miles E. by S. from London. It evi- 
dently derived its prefix from the noble family of 
Gray, who possessed the manor upwards of three 
centuries, from 1194, when it was granted by the 
crown, to Henry de Gray. The town principally 
consists of one irregular street, situated on a small 
creek from the Thames, which is navigable for ves- 
sels of small burthen. The market is abundantly 
supplied with corn. The Church is in the form of a 
cross, with a tower on the north side. The houses 
in this town, as returned under the population act, 
of 1811, amounted to 213; the inhabitants, to 
1,055. 

West Thurrock lies on? mile W. and East, or 
Little Thurrock, one mile E. by S. from Gray's 
Thurrock. In the latter parish, and that of Chad- 
well, near the highway leading from Stafford, arc 
various caverns, or holos, of unequal depths and di- 



mensions, formed in the chalk, which here consti- 
tutes the upper stratum. Camden describes them 
as very artfully built with stone ; and, from the 
drawing given by him of two of them, they appear 
to open from the top, by a narrow circular passage, 
which, near the bottom, begins to spread, and com- 
municates with subterranean apartments ; each apart- 
ment being of a particular and different form. Dr. 
Derham, who measured six of these caverns, all 
lying within the compass of as many acres, describes 
them as of the respective depth of 50 feet, 6 inches ; 
55 feet, 6 inches ; 70 feet, 7 inches ; 80 feet ; and 80 
feet, 4 inches. An horizontal passage is said to lead 
from Cave Field, at East Tilbury, into one of the 
caverns. The origin of these excavations is uncer- 
tain. The opinion of their having been the grana- 
ries of the Britons, seems the most rational supposi- 
tion. They are also called Dane Holes ; and are tra- 
ditionally reported to have been used as receptacles, 
or hiding places, for plunder, during the frequent 
incursions of the Danes. 

TILBURY FORT.] On the banks of the Thames, 
22i miles S. by W. from Chelmsford, stands Til- 
bury Fort, which was originally built as a kind of 
block-house, by Henry the Eighth, but enlarged 
into a regular fortification, by Charles the Second, 
after the Dutch fleet had sailed up the river, in the 
year 1667, and burnt three English men of war, at 
Chatham. Various additions have been since made ; 
and it is now mounted with a great number of guns, 
and is strongly garrisoned. Some traces of the 
camp, formed here, to oppose the threatened de- 
scent of the Spanish Armada, in the time of Eliza- 
beth, are yet to be seen. 

TILBURY.] East Tilbury, at which was the an- 
cient ferry over the Thames, is 2| miles E.S.E. from 
Tilbury Fort. 

West Tilbury, is one mile and three-quarters 
N.N.E. from Tilbury Fort. This appears to have 
been an episcopal seat of Cedda, Bishop of the East 
Saxons, who, in the 7th century, spread the Chris- 
tian religion in this county, and built Churches in 
several places, but " especially," says Bede, " in 
the city, which, in the language of the Saxons, is 
called Ythancestre ; and also in that which is named 
Tillaburgh, (the first of which places is on the banks 
of the river Pant, the other on the banks of the 
Thames,) where, gathering a flock ot servants of 
Christ, be taught them to observe the discipline of 
a regular life, as far as those rude people were then 
capable." Ythancestre is supposed to have stood 
at the mouth of the river Pant, or Blackwater, but 
has been entirely swallowed up by tbe sea. West 
Tilbury is now only a small village. A medicinal 
water was discovered hero, in 1727. Its qualities 
render it extremely useful in haemorrhages, scurvy, 
diabetes, &c. The marshes in this neighbourhood, 
are chiefly rented by the grazing* butchers of Lon- 
don, who generally stock them with Lincolnshire 
and Leicestershire wethers, which are neat hither, in 

September, 



ESSEX. 



405 



September, Or October, and feed till Christmas, or 
Candlemas ; when they are in prime order for the 
table. 

TILTEY.] At Tiltey, anciently Tileteia, 3 miles 
S. by W. from Thaxted, was an Abbey of Cistercian 
m7>nks, founded in 1193, by Maurice Fitz-Geff'ery. 
This Abbsy was dedicated to St. Mary, and situated 
in a beautiful vale, surrounded by trees. The only 
remains are part of a cloister, and a small building 
in the pointed style, now used as the parish Church, 
but traditionally said to have been the stranger's 
Chapel, which stood at the Abbey gate. 

TIPTREE.] At Tiptree, 4 miles S. from Witham, 
was an ancient Priory for black canons, founded be- 
fore the time of Edward the First. On the 3d of 
May, 1810, the venerable old mansion of Tiptree 
House, was destroyed by fire. It was built, in 
1585, by one of the D'Arcy family, from the exten- 
sive ruins of the Priory. Of late years, it had been 
occupied only as a farm-house, on the property of 
Peter Du Cane, Esq. 

TOLLESHUNT.] Tolleshunt Magna (a corruption 
of Tolleshunt Malger ; Tolleshunt D'Arcy ; and 
Tolleshunt Knights, are three contiguous parishes, 
from 5 to 7 miles in a N. E. direction from Maldon. 
The manor of Tolleshunt Malger, or Tolleshunt 
Beckiugham, was settled in 1711, by Dr. Daniel 
Williams, who had purchased the reversion, on a 
society in New England, for the purpose of pro- 
moting the conversion of poor Indians. An ancient 
brick gateway, belonging to the manor-house, is yet, 
standing. In Tolleshunt D'Arcy, and the adjoining 
parish of Tollesbury, " a considerable improve- 
ment," says Vancouver, " has lately been made in 
the rough marshes, by removing the ant-hills. The 
operation is performed by chopping round the hills 
with a heavy adze, or grubbing-hoe, the cutting 
edge of which is circular, and ten and a half inches 
wide.; the depth of the blade, including its nock to 
the eye, or where the handle is fastened, is eight and 
a half inches : from half a dozen to half a score 
strokes, will belt the largest hill, and loosen it from 
its seat, which is always left lower than the adjoin- 
ing surface of the marsh, to receive and hold the 
rain-water, by means of which, the ants are more 
completely destroyed. Boys follow the grubber, 
and carry the ant-hills into the rills, and low places 
in the marsh ; and thus a considerable increase of 
surface is obtained, that, in the course of a year, be- 
comes profitable by getting coated with grass, and 
at an expence which seldom exceeds fifteen shillings 
per acre." 

TOPPESFIELO.] At Toppesfield, 4 miles W.N.W. 
from Castle-Hedingham, about 16 years ago, a ske- 
leton, and various Roman antiquities, were disco- 
, vered by a labourer in a field belonging to Bradfield 
farm. Among them was a metal vase, or Prasferi- 
culum, with a handle ; a metal Patera;, bossed in 
the centre ; three elegant little cups, of red Samian 
ware ; a Roman coin, much defaced ; and a sword- 

VOL. u. NO. 74. 



blade, greatly corroded, lying across the breast of 
the skeleton. 

TOTHAM.] Little Totham is 3| miles N.E. and 
Great Totham, 3 N.N.E. from Maldon. The latter 
is remarkable for a number of defaced burrows or 
tumuli, known by the name of Borough Hills, 
a name corrupted, in all probability, from Barrow 
Hills. These seem to have been raised, without 
any distinction, over the bodies of the Danes and 
Saxons, who fell in the several engagements between 
those people. 

TWINSTEAD.] This village lies 4j miles N.E. by 
N. from Halstead. Twinstead Hall occupies a 
commanding eminence near the Church. It is a 
spacious and handsome building, encircled by plea- 
sant gardens, inclosed by a deep moat, over which 
is a light bridge. 

UPMINSTF.K.] The pleasant village of Upmin- 
ster, one mile and a half E.S.K. from Hornchurch, 
belonged to the Engaine family at the Conquest ; 
but is now in the possession of tli;- Esdailes. Peter 
Esdailc, Esq. has a seat, called Gtiines, about three 
quarters of a mile north-east from the Church. Dr. 
Derham, author of the Physico- Theology, and va- 
rious other works, was rector of this parish from the 
year 1089 to 1735. 

Upminster Hall was a mansion of the Abbots of 
Waltluun, who had a Chapel and cemetery here. 
It is built with timber, and commands some tine 
prospects over parts of Essex and Kent. 

VALENTINES.] About 2 miles N.W. from Wan- 
stead, stands Valentines, the olegant seat of Charles 
Cameron, Esq. which was bought by his father, of 
the co-heiresses of Sir Charles Raymond, Bart, 
who purchased it of Robert Surinan, Esq. by whom 
the mansion (originally built by James Chadwick, 
Esq. son-in-law of Archbishop Tillotson) was en- 
larged, and the grounds improved. Here are some 
valuable pictures, particularly the original of South- 
wark Fair, by Hogarth ; and some fine carving, by 
Gibbons. In the hot-house, is a remarkable vine, of 
the black Hamburgh sort, which was planted in 
April, 1758 ; it annually produces 1'rn in .300 weight 
of fruit, to 400|. The stem is about 14 inches in 
girth, and the branches extend 200 feet. In the 
gardens, is a tulip tree, upwards of 4^ feet in girth, 
and about 80 feet high. 

Near Valentines, is a seat culled Highlands, 
built by Sir Charles Raymond, whose heirs sold 
it to the late Earl Tylney. A mausoleum, which 
forms a conspicuous object for several miles round, 
was also built here by Sir Charles, who intended 
it as a burial-place for his family. 

WALDBN.] This market town anciently called 
Waleduna, then Waldenburgh, afterwards Chip- 
ping Walden, and now Satfron Waldeu, from the 
great quantities of that plant formerly cultivated in 
its neighbourhood lies 25 miles N. N. W. from 
Chelmsford, and 42i N. N. E. from London. The 
name of Walden appears to have been derived from 
5 K the 



40G 



ESSEX. 



the, Saxon words Weald and Den, signifying 
Woody-Hill. Its situation is, indeed, peculiar ; 
and Dr. Stukely, who, upon slight evidence, con- 
jectures it to have been that of a Roman station, 
terms it the most beautiful he ever beheld. A nar- 
row tongue of land, he observes, " shoots itself 
out like a promontory, encompassed with a valley 
in the form of a horse shoe, inclosed by distant and 
most delightful hills. On the bottom of the tongue 
stapd the ruins of a castle ; and on the top, or ex- 
tremity, the Church, round which, on the side of 
the hill, and in the valley, is the town built ; so that 
the bottom of the Church is as high as the town, 
and seen above the tops of the houses." 

Walden, at the period of the Domesday Survey, 
was one of the numerous Lordships possessed by 
Geoffrey de Magnaville, a Norman chief, who ac- 
companied the Conqueror into England. He found- 
ed a Castle here, and the place afterwards became 
the head of the barony and honour of Mandeville. 
This Castle occupied the highest part of the town, 
and, from the remains, appears to have been of 
great strength ; the walls having been composed 
of small flints, bound together by very strong 
cement." Geoffrey, grandson of the founder, was 
a man of great personal bravery. King Stephen 
made him keeper of the Tower of London, and 
created him Earl of Essex ; but the more advantage- 
ous offers of the Empress Maud allured him to her 
party. In addition to v ry ample grants of land, 
she consitituted him -hereditary sheriff of London, 
and of the shires of Middlesex, Hertford, and 
Essex ; confirmed to him the possession of all his 
forts and castles ; and gave him liberty to retain 
and fortify the Tower of London at his pleasure. 
She also granted him liberty to remove the market 
from the neighbouring town of Newport, to his 
Castle at Walden, there to hold it twice weekly ; 
with the right of all tolls, customs, &c. Stephen 
having been privately informed of the defection of 
the Earl, caused him to be arrested at St. Albans, 
in 1113 ; and, before he could obtain his liberty, he 
was obliged to surrender the government of the 
Tower, together with his own castles of Walden 
and Fleshy, to the King. Exasperated by this 
treatment, he, with a band of desperate partizans, 
ravaged the demesnes of the sovereign, and his ad- 
herents, without mercy ; but was at length shot 
by an arrow (A. D. 1144) while besieging the Cas- 
tle of Burwell,* in Cambridgeshire, when under 
sentence of excommunication for having plundered 
the Abbey of Ramsey, in Huntingdonshire. " Lyino- 
at the point of death." observes the Register Book 
of Walden, " ready to give up his last gasp, there 
came by certain Knights Templars, who laid upon 
him the habit of their religious profession, signed 
with a red cross ; and afterwards, when he was full 
dead, taking him up with them, enclosed him in a 
leaden coffin, and hung him up on a tree in the 

* Vide MODERN PANORAMA, Vol. I. page 209. 



orchard in the Old Temple in London ; for, in a 
reverend awe of the Church, they durst not bury 
him, because he died excommunicated ; so fearful 
in those days was the sentence of excommunication. 
A violent invader he was of other men's lands and 
possessions, and therefore justly incurred the world's 
censure, and this doom of the Church : but I must 
leave him, where buried, or where not, God knows." 
The excommunication being afterwards taken off, 
he was privately buried. 

The consequence of this town was further ad- 
vanced by the founding of a Benedictine Priory 
here by Earl Geoffrey in the year 1 136, which was 
converted into an Abbey in 1190. It stood on the 
spot now occupied by Audley House ; and was sup- 
ported by considerable endowments, arising from 
estates and churches in various counties. At the 
time of the general suppression, its possessions 
were granted to the Lord Chancellor Audley, who 
soon afterwards obtained licence to enlarge his park, 
by inclosing 200 additional acres. The grant in- 
cluded the manor of Walden. Lord Braybrooke, 
the present proprietor, is a descendant from the 
Lord Chancellor Audley. 

Walden was made a corporate town, in the year 
1549, when its government was vested in twenty 
persons, 6ut of whom a treasurer, or chief officer, 
and two chamberlains, were annually chosen. These 
officers were, by charter of William the Third, 
changed into a mayor, twelve aldermen, a recorder, 
town clerk, &c. 

A notable tournament is recorded as having been 
held here in the year 1-252, "in which Roger de 
Leiburne encountered with Ernauld de Montenei, 
a valiant Knight, and unhappily run his lance into 
his throat under his helmet, it wanting a collar ; 
whereupon Montenei fell from his horse, and died 
instantly ; upon which it was supposed, by some, 
that he had left his lance without a socket on pur- 
posp, in revenge for a broken leg he had received 
from Montenei, in tilting with him at a former tour- 
nament." 

Walden Church, dedicated to the Holy Trinity, 
is a spacious and most elegant pile of English archi- 
tecture, chiefly of the age of the Henries, Seventh 
and Eighth ; in the reign of the latter of whom, the 
east end, and part of the south aisle of the chancel, 
were built by the Lord Chancellor Audley, who is 
interred in the vault beneath, with several of the 
Earls and Countesses of Suffolk. Walpole calls 
it one of the lightest and most beautiful parish 
churches in England. It was thoroughly repaired 
about fi ve-and-twenty years ago, at the expence of 
nearly 8000/. To this the late Lord Howard con- 
tributed 1000/. for repairing the roof of the nave, 
and about 1800/. more for the repairs of the middle 
and south chancels. In addition to these contribu- 
tions, his Lordship was a generous benefactor to 
the parish, particularly to the poor, to whose use 



he 



ESSEX. 



407 



he bequeathed the interest of a sufficient sum to 
clothe twelve of each sex annually for ever. His 
Lordship died in May 1797, at Audley End, and 
was buried with his ancestors in the family vault in 
this Church. The altar-piece is a painting by the 
Rev. Mr. Peters, from Corregio. The monument 
for Lord Audley stands in the south aisle. Numer- 
ous monumental inscriptions appear in different 
parts of this structure. 

Some Alms-Houses, founded in the reign of 
Edward the Sixth, stand at the south-west end of 
the town. Here is also a Free School of ancient 
foundation. Sir Thomas Smith, Secretary to Ed- 
ward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, who was a 
native of Walden, is supposed to have received the 
rudiments ot his education here. 

A curious reliquc of old English workmanship is 
preserved in this town. " It consists of a large 
oaken beam, eight feet six inches in length, and 
ouu foot thcee inches in breadth at the centre, beau- 
tifully carved in relief with the following devices. 
The figure of a ton is cut in a scroll between the 
syllables myd and dyl, and being read aitcr them, 
makes up the word Myddylton ; probably the name 
of the person who mice possessed the building ; and 
upon the side of the vessel is a single letter, seem- 
ingly an R, to denote his Christian name : the date 
of the year, also, 1387, in Arabian figures, is placed 
at two transverse angles of the same letter. It is 
observable, that all the letters, figures, and the 
bolt of the ton, are formed of the twigs of vines 
stripped of their leaves." 

The population of Walden, as returned under the 
act of 1811, wis 3403 ; the number of houses 686. 

On the green behind the Castle, a singular work 
is mentioned, by Dr. Stukeley, called the Maze, 
which he supposes to have been a British Cursus, 
or place f exercise for the soldiery. About half a 
mile from the Castle, on the western side, are the 
remains of an aiicient encampment, of an oblong 
form, called Pell-Ditches, or Repel-Ditches. 

WALTHAM.] The large irregular town of Wal- 
tham, or Waltham Holy Cross, lies 23 miles W. by 
S. from Chelmsford, and J2J N. by E. from Lon- 
don. It is situated on low ground near the river I 
Lea, which here forms a number of small islands, 
and is skirted by fruitful meadows, famous for the 
succulent and nourishing qualities of their grass. 

This spot was originally part of the Forest of 
Essex, and derived the appellation of Waltham j 
from the Saxon words Ham, a place, or hamlet ; | 
and Weald, woody ; the whole site having been 
anciently overgrown with trees. The addition of j 
Holy Cross arose from a certain miraculous cross j 
to which the Abbey, founded here by Earl Harold, 
afterwards King, was dedicated. In the time of 
Canute the (.Jreat, the then owner, Tovy, or Tovitis, 
standard-bearer to the monarch, attracted by the 
quantity of game which abounded 'm the Forest, 
founded here a village and a church ; placing three 
score and six dwellers ia the former; and in the 
6 



latter, two priests. Athelstan, his son, squander- 
ed his inheritance; and Waltham, reverting to the 
crown, was bestowed, by Edward the Confessor, 
on Earl Harold. The gift was, however, made 
conditionally, that Harold should build a monas- 
tery in the place, " where was a little Convent, 
'Subject to the Canons, and their rulers ;" and should 
furnish it with all necessaries, relics, dresses, and 
ornaments, " in memoriam mei, et conjugis me 
Eadithe." The Convent here mentioned, was the 
original foundation of Tovy. The same year (1062) 
in which the grant was dated, Harold re-founded 
or enlarged the building, and endowed it, as a Col- 
lege, for a Dean, and eleven secular Canons, of 
the order of St. Augustine. The Church was at 
the same time enriched with a number of relics, and 
many costly vessels. The College continued lo 
flourish till the reign of Henry the Second. That 
prince, in 1177, deputed Richard, Archbishop of 
Canterbury, who had discovered many irregulari- 
ties in this College, to accept the resignation of its 
inmates ; and having procured a charter of licence 
from Pope Alexander, he soon afterwards changed 
the old foundation of seculars into an Abbey of re- 
gular Canons, of the same order, augmenting the 
number to twenty-four, and proportionally in- 
creasing their revenues. Additions were probably- 
made at this time, both to the monastery and the 
church, and the whole was re-dedicated to the afore- 
said Holy Cross, and St. Laurence. The first 
Abbot was Walter de Gaunt, who was indulged by 
the Pope, in 1101, with the use of the pontificals, 
and exempted from episcopal jurisdiction ; the lat- 
ter privilege being, in fact, a confirmation of Henry's 
charter, which has descended in part to modern 
times, Waltham being still exempted from the Arch- 
deacon's visitation. Richard the First confirmed 
all the former grants, and made further gifts to the 
monastery ; and Henry tlie Third not only aug- 
mented its privileges, but bestowed on it many rich 
gifts. From his time it became so distinguished, 
as to rank with the most opulent in the kingdom. 
This Monarch frequently made the Abbey his place 
of residence; and to provide, in some measure, for 
the increased consumption thus occasioned, he 
granted to the inhabitants of Waltham, the privi- 
lege of holding a weekly market, and a seven dayg 
fair annually : the t'.iir is now only held on the third 
and fourteenth of May. In this reign, great dis- 
putes took place between the monastery and the 
townsmen, respecting the right of the former to de- 
pasture cattle on the adjoining grounds ; and seve- 
ral outrages were committed by the inhabitants. 
These were at first overlooked ; but the Abbot at 
length resolved to seek redress. The towns-people 
dreading the consequences of their rashness, solicit- 
ed a love-day, or reconciliation, and engaged to 
make good all damages ; but, while the Abbot and 
Convent were deliberating on the proposal, they 
hastened to the King, and laid the blame of all that 
had happened on the monks. This proceeding was, 

the- 



408 



ESSEX. 



the signal for direct hostility. The Abbot denounced 
sentence of excommunication ; the people flew for 
redress to the common law. At length the matter 
came to a hearing before the King's judges, when 
the townsmen being proved the aggressors, were 
amerced in a fine of twenty marks; but, on their 
submission, the fine was remitted ; and the Abbot, 
in the end, assoyled them from the excommunica- 
tion. This contention was no sooner over, than 
another commenced between the Abbot and the 
Lord of the neighbouring manor of Cheshut, res- 
pecting some land in the occupation of the former, 
which was claimed as parcel of the Cheshut manor. 
This affair was frequently renewed, and continued 
a subject of dispute till the dissolution. During 
these altercations, the Monks were charged by their 
enemies with receiving much " affectionate" conso- 
lation from the holy sisters in the nunnery at Ches- 
hnt. Fuller, in his Church History, relates, that 
Sir Henry Colt, of Nether Hall, who was a great 
favourite with Henry the Eighth for his merry con- 
ceits, went late one night to Waltham Abbey, where 
being informed, by his spies, that some of the Monks 
were indulging in female converse at Cheshut Nun- 
nery, he determined to intercept their return. With 
this intent, he had a buck-stall pitched in the nar- 
rowest part of the meadow, or marsh, which they 
had to cross in their way home ; and the Monks 
getting into it in the dark, were inclosed by his ser- 
vants. The next morning, Sir Henry presented 
them to the King, who heartily laughing, declared, 
that, " he had often seen sweeter, but never fatter 
venison." 

The last event of importance recorded of Waltham 
Abbey, prior to the dissolution, is the accidental 
meeting between Thomas Cranmer, afterwards 
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the prelates Fox 
and Gardiner, which ended so remarkably in the 
advancement of the former. This Abbey was dis- 
solved in 1539; when its annual revenues were 
valued, according to Speed, at 1079/. 12s. \d. The 
last Abbot, Robert Fuller, may be reckoned among 
the literati belonging to this monastery. From his 
history, the lair manuscript of which was in the pos- 
session of the Earl of Carlisle, Fuller, his namesake 
afterwards curate of the same Church, professes 
t faithfully to have compiled almost all the materials 
of his account of Waltham Abbey, as given at the 
end of his " Church History." The site of the 
Abbey was granted, for thirty-one years, to Sir 
Anthony Denny, who dying about the year 1548 
his widow bought the reversion in fee from the 
crown. Sir Edward Denny, grandchild to Sir 
Anthony, created Earl of Norwich by Charles tb< 
First, was the next possessor : from him it passed 
by the marriage of his daughter, to the celebratet 
James Hay, Earl of Carlisle : it has since com 
into the possession of the family of Sir Willian 
Wake, Bart. The Abbey House is said to have 
been a very extensive building ; but has long beei 



wholly demolished. Another large mansion, erect- 
ed in its place, was, in 1770, sold to James Bar- 
wick, Esq. who soon afterwards had it pulled down, 
and let the site, and surrounding ground, to a gar- 
lener : within them is a tulip tree, reported to be the 
argest in the kingdom. 

Some ruinous walls, a gateway into the Abbey- 

rard, a bridge which leads to it, an arched vault, 

nd the Church, are the only vestiges of the ancient 

magnificence of Waltham Abbey. The gateway is 

f a much later style of architecture than the Church. 

Adjoining is the Porter's lodge, and a piece of ground 

ailed Homeland, as Peter-pence were termed 

Elomescot. On this spot King Henry the Eighth is 

eported to have had a small house, to which he 

requently retired for his private enjoyments. 

The Abbey Church covered an extensive plot of 
ground. Some idea may be formed of its extent from 
% no wing the situation of Harold's tomb, which stood 
about 120 feet east from the termination of the 
present building, in what was then probably the 
east end of the choir, or rather some chapel be- 
yond it. The intersection of the transept is still 
visible : above this rose the ancient tower, which 
contained a ring of five great tuneable bells, after- 
wards purchased by the parish, of the King's com- 
missioners. Part of this tower falling through 
decay, the remainder was blown up by under- 
miners, and the whole choir, the tower, transept, 
and the east chapel, were demolished, so that no- 
thing was left standing but the west end, which has 
since been fitted up, and made parochial. This 
venerable relic contains several interesting and 
curious specimens of the Norman style of archi- 
tecture. The roof is of timber, modern, and but 
little ornamented. At the west -end is a heavy 
square tower, having the date 1558. It rises to 
the height of eighty-six feet. The original charge 
of building, in 1558, independent of materials, was 
33s. 4.d. per foot, for the first fiity-tbree feet, and 
40s. per foot, for the remainder ; which ex,pence 
was defrayed by the parishioners from their stock 
in the church box ; a fund which had accumulated 
from various sources, such as the sale of stone, lead, 
and timber, from the monastic buildings, &c. 

From the south side of the Church projects a 
Chapel, formerly our Lady's, now a school room, 
under which is a beautiful arched charnel-house, or 
crypt ; " the fairest," says Fuller, " that evr I 
saw." This was once a place of worship, having 
its priest, &c. and adorned with its altar and read- 
ing-desk, the latter of which was covered with 
plates of silver. 

The tomb of Harold was plain, but of rich grey 
marble ; and had on it a sort of cross tteury, 
"much descanted on by art :" it was supported by 
pillarets, one pedestal of which Fuller mentions 
to have been in his possession at the time of his 
writing his History. The epitaph is said to have 
been only these two expressive words, Harold 

infclix ; 



ESSEX. 



409 



infelix ;* but Wcever gives half a dozen lines of 
barbarous Latin, which are probably genuine, as 
they are preserved in a very ancient manuscript 
once belonging to the Abbey. In the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth, a gardener belonging to Sir Ed- 
ward Denny, discovered, in digging, a large stone 
coffin, which, from the spot where it lay, was sup- 
posed to contain the royal corpse : the remains, on 
being touched, mouldered into dust. Some years 
ago, a second coffin was found near the same place, 
containing un entire skeleton enclosed in lead, 
which conjecture has identified as one of the bro- 
thers of Harold. 

The various streams of the river Lea, in the 
neighbourhood of Waltham, are traditionally said 
to how in the same channels which the Great Alfred 
made to divert the current, when he drew off the 
water, and left the Danisli fleet on shore. The 
number of houses, in this parish, which includes 
the hamlets of Holyfield, Sewardstone, and Up- 
shire, as returned under the act of 181 ly was 719 ; 
of inhabitants, 3385. Some of the inhabitants de- 
rive employment from the manufacture of printed 
linens, and the making of pins. On ona of the 
branches of the Lea, near the town, are some gun- 
powder mills, in (he occupation of government. 
Among the natives of this parish, are recorded Ro- 
ger de Waltham, Canon of St. Paul's, a writer in 
the 13th century ; and John de Waltham, keeper of 
the privy seal to Richard the Second. 

WALTHAM, GREAT.] In the parish of Great (or 
Much) Waltham, 4| miles N. toy W. from Chelms- 
ford, is Langleys, the seat and manor of John Jol- 
lifte Tuffnell, Esq. It was formerly called Mar- 
shalls, from a family of that name, which re- 
sided here from the time of King John, till the 
reign of Edward the Third, when it passed to the 
Langleys, from whom the present owner is descend- 
ed. The mansion was built by the late Samuel Tuf- 
neil, Esq. It is a handsome building, standing on 
a pleasant eminence, bounded by the Chelmer on 
the north, and by a small rivulet on the south. The 
park and grounds are laid out with considerable 
taste. 

WALTHAMSTOW.] The village of Walthamstow, 
on the borders of Epping Forest, is 6j miles N. E. 
by N. from St. Paul's Cathedral. In the village, 
ami its neighbourhood, are many seats belonging to 
the citizens of London. The parish, which is very 
extensive, consists of three manors ; viz. the manor 
of the rectory, which, before the Dissolution, be- 
longed to the monastery of the Holy Trinity, near 
Aldgate, in the city of London ; Walthamstow- 



* This unfortunate Prince offered up his vows ami prayers 
for victory in Waltliam Church, previously to his engagement 
with the Norman invader; in which he was slain, on the Hlh 
of October, 1066. His body, by Ihe mediation of his mother 
Githa, and two religious men of this Abbey, called Oregod, 
and Ailrtc, being obtained of the Conqueror, (who for some 
time denied it burial, affirming that it was not fit for him whose 
ambition had caused so many funerals,) was, with the bodies of 

VOL. II. NO. 74. 



Frances - T and Walthamstow-Tony. This, with all 
the neighbouring forest, was part of the estate of 
Harold. From the architecture of the Church, it 
appears to have been first built soon after the mo- 
nastery of the Holy Trinity, in 1112, and probably 
by the same foundress, Matilda, the wife of Henry 
the First ; but it has had so many additional repairs, 
that little remains of the ancient edifice are to be 
seen. It is a large Gothic structure, the aisles of 
which are of u later date, the north one having beeu 
built about the beginning of the reign of Henry the- 
Eighth, by George Monox, Lord Mayor of Lon- 
don, who also built alms-houses for 13 poor people. 
The south aisle is called Thorn's, from one Thorn, 
a merchant-taylor in London, and built by him much 
about the same time as the other. It has a square 
tower, with a clock ; and a set of eight bells, hung 
in 1778. The inside of the Church is neat and well 
contrived for Divine service ; two new gallerie* 
were added in the year 1807. There are considered 
to be more monuments in this Church, than in any 
one of its size, near London. Some of them, par- 
ticularly one to the memory of Dr. Peirce, Bishop 
of Bath and Wells, and another to Sir Thomas 
Stanley, son of the Earl of Derby are ancient. 
Near the altar, on the south side, are two monuments 
with Latin inscriptions, curiously cut in marble, to 
the memory of some of the Conyers family, who 
were Lords of the manor of Low Hall, or Waltham- 
stow -Frances. Along the walls, are many monu- 
ments ; but they are all eclipsed by one erected by 
Sigismund TrafFord, Esq. where both he and his 
Lady are interred. This monument is placed at the 
west end, and on the left band going in near the 
porch : it is entirely of fine white marble, curiously 
cut and finely polished. On the pedestal, are two 
figures in mournful attitudes, supporting a mauso- 
leum, and above are angels in the shape of children. 

Walthamstow Church is built on an eminence, and 
yet it sometimes happens, that in opening of vaults,, 
or digging of graves, considerable quantities of wa- 
ter are thrown out before the interments can take 
place. 

WANSTEAD.] The village of Wanstead is eight 
miles N. E. from St. Paul's Cathedral. The manor 
was granted by Ali'ric to the Church of Westmin- 
ster, and confirmed by Edward the Confessor ; but 
before the end of that monarch's reign, it became, 
probably by exchange, the property of the Church, 
of St. Paul, and was afterwards appropriated to the 
Bishop of London ; under whom, at the time of the 
Domesday Survey, it was held by Ralph Fitz- 
Brien. It afterwards passed through various pos- 

liis two brothers, Girth and Leofwin, slain at the same lime, 
brought hither attended by a small dejected remainder of the 
English nobility, and with great lamentation, solemnly interred. 
Harold's two brothers lost their lives manfully fighting under his 
banner, " which was brondet (saith Robert of Gloucester) with 
sygurof a man fyghting biset al about wyth gold and preciose 
stons, which bantr after the bataile, Due William sent to the 
Pope in tokne of the victory." 

5. L sessors, 



410 



ESSEX. 



Eessors, to Sir John Heron, whose son, Sir Giles 
Heron, being attainted, his estates were seized by 
the crown ; and Wanstead was granted, by Edward 
the Sixth, to Robert, Lord Ricli ; who made it his 
country residence, and is supposed to have rebuilt 
the manor-house, then called Naked Hall Hawe. 
His son sold it to Robert, Earl of Leicester, who 
enlarged and greatly improved the mansion ; and in 
May, 1578, entertained Queen Elizabeth in it for 
several days : here, also, the same year, in Septem- 
ber, he solemnised his marriage with the Countess 
of Essex. On the Earl's decease, in 1588,* Wan- 
stead became the property of the Countess, his 
widow ; and, by some family conveyances, it subse- 
quently became vested in Charles Blount, Earl of 
Devonshire, on whose death, in 1606, it escheated 
to the crown. It was afterwards the property of 
George, Marquis of Buckingham ; of whom, in 
J619, it was purchased by Sir Henry Mildmay; 
whose descendant, Sir William Mildmay, conveyed 
it to Sir Josiah Child, whose son, Sir Richard, 
afterwards created Earl Tylney, erected the present 
Waustead House, in 1715, near the site of the an- 
cient mansion. His grandson, the late Earl Tyl- 
ney, dying without issue, in 1784, this manor, with 
. other large estates, devolved upon his nephew, Sir 
James Tylney Long, Bart, of Draycot, in Wilt 
shire ; whose only son, James, succeeded to his title 
and inheritance, in 1794 ; but being then a minor, 
his seat at Wanstead was let, and was in the occu- 
pation of the Prince de Conde. Sir James dying at 
a very early age, before he had attained majority, 
the estate devolved to his sister, who, about the year 
1812, or 1813, married Mr. Wellesley Pole, nephew 
to the Duke of Wellington, who, in addition to his 
former plurality of names, has taken that of Long. 

Wanstead House, now occupied by R. Long Pole 
Wellesley, Esq. and his Lady, is a large and magni- 
ficent structure, standing in an extensive park, and 
surrounded with gardens and pleasure grounds. The 
principal front is 260 feet in length ; the entrance is 
in the centre, beneath a grand portico of six Corin- 
thian columns ; having a flight of steps on each side, 
and in the tympanum, the arms of the Tylney family, 
finely sculptured. The garden front has a pedi- 
ment, enriched with a bas-relief, and supported by 
six three-quarter columns. The whole building is 
cased with Portland stone : its depth is between 70 
and 80 feet. It consists of two stories ; the upper- 
most contains the ball-room, state bed-chambers, 
and other principal apartments. Over the door 
leading into the great hall, is a medallion of Colin 
Campbell, the architect ; who acquired great repu- 
tation from the science and judgment displayed by 
him, in the construction of this edifice. The great 

* .The Earl, at his death, was much involved in debt; and 
from an inventory and estimate of his property, it appears, that 
the furniture, library, horses, &c. at Wanstead, were valued at 
1 19/. 6$. 6d. The pictures, among which were three portraits 
>of Henry the Eighth, the Queens Mary and Elizabeth, Lady 
Casimere, Lady Bich, and 36 others not particularised, were 

8 



] hall, 51 feet by 36, is decorated in all the splendour 
of the last age. The cieling, gilded and painted by 
Kent, displays personifications of Morning, Noon, 
Evening, and Night. The walls are ornamented 
with paintings from the Roman History, by Cassali : 
they represent Coriolanns, and his mother ; Por- 
senna ; and Pompey's lat interview with his family. 
Here, also, is a portrait of Kent, who painted seve- 
ral ceilings at Wanstead House, besides that of the 
hall ; and two large statues, brought from the ruins 
of Herculaneum ; one of Doraitian ; the other of 
Livia, wife to Agrippa. Several suites of rooms 
extend from each side this apartment ; among them 
is a ball-room, a saloon, and four spacious and well 
proportioned state bed-chambers. The ball-room, 
75 feet by 27, is magnificently fitted up, in Ihe taste 
of the last century ; the furniture being richly em- 
bossed and gilt, and the walls hung with tapestry. 
The latter is well executed, and represents the story 
of Telemachus, and the battles of Alexander, in 
two compartments. Over the chimney, is a fine 
painting of Portia, the wife of Brutus, by Schalken. 
The saloon, 30 feet square, is highly embellished, 
and contains several statues, and a picture of Pan- 
dora, by Nollikens, father of the sculptor of that 
name. In the bed-rooms are various paintings ; 
among them is St. Jolm, and the Virgin, by Ra- 
phael; Apollo and Narcissus ; Cupid, by Corregio ; 
Venus Sleeping; Venus and Adonis; Cupid and 
Psyche ; Diana ami E /dymion ; and several views.. 
The principal dining-room, 40 feet by 27, is embel- 
lished with paintings, by Cassali ; representing So- 
phonisba taking poison ; the continence of Scipio ; 
and Alexander directing Apelles to paint Cam- 
pespe : some good landscapes, and views of ruins, 
are alse in this apartment. Various paintings are 
distributed through the other rooms ; the best are, 
St. Francis, and a Holy Family, by Guido ; Hero- 
dias, with the Head of St. John Baptist, supposed 
by Titian ; some Flower Pieces, by Baptiste ; Lord 
Chief Justice Glynne, and his family, by Lely ; and 
Sir Josiah Child. On the ceiling of one of the 
drawing-rooms, is a painting of Jupiter and Se-' 
mcle ; and in the centre of the chiinriey-pieee, is 
the family crest, a flying eagle with a snake; in white 
marble. 

The'prospects from several of the apartments are 
extremely beautiful, and include a very extensive 
part of the surrounding country. From the en- 
trance to the park, on the west, the road to the 
house is skirted by rows of fine elms, and winds 
round a circular piece of water, extending consider- 
ably beyond each extremity of the mansion ; which, 
from this approach, has an aspect of much grandeur. 
The gardens and pleasure-grounds were laid out by 

valued at \\l. \3s.4d. The library, consisting only of an old 
Bible, the Acts and Monuments, old Snd torn, seven Psalters, 
and a Service Book, was estimated at ]3s. Sd. The horses were 
valued at 3161, Os. Sd. The bill for the Earl's funeral, amount- 
ed to the enormous sum (in that age) of 4000^. 

Sir 



"'*>. S 




ESSEX. 



ill 



Sir Richard Child. Opposite the back front is an 
easy ascent, through a pleasant vista, to the river 
Roding, which is formed into canals, and has near 
it, a curious grotto, constructed by the second Earl 
Tylney, at an expcnce of 2000/. independent of its 
costly materials. The slopes or elevated grounds 
bordering the river, are beautifully planted. On 
the south side of the park, nearly adjoining the 
grounds at Aldersbfook, a tessellated pavement was 
discovered, in 17<35. Its extent, from north to 
south, was about 20 feet ; and from east to west, 
about 16. A small bras-; coin of the Emperor Va- 
lens, a silver coin, and several large pieces of Ro- 
man brick, were also found. Mr. Lethieullier sup- 
posed it to have been the pavement of a banqueting- 
room, belonging to a Roman villa. Further to the 
south, ruins of brick foundations have been met 
with ; and fragments of urns, patera?, Roman coins, 
&c. 

The parish Church was repaired and enlarged in 
the early part of the last century, principally at the 
expence of the first Earl of Tylney ; but being still 
found small and incommodious, it was resolved to 
pull it down, and build a new Church on a larger scale, 
nearly adjoining the old site. The first stone of the 
present structure was laid on the 13th of July, 
1787 ; and it -was finished and consecrated in 1790. 
" The building is of brick, cased with Portland 
stone, and having a portico of the Doric order : at 
the west end is a cupola, supported by eight Ionic 
columns. The inside is extremely neat and elegant, 
without any unnecessary embellishment : it consists 
of a chancel, nave, and two aisles, separated by co- 
lumns of the Corinthian order. The pavement 
(which is remarkable for its beauty and neatness) is 
of stone, brought from Painswick, in Gloucester- 
shire. In the chancel is a beautiful window of 
stained glass, by Egiuton, of Birmingham, repre- 
senting our Saviour bearing the cross, from the 
picture at Magdalen College, Oxford. In the east 
window of the north aisle, are the royal arms ; in 
the south aisle, those of the late Sir J. T. Long, 
Bart. In the chancel is a superb monument, with 
the effigies of the deceased in white marble, to the 
memory of Sir Josiuh Child, Bart, who died in the 
year 1099." 

WEALD HALL.] In the parish of South Weald, 
two miles W. from Brentwood, stands Weald Hall, 
the scat of Christopher Towers, Esq. It is a 
handsome building, situated in a large park, in 
which is a prospect house, formed like an embattled 
tower, commanding an extensive and interesting 
view. The grounds and gardens are extremely 
pleasant. 

WHALKBOMJ.] On the side of the high road, near 
Chadwell Street, is a very large whalebone, said to 
have been taken from a whale caught in the Thames, 
and fixed in its present situation in memory of Oli- 
ver Cromwell; it having been taken the same year 
in which he died. Its original length was twenty- 
eight feet. 



WHITLEY.] In the parish of Birdbrook, and al- 
most centric-ally situated between Birdbrook, Ba- 
thorne End, and Ridgwell, stands Whitley, the 
property and residence of Thomas Walford, Esq. 
who has greatly embellished and improved the 
estate by various ornamental plantations. A screen 
of firs and forest trees, combined with sycamores, 
chesnuts, larches, &c. extends from the house to a. 
small hill, planted with cedars, cypresses, and lau- 
rels. " The prospect hence, commanding some fine 
scenery, is enlivened by the grand embattled Castle 
of Hedingham, and the Churches of Toppesfield, 
Ridgwell, and Birdbrook. At a short distance is a 
wood of about seven acres, laid out in pleasant 
walks, and ornamented with various seats and build- 
ings. One of them, called the hermitage, agreeably 
situated amongst the trees, consists of three circular 
apartments. It is built with wrag-stone, timber, 
and the bark of trees : the whole covered with 
thatch, paved with pebbles and tiles, and rusticated 
with moss, &c. Several other rural and ornamen- 
tal scenes and objects are met with in these grounds. 
The flower-garden comprises a rich and choice as- 
semblage of exotic shrubs and flowers, besides ft 
collection of rare English plants : this spot is deco- 
rated with a building, named the Temple of Flora, 
and a summer-house, fancifully ornamented with, 
trellis-work." The estate of Whitby was purchas- 
ed, by the late Thomas Walford, M. D. of Finch- 
infield, in 1657. 

WICKHAM, BISHOP'S.] Bishop's Wickham, so 
called from the Bishops of London, to whose See 
it has belonged from time immemorial, having had a 
residence and park here, is three miles S. by E. 
from Witham. The park was inclosed in the year 
1735. Of the ancient manor-house there are no 
remains. The Church is nearly a mile west from 
the village. 

WILLINGEHALL.] The adjacent parishes of Wil- 
[ingehall-Doe, or I)e Ou, and Willingehall-Spain, 
or De Ispania, lie about 4-| miles N. E. from Chip- 
ping Ongar. The two Churches are in the same 
Church -yard. 

In Willingehall-Doe parish, stands Warden's 
Hall, a spacious brick edifice, the seat of William 
Mills, Esq. whose father obtained it in marriage 
with Selina, daughter of Sir John Salter, Knt. and 
Lord Mayor of London, in 1740. The grounds are 
furnished with various fish-ponds, &c. 

WITHAM.] The neat and respectable little mar- 
ket-town of Witham, 8} miles N. E. from Chelms- 
ford, and 37| N.E. by E. from London, is tradi- 
tionally reputed to have been built by Edward the 
Elder ; though it is probable that it was only re- 
stored by that sovereign, at least as far as regards 
the part situated on Cheping Hill, round the Church, 
which stands about half a mile north-west from the 
other part of the town. On this eminence, near the 
south side of the Church, are considerable remains 
of a circular camp, defended by a double vallum, 
almost levelled within on the south side, but very 



412 



ESSEX. 



plain on the south-west, where the present road 
runs along the outer banks. From this camp, and 
the considerable quantity of Roman bricks, worked 
up in the body and towers of the Church, Gough 
regards Witham as the Canonium of Antoninus ; 
an opinion which is greatly strengthened by two 
coins of the Emperor Valens and Gratian having 
been found in levelling the fortifications. The ma- 
nor of Witham was anciently possessed by Earl 
Harold, and afterwards by Eustace, Earl of Bou- 
logne, who married Goda, sister to Edward the 
Confessor. King Stephen bestowed it on the 
Knights Templars ; from whom it. passed to the 
Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem. 
In the time of Earl Eustace, it was called the ho- 
nour of Bonanda ; and was one of the four ancient 
honours which existed in this kingdom. The privi- 
lege of holding a market is said to have been first 
granted to Witham by Richard the First ; but this 
is evidently a mistake, as it was then held on Che- 
ping Hill, which proves that it had a market in the 
Saxon times. 

In Witham Church is a large tomb, erected in the 
reign of Elizabeth, to the memory of Judge Heath- 
cote, and his Lady. The chief trade of the town 
arises from the passage of travellers and carriers ; 
and in the summer season, from the company who 
attend to drink the chalybeate waters, at Witham 
Spa, about three-quarters of a mile from the town. 
An essay, upon the medicinal properties of this 
spring, was published by Dr. Taverner, a physi- 
cian, who long practised at Witham, in the year 
1737 ; hut it does not appear that the sanguine ex- 
pectations which were then entertained, of the grow- 
ing importance of the town, in consequence of the 
discovery, have been realised. The population of 
Witham, according to the last returns, was 2352 : 
the number of houses, 466. 

The seat of Thomas Kynaston, Esq. which for- 
Bflerly belonged to the late Earl of Abercorn, stands 
near the entrance of the town, from Colchester. It 
was here that her present Majesty, on her arrival 
from Germany, became the guest of the Earl of 
Abercorn. 

WIVENHOE.] The respectableandpopulous village 
of Wivenhoe, 3j miles S.E. by S. from Colchester, 
occupies the acclivity and summit of a pleasant emi- 
nence, on the north side of the Colne, of which it 
commands a fine prospect down to Mersey Island. 
At the time of the Domesday Survey, this manor, 
which has since passed through several families, 
was possessed by Robert Gernon, and became parcel 
of his barony of Stansted-Montfitchet. Jt passed, 
by marriage, to John de Vere, twelfth Earl of Ox- 
ford, of that name ; his estates being confiscated by 
Edward the Fourth, Wivenhoe was granted by the 
King, to his brother, afterwards Richard the Third. 
Henry the Seventh restored the De Veres to their 
honours and inheritance ; and this manor continued 
in their possession till the prodigality of Edward, 
the 17th Earl, occasioned it to be sold to Roger 



Townsend, Esq. who was knighted at sea, for his 
bravery in the engagement with the Spanish Ar- 
mada. From the Townsends, it passed, by sale, 
about the period of the Restoration, to Nicholas 
Corsellis, Esq. whose descendants are the present 
owners. 

Wivenhoe Hall is pleasantly situated north-west 

from the village : when in possession of the Earls 

of Oxford, it was a large and elegant building, 

j having a fine tower gateway of considerable height, 

and serving for a sea mark. 

Wix.] At Wix, Wickes, or Wykes, formerly 
Sopwicke, 4| miles S.E. by E. from Mauningtrec, 
was a Nunnery of the Benedictine order, founded 
in the reign of Henry the First. This was sup- 
pressed under the Pope's bull, granted to Cardinal 
Wolsey, and its revenues appropriated towards the 
support of the College, founded by Wolsey, at Ox- 
ford. After Wolsey's fall, the site of the Nunnery 
was first granted, by Henry the Eighth, to Sir 
Adam Fortescue, and again to Edward Gilbert, 
Esq. with licence to alienate it to the Veseys, from 
whom it has passed, through various families. No 
parts of the Nunnery are now to be traced. 

WoonroRu.] TheJargeand respectable village of 
Woodford, 8t miles N.E. byN. from St. Paul's Ca- 
thedral, is inhabited, principally, by merchants and 
tradesmen of the metropolis. The manor was the 
property of Sir James Tylney Long, Bart. The 
custom of the manor is that called Borough En- 
glish, by which the younger son inherits. In the 
Church-yard, is a remarkable yew tree ; the girth 
of which, at three feet from the ground, is 11 feet 
9 inches ; at 4i feet from the ground, 14 feet, 3 
inches : the spread of its boughs forms a circumfer- 
ence of about 180 feet. Here also, is a loi'ty marble 
column of the Corinthian order, to the memory of 
" the ancient and knightly family of Godfrey, which 
flourished many years in the county of Kent." The 
celebrated Sir Edmuudbury Godfrey was of this 
family. 

The seat and manor of Higham Hills, in this 
parish, belong to John Harman, Esq. who pur- 
chased them about 20, or 25 years ago, of William 
Hornby, Esq. formerly Governor of Bombay. The 
house, a square brick building with wings, is seated 
on a high ridge of ground, which slopes to the east 
and to the west : in both these directions the pros- 
pects are extensive, diversified, and beautiful. 'On 
the north-west the eye is directed over a finely 
wooded country into Hertfordshire ; to the west and 
south-west are the hills of Highgate, and the spires 
of the metropolis. The east front commands a rich 
woodland prospect over parts of Hainault Ferest, 
the Vale of the Thames, &c. which are shut in by a 
ridge of the Kent hills. On the western side of the 
house is a fine park, bounded by parts of Epping 
Forest to the north and south, and by a piece of 
water at the bottom. The whole is encompassed by 
a winding walk, ornamented with numerous iudige - 
nous and exotic trees aud shrubs. 

The 



ESSEX. 



413 



The late Richard Warner, Esq. lived in an old 
mansion called Hearts, at Woodford Row. This 
gentleman planted a botanical garden here, and was 
very successful in the culture of rare exotics. The 
Phnitae Woodfordienses, written by him, and pri- 
va'tely circulated, was the result of annual herbori- 
zations in this neighbourhood. The house was 
built in the year J617, by Sir Humphrey Hand tort li, 
Master of the Wardrobe to James the B'irst; who is 
said to have been frequently entertained here when 
hunting in the forest. Jervoise Clark Jervoiie, 
Esq. obtained it by his marriage with Mr. Warner's 
niece. 

Near Woodford Bridge, was Sir James Wright's 
Artificial Slate Manufactory, which was conducted 
upon a very extensive scale, under the protection of 
letters-patent ; but the slates not proving durable, 
the manufacture has been discontinued. 

WHITTLE.] Writtle, formerly a market-town, is 
2f miles W. by S. from Chelmsford, the rising im- 
portance of which long since deprived it of its trade. 
Here some antiquaries have placed the Ciesnroma- 
gus of tiie Itinerary ; but there is no evidence of its 
ever having been a Roman station. Near the vil- 
lage is a square plot of ground, inclosed by a deep 
in int, supposed to have been the site of a palace, 
recorded, in Stowe's Annals, to have been erected 
by K.ng John, about the year 1211 : some of the 
foundations were dug up about 50 years ago. 

Writtle Church is an ancient and spacious building, 
which appears to have been given to the monks of 
Bermondsey, in Surrey, by King Stephen. In 1203, 
it was granted to the English hospital of the Holy 
Ghost, at Rome, by King John ; but its possessions 
were afterwards seized by the crown, as belonging to 
an alien Priory, and, in 1359, betowed on the war- 
den and fellows of New College, Oxford, through 
the interest of its founder, Wyckham, Biahop of 
Winchester : it is still a peculiar jurisdiction belong- 
ing to that College. Within the Church are several 
elaborate monuments, to the memory of families who 
have resided in this parish, the circumference of 
which is estimated at 5-2 miles. Among them, is an 
elegant tomb to the memory of Sir John Comyns, 
Knt. Chief Barou of the Exchequer, who erected 
the large mansion called Highlands, near Chelms- 
ford, now occupied by Cornelius H. Kortright, Esq. 
On the tomb is a bust of this able and upright 
Judge, in- his Baron's robes ; and, engraven on an 
entablature of grey marble, his character, which 
concludes with the following lines from Horace, 
most happily selected : 



* Oh, where shall Faith, of soul sincere; 
Of Justice pure, the sister fair ; 
And Modesty, unspotted maid ; 
And Truth, in artlris guise array'd ; 
Among the race of human kind, 
A m.iii-li lor tin Justinian tiiui t 

f- Writtle was the birth p'ace of the < ele orated John Baetwick, 
M.I). He wa< b'T i in the year 1593, and educated at Eman- 
YOL. ii. NO. 75. 



>- Cui pudor et Justiti* soror 

Incorrupt;! fides, nudaque vetilas, 
Quaudo ullum invenient parum.* 

The extensive Lordship of Writtle, from which 
at different times, no fewer than nine manors have 
been separated, belonged to Earl Harold. In the 
reign of Henry the Third, it was in tiie possession 
of Philip de Athene, and afterwards of William 
Long-Espee, Earl of Salisbury. From him it 
passed, through various families, to Thomas of 
Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester ; after whose un- 
timely fate, in 1397, it was obtained by the Earl of 
Stafford, whose descendants continued possessors 
till the decapitation of Edward, Earl of Stafford, in 
1521. Queen Mary, in 1553, granted Writtle, with 
other manors, to Sir William Petre, Knt. by whose 
issue it is still enjoyed. f 

About four miles north-east from Writtle Church, 
in the middle of a wood called Highwood Quarter, 
was formerly a hermitage, founded by one Robert, 
a monk, in the time of King Stephen. Soon after 
the Dissolution, its possessions were alienated to Sir 
William Petre, Knt. 

YELDHAM.] Great, or Nether Yeldham, is three 
miles N.W. and Little, or Upper Yeldham, 2 
miles N. by W. from Castle-Hedingham. The for- 
mer is an extensive and well cultivated, though 
thinly peopled parish. Besides the arable, meadow, 
and pasture land, it contains some fine timber, and 
some flourishing plantations of hops. Near the 
Church, is a remarkable ancient oak, the trunk of 
which is upwards of 27 feet in circumference. The 
Church is a strong stone building, supposed to have 
been erected about the time of Edward the Third : 
it is pleasantly situated on a hill, and is ornamented 
with a neat altar-piece, and some painted glass, put 
up about HO years ago. Here is a handsome monu- 
ment to the memory of the Dowager Lady Vis- 
countess Bateman, daughter to Charles, Earl of 
Sunderland, who died in February, 1769. Within 
a little distance of the Church is a house, now serv- 
ing for a school, anciently used for dressing a dinner 
when any of the poor inhabitants were married. 

AURJCULTURE, SOIL, &c.] It is observable, that 
almost every species of soil is to be found within the 
limits of Essex, from the most stubborn to the mild- 
est loam. The north-west side of the county is 
characterised by a chalky substratum ; but the east 
and south sides abound with marshy and boggy 
land, having abundance of gravel intermixed. 
From tin's variety of soil, it is totally impossible to 
preserve one uniform system of farming : the moat 



nuel College, Cambridge, hut obtained his degrees at the Uni- 
versity of Padua. His writings incurred (lie displeasure of the 
Star Chamber, by whose decision he was deprived ot his ears In 
the pillory, and sentenced to perpetual imprisonment, in St. 
Mary's Castle, in the Isie of Sully. In 1640, he was released 
by order of Parliament, and his sufferings compensated by a 
grant of 5000/. from the estates of the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury. He died about ten years afterward* 

5 M established 



414 



ESSEX. 



established and prevailing mode is described as fol- 
loivs, by Messrs. Griggs, in their ' General View of 
the Agriculture of Essex :' " In the eastern part, 
the laud is chiefly of a strong good staple, and, ex- 
cepting the marshes, and here and there a small 
portion of meadow, is under the plough, and pro- 
dtices very considerable returns of every sort of grain 
and pulse. The most approved mode of treating 
the heavy land here, as in every other part of the 
country, is to winter fallow it every third or fourth, 
and, in some parts, every second or third year ; 
after which, in the eastern parts, oats or barley are 
sown, ami the land laid down with clover, trefoil, 
and rye-grass ; and having lain one year, is again 
broken up soon after Michaelmas, and wheat is 
sown ; after which, if the land is clean, and in good 
condition, the farmer takes a crop of beans, and then 
fallows again. The next rotation frequently is wheat, 
beans well hoed, and then wheat again. On the 
lighter lands are sown, first, turnips, for which a 
fallow is always made, and the land then manured. 
Barley, sown with clover, &c. which is fed off 
the ensuing year, succeeds the crop of turnips ; 
then wheat upon the clover lay ; and after that, peas : 
but where the clover fails, (a circumstance not un- 
usual,) the land is considered unfit for wheat, and 
peas are sown in its stead. Towards the middle of 
Essex, and the northern part bordering upon Suf- 
folk, the soil varies considerably ; some being light, 
with chalky clay, or gravelly sand, at a foot or a 
foot and a half below the surface ; other parts are 
moist and binding, affording a quick vegetation, and 
requiring constant attention in the summer months, 
to prevent it exhausting itself by a spontaneous pro- 
duce. The plough is seen to occupy a large part of 
this district, as little more meadow or old pasture 
grounds are found, than will supply hay and feed 
for the horses on the farms, and feed for a few cows 
kept for the purpose of suckling, and dry cattle and 
sheep, which are principally bought in one year, 
and sold out the next. Here every sort of grain, 
pulse, and artificial grass, is found, with some well- 
managed and productive hop-grounds, which, from 
the vast expence of cultivating, and uncertain pro- 
duce, are kept in the hands of the most opulent 
landholders, to whom they are, upon the whole, 
lucrative." 

The centre of the county of Essex is too distant from 
the pits to procure chalk ; but lime, clay, and other 
manures, are applied advantageously to the soil. 
In the north-west part of the county, the land is ren- 
dered most productive by one crop only, and then 
fallow ; except, indeed, where it will bear turnips 



* The common process of making the Epping butter, is to 
let the milk stand twenty-four hours, when the cream is^kimmed 
off, and the milk is drawn into vessels (not lined with lead) of 
an increased depth, (this is called doubling,) where it remains 
for about twenty h6tirs, during which time the rising cream is 
occasionally ski'mmed off. It is afterwards put into deeper 
vessels, (which is called trebling,) when all the remaining 
eream, or rich milk, is separated from it. The butter made 



or clover. Here is but little meadow or pasture ; 
but, in consequence of frequent fallows, very great 
crops of wheat, oats, and barley, are oflen ob- 
tained. The latter grain is malted on the spot, and 
sent to the London market, where it is in high es- 
teem. In the western part, bordering the river Lea, 
and including the forests of Epping and Hainault, is 
found an intermixture of soils, from a wet, heavy, 
tough clay, upon a tile earth, to a light, tender, 
thin soil upon gravel. The tile earth is often used 
in the manufacturing of coarse earthen pots, tiles, &c. 
Exclusive of the forests, the greater part of this dis- 
trict is pasture land, appropriated to the dairy, and 
suckling of calves. Many districts on the east side 
of the county are extremely productive in the various 
crops of wheat, beans, oats, cole-seed, rape, corian- 
der, and mustard. " The wheat is not unfrequently 
found to rise to a load an acre ; oats (particularly the 
Poland) to eleven or twelve quarters ; and beans, 
and other corn, in proportion. Some of this land 
has been known to produce five or six of the most 
exhausting crops successively. Wheat has been 
sown three successive years upon the same field, 
and the crops upon an average have amounted to 
four quarters per acre. This part of the county, in 
particular, ia tilled with great spirit and judgment, 
though at a very great expence." 

DAIRIES, CALVES, CATTLE, &c.] Though Es- 
sex is not highly celebrated for its Dairies, those in 
the parish of Epping, and its vicinity, are famous 
for the richness of their cream and butter ; of which, 
the latter is mostly sent to London, where it bears 
a high character and price.* 

In the selection of cows for the dairy, those of 
Holderness, Leicester, and Derby, are usually pre- 
ferred ; though the Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincoln, Welsh, 
and other breeds, are often indiscriminately blended. 
On a calculation, that two acres of prime pasture, at 
twenty-three shillings each, will support a cow on* 
year, and making allowance for all usual expences 
and receipts, on a dairy of twenty cows, Mr. Van- 
couver makes it appear, that the annual profits of such 
a dairy will be 108/. Os. Bd. To produce this pro- 
fit, however, it is necessary that the dairy be of 
prime quality, and regulated by the most skilful and 
attentive management. Each cow is allowed to give 
suck for forty weeks in the year. In the first twenty- 
six, her milk will produce six pounds of butter per 
week ; and in the other fourteen, about four pounds 
per week ; thus yielding about '212 pounds annually. 
Each cow is also estimated to support twelve pigs, 
and twenty calves, during the time that she gives 
milk. 



from these last skimmings, or after Meetings, is of a palet 
colour, and inferior quality to that made from the first skimmed 
cream ; is churned separately, and sold at lower prices. The 
skimmed milk is commonly applied to the feeding and fatten- 
ing of young pigs and porkers; and it appears, from repeated 
experiments, that the fat of these animals is firmer, and vastly 
superior to that of hogs fattened upon peas or meal. 

6 More 



ESSEX. 



415 



More calves arc supposed (o be brod or fattened 
here than in any other English county. The stock 
of cows is chiefly appropriated to the dairy, and 
grazing ; to them may be added, suckling, as an ob- 
ject of great attention with the !'js*ex farmer. The 
North Wales cows are, by somp, preferred for this 
purpose; but the Devonshire breed has been found 
greatly superior to all others; " not only for the 
dairy, and suckling, but in their disposition to keep 
in good order during the term of their milk, and in 
their great aptitude to feed, or to fatten afterwards: 
thus uniting at once, all those qualities which are 
supposed to exist individually in other breeds ; and 
, thus in one species concentrating all those excellen- 
cies so long and so earnestly sought for in the most 
perfect of those animals." These excellencies con- 
sist in their being satisfied with a less quantity, and 
inferior quality, of food, than the Derby or Leices- 
ter ; and their thin blue milk being more applicable 
to suckling, &c. Besides the calves that are bred 
within this county, great numbers are brought from 
other parts of the kingdom, and fattened here for the 
London butcher. To promote their fattening, some 
feeders prepare a small ball, of about two ounces 
weight, which is composed of the powder of fenu- 
greek, wheat meal, and a small quantity of powdered 
chalk, blended together with mild ale. This is given 
them morning and evening, just before sucking ; 
and is found to facilitate their fattening, from its 
soporific and composing effects. This nutritious 
opiate is also deemed useful in whitening the veal : 
a calf thus managed, is generally rendered com- 
pletely fat in about a quarter of a year. 

GENERAL PRODUCE.] The principal productions 
of Essex are wheat, barley, oats, beans, peas, tur- 
nips, tares, rape, mustard, rye-grass, and trefoil. 
Many acres are also appropriated to the cultivation 
of hops, carraway, coriander, teasel, and various 
horticultural plants and roots. The latter are con- 
fined to the large towns, and to the lands adjoining 
the metropolis. Potatoes are cultivated to consider- 
able extent in different parts of the county, and are 
occasionally employed to prepare a field for wheat. 
In the light lands, they fallow and manure as for 
barley, ploughing four furrow ridges, and planting 
two rows or sets at eight inches apart on each ridge. 
In the early part of the summer, the furrows are 
ploughed, and the plants earthed up as much as 
possible. The crop is obtained by splitting down 
the ridges with a double-breasted plough, and 300 
bushels per acre are esteemed the average produce. 
Near Ilford are some extensive potatoe grounds, 
which are constantly appropriated to this root. To 
support a succession of crops, it is necessary to sup- 
ply the land with abundance of manure, most of 
which is obtained from London. Cabbages, as 
food for cattle, sheep, &c. are raised in great num- 
bers, and are esteemed a good succedaneum for 
turnips. The land is ploughed into four furrowed 
ridges, with about 400 bushels of long dung per 
acre. This is ploughed under, making the furrows 



] the ridges, on the tops of which, and nt nearly one 
I yard apart, about a quart of water is poured down 
j on the spot where the plant is intended to be fixed. 
I A boy places the plants ready lor the dibber, who 
sets them in the mould, and another watering is 
; then applied to the fixed plants ; after which; 
! ploughing the intervals, hoeing and moulding up 
1 the plants, follow of course. The drum-head cab- 
j bage is preferred ; and it should be transplanted 
I from the seed-bed, before it is committed to the 
field. 

ESTATES, TENURES, &c.] If by estates, are 
meant possessions in landed property, they are in 
this county, in point of extent, almost infinitely 
various ; from one, five, and ten pounds a year, to 
10, or even 20,000 ; and although there may be a 
few considerable and extensive estates in the hands 
of the nobility, or of some very wealthy private in- 
dividuals, yet, perhaps there never was a greater 
proportion of small and moderate sized farms, the 
property of mere farmers, who retain them in their 
own immediate occupation, than at present. 

The tenures of the landed proprietors are in al- 
most all the diversities of freehold, leasehold, and 
copyhold. There are also estates in Mortmain be- 
longing to Guy's and Christ's Hospitals, and other 
corporate bodies. 

With regard to the tenures, by which the mere 
temporary occupiers hold their farms, they are ex- 
tremely various ; some upon leases of longer or 
shorter duration, some without any leases at all, 
agreeable to the taste and pleasure of the landlord; 
though by far the greater number, especially of 
those in the possession of the smaller proprietors, 
are let in leases of from 8 or 10 to '21 years. 

MANUFACTURES, TRADE, &.C.] This county de- 
rives many advantages from its maritime trade, as 
well as from its vicinity to the metropolis. The 
conveniency of water-carriage, and goodness of its 
roads, give it a commercial superiority over many 
other counties. The eastern counties of England 
are recorded to have been the first places inhabited 
by the woollen manufacturers, who canoe over from 
the Continent for the purpose of working up the 
English wool, which, at an early period, was ex- 
ported in a raw state. Essex, however, does not 
seem to have acquired any peculiar branch of manu- 
facture, till the civil and religious persecutions prac- 
tised in the Low Countries under the Duke of Alva 
compelled many artizans to quit those parts. Some 
of these settling at Colchester, commenced a manu- 
facture of baize : this flourished considerably, and 
soon extended its influence to several neighbouring 
towns and villages, and many of the poor inhabi- 
tants were tiien initiated in the arts of weaving, 
spinning, and dressing of wool. The manufacture 
is still continued, n a small scale ; and the return 
of peace, it is expected, will operate considerably 
in its favour. 

FAIRS.] Abridge June 2, for horses, cattle, 
and toys. 

Althorne 



410 



ESSEX. 



Mthorne June 5, for toys. 
Dudley End August 5, for cheese. 
Bardjield June 22, cattle, and toys. 
Barking October 22, for horses. 
Basildon September 14, for toys. 
Belchamp St. Paul's, November 30, for cattle, 
and toys. 

Bentley Monday after St. Swithin, July 15, 
toys. 

Billericay August 2, for horses, October 7, cat- 
tle, and toys in general. 

Blackmore August 21, for cattle in general. 
Bradroell June 24, for toys. 
Braintree May 8, October 2, and 3, for cattle, 
butter, and cheese. 

Brentwood July 18, October 15, and 16, for 
horses and horned cattle. 

Brightlingsea, near St. Osyth June 5, October 
15, for horses. 

Bulmer Tye, near Subdury. May 1, if it is Holy 
Thursday, then the day before, cattle, and hops. 
Burnham April 25, September 21, and 22, toys. 
Canewdon June 24, toys. 
Convey Island June 25, toys. 
Castle Hedingham, near Halstead May 14, Aug. 
15, hops, and cattle, and October 25, ditto. 
Chelmsford May 12, Nov. 12, for cattle. 
Chesterford July 5, for horses. 
Chigwe/l September 30, for hiring servants. 
Great Clac.kton June 29, for toys. 
Little Clackton July 25, for toys. 
Coggeshult Whit Tuesday and Wednesday, for 
toys and horses. 

Colchester Easter Tuesday, wholesale tailors ; 
July 5, horses; July 23, cattle, and horses; Oct. 
10, cattle, horses, butter, and toys. 

Colt, near Saffron Walden November 17. 
Datibury Shrove Tuesday, for toys. 
Ded/iam Easter Tuesday, for ditto. 
Diinmorv May 6, Nov. 8, for cattle. 
Carles' Coltte March 25, for cattle and toys. 
Elmstead May 4, toys. 

tipping Whit Tuesday, October 11, statute; 
November 13, for horses, cows, and sheep. 
Fairlop First Friday in July, pleasure fair. 
Ford Street Easter Tuesday, November 1, for 
toys. 

Fingering/we Easter Monday, ditto. 
Fou/ness Is/and July 10, toys. 
Grays May 23, cattle and hardware. 
Great, Ho/lingliiu'y, near Woodside Greeu Whit- 
Tuesday, for toys. 

Great Holland June 22, pedlary. 
Gieut. Oak/ey April 25, toys. 
Gieat 'I'ey Trinity Monday, ditto. 
Gieat Wukering Sept. 18, ditto. 
Goldanger May 14, ditto. 
Hndleigli June 24, ditto. 
HadstockJune 28, for horses. 
1 j a/stead M&y 6, Oct. 29, for cattle. 



Harlots Second Wednesday in July, wool ; Sept. 
9, Nov. 26, for horses and cattle. 

Harwich May 1, Oct. 18, for toys. 

Hatjield Broad Oak Aug. 5, for lambs. 

High Ongar Sept. 19, pedlary. 

Horndon June 29, July 15, wool. 

Ingatestone Dec. 1, for cattle of all sorts. 

Ke/vedon Easter Monday, for toys. 

Kerby July 2fi, toys. 

Luchinden, near Maldon August 27, great lamb 
fair. 

Leigh Second Tuesday in May, for toys. 

Maiden Second Saturday in July, wool ; Sept. 
14, toys and cattle. 

Manvden Easter Monday, toys. 

Manningtree May 31, June 15, toys. 

Mesing First Tuesday in July, toys. 

Ostend June 6. 

Ongar Easter Tuesday, and Oct. 11, for hiring 
servants. 

St. Osyth Ascension Day, for toys. 

Peverel Whit Tuesday, toys. 

Prittlewe//-^Ju\y 15, toys. 

Purteigh Whit Tuesday, toys. 

Ramsey June 15, toys. 

Ray/eigh Trinity Monday, for horses and toys. 

Rochlord Easter Tuesday, toys ; Wednesday 
after Sept. 29, wholesale tailors, glovers, and toys. 

Romjord June 24, horned cattle, and horses. 

Satcute Aug. 24, for toys. 

South Beiijteet Aug. 24, for toys. 

South Minster Three days, before Easter, nine 
days before Whit Sunday, St. Michael, Sept. 29, toys. 

Stanstead May 1, for horses and cattle. 

Stanaway April 23, lor toys. 

Stebbing July 10, for fat lambs and other cattle. 

Steeple Wednesday in Whitsunweek, Saturday 
after St. Michael, Sept. 29, for toys. 

Tendering Sept. 21, for toys. 

Ter/ing Wliit Monday, for toys. 

Thaxted Monday before Whit Monday, August 
10, for horses. 

Thorpe Monday before Whitsunday, for toys. 

Tilliiigham Whit Tuesday, Sept. IB, for toys. 

Tiptree Place July 25, for horses and toys. 

Tolesbury June 29, for toys. 

Tolleshunt Darcy June 11, toys. 

Walden Saturday before Mid-lent Sunday, for 
horses, Nov. 1, for cows. 

Walt ham Jbbey May 14, Sept. 25, and 26, for 
horses, cows, and hogs, and hiring servants. 

Wtillon June 2, for toys. 

West Mersey Whit Tuesday, toys. 

W icks Aug. 31, Sept. 18, toys. 

Witham Friday and Saturday in Whit-week, 
Sept. 14, Nov. 8 for toys. 

Wi-oenhoe Sept. 4, toys. 

Woodltam Femes Michaelmas Day, October 10, 

toys. 

Writtle, near Chelmsford Whit Monday. 



ESSEX. 



417 





u 

:5 
13" 








1 








u 






X 


-^ 






w 


. 






t/: 


ill 






r/t 


CJ 






W 


-. 


M 






J 






f* 


a. 


5 










5 




|N 

H 


H 
u) 

u 


"o 
u 

ti 




2 


3 


_5 




S 


E 


._, 







u 


5 




u 


9 


= 




w 


-& 
a. 


11 




HH 



H 


VI 

H 




^ 




X 



< 


r 




!< 


H 


^ 




-X* 


tn 


M 




Q 


a 





If 


6 


5 





|j 


PS 





M 


a 








7. 


co 

g 


I 


Gb 

O 


h 


u 


aj 
. 


i 




a 


Q 
X 


. 

1/1 
M 


IB 



o 







~~^ 


= 




f 




o 




J 






fc- 


E 


^ 


" 


u: 


h 


'"~j 


> 


" 


o 


^ 


4; 


X 


1/1 
H 





J2 







^j" 


re 


p 


< 
7. 


X 


| 


^ 


M - 


a 


V 


^ 





' 


S 


2^ 
. 


1 


u 


J 


L> 
X 


" 


H 


3 
5 






Or 




Z, 


^ 


O 


"< 


c- 

W 


^ 

8 


fl 

IB 




_jj 


a 








^ 


H. 


5 


M 
XJ 


T; 


a 


u 








1 

o 


r; 


OMME 




cs 


-^ 


U 




a 


r 


u) 




H 


c 


X 

H 




(n 


s 






p 

W 


o 
c 


P! 

o 

3 




X 





h 




pi 


u 


tn 
u 




^_J 


'J 


U 




C 


cr 


X 




u. 


i 


|< 










5 




S 


"J 








K 






H 


S 








p 








* 








* 







t 

a 



E 

2 

o" S 

A * 

t K 
s * 

O V3 



s 












M 



4 

a 



a 
4 



e 
*". 



= 





" 



li" -B 



sr 
M . 

JT 






a. 



Et- ~ ~ _r / 

aj _ 3 j* ' 

car vojorts 6 ^. 

js .i 



s^ 

1 1 

pa 



i- 






^J" t-* 



Oi 

CO 



Ci 'CCoo 'f 






a 
u 

<; 

u 

CZ 

O 



X 

O 



sj 


"22 



1 




u 


c 


^ ^ 


c_^ s ; 


^ O vi 


C 00 


2 "aJ 


8 


3 


w 


- ^ 


{y ^ .ilr U rtT* ^ C^ ? *" - 


.== 

to _C O 


_r c 


1 3 

pQ 52 


^ 


u 

> 

S 


_> 

Tj 

^ 


i! 

Ucw 


*x^i= M^-S s a > S 

I'O^CS^a -" 1 a;C 

JU-^^^cacesiCa J; 




'c 
'o 


OJ i 

.5 "w 




5 J 


is 


.2-3 2 


-c = ^ ii, ,* ^ c 
.255 13 eo o 



c- c !> 
!' I .t* 



N. E 



HARWIC 



z 
o 

Q 
1 



o 

a 



a 



Zca 







u^ pd-^j^- 


* J^^^-^pS^OJas-^HJ *X* 


*^JJ" 


J" 


3 JJ WS 


W fO (O 


o> o "* c/ to oo 


^ 


n 


s 


-l-l" y 


Ol ,O 


-C 


* 


M 


'O fc " 




o 


t! 

i 




1 


^ 5 xS 










S^ ? 2 


o 

1 S ^ 


_= 




bO 








V 










c 




""c "3 "^ " 


= -=-3 55 8 


c 





" 


W o 5 


^ OT J4 


( 4J ^ 


j 


S 


^ 22 o.S 


c t> 

JlJl si s 


II 


a 

= 


OO 

rt 

w* 



iJ 

o 



-H 



ESSEX. 



3-3 3- 

e =: e 

323 

" O 

K'3 



>WSC!I-UPO> Offiis 

=fsr u in it^it 
iMPtsfllPl 



Sn 
W 
















C 
ro 

s. 



ford 






Co 


to Co 


i to 


!0 


S3 J-- 
KHNI- 


Crt 


i&* 


* 


- 


oo 
NM 


Co Co Co to 

0. Co <O 


(O to O 
O) Cn 4* 


to 
to 


to 
O M 


CO 


00 O> U* 
Hj-i-!w 


.f 


Co 

-H 






Ill I! 

"8,1 P- as 

" 







i 



ir S-Pg 




i 












,= - ? -' 



, 

1? Iff 

s re o !* 
5 V! 3 






P?!: 

=g s 

" 



eo 





- 



a 

CL 



3." 
fl 






3 =? 

3 






2 o s.' < & *o 

-i -, 01 i 



SO 
58 
W 



O 

o 

5g 
H 

)-H 

2 

M 
O 



OD jp 



s 

S. o 




. 

2." 5 a 






Co Co H- 



(O tO 



* to 



to ^ 



to to i 



tn to 



o 01 



O 

a? 



io 

D ^ 



Q.H 

3 



w 



rJ{ 

*^^ O M 



ftf 

I i: 
^8a- 



55 

3 



ir 

^a 



o 
o 

& F"! 

8.2 



G? 



^F &7 



s- 



= 



CO 



o 

i 

03 

to 



03 

I 
. 

t- 1 
o 

o. 

s 



*> 

g 

r 
D 
o 

03 

u 



r 

r 



tO CO 4^ (O 



03 
"fD 



D*| 

1 

S-S" 



t- 1 

I 



Co 

| 

in 
o 



O 

Cb 



H 
PI 



a 
r 



ESSEX. 



419 



1 






"BO 

a 
9 
uj 

1 



Is 

rt cd 



c c 

c 



3 '. 



IS. 



fcTB 
5^ 

ScB 



8** 



^ u "S 



8 



|- 



- 

.i-i 






S 

o- 



1 

O 



o 











_j 


1 




CA 03 


.J 




" 


Id 




* c 


as 




D Jj 

!c 2 


"I 5 




t_i C/} 







g: c? 





S 


., *3 


^ 


U 


j^ 


Q 
(6 
O 


1 


t si 


fa 


1 


n4 




c 


I i 


U 


q 

tim 






CO O> ? CM 



(J 



2 fc > 
s 

M | < 



O 
w 
& 
Z 

H 
S5 
O 
U 

00 

> 

S5 

cs 





si^ 



!-JO 



PS g 



is .* o 5 a ^ ja 

= -^3 = = 
O 2uca O 



j 

(4 

a 



c u 
c 5 



2-4 



-3(35 M^ 



2 



' 



oW S 

lli 

J<-5.5 

O 3 t/i 
O O <2 

UJMra 

Si- 9 . 

"S-5 

s- . 



Between Tukeley St 
is Hollinbury Place, 
theR. of Tukeley St 
Sir Peter Parker, Bar 



e o; CM 

C CM CO 



w 



c 

v ^J- -C 

(L/ <U V 



,S"5 X-H 

*|8 



a- 



HJ c 

, o 

il 



* 



c 

gww 



o- 









CQ 



o 

60 






M 



f^g^gSg' 

fib .- J2 =.^45 

^jsKflBs^r 1 



^ M _i; r 

51I.W8-H 

11*71-.^ 






"o 
_o 



PS 



" TJ <o 


ar ? 


tJ* o* 


CO 03 SO Cl 
O" CM CO CO 



1 



D ^2 

f 2 



s ca 

<>i O i tiD"^ 

| sf'f-fs 

":" 



o 






o 2 ' 



Cj * =5 ^C 

v, B3. U 











s 

w 
fcj 
pei 
H 
g 

< 
PA 
ca 

"I 
Q 

s< 

.y 

>-H 

ast 

Dd 



C3 

S 
Q 

O 

CO 



03 
U- 



La 
O9 

"oO 


I 

c 



H 

3-C rt 

l|j.r 

-& 

ScW 

uo 



429 



ESSEX. 



*0 

. 



a w 

o S 

i I 

g" a. 

i 



rt 3 



n..^:-' >> E5- 
e-Pa.&'S 02.3 




o 



o 2 
3 JS- 



OJ GJ K> 




P 



?L* 

S-r 5 ? 

If' 

B = 

g.'S- 

1/3 03 

II 

C"? 

gi 



o 

re 

r 

55' 

d 



tr 

i 

*a 
8" 

re 






S 1 







c 



S 

5 



r> 

a 

w 

[-1 * W 

S 



fl 
o 

S3 
d 



Wffiffi ^0 OO O 



H 

5 
o 

S3 


B 

El 

s- 

2 



o 

3 



Hi 



er 
d 
oe 



o a 

*i , 






I I 

a 



IM 63 



2 



,l' 

"re 



O 5^ 

os U 
a-o 



^?? 

I'B a 

^ r? r 



?i 1 

sr 



w 



H^ 
'S 



s" 

^ 

*-s 



M 



HO y 



y 



o 



M 



8 

S! 
H 

S 

e 

M 



O 
O 



w Z r O R _j^ 

u !n~* %' ^ O 

2 5j M =. _' i 

oos; fc &- 






t 



a = o. OB 
* w* O S J3 

te3 ? re 



so 
w 



r 

a. 



cr 
o 



ESSEX. 



421 



TABLE OF DISTANCES. 

Ihe Names of the respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square inhere both meet gives the distance. 





IVillericay 


.../ 


Hstance from I 








19 


Rraintrrc 




40 










5 


22 


Uri-Mlwix 


xl . . 


18 










8 


11 


11 


C!u 
14 


linsfc 
Co f 


, r d ... 


29 










22 


6 


25 


;s;eslv 




44 










30 


15 


22 


22 


9 


Culchest 




.51 










'<!! 


8 


19 


13 


14 


23 


Dumnov 




40 












lo 


25 


11 


17 


31 


39 


16 


Epi 




17 










12 


33 


11 


22 


37 


44 


30 


23 


Gray's 1 








Halstead 


25 


6 


28 


17 


6 


13 


14 


31 


39 


Hal 


stead 46 








50 


36 


54 


43 


30 


21 


44 


60 


65 


34 








Maiden 


13 


13 


19 


9 
8 


13 


16 


18 


26 


25 


19 


37 Maiden .. 38 








10 


19 


7 


22 


30 


13 


7 


18 


25 


51 17 Ongar .... 21 








11 


28 


6 


17 


31 


39 


23 


10 


13 


34 








Waltham 


21 


30 


16 


20 
8 


36 


42 
14 


21 
13 


5 


25 


42 


63 29 12 !'* Waltham 12 






Witham 


16 


7 


19 


6 


25 


30 


12 


35 6 16 25 30 Witham 37 



ii. NO. 75. 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



GEt\ERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY. 



THE County of Gloucester is bounded on the 
north- west by that, of Hereford ; on the east by 
Oxfordshire and a small part of Berkshire ; on the 
north by Wiltshire ; and on the west by part of 
Somersetshire, the Bristol Channel, and Monmouth- 
shire. In length, it extends from the parish of Clif- 
ford Chambers, near Stratford upon Avon, to Clif- 
ton, beyond the city of Bristol, in a south-west 
direction, about 70 statute miles ; and in breadth, 
from Lechlade, North westward to Preston, in the 
hundred of Botloe, about forty statute miles. The 
figure of the county is elliptical ; but its north-east 
find is more acute than the other. The superficial 
contents of Gloucestershire were estimated, by Rud- 
der, in his history of the County, at nearly 1,100,000 
acres ; but, according to the tables which accom- 
pany the population returns of 1811, the super- 
ficial contents are no more than 718,080 acres. The 
boundaries of this County arc chiefly artificial. 

In describing the general aspect of Gloucester- 
shire, which is greatly diversified, nature having 
divided it into three districts of very dissimilar cha- 
racter, respectively termed, the Hill, the Vale, and 
the Forest, we shall, to avoid repetition, slightly de- 
viate from our usual plan, and, at the same time, 
mention whatever is most deserving of notice, re- 
lating to its agriculture, soil, produce, &c. 

The Hill district of the County, including the 
Cotswolds, and the Stroticl water Hills, is a con- 
tirmntion of the central chain running south from 
Derbyshire, through this county with smaller eleva- 
tion into Wiltshire : there swelling into the Salis- 
bury Downs, and thence running west towards the 
Lands- End, in Cornwall. Cotswold Hills extend 
thirty miles, from Broadway Hill to near Tetbury ; 
and twenty, from Birdlip Hill to Burford. Mar- 
shall, in his Rural Economy of Gloucestershire, 
says, that they contain an area of nearly 200,000 
aercs. The surface is billowy ; and the climate of 
this part is unusually mild, on the sides of the hills 
are numerous springs ; and almost every dip can 
boast its rill, and every valley its brook. The soil 
consists in general of a calcareous loam ; mostly 
mixed with gravel and small stones, termed stone 
brash. In some places, however, it varies to a 



lightish loam ; in others, it is of a tenacious, bind- 
ing quality, on the ascents of the hills, of a strong 
clayey nature. The soil is, on an average, not more 
than live inches deep; and the subsoil consists of a 
calcareous rubble. Near the surface stones of vari- 
ous kinds are almost every where found. Great 
improvements have been made in this district, with- 
in the last sixty years : the Downs, which were 
formerly quite open, producing little else than furze, 
and scantily covered with grass, are now, with few 
exceptions, converted into arable land ; and a com- 
munication with villages where the roads were for- 
merly impassable is now opened. Nine tenths of its 
surface are laid out in raising corn, turnips, and 
herbage. There are still remaining some sheep 
walks, and cow down ; and the bottoms and sides 
of the deeper vallies consist of meadow. On these 
hills are to be seen some patches of woodland. 
From the landed property being possessed by the 
few, the estates are generally extensive; and the 
tenures fee simple. 

The size of the farms varies from 200 to 1 000 
acres : the larger farms are generally let on leases 
of seven, fourteen, and twenty-one years. Sheep 
constitute the chief object of the Cots wold husbandry ; 
cattle, of which there are few, are considered in a 
secondary light ; horses and swine are merely kept 
for the use of the farm. Wheat and barley are the 
marketable crops : turnips, oats, peas, vetches, 
sainfoin, &c. are only raised for the keep of farm 
stock. The Cotswold sheep have been long cele- 
brated, and tradition states, that the Spaniards ori- 
ginally procured their breed of fine wooled sheep 
from these hills. The present breed, a polled, 
long-wooled, middle-sized . sheep, has been much 
improved from the native stock, both in weight of 
carcass and quantity of wool ; but the latter is some- 
what coarser than it was formerly. The average 
weight per quarter, of wethers, when fat, is twenty- 
eight pounds ; of ewes, twenty-two. 

The prevalent course of practice in the cultiva- 
tion of the arable land, is to divide it into seven 
parts, which are cropped thus ; sainfoin, turnips, 
barley, grasses, wheat, oats, peas, &c. The 
manure chiefly used, are ashes produced by sod- 
burning, 



- v f^&H^S. '"<>"!"">>;. 

^V**" ! ^T^ j^^''^^ / wz r 



yS3Smyl/l}fl>ti fcj,, 






K r 1 1 1 s li Stat ut f MUes . 

?^ *' 7 X 




GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



burning, dung, and tlie produce of tlie slieep-fold. 
The wheat is mostly sown in August and Septem- 
ber ; the produce is from twelve to twenty bushels 
an aero. The principal of the cultivated herbage 
is sainfoin, which is said to have grown on these 
hills about 160 years. In the ordinary course of 
husbandry, the ground is never ploughed more 
than once, excepting for turnips. Tlie plough in 
general use, is of the old heavy kind, requiring five 
Worses, or oxen, to draw it : the oxen, as beasts of 
labour, are in more estimation tlmn formerly ; they 
are all worked in harness ; not abreast, but single. 
The Cotswold, or Gloucestershire* waggon, is de- 
described, by Marshall, as the best kind of farm 
waggon he had ever seen. Its most striking pecu- 
liarity, he observes, is that of having a crooked side 
rail, bending archwise over the hind wheel ; by 
which method, the general bed of the waggon is 
lowered without lessening tlie diameter of the wheels. 
The inclosures are chiefly stone walls, about four 
feet and a half high, exclusive of a stone coping. 

The Stroudwater Hills partake both of the Cots- 
wold and of the Vale character; the southern ex- 
tremity varies most in soil and surface. On the 
hills the soil is principally a light loam : the modes 
of application, and rotation of crops, is nearly the 
same as on the Cotswolds. The woodlands are 
chiefly beech, but have much decreased within the 
last forty or fifty years. This part of the district 
is the chief seat of the woollen manufacture of Glou- 
cestershire. The vallics possess considerable pic- 
turesque beauty, particularly in the neighbourhood 
of Stroud. 

The Vale district comprises the entire tract 
bounded on the east by the Cotswold hills, and the 
river. Severn on the west ; and is usually subdi- 
vided into the Vales of Evesham and Gloucester, 
and the Vale of Berkeley ; the latter of which is 
separated from the former by a natural intersection, 
and is very different in produce, and husbaudry. 
The Vale of Berkeley has been celebrated even from 
the days of William of Malmsbury, who describes 
it as " Rich in corn,, productive of fruits, in some 
parts by the sole favour of nature, in others by the 
art of cultivation, enticing even the lazy to indus- 
try, by the prospect of a hundred fold return. Yon 
may sec the highways clothed with trees bearing 
apples, not by the grafter's hand, but by the nature 
of the ground itself ; for the earth, of its own ac- 
cord, rears them up to fruit, and that excellent in 
flavour and appearance ; many of which wither not 
under a year, nor before the new crops are pro- 
duced to supply their place. Neither has any county 
in England more numerous or richer vineyards ; or 
which yields grapes more abundantly, or of better 
flavour ; as the wine is but little inferior to that of. 
France in sweetness. The villages are very thick, 
the churches handsome, and the towns populous, 
and many." 

The Vale of Evesham, embracing a considerable 
portion of Worcestershire, belongs to the Avon, 



being included between that river and the Cotswold 
hills, extending southward to Campden and Mor- 
ley; and following the Avon eastward to Stratford. 
In respect of situation, climate, surface, soil, pro- 
duce, and management, it, may be considered as a 
continuation of the Vale of Gloucester ; which, in 
its outline, is somewhat semicircular ; the river 
Severn being the chord, and the surrounding hills 
the arch; the towns of Gloucester, Tnwksbury, nnd 
Cheltenham, forming a triangle within it:, ::rca. Its 
extent, from north to south, is about fifteen miles ; 
and from east to west, between seven and eight ; its 
superficial contents have been estimated at 50,000 or 
00,000 acres. The seasons are a week or ten days 
later than on the opposite side of the Severn ; pro- 
bably from the proximity of the Cotswolds, whick 
occasion a continued supply of coolness and mois- 
ture. The soil is mostly a deep rich loam ; but 
varies in many places to the light and sandy kinds : 
the subsoil is generally very retentive of water, e. 
pecially towards the middle of the Vale, where it 
appears to be composed, alternately, of stone and 
clay, in thin strata : the more genial parts are those 
adjacent to Gloucester, Tcwksbury, and Evesham. 
A considerable portion of the land belongs to the 
Church, and is mostly let on leases for lives. In* 
many of the townships the laud is still open : where 
it is inclosed, the inclosures are chiefly formed by 
hedge rows : the hedge trees are principally elm 
and willow ; in some few places, the oak, the ash, 
and the maple, are seen. The plantations in the 
Vale consist wholly of fruit trees. The farms are, 
in general, small ; scarcely any exceeding -'300 acres; 
and the rents but of very few, amounting to more 
than. 2001. The land is disposed into arable, mea- 
dow, and pasture ; the grand objects of the hus- 
bandry being the growth of corn ; breeding, and 
fattening; and the making of cheese. The ancient 
system, pursued in cultivating the arable lands, has 
been much improved of late years ; the course now 
practised on the most productive farms, being fal- 
low ; barley, beans, or clover, and wheat. Some 
extensive common fields, in the neighbourhood of 
Gloucester, have been cropped, under an extraor- 
dinary course ef management, year after year, 
during a century, or, perhaps centuries, without one 
intervening whole year's fallow : hence they are 
called, Every Year's Land. Here, as in the Cuts- 
wolds, the tillage is not abundant ; the number of 
ploughings being seldom more than six in four 
years. The arable lands are, nearly without ex- 
ception, in ridges ; some of them so much elevated, 
that it has been proverbially, though hyperholically, 
observed, that men mounted on horseback, and 
riding in the furrows, could not see, each other. 
The general height, however, seldom exceeds two 
feet, or two feet and a half ; the common width is 
about 24 feet. The origin of these ridges is un- 
certain : but the popular opinion is, that the soil 
was thus thrown into heaps to increase the quantity 
of surface. Marl, dung, and slightly calcareous 

clays, 



424 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



clays, are used as manures ; in some few places, 
the dung is mixed with mould. The cone and 
Lammas wheats are the species generally cultivat- 
ed : the time of sowing is in November and De 
cernber. The wheat is universally hoed ; and when 
cut, it is bound up in sheaves remarkably small. 
The medium produce per acre, is 18 bushels. The 
grass lands are indebted for a considerable portion 
of their fertility, to their situation near the Severn, 
or on the bunks of rivulets, by the water of which 
they are frequently overflowed. The soil of many 
of the meadows has, indeed, been mostly formed by 
the sediment deposited from the floods. The 
mowers of Gloucestershire use very short scythes. 

In this district, the cattle are of various species, 
and very numerous : the predominating kind, is 
that called the Gloucestershire breed ; but the long- 
horned breed of Staffordshire, and other midland 
counties, has been introduced of late years, and 
appears likely to dispossess the original stock : the 
Welsh and Herefordshire kinds have also been 
brought into the county, chiefly for the purpose of 
fattening for the London markets. The hogs grow 
to a large size ; those considered as the true Glou- 
cestershire breed, are the tall, long, white kind ; but 
the Berkshire, and a cross between the two breeds, 
are the prevailing species : the food of the store 
swine is chiefly whey, mixed with butter-milk. The 
swine market at Gloucester is supposed to be the 
largest in England. 

In this district, the dairies are not very large ; 
the number of cows kept on each being seldom 
more than 30, and most frequently below that num- 
ber : in the Vale of Evesham, they are larger, the 
cows on each varying, perhaps, to double the above 
numbers. The chief objects of the dairy, are cheese, 
calves, milk-butter, whey-butter, and swine ; but 
of these the cheese is the principal. 

Gloucester cheese has been long celebrated : 
though a considerable quantity of that sold under 
this appellation, has of late years been made in 
Wiltshire. The dairy-house is mostly large and 
commodious; a middle-sized dairy, measuring about 
15 feet by 18 : the floor is generally laid with stone; 
the shelves are mostly of elm or ash. The cheese 
vats are from 15 to 15' inches in diameter; and 
from one and a half to two inches deep ; the wood 
is invariably elm. The season of making includes 
about seven months, beginning in May, and ending 
in October: annotta is chiefly used for colouring. 
The cheese is principally purchased by factors, who 
live in or near the district ; the same factor gene- 
rally purchasing the produce of the same dairy 
year after year, and frequently without seeing it, or 
making a previous bargain. 

The butter of this county, like the cheese, is of 
superior quality : in making it, the milk, when 
cooled to about 80* of Fahrenheit's thermometer, is 
poured into shallow dairy vessels, locally termed 
skeels, till it stands at about an inch deep ; the pre- 
vailing rule being to set it as shallow as it can be 



conveniently skimmed ; under the impression, that 
the shallower the milk is set, the more cream will 
rise from a given quantity. The cream is received 
into earthen jars, wherein it is stirred several times 
daily with the cream slice. In churning, the cream 
of the Vale is very liable to rise; a circumstance 
attributed to its superior richness ; when this hap- 
pens, part of it is taken out, but replaced when the 
remainder is again gone down : the breaking is very 
particularly attended to ; and when the butter is 
taken out of the churn, the milk is carefully pressed 
out by kneading the lumps with the hand : when the 
operations are completed, the butter is made up 
into half-pound pats, or prints, and, neatly inclosed 
in green leaves, is packed in square baskets for 
sale. 

The farm buildings in this part of the country, 
are chiefly of timber ; consisting of frame-work, 
filled up with strong laths, interwoven in a peculiar 
manner, and plastered over. 

The Vale of Berkeley, called also the Lower 
Vale, forms, in its outline, nearly the segment of a 
circle. The river Severn, as in the Gloucester Vale, 
forms an irregular chord ; the hilts to the south and 
east, a curve which is continued to the northern 
angle by the Painswick and M itson hills. Its ex- 
tent, from Aust Cliff to the toot 01 Matson Hill, is 
25 miles ; its medium width is somewhat less than 
four ; the area compreueiuis about 50,000 acres. 
The surface is more irregular than that of the Up- 
per Vale ; the bottoms of the hills stretching in 
many places towards the river, and various risings 
appearing in other parts, particularly round the ex- 
tremities. The margins of the hills are hung with 
beech ; and the scenery is in general extremely fine. 
The soil is uniformly rich : in the more level parts, 
it is a deep fat loam, exceedingly fertile, excepting 
on the north of Berkeley, where it is clayey, ana 
less productive. The land is principally appro- 
priated to grass ; and, with the exception of some 
common fields, towards the upper angle, there is 
scarcely 1000 acres of arable land in tlte district. 
The rent is but low, but the farms are chiefly held 
at will : the general rental is from 200/. to 300/. and 
400/. per annum. The dairies are about the same 
value as those in the Vale of Gloucester. The 
cheese is of superior quality : the kind called Dou- 
ble Gloucester, but locally, Double Berkeley, is 
chiefly made in this district : its peculiar excellence 
appears to depend as much upon proper manage- 
ment, as on the richness of the milk : May, June, 
and July, are the principal months for making this 
" thick cheese ;" the season of making the thin 
cheese is from April to November. The quantity 
of cheese made in this district, is estimated from a 
thousand to twelve hundred tons annually : the an- 
nual produce from the milk yielded by each cow, is 
about 340 [rounds. The whey butter made here, is 
of good quality, when fresh ; the aggregate weekly 
produce is about 5000 pounds. 

The Forest district is separated from the rest of 

the 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



425 



the county, by the river Severn ; and is principally 
comprehended by the forest of Dean, formerly va- 
luable for the goodness and strength of its timber. 
Its oaks were so highly renowned, that Evelyn ob- 
serves, that in Elizabeth's reign, an ambassador 
was purposely sent from Spain, to procure its de- 
struction, either by negotiation or treachery. The 
destruction of this forest was also one of the im- 
portant objects of the Spanish Armada. It abounds 
with beech as well as with oak, and the soil is con- 
sidered peculiarly favourable for the growth of the 
stire apple. In a survey, made in the 17th of 
Charles the First, the forest is estimated to have 
originally contained upwards of 43,000 acres ; of 
which 14,000 were woodland. Various sovereigns 
have granted away several thousand acres, which 
have been cleared. 

RIVERS AND CANALS.] The rivers and canals of 
this county are so intimately connected, that we 
shall describe them under one head. The principal 
rivers are, the Frome, the Isis, or Thames, the Se- 
vern, and (he Wye. The Avon, or Upper Avon, 
serves only to divide a small part of Gloucester- 
shire from Warwickshire, at the northern extre- 
mity ; and another small portion from Worcester- 
shire, near Tewksbury. The canals which intersect 
this county, are distinguished by the names of the 
Berkeley, the Hereford and Gloucester, the Stroud- 
water, and the Thames and Severn canals. 

The river Frome, or Stroud, rises at Brimps- 
field, flows by Stroud, through Stonehouse, and 
Easington, towards the Severn, which it joins at 
Framilode. 

The W'ye separates part of the county of Glou- 
cester from those of Monmouth and Hereford, and 
forms a grand natural western boundary to the fo- 
rest of Dean. The scenery of this rivey derives 
much beauty from the noble wooded eminences of 
the forest. 

The Severn, which is considered as the second 
commercial river in England, enters this county 
near the ancient town of Tewksbury, where, uniting 
its waters with those of the Upper Avon, and pur- 
suing a south-westerly course, it crosses an exten- 
sive, fertile, and well- wooded valley. It divides 
into two streams, about a mile above Gloucester ; 
the streams uniting again a little below the city, and 
forming the tract of land called Alney Island. Soon 
after this junction, its width and depth are increased 
by tributary rivers ; and the character of the banks, 
and of the surrounding scenery, becomes more bold 
and picturesque. At a bend of the river near Fra- 
inilodc, branches off the Stroudwater canal, which 
unites the navigation of this river with that of the 
Thames. The Severn, then taking a northerly 
course, forms nearly a semicircle of 10 miles to the 
village of Frethern, which is not above two miles ! 
from Krarailode iu a direct line. The cliff, on 
which the Church of Newnham is situated, com- 
mands this immense semicircle with admirable ef- 

VOL. II. NO. 75. 



feet ; while the Cotswold range, terminating in the 
bold elevation of Stiuchcombe Hill, bounds the vale 
to the east ; and the undulating hills of the Forest 
of Dean close in upon it on the west, opening in 
various sweetly picturesque glens. The Severn, 
after this, studded with sails, and gliding between 
a range of fine pastures and villages, grows wider 
gradually till it receives the Wye, near Chepstow ; 
and the Avon, from Somersetshire : thus forming 

j the Bristol Channel. In passing through Glou- 
cestershire, the Severn receives the streams of th 
Upper Avon ; the Chelt, near Wainlode; the Leden, 
near Over's Bridge ; the Frome, at Framilode ; the 
Avon, at Berkeley ; and the Lower Avon, below 
Bristol. The Severn has been a navigable river 
from time immemorial : bearing vessels of different 
sizes, up to 150 and 200 tons burthen. Brigs, 
sloops, barges, and trows, are navigated as high 

j up as Gloucester ; but the larger vessels are rarely 
brought so high, from the difficulty of passing some 
parts of the channel, where the rocks sometimes 
appear at low water. Between Tewksbury and the 
sea, there is one passage over this river by bridge, 
which is at Gloucester. The other passages are by 
boats, at the Upper Lode, a mile below Tewks- 
bury ; at the Lower Lode, six miles above Glou- 
cester ; at Framilode, 12 miles below ; at Newn- 
ham, three miles lower ; at Purton Passage, above 
Berkeley ; at Aust, and at the New Passage. 
Some of these ferries being very precarious, and 

| sometimes dangerous, it is necessary for strangers 
to make particular inquiries relating to the tides, 
and to calculate on the force and direction of the 
winds. The river Severn, particularly below Glou- 
cester, has frequently overflowed its banks, and, by 
sudden risings of the tides, occasioned much da- 
mage to the contiguous country. To guard against 
these disasters, sea-walls, pills, and other precau- 
tionary means have been adopted ; and a society, 
called Commissioners of the Sewers, have occa- 

| sional meetings to consult on, and give directions 
for supporting the banks, &c. That portion of the 
river most subject to inundation is divided into two 
parts, called ihe Upper and Lower Levels : and 
the parishes bordering the east side, with Aure on 
the west from Arlingham, where the Upper Level 
commences, to King's-Weston, where the Lower 
Level ends, are assessed certain sums, according to 
the number of acres in each parish, to defray the 
expeuces. The Severn is remarkable for its tide, 
which rolls in with a head of three or four foet high, 
foaming and roaring in its course, as though en- 
raged by the opposition it meets from the strong 
current of fresh water, which seems to contend with 
it. They clash, so as to dash the waves to a consi- 
derable height : this combat is called the Ilygre, or 
Eager, probably from the French Eau-gnerre, or 
water-war. Sir Robert Atkyns, in his " Ancient 
and Present State of Gloucestershire," accounts 
for this peculiarity, by observing, that the Severn 
5 P receives 



426 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



receives its tides from the Great Atlantic Ocean, 
which pours in its waters with such considerable 
violence, as at once to fill the channel of the river. 

The Isis, or Thames, has its source in this county, 
at a place called the Thames Head, near the village 
of Cotes, about two miles S.W. of Cirencester. 
Near this place, the Thames and Severn Canal 
emerges from under the ground, and occasionally, 
from this spring, receives a considerable quantity of 
water. The water is raised into the canal by means 
of an engine, which is worked like a windmill, by 
six sails, or fly-wings. Several tons of water are 
thus thrown into the canal every minute. In the 
summer months, the spring-head is frequently with- 
out water for a long time ; but in the winter season, 
and after rains, it sometimes becomes such a torrent 
as to overflow the neighbouring meadows for many 
miles round. The Thames, however, has but a 
short course in this county, before it enters Wilt- 
shire, and receives the waters of the Churn at 
Cricklade, where it becomes navigable for barges, 
and other small craft. 

The junction of the two rivers last mentioned, was 
an object much desired by the London and Bristol 
merchants for many generations. In the reign of 
Charles the Second, a bill was brought into the 
House of Commons to effect this purpose ; and Jo- 
seph Moxon, hydrographer to the King, was em- 
ployed to survey the ground, and to prove the prac- 
ticability of the scheme. This important plan, how- 
ever, was not effected till between the years 1783, 
when the act was obtained, and 1792, when the first 
vessel passed from the Severn into the Thames. 
In 1782, several opulent individuals of London 
engaged an able engineer to plan and give an esti- 
mate of this canal. By the act passed, in 1783, it 
was stated, that the sum of 130,000/. would be suf- 
ficient to complete the undertaking ; but, in case of 
emergency, a further sum of 60,000/. was to be 
raised on mortgage. The citizens of London im- 
mediately subscribed the required sum ; and so 
zealous were the London merchants in the cause, 
that the connections of one mercantile house alone 
subscribed 23,000/. and several others 10,000/. each. 
The Thames and Severn canal begins at Wall- 
bridge, near Stroud, (at the place where the Stroud 
navigation ends,) and proceeds in a devious course 
through the country to Lechlade, where it joins the 
Thames. This course includes a distance of up- 
wards of 30 miles. The general breadth of the 
canal is 42 feet at top, and 30 feet at the bottom. In 
many places, where the ground is a dead level, it is 
considerably wider ; the banks and towing paths 
being made entirely with the sil dug from the canal. 
The tunnel at Sapperton is nearly two miles and a 



* Allium olleraceum. Strieked-field Garlic ; in meadows near 

Bristol. 
Altopccurus bulbnsus. Bulbous Fox-tail Grass ; in meadows 

below St. Philip's, Bristol. 
Anemone Pukatilla, Pasque flower ; near Rodborough. 



half in length, being lined with masonry, and arch- 
ed over at top, with an inverted arch at the bottom, 
except at some few places, where the solid rock, 
being scooped out, rendered it unnecessary ; the 
expence of this was about eight guineas per cubic 
yard. The boats are 12 feet wide, and 80 feet 
long ; when loaded, they draw four feet water, and 
will carry 70 tons. The union of the Thames and 
Severn, by means of this canal, and its connection 
with the internal parts of the kingdom, by the Ox- 
ford and Coventry canals, form a line of communi- 
cation with the metropolis, of the greatest national 
importance. In its course from Stroud to Sapper- 
ton, (seven miles, three furlongs,) the water is raised 
by means of locks, 241 feet, three inches ; and it 
falls 139 feet six inches, between Sapperton and 
Lechlade. For the Stroudwater canal, which forms 
a part of the Thames and Severn canal, an act was 
obtained in 1775, under the operation of which it 
was finished. Several plans had before been pro- 
posed ; but, through opposition, they all failed. 
The course of this canal begins at Badbrook, at the 
edge of the town of Stroud, passes on to Cains 
Cross, by Ebley, and across the main road at Stone 
Cross, and by Stone House, near Ryoott Mill, and 
to Lockham Bridge ; then across the river near 
Whitminster Mill, and goes into the Severn, at 
Framilode ; its length being somewhat more than 
eight miles, and its fall 802 feet. 

The Gloucester and Hereford canal was com- 
menced in the year 1792. Its course is from the 
Severn, near Gloucester Bridge, across Aluey Is- 
land, over a branch of that river, to Vineyard Hill, 
where it crosses the Leden by an aqueduct, and, 
turning the base of Lassington Hill, passes on to 
Rudford, and to Oxenhall. Here it enters a tunnel, 
2170 yards long, and emerges at Boyce, near which 
it again crosses the Leden, and soon afterwards 
enters Herefordshire. At the commencement of 
the work, the surveyor estimated the completion of 
the tunnel at 1000 yards, and each yard at 71. but 
when finished, it was found to be 2170 yards, and 
the real expence was more than 18/. per yard. 

The Berkeley canal joins the Severn at a brook 
called Berkeley Pill, opposite the town of Berkeley ; 
whence in a strait course, it passes Slimbridge, 
Frampton, Wheatenhurst, (where it intersects the 
Stroud canal), Hardwick, Quedgley, and termi- 
nates .on the south side of the city of Gloucester, 
making a line of 1S| miles. There is a short cut to 
the town of Berkeley. 

PLANTS.] Excepting what are given in the note 
below,* the plants of this county claim no particu- 
lar consideration. 

MINES, MINERALS, &c.] Various mineral sub- 
stances 



Antirrhinum minus. Least Snap-dragon ; under St. Vincent's 

Rocks. 

Arabis stricta. Rough Wall-cress ; > on St. Vin- 

Arenaria ttnuifoli*. Fine-kaved Sand- wort;} cent's rocks. 

Asparagus 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



427 



stances are found in the Forest of Dean, the prin- 
cipal of which are iron ore and coal. Iron appears 
to have been wrought here even in the Roman times ; 



Asparagus officinalis. Asparagus, or Sperage ; in marshes 

below Bristol. 
palustris (qfficintdis Linnasi). Marsh Asparagus ; 

flowering in autumn. Park, 454. Ger. 947 ; 

found at Maidenham, or Madam Meadow, in 

Laurence Weston. 
Aspiditim Oreoptoris. Heath Shield-fern ; on Huntley Hills, 

between Gloucester and Ross. 
Avena futua. ' Narrow leaved Oat Grass; in corn-fields about 

Bristol. 
1 pubesfens. Downy Oat Grass ; on Wick cliffs, and 

near Badminton. 
Bistort, or Snake-weed ; in a ground belonging to Mr. Watts, 

at OUlbury on the Ijill. Rudder, 585. 
Brizaminnr. Small Qiia'king Grass ; on St. Vincent's rocks. 

Corn Brome Grass ; in corn-fields about Bristol. 

Bromus diandrus. Upright annual Brome 1 c , v- 

Grass \ " 

Vinnatus. Spiked Heath Brome Grass ; \ ce " tlsrocks - 

Burus Scmpervirens. Box Tree; at Boxwell, in Coteswold. 
Cardamine impatiens. Impatient Ladies Smock ; in moist 

places at Clifton. 
Carduus eriophorus. Woolly-headed Thistle ; at Bourton on 

the Hill, and on St. Vincent's rocks. 
Carex ampullacea. Slender-beaked Bladder Carex ; in a pool 

in the Lakewood, near Pucklechurch. 
clandestina. Dwarf silvery Carex ; about St. Vincent's 

rocks. 
filijormis. Slender-leaved Carex ; at Shortwood, near 

Pucklechurch. 

pendula. Great pendulous Carex ; near Frocestev. 
Centaurea Solstitialis. St. Barnaby's Thistle ; by hedges near 

Cirencester. 

Chlora perfoliata. Yellow Centaury ; on St. Vincent's rocks. 
Cochlearia Anglica. English Scurvy Grass ; on (lie banks of 

the Avon. 

Colchicum. Meadow Saffron ; plentifully in the meadows. 
Convallaria multiftora. Common Solomon's Seal ; in a wood 

near Dursley. 

Dicranum polyphyllum. Many-leaved Fork Moss ; near Stan- 
ton Dean. 
Dipsacus pilosujt. Lesser Teasel, or Shepherd's Rod ; near 

Stapleton Bridge. 
Erigeron Canidenx. Canada Flea-bane; on St. Vincent's 

rocks. 
Erodium maritimum. Sea Cranesbill ; on the banks of the 

Avon. 

ntoscliatum. Musk Cranesbill ; by the footpath un- 
der St. Vincent's rocks. 
Galanthus ni-calis. Snowdrop ; in orchards. 
Gal/um, tricorne. Three-flowered Goose Grass ; in corn-fields 

at Pucklechurch. 
Geranium pratense. Meadow Cranesbill ; about Cheltenham, 

and elsewhere. 
rotundifolium. Round-leaved Cranesbill ; on St. 

Vincent's rocks. 
Sanguineum. Bloody Cranesbill ; on St. Vincent's 

rocks, and near Cheltenham. 

Helleborusfa-tidus. Stinking Hellebore, BearVfoot, or Set- 
ter-wort ; in Tortworth Park. 
Hesperis inodora. Scentless Dame's Violet ; on Coteswold 

ridge, between Frogmill and Cheltenham. 
Hypericum montanum. Mountain St. John's-wort ; on St. 

Vincent's rocks. 

Inula ffelenium. Elecampane ; in a pasture near AVickcliffs. 
Juncus fioridus. Flowering Rush ; on the west side of the 

Evenlode ; near Addlestrop Bridge. 



and so early as the reign of Edward the First, 72 
furnaces for melting iron, arc recorded to have been 
built here. The miners have distinct courts, and, 

like 



Lavatera arborea. Sea Tree Mallow ; on Dinney Island, 
near King's Uoad. 

Lejiideutn p etroeum. Mountain Dittander; on St. Vincent's 
rocks. 

rudfrale. Narrow leaved wild Cress, or Dittander ; 

about Bristol. 

Lichen atrovircns. Greenish Lichen ; near Slanton Dean. 

barbatus. Bearded Lichen ; on branches of trees in 

the Forest of Dean. 
dtmtus. Sooty Lichen; on St. Vincent's rocks. 

fragilis. Brittle Lichen ; near Stanton Dean. 

Lichen mucriiius. Mouse coloured > on St. Vin- 

polyrnhizos. Singed Lichen ; ) cent's Rocks. 

resupinatus. Reversed Lichen ; in the Forest of Dean. 

saccatus. Pitted Lichen ; on Si. Vincent's rocks. 

Lycoperdon Tuber. Truffles ; in Oakley woods, plentifully. 

Melampyrum syhaticum. Yellow cow wheat ; on Wick- 
cliffs. 

Milium lendigerum. Panic k Millet grass; on St. Vincent's 
rocks. 

Monotropu hyponithys. Yellow bird's nest ; in woods near 

Nasturtiolum montanum annuum tenuissime divisum (lapi- 
dum pttrxum, Linn.) Finely cut annual moun- 
tain cress, flowering in spring on the low 
rocks, over against Goram's chair in Henbury. 
Ray, 304. 

Neckera crispa. Curled Neckera ; on St. Vincent's rocks. 

heteromalla. Lateral N eckera ; at Badminton. 

Nymphea major lutea. Greater Water Lilly ; between Ad- 
dlestrop Bridge, and Dailsford. 

Ophrys apifera. Bee Orchis; near Clifton. 

muscifera. Fly Orchis; 1 on St. Vincent's 

Spiralis. Triple Ladies Traces. J Rocks. 

Orchis ustulata. Dwarf Orchis, on Wick cliffs. 

Phleum paniculatum. Branched Cat's Tail Crass ; in meadows 
below King's Weston, and in Bardminston 
Park. 

Pimpinelladioica. Rock Parsley ; on St. Vincent's rocks. 

Poo, procumbens Procumbent Meadow Grass ; at the foot of 
St. Vincent's Rocks, near the Hot well house. 

Poligonum minus. Small Knot Grass. Park, 446, 4; on 
the shore of Severn about Weston-Rudder, 584. 
Offington. 

Polypodium Dryopteris. Branched Polypody; in woods near 
Frocester Hill. 

Pelentilla Perna. Spring Cinque foil ; on St. Vincent's rocks, 
and Wick cliffs. 

Pyrola rotundifolia. Round-leaved Winter Green > 

minor. Lesser Winter Green. } in woods. 

Pyrus Aria. White Beam tree ; on Wickcliffs, and St. Vin- 
cent's Rocks. 

Ranunculus parvi florus. Small flowered Crow foot ; on Si. 
Vincent's Rocks. 

Rhamnus Catharticus. Buckthorn ; in woods. 

Rulna Peregrina. Wild Madder ; on St. Vincent's Rocks. 

Salvia prattnsis. Meadow Sage or Clary ; on Wickcliffs. 

Sambucus Ebulus. Dwarf Elder; at Dursley. 

Scilla autumnatis. Lesser autumnal Star Hyacinth; on St. 
Vincent's Rocks. 

Scirpus Adcularis. Least Clubrush ; near Bagshot mills, 
Bristol. 

Scolopendrium Ceterach. Spleenwort or Miltwast, on St. 
Vincent's Rocks. 

Sedum Album. White Stonecrop ; on Wickcliffs. 

detsyphyllum. Round leaved Stonecrop ; on walls about 

Clifton. 

rupestrc. 



428 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



like those of Derbyshire and Devonshire, are go- 
verned by their own rules and customs. Rudder 
mentions a report of a gold mine having been dis- 
covered near the village of Tainton, on the northern 
borders of theforestot'Dean ; and grains of silver in a 
vein of tin ore are also reported to have been found 
at Berry, in the parish of Syston ; but these stories 
rest only on loose tradition. Lead ore is found in 
many parts of the county, but not in sufficient 
quantities to defray the expences of working. 

Ores of this metal are also found at Iron Acton, 
Bitton, Stone, &c. and from the ochreous appear- 
ance of the water, it seems to exist in the low boggy 
meadows near Twyning, and Standish Park ; and 
also at Robin's Wood Hill, near Gloucester. At 
Lydney, and some other places, considerable works 
are carried on, both for smelting and manufacturing 
iron. The furnaces employed in the reduction of 
the ore are between 20 and 30 feet high ; they are 
built of a gritty stone, found in the forest, capable 
of enduring a fire intense enough to melt and break 
down almost any other material. The shape is that 
of an inverted cone, about seven or eight feet in 
diameter at the top, to which the approach is by a 
natural or artificial bank. The process is begun by 
throwing into the furnace some lighted brushwood, 
then charcoal, with the ore and fluxing matters ; 
which are usually calcareous and argillaceous stones, 
sometimes quartz and flints. These materials are 
thrown in alternately, and the whole covered with 
charcoal. The blast is made at a hole, about three 
inches diameter, towards the bottom, by two large 
bellows, nearly 30 feet long, which are driven by 
water, and work by alternate movements. At an 
orifice somewhat lower, the dross which separates 
from the metal in fusion, is let out : quite at the 
bottom is another opening, occasionally closed with 
a plug, through which the metal is let out, upon a 
bed of sand, to the length of 30 feet every 24 
hours. A large groove is formed on the sand, 
which serves to convey the motal to several grooves 
on each side, smaller and shorter. In the former 
are cast, the sows, and in the latter, the pigs of iron ; 
both of which are carried to the finery and chafery. 
On the hearth of the finery is a large charcoal fire, 
excited by bellows somewhat smaller than those 
used at the furnaces. The ends of two or three 



Scdum rupfstre. St. Vincent's rotk Slonecrop ; on St. Vin- 

{cut's Ri>cks. 
Seraiiias grandiflnra. White Helleborine ; in woods near 

Uley. 

- rulira. Red Flelleborine ; on Hampton Common. 
Sison xegetum. Corn Honewort; in corn fields about Bristol. 
Sityathruan narrate. W nil rocket ; near Bristol Hot welis. 
Sylvestre. Wild rocket on the banks of the 

Wye. 
Smyrnium Olusutrum. Alexanders ; on St. Vincent's Rocks, 

and elsewhere. 
Tltlaspi (irvcnst: Treacle Mustard; in a field in this County, 

near the Cyinmt-n, Monmouthshire. 
Tragopagon Porrioliitm. Purple Coatsbeard; in meadows 

beyond St. Vincent's Rocks. 



pigs or sows are put into the finery together, where 
softening gradually, the metal is stirred and work- 
ed till it runs into one mass or lump, which is called 
half-bloom. This is taken out, and (while glowing 
with heat) is first submitted to the stroke of sledges, 
and afterwards of a large weighty hammer, moved 
by a water-wheel. By these operations, the iron is 
beaten into a thick, short, square form ; it is then 
again put into the finery, and worked to the shape 
of a bar, with a square nob at each end. In the 
chafery it is reduced into bars of the required shape 
and size. The most ancient works employed for the 
reduction of ore, were called Blomaries, or Rlo- 
mary Forges ; but the particular period at which 
they were first employed is unknown. The process 
of obtaining the iron was elaborate and tedious ; 
and the operations being all carried on without the 
aid of machinery, the quantity produced was incon- 
siderable, as the blast was not sufficiently powerful 
to effect a complete fusion of the ores : hence the 
scoria, or cinders, found in large heaps in different 
parts of the forest, contained a great proportion of 
metal, and for a considerable time after the intro- 
duction of furnaces, were used as the principal ma- 
terials in obtaining iron. The cinders were parti- 
cularly useful in facilitating the fusion of the forest 
ores ; but the increased consumption having occa- 
sioned them to become scarce, other ores more easy 
of fusion, and productive of metal, have been lat- 
terly introduced, and in some furnaces, have entirely 
superseded the use of the forest ores. The scoria, 
or dross, which rises upon the surface of the metal 
in the furnaces now in use, has the name of scruff, 
and consists of a vitreous substance, more or less 
mixed with the impurities which arise from the ore 
in its fluid state. The best is used as an ingredient 
in the manufacture of common green glass ; for 
which purpose it is picked out, and reduced to a 
fine powder, by large stamping engines ; after 
which, the lighter substances are washed away. 
Sometimes among the scruff, during the process of 
stamping, are found considerable quantities of gra- 
nulated iron, and ragged lumps, which are called 
shot, and scap iron : these are separated by the 
stampers, and carried to the forges to be worked 
up with the pig iron. Pyrites, or sulphnret of iron, 
has been found in great abundance, and in various 



Trifolium maritimum. Teasel-headed Trefoil ; near Bristol, 
plentifully. 

Scabrum. Scabrous trefoil; on Wirk( lifts. 

oruithapndiaides. Bird's foot Trefoil ; on St. Vin- 
cent's Rocks. 

Turritis hirsuta. Hairy Tower Mustard ; on St. Vincent's 
Hocks and Wickcliffs. 

glabra. Smooth Tower Mustard; on St. Vincent's 

Rocks. 

Veronica montana. Mountain Speedwell ; at Shortwood, 
Pucklechurcht plentifully. 

spicttta. Spiked Speedwell ; at St. Vincent's Rock. 

(''icialathyroides. Spring Vetch ; on St. Vincent's Rocks. 
Many curious Plants about Thornbury, Rudder, 749. 



ft 



forms 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



forms of combination, but has not hitherto been 
applied to any useful purpose. Lapis Calamiaaris, 
or oxyd of ziuc, is found at Redland and Yate, and 
in small quantities, among the lime-stone rocks at 
oilier places. Coal is particularly abundant in the 
forests of Dean and Kingswood ; from the latter of 
which the city and neighbourhood of Bristol are 
chiefly supplied. The substance is, indeed, report- 
ed to be found every whore within the elliptic range 
of lime-stone rocks, which begin at Cromhall, and 
expand on each side till they again meet in Somer- 
setshire. Upwards of 129 pits are contained in the 
forest of Dean ; but none of them have been carried 
to any vast depth, as the usual methods of freeing 
collieries from water, by steam and other engines, 
hare scarcely been introduced. In the parish of 
Westerleigh, particularly at Coal-pit Heath, very 
extensive works are carried on. The coal strata dip 
to the east, about one foot in 25 : the thickness of 
the veins varies from two feet to five. The coal is 
generally small, but burns well, and without cinders. 
The average depth of the pits is between 30 and 40 
fathoms ; the deepest pits are about 50 fathoms. 
Abundance of coal is also obtained at Margotsfield, 
Bitton, and Pucklechurch : it abounds alse at Sys- 
ton, Iron-Acton, and Wick and Abston. la the 
latter parish, the cliffs rise perpendicularly to the 
height of 200 feet and upwards, and consist of a 
Beries of beds of lime-stone and petrosilex, alternat- 
ing with each other, exhibiting, towards the west, a 
vein of coral, 1 1 inches thick ; and another of lead, 
(both formerly worked,) with a mass of petrosilex 
on each side. In the centre of the glen is a bed of 
lime-stone, nearly (M)0 yards broad, lying between 
two beds of petrosilex, of nearly the same dimen- 
sions, all dipping to the north-west, in an angle of 
CO feet with the plane of the horizon. In this are 
embedded lead ore, sptithous iron ore, caulk, or 
barytcs, and a large species of anomia. The divi- 
sion of petrosilex adjoining (o this lead on the east, 
combines again with the limn rock on the road to 
Deyuton, and at this union becomes a mill-stone, or 
pudding-stone. By the side of the road, nearer to 
Bristol, under the surface of the red soil, arc some- 
times found a great abundance of geodes, or no- 
dules, containing beautiful quartz crystals, with 
ealcareous dog-tooth spar. Lime-stone of superior 
quality, and in great abundance, is found at Crom- 
hall, whence it extends to the south-east as far as 
Sodbury, and on the south-west to Aust Cliff, 
where it terminates : veins of lead ore, and sulphate 
of stronthian occur in it at various places. Aust 
Cliff is composed of two strata of clay ; the upper 
of a blue, and the under of a red tinge ; these rest 
upon a grey lime-stone rock ; but embedded in the 
lower stratum, is one of gypsum, of great depth 
and extent, continued through the counties of Mou- 
mouth and Glamorgan, and stretching as far as 
Tcnby, in Glamorganshire', its dip is about 20 to 
the south-east : two veins of sulphate of stronthian 
occur on this spwt. The rocks of Clifton are also 
VOL. v. NO. 76. 



composed of Hme-'stone, and vast quantities are 
annually burnt into lime. In this county, as in 
Derbyshire, large chasms, and fissures of consider- 
able dq>th, are found in the lime-stone strata, but 
none of them display the magnificence of those in 
the Peak. Pellucid quartz crystals, hexagonal, and 
terminated by detached pyramids, are found in the 
crevices of the strata at Clifton : these were for- 
merly in considerable request, under the name of 
British diamonds. Toad-stone is said to be abun- 
dant in the neighbourhood of Thornbury. Free- 
stone is found on the Cotswolds, and various other 
places. At Dursley is a stratum of tophus, or puff- 
stone, so soft as to admit of being worked with 
extreme facility, but becoming uncommonly hard 
and durable by exposure to the atmosphere. On 
Dagham Down, near the surface, embedded iu 
black earth, detached blocks of stone are found, of 
curiously grotesque and singular forms, occasioned 
by circular perforations : this stone is chiefly used 
for grottoes, and to ornament rustic buildings, 
Lime-stone, bearing a good polish, and resembling 
Derbyshire marble, is met with on the same down. 
The Cotham stone is a natural, but rather scarce 
production, of great curiosity : it lies in detached 
masses, wifhin the surface of the ground. The 
upper side is full of nodules and bunches ; the pro- 
minences en some of the stones, resembling the in- 
terlacings of ivy, crossing each other. The blocks 
are sometimes two feet and a half long, and seven 
or eight inches thick ; cut longitudinally, and po- 
lished, they exhibit the appearance of landscapes, 
trees, shrubs, and rivers : in general, they are used 
rough in the rustic work of gateways, and similar 
buildings. Grit-stone is found at Frampton-Cotte- 
rell, and in several other parts. 

FOSSILS.] The fossils of this county are ex- 
ceedingly numerous. They are found both on the 
hills, and in the vale; in the latter, the Conmcv 
Ammonis, ami Concha; Rugosa?, are particularly 
abundant. Frethern Cliff contains a variety of fos- 
sils ; and many extraneous fossils, with bones of 
large animals, have been found in Weslbury Cliff, 
embedded in an indurated blue clay, and sometimes 
enveloped fn martial pyrites. Asteriw are abun- 
dant at Pyrton, in Lydney parish, and under th<? 
adjacent cliffs, on the banks of the river : they ar6 
also found at Lassingtou, Dursley, Sherbourn, and 
Robin Hood's Hill. The Asteria Coliimnaris has 
been found in the quarries at Winrush ; and also the 
Seliquastra, or Fossil Pods, as well as several in- 
valvular petret'actions. Astroites, striated, of a pen- 
tagonal shape, seldom exceeding three inches in 
size, have been met with in abundance at Lassing- 
toa, Wick, and Abston, and other places : in the 
latter parish, are serpentine Stones, and bcleranitea. 
On the descent of the hill, from Cross-panels to 
Sodbury, the banks, on each side, are full of bdc:n- 
nites, ribbed nautili, &c. and, in a quarry, near the 
entrance of that town, are various musses ol' bivalve 
shells. Various coralloids, anomi:", cotjMea?, au>l 
5 Q uthci* 



450 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



other bodies, are plentiful at Sherbourne, North- 
leach, Dursley, &c. In the fields near Aston, 
stones resembling a duck's bill, are obtained, aid 
-others of a serpentine form. Fossils of the peri- 
winkle and oyster species, are met with at Badmin- 
ton and Didmarton ; and in the grounds near the 
latter, thunder stones, or St. Cuthbert's beads, are 
frequently discovered. 

MEDICINAL SPRINGS.] The only medicinal waters 
of note, in this county, are those at Cheltenham, which 
will be duly noticed, in onr account of that place. 

ETYMOLOGY.] The county of Gloucester appears 
to have derived its name from its chief town, a city ; 
and that, again, from Gloew, a British prinee, its 
founder, who is supposed to have lived at the com- 
mencement of the Roman period of British history. 
He is styled, in ancient pedigrees, Gloew Gwlad 
Lydan ; or Glcew, Lord of the Broad Region. The 
British name Caer Gltp.w, or Glcew's Fortress, was 
changed by the Romans, into Clevurn, or Glevum : 
the Saxons, adding C ester, signifying a fortress, it 
was called Gleaucester ; hence, Gloucestershire. 

GENERAL HISTORY. ] Previously to the arrival of 
the Romans, the inhabitants of the chief parts of Glou- 
cestershire, and Oxfordshire, appear to have been dis- 
tinguished by the appellation of Dobuni ; a name sup- 
posed to have been derived from the British Dwfn, 
denoting inhabitants of low, or vale, districts. Dio 
calls them Boduni, a term of similar import : Bodo, 
or Bodun, according to Pliny, signifying deep, in the 
ancient Gaulish language. The particular tract 
inhabited by the Dobuni, is described, by Whitaker, 
as that part of Gloucestershire lying north of the 
hill of Wottpn-under-Edge, and east of the hills 
which bound the eastern side of the Vale of the 
Severn, and the low vallies of Oxfordshire, on 
the north of the Thames, down to the con- 
fluence of the Tame, and the country about that 
river, up to its source in Buckinghamshire ; their 
north-western and northern boundaries being the 
summit of the chain of hills on those sides of the 
two last mentioned counties ; their eastern limit 
were the hills which extend at some distance along 
the same side of the Tame, through its whole course. 
On the arrival of the Romans, the Dobuni appear 
to have been subject to their neighbours, the Cat- 
teucblani ; but about A. D. 45, they submitted to 
Aulus Plantius, the Propraetor, who placed garri- 
sons among them, and according to the supposition 
of Fosbrooke, in his history of this county, the dis- 
trict now called Gloucestershire, was afterwards 
made a barrier country, and defended against the 
incursions of the Silures, by u chain of forts. On 
the division of the island into Britannia Priraa, et 
Secunda, that part of Gloucestershire which lies 
south-east of the Severn, was comprehended in the 
former province ; the other part in the latter. After 
the subsequent division made under Constantine, 
the whole county was included in the province i 
named Flavia Caasariensis. It is evident, observes 
Fosbrooke, " from the ruins which have been at va- 

6 



rious times excavated, that this county, from Ciren- 
cestcr to Painswick, Bisley, Sapperton, Woodches- 
ter, Uley, Kingscote, and other adjoining places, 
was much peopled with Romans, or Romanized 
Britons ; that Cirencester was the great metropolis, 
or resort of pleasure and amusement ; while Glou- 
cester, and the hills about the Severn, were the 
great military positions ; the last city, on account of 
the river, having peculiar advantages with respect 
to commerce." Under the dominion of the Saxons, 
Gloucestershire formed part of the Mercian king- 
dom, and Winchcombe and King-Stanley are men- 
tioned as residences of the Anglo-Saxon monarchs. 
On the division of Mercia into five bishoprics, after 
the conversion of the Saxons, Ihe greatest part of 
this county was included under that named Wicciae, 
and from this appellation, the Dobuni were after- 
wards termed Wiccii. " The meaning of the name 
Huiccii, orWiccii," observes Fosbrooke, " has ex- 
ercised the skill of etymologists : Dr. Thomas fol- 
lows those who derive the word from Wic, which 
among other significations, in Saxon, was used to 
express the creeks, curvatures, or windings of river 
banks ; but besides, that the Severn, in gliding 
through Worcestershire and Gloucestershire, has 
fewer windings than most other rivers, how unlikely 
is it, that the eastern part of Cotswold Downs, near 
Blockley and Iccomb, should have the name of 
Mons Wiccissa, Wiccian Hill, from the meanders 
of a river, which glides at so great a distance from 
it. Yet so we find it named in a charter, De Os- 
walde's Lawe, ascribed to King Edgar. A learned 
writer, Carte, who has sifted the remains of British 
antiquity with great diligence, proposed another 
conjecture : he observes that the great forests which 
spread themselves over the greater part of Worces- 
tershire, and run far into the adjacent counties, were 
iu those times, useful chiefly for the excellent pan- 
nage or mast they afforded for hogs ; whence, as the 
wealth of the inhabitants consisted in droves of these 
animals, the province itself might have its name from 
them ; and from hukh, the British word for porous, 
be denominated Huicca, or in Latin Wicci; and its 
people Wiccii." Other writers have derived th 
term from Wiches, or briny wells ; salt being an- 
ciently the principal article of traffic in this pro- 
vince. A late writer says, that the words huic and 
wic meant land on some border, and therefore that 
" the Wiccii were dwellers on border land. At 
what time the county obtained its present name, is 
unknown ; but it appears that Wiccia, and Glewan- 
cester-scira, were both used about the same period. 
Gloucestershire continued part of the Mercian king- 
dom, till the union under Egbert. Under the En- 
glish monarchs, it was miserably harassed by the 
Danes, whose General was Gurman. This county 
also suffered much in the civil wars, between Queen 
Maud, and King Stephen. In the reign of King 
Henry the Second, they were much harassed by 
the incursions of the Welch ; and in the barons 
wars, they sided with the barons. 

ANTIQUITIES, 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



431 



ANTIQUITIES, ROMAN ROADS, &c.] The prin- 
cipal antiquities of this county, will be noticed in. our 
accounts of Gloucester Cathedral, Tewkesbury 
Church, Cirencester, Fairford, Stroud, Wickwar, 
Campden, Cleave, Down Ampney, Lechlade, 
Wlnterburn, Wotton-under-Edge, and Westbury 
Churches ; Oakley Hales Abbey, Lanthony Priory, 
Beverstone, Benkley Sudley, St. Briavel's, and 
Thornbury Castles ; Newark, Pen Park Hole, &c. 
There are several ancient camps, and Roman roads, 
in this county. Of the latter, the principal were 
the Ikenild Street ; the Inning, or Ermiug Street ; 
the Foss Way ; and the Via Julia. The Ikenild 
Street crosses Oxfordshire, and entering Glouces- 
tershire at Eastleach, proceeds to Cirencester and 
Aust, the Trajectus Augusti of the Romans. The 
Ironing Street is supposed to have led from Caer- 
leon, in Monmouthshire, to Gloucester, and thence 
up Birdlip Hill, to Cirencester, and Cricklade ; 
proceeding from the latter towards Southampton. 
The Foss Way enters Gloucestershire at Lemiug- 
ton, proceeding through Morton -in -Marsh to Stow 
on-the-Wold, passes on to North-leach, leaving 
Burton-on-the-Water about half a mile to the east; 
then crossing the Colne at Foss Bridge, it joins 
the Ikenild about half a mile east from Cirencester ; 
hence it proceeds westward, and leaving Glouces- 
tershire at the distance of about five miles, traverses 
the western side of Wiltshire, in its course to Bath. 
The Via Julia led from Bath across the Severn into 
Monmouthshire, whence its course was continued 
through Glamorganshire, to Caermarthenshire and 
St. David's. 

CIVIL, AND ECCLESIASTICAL DIVISIONS.] For 
local purposes, this county has been separated into 
four divisions, subdivided into twenty-seven hun- 
dreds (vide Population Table; comprehending 335 
parishes, and seven parts of parishes. It has 96 
acting county magistrates, and 14 petty sessions. 
The whole county, with the exception of the Cha- 
pelries of Icomb and Cow-hony-born, is included 
within the diocese of Gloucester, which compre- 
hends one archdeaconry, and 10 deaneries.* 

PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.] The number 
of representatives returned from this county to Par- 
liament, are eight ; .viz. two for the shir, two for 
the city, two for Tewkesbury, and two for Giren- 
cester. 

MANUFACTURES.] " The city of Gloucester," 
observed Rudder, " was famous for its cloth manu- 
facture many centuries ago. Brook Street, situated 
upon Fullbrook, was the place of habitation for 
clothiers, dyers, and shearmen ; and even as lately 
as 1029, there was a company of clothiers in that 
city. It was -considerable at Cirencester, in tlie 
reign of Henry the Fourth, who granted a charter 
to a company of weavers there, which still subsists. 




win nai iitiiutcu HUIII *ji. A^VIU >> aim uiavuBcu unui/u 

of Gloucester. In July 1781, he was translated to the see of 



It has flourished also, at different times, in various 
parts of the county; but Nature pointing out the 
most convenient situation for carrying on the manu- 
facture, which requires plenty of water for driving 
the fulling mills, and scouring of wool, it has long 
seated itself principally on the borders of the little 
rivers and brooks in the parishes of Bisley, Hamp- 
ton, Stroud, Painswick, Woodchester, Horsley, 
Stonehouse, Stanley, Uley, Dursley, Wotton-un- 
der-Edge, and neighbouring places of less note, 
'Tis there the master clothiers live, and the most 
curious operations of the manufacture are performed 
under their immediate inspection ; but the women 
and children all over the county, are chiefly employ- 
ed in carding of wool, and spinning of yarn." In 
addition to the woollen manufactures of the county, 
such as . clothing stuffs, blankets, rugs, carpets, 
stockings, &c. bar iron, edge tools, wire, nails, and 
many other articles, are manufactured in large 
quantities. In the neighbourhood of Bristol, are 
some extensive founderies ; as well as different 
works for making brass and wire, vitriol, red lead,, 
sal ammoniac, &c. At Frampton Cottcrell, is a 
considerable manufactory of felt hats ; and, at Glou- 
cester vast quantities of pins are made. 

MARKET TOWNS.] The number of market-towns 
in this county, including the city of Gloucester, ap- 
pears to be twenty-eight as follows : 

Tbtfns. Market Days. 

Berkeley Wednesday 

Bilsley Thursday. 

Campdeo Wednesday. 

Cheltenham Thursday. 

tester ^^ 

Colford Friday. 

Dean Monday. 

Dursley Thursday. 

Fairford Thursday. 

Gloucester \ W ><W and 

( Saturday. 

Lechlade . Tuesday. 

Marshfield Tuesday. 

Minchin Hampton Tuesday. 

Morton in Marsh Tuesday. 

Newent Friday. 

Newenh im Friday. 

Northleach Wednesday. 

Painswick Tuesday. 

Sodlniry. Tliur>day. 

Stanley St. Leonard Saturday. 

Stow on the Wold Thursday. 

Stroud ., Friday. 

Tetbury Wednesday. 

Tewkesbury..... \ ^ffig.^ 

Thornbury Sat unlay. 

Wickwar Monday. 

Winchcombe Saturday, 

Wolton -under-Edge .-. Friday. 



Ely, and succeeded by Dr. Halifax, who being promoted to 
that of St. Asaph, in 1789, L>r. Beaclon was elected bishop of 
this diocese. In 1802, Dr. Iluntingford was consecrated, upon 
the translation of Dr. Beadon to the bishopric of Bath and Wells. 

POPULATION^ 



432 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



] The population of Gloucester- 
shire, in the year 1700, was 135,200; in 1750, it 
was 207,800 : in 1801, including the hundred of 
Barton Regis, and the city of Bristol, which it has 
been customary to consider as belonging to Somer- 
setshire, its population amounted to 250,809 ; ex- 



clusively of the city of Bristol, &c. it was 187,164 ; 
in 1811, including Bristol, &c. it was 285,514; ex- 
clusively it was 209,081. The average number of 
deaths, in this county, is one in 61 ; of baptisms, 
one iu 36 ; and of marriages, one u 120. 



Summary o/ the Population of Me County of Gloucester, as publithed by Authority of Parliament, in 181 1 . 





HOUSES. 


OCCUPATIONS. 


< 

PERSONS. 


HUNDREDS, &c. 


Inhabited. 


si 

18 . 

. K "3 
f V V 

JS'5. 

! 


A 

c 

2 

a 


Uninhabited. 


Families chiefly 
employed in 
Agriculture. 


> . 

S.s i 

= T3 *J 

^2 - 

tn ' r *~* ' 

8.2 _ 
= o.- s 

E S 2 a 
o. H ,a 


c 
, v 

11 iS 

&B?S 

fcSlw 

-X ~ oc 

o l:f 

J. 8 


Males. 


Females. 


Total 
of 
Persons. 


Berkeley 


3808 
2975 
441 
1080 
839 
2283 
1329 
1798 
299 
975 
622 
1564 
1540 
761 
2693 
380 
2330 
2806 
697 
677 
1406 
686 
1082 
ISO 
840 
704 
1949 

1 1940 

902 
1509 
9.>9 


4553 
3193 
499 
1195 
905 
2376 
1475 
2058 
326 
1075 
660 
1815 
1703 
867 
2911 
432 
2510 
2982 
787 
751 
1.552 
723 
1194 
219 
101 1 
835 
2217 

17597 

948 
1716 
1007 


23 
20 
5 
15 
4 
35 
2 
129 
1 
S 
3 
15 
14 
30 
23 
3 
27 
13 
7 

4 
5 
13 

14 

7 
14 

321 

4 
15 
1 1 


148 
222 
16 
33 
26 
63 
25 
123 
14 
33 
18 
43 
26 
25 
84 s 
15 
75 
264 
16 
21 
31 
17 
29 
3 
22 
22 
82 

425 

24 
20 
33 


1711 
1221 
240 
713 
644 
792 
873 
594 
286 
867 
458 
1230 
1093 
584 
1858 
322 
83 1 
761 
335 
524 
796 
573 
674 
174 
602 
559 
783 

394 

207 
12 
71 


2215 
1594 
176 
280 
145 
1344 
416 
788 
34 
141 
140 
366 
412 
126 
680 
79 
92j 
1958 
256 
143 
457 
112 
340 
37 
323 
154 
1218 

12420 

526 
1312 
873 


627 
378 
83 
202 
116 
240 
186 
676 
6 
67 
62 
219 
198 
157 
373 
31 
756 
263 
196 
84 
299 
33 
180 
8 
86 
122 
216 

47*3 

215 
392 
63 


10114 
6546 
1235 
2886 
2123 
5898 
3014 
4452 
694 
2273 
1560 
4117 
388*7 
2242 
6299 
964 
6353 
6320 
1968 
1640 
34:>3 
1780 
2804 
503 
2450 
2009 
4809 

32842 

2030 
3726 
.2201 


11248 
7895 
1173 
2824 
2120 
5667 
3235 
5282 
722 
2376 
1683 
4356 
4183 
2385 
6500 
914 
6585' 
7332 
1971 
1663 
3626 
1773 
3029 
476 
2503 
1980 
5547 

43591 

2510 
4554 
2619 


21362 
14441 
2408 
5710 
4243 
11565 
6249 
9734 
1416 
4649 
3243 
8473 
8070 
4627 
1J799 
1878 
12938 
13652 
3939 
3303 
7079 
3553 
5833 
979 
4953 
3989 
10356 

76433 

4540 

8280 
4820 


Bisley 


Blidesloe 


Bolloe 


Bradley 


Briavell's, St 




Cheltenham 




Crowthorue and Minety 


Duditoneand King's Barton 


Ilenliury 




Lancaster, Duclw of 


Langley and Swineslu-ad.... 
Longtrees 




Rapsgate 
















City of Briuol, with Barton ^ 


Borough of Cirencesler 


Borough of Tewkcsbury..., 


Totals 


52042 


62092 


782 


1998 


20782 


29988 


11322 


133192 


152322 


285514 





CHIEF TOWNS, PARISHES, &c. 
ACTON.] Tbe village of Iron Acton, 3| miles 
W. N. W. from Chipping Sodbury, takes its 
name frgju the great quantity of iron ore and ciu- 
Inrs dug up in the parish. In the Church-yard, 
are the remains of an elegant cross, in the pointed 
style, apparently of the time of Henry the Fourth, 
from their being an entrance on the north side, 
Lysons, who has given a view of it in his Glouces- 
tershire Antiquities, imagines it to have been a 
preaching 



ADELSTROP.] At Adelstrop, anciently Eadels- 
thorp, 3{ miles E. by N. from Stow-on-the-Wold, 
is llie seat of James Henry Leigh, Esq. a lineal de- 
scendant of Sir Thomas Leigh, to whom the manor, 
which had previously belonged to the Abbey of 
Kvesham, was granted in the year 1554. Tle 
house is a very ancient building, but has been 
much enlarged and improved : the pleasure-grounds 
were laid out by Rcpton. 

ALBERSLEY.] Aldersley, two miles S.S.E. froit 
Wottoii-under-Edge, was the birth-place of tin 

celebrate* 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



Celebrated Sir Matthew Hale.* Great quantities of 
fossil, cockle, and oyster-shells, have been found in 
this village. 

ALMONDSBURY.] Almondsbury, a small village, 
4| .miles S. by W. from Thornliury, is situated 
belo.v two singular lime-stone hills, which abruptly 
terminate the line through which the river Boyd 
flows to the Avon. The prospects from these 
heights, are uncommonly extensive and line. The 
greater part of this parish, however, consists of low 
pasture, partially defended from the inundations of 
the river by sea-walls. Specimens of lead ore, and 
of copper, have been found here. The village is 
said to have derived its name, from having been the 
burying-place of Alcmond, a Saxon Prince, and 
father of King Egbert ; but more probably from a 
burg, or fortification, constructed by him, the re-, 
mains of which are yet visible on an eminence east- 
ward of the Church. The traces of a camp are yet 
perceptible round the brow of Knowle Hill, within 
the area of which is the manor-house, the property 
of Thomas Masters, Esq. 

The interior of Almondsbury Church displays 
specimens of Norman architecture ; and in the north 
part of the transept, is an ancient tomb of an eccle- 
siastic. In a tumulus at Over, in this parish, open- 
ed in the year 1650, was found a human skeleton, 
which conjecture deemed to be that of King Oflfa, 
and which report affirmed to have exceeded the 
common stature by three feet. 

ALNEY.] The isle of Alney, Which comprehends 
many acres of fine rich pasture, lies on the north- 
west side of Gloucester, in the river Severn. It is 
the site of a small tract of land, formed by the se- 
paration of the river, into two channels. This spot 
is famous on account, of its having been the scene of 
the single combat between Edmund Ironside and 
Canute, the Dane ; when, after a doubtful contest, it 
was agreed to divide England belween the rivals. 

ALVINGTON.] {See Li/tlney.) 

AMPNEY.] There are four parishes of tlijs name, 
in the county of Gloucester : Ampney Crucis, 3 
miles E. by S. ; Ampney St. Mary, 4 miles E. by 
S. ; Ampuey St. Peter, 4J miles E. by S. from Ci- 
rencester ; .and Ampney Down, 4 miles S.W. by 
W. from Fairford, on the verge of the county, ad- 
joining Wiltshire. The Church of Ampuey Down 
is curious, and is said to have been built by the 
Knights Templars, about the year 1260. Under 
the window at the south end of the transept, is the 
tomb of Sir Nicholas de Villiers, and his Lady, with 
their effigies, represented under an arch. The knight 
is represented as a crusader, in mail and surtout, with 
his legs crossed, his i'eet resting on a lion, and his 
right hand on the hilt of his sword : on his left arm 

* Sir Matthew Hale was born in the year I GOO. He was 
educated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, whence he removed to 
Lincolns' Inn. He was one of Archbishop Laud's counsel, 
and also of many other sufferers in the rebellion, and likewise 
that of the King. He accepted of a Judge's place from Crom- 
well, but refused to act under his son Richard. He was made 

VOL. ii. NO. 76. 



is a shield, bearing the cross of St. George, charged 
with five escalop-shells. This figure is of hard 
blue stone ; that of the lady is of free-stone, and 
much mutilated. Below the efligies of the Knight, 
is a mutilated inscription, in the Saxon character. 

The manor-house, which was erected by theHun- 
gerfords, in the reign of Henry the Eighth, was, a 
few years ago, repaired and modernised. It be- 
longs, with the manor, to the family of Eliot, of Port 
Eliot, in Cornwall. 

ASTON.] The manor of Somerville Aston, six 
miles N. by E. from Winchcombe, has been vested 
in the family of Lord Somerville, upwards of six 
centuries. Of the ancient mansion, surrounded by 
a moat, near the Church, there are now no re- 
mains. 

ATEMNQ.] The manor of Avening (3 miles N. 
by W. from Tetbury) granted by the Conqueror to 
the Nunnery of Caen, in Normandy, has been in the 
possession of the Sheppard family ever since the 
17th century. The present owner resides at Gat- 
combe Park which is partly in Avening parish, and 
partly in that of Minchin Hampton in an elegant 
modern building, erected about 40 years ago. In 
a field adjoining the park, is a large oval tumulus, 
which formerly had large erect stones at each end. 
On the summit stands a large fragment of rock, 
evidently a sepulchral monument, which has been 
known for ages, by the name of Tingle Stone. In 
the common field, near it, are two large stones, set 
upright in the ground. Tradition assigns one, or 
both, to the memory of Long, a Danish chieftain ; 
whence the name of Long's Stone, or Pillar : near 
it two ancient rings were dug up^ 

Aveniug Church contains several monumental 
records of the Drivers, formerly Lords of the 
neighbouring manors. In the north transept, is a 
monument to the memory of Henry Brydges, Esq. 
seventh son to John, Lord Chandos, of Sudley. 

AITST.] At Aust, or Aust Cliff, 4| miles W.S.W. 
j from Thornbury, is a celebrated ferry over the Se- 
! vern, into South Wales. The Propra;tor Ostorius 
Scapula, was accustomed to ferry over his legions 
near this place. In the time of Edward the Elder, 
who was lying here with his army, Llewelyn, Prince 
of Wales, was stationed at Beachlcy, on the oppo- 
site bank. Llewelyn, who was required to pay ho- 
mage to the English Sovereign, refused to cross 
the passage ; but Edward immediately crossing in 
a boat, was seen, as he approached the shore, by 
Llewelyn, who, overcome by the condescension, 
rushed into the water, and taking the monarch upon 
his shoulders, carried him to land, and did him 
homage for'' the principality. The Severu is here 
nearly two miles over. 



Chief Baron of the Exchequer, soon after the Restoration, and 
afterwards Chief Justice of the King's Bench. 11 is remains were 
interred in the parish Church. He was a learned man, and an 
upright judge. His writings are numerous on theological, phi- 
losophical, and legal subjects. 

5 a BADMINTON.] 



434 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



BADMINTON.] Great Badminton Domesday 
Madmintune 5f miles E. by N. from Chipping 
Sodbury, has been theseatof theduealfarailyof Beau- 
fort, ever since the demolition of Ragland Castle, in 
the civil wars. Badminton House, the family resi- 
dence of the Duke, is situated in a noble park, 
nearly nine miles in circumference, through which 
various avenues have been formed. It was erected 
by the first Duke of Beaufort, in the year 1682. 
It is a very extensive building", on the French mo- 
del. In the hall is a large sarcophagus of Roman 
sculpture, representing a bacchanalian procession ; 
this was given to Henry, the third Dnke of Beau- 
fort, by Cardinal Alberoni. By that nobleman, 
who died in 1745, many curious and original paint- 
ings were procured, during his residence in Italy 
Among them is a Holy Family, by Raphael ; am 
Several by Guido, and Carlo Dolci, are highly 
esteemed. He also purchased the very singular am 
finely-painted satirical picture, by Salvator Rosa, 
for which that artist was expelled Rome : " the 
Sovereigns of the European nations are here de- 
picted by different animals ; as an eagle, a wolf, a 
sheep, a hog, a foxj a cow, and an ass ; the latter 
has the pontifical pall thrown over him; and the 
blind goddess, Fortune, is represented showering 
her gifts over the whole group." Some excellent 
landscapes by the Italian masters, are also preserv- 
ed here ; and a very fine series of fourteen portraits 
of the Beauforts, from John of Gaunt, from whom 
they trace their genealogy. 

Badminton Church, which was built by the late 
Duke, in 1783, is remarkably elegant. The pave- 
ment of the altar-part is richly composed of Flo- 
rentine mosaic, displaying the family arms ; and the 
steps are of jasper and verd antique. " On each 
side, is a specimen of monumental statuary by Rys- 
brach, in memory of some of the Beauforts ; and 
the several figures, though somewhat too theatri- 
cally conceived, have great strength of expression, 
arid may be ranked with the most elaborate works 
of that artist. Here is also the lower part of a 
Cartoon of the Transfiguration, by Raphael ; and 
Christ disputing with the Doctors, by Ghezzi." 

BARNSLEY PARK.] About 4J miles E.N.E. from 
Cirencester, is Barnsley Park, the residence of James 
Musgrave, Esq. Lord of the manor. Barnsley was 
formerly the seat of the Pefrots, by whom the man- 
sion, a sumptuous edifice, hi the high Italian style, 
was erected. The saloon is magnificently decorated 
with fresco painting. The park is about three miles 
in circumference. The ancient manor-house stands 
itear the middle of the village of Barnsley, but it is 
much dilapidated. The Church, a small irregular 
building, is said to have been built by Sir Edmond 
Tame, Knt. of Fairford, who occasionally resided 
here. 

BARRINGTON.] Great Barrington, 5| miles E. 



* " The subtle Earl Godwin," observes Walter Mapes, 



by S. from Northleich, is a parish containing about 
1000 acres, and including some portion of Oxford- 
shire within its limits, as well as a small tract be- 
longing to Berkshire. Previously to the Conquest, 
the manor was held by Earl Harold. The present 
owner is Lord Dynevor, grandson of the late Mary, 
Countess of Talbot. 

Barrington Church appears to have been erected 
about the time of Henry the Seventh. Beneath one 
of the windows of the aisle, are the monument and 
effigies of Captain Edmund Bray, grandfather of 
Sir Giles Bray, Lord of the Manor, who is repre- 
sented in armour, with a ruff" round his neck, and 
a sword girt on the " right" side. This peculiarity, 
it is said, originated from the captain having killed 
a man at Tilbury camp, and, in token of his sorrow, 
he determined never more to use his right hand. 
Several others of the Bray family were also buried 
here. In the chancel is a monument, by Nollekens, 
in remembrance of Mary, Countess Talbot, whose 
bust is displayed in statuary marble. The Lord 
Chancellor Talbot was also interred here. 

Barrington Hall, a seat of Lord Dynevor's, 
was built, by the Lord Chancellor TaJbot, in 1734 ; 
soon after which, the ancient manor house was de- 
stroyed by fire. It is an elegant structure, of the 
Doric order, situated on a pleasant eminence, at a 
short distance from the banks of the Winrush. In 
the dining room, are portraits of Adam de Cardon- 
nel, Esq. Secretary at War, in the reign of Queen 
Anne ; and Mary, Countess Talbot, his daughter 
and heiress, who died in the year 1787. The 
grounds furnish a go. id specimen of the ferine orn6e; 
and the park, about three miles in circumference, is 
well planted, with different sorts of trees. 
BEACHLEY.] (See Tydenham.) 
BUCKFORD.] At this village, 5| miles E. N. E. 
from Tewkesbury, formerly stood a Priory of Austin 
Canons, founded in the reign of Henry the Third, 
as a cell to the Abbey of St. Martin and St. Bar- 
bara, in Normandy. The manor has been the pro- 
perty and residence of the Wakeman family about 
two centuries. The spire of the Church, having 
fallen to decay, was taken down in the year 162*2, 
and the present tower erected in its place. 

BERKELEY.] The ancient, but small and now al- 
most disused market town of Berkeley is situated 
upon a pleasant eminence in the beautiful vale of 
Berkeley", almost east from the Severn, 17 miles' 
S. W. from Gloucester, and 113^ miles W. by N. 
from London. The population of this little town, 
according to the returns of 1811, was only 616 ; the 
number of houses, 130. In the Domesday book, 
t is termed a royal domain and free borough. A 
nunnery is said to have existed here in the reign of 
Edward the Confessor ; the frail sisters of which 
were dispossessed of their estates, including the 
nanor, by the craft of Earl Godwin,* who found 

means 



haplain to Henry the Sond 



' lusting not after her person, 
tuA 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



435 



means to introduce into the community, a profligate 
young man, by whom the nuns were seduced. 
This conduct being reported to the king, the nun- 
nery was dissolved, and its possessions granted to 
the Earl. The conqueror afterwards bestowed the 
ma.ior on Roger, surnamed De Berkeley ; a chief- 
tain who had accompanied him to England. Roger 
his grandson, taking part with Stephen, against 
Henry the Second, was deprived of his lands ; and 
Berkeley was given by that monarch to Robert 
Fitzharding, Governor of Bristol, in reward for his 
eminent services. This nobleman was descended 
from the kings of Denmark ; and in his posterity 
the extensive manor of Berkeley, one of the largest 
in England, is still vested. 

Berkeley Church appears to be of the age of 
Henry the Second ; though it has undergone vari- 
ous alterations. Near the pulpit is a curious tomb, 
in memory of Thomas, second Lord Berkeley, and 
Margaret, his first wife. Here also are various 
other monuments of this family. The tower, which 
stands at some distance from the Church, was con- 
structed about 60 years ago. In the Church yard 
is the well known ludicrous epitaph, written by 
Dean Swift, in memory of " Dickey Pearce, the 
Earl of Suffolk's fool." 

The town of Berkeley gave birth to Dr. Edward 
Jenner, the celebrated discoverer of vaccination. 

Berkeley Castle appears to have been founded 
by Roger de Berkeley, soon after the Conquest ; but 
various important additions were made to it during 



but her property, passing that way, left there till tie returned 
his nephew, a handsome youth, pretending to be sick, with a 
strict charge not to get well till he had got with child both the 
Abbess and all the nuns that visited him ; and that the young 
man might the easier gain his ends of them, in these visits, he 
left him plenty of rings and girdles to corrupt them by his pre- 
sents. He wanted not much persuasion to undertake this plea- 
sant pursuit ; the way to destruction is easy and quickly learnt, 
and he played the fool cunningly in a scheme so flattering to 
himself. Every circumstance to be wished for by these silly 
women, concurred in his favour; a handsome person, bloom 
of youth, wealth, and engaging manners ; and he took care 
to secure to himself a private apartment. The Devil drove 
out Pallas, and brought in Venus, and made the Church of 
Christ and the Saints an accursed Pantheon, the Temple a 
brothel, and so turned the lambs into wolves. The young 
man having got several of them with child, though spent and 
languid with dalliance, departed victorious, carrying off to his 
Lord, his banners of conquest, to claim the reward of his 
wickedness. The other presently repairs to the King, tells 
him the Abbess and her nuns were pregnant, and common to 
all comers, which he proved by persons sent thither on pur- 
pose." 

* Tradition states, that, when the murder of King Edward 
had been determined on, Adam, Bishop of Hereford, at the 
instigation of the Queen, wrote to his keeper the following 
words; which, not possessing the distinctness imported by 
punctuation, were capable of a double construction : 
" Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est." 
Edward the King kill not to fear is good. 

The keeper, easily divining the wicked wishes of his em- 
ployer, pill his royal master to death According to another 
account, when the death of this unfortunate, but weak sove- 



the reigns of Henry the Second, and Edward the 
Second, and 'Third. The form of the Castle ap- 
proaches nearest to that of a circle; and the build- 
ings are included by an irregular court, with a moat. 
The keep is flanked by three semicircular towers, 
and a square one of subsequent construction : its 
walls are high, and massive : the entrance into it is 
under an arched door- way, with ornamental sculpture 
in the Norman style, similar to one at Arundel Cas- 
tle. This fortress has been the scene of various 
memorable transactions ; the most remarkable, per- 
haps, was that of the murder of Edward the Second, 
in September, in 13-27, thus noticed by Gray: : 

" Mark the year, and mark the night, 
\Vhrn Severn shall re-echo with affright, 
The shrieks of death through Berkeley's roofs that ring; 
Shrieks of an agonizing King !" * 

Berkeley Castle, during the civil wars, was held 
for the king ; and frequent skirmishes took place in 
the town and neighbourhood. In 1645 it was be- 
sieged, and surrendered to the Parliament, after a 
defence of nine days. In the apartments, which are 
mostly low, dark, and void of proportion, are pre- 
served a numerous assemblage of portraits, chiefly 
of the Stratton branch, the bequest of the last heir 
of that family. Besides these portraits, here are 
several miniatures of the Berkeleys, of considerable 
antiquity, and so far curious. A few landscapes, 
by Wouvermans, Claude, Salvator Rosa, &c. com- 
plete the Berkeley collection.! 

BBVERSTONS 



reign, had been resolved on by the Queen, and Mortimer, 
her infamous paramour, he was removed from Kenelworth to 
Berkeley Castle, by Sir John Maltravers, and Sir Thomas 
Gourney, to whose keeping he had been previously commit- 
ted. Thomas, second Loro Berkeley, then owner of the Cas- 
tle, treated him with civility and kinilness, but was, in a short 
time, obliged to relinquish his fortress to the government of 
Maltravers and Gouiney, by whom (lie King was soon after- 
wards murdered, in the most brutal and savage manner. 

" Ipso prostrate, et sub ostio ponderoso detcnto ne surgeret, 
dum tortores imponerent cornu in ano suo (quod dictu vere- 
cundum est) et per foramen immiUerent ignitum veru in vis- 
cera sua." Walsingham's Hist. Ang. p. 127. Thomas de la 
More, who was Privy Counsellor to Edward, and wrote his 
Life, says, that the murder was committed with a plumber's 
iron, " cum ferro plumberri intense ignito." 

" His crie," says Holinshed, " did move many within the 
Castell and town of Birckelei to compassion, plainly hearing 
him utter a waileful noyse, as the tonnrnters were about to 
murder him; so that dyvers being awakened thereby, (as they 
themselves confessed,) prayed hearlilie to God to receyve his 
soule, when they understode by his crie, what the matter- 
ment." A small apartment, called the Dungeon Room, over 
the flight of steps leading into the keep, is shown as the place 
where the cruel deed was committed : at that lime, all the 
light it received, was from arrow slits ; the windows have been 
since introduced. A plaister cast kept here, and said to hav 
been moulded from the King's face alter death, is, in reality, 
a cast from his effigies on the tomb at Gloucester. 

t On the 8th of August, 1810, died, at Berkeley Castle, 
the Right Hon. Frederic Augustus, Earl Berkeley, Viscount 
Dursley, and Baron Berkeley, Lord Lieutenant and Gustos 
Kotuloruro of the County of Gloucester, and of the County 

tad 



436 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



BEVERSTONE CASTLE.] Beverstone, anciently 
Burestan, 2| miles W. N. W. from Tetbury, for- 
merly enjoyed the privilege of a market, long since 
discontinued. The Castle, one of the fortified man- 
sions of the Barons of Berkeley, retains but little 
of its original character ; having been besieged in 
the civil wars, and soon afterwards nearly destroyed 
by fire. It was a square building, with a tower at 
each corner, and surrounded by a moat : only the 
Chapel, one of the towers, and some fragments of 
walls, remain : the Chapel is now occupied as a 
dwelling house. 

BiBi'iiY.] In the 8th century, the little village of 
Bibury, 4| miles N. N. W. from Fairford, belonged 
to the See of Worcester : in the 12th century, it 
was given, with certain restrictions, to the Abbey of 
Osncy, in Oxfordshire; and, in 1547, it was fi- 
lially alienated from the see of Worcester, to the 
Earl of Warwick, from whom the manor has passed 
through various families to Estcourt Cresswell, Esq. ! 
Bibury is a peculiar, possessing jurisdiction over j 
Aldsworth, Barnsley, and Winson ; the Lord of the ; 
Manor, however, claims a prescriptive right of ap- | 
pointing his own official and chancellor, who hath ! 
the recording of wills, and the granting of licenses 
within the peculiar : nor doth the Lord of the Manor 
allow to the Bishop the right of visitation. The 
Church is supposed to have been rebuilt by the 
monks of Osney. The architecture of the north 
and south doors is in the early Norman style. On 
the north wall was a Colossal painting, in fresco, 
of St. Christopher, the sight of whose image, ac- j 
cording to the monkish legends, had sufficient effi- 
cacy to preserve the spectator from sudden or vio- 
lent death : the painting is now obliterated. Seve- 
ral monuments and inscriptions to the memory of 
the Coxwalls, and other families, are in the edifice. ! 

The mansion was built in the reign of James the | 
Second, by Sir Thomas Sackville, of the family of 
the Earls of Dorset. From its situation on an easy 
eminence, it commands a fine view of the river 
Colne, backed by an amphitheatre of low wood, of 
the most variegated foliage, clothing the acclivities 
of the hills, and rendered more beautiful from the 
contrast afforded by the barren downs which appear 
in the distance. 

BIKDLIP HILL.] -Birdlip Hill, 4| miles N. E. 
from Painswick, is celebrated for the extent and 
beauty of the prospect which it commands. Here, 

ami City of Bristol, keeper of St. Briavel's Castle in the 
Forest of Deaii, High Steward of the City of Gloucester, and 
Colonel nf the South Gloucester militia. His Lordship was 
horn oi> the 241 h of Mav, 1743, and succeeded to the title on 
the 9lh of January, 1753. His Lordship was said to have 
been married by banns, in the parish church of Berkeley, oil 
the 30th of March, 1 785, to Mary Cole, daughter of a trades- 
man, at Wutlbn under Edge. As this marriage, or reported 
marriage, was private, and as the register was believed to have 
been destroyed, his* Lordship married the same Lady, at 
La:iibeth Church, Surrey, on the I6ih of May, 1796. Pre- 
viously to 'the death of the Earl, his eldest son, William 
Frederic Fitzliarciinge, Viscount Dun-ley, was elected mem- 



from its lofty summit, the fertile vale of Gloucester, 
rich with woods, and gay with villages, seats, and 
pastures, lies expanded to the view. The back 
ground is formed by the blue mountains of Malvern, 
which, relieving the flatness of the other parts, give 
a sublimely beautiful effect to the whole. The most 
striking feature in the landscape, is the Roman road, 
which leads from the base of the hill to Gloucester, 
in an uninterrupted right line of nearly six miles. 

BISLEY.] The small and little frequented market 
town of Bisley, lies three miles east from Stroud, 
and 98 W. by N. from London. In the fifteenth 
century, the manor belonged to Edward, Duke oi 
York, afterwards Edward the Fourth, about whose 
time the Church is supposed to have been partly 
rebuilt. Under a window, in the south aisle, is the 
monument of a Crusader, reported to represent one 
of the Nottingham family, which was settled at Cotes 
and Cirencester, in the time of Edward the First. 
This building was new pewed in 1771, when a fresco 
painting, about ten feet square, of St. Michael sub- 
duing the fallen angels, in very lively colours, was 
discovered against the north wall ; but it was imme- 
diately defaced : the monuments, &c. are numerous. 
In the Church yard is an ancient stone cross, said 
to have been erected over a deep well, into which a 
man falling, the Church yard was excommunicated 
for three years, and the inhabitants were obliged to 
carry their dead to Bibury. Lysons supposes this 
cross to hate been built in the thirteenth century : 
on its top has been placed the ancient font that was 
removed from the Church, when it was new pewed. 

The extension of the cloth manufacture introduced 
many new inhabitants into this parish, who settled 
on the declivities of the Great Common ; and the 
cottages which they erected now form a detached 
hamlet, called the Lynches. The population, ac- 
cording to the last return, was 4,757. The Common 
was given to the poor of Bisley, by Roger Morti- 
mer, Earl of March, in the reign of Edward the 
Third : it then consisted of 1,200 acres, but has; 
been much lessened by inclosure since that period. 
The celebrated Roger Bacon is traditionally claimed 
as a native of this parish ; but that honour is given 
on clearer evidence, to Ilchester in Somersetshire 
Several Roman antiquities have been found it: 
different parts of this parish. 

HI.YI/.I: CASTLE.] This castellated mansion, the 
seat of S. Harford, Esq. is beautifully situated on u 

ber of Parliament for the County of Gloucester ; and, on hi 
taking his seat, and qualifying as the heir apparent of a Peer 
a petition was presented to the House of Commons, whicl 
led to proceedings in the Upper House; the result of whicl 
was, that Earl Berkeley's first marriage was pronounced " un 
proved" and his eldest son was under the painful necessity of sur 
rendering his title to a younger brother, born subsequently tc 
the marriage at Lambeth. Earl Berkeley's unfortunate con 
duct was accounted for by the situation in life of Lady Berkc 
ley's family, and a declaration his Lordship was understood t 
have made previously to the marriage of his brother, Admirr. 
Berkeley, to Lady Emily Lenox, of his resolution never t 
marry. 

fin 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



437 



fine eminence, rising 1 i'roin the village of Henbury, 
about four miles from Bristol. Several Roman coins 
and other antiquities have beeii found here. It pro- 
bably was the site of a Roman specula, or out- post. 
The name is thought to have been derived from 
J&ihop Blaize, the patron of the wool-combers, to 
whom a Chapel that stood on this eminence was 
dedicated. 

BODDINGTON.] In a field in Boddington manor 
farm, 3-J miles N. W. by W. from Cheltenham, was 
a remarkably large oak, which for several centuries 
attracted much attention ; but on the evening of the 
10th of November, 1790, it was maliciously set on 
fire, and totally consumed. Its dimensions were as 
follows : 

The length 90 feet, 

The circumference of the bottom 56 

The smallest part of the trunk 34 

Its age, on record, above 500 years. 

The lower part of this tree was quite hollow, 
forming a round 18 feet in diameter. 

Boddington Park has long been under cultivation. 
The mansion, surrounded by a moat, and evidently 
of the first style of building that prevailed when 
castles were no longer deemed necessary for safety, 
belongs, with the manor, to John Neale, Esq. 

In the [hamlet of Barrow, in this parish, is a little 
conical hill, which, from its resemblance to a tumulus, 
gave name to the hamlet. From the top of this 
hill, in a clear day, is a distinct view of 36 parish 
Churches. 

BOURTON.] There arc two villages of this name, 
in the county: Bourton-on-the-hill, two miles W. 
by N. from Morton-in-Marsh ; and Bourton-on- 
the-Wuter, four miles S. S. W. from Stow-on -the- 
Wold. The first of these is supposed to have been 
anciently a much larger place, as, after rains, the 
extensive foundations of houses are discernible. In 
the vicinity are also the vestiges of an ancient en- 
trenchment, or camp. Bourton-on-the-llill was 
the birth place of the celebrated Sir Thomas Over- 
bury, who was poisoned by the arts of the infamous 
Frances Howard, Countess of Essex, afterwards 
mistress and wife to Carr, Earl of Somerset, the 
abandoned minion of .James the First.* 

Bourton-on-the- Water is a place of more conse- 
quence ; it is a large village, situated in a pleasant 
vale, and consists of detached houses, arranged on 

* Sir Thomas Overbury was born in the year, 1581 ; and 
having continued about three years at Queen's College, Ox- 
fonl, was removed to the temple at the age of seventeen, to 
study the law; but not liking the profession, he travelled for 
some time on the Continent, and, after his return, attached 
himself to Sir Kobert Carr, then Viscount Rochester, by 
whose interest with King James, he was knighted in 160S ; and 
his father, Sir Nicholas Overbury, made one of (he Judges of 
the Marches in Wales. The intimacy of his patron with the 
Countess of Essex, proved destructive to his advancement, and 
Jiff ; for, by endeavouring to dissuade Carr from marrying the 
latter, he made both of them his enemies; and, being com- 

VOL. II. NO. 70. 



the opposite sides of i clear stream, formed by vari- 
ous small springs ; over this stream is a handsome 
stone bridge, erected in 1756. The Church is a 
modern edifice, from a singular design by Mr. 
Marshall. " At the west end is a tower, with a 
rustic base, the angles of which are ornamented 
with Ionic pilasters ; and the whole is finished with 
a balustrade, urns, and a cupola ; in the interior of 
the Church is a neat colonnade of the Ionic order." 
The manor is the property of Thomas Ingram, Esq. 
The ancient Foss- way passes this village, about two 
furlongs to the east ; and at nearly the same distance 
from that road, is a quadrangular Roman camp, 
inclosing about sixty acres. Numerous coins and 
other vestiges have been discovered here. Among 
the latter was a curious gold signet, weighing nearly 
an ounce, having the representation of a Roman 
soldier, sitting on a tripod, with a spear in his left 
hand, and the Roman eagle at his feet. .On one 
side of the camp a paved aqueduct has been found ; 
and human bones have been frequently met with. 
j Petrifactions of different species of shell fish, are 
i frequently found in the neighbouring quarries. 
| Icombe camp, in this parish, is situated on a high, 
conical, barren hill, which commands an extensive 
view over the Wolds. 

BICKWEAR.] At Biekwear, or Bixwear, near St, 
Briavell's Church, is the seat of General Rooke, 
The vicinity abounds with blocks of lime-stone, very 
similar to the grey stone of St. Vincent's Rocks j 
and being more than half buried in the earth, they 
assume a singular appearance, not unlike the Grey 
Weathers on Marlborough Downs. In a field 
called Closetuft, is an immense single stone, tra- 
ditionally supposed to mark the place of interment 
of some distinguished warrior. 

BKIAVELU'S ST.] This is the name of a village, 
castle, and hundred, the first of which lies eight 
miles W. by S. from Blakeney ; and the last com- 
prehends nearly the whole of the Forest of Dean. 
The village, formerly of greater extent than at pre- 
sent, was once regarded as a borough, and market- 
town ; and its Burgesses had iin exemption from all 
toll throughout the realm. These immunities are 
new obsolete ; but the parochial inhabitants, have 
still the right of common in a wood called Iludnells, 
and its purlieus, which include a tract of land on 
the banks of the Wye, about six miles long, and one 
broad ; and of cutting wood, but not timber, in 



milted to (lie Tower, on a frivolous pretext, in April, 1(513, 
he was there poisoned, and died in the September following;. 
The shocking practices employed to effect his death, were 
discovered within two years afterwards, and several of the in- 
ferior agents executed for the crime; lint Carr, and his in- 
famous associate, though condemned on the clearest evidi-nrr, 
were reprieved, from lime to time, and at Icnutli ontinly 
pardoned. Sir Thomas, who was author of several pieces, 
both in prose and verse, -,vas esteemed as one ot the nul ac- 
complished characters of his age. lie appears to have been 
buried in the Chapel cl St. Peter ad Vinctila, in the Tower of 
London. 

S other 



438 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



other parts of the Forest. These claims were set 
aside by Cromwell, and afterwards contested, but 
allowed after the restoration. They are said to 
have been obtained for the inhabitants by a bene- 
volent Countess of Hereford, on the same capri- 
cious terms which the Lady Godiva performed to 
procure the boasted privileges of the men of Coven- 
try. A condition of the grant, is said to be a cus- 
tom yet observed, of collecting one penny from 
every inhabitant annually, for the purchase of bread 
and ale, to be distributed to every claimant on the 
ensuing Whitsunday. Through the above privi- 
leges, the city of Bristol is served with vast num- 
bers of hoops, poles, faggot wood, &c. and large 
quantities of hoops are also sent to our colonial 
possessions. 

St. Briavel's Castle was erected in the reign of 
Henry the First, by Milo Fitz-Walter, Earl of 
Hereford, to curb the incursions of the Welsh. It 
was afterwards forfeited to the crown, by whom its 
constables have ever since been appointed. The 
site of the Castle is surrounded by a moat, and com- 
prehends an extent of about 1,500 feet The north- 
west front, which is nearly all that has escaped the 
ravages of time, is composed of two circular towers, 
three stories high, separated by a narrow, eliptical 
gateway : within the towers are several hexagonal 
apartments, whose walls are eight feet thick, and 
one of which is used as a prison for the hundred. 
In the interior, two gateways present themselves, 
of similar dimensions to the former : en the right 
are the remains of an apartment, forty feet by twenty, 
with large pointed windows ; and on the left are the 
vestiges of a spacious hall. In the centre is a low 
building, which serves as a kind of anti-chamber to 
the room, in which the officers of the Hundred as- 
semble to hold their courts. The chimney piece is 
an early specimen of the modern style, with mould- 
ings of rude sculpture. On the highest rampart 
stood the keep, consisting of a large square tower, 
more than one hundred feet high, flanked by two 
smaller towers, about half that height ; but of this 
the greater part fell in the year 1754, and the re- 
mainder just twenty years afterwards : large masses 
of the ruins are yet remaining, adhering together by 
the strength of the cement. The surrounding 
scenery is beautifully varied, and eminently romantic. 

St. Briavel's Church is an ancient building, in 
the chancel of which is a large mural monument, 
to the memory of William Warren, Esq. and 
Mariana, his wife, who died in the reign of Eliza- 
beth, and whose effigies, in the dress of the times, 
are displayed, in reclining positions, on the tomb. 
The Earl of Berkeley is Lord of the Manor, con- 
stable of the castle, &c. 

BRIMPSFIELD.] AtBrimpsfield,five miles E.N.E. 
from Painswick, was an alien Priory of Benedictine 
monks, a cell to the Abbey of St. Stephen, at Foun- 
tenav, in Normandy. There was formerly a castle 
here* which was razed to the ground in the reign 
of Edward the Second, on account of the attainder 



of John Gifford, to whom it then belonged. The 
Giffords came in with the Conqueror. 

BROMESBERROW.] On the Worcestershire boun- 
dary of the county, about two miles N. from Red 
Mar'ey, stands Bromesberrow Place, the elegant 
mansion of Walter Hoijeywood Yate, Esq. the de- 
scendant of a family settled in this county as early 
as the reign of King John- It occupies the site of 
an ancient structure, cajjed Hook House. 

BBCKLAND.] The parish of Bucklandis5| miles 
W. S. W. from Chipping Campden. The Church, 
which is in the style of the fifteenth century, has an 
embattled tower, at the angles of which are grotes- 
que sculptures of flying demons for water spouts. In 
the east window of the chancel are three compart- 
ments of beautifully painted glass, executed with such 
brilliancy of colouring, an.d correctness of outline, 
as evince the perfection of the art. They represent 
three of the sacraments of the Romish Church ; the 
ceremony of baptism, the office of matrimony, and 
extreme unction. The Rectory house was built in 
1520, by William Grafton, who was then Rector, 
and whose darce, or rebus, the graft of a tree issuing 
from a tun, is displayed in one of the hall windows. 

BUENOS AYRES.] Buenos Ayres, tho handsome 
aud pleasant seat of Benjamin Hyett, Esq. near 
Painswick, commands some very fine and extensive 
views. It is surrounded by groves and planta- 
tions. 

CAMBRIDGE.] This little village, two miles north 
by west from Dursley, on the river Cam, which 
runs into the Severn, is remarkable for a battle 
fought between the Danes and Saxons, in the reign 
of Edward the Elder, in which the former were 
defeated. 

CAMPDEN.] The market and borough town of 
Campden, anciently Campedene, lies 25^ miles 
N. E. by E. from Gloucester, and 90* miles N. W. 
by N. from London. It is situated in a fertile val- 
ley, surrounded by cultivated hills, and hanging 
woods. The Saxon kings assembled here, in the 
year 687, to consult on the mode of carrying on the 
war with the Britons. In the 14th century, it be- 
came a principal mart for wool, and the residence 
of many opulent .merchants. After the establish- 
ment of the cloth trade in England, and the more 
general diffusion of the wool business, Campden 
was gradually deprived of its consequence ; and 
both the manufactures and merchandise of early 
days, are now totally lost. Exclusively of the ham- 
lets of Berrington, Broad Campden, and Wessing- 
ton, the population of this town, according to the 
last returns, was 1,214; the number of houses, 
288. 

The corporation, which consists of two bailiff's, 
twelve capital, and twelve inferior burgesses, a 
steward, &c. is extremely defective. By the char- 
ter, granted by James the First, the bailiffs and 
steward were empowered to hold a court of record 
every fourth Friday, and to take cognizance of all 
pleas of trespass, debt, contract, and fraud, within 
the 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



the brougb ; provided the respective actions were 
for sums not exceeding 6/. 13s. id. The buildings 
of this town are principally ranged in one street, 
nearly a mile in length ; about the middle of which, 
ar-the court and market houses. The former is an 
ancient structure ; probably of the commencement 
of the fifteenth century, or earlier : the latter was 
erected, by Sir Baptist Hickes, in the year 1624. 
A capacious mansion, yet remaining', of nearly the 
same age as the court house, is said to have been 
a dwelling of one of the wool-merchants. 

Campden manor, which, at the period of the 
Domesduy Purvey, was held by Hugh .Lupus, Earl 
of Chester, was purchased, in the time of James 
the First, by the celebrated Sir Baptist Hickes, 
\viio was created Viscount Campden, in IG'29, with 
remainder to the noble family of Noel ; Edward 
Lord Noel, having married Juliana, eldest daughter, 
and co-heiress, of Sir Baptist. The late Henry 
Noel, sixth Earl of Gainsborough, in the year 1798, 
bequeathed tlie manor, with other estates in this 
neighbourhood, to his nephew, Gerard Noel Ed- 
wards, Esq. who has since assumed the name of 
Noel. 

Campden Church stands on an easy eminence 
above the town, in the hamlet of Berrington, said 
to have received its name from the tumuli, or bar- 
rows, raised over the bodies of those who were slain 
in a great battle, fought here between the Mercians 
and the West Saxons. The Church is an elegant 
structure, having a tower tit the west end, 120 feet 
high, ornamented in a very chaste style, and finish- 
ed by battlements, and twelve pinnacles. At the 
east end of each aisle is a Chapel ; that on the south 
side is the burial place of the families of Hickes and 
Noel. To the munificence of the wool merchants, 
it is probable that this beautiful building owed its 
erection ; several of them are here interred, with 
brass effigies and memorials. From a grey marble 
flat stone in the Church, for William Grevil, who 
died in 1401, on which he and his wife are repre- 
sented by brass plates, standing in two niches, 
adorned with pinnacles, and exactly corresponding 
with the fine Gothic carved work over the great 
door and belfrey windows, at the west side of the 
tower, it is conjectured that Grevil either built, or 
contributed largely, to the building of the latter ; 
and a propitiatory inscription over the north door, 
also renders it probable, that the north aisle was 
partly erected at his charge. Several other monu- 



* Amongst Hie remarkable persons to which the town of 
Campilen lias given birth, may he mentioned Dr. Robert 
Harris, a celebrated preacher in the interest of the Parliament, 
and President of Trinity College, Oxford, during the Inter- 
regnum, (born in I57H, and died in his eightieth year ;) and 
Mr. George Ballard, author of Memoirs of British Ladies. 
The latter was one of those singular compositions, observe his 
biographers, that shoot forward without culture. Being of a 
delicate habit, he was apprenticed to a lay lor, in which lowly 
situation lie obtained a knowledge of the Saxon language, 
when (he labours of the dy were over, and during the hours 
which are generally devoted* to sleep. Lord Chedworth, and 



mental brasses 'are in this Church ; and in the 
Chape! in the south aisle, are some of as fine marble 
monuments as any in England. That to the memory 
of Baptist, Lord Hickes, Viscount Campden, and 
his Lady Elizabeth, is a very stately allar tomb ; 
on which are recumbent effigies of those personages, 
in their robes of state, and coronets. Another 
monument records the memory of Edward, Lord 
Noel, and his Lady Juliana, whose figures are 
displayed in Parian marble, as large as life, standing 
in their winding sheets, within a niche, represented 
as contained in a cubiuet, the folding doors of which 
are thrown open, and bear inscriptions. This monu- 
ment was erected iu 1664, at the cost of the Lady 
Juliana, by Joshua Marshall. Lord Noel died in 
1642; his Lady survived him thirty-eight years^ 
On a mural monument, in remembrance of Lady 
Penelope Noel, daughter of the former, is her bust, 
in a Vandyke dress ; the drapery finely executed. 
This Lady died in 1633, at the age of twenty-two. 
A curious cope, of crimson velvet, semee of ducal 
coronets and etoiles, and having- portraits of saints 
embroidered on the border, is preserved here in an 
old chest. It was probably used in the Catholic 
times, when four chantries existed here. Near the 
Church are some remains of a very magnificent 
mansion, erected by Sir Baptist Hickes, early in 
the seventeenth century. From an accurate plan 
.and elevation, still extant, it appears to have been 
an edifice in the boldest style of that day. It is re- 
ported to have accupied, with its offices, a site of 
eight acres, and to have been erected at the ex- 
pence of 29,000/. Its destruction was occasioned 
by the loyal spirit of Baptist, Lord Noel, grandson 
of Sir Baptist, who, during the civil wars, com- 
manded it to be set on fire, that it might not be 
garrisoned by the Parliament's forces, which he 
understood were advancing ; but, as it afterwards 
appeared, they did not approach nearer than War- 
wick. The principal remains are the grand entrance, 
composed of the two pavillions, connected by a 
screen, and two hanquetting houses, which termi- 
nated the terrace. A sameness of style pervades 
the Hospital, and other public buildings, which Sir 
Baptist gave for the benefit of the inhabitants of 
Campden ; all of which are distinguished by his 
armorial ensigns. Various donations have been 
made, for the use of the poor, and other useful 
purposes ; particularly by Sir Baptist Hickes.* 
The Coteswold Games, in the reigois of James. 



the other gentlemen of the Campuen hunt, offered him an 
annuity of 100/. but this he modestly declined ; observing, 
that 60/. yearly, was fully adequate to liis wishes. On this 
stipend, he seated him&ell 'at Oxford, thai lie might enjoy the 
advantage of the Bodleian Libiary ; and, after some tiu.c, lv 
was made one of the University Ik-dels. His intense applica- 
tion contributed to shorten his life,, which terminated in 1755. 
He left large collections which j i-l remain in manuscript. 
Hearne has mentioned him as ;i i^ivut admirer of Stow ; and an 
account of Campden Church, written by him, was read at u 
meeting of the Antiquarian Society. 

the 



410 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



the First, and his successor, \vere celebrated in the 
neighbourhood of this town. They were instituted 
by a public-spirited attorney, of Barton-on-the- 
Ileath, in Warwickshire, named Robert Dover, 
and, like the Olympic games of the ancients, con- 
sisted of various manly exercises. The prizes were 
distributed by the institutor, who, arrayed in a dis- 
carded habit of King James's, superintended the 
games for many years. The meetings were annu- 
ally held on Whit-Thursday. Ben Johnson, Dray- 
ton, and other poets, wrote verses on this festivity, 
which were collected into one volume, and pub- 
lished under the title of Annalia Dubrersia. These 
diversions were terminated by the civil wars ; but 
the remembrance of them is preserved by an annual 
meeting of young persons on Dover Hill, an emi- 
nence about half a mile from the town. 

CERNEY.] North Cerne-y lies four miles north, 
and South Cerney four miles S. E. by S. from 
Cirencester. On the Downs, in the former parish, 
an annual race course has been long established. 
The imperfect vestiges of a Roman specula, or out- 
post, with circumvallations, arc here to be traced ; 
and a Lachrymatory, of a blue vitrified substance, 
was formerly discovered. The Church at South 
Cerney, is remarkable for its architecture, which 
exhibits some very curious specimens of the Anglo 
Norman style. 

CHALFORD.] This is a populous hamlet to the 
parish of Bisley, on the borders of the Frome, 1 1 
mile N. E. from Minchin Hampton. It lies in a 
romantic valley, called Chalford Bottom. The 
cloth manufacture is here carried on to a great ex- 
tent : and one of the numerous mills erected on this 
river, is coeval with the more general introduction 
of that business into this part of the county, about 
the year 1500. The scenery in this neighbourhood 
is uncommonly fine. A spring, flowing by several 
apertures from the hill on the south side of the river, 
is remarkable for its petrifying qualities. 

CHEDWOIITH.] The parish of Chedworth five 
miles W. S. W. from North Leach, gave title to 
the Lords Chedworth, who possessed large estates 
in this part of the county. John Howe, Lord of 
the Manor, was created Baron Chedworth in the 
year 1711; his nephew John, the fourth Lord by 
whose death without issue, in 1801, the title be- 
came extinct, was a nobleman of much benevolence, 
but of great eccentricity, much attached to the stage, 
and its professors, amongst whom he bequeathed 
many large and valuable legacies. A Roman bath 
was discovered here, in the year 1760 : most of the 
bricks were marked Arviri. On the neighbouring 
tumulus was a huge, unwrought stone, which be- 
ing removed by the strength of a double team of 
oxen, great quantities of human bones were dis- 
covered. 

CHELTENHAM.] The market town of Chelten- 
ham, celebrated for the salubrity of its medicinal 
waters, is supposed to have rlcrived it's name from 
the river Chilt, which flows past it on the south 



side, in its passage to the Severn, at Wainlode, 
Some, however, find the origin of Cheltenham in 
the Saxon word Chilt, which signifies an elevated 
place, or place rising to an eminence, and Ham, 
signifying a farm or village. It is distant 9| miles 
E. N. E. from Gloucester, and 95 W. N. W. from 
London. 

The manor, in the time of Edward the Confessor, 
was part of the demesnes lands of the crown, but 
subjected to a yearly payment of 9/. 5s. and three 
thousand globes for the king's dogs. It now, says 
the Domesday Book, " pays 20/. and twenty cows, 
and twenty hogs, and 16s. instead of the bread." 
It afterwards belonged to William Long Espee, 
Earl of Salisbury, on the extinction of whose family, 
it reverted to the crown, and subsequently, by ex- 
change of lands, became the property of the Priory 
of Montburi Fischamp, in Normandy. On the 
seizure of the Alien Priories, it was granted to the 
nuns of Sion, in Middlesex, who appear to have 
leased it to the Berkeleys. In the year 1628, it 
was finally alienated to John Dutton, Esq. of Slier- 
borne, ancestor to the present Lord Sherborne, who 
is now owner ; but under whom some small estates 
are held by copyhold tenure. By the custom of the 
manor, confirmed by Act of Parliament, lands de- 
scend as by common law ; but the eldest female in- 
herits solely. 

Cheltenham occupies an exceedingly pleasant site : 
on tlie south and west, it is open to the vale ; but 
on the north east, it is sheltered by the immense 
amphitheatre formed by the Coteswold hills, which 
abruptly terminate about the distance of two miles 
to the north. The houses are principally ranged in 
one street, nearly a mile in length, and in some 
parts particularly spacious. Since the commence- 
ment of the last century, when the senative qualities 
of the springs were first noticed, the buildings have 
progressively improved, both in appearance and 
number, and particularly within the last twenty 
years. Many neat mansions have also been erected 
in the vicinity, the principal of which is Bays Hill 
Lodge, an elegant building, erected for the late 
Earl of Fauconberg, in the year>1781 ; and distin- 
guished as the residence of their present majesties, 
during their visit to Cheltenham, in the summer of 
1788. The number of houses, according to the re- 
turns of 1811, was 1,804; the population, 832.5. 

On the south side of the town, near the centre, 
stands the Church, a spacious fabric, for the most 
part of tlte architecture of the middle ages. In the 
north transept is a beautiful circular window, fif- 
teen feet in diameter ; divided into thirty three com- 
partments. The east window, in the pointed form, 
is also large and handsome. The symmetry of the 
interior is broken by the many galleries which it has 
been expedient to erect for the convenience of the 
congregation ; part of the ancient rood-loft is yet 
preserved, and in the chancel is a very curious 
Piscina. Near the Church is an ancient stone cross, 
consisting of a single shaft, rising from the centre 

of 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



441 



of a flight of steps : the Clinrch yard is extensive; 
the walls are shaded with double rows of limes. 
The wapropriate rectory is of great value ; yet the 
stipend to the officiating minister is not more than 
40/. a year, besides surplice fees, and is held under 
thefollowing peculiar tenure. He must be a fellow 
of Jesus College, Oxford, and with two others re- 
commended to the heir of Sir Baptist Hickes, an- 
cestor to tiie present Karl of Gainsborough, who 
elects one, ami presents him to the bishop. By an 
agreement also between the College and Sir Baptist, 
flKom whom they derived their title of recommending, 
the incumbent cannot hold his appointment longer 
than six years, unless re-elected as before. In ad- 
dition to the small stipend paid by the impropriator, 
a lecture on Sunday afternoon, is supported by the 
inhabitants, and a liberal subscription is also made 
l>y the nobility and gentry resorting to the place. 

An Hospital for six poor men and women, and 
a Free School, were founded here in 1574, by 
Richard Pate, Esq. who represented the city of 
Gloucester in five Parliaments : the endowments 
were increased by Queen Elizabeth. By a subse- 
quent benefaction, two scholars, educated at the 
Free School, are sent to Pembroke College, Ox- 
ford. Some other schools are also established in 
this town ; and a peculiar charity was instituted, 
about the year 1800, called the Cheltenham Reposi- 
tory, " for the reception and sale of works of inge- 
nuity and industry, for the benefit of the sick and 
industrious poor:" this establishment originated 
with the fair sex, and is principally managed by a 
committee of females. Many other societies of a 
similar nature, have since been formed in different 
parts of the kingdom. A Priory is said to have 
been founded here in the year 803. 

The spring, or spa, 'as it is called, by way of dis- 
tinction, is situated very conveniently near the town. 
The walk to it is through the Church yard, under a 
fine alcove of lime trees, and from thence in a ser- 
pentine direction, through orchards and gardens, 
into a beautiful meadow. On crossing a rivulet, 
tbu grand walk is entwed, which, by a gentle ac- 
clivity lends to the buildings. This walk is 20 feet 
wide, and the elm trees, on each side, are at least 
60 feet high. The pump appears under a dome, 
through a light and elegant archway with two pos- 
lerns ; it is supported by pillars. O& the right are. 
the library and offices, on the left the breakfasting | 
room. Round the buildings is a shrubbery, upon a 
gentle ascent, and a walk round it with seats. The 
spring rises out of a. mixed loamy and sandy soil, 
the same on which the town stands, and for ten 
miles round it. It is said to have been discovered 
by a slow spring being observed to oose from a 
strong thick bluish clay or marie, under the sandy 



* In the Philosophical Transactions, No. 461, p. 830, anno 
1741, is an examination of the Cheltenham mineral water, by 
C'onradusHieronymus Senckenberg, but which seems to ditTcr 

VOL. II. NO. 77. 



I soil, which, after spreading itself a few yards upon 
; the surface, disappeared, leaving much of its salts 
behind ; to feed on which flocks of pigeons daily 
coming, induced Mr. Mason, the then proprietor of 
the ground, to take more particular notice of it ; 
when it was further remarked, that in hard frosty' 
weather, when other springs wore fast bound, this 
j alone continued in its fluid state. Upon trial it wa* 
found to be cathartic. According to other accounts, 
the virtues of this water were first shewn on a horse 
which grazed here, and by drinking at this place 
and rolling himself in the grass where the spring 
oosed out, was cured of a violent humour and other' 
disorders he laboured under. Horses drink the 
water very willingly, and usually receive benefit 
from 'its use. The ground was originally the pro- 
perty of Mr. Higgs, of Charlton Kings ; he sold 
it with adjoining lands to Mr. Mason, who dis- 
covered the spring in 1716, which, for some time 
after its discovery, was open, and the people of the 
town and neighbourhood drank of it. In 1718 it 
was railed in, locked up, and a little shed thrown 
over it ; and in consequence of some experiment* 
made on the water by Dr. Baird, of Worcester, 
and Dr. Grevil, of Gloucester, its virtues became 
more generally known, and it was sold as a medi- 
cine till the year 1721, when it was leased to Mr. 
Spencer at 6l/. per annum. After the decease of 
Mr. Mason and hi* son. Captain Henry Skillecorne, 
becoming proprietor of the spring and premises, in 
right of his wife, the daughter of Mr. Mason, in the 
summer of 1738, not only built the old room on the 
west side for the drinkers, with other necessary con- 
veniences, but secured the spring from all extra- 
neous matter ; greeted a squarq brick building OR 
four archej, as a dome over it, with a pump on the 
east side rising in form of an obelisk. The well, in 
the centre of this dome, being the neatest and per- 
haps t'v best secured of any of the kind, is about 
five or six feet below the surface, close shut dowo 
with doors to exclude the freedom of the air. At 
the same time he laid out the paved court about it, 
formed the upper and lower walks, planted the 
trees, and was continually improving the natural 
beauties of the place, to render it worthy the very 
numerous respectable companies which at that 
period resorted to it ; and which increased in the 
year 1740, on the publication of the experiments 
made on it by Dr. Short, inserted in bis treatise oa 
Waters ; where, calling it a Neutral Purging 
Chalybeate Water, he gives it the preference to all 
others of the same kind, yet discovered in Eng- 
land ; and says, that excepting the Stoke water, it- 
carries the greatest proportion of salt in the same 
volume.* The good effects produced by this spring 
have proved an increasing source of wealth to the 

town ; 



very much from the examinations made since of this water. 
Senckenberg could not find Ihere was any iron i this water 
but he made the experiment in London, where the chalybeate 
5 T particle* 



442 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



town ; and its visitors have been so numerous, that 
it was feared the waters would be insufficient to 



particles must have been lost by carriage ; indeed they are 
equally so it the water is drank at the least distance from the 
spring; for which reason those who wish to benefit by the 
chalybeate, drink it in many small glasses at the well, and find 
it answer the purpose, as in larger glasses it tlies off before the 
whole is taken. The existence of iron in this water is fully 
proved by Dr. Fothergill in his ingenious experimental en- 
quiry into the nature and qualities of the Cheltenham water, 
1785. It has since been examined by Doctors, Linden, Lucas, 
Hussel, Ruttey, Hulme, Smith, Mr. Barker, and others; and, 
by their several experiments, and its effects on many persons 
of various constitutions, in different distempers, it is found on 
evaporation to contain in u gallon eight drams of nitrous salt, 
with two drams of an alkaline earth ; that it consists of a large 
quantity of calcareous nitre, (native Sal Catharticum Amarum) 
to which it owes its purgative virtue; a light sulphur, mani- 
fested by its fetid dejections; and a volatile steel. It is not 
affected by alkaline spirits, but ferments with acids. Some 
other materials might perhaps be found in its composition, if 
more minutely examined ; but the principles already men- 
tioned are so evident and inconteslible, as to account for all its 
operations and effects. When drank on the spot, it in general, 
as a diluter, corrects all sorts of acrimony; as a diuretic and 
cathartic, it carries it off; attenuates viscid humours, dries, 
deterges, and cleanses. It also cools, not only as a diuretic 
and cathartic, but as an alterative used in small doses. Its 
peculiar excellency is, the mildness, certainty, and expedi- 
tion of its operation ; being a most commodious purge for those 
who do not bear strong carthatics, consequently in hypochon- 
driac and scorbutic cases ; neither does it agitate the blood, or 
ferment the humours so much as common purges ; is friendly 
to the stomach, less heating, less windy, and less apt to leave 
a worse constitution behind it : works off without heat, thirst, 
or'dryness of the mouth, sickness, gripings, faintness, or de- 
jection of the spirits ; but rather increases the appetite, and 
strengthens the stomach, ami from its astringent qualify it is to 
be concluded that it not only dilutes and carries oft' viscous 
humours, but by strengthening the vessels, and restoring the 
lost tone of the solid parts, it enables them to resist a fresh 
efflux of the same. It is particularly efficacious in all bilious 
complaints, obstructions of the liver and spleen, obstructed 
perspiration, lo>>s of appetite, bad digestion, and all disorders 
of.the prinix vise; in habitual costiveness, and obstinate ob- 
structions, the ioMndation of many chronic diseases, as colics, 
iliac passion, and herniz, for which, when reduced by boiling 
one third or one half, and drank warm, it is superior to all 
other remedies, and will operate when most other medicines 
fail. And those who on long journies, and in summer, are apt 
to be costive, will, by taking two or three drams of the salt 
in lukewarm spring water, keep themselves soluble and very 
cool. It restores a relaxed habit ; whether from long residence 
in a hot climate, fre* living, use of mercurials, or any other 
causes. In rheumatic, scrophulous, erysipelous, scorbutic, 
leprous cases, but especially in spermatic,, and hemoirhoi.lal ; 
in disorders of the urinary passages, and particularly the kid- 
dies, which it cleanses, corroborates, and frees from obstruc- 
tions; and in those tormenting pains of the hips and lumber 
muscles, proceeding from a lodgement of hot scorbutic salts, 
it is sovereign, and not to be equalled. It gives quiet nights 
in nephritic and gouty complaints, when not under the lit. 
The water kills worms, and expels the nidus, the humours in 
which they lodge ; and also cures vertigo, convulsions, pains 
of the head, pustules, and itching, which proceed from vitiated 
humours settled in the prima? viz, or larger secretory vessels ; 
extending its virtues to the habit, of body, it depurates the 
mass of olood from scorbutic impurities, and cures pimples, 
'iicats in the face, hands, or feet; (indications of heat in the 
viscera,) especially if repeated more seasons than one. In coni- 
'ylaints incident to the fair sex at an early period, owing to a 
6 



supply the demand ; and this would certainly have 
been the case, but for the discovery of some new 

springs 

too languid circulation, or other weakness, this water should 
be immediately resorted to, and its efficacy will justify the 
assertion, as also to prevent heats, flatulence, pains of the 
back, tumours of the feet, &c. proceeding from a redundance 
of the blood at a later stage of life ; for which latter reason it 
is equally useful to studious sedentary men between forty and 
fifty, falling into the like disorders; but in these cases it must 
be drank long and more liberally, to take off the redundant 
humidity, and restore the lost tone of the parts. In a diabetes, 
this water or its salts, moving very easily and cooling much, 
is of all others the most safe and only purge when gentle evacu- 
ation is necessary. Great cures have also been done by this 
water in violent inflammations, and other disorders of the eyes, 
which must only be washed (by dabbing) at the spring, but not 
rubbed, or by putting some of the water in an eye-cup, and 
applying it, using the water also internally. 

It is impossible to lay down a rule for what quantity of the 
water ought to be taken by people of different constitutions, or 
length of time for a course of these waters: some can only 
bear two or three glasses in a morning, while others drink 
three or four, and even so far as seven or eight half pints be- 
fore breakfast. As to the time of drinking, some stay only a 
fortnight, or three weeks : but the usual stay is from a month 
to five or six weeks ; though some have taken them for ten 
weeks, and even longer; for, after having despaired of suc- 
cess at first, they have by perseverance wrought the desired 
cure. The following general heads may, however, be ob- 
served : to begin, moderately, by taking a half pint glass going 
to bed, it having the peculiar quality of lying all night in the 
body without disturbing it, or impeding rest; but goes off the 
next morning with great facility, especially if the first glass 
drank at the well has the chill taken off for a few days, till the 
stomach becomes accustomed to it ; if a small quantity on the 
first morning should not have the desired effect, as may'some- 
times be the case before the foulness of the passages is removed ; 
the next morning half an ounce of the salt extracted from the 
water may be taken, dissolved in a small glass of it, drinking 
one or two small glasses with the chill off, at proper distances 
after it ; thus the body will be so prepared, that the quantity 
may be gradually increased, till its operation as a carthatic is 
found to have the desired effect. When obstructions are re- 
moved, drink the water three or four days as a purgative, then 
a day or two a smaller quantity, then return to the purgative, 
sometimes omitting drinking any ; which will be more likely 
to do good than the mode of drinking it in large quantities 
every day for a month or six weeks. Dr. Folhergill says, 
" It may not, however, be improper to observe in general, 
that the neutral salt is the basis wherein the purgative and 
diuretic qualities of this water principally reside. 1 he virtues 
of this agree with those of the artificial Glauber's salt, but its 
superior solubility renders it a more active purgative, and this 
quality is greatly heightened by copious dilution. Hence a 
quarter of an ounce of the salt, contained in a quart of the 
water, operates more briskly than double the quantity wljtn 
dissolved only in two ounces of water. Hence too we see the 
impropriety of the common purging drafts, which directs an 
ounce of Glauber salt to be dissolved in two ounces of water, 
a quantity too small to retain it in a state of solution, or to 
promote its due operation. The Cheltenham salt being pre- 
pared in considerable quantity from the water at the Spa, in a 
portable form, its crystals may be preserved in bottles, un- 
impaired by time, and may1)e usefully employed at a distance 
from the spring, a? a safe and gentle purgative. It may also 
afford an useful tubstitute for the water itself in inflammatory 
or hectic disorders, where the chalybeate principle might be 
deemed improper. By adjusting the do->e, it may he deter- 
mined to operate as a brisk purgative, or mild laxative and 
diuretic, and may therefore be added occasionally to quicken 
the operation of the water, when it passes off too slowly ; or 

may 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



443 



springs equally congenial to health as the former. 
The last spring discovered, was in 1803, by Dr. 
Thomas Jameson, who has described the water as 
somewhat resembling that at Harrowgate, and con- 
taining a rather larger proportion of sulphureous 
gas" than the other wells : this spring yields seventy 
gallons an hour. The amusements of Cheltenham 
are similar to those of most other places of public 
resort ; the season is from May to the end of No- 
vember. The Theatre and the Assembly Rooms 
are spacious and handsome ; and the hotel and prin- 
cipal lodging houses are fitted up with the greatest 
attention to comfort and convenience. 

CHURCHDOWN.] Churchdown church, 3 miles 
E. by N. from Gloucester, is singularly situated on 
the summit of an eminence, rising from the vale of 
Gloucester to the height of about 2,550 feet. In 
this parish was born the famous Greek professor 
John Harmer, who died in 1670, at the age of 
seventy-five. 

CIRENCESTER.] The market and - borough town 
of Cirencester, or, as it is vulgarly termed, Ciceter, 
gives name to one of the hundreds of the County. 
It lies 17 miles S. E. from Gloucester, and 89 W. 
by N. from London. Cirencester appears to have 
been a town of consequence from the earliest period 
of our annals, but particularly during the time of 
the Roman ascendancy, when it was the metropolis 
of the Dobuni, and the seat of a Roman colony. 
By Bede and Nenuius, in their lists of British 
cities, it is omitted ; but Henry of Huntingdon 
mentions it, nnder the name of Caer Cori ; proba- 
bly a contraction from Caer Coryn ; an appellation 
apparently derived from the situation of the town 
on the Coryn, now called the Churn, which rises 
in the Cotswold Hills, and flows into the Thames 
near Cricklade. Coryn, in the British language, 
signifies the top, or summit, and is very properly 
applied to this river, because it is the highest source 
of the Thames. The eligibility of this spot for a 
Roman station, is evinced by the circumstance of 
the Foss Way, the Irmin Street, and the Icknield 
Way, all meeting here. The present town occupies 
a part only of the ancient site, which extended more 
on the south-east side, and is now under cultiva- 
tion. Here numerous vestiges of Roman occupa- 
tion are from time to time discovered. The ancient 
city was inclosed by a wall and a ditch, the circum- 

may be dissolved in a small quantity, where large draughts of 
cold water are deemed improper, as in hydropic and leucoph- 
legmatic habits. The Sea-Salt, though very minute in quan- 
tity, may, when largely diluted, contribute its share to the 
prgan\e and diuretic effects of the other saline ingredients. 
And as this salt has the singular property of passing, unaltered 
in its nature, through the several stages of circulation ; and 
after all, of being; recoverable from the blood and urine of ani- 
mal bodies; its deobstruent effects in the remote parts of the 
frame may be more considerable than has been generally 
imagined. Docs not the known efficacy of sea water in this 
respect, even whi-n drank in small quantities as an alterative, 
tend to corroborate this opinion ? The Iron combined with 
the Aerial Acid, constitutes an active saline chalybeate ; 



ference of which was upwards of two miles. The 
fortifications ure supposed to have been rased soon 
after the time of Henry the Fourth ; but were not 
wholly obliterated. Sir Robert Atkyns nicntiods a 
variety of coins, and a building under ground, acci- 
dentally discovered. This was fifty feet long, and 
forty broad, and about four feet high; supported 
by 100 brick pillars, inlaid very curiously with tes- 
| seraick work, with stones of divers colours, little 
bigger than dice. Dr. Stukeley, who visited Ciren- 
cester in the early part of the last century, observes, 
that the walls might still be traced with tolerable 
accuracy. The tract of ground called the Leauses, 
now converted into garden and corn fields, on the 
south-east side, where the principal antiquities are 
found, is supposed to have been the Roman Prajto- 
rium, from i<s name, which he derives from Llis, a 
British word, signifying a court. A more probable 
derivation is, however, obtained from the Saxon 
Leswe, Leauses, Leasows, or pasture ground. A 
fine Mosaic pavement was dug up here in. Septem- 
ber, 1723, with coins. A little head, which had 
been broken off from a basso-relievo, seemed, by 
the tiara, of a very odd shape, like fortification 
work, to have been the genius of a city, or some of 
the Dea? Matres, which are in old inscriptions. 
The ancient building, mentioned by Sir Robert 
Atkyns, and Dr. Stukeley, is supposed to have 
been discovered about 1683. The remains were , 
afterwards covered up ; and all remembrance of the 
place appears to have been lost till the year 1780, 
when some workmen, employed near the spot, dug 
up several flat bricks, which awakening curiosity, 
the discovery was pursued, and the remains were 
ascertained to belong to a Roman hypocaust. In 
addition to the Roman antiquities already enume- 
rated, there hare been found in this vicinity, coins 
of Antoninus, and Constantino ; a fine brass figure 
of Apollo, now in the Bodleian Library at Oxford; 
several small altars ; various tesselated pavements 
and a burial urn of glass, of a square form, dis- 
covered in a field called King's Mead, about half a 
mile from the town. Another antiquity belonging 
to this town, which appears to refer to the Roman 
times, is the Bull-Ring, a supposed amphitheatre 
situated in the Querns, (a field adjoining the town 
on the west) and thought to have obtained its pre- 
sent appellation from having been appropriated to 



which contributes to warm and invigorate the system, and to 
promoteappetiteand digestion. The Un-neulralized Magnesia, 
as a laxative and absorbent, tends to correct acidities, and viti- 
ated bile in the first passages, and to promote their expulsion. 
Whether the Calcareous or Sclenetic matter impart any useful 
medicinal quality to this or any other water, seems at least 
very problematical. Inert substances of this nature pass with 
difficulty through the finer scries of vessels, and can scarcely 
be subdued by (he animal fliiids." The water may, however, 
be taken occasionally in the winter at a distance from the 
spring, provided it be warmed, and care taken not to expose 
one's self to the cold air during its operation ; which will be 
stronger and more immediate, if the bottled water be boiled 
gently till one-third of the quantity be evaporated. 

the 



444 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



the inhuman purposes of bull-baiting. The area is 
of an elliptical form, inclosed with a mound or wall 
of earth, about 20 feet high, very regularly sloped 
on the inside, with rows of seats, like steps, one be- 
low another from top to bottom : these are over- 
grown with herbage, and defaced by time. The 
longest diameter or the area is about 63 yards, the 
other 46 : it has one avenue on the east side, and 
another on the west ; and there is also a straight 
approach to it under ground, on the south, between 
stone walls, about 2 feet asunder, pointing to the 
centre of tha area. 

When the Romans left our island, the government 
of this city reverted to the Britons, who probably 
retained it till the year 577, when, according to the 
Saxon, Chronicle, it was wrested from them, toge- 
ther with Bath and Gloucester, by the West Saxons, 
Cuthwin and Ceawlin, who defeated the British 
Kings, Cournail, Condidan, and Farinmuil, in a 
great battle, fought at Dyrham, near Chipping 
Sodbury. After this period, however, if any credit 
could be given to the legend quoted by Holinshed, 
it was again possessed by the Britons, who were 
driven out by a singular stratagem of a Danish 
Chieftain, named Gurmond, or Gurmundas.* Pen- 
da, King of Mercia, endeavoured to wrest Ciren- 
<;ester from the West Saxons, in 628 ; but, after a 
tremendous battle, fought in the vicinity, and ter- 
minated only by the darkness of the night, he was 
obliged to make peace on the ensuing morning. 
Penda, his son, the first Christian King of Mercia, 
was more successful, as he obtained, and annexed it 
to the Mercian kingdom, in 656. Between that pe- 
riod and the defeat of the Danish Chief Gothrum, 
at Eddington, in Wiltshire, by King Alfred, in 879, 
nothing particular is recorded of this town ; but, 
after the treaty made in consequence of Alfred's 
victory, Gothrum, and his followers, resided here, 
one whole year, previously to their departure for the 
eastern parts of the island. In 1020, a great coun- 
cil was held here by Canute, at which Duke Ethel- 
wold was expelled his dominions. In the reign of 
Stephen, Robert, Earl of Gloucester, half-brother 
to the Empress Maud, placed a garrison in Ciren- 
cester Castle, the first mention of which occurs at 
this period ; but the King attacking it by surprise, 
it was taken and burnt. Being afterwards restored, 
it was held by William de Dive, Constable to the 
Earl of Leicester, who was then in arms in opposi- 
tion to the King ; but the Constable soon surren- 
dered it, in order to procure more favourable terms" 

* " Anno 586", Gurimimlus appointing his brother Turgesi us 
to pursue the conquest of Ireland, came and arrived here in 
Bryiain, making such crticll warre in ayde of the Saxons against 
the Urilaiiii's, that Caielicus was constrained to keep himself 
within the citie of Cirencestre, and was there besieged ; and at 
length, by continued assaults, and sieges, when he had lost 
maine of his menne, was glad to forsake lhat citie. Gunnonde 
took Cirencestre, and destroyed it in a most cruell manner, by 
a policie of warre, in binding to the feet of sparrowes, which 
his people had caught, certain clewes of thred, or matches, 



for the Earl, his master. In the time of Henry the 
Third, the Castle was garrisoned by the Barons ; 
but the King recovering it, issued his warrant for 
its total demolition. Notwithstanding the destruc- 
tion of the Castle, Cirencester appears to have been 
considered as a place of strength ; and King John 
assembled a large army here in the sixteenth of his 
reign. Edward the Second kept his Christmas 
here in 1822. 

In a military point of view, this town is most 
celebrated for the suppression of the insurrection 
of the Duke* of Aumerle, Surrey, and Exeter, the 
Earls of Gloucester and Salisbury, and their ad- 
herents, in the reign of Henry the Fourth. These 
noblemen had determined to assassinate the King 
during a tournament to be held in his presence at 
Oxford. Aumerle, dining with his father, the Duke 
of York, was discovered by him to have a paper 
concealed in his bosom : this tie obtained, and on 
reading it, found it to be the written plan or compact, 
of the conspiracy. The Duke immediately ordered 
his horse to be saddled ; but his son suspecting his 
purpose, rode first to the King, and obtained his 
pardon before his father's arrival. The other con* 
spirators, aware of the discovery of their designs, 
assembled an army to surprise the monarch at 
Windsor ; but he being equally active, marched 
towards them with an army of 20,000 men. The 
insurgents retreated to Cirencester, where the 
Chiefs took up their quarters in the town, but en- 
camped their army without the walls. At this 
critical period, the inhabitants, headed by the bailiff, 
and a party of archers, assembled to the amount of 
400 men, and seizing the gates, attacked the unsus- 
picious noblemen in their quarters. The Duke of 
Surrey, and the Earl of Salisbury, were taken, and 
beheaded ; Exeter and Gloucester escaped to the 
camp, hut found it deserted, the troops having fled 
on hearing the confusion in the town, and seeing 
some buildings in flames, which had been set fire to 
by some of the under conspirators to favour the 
escape of their Cliiefs.f The King, in reward for 
the essential services thus afforded him by the inha- 
bitants of Cirencester, granted them all the pro- 
perty of the conspirators, found in the town, except 
plate, jewels, and money ; together with four does 
in season from Bradon Forest, and one hogshead of 
wine from Bristol, yearly, to the men ; and six 
bucks, and a hogshead of wine, yearly, to the wo- 
men of Cirencester : the grant ot the deer and wine 
to be revokable at the pleasure of a the King. 

finely wrought, and tempered ready to take fire, so that the 
sparrowes being suffered to go out of hand, flew into the towne, 
to lodge themselves within their nestes, which they had made in 
stackes of corne, or eaves ol houses, so that the towne was 
thereby set on fire ; and then the Brytons issuinge forth, fought 
with enemies, and were overcome and discomfited." 

f For additional particulars relating to this conspiracy, vide 
Dr. Robertson's new folio edition of Rapin's History of En- 
gland, VoL I. page 379. 

Ip. 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



In the reign of Charles (he First, the inhabitants 
of Cirencester adopted the cause of the Parlia- 
ment; and in 16-11, they insulted Lord Chandois, 
then, executing 1 the commission of prray, as Lord 
Lieutenant of the county, by compelling- him to sign 
a declaration, that lie would not again attempt to 
enforce its execution. The town being esteemed 
the key of Gloucestershire, from its strength, it 
being halt' 'encompassed by water, partly secured 
by a high wall, and the remainder of the circum- 
ference defended by strong works, it was decided 
that it should be secured for the Parliament; and 
such was the dependance placed upon the efforts of 
the garrison, that one of the ofiicers declared, the 
day before the attack, that IMJ could keep possession 
of the place in defiance of 20,000 men. On the 
21st of January, 1012, Prince Rupert made his first 
movement towards Cirencester ; shortly afterwards 
it was invested ; aud on the 2d of February, the 
assault commenced. The conflict was severe, and 
both parties displayed address and courage; but 
the King's troops succeeded in forcing the town, 
in which, and the suburbs, the garrison lost 300 
men killed, 1200 taken prisoners, and had 160 
wounded. Colonel Fettiplace, the Governor, Cap- 
tain Warneford, and Mr. George, member for the : 
borough, were amongst the prisoners. In 1043, 
the town was recovered by the Parliament's forces, 
commanded by the Earl of Essex, who attacked, 
and expelled the two regiments of horse, that gar- 
risoned it under Sir Nicholas Crisp, and Colonel 
Spencer. The inhabitants were strong partizans of 
the Stuarts, at the Revolution of 1688 ; a bias 
which appears to have been principally excited by 
the influence of the Duke of Beaufort. The first 
blood shed, at that period, was at Cirencester, where 
Captain Lorunge, of the county militia, attacked 
Lord Lovelace, then on his march to join the Prince 
of Orange : the Captain and his son were killed ; 
but his men made Lovelace prisoner. 

The town of Cireucester was formerly celebrated 
for its rich Abbey, which arose from a decayed Col- 
lege of prebendaries instituted in the early Saxon 
times. Rumbaldus, or Reimbaldus, Dean of this 
College, and Chancellor to Edward the .Confessor, 
Avitnasyed a grant of that Sovereign to the Abbey 
at Westminster. Ldnnd mentions a " sepulchre 
crosse," of white marble, as remaining in the Abbey 
Church, with an inscription to his memory. Here 
also the "heart of Sentia," vvifo to Richard, King of 
the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, was deposited. 
The endowments of the College appear to have been 
givei> to the Abbey, which was founded in 1117, by 
Henry the First. Between that year and 1131, the 
monastic buildings were completed. The endow- 
ments were increased by Richard the First, who 
also invested the Convent with the jurisdiction of 
the district called the Seven Hundreds. These 
grants were confirmed by King John, who likewise 
granted some additional liberties, and further privi- 
leges were bestowed by Henry the Third ; in whose 

VOL. II. NO. 77. 



49th year, Roger de Rodmarion, the TOfli Abbot, 
was summoned to Parliament. Another Abbot \\a 
summoned to a council at Carlisle, in 1307, the first 
of Edward the Fifst; but the right of a seat among . 
the Barons was not confirmed till the year 1416, 
when the mitre and pontificals . were granted by the 
Pope, to William Best, the 21st Abbot. On the 
surrender of this Abbey, in 1539, its annual reve- 
nues were estimated at 1051/. 7s. 1 \d. The Abbots 
are supposed to have liad the privilege of coinage, 
from some small brass pieces of money that have 
been dug up at different times, within the Abbey 
precincts. The seventh Abbot was the celebrated 
Alexander Nequam, or Neccham, who was born at 
St. Albans, and much celebrated for his learning, 
and proficiency in various kinds of literature. He 
died in 1217. The Abbey Church, was of the Sax- 
on style of architecture, 280 feet in length, and of 
proportionable dimensions. In the grant made by 
Henry the Eighth, to Roger Bassinge, Esq. of the 
site and buildings of the Abbey, he commands that 
all the edifices within the Abbey precincts should be 
pulled down, and carried away ; and so effectually 
was the royal mandate obeyed, that even the spot 
occupied by the Church can hardly be ascertained ; 
and all that now remains of the Abbey buildings, 
are the Almery Gate, the Spital Gate, and a large 
barn. In the first of Edward the StNth, the site 
of the Abbey, which had reverted to the crown, was 
granted in capite to Thomas Lord Seymore, on 
whose attainder, the crown re-obtained possession : 
but Queen Elizabeth finally granted it, with its 
appendages of granges and lands, in consideration 
of the sum of 590/. 16s. 3d: to Dr. Richard Waster, 
the direct ancestor to the present proprietor, Tho- 
mas Master, Esq. The seat of this gentleman, 
who has repeatedly represented the county in Par- 
liament, includes the site of -most of the monastic 
buildings. The mansion, a handsome edifice, called 
the Abbey, erected in the year 1772, also occupies 
the Site of a house built by Dr. -Master, in the time 
of Elizabeth. 

Cirencester Church, dedicated to St. John, H 
one of the most magnificent parochial edifices in 
the kingdom. It was completed but a few years 
before the suppression of the Abbey, yet the re- 
gular style of the 15th century, is prevalent in every 
part. " At the west end is a handsome embattled ' 
tower, 134 feet high, ornamented with pinnacles and 
statues ; and on the south side is a beautiful porch, 
richly decorated extermilly with grotesque figures, 
carved niches, canopies, oval windows, sculptured 
cornices, and open-worked battlements ; and inter- 
nally adorned by radiated tracery, spreading over 
the roof in eight circular fan-shaped compartments, 
which rise from single pillars, and meet in the cen- 
tre, where the lozenges formed by the extremos of 
the circles, are ornamented with circles of quatre- 
foils : the length of the porch is 3S feet, its height 
50. The inside of the Church contains two rows 
of clustered columns, five in each ; which, with two 
5 w pilasters 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



pilasters at each end, support the roof. Affixed to 
the capitals are cherubic figures, with escutcheons, 
and other armorial insignia of the contributors to- 
wards the erection of the building. The windows 
were formerly filled with painted glass; but a great 
deal having been mutilated, or misplaced, the chief 
part of what remained, has been of late years col- 
lected from the others in the Church, and replaced 
in the great east-and west windows, under the di- 
rection of S. Lysons, Esq. whose arrangement ex- 
ceeds the original both in taste and beauty ; a por- 
trait on glass, in the latter window, is supposed to 
represent Richard Duke of York, father to Edward 
the Fourth. Part of the painted glass now ar- 
ranged in the chancel window, representing some 
of the Langley family, was brought from the 
Church at Siddington." The nave is separated 
from the chancel by a gallery, or screen, containing 
a good organ, by Green. St. Catherine's Chapel, 
situated on the north side, between the chancel and 
St. Mary's Chapel, appears to have been originally 
separated from them by open arches, now walled 
up. The central compartments of its pendant roof 
are richly ornamented with a variety of sculptured 
foliage and roses, the arms of Henry the Seventh 
within the garter, and the cognizances of the King 
and Prince of Wales. The date, 1508, is also to 
be seen on the roof; and the initials, J. II. and 
mitre of Abbot Hakebourn ; and T. R. the initials 
of Thomas Ruthall, or Rowthale, Bishop of Dur- 
ham. These prelates were at the charge of build- 
ing the roof ; but the Chapel itself is supposed to 
have been founded by Richard Osmund, whose 
effigies, in stone, lies in a niche, formed in the north 
wall, at the east end. Over an opposite niche, in 
the south wall, is a representation of the Martyrdom 
of St. Catherine, painted in fresco. The antiquary 
will be gratified in this Church by the sight of seve- 
ral very rich sepulchral brasses. In others of the 
towns in the Cotswold district, they are seen in 
equal excellence. The merchants in wool, for 
which it was so celebrated, traded in the 15th cen- 
tury with the manufacturers in Flanders, where 
these brasses were made, and given in exchange. 
Though, as portraits of the persons they comme- 
morate, they are purely imaginary, it is curious to 
observe the strict costume of habits according to 
the rank in life of those they purpose to represent. 
Three of the most remarkable of these are in Tri- 
nity Chapel, and represent William Prelatte, Esq. 
and his two wives. The former appears in plated 
armour, with a gorget of mail, having a dagger on 
his right side, and a long sword across his middle. 

* This nobleman, who was himself a man of learning and 
genius, was the intimate friend of Atterbury, Pope, Swift, 
Addiscn, and many of the distinguished literati of his time. 
He represented this borough in Parliament, from the year 1705 
till 1711, when Queen Anne raised him to the Peerage. He 
afterwards became Captain of the band of Gentleman Pension- 
ers, but resigned in 1744. In 1757, he was appointed Treasu- 
rer to his present Majesty, then Prince of Wales, by whom in 



The ladies have the mitred head-dress of that age, 
with veils ; long loose gowns, with close sleeves, 
and cuffs of ermine : at their feet are little dogs, 
with collars of bells. Beneath is an inscription in 
black letter, with the date 1462. Many other in- 
scriptions and monuments are contained in the dif- 
ferent parts of this edifice. In the Chapel of St. 
John is a handsome tomb to the memory of George 
Monox, Esq. merchant, and Sheriff of London, who 
died 1638, and bequeathed 100/. and a tenement, for 
the benefit of the poor, and to support a lecture in 
this Chnrch : another monument in the chancel, 
was erected to commemorate Sir Thomas Harrison, 
Knt. Chamberlain of the city of London, 1765. la 
St. Mary's Chapel is a curious monument, with the 
effigies of Humfrey Bridges, and Elizabeth, his 
wite ; these are arrayed in the habits of the times, 
1598 and 1620. He left 40s. per annum to the poor 
of Cirencester ; and Mrs. Bridges six houses, for 
as many widows, with pensions of 6*. per week. 
Here, also, are many inscriptions for the family of, 
Master. In Trinity Chapel is a marble monument, 
witli the busts of Allen, Earl Bathurst, and his 
Lady, and a weeping figure between them.* Ad- 
joining, is another monument to the memory of the 
Earl's son, the Lord Chancellor Bathurst, who 
died in 1794, aged 80 ; and whose bust is placed 
on the top. On the outside of the Church, under 
the parapet of the north side of the nave, is a 
range of curious sculpture, representing a series of 
figures, chiefly habited as minstrels, with various 
instruments of music practised in the 15th century. 
They represent the characters of a Whitsun Ale :* 
one of them, supposed to be the lord of the feast, is 
arrayed in a hunting dress, having a cap with fea- 
thers, a bugle horn, and an arrow, in his left hand ; 
in his right, he carries a scroll, with an inscription, 
which has been read 



Under the parapet, on the south side, is another 
range of sculptured figures, conjectured to repre- 
sent some of the characters in the old mysteries, or 
moralities, which, at the time of the erection of this 
fabric, were the favourite amusements of the people: 
among them is a figure of Death, a Monk, an Ab- 
bot, a King, a Prize-Fighter, with a sword and 
dagger, an Angel, &c. 

Cirencester has several schools ; the most ancient 
of which is the Free Grammar School, founded by 
Bishop Ruthall, a native of this town, and an emi- 
nent Privy Counsellor to Henry the Seventh. 

1772, he was created Earl Bathurst of Bathurst, in Sussex. He 
died at the advanced age of 91, in September 1775. 

f The Whitsun Ale is still commemorated in some of the 
villages in this part of Gloucestershire. At these meetings, the 
dramatis personic are represented by the peasantry, dressed in 
Hie characters of a lord, his lady, steward, purse-bearer, fool, 
Sec. The day is passed in festivity and dancing ; and generally 
occasions the aswmblage o{ ail the inhabitants in the vicinity. 

Queen 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



447 



Queen Mary increased the endowments by the 
grant of '20/. per annum, payable from tbe Exche- 
quer. Amongst the eminent persons educated at 
tliis school, have been Dr. Jeuner, introducer of the 
VTiccine Inoculation ; Dr. Parry, physician at Bath ; 
and the Rev. James Dallaway, M. B. and author of 
several esteemed works. Recent dissensions among 1 
the feoffees and others, have caused the reputation 
of the school greatly to decline. The Blue Coat 
School was established by subscription, in 1714. 
Four years afterwards, Thomas Powell, Esq. en- 
dowed it with lo/. part of an annuity payable from 
the Exchequer for 99 years, and a moiety of the 
profits of Maskelyne's Ham, in Cricklade : " And 
the Court of Chancery, in 1737, appropriated 20/. 
a year out of the estates bequeathed to Mrs. Powell, 
for erecting and endowing a charity school, or 
schools, in this parish, for the support of this 
school ; and in 1744, appointed the produce of 
582/. 7s. 6d. to be paid yearly for the benefit of 
this school, as a provisional supply after the expi- 
ration of the annuity out of the Exchequer. The 
children are elected by the minister for the time 
being; seldom tinder eight years old, or above 11 ; 
and they continue in it not more than three years. 
The Yellow Coat School was founded under the 
will of Mrs. Rebecca Powell ; who died in 1722, 
for teaching 20 boys of Cirencester, reading and 
arithmetic, and the art of frame-work knitting ; and 
for cloathing, teaching, and instructing 20 girls to 
spin : after much delay, by different applications to 
the Court of Chancery, Mr. Thurston, one of the 
masters, made his report of the plan, in 1737, 15 
years after the death of the testatrix. The school 
was then commenced, and has continued with va- 
rious success, to the present period. 

This town has various other charitable institu- 
tions. The hospital, dedicated to St. John, was 
founded by Henry the First : the revenues arise 
principally from reserved rents in the town, and 
some scattered pieces of land : the alms-people 
have 4/. Os. per annum each. This hospital is si- 
tuated on tbe north-cast side of Gloucester Street, 
over a crypt, with round pillars, partly buried in the 
earth : six of the apartments were reserved for the 
inmates, and the remainder let for the benefit of the 
institution ; but the building falling into decay, 
through neglect, six cottages have been erected on 
the hospital land, in Spital-gate-lane, for the alms- 
people. St. Lawrence's Hospital, on the west side 
of Gloucester Street, was founded by Edith, Lady 
of the manor of Wiggold, but at what period is 
unknown. The three sisters of this charity receive 
3/. 25. 6tl. per annum, each, from 11 revenue the pro- 
duce of several detached pieces of laud, and reserv- 
ed rents from 21 houses, and two gardens, in Ciren- 
cester. Earl Bathurst is Governor of the institu- 
tion. St. Thomas's Hospital, situated in the street 
of that name, was erected and endowed by Sir 
\Yilliam Nottingham, Attorriey-General, in the 
reign of Henry the Fourth. The four poor weavers, 



who receive the benefit of this charity, have each a 
small apartment ; but the revenue Jeft by Sir Wil- 
liam, is no more than O/. l&s. 8d. payable from aa 
estate in the parish of Thornbury. 

The manufactures of this town seem generally in 
a declining state, excepting that for curriers' knives, 
which are made by three or four houses here ; by 
one at Gloucester ; and scarcely any where else 
in the kingdom : these knives are highly valued, not 
only throughout Europe, but in America. Here is 
a company of weavers, but none of the Company's 
transactions have the least relation to weaving ; and 
there is only one clothing-house. A small carpet 
manufactory, and two breweries, furnish some em- 
ployment. Formerly, great quantities of wool, 
Drought from Buckinghamshire, Berkshire, Nor- 
thamptonshire, and Oxfordshire, were sold at the 
Boothal, where large rooms were provided for its 
reception ; but the modern practice of the dealers 
themselves travelling to purchase, has effectually 
destroyed this market. In addition to three an- 
nual fairs, here are two mops, or statute markets, 
on the Mondays preceding, and following October 
the 10th ; and if that day happens to be Monday, it 
is also a mop day. These markets are much throng- 
ed by farmers and others, who attend to hire labour- 
ing persons and servants ; the latter wear badges, itt 
the hat or bosom, of whipcord, wool, or cow-hair ; 
thus describing themselves as candidates for the re- 
spective services of carter, shepherd, dairy-maid, &c. 

When the Domesday Survey was made, the hun- 
dred of Cirencester included several villages ; but 
Henry the Fourth made the town a distinct hun- 
dred, as it still remains ; excluding the Abbey, the 
Almery, and Spiringate Lane. He also made it a 
corporate town, and invested its government in a 
mayor, two constables, &c. but his charter was lost 
in the 37th of Elizabeth. The hundred is divided 
into seven wards ; and the steward of the manor an- 
nually appoints two high constables, for each ward, 
with the other necessary officers. An ancient court, 
for cognizance of debts under 40s. was abolished in 
1792, and a Court of Requests established by Act 
of Parliament for-tthis manor, and the district call- 
ed the Seven Hundreds of Cirencestcr. Represen- 
tatives were sent from this borough to a Great 
Council in the lltb of Edward the Third ; but the 
first regular return to Parliament was made in the 
year 1571, under a grant of the 13th of Elizabeth. 
The right of election is limited to the inhabitant 
householders of the borough not receiving alms. 

This town, which is celebrated for the salubrity of 
its air, and general healthfuluess, consists of four 
principal, and seven less considerable streets, besides 
several lanes, extending over an area of about two 
miles in circumference. The buildings are clwefly 
of stone ; and the more respectable houses arc ge- 
nerally detached. The population, as ascertained 
by the Act of 1811, was returned at 4540 : the 
number of houses was 930. The streets, excepting 
on the south side, have a .gradual descent from the 
" centre 



448 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



centre to the extremities. The water, which is 
very good, arises from a fine gravel at the depth of 
15 or 20 feet, in such plenty, that almost every 
house has a pump or well appropriated to itself.* 

Cirencester manor was part of the ancientderaesnes 
of the crown : Richard the First granted it to the 
Abbey. J After the Dissolution, it passed through 
the hands of Thomas, Lord Seymour, and Sir An- 
thony Kingstone, to Sir John D'Auvers, whose 
son Henry, Earl of Danby, built a house on the 
site of Earl Bathurst's present mansion. The ma- 
nor and hundred were afterwards sold to Henry 
Poole, of Sapcrton, whose son, Sir William Poole, 
assigned them, in 1645, to his mother in lieu of 
dower. Her daughter, Anne, conveyed them to 
James, Earl of Ncwburgh, whom she afterwards 
married. Charles, his son and heir, left them to 
his widow Frances, by whom they were sold, in 
the year 1695, to Sir Benjamin Bathurst, the pre- 
sent proprietor. 

CLEEVE, BISHOP'S.] Bishop's Cleeve, 3| miles 
N. by E from Cheltenham, was anciently the resi- 
dence of a small fraternity of monks, established 
here about the year 790. The Church is a curious 
and spacious edifice, of the architecture of different 
periods, from the Saxon or early Norman times, to 
the last century. Beneath a low arch, at the south 
end of the transept, is the effigies of a croisader ; 
and, in one of the aisles, is an ancient recumbent 
figure of a nun. In the same aisle, is a sumptuous 
mural, and altar monument, to the memory of Ri- 
chard de Ja Bere, Esq. of Southam, and his Lady ; 
the effigies of the former is displayed in a sergeant's 
habit. The Chancel was, a few years ago, fitted 
up in a very handsome manner. The rectory- 
house, an ancient and spacious building, was ori- 
ginally a residence of the Bishops of Worcester. 
On the ridge of hills, in this parish, called Cleeve 
Clouds, are many vestiges of military transactions : 
the ^extremity of the ridge is fortified by a deep 
vallum, extending 350 yards, in the form of a 
crescent ; and, on every side, but the front, inacces- 
sible. 

CLIFTON.] About a mile and a quarter W. from 
Bristol, is the beautiful village'of Clifton, which, 
for the purity and salubrity of its air, has been de- 
nominated the Montpelier of England. Standing 
on a hill, which rises by a gradual ascent from the 
river, it enjoys the most charming views over Bris- 
tol, and of the Avon, with its moving scene of ships. 

* Ricardus CorinuMisis, or Richard of Cirencester, so call- 
ed from being a native of tliis town, was the compiler of the 
celebrated Itinerary, part of which, relative to England, was 
published under his name, by Dr. Suikely. He was a monk 
of Westminster; and is registered on the Chamberlain's list for 
1355, preserved among the Abbeyrecords, by the name of Cir- 
cestre. Between that period and the year 1400, in which he 
died, he composed several elaborate works on Saxon and Bri- 
tish history, taking great pains to render them accurate, by tra- 
velling to'most of the libraries in the kingdom for reference to 
riginal manuscripts. He also made a journey to Rome^for 



The hill is beautifully studded wilh villas, and ele- 
gant piles of building. " Independently of the na- 
tural beauties of its situation," observes a modern 
writer, " Clifton has obtained celebrity from the 
medicinal spring which rises at the base of the 
rocks, and which has given origin to the Hot Wells. 
Here the scenery is of a sublime character, espe- 
cially from a point contiguous to the Well House; 
but the valley is so narrow, and crowded with 
houses, that it admits cf little fore-ground. The 
chasm through which the Avon flows, in this part 
of its course, is formed of lime-stone rocks, shoot- 
ing up precipitously to a vast height, and varying- 
in colour from light red, to brown, dark grey, and 
blue. In the fissure, numerous quartz crystals, and 
rhomboidal stalactites, and dog-tooth spars, are 
found. Great quantities of the rocks are annually 
burnt into lime. The height of the cliffs on each 
side, is nearly equal ; and the strata so nearly corr 
respond, both in substance and inclination, that 
hardly a doubt can be entertained of the chasm hav- 
ing been formed by some violent natural convul- 
sion." The properties of the celebrated spring, or 
hot well, whose waters are of such admirable effi- 
cacy in cases of debility and consumption, were but 
little noticed till the close of the 17th century. In 
1605, the Society of Merchant Adventurers of Bris- 
tol, (proprietors of the manor of Clifton,) granted a 
lease to Sir Thomas Day, Knt. and others, who 
erected the hot-well house, and other buildings, for 
the reception of company : since that period, the 
repute and efficacy of the springs have greatly in- 
creased. 

At the entrance of Clifton town, is an elegant 
house, which belonged to the late Sir William 
Draper, the antagonist of Junius. He erected 
here an obelisk, with a short Latin inscription on 
its base, in honour of William, Earl of Chatham; 
and verses and inscriptions to the memory of the 
warriors who fell at Madras, Arcot, Pondicherry, 
and Manilla. The house of Gabriel Golding, Esq. 
which has a curious grotto, stands opposite to 
Clifton Church. Its entrance is decorated with a 
variety of rare and costly shells : its sides embossed 
with Bristol stones, mundic, metallic ores, petre- 
factions, fossils, &c. Its roof is finely fretted, and 
a rich mosaic pavement adorns the floor. A statue 
of Aquarius, leaning on an urn, stands in a cavity 
at the upper end, out of which issues a stream of 
water, murmuring over rugged stones, till it falls 



the purpose of obtaining information ; and the original licence 
for permission is still preserved among the Abbey records. His 
History of Roman Britain, containing the I.ineiv.ry, was dis- 
covered at Copenhag'-n, in 1747, by Mr. Bertram, a corres- 
pondent of Dr. Stukeley's, through whose solicitalions, the 
whole work was published in that city in the year 173S. Gib- 
bon thought so highly of this work, that he styles it, " A 
wonderful performance for a monk of that age." Several 
manuscripts, by Richard, are in different libraries in Great 
Britain. 

into 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



449 



into a large escalop shell, from whose brim it runs, 
in gentle rills, into a reservoir intended for gold 
fishes. The representation of a lion's den is front- 
ing the door, in which appear the figures of a lion 
and lioness. A subterraneous passage leads from 
the grotto to a fine terrace walk, whence the most 
enchanting and exuberant landscapes present them- 
selves. The gardens, which are large, aud have many 
fine accompaniments, are laid out with great taste. 

COBERLEY.] In the ancient Church of Coberley, 
4| miles S. by B. from Cheltenham, supposed to 
have been rebuilt about the year 1330, are some cu- 
rious specimens of monumental sculpture : amongst 
others, a crusader, a lady in the habit of the 14th 
century, a knight in mail armour, and the effigies of 
Sir Thomas de Berkeley. 

CLFORD.] The market-town of Colford is si- 
tuated in the parish of Newland, 7-f miles W.N.W. 
from Blakeney, and 123 W. by N. from London. 
The original market-house was destroyed in a skir- 
mish which took place previously to the siege of 
Gloucester, between some royalists, under the com- 
mand of Lord Herbert, and the Parliament's forces, 
at the head of which was Colonel Barrow. Sir Ri- 
chard Lawdy, Major-General of South Wales, and 
several officers, fell in this contest. Charles the 
Second gave 40/. towards defraying the expense of 
building the present market-house, in 1679. The 
Chapel, which was also destroyed during the civil 
war, was rebuilt in the reign of Queen Anne, who 
made a donation of 300/. for that purpose.. There 
are still seen traces of Claud Offa, or King Offa's 
dyke. The houses ranged in one street, are in ge- 
neral good buildings. 

CORSE.] In this parish, 4 miles E. by N. from 
Newent, great improvements have been effected by 
inclosures. Corse Court is the seat of Thomas 
Dowdeswell, Esq. whose father was Speaker of 
the House of Commons, and Chancellor of the 
Exchequer. 

DEAN.] The forest of Dean, which is supposed 
to derive its name from the British Dary's Coed, or 
the wood of fallow deer, for which it was famous 
for many 'centuries, is limited according to the pe- 
rambulations made in the 12th of Henry the Third, 
and 10th of Ed ward, the First. The centre of the 
forest is five miles S.W. by W. from Newnham. 
The quantity of ground which it includes, belonging 
to the crown, exclusive of freehold property, obtain- 
ed by encroachments or grant, is stated at 23,013 
acres. Many depredations have been made upon 
the forest, at various times, either through the 
neglect oi' the officers, or the too improvident grants 
of Sovereigns ; but, in no instance, perhaps, was 
greater mischief done, than by Sir John Wyntour, 
to whom a grant was made by Charles the First, oi' 
all the King's coppices, and waste soil of the forest, 
except the Lea Bailey, with all the mines and 
quarr-es, in consideration of 10 BOO/, and a fee-farm 
rent of 1950/. 12s. f-W. for ever. At that time, 
within the limits of the forest so granted, were 

VOL. II. NO. 77. 



growing 105,557 trees, containing 61,928 tons of 
timber; besides 153,209 cords of wood. The civil 
war put an end to the patent ; and the inclosures 
which had been made, were thrown down, and the 
whole re-afforested. At the Restoration, a com- 
mission was issued to inquire into the state of the 
forest ; and, upon survey, there were found 25,929 
oaks, and 4204 beeches, containing 121,572 cords 
of wood, and 1J, 335 tons of ship timber. A new 
grant was then made to the nominees of Sir John 
Wyntour, of all the trees, excepting the timber fit 
for the navy. Five hundred fellers of wood wore 
immediately employed ; and so rapid was the de- 
vastation, that an order of Parliament was made, to 
prevent any further felling of timber, or cutting of 
wood. Before a bill could be passed, however, the 
Parliament was prorogued, and Sir John was left 
to pursue his pleasure, which he did so effectually, 
that, on a new survey, in 1007, only 200 of the 
oak ami beech trees were standing, and a deficiency 
of 7000 or 8000 tons was found in the quantity that 
should have been reserved for the navy. To repair 
these mischiefs, 11,000 acres were immediately in- 
closed, planted, and carefully guarded ; and from 
the plantations then made, the supply for the dock- 
yards is now principally obtained. 

The forest is divided into six walks ; and its go- 
vernment vested in a Lord-Warden, who is Con- 
stable of the Castle of St. Briavel's ; six deputy 
Wardens ; four Verderers, chosen by the freehold- 
ers ; a Conservator ; sevn Wood-wards ; a Chief 
Forester in Fee, and Bow Bearer ; eight Foresters 
in Fee; a Gaveller; and a Steward of the Swahi- 
mote. These officers are empowered to hold a 
Court of Attachment every 40 days ; a Court 6f 
Swanimote, thrice every year ; and another Court, 
called the Justice Seat, once in three years. These 
Courts are held at the King's Lodge, or Speech 
House, situated nearly in the centre of the forest'. ->- 
The office of Chief Forester in Fee, is held by the 
Wyndham family, in right of inheritance. He has 
no salary, but claims to be entitled to the -left 
shoulder of all bucks and does killed within the 
forest ; also ten fee bucks, and ten fee does, an- 
nually, to be thenogbtaken and killed, according to 
his own will ; with unlimited right of huntrng", 
hawking, and fishing, within the forest. As Bow 
Bearer, he is to attend the King, with a bow and 
arrow, and six stout bowmen, clothed in green, 
whenever his Majesty hunts within the forest. 

The whole forest being extra-parochial, and its' 
inhabitants exempted from rates and taxes, with 
free liberty of pasturage, "access to the woods and 
timber, aud the privilege of sinking mines, many 
persons have been induced to form residences here ;' 
and, according to the returns of 1811, the popula- 
tion amounted to 4073 ; the number of houses to 
908 : nearly the whole of which have been built 
within the last 100 years ; the six lodges erected 
for the keepers, being the only houses in the forest, 
in the time of Sir Robert Atkyns. The crown 
5 x possesses 



450 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



possesses the right of keeping 800 deer here, at all 
times ; but these animals are so scarce, that the an- 
nual warrant issued from the crown, for four bucks, 
and four does, is frequently sent back unexecuted. 
The free miners and colliers claim a right not only 
to dig for coal and ore, with the consent of the Ga- 
veller, but to be supplied with wood and timber for 
their works ; and on an average of seven years, 
nearly 1500 trees are annually delivered to them. 
The sixth part of the produce of each mine is due 
to the King : the annual composition is called the 
King's Gawl, and is paid to the Gaveller. The 
general appearance of the forest is beautiful and 
picturesque, finely interspersed with deep vallies, 
and rising grounds. Some new road* have been 
opened through the forest, in pursuance of an act 
passed in J795. The forest abounds with orchards, 
and the cyder made of its almost peculiar produce, 
the styre apple, is peculiarly fine. 

DEAN, MICHAEB.] The market-town of Michel, 
or Michael Dean, deriving its name from the Saxon 
words Dene, and Micl ; the former, explanatory 
of its situation in a deep dell, the latter, denoting 
its relative consequence to the neighbouring village 
of Little Dean, lies 5 miles N. by W. from Newen- 
ham, and 116| W. by N. from London. The 
Church has a tower, terminated by a well propor- 
tioned octagonal spire, 156 feet high from the 
foundation. The roof is of oak timber, studded 
with roses, and other devices, finely carved. In 
the east window of the further north aisle, are some 
remains of painted glass. Many sepulchral memo- 
rials arc exhibited by this Church ; and among 
them various mutilated slabs, which were once or- 
namented with brasses. The font is supposed to 
have been cut out of a capital of some column, as 
the lower part displays carvings evidently inverted. 
A subterraneous passage, concerning which many 
stories are told, leads from this Church to a wood 
upon a hill, about half a mile from the town. The 
manners of the inhabitants are reported to have 
been greatly improved since the establishment of a 
Charity School. The population of this parish, as 
returned under the late act, amounted to 535 ; the 
houses to 121 : the latter are principally arranged 
in three streets, resembling tne Roman Y. A 
small manufacture of leather iscarriedon in this town. 

DEAN, LITTLE.] Little Dean, or Dene Parva, 
now a distinct parish, a mile and three quarters 
N.W. by W. from Newennam, was formerly in- 
cluded in that of Dean Michel ; and, like that, 
produces coal and iron ore. The village is popu- 
lous : and, if we may judge, from a curious market- 
cross, near its centre, must have formerly enjoyed 
the privileges of a market-town. The mines, and 
the manufacture of nails, afford the chief employ- 
ment to the labouring classes. The principal estate, 
which has a handsome mansion, is that of Joseph 
Pyrke, Esq, a descendant from a family reported 
to have been seated in this neighbourhood, from the 
Conquest. Under the direction of Sir G. O. Paul, 
'Bart, has been built, upon an improved plan, a Pe- 



nitentiary House, for the forest division. In the 
Church, arc the remains of some finely painted glass. 

DEERHURST.] Deerhurst, anciently Deortyrste, 
a village on the banks of the Severn, 2 miles W. 
from Tewkesbury, is celebrated as the site of a 
Priory, originally founded by Duke Dodo, about 
the year 715, from respect to his brother Alrnaric, 
who resided, and was buried here. The site of the 
Priory was purchased, in the 17th century, by the 
noble family of Coventry. The Priory Church, 
and several other parts of the monastic buildings, 
are yet standing. In the windows are remains of 
painted glass. A large slab of blue marble marks 
the place of interment of Sir John Cassy, and his 
Lady, whose effigies are displayed by well preserv- 
ed brasses let into the stones. The former is re- 
presented in his robes, as Chief Baron of the Ex- 
chequer : the latter in a long loose dress, fastened 
at the neck nnd wrists. The other monastic buildings 
have been converted intothehouse and offices of afarm. 

DERIIAM.] At Derham, or Dyrbam, 3 miles E. 
of Pucklechurch, is a large and handsome mansion, 
with a park of 500 acres, the residence of William 
Blathwayte, Esq. Lord of the manor. This village 
is remarkable for its number of springs, and for 
great ramparts and trenches, which shew that it 
was formerly the seat of military actions. Relating 
to this, we are told that one Ceaulin, King of the 
West Saxons, engaging with the Britons, in the 
neighbouring fields, obtained a great victory, and 
slew Cammeail, Condidan, and Fariemoil, three of 
their Kings ; upon which the cities of Bath, Glou- 
cester, and Cirencester, yielded to the conqueror. 

DOWDESWELL.] This village, 4| miles S.E. by 
E. from Cheltenham, on the London road, though 
containing only a few houses, is one of the most 
elegant and pleasantly situated in the kingdom. 
It is built upon the sunny side of a hill, sheltered 
by lofty and ancient trees, and commands not only 
Chletenham, but the greatest part of the Vale of 
Gloucester, with seme of the most conspicuous 
buildings in that city. Malvern hills, which lie at 
a considerable distance, are seen to great advan- 
tage from this spet, and when illumined by a setting 
sun, form a picture grand, charming,and impressive. 

DUNTSBORNE, ABBOT'S.] Abbot's Dujjtsborne, so 
called from having belonged to the Abbots of Glou- 
cester, was devised to the Earl of Radnor, in 1770, 
by Sir IVfark Stewart Pleydell, Bart. Sir Mark 
had previously erected a villa, on a singular plan, 
on an eminence in this parish, in a spot distin- 
guished for the beauty of its prospects. 

DURSLEY.] The small, irregularly built market- 
town of Dursley, is 15 miles S.W. by S. from Glou- 
cester, and 107| W. by N. from London. It is si- 
tuated at the base of a steep hill, covered with a fine 
hanging wood, of beech. Its population, as returned 
under the late act, was 2580 ; the number of houses, 
470 : several of the latter bear the marks of consider- 
able antiquity : on the exterior of one of them, is the 
date 1520. The fossil productions of this and the 
adjacent parishes, are very considerable. 

Durslev 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



Dursley is called, by Leland, " A praty clpth- 
Jnge towne." The clothing manufacture is still its 
chief support, and is now carried on with every ad- 
vantage derived from machinery : the business of 
making cards for the clothiers is also flourishing 
here. In old records, Dursley is enumerated as one 
of the five ancient boroughs in Gloucestershire ; and 
so it was returned by the sheriff in the ninth of Ed- 
ward the First. The chief officer was formerly 
styled the Prcepositus, but now has the appellation 
of Bailiff: he is elected annually at the Manor 
Court, from among the more respectable inhabi- 
tants ; but bis authority is limited to the examina- 
tion of weights and measures, and the superintend- 
ice of the police. Near the centre of the town is a 
market house, built with free stone, about the year 
1738, at the expence of the lord of the manor, whose 
arms are displayed on front : at the east end is a 
statue of Queen Anne. The charter for the market 
was granted by Edward the Fourth in the year 
1471.* 

Dursley Church is an elegant building, with a 
tower of modern Gothic at the west end, and a 
handsome portal on the south ; over which are three 
ornamental niches, canopied. The dividing arches 
of the interior are light : carved on the timber frame 
roof are the arms of Berkeley and Fitz Alan, and 
the device f Thomas Tanner, who, in the reign of 
Henry the Sixth, erected a chapel at the end of the 
south aisle, for the reception of a chantry, in which 
is the figure of a skeleton beneath a canopy, in- 
tended as a memorial of him. The old spire fell in 
1699, while the bells were ringing, by which acci- 
dent several lives were lost : it was rebuilt and 
finished in 1700, at the expence of 1000/. The 
chancel was likewise erected in 1738, and neatly 
fitted up. " On the south east side of the Church 
yard," observes Rudge, " some springs arise out 
of the ground, like boiling water, in so copious a 
manner, as to drive a fulling mill, at about a hun- 
dred yards distance below ; and are never known to 
diminish in quantity. At their rise they cover a fine 
level gravelly bottom, for about fifteen feet square, 
with nearly two feet of water, wherefore the inhabi- 
tahts'tfall it Broad Well ; but further back than the 
time of Henry the -Third, it was called Ewelme. 
This is a Saxon word, signifying the head of a spring; 
and it is conjectured that this remarkable water gave 
name to the town ; as in British, Dwr is water ; and 
Ley, Legc, Lcga, are common appellations for pas- 
ture grounds, particularly in elevated situations." 

The Berkelcys, Lords of the Manor from the 
time of the Domesday Survey till the 6th of Richard 
II. formerly had a Castle, or Baronial residence, 
at the north-west end of the town, surrounded by a 

* Edward Fox, Bishop of Hereford, whom Fuller styles 
" The principal pillar of the reformation, as to the politic and 
prudential part thereof," was a native of Dursley. He was 
taught the rudiments of knowledge at Eton ; but was admitted 
at king's College, Cambridge, in 1512; and in 1528, he be- 
came its Provost He was employed several times by Heury 



moat, which still remains : the site is now an orchard; 
but the fields adjoining are yet called the Castle 
Fields. The fortress was pulled down about the 
reign of Queen Mary. 

On the top of the hill, near Nibley Park, in thiC 
parish, is a bleak and dreary place called the hermi- 
tage, where an anchoret appears to have had his 
abode at the commencement of the 10 century. 

DYMOCK.] Dymock, four miles N. N. W. from 
Newent, in Henry the Third's time, had the pri- 
vilege of a market and fairs ; but these have been 
long disused. Sir Johu Wyntour, the zealous par- 
tisan of Charles the First, had a garrison here for 
the king; supposed to have been maintained in the 
old moated mansion near the road, on the southern 
borders of the parish, and within 200 yards of which 
is an artificial mount, called Castle Tump. The 
celebrated John Kyrle, better known as the Man of 
Ross, was born at White House, in Dymock parish, 
in the year 1637, and died in 172-1, at Ross, iu 
Herefordshire. 

ELKSTONE. The village of Elkstone, comprising 
the hamlets of Cockleford and Comb-end, is 7 
miles N. N. W. from Cirenccster. The Church is 
one of the most ancient buildings in the county. 
The south door presents a rich specimen of ancient 
architecture: over it is the figure of our Saviour, 
sitting on a throne, with his right hand extended, 
and holding a book in his left ; over his head is the 
figure of a hand pointing downwards ; and round 
him are the holy lamb, and symbols of the evange- 
lists, all carved in basso-relievo. This group of 
figures is surrounded by a semi-circular arch, and 
grotesque heads, and zig-zag mouldings, which ar* 
very similar to those round the south door of Sid^ 
dington Church. At Comb-end, about 40 years 
ago, the foundations of a Roman building and various* 
antiquities were discovered. 

FAIRFORD.] The market town of Fairford ft 
situated near the banks ol the Colne, in an exceed- 
ingly pleasant country, 24 miles S. E. by E. froitt 
Gloucester, and 80^ W. by N. from London. Rud- 
der deduces its name from the Saxou Faran, to go, 
or to pass, and ford : thus supposing it to signify 
the passage, at the ford. It consists of two streets, 
neatly and regularly built. The charter for the 
market was procured through the interest of An- 
drew Barker, Esq. about the year 1608 ; but it is 
not very numerously attended. Several charitable 
donatious have been made for the use of the poor; 
and a Free School has been established by the pro- 
duce of money expended in the purchase of lands, 
and bringing in about sixty pounds annually, be- 
queathed by the Hon. Elizabeth Fcrmor, and Mary 
Barker, spinster. The population of this parish, in 

the Eighth, as Ambassador to the courts of France and Ger- 
many. The opinion of thu University of Cambridge in favour 
of that overeign's divorce from Catherine, was chiefly pro- 
cured by his exertions, aided by those of Dr. S. Gardiner. In 
1535, he was promoted to the See of Hereford, and died three 
years afterward*. 

181L 



432 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



18.11, was returned at 1144 ; the number of houses 
at 302. 

The manor of Fairford was held, in the reign of 
Edward the Confessor, by Bithric, Earl of Glouces- 
ter, from whom it was taken by Matilda, the wife 
of William, Duke of Normandy: after her death it 
reverted to the crown. In 1263, Richard de Clare, 
Earl of Gloucester and Hereford, obtained the lord- 
ship, with the privilege, of a market and fairs. It 
then descended to the Beauchamps, and Nevilles, 
Earls of Warwick, and was one of the 114 manors 
which were fraudulently obtained from Anne, Coun- 
tess of Warwick, by Henry VII. by a deed, dated 
December 13th, 1488. In 1498, it was again pur- 
chased from the crown, by the Tame family, and is 
at present the property of John Raymond Barker, 
Esq. of Fairford Park. The ancient baronial resi- 
dence, originally erected by the Earls of Warwick, 
and called Beaiichamp and Warwick court, stood 
near the Church. It was pulled down by Andrew 
Barker, Esq. who, with the materials, erected the 
present manor house, a few furlongs distant towards 
the north. In sinking the foundations of the latter, 
urns and Roman coins are recorded to have been 
found. The house is a spacious and convenient 
building. The pleasure grounds were originally 
laid out in the formal style, that was introduced 
from Holland, soon after the revolution ; but they 
have since been greatly improved. The Colne 
flows on the west side, and its channel having been 
widened, and its extremities artificially concealed, 
the views are very beautiful. 

It appears to be from the beauty of its Church 
the architecture of which is very fine, and highly 
embellished with the exquisitely painted glass, of 
which it is the depository, that Fairford derives its 
chief celebrity. The history is curious. John Tame, 
a merchant of a respectable family, settled in Lon- 
don, where several of them had served the office of 
sheriff, had the good fortune to take a vessel bound 
for Rome, laden with painted glass, which he 
brought into England. Having determined to erect 
a building to receive this glass, he made choice of 
Fairford, where he had resided some time, for the 
purpose, and having purchased the manor of Henry 
VII. he commenced the Church, in 1493 ; but 
dying soon afterwards, it was completed by his son, 
Sir Edmund Tame, Knt. The glass was disposed 
in 28 windows, with four or more compartments in 
each ; but in several of them, the figures are now 
mutilated,' or displaced. The subjects commence 
in the fifth window of the north aisle, on which side 
all the paintings are in much the best state of pre- 
servation ; the third and fourth compartments of this, 
window, which represent Moses and the Burning 
Bush, and the Queen'of Sheba ottering gifts to King 
Solomon, are very finely coloured. The next win- 
dow is very imperfect, but commences the subjects 
from the history of the redemption, which, with the 
exception of the resurrection and day of judgment, 
is concluded in the ninth window, by a representa- 



of the Ascension, and of the Descent of the Holy 
Spirit. The third window in Ibis series is the best : 
in one of the compartments displaying the Salutation 
of the Virgin, the architectural perspective of the 
temple is very fine : the great east window also, of 
which the chief design is the Triumphal Entry into 
Jerusalem, is perfect, and extremely grand, the 
effects of the crimson velvet and gilding being truly 
surprising. The tenth, eleventh, and twelfth win- 
dows, contain the figures of the twelve Apostles, 
over the heads of whom, on scrolls, are labels, con- 
taining the Creed in separate sentences. The two 
next windows, which display the Primitive Fathers 
of the Church, &c. are very imperfect. The de- 
signs of the great west window are the Resurrection 
and last Judgment. Gothic fancy has here been in- 
dulged to an extreme in these exhibitions of the hor- 
rible and the ludicrous. So brilliant are the colours, 
and so delicate the drapery of the smaller figures in 
this assemblage, that a more pleasing specimen of 
ancient art will rarely be found. The sixteenth and 
seventeenth windows represent the Judgment of 
Solomon, the Evangelists, &c. the three next are 
adorned with the figures of twelve Prophets, with 
appropriate labels over each. From the twenty-first 
to the twenty-fourth windows, inclusive, are the 
figures of Roman Emperors, and others who op- 
posed the progress of Christianity : the remaining 
four are embellished with paintings of the Roman 
Emperors who favoured its establishment. By 
whorat these paintings were executed is unknown. 
Their imperfections most probably originated in the 
civil wars, when they were obliged to be removed. 
Though mutilated in various parts, they are still 
unrivalled, excepting by the windows in the Chapel 
at King's College : to secure them from further in- 
jury, a lattice of wire was fitted to each window in 
the year 1725, at the expence of 200/. given by the 
Hon. Elizabeth Fermor, daughter of William Lord 
Lempster, and grand-daughter to Andrew Barker, 
Esq. 

Here are various monuments and sepulchral in- 
scriptions. In the north aisle is a table tomb, of 
Italian marble, to the memory of John Tame, the 
beneficent founder of this edifice, and Alice, his 
wife. Inserted in the slab on the top, are brasses, 
displaying their efh'gies ; the former is represented 
in armour, the latter in the dress of the times : be- 
neath is the following legend : 



lout praj for me A? 3f mag not prag note 
amitf) a Pater /5otzr ttan 9toe j 



At the corner of tho slab are four escutcheons of 
arms, and round the verge is an inscription, re- 
cording the respective dates of the deaths of the 
said John and Alice, &c. On a blue nuu-ble. slab, 
in the same aisle, are brasses of Sir Edmund Tame, 
Knt. son of the above ; and of his two wives. Sir 
Edmund died in 1433. IL're also is a table tomb to 
the memory of Sir Roger Lygon, and Catherine, 
his wife, with their effigies in free-stone. Various 

6 . other 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



459 



other monuments embellish the interior of this 
building. 

FARMINGT<N.] At Farmington,tw<> miles E.N.E. 
from Northleach, is the seat of Edward Waller, 
Esq. and near it is an ancient Roman entrench* 
meht called Norbury. 

FUAXLEY.] At the little village of Flaxley, 2 
miles north from Newnham, Roger, the second sou 
of the Earl of Hereford, built an abbey in the time 
of King Stephen, for Cistercian monks. Henry 1 1. 
was a great benefactor to this abbey, granting to it 
several neighbouring manors, together with an iron 
forge in the forest of Dean, and two oaks weekly to 
supply it with fuel. This latter grant was after- 
wards revoked by Henry III. and a wood, since 
called Abbot's Wood, given in lieu thereof. The 
manufactory is still carried on, and the iron is es- 
teemed particularly good ; but its goodness does 
not arise from any extraordinary qualities of the ore, 
but from the practice of the working of the furnace 
*nd forges with charcoal, without any mixture of 
pit-coal. The site of the abbey was granted, iu 
1545, to Sir Anthony Kingston ; and the estate now 
belongs to the Boevey family. The Abbot's lodging 
was the family residence, and continued in tolerable 
preservation till the year 1777, when a considerable 
part was destroyed by tire. The remainder, with 
many additions, forms the present mansion, in 
which are some good family pictures. The flour of 
the Chapter-house was discovered a few years ago, 
at a small depth iu the garden ; and some stone 
coffin lids were dug up, sculptured with ornamented 
crosses. The surrounding scenery is strikingly 
picturesque. 

FftocESTER.] On the left of Frocester a little 
village 3| miles N. E. by N. from Dursley ap- 
pears Camley Pike, of a volcanic shape, and the 
bold projecting head of Stinchcombe ; in the fore- 
ground, two expanded reaches of the Severn : the 
intermediate distances between the Forest Hills, 
ihe. blue 'mountains of Malvern, and the turrets of 
Gloucester, arc filled up with cultivated fields, vil- 
lage -churches, and buildings of various descrip- 
tions, among which the Castle and Tower of Berke- 
ley, with their lefty battlements, are easily distin- 
guished. The Manor belongs te the Earl of War- 
wick. The mansion is of tluvagc of Elizabeth ; and 
during the progress ef that sovereign through this 
country, in I r>7- ( , it became her residence for one 
night. -It was then in the possession of George 
Huntlcy, Esq. whose family continued owners till 
1012, when it became the property *f Sir Robert 



' That King's Holm was within the limits of the Roman 
city, is evident, from the abundance of corns, of the Lower 
Km|Jire, and other memorials, that have been discovered here 
at different periods; such as coins, burial unis, leaden and 
ttone coffins, and various mentis. A moiigthe ether remains, 
was tl.e fragment of an Amphora, consisting of the neck and 
handles; a small brass lamp; an iron hatchet ; a biass patera, 
with a handle, the latter the only part not corroded; a small 
ornamented bell; part of a pair of brass compasses; main- 

VOL. n. vo. 78. 



Ducie, Bart. Lord Ducie is the present owner. 
The Abbots of Gloucestershire had a sumptuous 
residence here : and it is said to have formerly been 
the, site of a College of Prebendaries. An ancient 
conventual barn, 210 feet in length, is still re 
maining. 

GLOUCESTER.] The ancient and highly respect- 
able city of Gloucester is situated in the vale of 
Gloucester, on a gentle eminence, rising on the 
east side, from the Severn, 104 miles W. N. W. 
from London. Its etymology, us connected with 
that of the county, we have already noticed. It 
may not, however, be amiss further to mention, 
that the word Gloew, by some writers spelt Glow, 
Gloyw, &c. means clear, transparent, or pellucid ; 
also bright, shining, and splendid : hence Camden, 
Rudder, Skinner, Minshew, and others, call Glou- 
cester the bright, lair, or splendid city ; not ad- 
verting to the historic evidence which makes Gloew 
its founder. Gough calls it the city of the pure 
stream, from the British Caer gloyii iis. By others, 
again, it has been called Claudiocestria, from the 
Emperor Claudius, who, they pretend, gave it this 
name when he married his daughter Geuisa here to 
Arviragus, the British King. At all events, the 
city appears to have been subjected to the Romans 
by Aulus Plautius ; and it was afterwards made a 
station to awe the Silures. Its inhabitants being 
thus increased by a Roman garrison, it obtained, 
the privileges of a colony, and its name, assuming 
a Latin termination, became Glevmn ; and as such 
is mentioned by Antoninus, iu IMS thirteenth Iter. 
The exact situation of the Romuu Glevum is sup- 
posed to have been the tract of ploughed land culled 
King's Holm, which adjoins the city on the north- 
east, and, in all old writings, is named Regia 
Donuis ; probably from its having been the site of 
the Pnetorian Palace, and afterwards of that of the 
Saxon Kings.* , , 

The city continued in the possession of the Ro- 
mans, till the distractions of their own empire or- 
casiotied them to quit the island. Its government 
then reverted to the British Princes, under whose 
domination it continued till about the year 577. 
when it was surrendered to the West-Saxons, and 
was reputed as one of their principal cities : it was 
afterwards subjugated by the Mercians. During its 
continuance under the recovered sway of its native 
Princes, it gave title to an Karl, the gallaut Eldol, 
who is recorded to have accompanied Yortigcrn to 
the fatal banquet at Ambresbury, in Wiltshire, 
where so many British chieftains fell a sacrifice to 



brass bends found with above sixty blue ones, of the kind 
called Druids' beads; and a Slater;;, or Koman steel-yard, ol 
brass, supposed to have been the Arst ever discovered in Bri- 
tain. This was in good preservation ; the hook or chain whith 
suspended the weight, being the only part lost. One side of 
the beam was divided into six part*, earh of whidi was sub- 
divided into twelve: the only number marked on this side 
was v. the other side had the numbers v. x. x\% ajid xx. in- 
scribed on it. 

5 V Saxon 



451 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



Saxon treachery. The Britons were unarmed ; and 
Eldol is said to have caught up a stake, and to have 
laid about him With such courage and effect, that he 
slew seventy of his opponents ; and having broken 
the heads, arms, and limbs of many more, got from 
them into Gloucester, his own city. 

By the frequent conflicts between the Britons and 
the Saxons, the buildings of the city were nearly 
ruined ; and the whole place might have sunk into 
complete decay, if Wolphere, son of King Penda, 
had not enlarged and adorned it, about the year 
679. The early importance of Gloucester is evinced 
by its having been the residence of various Saxon 
monarchs ; and hence it was denominated a royal 
city. A battle was fought here between King Ed- 
gar and the Danes, who had twice plundered the 
city in the times of his predecessors, and who again 
ravaged, and partly consumed it by fire, during 
the reign of his son Ethelred. After the decisive 
battle, between Canute and Edmund Ironside, the 
latter retreated into this city : and here also Edward 
the Confessor frequently resided, and kept his court. 
William the Conqueror followed the example of the 
Saxon sovereigns, and often made Gloucester his 
place ef residence : he generally spent his Christmas 
here in great splendour; a custom which was con- 
tinued by William Rufus, after whose accession, in 
1087, part of the city was burnt, by the adherents 
of his brother Robert. In 1095, Malcolm the Third, 
King of Scotland, was received here by Rufus with 
great haughtiness, on the occasion ot the adjust- 
ment of the terms of a treaty of peace. Henry the 
First held his court at Gloucester in 1123 ; and the 
same year summoned all his Bishops, Abbots, and 
Thanes, to attend it, for the purpose of choosing 
an Archbishop of Canterbury. Another great coun- 
cil was held here, by Henry the Second, in 1 1 75, 
to determine on the most effectual measures for 
quelling the insurrections of the Welsh. On the 
death of King John, in 1216, the young Prince, his 
sou, afterwards Henry the Third, was crowned in 
the Abbey Church, by the Bishop of Winchester and 
Bath, in the presence of Walo, the Pope's legate. 
This sovereign frequently resided and held his court 
and council at Gloucester, which had more of his 
favour than even London itself. In 1263, however, 
Henry appointed Sir Maci de Besile, a French 
knight, sheriff of Gloucestershire, and constable of 
the castle within the city. The preference thus 
given to a foreigner, was violently resented by the 
indignant nobles, who immediately chose Sir Wil- i 
liam Tracy, a native of the shire. The knight pro- I 
ceeded to exercise the duties of his office, in holding 
a county court, but was suddenly interrupted by 
De Besile, who entering with a party of the King's 
troops, seized the Knight, and hurried him to the 
Castle, as a close prisoner. The Barons then de- 
puted Sir Roger de Clifford, and Sir John Giffard, 
to besiege the Castle ; and, at the conclusion of a 
few days, an entrance was contrived, and Besile 
eventually surrendered himself prisoner, when he 



was sent to Erdesley Castle, in Wales. De Clif- 
ford afterwards made his peace with the King, by 
resigning the town and Castle into his hands ; but 
Giffard retired to Brimpsfield, whence he madefre- 
! quent sorties. The ensuing year witnessed the re- 
[ duction of the town by stratagem ; but, although 
possession of the town was obtained, the Castle still 
1 belonged to the King's forces ; and the Barons were 
much pressed by Prince Edward, who would have 
t entered the town almost with them, had they not 
destroyed the bridge across the Severn. This being 
repaired by the Prince, he assaulted the town at 
the west gate, but without success. He then pri- 
vately crossed the meadows, and was conveyed, by 
a boat, to the Castle. The sight of his banner dis- 
played on the keep, was the first intimation the 
nobles received of his successful enterprise : they, 
however, commenced the siege with vigour; and 
Sir John Giffard, having burnt the Castle bridge, 
prevented any further communication with the coun- 
try. This circumstance, and the approach of a 
strong reinforcement for the Barons, under the com- 
mand of Robert Ferrers, Earl of Derby, induced 
the Prince to visit his enemies unarmed, when ko 
offered them acceptable terms, confirmed by his 
oath ; and they retired, leaving him in quiet posses- 
sion. The Prince revenged his former disappoint- 
ment on the unoffending Burgesses ; whom he im- 
prisoned till they had ransomed themselves for 1000/. 
In the year, 1278, or 1279, a Parliament was as- 
sembled here by Edward the First, and several laws, 
connected with the statute of Quo Warranto, were 
enacted, and have from that period been known 
under the general appellation of the Statutes of Glou- 
cester. Another Parliament was held here, in 1378 ; 
and a third, and fourth, in 1403 and 1407. Th 
last Parliament assembled here, was in 1420. The 
opposition of the Gloucestrians to the royal cause, 
during the reign of Charles the First, is generally 
supposed to have operated fatally against that mo- 
narch's interest throughout the kingdom. The long 
and unfortunate siege which the city sustained, gave 
a check to the King's victorious army; and, the 
siege having been raised, it turned the* state of the 
war, and the King was never after successful. 

It is asserted, that the Christian faith was pro- 
mulgated in this city in the year 189, by a Bishop 
and preachers, chosen by Lucius, the first Christian 
King in this island ; and that he afterwards made it 
the seat of an Archbishop. The authorities for this 
relation are not sufficiently respectable to warrant 
belief; yet, from the general tradition, as well as 
other circumstances, there is a probability of Glou- 
cester having been one of the earliest Bishop's Sees 
in England. After the conversion of the Saxons, 
Edwy, King of Northumberland erected Lichficld 
into a Bishop's See, and included Gloucestershire 
within its diocese. In 679, this Bishopric was 
divided into the five smaller ones of Lichfield, Dor- 
eli*ster, Leicester, Hereford, and Worcester ; to 
the last of which this district was annexed, and con- 
tinued 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



tinned subject till the reign of Henry the Eighth ; 
though suffragan Bishops of Gloucester occur both 
in the years 1223 and 1534. This sovereign, in 
1511, erected "the city of Gloucester, the county 
of that city, and all the county of Gloucester, into a 
Bishopric, with a Dean and Chapter, by the name 
of the Diocese of Gloucester ; and ordained that 
such part of the then vill and county of Bristol, as 
formerly was in the Diocese of Worcester, should 
be from thenceforward in the Diocese of Gloucester 
for ever." The Church appointed for the Cathedral 
of the new See, was that belonging to the Abbey, 
founded by Wolphere, first Christian King of Mer- 
cia, and Ethelred, his brother and successor, be- 
tween the years 680 and (582. This establishment 
having undergone numerous changing, the Benedic- 
tines were completely established here previously to 
the year 1058, about which time AhSred, Bishop of 
Worcester, destroyed the decayed old Church, and 
built another nearer the walls of the town. This 
new; minster, as it is termed in the records, was 
burnt with the monastery in 1087, or 1088 ; proba- 
bly at the same time that the city was partly de- 
stroyed by the adherents of Robert, brother to Wil- 
liam Riifus. Serlo, the third Abbot, began a new 
Church in June 1089 ; the tirst stone was laid by 
Robert, Bishop of Hereford ; and on the comple- 
tion of the edifice, in the following year, it was con- 
secrated, and dedicated to St. Peter. The Abbey 
wag again destroyed by fire in 1101 or 1102, but 
the Church was saved. In the year 1122, on the 
eighth of the Ides of March, during the celebration 
of mass, the tower is said to have been fired by 
lightning, and the whole monastery consumed. The 
Abbey was also destroyed by lightning in the year 
1214, and again in 1223. Henry Foliot, Faleth, or 
Folet, elected Abbot in 1228, constructed an aque- 
duct for supplying the Convent with water, besides 
building a handsome tower to the Church, and part 
of the vaulting of the nave. He also began a tower 
at the west end, which was finished in 1246. In 
the year 1300, the cloisters, belfry, and great cham- 
ber, with the adjoining buildings, were ruined by 
an accidental fire. In the early part of the 14th 
century, the Abbot Gamages had the address to 
rescue the Convent from some enormous debts, 
which it had contracted, and increased the stock of 
sheep to 10,000. His successor, John Thokey, or 
Tokey, was highly instrumental in increasing the 
splendour and riches of the Abbey ; for, on the mur- 
der of Edward the Second, he conveyed the body of 
the deceased monarch to Gloucester without hesita- 
tion ; though the Abbots of Kingswood, Bristol, 
and Malmsbury, were all too greatly intimidated to 
offer to remove it, lest the Queen, and her partisans, 
should be offended. The funeral of the King was 
conducted with much solemnity ; and the offerings 
of the numerous visitants, who afterwards arrived at 
this city to pay their dvotions to his relics, were so 
great, that a considerable portion of the present 
Church was rebuilt with them. William Malveru, 

6 



otherwise Parker, the thirty-second and last Abbot 
of this community, was elected in 1514 ; ten years 
afterwards, he wrote a history of the Abbey, which 
has been printed, with Robert of Gloucester's 
Chronicle. In 1525, Cardinal Wolsey commanded 
a visitation of this Abbey ; when the revenues were 
stated to be 1022/. 15* Itl. Parker adorned King 
Edward's gate, and another now demolished ; re- 
built great part of the Abbot's hoinu*, the present 
Episcopal Palace, and the Chapel on the north side 
of the Presbytery, wherein he was buried. 

The conversion of the Abbey Church into a Cathe- 
dral was the chief means of its preservation at the 
reformation : nnd to the honour of the inhabitants of 
Gloucester, it became the object of their peculiar 
care during the civil wars, after which they obtained 
a grant of it from Oliver Cromwell. Hence the 
Cathedral still exists, as nearly perfect in all its 
parts, with regard to its general construction, a* 
it was left by the most favoured of its architects. It 
combines many interesting specimens of Saxon, 
Norman, and English architecture; and particularly 
of the latter. The general face of this Cathedral is 
similar to most others ; the inferior consisting of a 
nave, choir, side aisles, and transepts, with a 
Chapel of our Lady, and several smaller Chapels, 
or Oratories. From the intersection of the nave 
and transepts rises a high tower, and on the south 
side is a projecting porch. The roof te sustained on 
twenty-eight columns, which extend in two rows 
from the west end to the high altar, where the Pres- 
bytery forms nearly a semi-circular sweep : the tran- 
septs have no isolated pillars. The Chapel of Our 
Lady is, as usual, attached to the Presbytery ; and 
there are Chapels in the north-east and south-east 
angles of the transepts and choir, with 1 two others 
projecting in the sweep between those and the Chapel 
of Our Lady. The ground plan of the Cathedral, 
is probably the same at present as designed by Bishop 
Aldred previously to the year 1089 ; and the Crypt 
remains almost as perfect as the masons left it. The 
Nave is an interesting specimen of the style which 
continued to. prevail for nearly two centuries after 
the Norman Conquest. The arch of entrance to the 
cloisters from the north aisle, is elaborately and ex- 
quisitely adorned by pillars, buttresses, niches, pin-- 
uncles, foliage, and pannels, and the' singular orna- 
ment of twisted pinnacles under the arch. In the 
south aisle, nail-headed mouldings are introduced 
as embellishments on each side of the windows. An 
advanced gradation of style is exhibited in the in- 
terior of the south transept ; but the most perfect 
and ornamental degree is displayed in' the Choir and 
Chapel of Our Lady. The Choir is divided from 
the nave by a Skreen, designed by Kent. This, 
and the organ above it, a party -coloured gaudy in- 
strument, are obnoxious intruders, which obstruct 
the view of the grand east window. At the termi- 
nation of the nave, under the tower, is the approach 
to the choir ; and above the great arch is a window 
between two vacant arches, richly sculptured. On 

the 



45G 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



the north ami south skies are the arches which sup- 
port the vaulting of the transepts. Both these nre 
intersected at the springing by a flying arch, with 
open spandrils, each spanning the space of the tower. 
Upon the exact point of these intersecting arches, 
is a pillar forming an impost of the great vaulted 
roof, which is then divided into sharp lancet arcades, 
and has an air of incredihle lightness. From this 
part are five more arcades, divided by clusters of 
semi-columns, which reach from the base to the 
roof; and the ribs are infinitely intersected and 
variegated with the most elaborate trellis-work, 
composed -of rosettes, thickly studded. Over the 
high altar are angels in full choir, with every in- 
strument -of music practised in the fifteenth century. 
On each side are thirty-one stalls of rich tabernacle 
work, 'carved in oak, little inferior, in point of exe- 
cution, to the episcopal throne at Exeter, or those 
at Windsor, -erected in the reign of Edward the 
Fourth. The two furthest arcades dilate about a 
yard -from <he right line, and are connected with the 
great east window, which occupies the whole .space 
of the end of the choir. The dimensions are sup- 
posed to be greater than those of any other window 
in England ; the glass occupying a space of seventy- 
eight teet, ten inches, by thirty-fire feet, six inches. 
This magnificent window was recently in a sad state 
of dilapidation. 

The pavement before the altar is composed of 
painted bricks, representing the devices of Edward 
the Second, of the Clares, and De Spencers, Earls 
of Gloucester, and of Abbot Sebroke ; these are 
imagined to have been prepared for the kiln by the 
monk*, who have displayed ingenuity, taste, and 
accuracy, in the scrolls, rebuses, and armorial 
bearings. The passages and oratories by which the 
choir is surrounded, are all of Saxon, or at least of 
early Norman architecture. The pillars and arches 
of those aisles or passages are of such gigantic mquld 
in breadth, (though not equally so in height,) that 
eternal duration seems to have been attempted by 
the architect. Kqually strong and durable nre those 
of the Whispering (Jallery, which is mentioned, by 
Lord Bacon, as being very remarkable. It is 
seventy-five ieet in length, and forms five sides of 
an octagon ; hut the reverberation of sounds was 
probably the effect of accident. On the left side are 
the remains of an altar, of rough stone, at which the 
Abbot, and others, are supposed to have stood to 
witness the celebration of mass within the Chapel of 
Our I /ul v. In the gallery of the south transept is 
a curious and very ancient painting of the La.-t 
Judgment, which was discovered some years ago 
bchiud the wainscottinjj in the nave, when the seats 
were TCinevcd, It was probably an altar-piece, con- 
cealed at 'he lime of the reformation. Part of the 
north transept is inclosed by a wall pierced into a 
door, and two windows of great beauty ; which 
afforded a<!misioH aud light to the refractory in- 
mates of 'the monastery, who were imprisoned within 
this apartment, as -the gratings still testify: it is 



now used as a vestry. The interior of the Chapel 
of Our Lady, a continuation of the choir, is pecu- 
liarly rich and fascinating $ fcut the effect is greatly 
injured by the introduction of the present altar-piece, 
which is utterly unsuitable to its situation. " AH 
unmeaning, opake, stuccoed glory, under the in* 
conceivably bright tints of the beautiful east window, 
is a wretched substitute for the elegant ornaments, 
pannels, and tubcrnacle work, concealed by it. 
When the view from the nave was uninterrupted, 
the coup d'u-il must have been infinitely splendid; 
and the eye dazzled by the brilliant colours of the 
painted glass, which represents our Saviour sur- 
rounded by Kings, Prelates, and Abbots. The 
figures are thirty-seven in number, yet every atti-- 
tude is judiciously varied. The roof of this Chapel 
is one grand pointed arch, indented on the sides by 
the arches of the windows : a centre rib, with one 
on each side, extend east and west ; seven others 
diverge from each column, and intersecting through- 
out the surface of the whole vault, form a vast 
variety of lozenges, radii, and angles, which are 
bound together by fillets : the variety of the rosettes, 
flowers, foliage, and scrolls, which cover the inter- 
sections, is truly wonderful. The side Chapels, or 
Chantries, have ceilings of profuse decorations ; 
they each contain twelve circles, with centre flowers, 
whose intervals are full of tracery ; between them 
are quatrefoils in circles, and the ascending arches 
arc covered by nets of enriched pannels. The en- 
trance to the Chapel of Our Lady is fronted by a. 
most beautiful Screen, pierced into a number of 
cinqucfoiled divisions, with ornaments of quatrefoils 
interspersed : a seat, or basement, exactly similar 
to a Tuscan pedestal, encircles the Chapel ; the 
sides of the porch above this are partially pierced 
into windows, containing three rows of horizontal 
quatrefoils, making the same number of divisions in 
height : fragments of painted glass canopies are 
left in the ornamented arches : the extreme lines of 
these windows are formed by pillars into four narrow 
pannels, wliicli were filled by eight niches; two of 
them are destroyed on the north side, by the mural 
monument of Sir John Powell ; the pedestal and 
canopies are of the most exquisitely pierced foliage 
and pannels, but the statues are entirely gone. 
The ceiling of this grand porch has a cross of rich 
pendants, surrounded by the most elaborate ribs, 
judiciously intersected. Tike west end consists of 
one superb arch above the porch, the base of which 
is a string of eleven ovals, filled with foliage, and 
blank shields ; the sides have each a pannel aud 
niche ; and the architect has pierced the great space 
within the above out-line into forty-two trefoilcd 
arches, of unequal sizes." " Behind the screen is 
an elegant Chapel or Oratory. Five columns on 
each side, three in a cluster, form the length of the 
Chapel ; every column is adorned by two narrow 
pannels, each of which contains a cinquefoil pauncl 
at its base, and three niches, with caryatide busts 
<f angols, bearing scrolls, originally inscribed with 

the 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



457 



the names of the saints above them ; Ihe minuteness 
and elegance of the ornaments of this part of the de- 
sign are extremely interesting. Here are six win- 
dows, three on each side, glazed ; but one on each 
side the altar serve as screens to the chantry chapels 
before mentioned : the spaces under the windows 
abound in the delicately sculptured decorations pe- 
culiar to the florid style ; nor are the windows less 
attended to ; the divisions are very numerous, and 
those of the arches are again sub-divided in the 
most graceful manner. On the south side of the 
altar are three seats for the officiating priests ; four 
buttresses, exquisitely fluted, and enriched with 
foliage, inclose and support three-sided canopies 
with indented trefoil arches, from each corner of 
which small clustered columns ascend to the cor- 
nice, forming eight arches, finely indented, and a 
diminutive colonade ; the ceilings of the canopies 
are covered with slender ribs, that arise from pil- 
lars not larger than a wand : the piscina is quite 
perfect on a beautiful pedestal. The floor of the 
porch and chapel is paved with painted tiles ; but 
numerous ancient and modern coverings of graves 
have demolished a very considerable part of them ; 
those that remain are generally much worn : seve- 
ral tiles form a circle filled with a cinqucfoil and 
roses of yellow and dark brown colours ; imperfect 
inscriptions yet remain of Ave Maria mater pte 

Domiue Jesu ; some of the figures are a 

crown, with 1. H. S. others, broken shields of 
arms." 

The Centre Tower of this fabric is, for symmetry 
and proportion, equal, if not superior, to any other 
in England. It is divided into two stories, and sur- 
mounted with four elegant pinnacles, perforated 
into numerous small arches, and terminated with 
foliated fincals. The summit is additionally em- 
bellished with open worked battlements. " Each 
story or compartment of the tower has eight win- 
dows, richly ornamented with sculptured fincals. 
The buttresses at the angles are also embellished 
with attached pinnacles, niches, and other orna- 
ments. Between the south transept and porch are 
six buttresses, which are detached from the wall at 
bottom, and are ornamented with canopies, niches, 
statues, and purfled pinnacles. Each abutment 
had originally three statues ; but out of the eighteen 
there are only five remaining. One of these, con- 
tiguous to the transept, represents a King, and is 
esteemed a fine specimen of sculpture. The south, 
or entrance porch, is equally profuse in ornament 
with the tower ; and from the style of its pinnacles, 
perforated battlements, niches, &c. it appears to 
have been erected about the same period. The 
west front contains a large central window, light- 
ing the nave, with two lateral windows, opening 
respectively into the north and south aisle. Be- 
neath the former is a small entrance door- way, and 
another leading to the north aisle. In the spandrils 
of the first are the anus of the See, and the arms f 

YOL. 11. n. 77. 



England. Over this door-way is a gallery before 
the great window with a quatretbil open balustrade. 
Attached to the central uiullions of the window are 
two open abutments ; and the top of the window is 
adorned with a profusion oftraoory." 

Amongst the various interesting specimens of mo- 
numental sculpture, in Gloucester Cathedral, the 
tomb of Edward the Second, erected by his son and 
successor, near the high altar, is, probably, the most 
ancient piece in England, which exhibits the art in 
such superlative excellence. " On the tomb, be- 
neath a modern canopy, consisting of three arches 
of two stories, interlaced with minute tabernacle- 
work, is a recumbent figure in alabaster, of the de- 
ceased monarch, regally robed and crowned. The 
head is supported by two angels : the right hand 
bears a sceptre, and the left supports an orb or 
globe : on the side of the tomb are three arches in 
recess, and four smaller ones, all of which have hail 
statues ; on the spandrils of the former are six 
shields : on the rails of the north side are the arms 
of England, with those of Oriel College, Oxford, 
and an inscription dictated by the society of that 
foundation, who repaired this monument in 1737. 
The capitals of the two pillars between which the 
tomb is situated, were then painted with a number 
of white stags on a red ground ; a circumstance 
which has given rise to a vulgar report, that the 
body of the murdered King was drawn from Berk- 
eley Castle to Gloucester, by those animals. This 
monument is supposed to have been executed by an 
Italian artist." 

The monument to the memory of Alderman Black - 
leach, and his wife, whose figures in white marble, 
lie on a table tomb, dated 1039, and seem accurate 
copies of the portraits of Vandyck, is evidently the 
work of a skilful artist. A third monument, entitled 
to distinct notice, for its design, and classic style, 
displays a group by Flaxman, erected to the me- 
mory of Mrs. Morley, who died at sea, in child- 
bed. She is represented as rising from the waves 
with her infant in her arms, and conducted, by two 
angels, to the abodes of the blessed. 

The south aisle contains an ancient tomb, tradi- 
tionally ascribed to Humphrey Bobtin, Earl of 
Hereford, and his Lady ; the former of whom died 
in the year 1637. Between the north aisle and the 
choir, is the monument erected by Abbot Parker, to 
perpetuate the memory of King Osric, (nephew of 
Ethelred) the original founder of the monastery, in 
the year 681. In a Chapel nearly opposite, is a 
figure carved in Irish oak, and inclosed by a wire 
lattice, supposed to represent the unfortunate Ro- 
bert Curtois, or Curthoise, Duke f Normandy, 
and eldest son of William the Conqueror. This 
nobleman died in 1134, after an imprisonment of 
26 years in Cardiff Castle, and was buried in the 
choir of this Church : he is delineated in armour, 
with the legs crossed. Various other memorials of 
the interment of Abbots, Bishops, and distinguished 
5 z persons 



458 



GLOUCEST ERSHIKET. 



pcrs"bns are preserved in this edifice. The great 
bell, in the first story of the centre tower, is sup- 
posed to weigh 6500 pounds ; its diameter at the 
bottom is 5 feet, ten inches. 

The entire length of the Cathedral, inside, is 423 
feet : length of the nave, 171 feet ; breadth, 11 feet 
2 inches ; height, 07 feet, seven inches : breadth of 
the north aisle, 20 feet, 10 inches ; height, 40 feet, 
6 inches : breadth of the south aisle, 22 teet ; height 
40 feet : length of the south transept, 66 feet; 
breadth, 4.3 feet, 6 inches ; height, 81> feet : length 
of the north transept, 66 feet ; breadth, 43 feet, 6 
inches ; height, 78 feet : length of the choir, 140 
feet ; breadth, 34 feet, 6 inches ; height, 86 feet : 
length of Our Lady's Chapel, 92 feet : breadth, 24 
feet, four inches ; height, 46 feet, 6 inches : height 
of the tower, including the pinnacles, 225 feet. 
The prospect of the surrounding country from the 
summit of the tower, is remarkably extensive and 
beautiful. 

The Great Cloisters are considered to be the 
inost elegant and perfect of the kind in England. 
The sides and roof are profusely embellished, and 
the windows are filled with mullions and tracery. 
On the north side of the Cloisters, are several neat 
lavatories near the site of the refectory, which was 
the only part of the buildings belonging to the Ca- 
thedral, demolished by the republicans. These la- 
vatories consist of eight arcades ; and opposite to 
them is the sudatory, or places where the napkins 
were hung, consisting of two arcades. On the 
south side, are 20 distinct places, or seats, where it 
is said the monks used to sit and write before the 
invention of printing. The Cloisters form a square, 
measuring 148 feet by 144 ; the breadth is 19 feet ; 
and they are nearly 118 feet, 6 inches, in height. 

The College Library, entered through a door in 
the east walk of the Cloisters, was formerly the 
Abbey Chapter-House ; but was converted into a 
Library by Sir Matthew Hale, and others, in the 
reign of Queen Mary ; when the Mayor and Bur- 
gesses were appointed its guardians. In 1688, Mr. I 
Wheeler, then Master of the College School, began I 
to stock it with books ; it was, however, but an i-.i- i 
different collection, till the late Dean Tucker made 
a bequest to the Library of a more valuable assem- i 
blage. The College School, intended originally 
for the instruction of youth belonging to the 
thoir, and founded by Henry the Eighth, is held in 
an apartment over the Audit Room, at the end of 
the north transept. The Lesser Cloisters are sup- ' 
posed to be coeval with the ancient parts of the 
i'hurch attributed to Bishop Aldred, but improved 
fcy the more modern mullioned arches : the Regis- 
-trar's Office for proving wills, granting marriage 
licences, &c- is held at the east entrance : and at 
the west entrance is the Episcopal Palace ; this has 
undergone much alteration under Bishop Benson, 
who expended large sums in modernising it, parti- 
cularly the great hull, die end window, and the , 
Chapel. .1 



The College Green is an irregular space, par- 
tially shaded by short avenues of lime trees, and 
surrounded by the deanery and prebendal houses. 
Tht; deanery adjoins the Cathedral on the north. 
King James resided in this mansion during the time 
he was at Gloucester, " and in the afternoon of the 
day after his arrival, touched 103 persons in Our 
Lady's Chapel, for the King's evil." Several sy- 
nods and ecclesiastical councils, have, at different 
times, been holden in this city. 

The walls which surrounded Gloucester, are men- 
tioned in an ancient prophecy, attributed to Merlin ; 
and tradition ascribes them to Cissa, the second 
King of the South Saxons. William the Conque- 
ror caused them to be additionally strengthened, 
and embattled ; and erected, or rebuilt, the gates 
on the north and south sides. They were again 
repaired in the reign of Edward the Third. The 
walls were completely demolished soon after the 
Restoration ; and the only memorial of the former 
strength of the fortifications now remaining, is the 
west gate : this is embattled ; and was erected in 
the time of Henry the Eighth. It stands on the 
banks of the Severn, at the end of a stone Bridge, 
of five arches, built over that river during the 
reign of Henry the Second. The bridge connects, 
on the west, with a causeway of stone, called 
Over's Causeway, which extends through the low 
meads across the Isle of Aluey, to the distance of 
about half a mile : in different parts of it, 36 arches 
liave been constructed, which serve as bridges to 
admit the waters to flow off the meadows. 

Gloucester Castle, of which the last remains were 
destroyed some years ago, to make room for the 
county gaol, was probably erected about the period 
of the Norman invasion, as the Domesday Book 
records, that 16 houses were taken down for its 
site. Camden mentions it as being constructed of 
hewn stone ; though, in his time, it was " for the 
most part decayed." It was anciently held by the 
Earls of Gloucester, but afterwards became vested 
in the crown. The keep had long been appro- 
priated as a prison ; but, becoming ruinous, com- 
missioners were appointed to erect a new gaol ; and 
a grant of the Castle lands was obtained from his 
present Majesty for that purpose. Soon afterwards 
the building of the gaol was commenced, from the 
designs, and under the direction of Sir George 
Onesiphorus Paul, Bart. The gaol consists of 
three divisions, respectively named, the Peniten- 
tiary House, the Bridewell, and the Sheriff's Pri- 
son : these have all their distinct and appropriate 
regulations. It contains 203 separate cells ; 164 
for sleep, and 39 for employment. At stated hours 
during the day, the prisoners are allowed to enjoy 
the fresh air, in a court-yard, 210 feet in length, 
and 57 broad, having a colonnade at each end, to 
shelter them from bad weather ; the same class of 
prisoners only are permitted to associate together- 
The whole .internal teconomy is under the manage- 
ment of the Chaplain, Governor, and Surgeon, 

whoso 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



459 



whose attention is regulated by certain rules, and 
who are themselves subject to the controul of the 
county magistrates. This building was opened for 
the reception of prisoners, in the year 1791. 

Within the cily and suburbs of Gloucester, were 
fornrrrly 11 parochial Churches ; but those only of 
St. Michael, St. Mary de Crypt, St. Nicholas, St. 
Mary de Lode, St. John's, and St. Aldate, are now 
standing ; the remainder having been either destroy- 
ed at the siege, in 1643, or since taken down. In 
St. Michael's parish, a Blue Coat Hospital, in the 
Eastgate Street, was founded by Sir Thomas Rich, 
Bart, who, in 1G6G, left a house and 6000/. for the 
purchase of lands, the rents of which, IfiO/. per an- 
num, were to be applied for the perpetual mainte- 
nance, educating, and apprenticing of 20 boys. 
St. Mary de Crypt contains, among other monu- 
ments, the tomb of Sir Thomas Bell, Bart, who 
died in the year 1560, after having founded and 
endowed a neighbouring Almshouse for six poor 
persons. Near this Church, are the remains of a 
Monastery of Black Friars, founded, about the 
year 1239, by Henry the Third, and Stephen, Lord 
of Harneshull. A considerable part of the conven- 
tual Church, now converted into tenements, is yet 
standing. The remains of a Priory of Grey Friars, 
founded by one of the Lords of Berkeley, are also 
situated within this parish. The mansion, fitted up 
from the remains of this Priory, was the residence 
of Judge Powell, a native of this city, whose inte- 
grity and knowledge of the laws, were the means 
of his promotion to the dignified station which he 
lield. He died in the year 1713, and lies buried 
under a costly monument in the Cathedral. On the 
west side of the Church-yard, is Crypt Grammar 
School, founded and endowed by Dame Joan 
Cook, in pursuance of her husband's will, in the 
31st of Henry the Eighth. Every four years, a 
scholar is sent from this school to Pembroke Col- 
lege, Oxford, to be there maintained for eight 
years on the foundation of George Townsend, Esq. 
instituted in 1083. Near West Gate Bridge, in St. 
Nicholas's parish, is St. Bartholomew's Hospital, a 
neat and convenient structure, erected about the 
year 1788,. for the residence of 26 men and 30 
women. This building occupies the site, and is 
chiefly supported by the revenues of an ancient 
Priory, the date of the foundation of which is un- 
certain. In the north wall of the chancel of St. 
Mary de Lode Church, are the ancient tomb and 
effigies assigned, by tradition, to King Lucius, but 
more probably the monument of some contributor 
towards the building of the Church. St. John's 
Church is a modern building, occupying the site of 
an ancient Church, ascribed to King Athelstan. 
The latter appears to have had the privileges of a 
sanctuary ; Francis, Viscount Lovel, and Lord 
Stafford, being recorded to have fled to it for 
safety after the battle of Bosworth Field. In this 



* This diminutive and useful article passes through the hands 



parish, is St. Margaret's Hospital, founded origin- 
ally for lepers, but at what period is uncertain : 
Aldred, Bishop of Worcester, granted them the 
privilege ot burial in their own Church-yard, about 
the middle of the 12th century. The persons now 
supported here, arc eight poor men, a reader, &c: 
Near this Hospital, is that of St. Mary Mag- 
dalen, or King James's, which owed its founda- 
tion to the Priory of Lanthony, and, like the for- 
mer, was originally intended for persons afflicted 
with leprosy. King James ordered it to be call- 
ed after his own name; and directed that the sum 
of 19/. annually paid by the crown, should thence- 
forward be applied to the support of 19 poor per- 
sons, and a minister. St. Aldate's, or St. Eldad's, 
now a Chapel, is a neat modern fabric. In the 
parish of St. Oswald, near the banks of the Severn, 
was a Priory, traditionally reported to have been 
founded in honour of St. Oswald, about the year 
060, by Merwald, Viceroy of Mercia, and Dom- 
neva, his wife. The most respectable authorities, 
however, attribute its foundation to Ethelred, Earl 
of Mercia, and the celebrated Princess Etbelfleda, 
who are said to have removed hither the remains 
of St. Oswald, from Barduey Abbey, in Lincoln- 
shire, to prevent their being exposed' to the sacri- 
legious fury of the Danes ; and having richly en- 
tombed him, to have founded a College here in 
veneration of his memory. Some remains of the 
monastic buildings are yet standing. In this parish 
also, was a house of White Friars, or Carmelites, 
founded, in the reign of Henry the Third, by Sir 
Thomas Berkeley. 

The County Infirmary was built by voluntary 
contributions, and opened in the year 1755. The 
medical gentlemen connected with this institution, 
attend gratuitously. The annual receipts arising 
from voluntary donations, and the interest of fund- 
ed property, amount to between 2000/. and 3000/. 

The House of Industry was established in 1703, 
to rescue the idle and profligate from the influence 
of vicious habits, and to enable them to exert their 
abilities for their own use, and to tho advantage o, 
the community. The management is directed by 
24 Governors, who have full power to oblige the 
able to work, both by rewards and punishments. 
The chief employment is the making of pins. 

The principal trade of this city arises from the 
navigation of the Severn, from the hemp and flax- 
dressing business, and from the pin manufacture : 
the latter is carried on here to a far greater extent 
than at any other place in England. The Severn is 
navigable to the wharf near the bridge, for trows, 
sloops, and brigs ; but vessels of more considerable 
burthen, can only get up ;it spring tides, the narrow 
channel of the river near the city being obstructed 
by rocks and sand-banks. The hemp and flax 
business employs a number of bauds ; but the prin- 
cipal bource of labour to the inhabitants, is the pin* 

manufacture, 

of 25 persons, from the state of rough wire, ere.k assumes the 

(am 



460 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



manufacture, which appears to have been intro- 
duced into this city, by John Tilsby, in the year 
16'20, on the decline ot' the clothing trade. Here 
are nine manufactories, which furnish employment 
to about 1500 persone. The pins conveyed an- 
nually to the metropolis, are said to amount to the 
value of 20,000/. but the principal demand is from 
Spain and America. A bell-foundry was establish- 
ed in this city, before the year 1500 ; and about that 
time, was conducted by William Hanshaw, who 
served the office of Mayor four times between 1500 
and 15'20. The clothing trade, from which the in- 
habitants of Gloucester formerly derived their chief 
support, is now lost ; one fulling mill only remains. 
The principal tradesmen of this city are associated 
into twelve companies ; that of the Mercers, in- 
cludes Apothecaries, Grocers, and Chandlers ; the 
Smiths, and Hammermen, include Ironmongers, 
Cutlers, Sadlers, and Glaziers ; to the Metal-men, 
belong Goldsmiths, Braziers, Pewterers, and Pin- 
inakers , the remainder are distinct, and consist of 
Weavers, Tanners, Butchers, Bakers, Joiners, and 
Coopers ; Shoemakers, Taylors, Barbers, and Glo- 
vers. The public business of this city is transacted 
in the Tholsey, an appellation supposed to have been 
derived from the toll which was received in it, by the 
Lords of the manor, from the fairs and market. 
The present building was erected about the latter 
end of the reign of George the Second, but has 
since been altered. The Booth Hall, situated be- 
hind the inn of that name, and appropriated to the 
holding of the assizes, and other county business, 
is an ancient building ; the interior contains two 
ranges of timber pillars, apparently of the time of 
Elizabeth. 

King Athelstan granted the privileges of a mint 
to the inhabitants of Gloucester, which was confirm- 
ed by charter of King John, who erected the town 
into a borough, to be governed by two bailiffs. 
Henry the Second granted the burgesses the same 
liberties and customs as were enjoyed by the citizens 
of .London in the time of Henry the First. 

Various and important privileges were granted by 
succeeding monarchs ; the town was incorporated 
by charter, and empowered to send two representa- 
tives to Parliament. The charter, under which the 
Corporation now act, was granted by Charles the 
Second. Gloucester was anciently regarded as a 
distinct hundred ; and the city is still privileged as a 



form of a perfect pin. When the wire is reduced to a proper 
size, it is cut ifito portions of six inches in length, and after- 
wards to the size of the pin ; each pin is then pointed, by being 
sharpened on a grinding stone, turned by a wheel. The head 
spinning, as the workmen term it, " is accomplished by means 
of a wheel, which, with astonishing rapidity, winds the wire 
round a small rod ; this, when drawn out, leaves a hollow tube 
between the circumvolutions: every two circumvolutions, or 
turns, being cut off by shears, form one head. The heads are 
then distributed to children, who, with great dexterity, by the 
assistance of a hammer and anvil, worked by the foot, fix the 
kead ia its proper place. The pins thus formed, are boiled in a 

6 



county within itself. The corporate officers consist 
of a Mayor, 12 Aldermen, a High Steward, a Re- 
corder, Town-Clerk, two Sheriffs, Common Coun- 
cil, &c. The title of Mayor, first occurs in the 
year 1413. The High Stewards have generally 
been persons of high rank and eminence. The 
members of Parliament are olected by the inhabi- 
tants and freemen ; the number of voters is about 
3000 ; the earliest return was made in the 23d of 
Edward the First. By a. particular clause iu the 
act of the 33d of Henry the Eighth, which erected 
the present bishopric of Gloucester, itf was ordered, 
that, the town should thenceforth be termed a city. 

The market-house, in the East Gate Street, was 
built in 1780, and has a handsome front. Tho 
market-house, in the South Gate Street, is open 
daily. 

Within the lust 70 years, the streets of this city 
have been well paved, and lighted ; and various 
edifices, or projections, which obstructed the free 
passage of carriages, have been removed. For- 
merly the houses were chiefly of timber, which at 
several periods, occasioned the destruction of a 
large proportion of the city by accidental fires : 
they are now principally of brick. From the inter- 
section of the four chief streets, the buildings oc- 
cupy an easy descent each way, a circumstance 
which greatly contributes to health and cleanliness. 
The city receives its supply of water from springs 
which arise on Lord Sydney's estate at Matsou, 
about two miles southward ; and, as appears from 
ancient records, an aqueduct was carried thence to 
Gloucester, for the same purpose, upwards of 400 
years ago. 

The public amusements are similar to those of 
most other respectable cities ; and recreation is 
sought in the attractions of a Theatre, Assembly- 
Rooms, &c. A more local amusement, connected 
with the purposes of benevolence, is the musical 
festival, established by the members of the choirs of 
Gloucester, Worcester, and Hereford ; and aided 
frequently, by the first performers in the kingdom. 
The profits are applied to relieve the necessities of 
the widows and orphans of clergymen ; and arise 
from collections made at the Cathedral door where 
the festival is celebrated. The meetings, which 
continue three days, are holden yearly, and alter- 
nately, in each of the above cities. 

The population of Gloucester,* which appears to 

have 



copper, containing a solution of block tin pulverised, and the 
lees of port ; by this process, they lose their yellow brassy 
colour, and assume the appearance of silver or tin." The art 
of making pins of brass wire, is asserted to have been introduced 
into England, in the year 1543. Before that period, they 
appear to have bee made of ivory, bone, box, and other hard' 
woods. 

* Amongst the eminent natives of the city of Gloucester, 
may be recorded Benedict, who wrote the Life of St. Dubri- 
cius, Archbishop of Caerleon, and lived about the year 1 120 ; 
Osbern, whose skill iu philosophy, divinity, and eloquence, was 
particularly celebrated, and whose manuscripts were placed in 

the 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



461 



have been on the increase for many centuries, 
amounted, in 181], to 8-280 : the number of houses 
was 1544. 

GROYE COURT.] The reputed manor of Grove 
Court, at Upton St. Leonard, 2f miles S.E. by S. 
from Gloucester, now the property of Joseph Blis- 
set, Esq. formerly belonged to JeolTrey de Grave, 
who held one yard land here, in the reign of Henry 
the Third, by the service of attending' the King, in his 
wars against the Welsh, with bows and arrows, for 
10 days, at his own expenee ; and afterwards, at 
the cost of the King. 

GKOVESEND.]- At Grovesend, or Grovening, a 
hamlet in Alveston parish, three miles S. by E. from 
Thorubury, is a large circular encampment, and 
near it an immense tumulus, which, upon being 
opened in the year 1760, was found to contain seve- 
ral stoue coffins with human bones. At a little dis- 
tance, is a small square camp, with a single ditch 
and vallum. 

GUITING PARK.] The mansion of - Snell, 

Esq. at Guiting Park, in a pleasant and fertile part 
of the Cotswold, is an elegant and compact edifice ; 
the vicinity of which abounds will) beautiful scenery. 

HALES.] Hales, or Hayles, one mile and three 
quarters, N.E. from Winchcombe, being in the pos- 
session of the crown, in 1226, was granted by 
Henry the Third, to his brother, Richard, King of 
the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, for tiie pur- 
pose of accomplishing a vow which the Earl had 
made when in danger of shipwreck. In pursuance 
of this vow, he founded an Abbey here for Cister- 
cian monks, about the year 1246, and removed into 
it 20 monks from the Abbey of Be.uilieu, in the 
New Forest, Hampshire. The buildings were 
finished in the most magnificent style of that age, 
at the expense of 10,000 marks. 

In 1271, the chief part of the Abbey was destroy- 
ed by fire ; but it was restored, at the additional ex- 
pense of 8000 marks, by the founder, who dying 
the following year, was buried near the high altar. 
The riches of the Abbey were much increased by a 
gift from this Earl, of a vessel, reputed to contain a 
portion of the blood of Christ, which, in the age of 
credulity and superstition, attracted innumerable 
visitors and oblation?, and obtained the Abbey great 
privileges from succeeding Popes. This esteemed 
relique had been brought by the Earl from Ger- 
many, where it had been discovered among the 
stores of " the ancient Emperors ;" and one part of 
the quantity obtained, he gave to this Abbey ; and 
the other two parts he reserved till he had founded 
the Abbey of Bonnehommes, at Ashridge, in Buck- 
inghamshire. Edward the First granted the site of 
the Abbey, ami the greatest part of the manor to 
Sir Thomas Seymour. It is now the property of 
C. H. Tracy, Esq. of Toddington, having been 
purchased by one of the Lords Tracy in the reign 

Royal Library, by Henry the Eighth ; and Robert of Glou- 
cester, who flourished about the year 1263, and wrote a Chro- 
nicle of Britain, in verse, from the age of Brutus lo the reign of 
VOL. II. NO. 78. 



of Charles the First. The situation of Hayles Ab- 
bey is extremely fine ; its site being a rich meadow, 
sheltered, on the north and cast sides, by high hills, 
covered with wood. Jt appears from the ruins, that 
the buildings formed a quadrangle, with a cloister, 
inclosing an area about 120 feet square. The south- 
west angle contained the Abbot's lodgings, and 
part of the entrance-tower still remain ; this is em- 
battled, and contained a great chamber, with large 
wood windows ; the other part of the Abbot's lodg- 
ings, which are said to have been rebuilt a short time 
previously to the Dissolution, extended over the 
cloisters ; some broken arches of the latter, in the 
lancet form, with ornaments of trefoils, are yet stand- 
ing : as well as the conventual barn, ami various 
offices now inhabited as cottages. 

Hales Church, a small and mean edifice, was 
constructed from the ruins of the Abbey, before 
1603, by William Hobby, Esq. who was then Lord 
of the manor, and died in that year, at the great 
age of 103. 

HAMPTON, MINCHIN.] The market town of Min- 
chin Hampton, (13 miles S. by E. from Gloucester, 
and 99 W. by N. from London) is pleasantly situat- 
ed on a gradual declivity, with a south-east aspect. 
It consists of four streets, lying at right angles, but 
irregularly built. It contains three market-houses, 
two of which were erected by P. Sheppard, Esq. in 
the year 1700, with the design of establishing a 
wool market ; but the attempt was without success. 
The number of houses, in this town, in 1811, was 
812; the number of .inhabitants, 3240. The manu- 
facture of cloths is carried on to a considerable ex- 
tent in the vicinity, the numerous brooks and rivulets 
being extremely favourable for the purpose. This 
town appears to have received the former part of its 
name from the old word Monachyn, a nun, in refe- 
rence to its having belonged to the nuns of Caen, in 
Normandy, to whom the manor was granted by the 
Conqueror. In 1213, the Abbess of Caen pur- 
chased the privilege of a weekly market, and two 
annual fairs for this town ; and the grant was re- 
newed, 1545, to Andrew, Lord Wyndesor, to whom 
the manor had been sold after the final dissolution of 
the monasteries. Philip Sheppard, Esq. Lord of 
Avening, purchased this estate in the year 1604 ; 
and his descendant, Philip, of Gatcombe Park, is 
the present proprietor. 

Amberley, a large tract of common land, on 
the west side of, the town, containing about 1000 
acres, was given for the use of the poor resident 
housekeepers of this parish, about the reign of 
Henry the Eighth, by Dame Alice Hampton. This 
tract is the site of a singular encampment. Com- 
mencing at Lktleworth, it extends nearly three 
miles to Woeful Dane Bottom ; a smaller, skirting 
the brow of Nailsworth Hill, meets it at the eastern 
extremity. Fosbrook conjectures that this encamp- 

Henry the Third. Tlii* Chronicle was published by Hearne, 
in the year 1714, in black Utter, with a glossary. The natives 
were a'll monks of St. Peter's Abbey. 

6 A inent 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



vnent was made by the Danes, as a residence during 
the year 879, when they abode at Cirencester. 
The name, Woeful Dane Bottom, is probably allu- 
sive to some unrecorded defeat, sustained by the 
Danes-, on this spot. 

Miiiehin Hampton Church, founded about the 
reit>-n of Henry the Third, by the nuns of Caen, is 
built in the form of a cross, with side aisles, &c. 
The south transept was rebuilt, in 1382, by Sir John 
de la Mere, and Maud, his wife. The great win- 
dow is beautifully ramified : between the buttresses 
are several other windows, with narrow lancet 
arches : under the large window are two arcades, 
With the recumbent effigies of Sir John and his 
Lady : the former is represented as a croisader ; the 
latter, in the dress of the age. Numerous monu- 
hielits, and sepulchral inscriptions, diversify the in- 
terior of this fabric. In the Church-yard is an in- 
scription to the memory of James Bradley, a cele- 
brated astronomer, who was a native of Sherborne, 
hi tliis county. He was born in 1692, anddied in 1726. 

HAUDWICK.] The manor of Hard wick, 4 miles 
S.W. by S. from Gloucester, was anciently held of 
the Earls of Gloucester ; but afterwards became the 
property of the Botelers, from whom it passed, in 
marriage, to John Frye, Esq. in the year 1447. 
This family, which is of Norman extraction, have 
continued the owners nearly 300 years. It is now 
the property of the Earl of Hardwicke, whose grand- 
father purchased it of the Fryes, about the year 
1730. Many sepulchral memorials of the Trye fa- 
mily are contained in their burial Chapel, at the 
south end of the aisle, in Hardwicke Church. 
Hardwicke CouVt, or Manor House, built about the 
\cur 1625, contains a spacious hall, and many 
large apartments ; the park has been cultivated 
many years. 

HARESCOMB.] Harescomb, 2 miles W. by N. 
from Painswick, is said to have been the site of a 
Castle, erected by the De Bohuns, Earls of Here- 
ford. 

HAIIESFIELD.] In Haresfield Church, 5| miles N. 
W. by N. from Stroud,are ancient recumbent figures, 
under 'arcades, of a croisader, and two females, sup- 
pesed to have been memorials of the Bohun family. 
This village is sheltered, on the east, by a high 
ridge of hills, called Broad Ridge, or Broad Barrow 
Green, the site of a singular camp, thought to have 
been a British station, after the Roman invasion. 
The surrounding prospects, from this ridge, are 
uncommonly extensive. 

HASE'LUEN.] At Haselden, in the parish of Rod- 
tnarton, Oi miles W.S.W. from Cirencester, was a 
Benedictine monastery, founded about the year 
1110, by Reginald de Waleric ; but the monks 
'afterwards removed to Tetbury, through scarcity of 
water. The Abbey-barn is yet standing. 

HEMPS'TEAD.] The vHlage of Hempstead, one 
mile and three quarters S.W. by W. from Glou- 
cester, was part of the great possessions of Milo, 
Ewl of Hereford, who, in the year 1136, bestowed 



it on the Priory of Lnnthofty. After the Dissolu- 
tion, it was granted to Thomas Atkyns, whose de- 
scendant, Sir Robert Atkyns, of Saperton, sold it 
to Allen Bathurst, Esq. afterwards Earl of Ba- 
thurst, of whom it was purchased by Daniel JASOIVS, 
Esq. His grandson, Samuel Lysons, Esq. 1 .A.S. 
is the present owner. The manor-house, built 
about tlie commencement of the last century, com- 
mands a very beautiful view over the city, and vale 
of Gloucester. The Chnrch seems to have been 
erected in the early part of the fourteenth century. 
The interior was paved with painted bricks, and 
displays Some remains of richly painted glass : the 
font is ancient, and somewhat curious. 

HrcuNAM.] Highnam Court, the seat of Sir 
Berkely William Guise, Bart. Lord of the manor of 
Highnam, is pleasantly situated about two miles 
W.N.W. from Gloucester. The present mansion 
was built by William Cooke, Esq. a Colonel under 
Cromwell. The design is said to have been given 
by Inigo Jones. The apartments are embellished 
with many original family portraits, particularly of 
General Guise, in a Roman character, painted by 
Gervaise Hamilton, at Rome. During the Gene- 
ral's residence in Italy, he made a rich collection, 
which he bequeathed to Christ Chnrch, Oxford. 
The family pictures were returned to the heir at law, 
and a very fine Madona, by Titian, as one of them. 
An original portrait of Cromwell, probably by R. 
Walker, given by the Protector himself to Colonel 
Cooke ; and another of the patriot Algernon Syd- 
ney, by Lely. Besides these, is a half-length of 
Mrs. Jane Lane, who conducted the escape of 
Charles the Second, after the decisive batUe at 
Worcester. Near the house is a private Chapel, in 
which several of the Cooke family have been buried. 
The park is extensive ; and the pleasure grounds 
are disposed in a very judicious manner. 

HIKTON.] The little village of Hinton-on-the- 
Green, anciently written Hynetune, is 9J miles 
N.E. by E. from Tewkesbury. The manor was 
granted to the Abbey at Gloucester, in 981, by El- 
fleda, sister of King Ethelred, and continued part 
of its possessions till the Dissolution. William 
Baker, Esq. purchased it in the year 1792. The 
mansion stands near the Church, which was rebuilt 
about the year 1315, at the expense of the Abbey at 
Gloucester. 

HORSLEY.] At Horsley, anciently Horkesly, for- 
merly a market-town, two miles S.E. from Nymps- 
field, was a Priory, founded for Benedictine monks, 
by Roger Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury, a cell 
to the Abbey of St. Martin, at Truard, in Normandy, 
and afterwards made subject to Bruton, in Somer- 
setshire, with which it was granted by Edward VI. 
to Sir Walter Denys. All that remains of this 
Priory, is an ancient gateway standing near the 
Church. 

KEMPSFORD.] This parish lies two miles S. from 
Fairford, " Henry, Duke of Lancaster," says Rud- 
der, " resided here in the reign of Henry the Third ; 

where 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



46* 



where his only sou came to an unfortunate end, 
which determined the Duke to leave the place ; and 
his horse casting a shoe at his departure, the inhabi- 
tants nailed it to the Church door, where it remains 
as a memorial of that event to this day. Big-land 
also states, that " there is a well-founded tradition, 
that Kempslbrd was the site of a royal palace, in 
the Saxon times, and that the Chaworths and Plau- 
tagenets resided in their Castle here, which was re- 
built by Sir Thomas Thynne, in the reign of James 
the First : this manorial mansion, within a few years 
levelled with the ground, was a quadrangular struc- 
ture, of very large dimensions, ornamented in the 
style o! that day." In several old writings, Kemps- 
ford is styled a barony. 

Kcsnpstmd Church was erected in the fourteenth 
century, nt the expcnce of Henry, Duke of Lancas- 
ter, whose arms, with the cognizances of the houses 
of Clare and Plantagenet, are displayed on the pil- 
lars which support the roof. 

The vicinity of Kcinpsford is, by some, supposed 
to have been the place where a battle was fought, 
about the year 800, between Ethelmund, Chief of 
the Wiccii, and Wearitan, General of the Walsati, 
who inhabited Wiltshire. Rudder imagines, that 
tire battle was fought at Cummersford, hear Calne, 
iu Wiltshire, where large entrenchments still re- 
main : botli Generals were killed, but the Walsati 
were the conquerors. 

KINLEY.] At Kinley, or Kinline, in the parish of 
Nipsikld, 4 miles . by N. from Dursley, was a 
Priory, founded before the Norman invasion. The 
Conqueror seized its possessions ; but William Un- 
fits restored them ; and afterwards, the Priory be- 
came a College, or Free Chapel, of secular priests, 
which continued till the general suppression. The 
Priory-house still remains. 

LANTHONY.] Lanthony, so called, from a Priory 
of Austin canons, founded in 1136, by Milo, Earl of 
Hereford, for the monks driven from an Abbey of 
that name in Mo'nmouthshire, is situated in the 
southern suburbs of Gloucester. In the reign of 
Henry the Eighth, the site was granted to Arthur 
Porter, and was conveyed, in marriage, to Sir John 
Scudamore, of Holm-Lacey, Herefordshire. The 
Duke of Norfolk obtained the estate by his marriage 
with Frances Fitzroy Scudamore ; and was in pos- 
session of all the registers of the Priory ; the most 
complete, probably, of any in England. Of the 
monastic buildings, the only parts that now remain, 
are a large barn, and the principal entrance, or 
gateway, on which arc the arms, among others, of 
the Boliuns, Earls of Hereford, who were great 
benefactors to the Priory, and many of whose family 
were burivd in the Church. In digging the Berke- 
ley Canal, the foundations of the old Church were 



* It wr.s at Ivastington that Dr. Woodward made a great part 
of hit v.ilu;iblu collection of lo-sils, which lie afterwards pre- 
sented to the university of (..'anibritlge. Easlingtoii is also re- 
markable for being the site >( an ancient camp, tailed Norbury. 



discovered, and some bodies disturbed , but n 
stones appeared, by which names or dates could be 
ascertained. 

LEACH, NORTH.] The little market-town of 
North Leach, 20 miles E. by S. from Gloucester, 
and 8-2 W.M.W. from London, is composed chiefly 
of one long and irregular street, lying in a bottom 
in the Cotswold hills, near the Source of the little 
river Let-he ; from which its relative situation, its 
name is evidently derived. The manor, which an- 
ciently belonged to the Abbey at Gloucester, has 
long been in the family of the Duttons, ancestors of 
Lord Sherborne. 

Three hundred years ago, North Leach was im- 
portant as a clothing town ; but not having water to 
supply the increased demands of the mamiJ'acture, it 
gradually declined. Here was a public market for 
wool and cloth, 

North Leach Church, is a large and handsome 
structure, with an elegant south porch, and a 
lofty tower at the west end, with open worked bat- 
tlements. On several slabs, in the pavement, are 
sepulchral brasses ; one of which marks the place of 
interment of John Fortey, an opulent clothier, who 
either built or heightened the nave before 1458. YU 
exhibits the figure of a merchant under a rich Od- 
t hie canopy, having a sheep under his right foot, and 
a woolpack under his left. On another slab, are 
brass representations, nnder Gothic canopies, of a 
female between two men in gowns, one of whom has 
a woolpack under his feet, the other a pair of shears ; 
and beneath them two groups (also in brass) of the 
children of each marriage. These are the effigies 
of Thomas Fortey, William Scors, and Alice, first 
married to the former, and afterwards to Scors. 

In 1558, a Free Grammar School was founded 
here by Hugh Westwood, Esq. Every fourth 
year an exhibitioner is sent from this school to 
Pembroke College, Oxford, on tho foundation of 
George Townsend, Esq. 

The market-house is an old building, supported 
on columns ; near it, are several steps, and the base 
of an ancient cross. The population of this parish, 
in 1811, amounted to 647 ; the houses to 142. This 
is exclusive of thetything of Eastington, considered 
by some, as a distinct parish, which contained 28 
houses, and 146 inhabitants. 

LF.ACIILADE.] Leaehladc, or Lechlndc, is an- 

' other small market town, 28{ miles S.E. by E. from 

! Gloucester, and 76 W. by N. from London. It lies 

on the north side of the Isis, or Thames, near the 

point where the counties of Wilts, Berks, and 

Gloucester unite ; and not far from the place where 

the Leche rivulet empties itself into the Thames. 

A Priory, or Hospital, for black canons, dedicated 

to St. John Baptist, was founded here upon a piece 

Tt contained about SO acres ; but the ground has been long 
cultivated, ami the banks an; in many parts levrllfd by the 
plough. 

of 



464 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



of ground called Lade, near the ancient bridge over 
the Thames, (hence called St. John's Bridge,} given 
for that purpose, by the Lady Isabel Ferrers. The 
Hospital was suppressed iu 1473, and its revenues 
applied to the foundation of a chantry of three 
priests. The Church is a handsome structure in the 
pointed style. The pulpit is of sculptured stone. 

The Thames becomes navigable at this town ; and 
here the junction of the Thames and Severn is com- 
pleted by the canal. According to the returns of 
1811, the inhabitants of this parish amounted to 
993 ; the number of houses to 201. A few years 
ago, in a meadow near this town, was disco- 
vered a large subterraneous building, supposed to 
have been a Roman bath : it was near 50 feet in 
length, 40 in breadth, and four in height ; and was 

.supported by pillars of brick, and curiously inlaid 
witii variegated stones. 

LECKHAMPTON.] About 2{ miles S. by W. from 
Cheltenham, is Lcckhamptou, a parish containing 
about 1200 acres of very irregular ground; part of 
it being a rich pasture, and the remainder a moun- 
tainous tract, including some of the boldest and 

.most lofty of the Cots wold Hills. The manor, or 
court-house, though situated at the base of the 
Lechampton hills, commands a tine view over the 
vale of Gloucester. It is supposed to have been 
originally built in the reign of Henry the Se- 

.venth, but the interior has been modernized. 
Iu the Church, are the effigies of a knight Cross- 
legged, and his Lady : the former is supposed to 

.represent Sir John Giflard, who died seised of the 
manor in the third of Edward the Third. 

LYDNEV.] The little market-town of Lydney, 
3i miles S. W. by W. from Blakeney, and 118i W. 
by N. from London, is thought by some to have 
been a Roman station, though it does not seem to 
have any name in the Itineraries. Its population, 
at present, is only about 820. Here, on two hills 
of considerable elevation, are two ancieiit camps, or 
forts, overlooking the Severn. Near the western 
edge of the larger, are the remains of a Roman 
bath, of an oval form, about three yards in length. 
Various foundations of Roman buildings, and other 
antiquities have been found here. 

Lydney park is the seat of the Right Honourable 
Charles Bragge Bathurst, a descendant, by the fe- 
male line, from Benjamin Bathurst, Esq. (younger 
brother of Allen, first Earl Bathurst,) who pur- 
chased the manor of the lieirs of Sir John Wyn- 

.tonr. The old mansion, called Whitecross, was 
built here by Sir William VVyntour, who was Vice- 
Admiral of England, and to whom the manor had 
been granted by Queen Elizabeth, for his gallant 
conduct, in the defeat of the Spanish Armada. This 
building was fortified by Sir John \Vyntour, during 
the civil wars ; and the neighbourhood consequently 
became the scene of several severe actions. Not 
far distant from the house, in a wood, is an excava- 
tion culled the Scowls, which forms a kind of irre- 
gular rocky trench of considerable extent, and is 




overhung by trees and underwood : the entrance is 
between upright pillars of unwrought stone, and 
the interior is fringed with moss and shrubs. 

MJEON.] About three miles N. by E. from Chip- 
ping Campden, in the parishes of Mickleton and 
Quenington, stands Ma;on,or Meeu Hill, the site of 
a very extensive encampment, with double ramparts, 
supposed to have been formed by the West Saxons, 
previously to the battle near Campden. Drayton 
has celebrated this eminence in his Poly-Olbion : its 
summit commands a most extensive and beautiful 
prospect. 

MATSON.] The little parish of Matson, two 
miles S. by E. from Gloucester, consists principally 
of Robin's Wood Hill, a delightful eminence, of a 
conical form, which rises immediately from the vale, 
and forms a beautiful object to the surrounding 
country. 

Matson house, with its appurtenances, at the lat- 
ter end of the reign of Elizabeth, came into the 
possession of the Selwyns, and is now the property 
of Lord Viscount Sydney, a descendant from that 
family, by the female line. The present mansion 
was built by Sir Ambrose Willoughby, Knt. some 
time in Elizabeth's reign : during the siege of Glou- 
cester, it became the head -quarters of Charles the 
First. 

MARSHFIELD.] Marshfield, a market-town on the 
borders of the county, adjoining Wiltshire and So- 
mersetshire, lies 10| miles E. by S. from Bristol, 
and 10-2 1 W. by S. from London. It is composed 
chiefly of one street of old buildings, nearly a mile 
long, and is governed by a bailiff. It is a clothing- 
town, and a considerable quantity of malt is made 
here for the consumption of Bath and Bristol. 
Here is a good Charity School, and a well endowed 
Alms-house for eight poor people. The population, 
according to the returns of 1811, was 1415. At a 
place called the Rocks, near the town, are three 
shire stones, to mark the limits of the counties of 
Gloucester, Wilts, and Somerset, where they meet 
in a point. The parish is 16 miles in circum- 
ference. 

MISERDEN.] The manor of Miserden, supposed 
to be a corruption from Musarden, belonged to Has- 
coit Musard, who accompanied the Conqueror to 
England. It continued in his family till the year 
1301, and has since passed through the various 
houses of I)e Spencer, Woodstock, Mortimer, King- 
ston, and Jerningham, to the Sandys, who have been 
in possession since the year 1608. " The Church," 
observes Bigland, " consists of a nave, chancel, and 
two cross aisles, of modern structure, with a low, 
embattled tower at the west end. A Chapel, on the 
south side of the chancel, appropriated to the family 
of Sandys, is decorated with various military trophies 
and insignia, and contains a costly and magnificent 
marble tomb, with the recumbent effigies of Sir 
William Sandys, and his Lady, in alabaster ; their 
heads supported by a cushion, and their feet resting 
on their separate crests, (a griffin and falcon :) the 

former 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



former is in complete armour ; the latter in the most 
courtly and fashionable dress of the times. The 
sculpture is very accurately copied from two paint- 
ings of Sir William Sandys and his Lady, by Cor- 
nelius Jansen, which were sent to Italy for that pur- 
pose ; and even the nicest parts of the female dress 
are exquisitely finished : on the sides of the tomb, 
decorated with escutcheons of arms, are the kneel- 
ing figures of their ten children. This superb mo- 
nument cost 1000/. and is still in the highest state of 
preservation." Sir William died in 1640 ; his Lady 
about four years afterwards. On another tomb, in 
the chancel, is the effigies of William Kingston, 
Esq. in armour, with his head lying on a cushion. 

Miserden Park is seven miles in circumference. 
It is uneven in surface, clothed with fine beech wood, 
and exhibits many picturesque, sequestered, and ro- 
mantic scenes. In the middle of a deep valley, now 
overgrown with trees, and devoted to solitude, is a 
circular mound, surrounded by a moat, on which 
stood an ancient Castle, founded by Ralph Musard, 
Sheriff of this County, from the year 1215 to 1224, 
j ml great-grandson to the original proprietor. The 
manorial house, situated on an eminence in the park, 
lias the appearance of antiquity, and is reported to 
have been built with the materials of the old Castle; 
but the period at which the one was destroyed, and 
the other rose from its ruins, cannot now be ascer- 
tained. The rooms are capacious, but have suffered 
greattly from neglect. Tliey contain a number of 
ancient portraits of the Sandys family. This man- 
sion was for a short time garrisoned for the Parlia- 
ment, by 300 men, during the Civil Wars of 
Charles. 

BIoRETON.] Moreton-in-the-Marsh, or Moreton- 
hen-Marsh, is a market-town, 27 miles E.N.E. from 
Gloucester, and 8-2| miles W.N.W. from London. 
It occupies a low situation, on the Roman fosseway, 
about two- miles west from the spot of land, where 
an ornamented pillar, inscribed " This is the Four 
Shires Stone," marks the point of meeting of the 
counties of Gloucester, Oxford, and Warwick, and 
a detached part of Worcestershire. This manor, 
held in the reign of Edward the Confessor, by two 
noble Saxons, became the property of the Abbey of 
Westminster, till the Dissolution, when it was grant- 
ed to the dean and chapter of Westminster, whose 
property it yet remains. The market has been long 
disused : an ancient building, supported on pillars, 
in the middle of the village, is said to have been the 
market-house. The population of this town the 
poor classes of which are chiefly employed in spin- 
ning linen yarn, for different purposes is about 
028. 

NEWENT.] Newent, distant 9{ miles N.W. from 
Gloucester, and 108 W.N.W. from London, is a 
nr.ill. irregular market-town, of little note, though 
formerly it was much larger, and had the privileges 
of a borough. It was then governed by a bailiff, 
whose office appears to have fallen into disuse about 
the end of the 17th century. Its original appella- 

VOL. II. NO. 78. 



tion, according to Leland, was Xew Inn ; from a 
building erected for the accommodation of travellers, 
when a communication was first opened by this road 
into Wales. The court-house, now the property, 
with the manor, of the Hon. Andrew Foley, was 
built on the site of an Alien Priory, supposed to 
have been founded soon after the Norman invasion ; 
and subjected to the Benedictine Abbey of Cor- 
meille, in Normandy. An ancient gateway, and 
some smaller fragments of monastic buildings, yet 
remain. The Church is a spacious edifice of various 
architecture, appearing to have been thrice partially 
rebuilt. The monuments are numerous : on a very 
ancient tomb, are the effigies of a knight, in mail 
armour, and his Lady ; traditionally said to record 
the memory of a Baron Grandison. The register 
records the burial of " Anne Wilson, aged 115," 
in the year 1602. According to the late returns, 
the population amounted to 2538. This neigh- 
bourhood was the scene of many military transac- 
tions during the Civil Wars. The parish, which 
includes a circumference of nearly 25 miles, abounds 
with coal. 

NEWLAND.] Newland is a very extensive parish, 
in the forest of Dean, including meadow, pastnre, 
and arable lands, iron-mines, coal-pits, &c. The 
village, which forms an irregular square, round the 
Church, is pleasantly situated, at the distance of 
9| miles W.N.W. from Blakenev. The Church is a 
large and handsome structure. In the Church-yard, 
which is large, and laid out with gravel walks, are 
some ancient tombs of the Wyrhali family. On the 
the west side is a Grammar School, founded in 1632, 
by Edward Bell, Gentleman, with a house and en- 
dowment for a master. Here is also an Alms- 
house, founded by the same gentleman, for eight 
poor people. 

Clearwell, the seat of Thomas Wyndham, Esq. 
in this parish, is a handsome structure, situated in a 
pleasant park : the plantations are fine, and judi- 
ciously laid. 

Ilighmeadow, the seat of Lord Viscount Gage, 
stands about half a mile north from the village. 
The mansion, which occupies a lino hold elevation, 
is a noble structure, commanding a delightful pros- 
pect. 

NKWNHXM,] The Kttle market-town of Newn- 
ham, 1 1| miles W.S.W. from Gloucester, and 116$ 
W. by N. from London, is seated on an eminence 
rising from the western banks of the Severn, which 
is here nearly a mile across, at high water. The 
origin of the town is remote ; and it was, probably, 
connected with a ford, formed bj a ridge of rocks, 
uniting with a bed of sand, and sufficiently near the 
Burfaco, at low water, to udmit both of the crossing 
of foot passengers and carriages. This bed of sand 
was removed, in 1809, by the river changing its 
direction. Newnham, in the Norman times, appears 
to have been fortified to repress the incursions of 
the Welsh ; and, in ancient records, mention of a 
Castle here is frequently made. The fortifications 
SB on 



46G 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



on the south, are probably of Norman origin ; but 
the circumvallation on the back of the town, must 
be referred to the civil wars, when Newnham was 
garrisoned for the King, by Sir John Wyntour, 
whose soldiers were obliged to surrender to Colonel 
Massie, about 20 of them having been previously 
killed in the Church, whither (hey had fled for shel- 
ter. This was one of the five boroughs of Glouces- 
tershire, returned on a mandate from the crown, in 
the ninth of Edward the First. It was then go- 
verned by a Mayor and burgesses ; and, till lately, 
the inhabitants amused themselves with electing a 
Mayor, and six Aldermen annually ; though the 
government of the town has long been vested in two 
constables. A sword of state, presented by King 
John, is still preserved as a testimony of former 
greatness : it is of polished steel, highly ornament- 
ed, and of exquisite workmanship. The former 
consequence of this town may also be inferred from 
many names of streets and lanes, which appear in 
ancient grants, but whose situations are now for- 
gotten. Newnham was the place of meeting be- 
tween Henry the Second, and Earl Strongbow, of 
Cbejjstow, on the return of the latter from his con- 
quests in Ireland. 

About 60 years ago, a quay, for vessels of 
150 tons burthen, was built here, by one of the 
Pyrke family ; and some. trade is now carried on 
with Bristol, London, and other parts. A verdi- 
grease manufactory, and a little ship-building fur- 
nish the principal employ to the labouring inhabi- 
tants. 

Newnham Church stands on a commanding cliff, 
near the river. The population of this parish, in 
1811, was 952; the number of houses, 155. The 
houses are mostly ranged in one long street, but 
singularly disposed ; for though they front each 
other, the perspective side of each is on the re- 
Terse. 

The wildness of the scenery, in crossing the forest 
from this town, sometimes immersed in a depth of ; 
shade, and sometimes assuming the most dreary ] 
aspect, from the hollows of deserted mines, the 
heaps of rubbish that have been raised from them, 
and the occasional thickness of the underwood, ex- 
cites ideas of melancholy seclusion ; though the at- 
tention is occasionally relieved by the recurrence of 
mines and pits still in work. " A brighter scene, 
however, presents itself in the view of English 
Bicknor, so called, because another Bicknor stands 
on the opposite, and what was formerly called the 
Welsh side of the river Wye. Several coal and 
iron mines are worked in the neighbourhood. The 
meadows towards the river, are very fruitful ; and : 
the excellent orchards of styre, and other fruits, j 
with the lively traits of water, impart a degree of 
brilliant richness to this little spot. The Church i 
stands within the area of an old fortification, the fosse 
of which is still apparent. Beyond is a bold jutting 
promontory, round which the river winds in a tor- 



tuous stream. Part of this eminence has been 
planted by the proprietor, George Wyrhale, Esq. 
who has an occasional residence at Bicknor Court. 

OAKLEY GROVE.] At a short distance westward 
from the town of Circncester, stands Oakley Grove, 
the seat of Henry Earl Bathurst. The mansion 
was built early in the last century, and though very 
spacious, is more convenient than grand. The plan 
is French, with a large hall in the centre, and rooms 
en suite. The east front is of free-stone, and of 
great length ; the west front has been lengthened by 
a portico and wings, added under the direction of 
the present Earl ; who has also much improved the 
whole building. Amongst the portraits, the follow- 
ing seem entitled to particular attention : Thomas, 
Lord Clifford, of Chudleigh, who died in 1673. 
He was Lord High Treasurer, when he advised 
Charles the Second, to shut up the Exchequer: 
his initial forms the first letter of the Cabal ; Clif- 
ford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley, and Lauder- 
dale. Henry Bennet, Earl of Arlington, Lord 
Chamberlain, who died in 1085 ; and whose cha- 
racter is admirably drawn in the Memoirs of the 
Count de Grammont. Henry Jerinyn, Earl of St. 
Albans, Steward of the Household, afterwards pri- 
vately married to Henrietta, relict of Charles the 
First. Colonel William Ashburton, second son of 
Sir John Ashburton, Cofferer to Charles the First 
and Second. Mr. Henry Brounker, brother of 
William, Lord Viscount Brounker, of the kingdom 
of Ireland, the first President of the Royal Society, 
for whom this portrait has been mistaken by 
Granger. He was Gentleman of the Bed-Cham- 
ber to the Duke of York, and died in 1687. Mr. 
Baptist May, Keeper of the Privy Purse to Charles 
the Second, and one of his most convivial compa- 
nions. These are all whole lengths, by Sir Peter 
Lely. They are pourtrayed in the full dress of the 
times, with flowing vests ; and were procured by 
Lord Bathurst's ancestor, Sir Allen Apsley, Vice 
Chamberlain to Charles the Second. Amongst the 
half-lengths, by the same artist, are very attractive 
portraits of a few of the beautiful individuals who 
composed the female society of that gallant mo- 
narch. Barbara Villiers, Duchess of Cleveland ; 
delineated as St. Barbara, bearing the emblems of 
martyrdom, a sword, and a palm-branch. She 
once sent her portrait, in this character, to the nuns 
of Abbeville, in France, who, on detecting the in- 
tended imposture, returned it with great indignation. 
Louise de Querouaille, Duchess of Portsmouth ; 
still more beautiful than the preceding. Eleanor 
Gwynn, represented as corpulent, and advanced in 
years. Another half-length, by Lely, of Charles 
the Second, is a likeness very faithfully ugly ; from 
which circumstance, he was called Old Rowley ; an 
appellation derived from the name of a very ill- 
looking hunter, then kept with the other horses in. 
the King's Mews, whose progeny was remarkably 
beautiful. John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester, by 

Henry 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



467 



Henry Gascar, is represented in a loose coat of 
scarlet, a wig, and falling cravat, richly laced. 
Allen, Earl Bathurst, is merely represented in his 
robes of state, soon after he was advanced to the 
peerage, with 11 others, in 1711. His associates 
in genius, and in literary as well as political pur- 
suits, Bolingbroke, Prior, Atterhury, and Pope, 
may be seen here, not only pourtrayed with glowing 
faithfulness, but ideally assembled under that very 
roof which they so often dignified by their presence. 
These pictures were bequeathed by Pope to his 
noble friend, Lord Bathurst. Of the foreign mas- 
ters, this collection contains but few specimens. 
Two large landscapes, with sheep and figures, 12 
feet by ten, by Rosa da Tivoli, are extremely fine ; 
and here is a very striking picture of Rubens, eii 
famille. Rubens himself, is represented as a satyr ; 
his wives as the three graces ; and an old female do- 
mestic is pourtrayed blowing a firebrand : this was 
probably executed by one of Rubens' best scholars. 
Various family portraits are preserved in this man- 
sion ; and also a cast, in plaister, of Allen, Lord 
Bathurst, from which two busts have been executed : 
one is in the Temple of Friendship, at Stowe; and 
the other, by Nollekins, on his Lordship's monument 
in the Church, at Cirencester. 

The Park and grounds of Oakley Grove, are in- 
debted, for their origin, to this nobleman, who was 
engaged in converting an uncultivated down into 
its present state, at the same period that his friend, 
Lord Cobham, was creating Elysian Fields at 
Stowe. The embellished division consists of a 
series of linear terraces, flanked by plantations of 
shrubs and evergreens, and adorned with a few 
small buildings, of little other merit than as they 
afford shelter, and mark the distances : near the park 
wall, a path, finely shaded by beech and other trees, 
runs upwards of a mile in a serpentine direction. 
The original plan of what is now called the " Wood 
House," is supposed to have been suggested by 
Pope. At some distance from the house, on the 
south-west, is a small artificial lake. The pleasure- 
grounds have been improved under the direction of 
the present Earl. Within the park, is an ancient 
circular tumulus, called Grismond's Tower, about 
20 feet high ; in which, about 40 or 50 years ago, 
several urns were found, containing ashes and burnt 
bones. In the park, is an ancient stone cross, which 
formerly stood in the lesser market-place in Ciren- 
cester. On the base is some rude ornamental carv- 
ing ; and round the capital of the shaft, which is 
octangular, and about 13 feet high, were four shields 
of arms, now nearly obliterated. Connected with 
the park, abouttwomiles on the road to Stroudwater, 
is a mnjestic woodland called Oakley, planted by Lord 
Bathurst, the shade of which he lived to enjoy with 
philosophic calmness. Here, nearly iron) the centre, 
ten very ample and extensive avenues diverge, but 
the terminations are not made, in every instance, by 
objects of importance. These were planted in a 
radiated form, in emulation of the groves of Cnan- 



tilli, and others in France, so laid out as producing 
an extraordinary effect of grandeur, under the au- 
spices of Louis the Fourteenth. The more frequent 
and beautiful trees are large beech and fir, in every 
stage of growth. In the deepest recess, stands a 
modern ruin, which, from a tradition of Saxon his- 
tory, is called Alfred's Hall ; and conjectured, by a 
convenient fiction, to have been the place where 
Alfred signed the treaty with Gothrum the Dane. 
An inscription in the Saxon characters and lan- 
guage, opposite the south entrance, and a Latin 
translation over the south door, give plausibility to 
the tale ; which most probably originated from the 
similarity of Achelie, the ancient name of this place, 
to /Eeglea, the appellation of that where Alfred 
rested his army the night before the battle at Ed- 
duigton. This ruin has no prototype, nor does it 
resemble any Castle of any age or country : the 
walls, however, are now very happily invested with 
ivy, and the shade is delightful in a sultry day. 
Lord Bathurst was less successful, in this imitation, 
than Lord Cobham, at Stowe ; though, even there, 
the Gothic temple is of no definitive style or era. 

OLDBDRY.] Oldbury-on-the-Hill lies 5J miles 
S. W. by S. from Tetbury . Oldbury-on-the- Severn 
is two miles N. W. by W. from Thornbury. The 
latter, though certainly not the Trajectus of the 
Itinerary, is evidently of remote origin, and might 
possibly have been occupied by the Romans, as one 
of the chain of forts by which they protected the 
passage of the Severn. Here are two camps ; one 
of them extensive, and tolerably entire ; the other 
of less dimensions, and now the site of the Church. 
Many foundations of buildings have been dug up in 
an adjoining field, the surface of which is so irre- 
gular as to excite the idea of buried ruins. Here 
is a salmon fishery, from which the principal sup- 
ply of that fish is obtained for Bath, Bristol, &c. 

PAINSWICK.] The little market town of Pains- 
wick, six miles S. S. E. from Gloucester, and 101 
W. by N. from London, is irregularly built on the 
southern acclivity of Sponcbed Hill, and is chiefly 
inhabited by persons employed in the clothing trade. 
In the Domesday book, the manor is mentioned by 
the name of Wiche. It afterwards passed into the 
family of Pain Fitz- John, from whom it derived the 
former part of its appellation. The present Lord 
of the Manor is Sir James Jerningham, Bart, whose 
family obtained possession in the 16th century. 
Some peculiar customs belong to this manor : among 
others, a wife has a right to her free bench during 
life, on payment of a penny. This grant was made 
to Lord Talbot, in the year 1400, to recompense 
the widows of those who were slain in foreign wars ; 
it having been represented, that eleven married men, 
out of sixteen, had lost their lives beyond the sea ; 
and the widows were allowed to " marry with whom 
they list." 

Painswiek Church has a tower, and spire at the 

west end, rising to the height of 174 feet. Several 

funeral memorials of the Jenringhams arc in the 

7 chancel. 



408 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



chancel. The inhabitants of this parish, as returned 
under the act of 1811, amounted to 3201 ; the num- 
ber of houses was 674. In the reign of Edward the 
Sixth, there were several insurrections in the west, 
and other parts of the kingdom ; when Sir Anthony 
Kingston, Knight Marshal, and Lord of the Manor, 
caused a gallows for the insurgents to be erected 
upon Shepscombe Green, in this parish ; and made 
a prison in Painswick, to secure all sorts of offen- 
ders ; and " supposing they might be useful to pos- 
terity," be also gave three estates in his Lordship, 
since called Gallows-lands ; one, always to maintain 
the gallows, a second to keep two ladders in readi- 
ness, and the third to provide halters ; and that 
nothing, " in so necessary a business, might be 
wanting, provided that the tythingman of Sheps- 
combe should be hangman, and that he should en- 
joy an acre of land, in that tything, for his service. 
A piece of ground in Shepscombe, possessed by the 
tything-raan for the time being, is still 'called 
Hangman's Aece. 

An ancient fortification, doubly entrenched, called 
Kinsbury Castle, King's Barrow, and Castle-God- 
win, including about three acres, is apparent on the 
summit of Sponbed Hill. Roman coins have been 
found here, with a sword, and some heads of spears, 
greatly corroded. In the time of Edward the Con- 
fessor, it appears to have been occupied by Earl 
Godwin, during the insurrection made to expel 
foreigners : it was also occupied by the royalist 
army, after the siege of Gloucester. Its situation 
is extremely good ; its height commanding all the 
adjacent stations. The ramparts have suffered great 
dilapidation, for the sake of the stones employed in 
their construction. 

PAUNTLEV.] The little village of Pauntley is 
three miles N. E. by N. from Newent. Rudge ob- 
serves that, in this parish and its vicinity, " A cus- 
tom, intended to prevent the smut in wheat, in some 
respects resembling the Scotch beltein, prevails. 
On the eve of twelfth-day, all the servants of every 
particular farmer assemble together ia one of the 
rields that has been sown with wheat. At the end 
of twelve lands, tbey make twelve fires in a row 
with straw; around one of which, made larger than 
the rest, they drink a cheerful glass of cyder to their 
master's health, and success to the future harvest; 
then returning homo, they feast on cakes made of 
carraways, &c. soaked in cyder, which they claim 
as a reward for their past labours in sowing the 
grain." 

PRESTBURY,] The delightful village of Prest- 
bury, lies about a mile and a half E. by N. from 
Cheltenham, and is so secluded by orchards and 
trees, as to form a sylvan scene round almost every 
house. Here are some very neat dwellings, where 
lodgings may be procured ; and the hotel is infinitely 
superior to what might be expected in such a se- 
queHter.ed spot. Its aocompanianents ure in the 
prettiest style. The grotto is decorated with shells 
and fossils of various kinds, very tastefully arranged; 



the windows are gothic, and filled with painted glass ; 
the floor is tesselated ; and convex mirrors adorn 
the walls. Its exterior is pleasingly shaded with 
gadding shrubs, which give the whole a solemn and 
impressive effect. 

PRINKNASH.] Prinknash, the seat of Thomas 
Bayley Howell, Esq. 2| miles N.by E. from-Pains- 
wick, was formerly the property of the Abbots -of 
Gloucester. In the reign of James the First, it was 
purchased by Sir John Bridgman, one of whose de- 
scendants sold '.it, in 1770, to John Howell, Esq. 
The mansion is situated in a pleasant Park, on the 
acclivity of a hill, commanding an extensive pros- 
pect. 

PUCLECHUHCH. Pucklechurch, four miles S. W, 
by S. from Chipping Sodbury, is called, by Cam- 
den, Villa Regia, from its having been the residence 
of some of the West Saxon Kings. It Ls supposed 
to have been the place where Edmund the Elder 
was slain by the robber Leolf, A. D. 946. It was 
formerly a market town, but has been long disused. 
A manufactory of felt hats is carried on here. In 
the Church is a curious tomb, of the style of the 
14th century. 

QUENINOTON.] This little village, which lies 
two miles N. from Fairfbrd, is remarkable for the 
architecture of its Church,, which is a small low 
building, displaying vestiges of great antiquity ; 
though it has apparently undergone considerable 
alterations during the two last centuries. " The 
original round-headed windows," observes Lysons, 
" may still be traced, though they are now either 
walled up, or changed into sharp-pointed, or square 
ones. At the western extremity of the north and 
south walls, arc two door ways leading into tha nave, 
which exhibit very rich specimens of that kind of 
architecture usually termed Saxon. From the situa- 
tion of these door- ways, it seems probable that the 
nave of the Church formerly extended further west- 
ward than it does at present, and perhnps termi- 
nated in a tower. The south door-way is five feet, 
ileven inches in height, and nine feet, eleven inches 
wide : the arch is semicircular, and ornamented 
with a variety of mouldings, and other decorations,, 
wherein plainly appears a corruption of the Roman 
style. The interior part of the arch is ornamented 
with the zig-zag moulding, so constantly to be seen 
n works of this kind. Within this, and immedi- 
itely over the door, are several figures rudely carved 
n bass-relief, among which may be distinguished 
the Deity crowning the Virgin Mary, who holds a 
dove; and the angel, eagle, winged bull, and lion, 
the symbols of the Evangelist ; the four last of 
which are accompanied with scrolls. On one side 
9 the figure of a Church, in which it may here- 
Marked, that all the arches are circular ; that it has 
a low spire, covered with shingles ; and a small 
:ower on each side, terminating in a pinnacle ; pro- 
jably n representation of tho original west front of 
this Church." " The north door-way is ten feet, 
eight inches in width, and thirteen feet in height. 

It 



GLO UCESTERSHIRE. 



469 



It has a great variety of ornaments, among which 
the zig-zag, and lozenge mouldings, are the most 
conspicuous. Over the door is the figure of our 
Saviour, carved in bass-relief, trampling on the 
Devil, bound hand and foot, and thrusting the 
cross into his mouth. There are also three figures 
in praying attitudes, one of whom appears just es- 
caping from the jaws of a large serpent; over these 
is a figure of the sun. Above the door- way is the 
figure of a ram's head, much mutilated." Lysons 
.supposes, from the general style, that this Church 
was erected soon after the Conquest, and probably 
by \Valter de Laci, to whom the manor was given 
by the Conqueror, or by his son, Roger dc Laci, 
who is said to have been in such favour with the 
Norman sovereign, that he bestowed on him lib 
manors, of which twenty were in this county. 

Previously to the reign of King John, a precep- 
tory for the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of 
Jerusalem, was founded here by Agnes Laci, Wil- 
liam de Poictou, and the Countess Cecelia ; and 
the endowments being afterwards increased, the 
Kuights became possessed of the entire manor, 
which, after the suppression, was granted to Sir 
Anthony Kingstoue, A. D. 1545. It was lately the 
property of Michael Hicks Beach, Esq. The pre- 
ceptory was surrounded by a moat, now mostly 
filled up. 

REULAND COURT.] At Rcdland 1{- mile N. W. 
from Bristol, is Redland court, an elegant modern 
structure, built by Mr. Cossens, from the designs 
of Mr. Strachan ; the gardens belonging to which 
are very fine. 

RENDCOMBE.] The village of Rendcombe is 5| 
miles N. by E. from Cirencester. The manor came 
into the possession of Shute Barrington, Bishop of 
Durham, in right of his Lady. The mansion is an 
elegant building, situated in an extensive park, 
abounding in wood, and furnishing many fine pros- 
pects. 

RODBOROUGH.] At Rodborough, one mile W. 
by S. from Stroud, on a fine eminence, command- 



* Richard Clutter-buck, a person of extraordinary endow- 
ments, was born at llodborough, in the year 1638. " At three 
years old lie enjoyed a sufficient portion of sight to enable him 
to discern the difference between white and black ; but at 
twelve he was totally blind, and so continued to bis death; 
notwithstanding which, he walked up and down all the uneven 
ground in the neighbourhood (and no ground can be more un- 
even,) without a guide. He could tell when an hour glass was 
run out by his hearing, which was so acute as to discover the 
lowest whisper in an adjacent room. He was a curious mecha- 
nic, and mude oatmeal mills, and pepper mills, and could 
make a wheel for a cloth mill with great advantage. He look 
a watch in pieces and mended it ; and made a handsome chain 
for bis own watch. He made violins, bass-viols, and citterns, 
and a set of virginals with double jacks, and other improve- 
ments of his own invention; and played on each of those in- 
struments. He taught music according to a scale of his own 
forming, and cut his notes upon pieces of wood." 

f The junction of the Severn and the Isis, completed in 
17S9, gave rise to the following allegorical letter: 

VOL. II, NO. 79. 



ing a beautiful prospect, st.inds Hill House, the 
seat of Sir G. O. Paul, Bart.* 

RODMARTON.] Rodmartoii is a little village, of 
Roman origin, situated to the north of the Foss 
Way, Of miles W. S. W. from Cirencester, to 
which it is supposed to have been an advanced post. 
A tcsselated pavement, and some Roman coins, 
were found here in the year l(53li. 

The ancient manor house belonging to Charles 
Westley Coxe, Esq.- forms three sides of a quad- 
rangle, and appears to have been built during the 
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. 

SAINTBLRY.] Saintbury, anciently called Suine- 
berie, from the Danish King Svein, who is reported 
to have encamped here, lies 2{ miles from Chipping 
Campden. An artificial mount of earth here, is yet 
called Castle Tump, and seems to have been raised 
to overlook the adjacent country. 

SAPERTON.] Saperton, 5J- miles W. N. W. from 
Cirencester, was the property and residence of Sir 
Robert Atkyns, author of the " Ancient and Pre- 
sent State of Gloucestershire," published in 1712, 
the year after his death. He lies buried in Saper- 
ton Church, beneath a handsome monument, on 
which he is represented by a figure of white marble, 
in a recumbent position. The manor now belongs 
to the Bathursts. In this parish, near a place 
called the Lark's Bush, in the hamlet of Frampton, 
a great quantity of silver and brass Roman coins, of 
the Lower Empire, was discovered in the year 1759, 
by a waggon accidentally passing over the spot 
where they had becii buried, and breaking the urns 
which contained them. In this vicinity are vestiges 
of an ancient camp ; to the south-east of which is 
an eminence called Beacon Hill. The Saperton 
Tunnel, effecting the junction of the Severn and 
the Thames, as already mentioned, passes through 
the hill at this place. f 

SHERBORNE.] The little village of Sherborne, 
five miles E. from Northleaoh, is situated, as its 
name implies, in a valley, through which runs a 
stream, that falls into the Winrush, at Great Bar- 



Sir, 



' Friday, Nov. 20, 1789. 



" Yesterday a marriage took place between 
Madame Sabvina, a Lady of Cambrian extraction, and mis- 
tress of very extensive property in Montgomeryshire (where 
she was born,) and the counties of Salop, Stafforcl, Worcester, 
and Gloucester, and Mr. Thames, commonly called ' Father 
Thames,' a native of Gloucestershire, now a merchant trading 
from London to all the known parts of the world. The cere- 
mony took place at Lechlade, by special license, in the pre- 
sence of hundreds of admiring spectators, with myself, who 
signed as witnesses : whence the happy pair went to breakfast 
at Oxford, dine at London, and consummate at Gravesend; 
where the venerable Neptune, his whole train of inferior deities 
and nymphs, with his wife Amphitrite and her train, are to fling 
the stocking. An union which presages many happy conse- 
quences, and a numerous offspring. 1 mention tin; Lady's 
name, as the tendre came from her, after many struggles with 
her modesty, and Cambrian aversion to a Saxon spouse. 

" A TRAVELER." 
6 c rington. 



470 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



ring ton. The manor, anciently belonging to the 
Abbey of Winchcomb, is now the property of Lord 
Sherborne ; of whose family there are several monu- 
ments HI the Church. 

Sherborne House, the seat of Lord Sherborne ; 
is an extensive mansion, consisting of two quadran- 
gles : the eastern, and most ancient part, is sup- 
posed to have been a seat of the Abbots of Winch- 
comb. Two pleasant parks belong to this house, 
each between three and four miles in circumference ; 
and in one of them is a neat lodge. 

SIDDINGTON.] Siddington St. Peter (comprising 
the united parishes of St. Peter and St. Mary) some- 
times also called Siddington Langley, from a family 
of that name, who were proprietors of the manor for 
many generations, is a small village, occupying a 
low situation on the banks of the river Churn, two 
miles S. S. E. from Cireneester. " The Church, 
dedicated to St. Peter, has a handsome Chapel or 
aisle on the north side, built, in the fifteenth cen- 
tury, by Edmund Langley. In this Chapel are 
various escutcheons, with the arms of the Langleys, 
round the arched recesses on the wall, where many 
of the family were buried. The arch which sepa- 
rates the nave and chancel, is in the pointed form, 
though decorated with zig-zag mouldings. The 
south door-way is in the Saxon style, and has two 
columns on each side : the capitals of the inner 
columns are grotesque heads ; and the moulding 
springing from them is also ornamented by a series 
of heads, of singular and various forms. Within 
the arch is a mutilated sculpture, in bas-relief, re- 
presenting our Saviour, and a Saint kneeling on 
each side of him. The painted glass of the Langley 
family, which formerly adorned the windows of this 
fabric, has been removed to Cireneester Church, 
by permission of Earl Oathurst, the present Lord 
of the Manor." 

SLIMBRIDGE.] At the little village of Slimbridge, 
3| miles N. by W. from Dursley, there was a family 
of the surname of Knight, distinguished for many 
generations by having five fingers and a thumb on 
each hand. 

SODBURY.] The ancient market town of Chip- 
ping Sodbury, 27 miles S. S. W. from Gloucester 
and 1I3| W. by S. from London, was originally 
governed by a Bailiff; but in 1681, it was made a 
corporation, with a mayor, six aldermen, and twelve 
burgesses ; yet in 1688 it was disincorporated. 
The bailiffs and burgesses are still empowered to 
distribute eighty-eight cow pastures to as many of 
the inhabitants, and eight acres of meadow for their 
own lives, and those of their widows ; and as they 
fall, to grant them again in the like manner. This 
town is seated in a bottom, and consists of several 
streets. It is a great thoroughfare in the road from 
.Bristol to Cireneester and Oxfordshire, and has 
therefore very commodious inns. Here is a spacious 
Church, with a high tower at the west end, though 
it is only a Chapel of ease to Old Sodbury, a vil- 
lage iu its neighbourhood. Here is a Free School, 



with other benevolent establishments. The market 
was formerly esteemed one of the greatest cheese 
markets in England. The population of Chipping 
Sodbury, in 1811, amounted to 1235. 

At Little Sodbury, in this neighbourhood, on 
the brow of a hill, is an ancient camp, of an oblong 
form, 320 yards long, and 200 broad. It is not 
known by whom it was made, nor have any coins 
been found there. Edward IV. lay here with his 
army a little before the battle of Tewkesbury. 

SOUTHAM.] At Southam, 2f miles N. E. from 
Cheltenham, stands Southam House, a venerable 
and far-famed mansion, the property of Thomas 
Bagshott de la Bere, Esq. The accurate Lelaud 
mentions this house as recently built by Sir John 
Huddlestone, at the time when he made his survey 
by command of Henry the Eighth ; and it yet re- 
tains as much, or more, perhaps, of its original 
form, than any other domestic building in England, 
of that era. It is constructed with two stories only 
without a parapet ; the three principal apartments 
appear to have been internally finished as they still 
remain, when the house was built by Sir John Hud- 
dlestone, as the ceilings are all of oak frames, fret- 
ted, in allusion to his coat-armour. One of the 
halls is partly paved with glazed or painted tiles, 
brought from Hayles Abbey, and displaying various 
cyphers and armorial ensigns : these, with some 
rich painted glass, and a carved chimney-piece, 
charged with shields of arms, brought from the same 
place, afford a curious specimen of the internal or- 
naments of conventual houses, at a period imme- 
diately preceding their final dissolution. Here are 
some interesting portraits of the De la Bere family, 
&c. Amongst these, are two curious paintings of 
Edward the Sixth, on pannel, cenjecturally by 
Holbein, but not equal to those by the same artist, 
at Kensington and Petworth : Sir Thomas Over- 
bury, half length, on pannel, by Cornelius Jansen : 
Giles Palmer, Esq. of Lemington, Warwickshire, 
maternal grandfather to the former : William Palmer, 
one of the Gentlemen Pensioners to Henry the 
Eighth, and Porter of Calais ; probably by Andrew 
Wilson : Sir John Hales, of the White Friars, in 
Coventry : Dorothy, his second daughter, wife of 
Michael Rutter, Esq. of Quenington, in this county: 
Joan, another daughter of Sir John Hales : John 
de la Bere, her son : Mary, eldest sister to Joan 
and Dorothy : the four last by Sir Peter Lely. 
Another portrait, preserved here, represents a half 
length of a Lady, " remarkably fair, with bright 
auburn hair, contemplating a book, an urn on the 
table; her dress crimson satin, sleeves slashed, and 
puffed with white ; to the necklace of gold, the me- 
dallion of a man is dependent." This painting has 
been supposed to represent Jane Shore, from a cer- 
tain degree of resemblance which it bears to the de- 
scriptions of that celebrated female, given by Sir 
Thomas 3Iore, and Drayton. 

The situation of Southam House is extremely 

beautiful : in front is an expanded prospect of the 

7 vale, 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



471 



Tale, closed by the Malvern hills ; and behind, some 
finely picturesque woodland scenery, stretching along 
the base of Cleeve Cliff, which rises to the height 
of 630 feet perpendicular. 

STANLEY.] The ancient market town of Stanley 
St. Leonard is3| miles W. S. W. from Stroud, and 
104j W. by N. from London. The greater part of 
the buildings having been destroyed by fire, in 
J086, it is now only a straggling desolated village, 
the population of which, in 1811, was no more than 
538. A priory, dedicated to St. Leonard, was 
founded here soon after the Conquest, by Roger de 
Berkeley, as is supposed, who afterwards took the 
uowl. The manor, with the site of the priory, &c. 
have long been in the Sandford family. The old 
Priory House, and seat of the Sandfords, was 
pulled down about the year 1750, and a new man- 
sion begun on the spot. The Priory kitchen, a 
large square building, and some out-houses, are 
still standing. The parish Church is an undent 
fabric, in the form of a cross, having a low tower, 
rising from the intersection, and very singularly 
constructed ; the walls being double, with a pas- 
sage and recesses between them. Several of the 
landlords lie buried in the chancel ; and in the 
south aisle was interred Dr. John Crosse, Prior of 
St. Leonard's in 1189. 

Stanley Regis, a considerable village adjoining, 
lies three miles W. by S. from Stroud. It is sup- 
posed to have been the residence of one of the Mer- 
cian Kings. The population (about 1722) is prin- 
cipally employed in spinning, and other branches of 
the clothing manufacture. That part of the village 
called the Borough enjoys the right of choosing two 
Bailiffs, who execute the office of Constable within 
its prccints. The manor belongs to Lord Ducie. 
Here was a Roman camp, in the vicinity of which 
numerous antiquities have been found. 

STASTON.] In the parish of Stanton, 10 j miles 
W. by N. from NeWeubam, on the edge of a preci- 
pitous declivity of lime-stone rock, is a rude frag- 
ment of silicious grit, called the Buckstone, the 
general form of which resembles an irregular square 
pyramid, inverted. Its circumference at top, is 
somewhat more than fifty-six feet; the point on 
which it rests, about three feet. It is considered 
to be a Logan, or Rocking stone. A Roman road 
is said to have led from Stanton towards Monmouth; 
and in the vicinity of the Church, are vestiges of a 
considerable entrenchment. 

A considerable eminence in this parish, called the 
Kymin, has become celebrated from a Naval Tem- 
ple, erected on its summit, to record the eminent 
victories obtained by the English on the seas. This 
edifice, ivliicb stands on the ridge of a rock, forms 
a square of thirteen feet. The frieze, which is con- 
tinued round it, is ornamented with medallions of 
the most eminent British Admirals, surrounded with 
emblematical and appropriate devices. The ex- 
pence of this building was defrayed by subscription. 



The views from the top of the Kymin are highly 
picturesque, and remarkably extensive. 

STAPLETON.] About 2 miles N. E. by N. from 
Bristol, is Stoke Stapleton, a pleasant village, in 
which are some good houses, and extensive tempo- 
rary barracks for prisoners of war. South of the 
Church is the seat of Isaac Elton, Esq. an elegant 
mansion, with extensive gardens and pleasure 
grounds. 

STOKE, BISHOP'S.] At Bishop's Stoke, a tything 
in the parish of Westbury-on-Trim, 3\ miles N.N.W. 
from Bristol, is a fine old mansion, the seat of Lady 
Lipencot. " To the left, about half a mile distant, 
is a building resembling a Church, or tower, called 
Cooke's Folly : it stands on the brow of a high cliff, 
which overlooks the river Avon quite down to King's 
Road. Tradition states, that one Cooke, having 
dreamt a viper should bite him, and occasion his 
death, he, to prevent it, erected this building, and 
immured himself therein ; yet nevertheless his dream 
came to pass : a viper happened to be concealed 
among some faggots that were laid upon the fire, by 
which Cooke was sitting to warm himself ; the veno- 
mous creature on feeling the heat suddenly sprang 
forth, and bit him so that he died. It is now a plea- 
sure house belonging to Mrs. Jackson, who has a. 
fine old seat, seen from hence, called Snead Park, 
near to which is Say-Mill Dock, a place that was 
some years ago of great importance. It was of such 
magnitude as to contain several large ships, which 
lie afloat in its bason. But as there are now other 
docks in more convenient situations, this has been 
neglected." 

STOKE, GJFFORD'S.] At Gifford's Stoke, five 
miles N. N. E. from Bristol, is Stoke House, a seat 
of the Dowager-Duchess of Beaufort, finely situated 
on a natural terrace, in the centre of an extensive 
park, and commanding an interesting view of the 
vale of Bristol. This spacious mansion was origi- 
nally built in the reign of Elizabeth ; but was em' 
battled, and altered into a castellated form, by the 
late owner, Lord Botetourt, about the year 1760. 

STOW.] The irregularly built little market town 
of Stow-on -the- Wold, enjoying a population of 
about 1200 persons, lies 28 miles E. by N. from 
Gloucester, and 82 W. N. W. from London. It 
occupies the summit of a high hill, the base of which 
is about nine miles in circumference. From this 
elevated situation it is generally said to want three 
elements out of the four ; fire, earth, and water : 
air, it possesses in plenty, and though uncommonly 
sharp, it is reputed to be very healthful. Water is 
scarce, especially since the decay of an horizontal 
windmill at the north end of the town, which for- 
merly raised it from a very deep well, and forced it 
through pipes to the houses. The manor belongs 
to Edmund John Chamberlain, Esq. whose family 
settled here in the time of Elizabeth. 

Stow Church is a strong and well-built edifice, 
apparently the workmanship of different periods 

during 



472 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. It 
has an embattled tower, eighty-one feet in height, 
which constitutes a principal object many miles 
around. Several monuments and inscriptions, to 
the memory of the Chamberlaynes, are contained 
in this edifice; and in the midst of the chancel is a 
large altar tomb, in remembrance of Duke Hastings 
Keyt, of Ebriugton, an officer on the part of Charles 
the First, who died in the year 1045 : his effigies in 
armour is engraved on the slab which covers the 
tomb. Here is an Alms-house, for nine poor per- 
sons, and a Free School ; both of which are situated 
on the south side of the Church yard : the former 
was founded in the year 1 170. Ailmere, or Ethal- 
mere, Earl of Cornwall and Devon, in the tenth 
century, the reputed founder of the original Church, 
is also said to have erected an Hospital here. The 
houses here are mostly low, built with stone, and 
have a very ancient appearance. The shoe manu- 
factory is carried on here to some extent. 

STOWELL.] Two miles W. N. W. from North- 
leach, is Stowell, the seat of the late Lord Ched- 
tvorth, situated on a gentle eminence, within a 
park, containing about one hundred acres beauti- 
fully planted. 

STROUJX] The market town of Stroud, 10 miles 
S. by E. from Gloucester, and 102 W. by N. from 
London, is situated on the ridge of a declivity near 
the confluence of the river Frome, and the Slade- 
water, and may be regarded as the centre of the 
clothing manufacture in this part of the county ; 
all the surrounding vallies, or bottoms, exhibiting 
a continued range of houses, or villages, inhabited 
by persons engaged in that employment. The 
Stroud river has long been celebrated, as possess- 
ing superior qualities in communicating the scarlet 
dye to cloth. The population of Stroud, in 1811, 
amounted to 5321. Here is an endowed Free- 
School, with several subscription Charity Schools. 
The adjacent scenery is very beautiful.* 

S.UDELY CASTLE.] Sudely is one mile S. S. E. 
from Winehcomb. Here are the ruins of Sudely or 
Sudley Castle, resembling a castellated mansion 

"v ^^^r^z^zzzzz^izzz^zzi^^z^zz^^^^^ 

i t *Q 

* John Canton, a natural philosopher, the son of a broad 
cloth weaver, was born at Stroud in J718. His progress in 
mathematical studies was very rapid ; and though his early 
studies were impeded by constrained attention to his father's 
business, his acquirements were very great. Without instruc- 
tion, and aided only by, a common knife, he carved a dial in 
stone, which shows the hours, the time of the sun's rising, his 
place in the ecliptic, &c. This having been placed against the 
front of his father's house, so far attracted the notice of the 
neighbouring gentry, that they gave him free access to their 
libraries, and tims enabled him to pursue his favourite studies 
to more advantage. In 1739, lie was prevailed on to visit the 
metropolis, where he became assistant to Mr. Watkins, at an 
academy in Spitalfields, and afterwards succeeded him. About 
1 746, he made some iitiportant discoveries in electricity ; and 
received the annual gold medal from the Royal Society, of 
which he was also admitted a member, for an improved method 
of making artificial magnets. In the same year, the Univer- 
sity complimented him with the degree of M. D. and the 
Royal Society elected him one of the Council. lie made 



rather than a baronial fortress. This building i* 
understood to have been erected by Ralph, Lord 
Boteler, an eminent statesman in the reign of 
Henry the Sixth, on the site of a more ancient 
castle, which appears to have been the residence of 
Herald, son to Radulf, Earl of Hereford, who pos- 
sessed, and had his chief seat at Sudely in the time 
of the Conqueror. Ralf, Herald's grandson, as- 
sumed the name De Sudeley, and in his family tin 
manor continued till the year 1367. when, on failure 
of male issue, Sudeley was allotted to Thomas Bote- 
ler, son of William de Boteler, and Joan de Sude- 
ley, a co-heiress. Ralph de Boteler, a younger 
son of Thomas, succeeded on the death of his bro- 
ther ; and being a zealous partisan of the house of 
Lancaster, was made Lord Chamberlain of the 
household of Henry the Sixth, and created a Baron, 
by the name of Lord Sudely. This nobleman 
erected the Castle, and here he lived in the decline 
of life, till the jealousy of the Yorkists forced him 
to abandon his retirement, and resign his newly 
raised mansion to the Kingf. It then continued in 
the crown till the reign of Edward the Sixth, when 
it was granted to Sir Thomas Seymour, who having 
restored its neglected buildings, retired hither with 
Catherine Parr, the Queen Dowager, who had 
honoured him with her hand. She died in child-bed 
in the second year of her marriage, not without 
suspicion of poison. Her grave was discovered in 
the Chapel here, in 1782 ; and the body being taken 
up, her namo and titles were found marked on the 
cerecloth in which it was inclosed. After the attain- 
der and death of Seymour, the Castle was granted 
to William Parr, Marquis of Northampton, by 
whom it was soon forfeited. On the accession of 
Queen IVlary, it was bestowed on Sir John Bridges, 
Knight, of Coberly, a strenuous supporter of her 
right to the crown. In 1554, his services were re- 
warded with the title of Baron Chandos, of Sudely, 
with limitation to his heirs male. Giles, third 
Lord Chandos, entertained Queen Elizabeth here, 
in J592. His nephew, Grey Bridges, fifth Lord 
Chandos, was styled King of the Cotswold, from 

many communications to that Society upon astronomical and 
philosophical subjects, but does not appear to have published 
any separate work. He died of a dropsy, probably arising 
from his sedentary occupation?, in 1772. 

f The Lord Sudely, says Leland, " That builded the Cas- 
tle, was a famous man of warre in King Henry V. and King 
Henry VI. days; and was an Admiral), as I have heard, on 
sea ; whereupon it was supposed and spoken, that it was partly 
builded ex spoliis Gallorum : and some speake of a tower in it 
called Portmare's Tower, that it should be made of a ransome 
of his. One thinge was to be noted in this Castle, that part of 
the windowes of it were glazed with berall (probably stained 
glass.) King Edward IV. bore noe good wills to the Lord 
Sudely, as a man suspected to be, in heart, King Henrv VI. 
his man: whereupon, bv complaynts he was attached; and 
going up to London, he looked from the hill to Sudely, aril 
sayd, Sudely Castle, thou are the traytor, not I. After, \vt 
made an honest declaration, and sou'.dhis Castle to King Ed- 
ward IV." 

his 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



473 



his hospitality, and numerous retinue. George, his 
successor, fought bravely in the cause of Charles 
the First ; but as the contest advanced, the repub- 
licans prevailed ; and his Castle was forced to sur- 
render, after several assaults, to a body of mus- 
quetecrs, under Colonel Massie, in January, 1642. 
" Then it was lhat this splendid mansion became a 
ruin; for the conquerors, indulging a splenetic re- 
sentment at the opposition they had met with, dis- 
mantled the walls, and habitable parts ; and having 
destroyed the memorials of the dead, stripped the 
Chapel, even of its roof. Soon afterwards, the 
Republicans were dispossessed by the Royalists ; 
but in 1614, the Castle was again surrendered to 
the united forces of Massie and Sir William Waller. 
On the death of (he above George, Lord Chandos, 
without issue male, his estates went, by bequest, to 
Jane, his widow, who afterwards marrying George 
Pitt, of Stratfield Say, in Hampshire, conveyed 
them to his family ; and his descendant, George 
Pitt, Baron Rivers, is novv owner." As a ruin, 
Sudely Castle is grand, rather than strikingly pic- 
turesque. Its extent, and lofty towers, with the 
rich architecture of the Hall, in \arious fragments, 
indicate the magnificence celebrated by Leland, and 
by Fuller, who calls it, "of subjects' Castles, the 
most handsome habitation ; and of subjects' habita- 
tions, the strongest Castle." The Chapel is un- 
commonly light and elegant. At the west end is a 
large window, having a beautiful canopied niche on 
each side ; and above it, rising over the roof, a sort 
of square turret. In this Chapel the first five Lords 
Chandos were interred ; the sixth was buried in a 
small side Chapel, or aisle, which is novv used as 
the Parish Church of Sudely. 

TETBURY.] Tetbury is a large and respectable 
market town, situated on a pleasant and command- 
ing eminence, 20 miles S. by E. from Gloucester, 
and 99| W- by N. from London. It consists prin- 
cipally of four streets, which meet in the centre. 
On the S. E. side were formerly to be seen traces of 
an ancient camp, now completely destroyed, in the 
area of which arrows and javelin- heads have heen 
found, with various British coins. There was also 
a Castle here ; said to have been built by a British 
King. Several Roman coins have been found in 
an. I near the town. In the year 1770 the Church 
was undermined by a flood, which occasioned the 
roof to fall, and in other respects did so much 
damage, that it was rebuilt at the expence of nearly 
6,000/. The new building, opened for public wor- 
ship, in 1781, is a handsome structure. The in- 
side is divided into aisles, by a very light arcade 
and clustered columns, which, however, support 
nothing, as the principle on which the roof of the 
Theatre at Oxford was constructed, has been ap- 
plied to this building. The tower, which belonged 
to the Oid Church, has now a handsome spire. 

* Duke Dodo caused this Uoyal Palace to be converted 
into a Cliurch. 

VOL. n. NO. 79. 



Here is an Alms-house for eight persons, founded 
and endowed l:y the bounty of Sir William Romney 
(alderman and sheriff of London in the reign of King 
James I.) a native of this town ; who also founded 
a Free Grammar School here, which has produced 
several eminent scholars. Another School was 
founded by Mrs. Elizabeth Hodges ; and here arc 
many other charitable institutions. 

The inhabitants of Tetbury are principally enr 
gaged in the woollen manufactory and sale of yarn. 

The population in 1811 amounted to 2,533. The 
parish is ten miles in circumference, nearly the 
whole of which is the property of the inhabitants. 
The Avon rises here, and runs through Bath and 
Bristol into the Severn : and at the end of the town 
is a long high bridge, half of which is in Wiltshire. 
The public revenue of the town is managed by a 
Bailiff chosen every year. North of the town is a 
spring, which encrusts pieces of wood and slone 
with a strong stony substance. The annual races 
are run upon a large common, about one mile east- 
ward of the town, and are much frequented by the 
neighbouring gentry, &c. 

T EWKUSBURY.] The large and respectable market 
and borough town of Tewkesbury, lies eight miles 
N. N. E.^from Gloucester, and" 104 W. N. W. 
from London. It is situated in the vale of Eve- 
sham, on the eastern banks of the Avon, near its 
confluence with the Severn, and between the Car- 
ron, and the Swilgate, which flow into the Avon. 
Tradition has uniformly deduced the name of 
Tewkesbury from Theocus, a recluse, who fixed 
his residence near this place, about the end of the 
seventh century. The Saxon inscription discovered 
in the Church at Leominstcr, and printed by Weever 
in his funeral Monuments, calls it Deotisbyrg, or 
Theot-is-byrg ; the town belonging to Theot ; the 
latter word being supposed a contraction for Theo- 
cus. William of Malmsbury derives Tewkesbury 
from the Greek word Theotocos, signifying the 
mother of God; merely on the grounds of the Ab- 
bey having been dedicated to the Virgin Mary ;' and 
Baxter supposes Tewkesbury to be the Etocessa of 
the Romans, latinized by them from the British 
Etoc isceu, faux aquarum, and afterwards changed, 
by the Saxons, into Theoesbyrig, or the town of 
Etocessa. In the Domesday Book it is called 
Teodechesberie. The first Lords of this manor, 
whose names appear on record, are the noble Saxon 
brothers, Dodo and Odo, reputed to have been 
Dukes of Mercia, and to have founded an Abbey 
herein 715; or rather to have converted a palace 
of Dodo's into a monastic establishment, agreeably 
to the following inscription : 

" HANG AULAM RECIAM DODO DUX CONSECRARI 
PEOIT IN ECCLESIAM."* 

These noble brothers dying in 72o, were buried at 



Pe:-shor, 



474 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



Pershore^ in Worcestershire. In 800, a nobleman 
of Mercia occurs as Patron of the Abbey ; and by 
his influence, Britcric, King of the West Saxons, was 
buried there, os hs himself was in 812. From this 
period tiil 980, the Abbey is little noticed by his- 
torians : it was then subjected to the Abbey founded 
nt Cranborne, in Dorsetshire, by Haylward the Fair, 
or Snow-like, so called from his complexion. His 
grandson, Brihtric, Brictric, or Bithric, whose ruin 
was effected by Matilda, wife to the Conqueror, in 
revenge for slighted passion, was afterwards patron; 
but, alter the seizure of his estates, Tewkesbury be- 
came the property of the Qaeen, as part of the 
honour of Gloucester. On her death it reverted to 
the crown ; but was granted, by William Rufus, to 
Robert Fitz-Hamon, who, ia 1102, rebuilt the 
whole, or the greater part, of the Church and 
monastery, at the request of his wife Sybil, and 
Girahl, Abbot of Cranborne, who, with his monks, 
soon afterwards removed to Tewkesbury ; Fitz- 
Ilarnon having so greatly increased the Abbey pos- 
sessions, that he was considered as the second 
founder. On the death of Fitz-Hamon, in 1107, 
Mabil, his eldest daughter, was married by Henry 
"the Third to his natural son Robert, whom, on that 
occasion, he created Earl and Consul of Gloucester. 
This nobleman also founded the Priory of St. James, 
in Bristol, and subjected it to this Abbey. In the 
loth century, the manor of Tewkesbury became a 
part of the share of Isabel, who married the unfor- 
tunate George, Duke of Clarence, and died in 
child-bed, at Warwick, in 1476. From the death 
of Edward Plantagenet, son of Clarence and Isabel, 
who was beheaded in the Tower by Henry the 
Seventh, on a charge of conspiracy, the Lordship 
of Tewkesbury continued in the crown till the year 
1547, when Edward the Sixth granted it to Sir 
Thomas Seymour, on whose attainder it again re- 
yerted, and remained annexed to the crown, till the 
22d of March, 1609, when James the First sold the 
Manor and Borough to the Corporation, together 
with various privileges, for the sum of 2455/. 7s. 4|rf. 
Some ravages were committed at Tewkesbury by 
the Danes ; but the extent of the spoliation is not 
particularly noticed; and during the time of the 
celebrated Robert, Earl of Gloucester, the town 
was ransacked (A. D. J139,) by Walleran de Beau- 
mont, and immense riches taken; but the goods of 
the Abbey were spared. The most remarkable oc- 
currence in the history of this place is the bloody 
battle fought on the 4th of May, 1471, between the 
rival houses of York and Lancaster, by which the 
hopes of the latter were entirely destroyed, and the 
crown secured to Edward the Fourth. The local 
memorials of this very decisive battle, however, are 
but few. The principal scenes of the action are the 
meadow, which has received the appellation of 
Bloody Meadow, and the vine-yard. The former 
lies between two gently descending banks, about 
half a mile south-west of the town, and was the 
spot where the slaughter was the greatest. The 



latter was the place where Queen Margaret lay, 
and where some intrenchments are still to be traced. 
From the memorable battle of Tewkesbury, no 
events of particular historical importance occurred 
in this town, till the civil war in the reign of Charles 
the First. Before the siege of Gloucester, Tewkes- 
bury was garrisoned for the Kins; ; but, after the 
surrender of the Welsh forces, it was evacuated in 
less than twelve hours, and taken possession of by a 
part of the Parliament's army under Captain Fiennes. 
It once more fell into the hands of the Royalists, and 
was fortified. Governor Massie resolved, in 1644, 
to attempt its reduction ; and, on the 5th of June, 
he detached 120 horse, 30 dragoons, and 300 foot, 
for this purpose. When the party had advanced 
within a mile of the place, a forlorn hope was formed 
to reconnoitre ; and finding the bridge down, the 
King's troops without intelligence, and but a slender 
guard, they surprised and made themselves masters 
of the bridge without firing a gun; a body of ,dra- 
goons rushing forward, actually reached the main 
guard before the alarm was spread : then overturn- 
ing the garrison's ordnance, charged through the 
streets, taking Major Myn, Governor of the town, 
prisoner. This rapid movement occasioned a uni- 
versal panic, and the troops threw down their arms, 
and fled. One stand only was made by the rallying 
of the main guard ; but the arrival of Colonel Mas- 
sie prevented further opposition ; and by midnight 
that officer found himself in complete possession of 
the town and works. 

Tewkesbury Abbey advanced in consequence 
under the protection of the various proprietors of the 
Lordship, whose munificence rendered it one of the 
richest foundations in the kingdom. The hist Ab- 
bot, John Wych, or Wakeman, surrendered its 
possessions in 1539 ; and for his ready compliance, 
was, in 1541, rewarded with the Bishopric of Glou- 
cester. The annual revenues were estimated at 
1595/. 17s. Qd. exclusively of 130/. 8*. Id. granted 
by the Convent in fees and annuities: its plate was 
also very valuable ; the sacristy alone containing 
1421 ounces. After the Dissolution, the destruc- 
tion of the buildings was rapid and complete, 
through the ineffectual opposition of the Monks to 
the visitors appointed by the King, who, in revenge, 
destroyed the Lady Chapel, Cloisters, Chapter- 
House, &c. by fire. The remains of the buildings 
were afterwards purchased by the inhabitants ; and 
the Abbey Church was repaired, and made paro- 
chial. This magnificent structure displays an inter- 
esting example of early Norman architecture, com- 
bined with specimens of other kinds. It is built in 
the Cathedral form, and consists of a nave, choir, 
transept, and central tower, with the addition of 
several Chapels, that have been erected at different 
periods. The nave and choir are separated from the 
aisles by eighteen massive columns, sustaining the 
roof, and four substantial piers, which support the 
tower. The arches above the columns in the nave, 
and over the piers, are plain, and semicircular ; but 

those 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE^ 



476 



those oHhe choir nre pointed. Above the crown of 
the former arches, runs a trilbriuin, opening 1 into 
the nave by a series of double round-headed arches ; 
two over each arch. The roof of the nave is orna- 
mented with groins, springing 1 from crocket-heads 
over eacli pillar ; and at the intersections are various 
atigels, and other figures, playing on different musi- | 
cat instruments. At the west end is a lare window I 
with a pointed arch, which appears to have been | 
introduced within a semicircular arch in 1650. The 
aisles are lighted with pointed arched windows ; 
probably altered to that shape about the beginning of 
the fourteenth century, 'when the Choir was height- 
ened, and greatly embellished. In 1790, this was 
again altered, fitted up with new pews, and other- 
wise improved, at an expence of two thousand ! 
pounds. The effect of this portion of the fabric is 
singularly grand and beautiful. The, east end is 
hexagonal, and is separated from the aisles by six 
massive short columns, which support pointed 
arches. Beneath these are some large monuments ; 
and over the arches are windows filled with painted 
glass. In two of them are very curious figures of 
Knights in armour. They are eight in number, and 
are represented standing under very rich gothic 
canopies, each nearly filling one of the principal 
compartments of the window : some are in mail, 
others in plated armour ; and all of tham have arms 
on their surcoats. The upper and smaller com- 
partments of these windows are filled with scrolls 
of vine branches on a brilliant red ground, disposed 
in a most elegant taste. These figures are supposed 
to represent Robert Fitz-Hamon, the second founder 
of the Abbey ; Robert Fitz-roy, Earl of Glouces- 
ter ; the three Gilberts de Clare, Earls of Glouces- 
ter; Richard de Clare, Earl of Gloucester ; Hugh 
le Despencer the younger ; and one of the le Zouch ' 
family. On the south side of the altar are three i 
stone stalls ; only two of which are visible, the ! 
third being concealed by some ornaments. The j 
upper parts are mutilated ; but the remainder dis- 
plays some elegant carving. The ceiling is adorned ' 
with a profusion of tracery, and at each intersection i 
is a carved flower, or knot of foliage. Branching ' 
out from the north and south aisles of the choir, are j 
five or six small private Chapels, or Oratories, con- ] 
f aining the tombs and ashes of their respective foun- ! 
<U-rs. The Lady Chapel, which, as was customary, | 
stood at the east end, is entirely destroyed; but a j 
large arch, through which it was entered from the j 
Church, is stiil seen on the outside. Caryatide : 
heads, busts, and half lengths, abound as orna- 
ments, and some of them are very highly finished i 
caricatures. The Cloisters were on the south side 
of the nave, where some fragments of them yet re- i 
main ; and appear to have been highly ornamented, j 
The tower is lofty, and was once terminated by a j 
wooden spire, which fell on Easter-day, 1559. The i 
most remarkable specimens of its architecture, are j 
three tiers of arcades in the upper part; the arches j 
of the middlemost tier are intersected. The length j 



of the Church Is SOO feet; of the transept, 12<T; the 
breadth of the choir and side aisles is 70 feet ; of the 
west front, 100 ; the height from the area to the 
roof is 1-20 feet ; the height of the tower is 152 feet. 
Between two of the pillars, on the north side of the 
choir, is an elegant and light Chapel of stone, 
erected by Abbot Parker, in 131(7, over the tomb of 
Robert Fitz-Hamon, who was slain at Falaize, in 
Normandy, in 1107, and originally Luricd in the 
Chapter House, whence his bones were removed by 
Abbot Robert in 1241. The tomb is of variegated 
marble, with five niches on the south side ; those on 
the north have been destroyed ; and the sculpture is 
otherwise much mutilated, and the ornamental 
brasses taken away. This tomb was opened during 
the repairs in 1795 : at the west end was a large 
stone, scooped out to receive a sheet of lend, in- 
closing one arm and t\vo thigh bones ; probably all 
the remains of the founder that could be collected at 
the time of their removal. On the east wall of the 
Chapel may be traced a delineation of a battle. On 
the north side of the altar is a monument, of the 
most delicate sculpture, and beautiful proportions, 
in four stages of open arched work, with a tomb 
beneath, surrounded by an embattled border, and 
the sides ornamented alternately with single and 
double arclies. On the tomb are the effigies of a 
Knight and his Lady : the former wears a round 
helmet, a gorget, and hauberk of mail : at his feet 
is a lion, and under his head a helmet, with a grif- 
fin's head for a crest. The Lady has a dog at her 
feet, and appears in the square laud-dress so com- 
monly seen on tombs erected in the reign of Edward 
the Third. Tradition assigns these figures to 
George, Duke of Clarence, brother to Edward the 
Fourth, and his Duchess Isabel, who were both 
buried here ; but it appears, from various authori- 
ties, that this splendid monument was erected to 
the memory of Hugh le Despencer, eldest son of 
Hugh le Despencer the younger ; and his wife, 
Elizabeth, daughter of William de Montacute, 
Earl of Salisbury. He died the Sth of February, 
23d Edward the Third, and she, tho 20th of June, 
33d Edward the Third. This Lady was thrice 
married ; her first husband was Giles de Badlcs- 
mere ; and her last SSir Guy de Brian, whose efii- 
gies is also represented on a tomb, under a rich 
canopy, with similar sculpture to the above. Sir 
Guy was a brave warrior in the time of Edward the 
Third, from whom he received an. annuity of 200 
marks for his services as standard bearer : he died 
in 1391. Another magnificent monument, on the 
north side, is inclosed by tho sepulchral Chapel 
founded by Isabel, Countess of Warwick, over the 
remains of Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Worcester, 
her first husband, who was slain at the siege of 
Meaux in France, in March, 1421. The Coun- 
tess died in December, 1439, nnd was also interred 
here. The upper part of the Chapel is richly or- 
namented by arches, canopies, and linials ; but only 
two of six blue marble pillars remain which sup- 
ported 



476 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



ported it : the roof, more perfect, is entirely com- 
posed of beautiful tracery, spread over the" arches 
and pendants ; and six niches, in two rows of three 
each, bound the screen. The buttresses on the 
sides of the tomb form seven divisions, with dou- 
ble canopies, for angels beneath, bearing shields of 
tbe several quartcrings ot the deceased Countess. 
This lady, fanatical in humility, ordered that her 
effigies should be carved entirely naked, with Mary 
Magdalen laying her hands across, with St. John 
the Evangelist, on the right side, and St. Anthony 
on her left. According to tin; Chronicles of the 
Abbey, this part of her will was literally obeyed ; 
but the figures have been long removed. A sur- 
coat of arms, long obscured, authenticates another 
effigy, denominated, by the Saxons, ' the King- 
making 1 Earl of Warwick,' to be that of Edmund, 
Baron Do Spencer, a hero in the field of Poitiers, 
who died in the year 1375. Every part is yet 
perfect, excepting the rowels of the spurs. On 
the south side of the choir, is a Chapel, dedicated 
to the Holy Trinity, erected by Elizabeth, the wife 
of Edward le Despenccr, whose figure, kneeling, 
is placed on the roof, over which was, formerly, a 
rich Gothic canopy. The east wall was, originally, 
iighly ornamented with paintings ; representing the 
Trinity, various snbjects from the New Testament, 
&c. but all of them are now effectually obscured 
by white- wash : the roof is ornamented with fan- 
shaped tracery. In the south aisle, is an altar - 
tomb, ornamented, on both sides, with' quatrefoils, 
and shields, having over it, a very flat arch, the 
vault of which is decorated with rich Gothic tra- 
cery. This is traditionally assigned to Abbot 
Fortington, who died in 1253; but the architectu- 
ral decorations are, unquestionably, of a later age ; 
and the cyphers (R. C.) on the shields on each 
spandril of the arch, and at the intersection of the 
ribs of the tracery beneath the arch, render it evi- 
dent, that this monument was designed for Abbot, 
Richard Cheltenham, who died in 1500 Opposite 
to the above, at the back of the stone stalls, in the 
choir, is another tomb of an Abbot, consisting of a 
stone coffin, placed under a low flat arch, orna- 
mented with a scroll of vine leaves and grapes, 
over which are two rows of niches, with rich cano- 
pies. On the lid of the coffin, the following in- 
scription is very deeply cut; JOHANNES AB- 
BAS. II VJVS LOCI: this has been ascribed to 
John Cotes, who died A. D. 1361. In the same 
aisle, in the south wall, is the tomb of Abbot Ala- 
nus, the friend and biographer of Thomas -X Becket, 
who died in the year 1-202. The body was depo- 
sited in a coffin of Purbeck marble, laid under a 
very plain semi-quatrefoil arch. This coffin was 
opened, in 1795 : when the lid was taken off, the 
liody appeared surprisingly perfect, considering it 
had lain there nearly 600 years : the folds of the 
drapery were very distinct ; but, from being ex- 
posed to the air, the whole very soon cr,um6led 



away, and left little more than a skeleton : the 
boots, however, still retained their form, and a 
certain degree of elasticity ; they hung in large 
folds about the legs. On his right side, lay a plain 
crosier of wood, neatly turned, the top of which 
was gilded, having a cross cut in it : it w.as five 
feet, eleven inches, in length, and remarkably light : 
on his left side, was the fragment of a chalice. 

Another tomb of an Abbot, between those of Ahi- 
nus, and Abbot Cheltenham, consisting of a coffin, 
beneath an arch, richly adorned with foliage, and 
other ornaments, was opened about the same time, 
and the body was found nearly in the same state as 
that of Abbot Alanus, but without a crosier. In 
the south aisle of the nave, against the wall, is au 
ancient monument, said to be that of Edmund 
Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, beheaded after the 
battle of Tewkesbury ; but the shields of firms, on 
the tomb, which have no relation to Somerset, and 
the architectural decorations, evince its date to have 
been earlier. Lysons conjectures it to hare been 
erected for one of the family of the Clares, Earls 
of Gloucester ; but observes, that the Duke's body 
might have been interred in the stone coffin placed 
upon the top, but which formed no part of the ori- 
ginal tomb. Nearly opposite, inthcwallof the north 
aisle is arich flower surbased arch, \vithatomb under 
it, on which lies the effigies of a knight, in complete 
armour ; a shield on his left arm, and a lion at his 
feet : tradition calls it the monument of Lord Wen- 
lock ; but Leland asserts, that he was buried else- 
where ; and the arms on the shield are not those of 
that ill-fated nobleman. At the entrance of the 
Chapel, dedicated to St. Edmund the Martyr, is 
the cenotaph of Abbot Wych, or Wakeman. In 
the lower part is a figure, representing the corpse 
of a priest, in an emaciated state, lying in a shroud ; 
a subject which frequently occurs on the tombs of 
ecclesiastics. The canopy is of the latest style of 
Gothic architecture, being overcharged with a great 
profusion of arches, quatrefoils, and other orna- 
ments. The Bishop was buried in his Chapel at 
Forthampton. The large blue slab, shewn as pro- 
tecting the remains of the spirited Prince Edward, 
so inhumanly treated by his victorious competitors, 
retains no indication of its pretensions, its brasses 
having been removed: indeed, there is -no autho- 
rity for the tale of his having been buried in this 
spot. Many other monuments, and sepulchral in- 
scriptions, appear in this Church, where numerous 
personages of distinction, besides those already re- 
corded, moulder into indistinguishable dust. One 
of them, by Flaxman, to the memory of the Lady 
Ann Clarke, wife of Sir Samuel Clarke, Bart, de- 
serves particular notice, for the taste and abilities 
displayed in the execution and drapery of the 
figures. 

Near the west end of the Church is the Gate- 
House, with a few other remains of the Abbey 
buildings. The former appears of the fifteenth 

century : 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



477 



century : it. is embattled, and ornamented with 
figures, projecting 1 from a cornice ; beneath which 
is a canopied niche, between two windows of a 
square form. 

The Town-Hall was erected by Sir William Co- 
drington, Bart, at an expence of 1200/. It was 
completed in 1788 ; the ground-flosr is appropriat- 
ed for the holding of the Quarter Sessions ; and the 
principal s(ory for a banqueting or ball- room : in 
the latter is a portraiture of Sir William Codring- 
ton, painted by Sir William Beechy : a drawing- 
room, on the same floor, is used for meetings of 
the Corporation. The old Town-Hall originally 
served as a Market-Place ; but, after that "edifice 
was removed, 20 persons entered into an agree- 
ment with the Corporation, to erect the present 
Market-House, in consideration of a grant of the 
profits of the stalls, &c. for 99 years ; at the end of 
which terra, the whole will revert to the Corpora- 
tion. " This building is of the Doric order, with a 
pediment, and two wings, supported by four pilas- 
ters, and two pillars, forming a very handsome por- 
tico, with large arches in the wings." 

Tewkesbury has a Free Grammar School, and a 
Charity School, and several Alms-houses. The bo- 
rough Gaol appears to have been originally annexed 
to the Abbey, and used as a belfry. The House of 
Industry is a spacious and convenient building, 
situated on Holme Hill, near the entrance of the 
town from Gloucester. The Independents, Quak- 
ers, Anabaptists, and Methodists, have each a meet- 
ing-house. 

Tewkesbury is governed by two Bailiffs, and four 
Justices, with a Recorder, 24 principal burgesses, 
and 24 assistants. The charter of incorporation 
was granted by Queen Elizabeth, and confirmed by 
James the First: but, in the reign of James the 
Second, the corporate officers surrendered their 
seal to that monarch, who, in his second year, re- 
incorporated them, by the names of the Mayor, Al- 
dermen, and Common Council. The Revolution, 
which immediately followed, prevented the charter 
from being carried into effect ; and the town remain- 
ed in a state of indecision, as to its government, till 
the year 1700, when the present form was ordained. 
The privilege of returning representatives to Par- 
liament, was obtained in March, 1009 : the right of 
election is possessed by the freemen and free- 
holders. 

This town has several times suffered by the 
plague ; particularly in 1592 and 1593. A few years 
before, A.D. 1580, the county assi/es were holden 
here, on account, as imagined, of that calamity being 
at Gloucester. The bailiffs then charged 1 Is. for 
wine, and 13.?. id. for tent, " to treat the court and 
their friends." From the low situation of the town, 
considerable damage has been frequently done by 
Hoods ; and shocks of an earthquake are recorded 
to have been lelt here, in the roars ](i75, and 1773. 
The population of Tewkesbury, in 1723, amounted 
to 28150; in 1801, to 410J; and, in 1811, the num- 

II. NO. 71). 



ber of inhabitants was 3553 ; that of houses, 708 : 
the latter are chiefly of brick, and principally ranged 
in three spacious streets. Since, the year 1780, 
when an act was obtained for paving and lighting 
the town, &c. many improvements have been made ; 
and the buildings assume an air of respectability. 
The working classes are mostly employed in stock- 
ing frame-Work knitting, particularly cotton ; in 
the manufacture of nails ; and in the business ot 
malting : the latter is carried on to a considerable 
extent. This town was formerly famous for its ma- 
nufactures : it had once a considerable share in the 
clothing business, but that trade has been long since 
lost. It was, likewise, remarkable for its mustard 
balls, which, being very pungent, have occasioned this 
proverb to be applied to a sharp fellow ; " He looks 
as if he lived on Tewkesbury mustard :" and Shake- 
speare, speaking of 1 one with a sad severe counte- 
nance, uses the simile, " As thick as Tewkesbury 
mustard." 

THORNBHRY.] Thornbury, another ancient bo- 
rough and market-town, lies 21 miles S.VV. from 
Gloucester, and 122 W. by N. from London. It is 
composed principally of three streets, in the form 
of the Roman Y, " having first one longe strete," 
says Leland, " and two homes goyne owt of it."- 
The market is now but poorly attended. Its go- 
vernment is vested in a Mayor, and 12 Aldermen ; 
but the power of these officers is much limited by 
disuse. The Church, spacious and handsome, has 
a lofty tower, ornamented with rich open-worked 
battlements, and eight pinnacles. The population 
in 1811, was 1083. 

The remains of the unfinished Palatial Castle of 
Thornbury, the building of which was begun by 
Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, but stop- 
ped when he was beheaded in 1522, are at the end 
of the town. It is particularly deserving of notice, 
from its affording, even in its present dilapidated 
state, a happy specimen of the last gradation of 
Gothic architecture, in the application of that style 
to castellated houses. Leland, who visited this 
pile, which the Duke of Buckingham had com- 
menced on the site of an ancient fortress, informs 
us, that the principal front, towards the west, was 
! nearly finished; and another, towards the south, 
: completely so : the stately gateway had risen only 
: to the first floor. From a survey made in tho year 
j 1582, it, appears, that the whole southern side was 
habitable, and that it consisted of several chambers, 
of magnificent dimensions. The tower, the walls of 
which are perfect, was divided into four rooms, the 
Duke's own apartments : this stands at the south- 
west angle of the Castle. The Duke was meditat- 
; ijig the re-erection of the old hall, on the east side, 
and to complete the; quadrangle, which would have 
inclosed an area of two acres and u half, when his 
fatal attainder closed his views forever. The chim- 
neys are very curiously constructed, and beautiful; 
, being composed of brick, wrought into spiral co- 
lumns, the bases of which arc charged with the 
E cognizances 



478 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



cognizances of tha family, and the Stafford's knot, 
so well known to the lovers of heraldry. Within 
the circuit walls, founded upon the ancient ram- 
parts, 12 acres were inclosed : annexed to them are 
small rooms, intended as barracks tor soldiers ; a 
circumstance which is said to have excited the jea- 
lousy or' the King, and to have confirmed his suspi- 
cion of the Duke's traitorous intentions. In the 
reign of Elizabeth, the principal timbers were taken 
away ; and time has since promoted the dilapida- 
tion. A singular coincidence has been remarked 
between the front of Thornbury Castle, and that of 
Christ Church, Oxford. 

TODDINGTON.] At Toddington, 2| miles N. by 
E. from Winchcombe, stands Toddington House, 
the ancient seat of the Tracy family, who have been 
lords of the manor ever since the reign of Stephen. 
It is now the property of Charles Hanbury Tracy, 
Esq. who, in 1798, married the Hon. Henrietta Su- 
sannah, daughter and sole heiress of the late Lord 
Viscount Tracy, The house, which is a spacious 
building, was erected about the latter end of the 
seventeenth century. Having been partly destroy- 
ed by fire, a few years ago, it has I>;-MI repaired and 
modernised. The gardens and grounds are dis- 
posed in the modern style : the park, which is well 
planted, and includes about 150 acres, abounds with 
rabbits. 

In the chancel of Toddington Church are figures 
of nine of the Apostles, delicately finished, and 
about 18 inches in height, supposed to have been 
brought from the Chapel at Hayles Abbey. 

TOWBEURY HILL.] On this eminence, which rises 
from the meadows near the Severn, three miles N. 
by E. from Tewkesbury, is an ancient camp, doubly 
entrenched, in the form of an irregular oblong square. 
Leland conjectures, that it was the residence of King 
Offa, or King Ranuiphus. 

TYDENHAM.] In this parish, which lies two miles 
N.E. by N. from Chepstow, in Monmouthshire, is a 
point of land, called Beaehley, formed by the con- 
fluence of the rivers Wye and Severn. Here is the 
i'erry called the Old Passage ; and near it, among 
the rocks, on Treakle Island, a small tract, which 
appears to have been separated from the main land, 
in former ages, by the violence of the Severn, are 
the ruins of a small Chapel, that was dedicated to 
St. Tecla, who is said to have been martyred in the 
year 47. Beachley, from its almost insulated situ- 
ation, lias always been of great military importance. 
Extensive earth-works are still remaining, probably 
of British origin. Offa's dyke terminates here, and 
may be clearly traced crossing the road at Butting- 
ton Tump. In the civil wars, Beachley was consi- 
dered of such consequence, that Prince Rupert de- 
tached 500 horse and foot to occupy and fortify it ; 
but, before the fortifications were completed, the 
garrison was dislodged, with great loss, by Gover- 
nor Massie. Another, and a desperate battle, was 
fought here, between the Parliament's forces, and 
the Royalists, under Sir John Wyntour, when the 



latter was defeated, with the loss of 220 men ; and 
himself reported to have been forced down the Cliff', 
(now called Wyntour's Leap,) into the river, where 
a small boat lay ready to receive him. 

VINEYARD HILL.] The Vineyard Hill, about one 
mile west from Gloucester, was the site of a large 
house, belonging to the Abbots of St. Peter's. It 
was demolished during the civil wars, as well as 
another, called the Newark, built by a Prior of Lan- 
thony, on a fine eminence south of Gloucester. 
The moat surrounding the Vineyard House is yet 
visible ; the summit of the hill commands a fine 
view of the city, the river Severn, and the Vale of 
Gloucester. 

ULEY.] The pleasant and populous little village 
of Uley, principally inhabited by persons engaged 
in the clothing manufacture, is situated three miles 
E. from Dursley, in a valley bounded by lofty hills 
on every side but the west, and watered by a fine 
stream, formed by the springs which descend from 
the surrounding heights. On the hill north-west of 
the village, is an ancient Roman work, called Uley 
Bury camp. Various coins have been found here, 
chiefly of the Emperors Antoninus and Constan- 
tine. 

Stout's Hill, in this parish, the seat of Lloyd 
Baker, Esq. is a handsome modern building, with oc- 
tagonal projections, turretted, and ornamented in the 
pointed style. It commands a fine view of the vil- 
lage ; and is rendered interesting by the contiguity 
of some fine beech woods, hanging from the slope 
of the eminence to the south. This was the birth- 
place of Mr. Samuel Rudder, one of the historians 
of this county. 

WALTON.] At Walton, in the parish of Deer- 
hurst, is a medicinal spring, the properties of which 
are similar to those of Cheltenham ; but the at- 
tempts to give celebrity to its virtue have hitherto 
failed. 

WESTBURY.] Westbury - upon - Severn lies 2 
miles N.E. from Newnham ; and the neat' little vil- 
lage of Westbury-on-Trim, chiefly occupied by the 
respectable merchants and traders of Bristol, is 
3f miles N.N.W. from that city. Here was a Col- 
lege for a dean and five canons, founded by the 
eccentric William Canning, of Bristol, who became 
the first dean. The building was entire till the time 
of Charles the First, when Prince Rupert ordered 
it to be destroyed, lest it should afford shelter to the 
Parliament's troops in annoyance to the garrison of 
Bristol. The remains have been incorporated in a 
genteel mansion, recently the property of John 
Hobhouse, Esq. 

In this parish, on the estate of J. Harmer, Esq. 
who has a beautifully situated villa at Pen Park, is 
the celebrated cavity called Pen Park Hole. This 
remarkable excavation, supposed to be an exhaust- 
ed lead-mine, was inspected by Captain Sturmey, 
in 1609, and afterwards by Captain Collins, in 
1682 ; the account of whose observations were 
published in the Philosophical Transactions. On 

the 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



470 



the 17th of March, 1775, the Rev. Thomas Newn- 
liam, a minor canon of Bristol Cathedral, visiting 
the spot, with some friends, and among them, a 
lovely female, to whom he was shortly to have been 
married, descended towards the mouth of the pit, 
for the purpose of ascertaining its depth with a line, 
when his foot slipping, and the twig of an ash, which 
he seized for support, giving way, he was precipitat- 
ed to the bottom, without the possibility of preven- 
tion. Many persons afterwards descended to search 
for the body, but it was not found till the expiration 
of 39 days. In that and the following year, Captain 
Hamilton, a Mr. Tucker, and a Mr. White, descend- 
ed into the cavity, and from their observations, a 
descriptive account was published by Mr. Catcott, 
author of a Treatise on the Deluge. It appears 
from this, that the mouth, or rather mouths, of the 
pit, run nearly east and west, the principal being 
about 111 feet in length, and 35 in width. Near 
the middle is a separation, made by an ash tree, 
whose roots extend across the hole, the bottom of 
which is about 215 feet from the surface, and cover- 
ed with water ; the height of the water was found to 
vary, according to the season of the year, from 20 
to 75 feet. About 40 feet from the bottom, is a 
passage running nearly horizontally, to an extent of 
about 80 feet ; and higher up, on the opposite side, 
another passage, extending in x a curved line, to a 
considerable distance, and then, by a sudden turn, 
ascending, and communicating with the surface by 
another opening. 

WESTON.] King's Weston, five miles N.W. from 
Bristol, is the beautiful residence of Lord de Clif- 
ford, whose mansion, seated on a fine eminence, in 
a park of nearly 500 acres in extent, is one of Van- 
brugh's best works. Through the different apart- 
ments, which, excepting the hall, are not large, 
many original portraits, and other paintings by the 
first masters, are distributed. Among the former 
are Cromwell, Earl of Essex, and Sir Richard 
Southwell, eminent statesmen in the reign of Henry 
the Eighth, and the immediate ancestors of Lord 
de Clifford : these were executed by Holbein. In- 
laid in the doors of two cabinets, are various origi- 
nal miniatures of the Cliffords, and of other illus- 
trious personages, from the time of Elizabeth to 
that of James the Second. The situation of King's 
Weston is distinguished by beauty and grandeur. 

WICKHAM.] Child's Wickham lies 5* miles W. 
by S. from Chipping Campden. The parish being a 
peculiar, the bishop and arch-deacon are entertain- 
ed at -the manor-house, where, as custom prescribes, 
the Lord provides his visitors " with a cake, a loaf, 
a pound of butter, a quarter of a sage cheese, a 
quarter of a plain cheese, a dozen of ale, and six 
bottles of strong beer." At Whitsuntide also, the 
Lord " furnishes a certain quantity of malt for ale 
to he given away, and flour to make cakes. At the 
same time, every one that keeps a' cow, sends curd : 
others send sugar, plumbs, and flour ; and the land- 
holders contribute sixpence each : from this fund, 



every poor person in the parish may receive a quart 
of ale, a cake, a piece of cheese, and a cheese- 
cake." 

WITCOMBE.] Great Witcombe lies 31 miles N.E. 
by N. from Painswick. The views from Witcombe 
Park, the seat of Sir William Hicks, Bart, are 
eminently beautiful and extensive. The best station 
is from a vista on the hill, about a mile from the 
mansion. To the left is a part of the forest of Dean, 
and the Conic mountain, near Abergavenny : in 
front are the ponderous hills of Malvern ; and the 
Welch mountains, at a great distance form the back 
ground ; to the right lies Tewkesbury and Wor- 
cester. 

WICKWAR.] The little market-town of W 7 ickwar, 
lies 19 miles S.S.W. from Gloucester, and 108 W. 
from London. It is a very ancient corporation, go- 
verned by a Mayor and Aldermen. The town is 
well watered by two brooks, over one of which is a 
handsome stone bridge. Here is a well-endowed 
Free School. The neighbouring wastes afford 
plenty of coal. In the garden of the manor-house, 
some years ago, was a chesnut-tree, which measured 
57 feet, in circumference, at the height of six feet 
above the ground. It was supposed to have been 
planted about the year 1216. 

WILLERSLEY.] Willcrsley is 3| miles W. from 
Chipping Campden. An estate in this parish is no- 
ticed by Rudder, as subject to a rent-charge, (propor- 
tioned to the rate of the land-tax,) payable to a cer- 
tain family, as a recompense for the fidelity of their 
ancestors, in preserving Charles the Second, by 
concealing him in the oak. 

On the summit of a hill, in this parish, is an an- 
cient camp, the area of which includes about 60 
acres, and the banks are in tolerable preservation. 
From this eminence is a beautiful prospect of the 
town and vale of Evesham, with the Malvern and 
Breedon Hills in the back-ground. 

WILLIAMSTRIP.] Williamstrip, the seat of Mi- 
chael Hicks Beach, Esq. occupies an elevated site 
about three miles N. from Fairford. The house 
is sheltered, on tire north and east, by plantations, 
which defend it from the bleak winds. On tlie ad- 
jacent high grounds, which rise from the Colne, 
traces of the Icknield Way are still apparent. 

WINCHCOMBE.] The market-town of Winch- 
combe, written Wiufcelcumbe, in the Domesday 
hook, lies 14 miles N.E. by E. from Gloucester, 
and 95| W.N.W. from London. It was formerly 
of considerable importance, and is still a borough by 
prescriptive right. It was anciently the site of a 
Castle, and of a mitred Abbey, sufficiently capa- 
cious for 300 Benedictine monks : but every vestige 
of those buildings has been levelled with the dust. 
By whom the Castle was erected is unknown ; but 
the foundation of the Abbey, anno 798, is ascribed 
to Keuulph, King of Mercia, who is said to have 
had a palace here. The spot chosen for the Abbey, 
had been previously occupied by a Nunnery founded 
by King Offa: its dedication was conducted by 

Wulfrid, 



480 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



Wulfrid, Archbishop of Canterbury, and 12 bishops, 
in presence of Kenulph himself; his prisoner, Gu- 
thred, King of Kent, who was released on the oc^a- 
sipn ; Sired, King of the West Saxons ; and mpst 
of the Mercian nobles : many rich gifts were at the 
same time distributed by Kenulph; who, on his 
death, in 820, was buried in the Abbey Church. 
Kenelm, his son, was murdered by his tutor, Aske- 
bert, at the instigation of Quendred, his elder sis- 
ter, iu the hope of succeeding to the kingdom. His 
remains having been discovered in a wood, (accord- 
ing to the monkish legends, miraculously) they were 
removed to the Abbey, where a shrine being erected 
over them, the Convent became greatly enriched by 
the offerings that were made by superstitious visit- 
ants. The Abbey was afterwards destroyed by the 
Danes, and rebuilt, about the year 985, by Oswald, 
Bishop of Worcester, who made it a College of Se- 
culars, and dedicated it anew to the Virgin Mary, 
and St. Kenelm. At the period of the Domesday 
Survey, 19 manors in Gloucestershire, were annex- 
ed to this Abbey, independently of Winchcombe it- 
self. Richard Ancelme, the last Abbot, subscribed 
to the King's supremacy, in 153-t, and surrendered 
in December, 1539. His immediate predecessor, 
Richard de Kederminster, is recorded to have writ- 
ten a valuable history of the foundation of this Mo- 
nastery ; and another of the lives of the Abbots : 
the latter of which was burnt in the fire of London. 
The Abbey, and all its buildings, were totally de- 
stroyed soon after the Dissolution, though tradi- 
tionally reported to have been extremely magni- 
ficent. The manor is now the property of Lord 
Rivers. 

. The parish of Winchcombe, with a small adjoining 
and dependent tract, is said to have been a sheriff- 
dom, or county, in the Anglo-Saxon times, and to 
have so continued till the reign of Canute, whose 
Viceroy, Edric, surnamed Streona, divested it of 
its independence, and annexed it to Gloucestershire. 
Its situation is extremely beautiful ; it stands at the 
base of several hills, having the little river Isborne 
flowing near it on the south and east. Leland tes- 
tifies that it was anciently surrounded by a wall. 
The houses, mostly low, and of stone, are prin- 
cipally ranged in two streets, crossing each other. 

Winchcombe Church was begun, in the reign of 
Henry the Sixth, by the Abhot, William Wiuch- 
combe, who completed the east part : the remainder 
was finished by subscriptions among the parishioners, 
assisted by the munificence of Ralph Boteler, Lord 
Sudelcy. It is a spacious building, witli an embat- 
tled tower at the west end, opening by an arch info 
the iiiive, The body of the Church is ornamented 
with battlements and pinnacles ; and on every but- 
tress are monstrous caricatures of human and brute ; 
heads : on the south is a neat porch, with tracery on j 
the ceiling. The pillars in the interior are octagon : 
the nave is separated from the chancel, by a clumsy 
g iHery, and a carved screen below it. The altar is 
detached from the wall, and covered with an ancient, | 



but once magnificent carpet, embroidered with a 
border of Saints, in coloured silk and silver. 

The government of the town is vested in two bai- 
liffs and ten assistants. The population of Winch- 
combe, in 1811, was 1256. From its recluse situ- 
ation, among hills, and the unevenness of the roads, 
this town possesses very little trade ; a paper-mill, 
and tan-yard, being its chief sources of employ- 
ment. The Workhouse is an ancient, irregular 
building ; in which the poor are employed in 
weaving and spinning linen for their own clothes. 

WITHINGTON.] AtWithingtoiijSixmilesW.N.W. 
from North Leach, a Nunnery was founded in the 
early Saxon times ; and in the 8th century, Wilfrith, 
Bishop of Worcester, obtained a synodal decree, that 
it should be annexed to the see of Worcester, after the 
death of the then Abbess. His successor, however, 
regranted it to ^Ethelburga, Abbess of a religious 
house in Worcester, on condition, that both this and 
her own establishment should devolve to his see 
after her decease. The manor of Withington be- 
came a possession of the Bishops of Worcester, 
through this agreement, and is still held under that 
see. The Church is the burial-place of the Ched- 
worth family : some parts of it are very ancient ; 
on the angles of the tower are grotesque figures of 
demons, &c. 

WOODCHESTER.] The village of Woodchester, 
celebrated for the number and beauty of the Roman 
antiquities, which have been found there, lies Si- 
miles 3.W. from Stroud. It is situated on a plea- 
sant eminence, forming part of a range of sweeping 
hills, which bound a fertile and delightful valley, 
and are clothed with fine beech wood. Tradition 
states, that Gueta, the wife of Godwin, Earl of 
Kent, built a religious house here, to atone for her 
husband's guilt in corrupting' the nuns at Berkeley. 
The manor was held of William, Earl Mareschal, 
in the reign of Edward the First, by the Maitravers, 
whose family became owners, and continued in pos- 
session till the time of Richard the Second, when it 
passed to the Aruudels, by the marriage of an heir- 
ess. Queen Elizabeth bestowed it on the Iluntleys, 
who sold it to Sir Robert Ducie, from whom the 
present proprietor, Francis Reynolds, Lord Ducie, 
is maternally descended. This nobleman has a de- 
serted seat in the parish, called Spring Park, most 
romantically situated, and abounding in fine wood, 
but laid out in the old style, with numerous fish- 
ponds, &c, 

. In the chancel of Woodchester Church is a hand- 
some altar monument to the memory of Sir George 
Hnntlcy, and his Lady, who are represented lying 
beneath a canopy : round the tomb, are figures of 
their ten children. Near the Church, is the seat of 
Sir Samnel Wathen, Knt. 

The inhabitants of Woodchester, between 800 
and 900 in number, are chiefly employed in the 
clothing trade. In the year 1097, a large quantity 
of gold coin, of Edward the Fourth, was found 
here. 

Bishop 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



Bishop Gibson, in his Additions to Camden, par- 
ticularly notices the great tessellated pavement, 
parts of which had been frequently uncovered, on 
the digging of graves in Woodchester Church-yard; 
it was afterwards mentioned by Sir Robert Atkyns, 
Count Caylus, and other writers ; but no accurate 
description appeared till the year 1797, when a very 
curious and interesting account was published by 
Samuel Lysons, Esq. who ascertained its complete 
design, form, and dimensions, through various open- 
ings made in the ground, to the depth of about four 
feet, in the years 1793, and 1794. The pavement, 
says Mr. L. " appeared to have been a square of 
48 feet, 10 inches. The general design is a circular 
area, 23 feet in diameter, inclosed within a square 
frame, consisting of 24 compartments, enriched with 
a great variety of guilloches, scrolls, frets, and other 
antique architectural ornaments, edged on the inside, 
by a braided guilloche, and, on the outside, by a la- 
byrinth fret, between a single fret, and a braided 
guilloche. The large circular compartment, or area 
in the centre, is surrounded by a border, consisting 
of a Vitruvian scroll, edged on each side by a guil- 
loche, and enriched with foliage, proceeding from a 
mask of Pan, having a beard of leaves. Imme- 
diately within this border, are representations of 
various beasts, originally 13 in number, on a white 
ground, with trees and flqwers between them. The 
figures of a gryphon, a bear, a leopard, a stag, a 
tygress, a lion, and a lioness, are remaining. Those 
of a boar, a dog, and an elephant, and two others 
unknown, but necessary to fill up the whole space, 
have been destroyed : most of these figures are 
about four feet in length. Within the circle occu- 
pied by the above-mentioned figures of animals, is a 
smaller circle, separated from the larger by a guil- 
loche, and a border of acorns, in which various 
birds are represented on a white ground : in this 
circle is also the figure of a beast, which seems to 
have been designed for a fox. Within the circle of 
birds is an octagonal compartment, formed by a 
twisted guilloche ; in the south side of which, and 
also of the border of acorns, are openings to admit 
the principal figure of the design, which is now 
much mutilated ; though about the year 172-2, as 
appears from a drawing then made, the head only 
was wanting : it represents Orpheus playing on the 
lyre, which he rests on his left knee. No part of 
the pavement, within the central octagon, exists at 
present ; but it appears, from a memorandum on a 
drawing in the possession of Richard Goiigh, Esq. 
that it contained figures of fish, and that ' about the 
centre, was a star-like figure.' In the four angular 
spaces, between the great border, and the great cir- 
cular compartment, are the remains of female figures, 
two of which appear to have been in each of those 
spaces. The figures in the north-east angle, which 
are more perfect than any of the others, were evi- 
dently designed for Naiads : one of them is repre- 
sented in a recumbent posture, with her right hand 
over her head, and her left holding what, undoubt- 
VOL. n. NO. 80. 



edly was intended for an urn, though very rudely 
expressed ; the other, supporting her head with her 
left hand, extends her right over an urn, placed un- 
der her left arm." 

Mr. Lysons supposes this pavement, for its size, 
and richness of ornament, to be equalled by few ol 
those discovered in other provinces of the Roman 
empire ; and to be, unquestionably, superior to any 
thing of the same kind hitherto found in Britain. 
The compartments, of which the great border is 
composed, are all extremely elegant ; and the co- 
louring throughout the whole is so managed, as to 
produce the most harmonious effect. The colour* 
are of a dark bluish-grey, red, white, and several 
shades of brown : the first is every where used for 
the outlines ; and the red, HgJit brown, and white, 
are introduced in all the guilloches, in such a manner, 
as to produce a sort of relief. The figures are, in 
general, inferior to the ornaments, a circumstance 
usually occurring in works of this kind ; and, in a 
great measure, to be attributed to the nature of the 
materials of which they are composed. Part of the 
pavement, near the north-east corner, appears to 
have been discoloured by fire ; the tesserae are 
mostly cubes of about half an inch ; those of the 
outward border are somewhat larger, and those near 
the centre, much smaller : many are triangular, and 
of various other shapes. The whole, when entire, 
could not have contained fewer than a million and a 
half of pieces. Most of the materials of which the 
tesserae are formed, are the produce of this country, 
except the white, which are of a very hard calcareous 
stone, bearing a good polish, and nearly resembling 
the Palombino marble of Italy. The dark bluish 
grey are of a hard argillaceous stone, fbund in 
many parts of the Vale of Gloucester, and there 
called blue lyas. The ash-coloured are of a similar 
kind of stone, and frequently found in the same 
masses as the former. The dark brown are of a 
gritty stone, found near Bristol, and in the forest df 
Dean. The lightest brown nearly resemble a hard 
calcareous stono, found at Lypiat, about two miles 
from Woodchester. The red are of a fine sort of 
brick. The cement on which the pavement was laid, 
appeared to he about eight inches thick, and com- 
posed of fine gravel, pounded brick, and lime, 
forming a very hard substance, on which the tes- 
serffi were laid : the interstices between them were 
filled with cement, so hard, that it was more diffi- 
cult to break than even the tessera; themselves. 
The pavement had several lines running under it, 
which crossed each other at right angles : these 
were 48 inches in height, and -23 inches wide, at 
the bottom ; from the middle they gradually dimi- 
nished, till their width at the top was only six 
inches. They were tniilt of stone, and, from the 
remains of soot, were, doubtlessly, intended for 
heating the room under which they were construct- 
ed ; though no communication with u fire-place 
can now be traced. Various foundations of apart- 
ments, with tessellated pavements, of diverse pat- 
8 r terns. 



4S2 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



terns, and part of a hypocaust, have been found at 
different periods, within the Church-yard, and con- 
tiguous to the great pavement ; but the principal 
discoveries were made in the years 1795 and 1796, 
when the ground-plot of a very extensive Roman 
building was almost completely ascertained. The 
remains within the Church-yard formed its northern 
extremity. The other parts were included in an 
adjoining orchard, and in a field called the Parks. 
" The houses of the Romans," observes Mr. Lysons, 
" when situated in the country, were frequently on 
one floor ; and if they belonged to persons of conse- 
quence, were of very great extent, and enriched with 
the most magnificent and splendid decorations of 
every kind, though their external elevation was 
usually quite plain. They consisted of several 
large halls, porticoes, and open courts, running 
through the centre of the building, with suites of 
rooms branching out on either side. The remains 
of the building at Woodchester bear a striking re- 
semblance to the plan of the Roman houses here 
described. They cannot be expected to agree in 
every particular, since the Romans frequently va- 
ried the form of their houses, to adapt them to the 
climate of the country in which they were built. 
Two great courts, and the great room, (which con- 
tained the principal pavement,) run through the 
middle of the building, and have numerous rooms, 
of various dimensions, branching out from them. 
The first, or greater court, seems to answer to the 
Peristylium, or large court, of Vitruvius, and was 
probably surrounded with a colonnade, though only 
loose fragments of columns were found, and none 
of their bases could be discovered so as to ascertain 
their situations. On the east and west sides of this 
court, were considerable ranges of building ; in the 
eastern wing, the remains of the Lacomcum (or 
sweating-room) are fully sufficient to indicate its 
original use. The room contiguous to it, on the 
eastern side, seems to have been an Apodyterium ; 
(or dressing-room for the baths) and the one most 
distant, on the western side, a cold bath, as it was 
a very common practice among the Romans, to use 
the cold bath immediately after the sudatory. Most 
of the rooms on the west side, it is very probable, 
were appropriated to the use of the servants, as 
they do not appear to have had tessellated pavements, 
or other decorations. On the north side of the great 
court, were three large rooms, which, from the frag- 
ments of statues, marbles, and columns, found there, 
appear to have boon very highly decorated ; and, 
from their size, it is probable, that they were O3ci, 
or Exe.drae.* The second, or inner court, had gal- 
leries on the north, cast, and West sides ; that on 
the north side has an elegant tessellated pavement ; 
and a fragment of one remains in that on the east 
side. These galleries were clearly what the Ro- 

* The (Eci were a large kind of saloons, sometimes square, 
and frequently with columns, used for the purposes of enter- 
tainment. The Exedrte were large rooms, of various forms, 



mans called Crypto-porticus, and the area inclosed 
within them, might have been the Atrium (or open 
court). The room, of which the great tessellated 
pavement remains, was, no doubt, the Cavsedium 
Tetrastylon, (or large hall) of Vitruvius, and must 
have been extremely magnificent; as there is great 
reason to imagine, from the elegance of the floor, 
that the ceiling and other parts ef the room, were 
richly decorated. The walls on the west side of the 
cavspdiutn, and crypto-porticus, are probably re- 
mains of the Triclinia Hyberna, (or winter supper- 
rooms) and baths ; as most of them have subterra- 
neous flues for the purpose of introducing heat ; and 
their situation corresponds with that which Vitru- 
vius assigns for those apartments. The apartments 
on the eastern side of the crypto-porticus, were 
probably warmed by the hypocaust : these occupy 
the situation assigned, by Vitruvius, for the triclinia 
of the spring and autumn." The design of one of 
the pavements, discovered amongst these remains, 
consists of five octagonal compartments, containing 
figures on a white ground, surrounded by a double 
labyrinth fret ; immediately within which, on the 
north side, is a scroll of flowers, having a vase in 
the centre. In the compartments at the north-west, 
and south-east corners, are fragments of Bacchanal- 
ian figures : the compartment at the south-west 
corner, is entire, and contains figures of two boys, 
holding up a basket of fruit and leaves, with the 
words BONUM EVENTUM inscribed under them. 
Nothing remained within the compartment at the 

north-east corner, but the letters BIINII c 

being the concluding part of the foregoing sentence. 
The last word has probably been COLITE, and the 
whole inscription BONUM EVENTUM BENECOLITB; 
the II, intended for the Greek II, being introduced 
for E, a circumstance, by no means uncommon iu 
Roman inscriptions. 

Several fragments of stucco, painted in fresco, 
were found among the rubbish ; and various flues, 
crossing each other at right angles, about four feet 
in depth, were discovered beneath the pavement. 
Under the ruins of an adjoining room, were also 
flues of similar dimensions, as well as considerable 
remains of the fire-place by which they had been 
heated. This projected four feet from the walls of 
the room : on each side of it was a wall, one foot, 
eight inches thick, and four feet, two inches asunder. 
Near the fire-place, was a number of sculls and 
bones, mostly of sheep. In another room to the 
south, was a similar fire-place ; and not far distant, 
a coin of Magnentius was found. The remains of 
the Laconicum were very considerable. The floor, 
of very hard cement, was about four feet below the 
surface of the ground : its width was eight feet, ten 
inches, and its length nine feet, ten inches. The 
floor was eight inches thick : beneath it was a layer 



supposed to have been furnished with seats, and used for COB. 
versation, &c. 



6 



of 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



483 



of bricks, about one foot wide, two feet long, and 
two inches thick : some of these covered the flues 
that run beneath the floor, and their under sides 
were covered with wood soot. The depth of the 
flues was two feet, two inches : they were five in 
number, four being transverse, and one longitudi- 
nal. " The intermediate space between the trans- 
verse flues is filled up with a sort of ridge tiles, 
forming funnels, and placed between layers of brick 
and stone. The funnels were, one with another, 
18 inches long, and four and a half in diameter ; 
some of them were formed by only one of the curv- 
ed tiles. A row of perpendicular funnels extended 
along the north and south walls, formed of brick 
tiles, with their edges turned up : the tops of these 
funnels were level with the surface of the cement 
floor, where the openings formed by them were 
three inches wide." 

The remains of two hypocausts were also found 
within a little distance of each other ; and several 
fragments of statues, and red glazed pottery, va- 
rious pieces of stags' horns, broken glass, and nu- 
merous coins, have been found amongst the ruins of 
the buildings. From the magnitude of the building, 
and from the richness of its decorations, Mr. Lysons 
imagines it to have been a villa, erected for the resi- 
dence of the Roman Propraetor, or at least for the 
Governor of this part of the province, and occasion- 
ally, perhaps, of the Emperor himself. 

WOTTON-UNDER-EDGE.] This large and respect- 
able market-town, is 10 miles S.S.W. from Glou- 
cester, and 108 W. by N. from London. It lies 
near the foot of a ridge of woody hills, from which 
situation its name appears to have been derived. 
The old town was burnt down in the reign ef King 
John, and a place, called the Brands, is supposed 
to mark its original site. During the civil wars, 
Woodchester was the theatre of some military 
scenes. The cloth manufactory is carried on to a 
very considerable extent, in this town and neigh- 
bourhood : one house alone employing near 4000 
persons. The Church is a handsome and spacious 
fabric, containing many curious monuments. Here 
are two Free Schools liberally endowed. Hugh 
Perry, Esq. an Alderman of London, in 1632, 
brought water to this town at his own charge, and 
gave 1000/. to purchase lands for erecting and en- 
dowing an Alms-house, for six poor men and six 
women, and for establishing a weekly lecture in the 
Church. The number of inhabitants of this parish, 
in 1811, amounted to 1527. 

FAIRS.] Jiardin Regis September 28, clotb, 
sheep, and pigs. 

Berkeley- May 14, cattle and pigs. 

li/dkeiisy April 23, November 12, cattle, sheep, 
and horses. 

Campdeit April 23, July 25, November 3, horses, 
cows, sheep, linen, cloth, and stockings. 

Cirencester Easter Tuesday, July 18, cattle, 
sheep, and horses ; Nov. 8, wool, oil, and leather. 

Cheltenham Second Thursday in April ; Holy 
Thursday, all sorts of cloth ; August 5, lambs. 



Coleford June 20, wool ; November 24, cattle 
and cheese. 

Dursley May 0, December 4, cattle and pedlars' 
ware. 

Fairford May 14, November 12, sheep and 
cattle. 

Frampton February 14, pedlary ware. 

Gloucester April 5, cheese fair ; July , Sept- 
tember 28, November , cattle, pigs, horses, 
cheese. 

Hampton Trinity Monday, cattle, pigs, horses, 
cheese. 

Iron Actnn April 25, September 13, cattle, pigs, 
horses, cheese. 

Lechlnde August 5, and 10, cattle and toys ; 
September 9, cheese and cattle. 

Leonard Stanley July 20, cattle. 

Lydney May 4, November 8, horned cattle. 

tittle Dean Whit-Monday, Nov. 26, pedlars' 
ware. 

Marshfield May 24, horned cattle ; October , 
sheep, horses, cheese. 

Michael Dean Easter Monday, October 10, cat- 
tle, sheep, and horses. 

Moreton April 5, October 10, cattle. 

Newnham June 11, October 18, horses and 
sheep. 

Kewent Wednesday before Easter, Wednesday 
before Whit-Sunday, August 1, Friday after Sep- 
tember 8, cattle, horses, and cheese. 

Northleach Wednesday before April 23, cows 
and sheep ; Wednesday before September 29, 
horses and small ware ; third Wednesday in May, 
cheese and cattle. 

Painswick Whit-Tuesday, September 19, cattle, 
sheep. 

Sodbury May 23, June 24, cattle, cheese, and 
pedlary. 

Stonehome May 1, December 29, cattle and 
cheese. 

Stow-on-the-WoId May 12, horses, cows, and 
sheep ; October 24, hops, &c. 

Slroud May 12, August 21, cattle, sheep, and 
pigs. 

Tetbury Ash-Wednesday, July 22, cattle, Iambs, 
sheep, and horses. 

Tewkesbury March 7, May 14, June 22, Sep- 
tember 4, October 10, cattle, tanned leather, and 
pedlary. 

Thonibury Easter-Monday, August 15, Monday 
before December 21, cattle and pigs. 

Tockington May 9, December 6, cattle and ped- 
lary. 

Waterleigh September 19, cattle and horses. 

Wickwar April 5, July 2, oxen and iiorses. 

WinchcombeMtiy 16, July 28, cattle, sheep, 
horses. 

Winterburn June 29, October 18, cattle and 
sheep. 

Wotton-under-Edge September 25, cattle and 
cheese. 

TABLE 



484 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



29 o o OWBW o 

ag i I ffif f 

2:^ a. ~ Sg g-3 2 
2^ 3 =. 3 |g3 

O M < i_j EU Cfl 3 O ^ 

"ET = K 3 =- 


3? 
003 
5 

S o I 
Ipa 

fl> D- 

H: 


33 > 

s?; s 

iS-prS- ( 
(Ts o a - 

S S 3 o 
o ^* cr 

* 2T r* W >d 

*-i O 


?4 

Il^fl |f| 

ST O^ => cr 

s" E 


i*^ 


" 3 8 S- 


b! 


^ 


a' o 





; 'W-v-^ 


JO ; ; 


"F 3 


>lv*< 


o 




QJ 


i 




. . 


OS (O to > *- t Co t i 


5 




W *- ^- O> it 

*!!. - 


PI 


B* 4M* 


^\ Oi tO tO 

o to oo 
PI 


to *o to to 


w o to oo 


a 

E 


3">| ~ o 5- 

B B 1 B ft> c Cfl ^ 

" C- 1 "* 3 * w 


^ 'l = 


spf r f| t 


f? : rs E 


o 
w 


p ^ 

fxSags-'S = 


O 1 5" 

HH " n 


S-." ^,3 I g 

W *~* [a CT* J; 

q n -i c. s 


W ' 

-> >> O^< ET 
-ir a o a a. 

S" 3 gl" 
^ -5 1 g. B 


9 
O 

o 


S" 1 M"* ^ ^ S "^ 




c *" h C- 


^H 3 |g> g 


c 


5''-f>f & 


P ^"f 


1 s"?- s " r 


O ^ EJ ^ 


o 

P5 




>^x c 


2. V3 








pi N& rt 








3 <$ .- | 
H H W = 

3 a.2. a 

^ *~* O 3 ** 


> d^a 

^j C n> 

B I" 


1 I'I K 

w * 3 JS 
5? ?r' 5' 


S 2 "B w 

3 S ? S 

fS w 


SO 




a 




O fcC 


^ 


f 12 S^JT 
- o e B 5 


^^ f* 

w g 

v_x -O 


!T S" 
o- 


6> i= 


JB 


e o si a 


&' 


*3 


c- :r: 


O" 


OT OM 03 
-O <" 


H 

F 


1 


O 
u 


a 


I *i P 




T* 


1 


Cx 


n d. 




C/5 






S* 




*i" 


6? 




3 | 

W Prf 




.^ 


y 




S 3 " S^ ?? g 3 ^?^ 
? l 5 i-tl S|| 
S. ? B7 l|i. 

g. 3 fi r Is-I 
a 6-q f a 5 

O ) 


^ajpB O 

lla.fi 

3 S 3.8 

o . .n> 

H PT^ 


ll II 

DW NJ 

B 


i 

a. CL3 3 w 

" ~>x 


H 

1 


s ? 


": 5" 





3 i.2 _. 


^ 


Ps ? 


t WvW 


o* 

o 


.: = FS 
Fl : : < ^ 


i. 


10 U>(O U 4& M CotOOOI-0 


* O-i *^-* 


tOW jj-- 


w K> w - - o, w 


5 
o 








#*** 


B 


it" i.- Co Co to O ^- ^_ 


O 


i-o to to to 


O *^5 V' it> (O OO 




*H H|>.M>.H-< M-l^-fM^! 


2V 


M- 


M^^H HH^HWwW-J 


B 


act- 1 g=^r 


fe 


{s a 


g=S-0 D > 




l| 1 4 |f 

ft 5 S "5 


O m 
= H 


r'-s] 

Gftjw 
500 


K 3 o c:' > 
g-- c. 3-g'cn 

f? 1" | 


B^ 

3 
o 


^B S' S f^?M' 
o B 5' o " 


CKJ to 
. 


o " < 
S ? 


- I V! 




"5" 5r * X-^S- 
J \ " O <f en !_, 

1 ' P'fi'Sil 


w- o 

C3 

K ffi 


0.*M 

-i 

o Mo 

^ JO 5) 
( 

t_3 


i i " 
g vg> -,-;$ 

I- f ,|i ; ga 

= O =f 3 
^ cr -S ^ 


S 
3 

1 




w . 




CC D- w . 


H 


v 5j C * ft rt 


2 


Ol 


g S-' ' 1-1 


W 


WH: o * tc*-y 

"i 1 1 in 

(SO O O 1 -! 

"1 a ? 


1 $ 

Q. ^ 

JS 


^ 
3 
D- 
ft 

- 3 P 

PI ? 


S O J* >il 

| *:.,. J 

r 2 .0 S 
O 

a r i 

& . 1 


TBURY. 


P 3 : 




^ V 


5* 




kO 3 * 




' ^ 


"a ^ 


.'*-* 

23 


H 2 




S 


8 HJ 





H IS 



5" T 



O 

en 
en 



I 



w 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



48-3 





1 1 




- A S c 
9 -2 o 


0> 

J* 

u 




^ 




c 9 = el 


*;^ 




| o 




>< ^H j 

I j 


"E 

c5 




3 




c rt S c - ^ 


s 




Q W 










-2 H 


xs 


o e . > 
c ^ ^r" a ^ tj 






as * 


o 
t. 


. . x*s '**'- ig 

tf I sr|i 2 | 






r* ^H 


(d 








" ^ 


d- Q i 


J +* , 53 S* on ^ u 1 > r^ i " J 






5 

i4 ^ 
J 
8, | 


1 f 2 1 

n "^ JP ^ cr 
- o* Sfci 1 (3 * 
o > en I P - t 

J | -c Z oTS" 


*sM "rt S W5 c f~ " 
Ej=^3 > y^= - ^ S " E =" 

^73" ^wU^ -2a; S i 035 

2^3 J S ^.S^ 
?- rtSt- ^ ^ 2 aT-^ 
- o s * O ^ ^ CaT M'IO 

was -=3S^O . H "S 2-5 
" .-." "-; -a s - JH- sr; 






*C -a 

111 




^| lrTTc-5 a ,-" =^- : S 






orr . 


1.- -S 17 ? ^H >i< ;r C l'< 
1 i ^' o ^ ft f ' , 

= o 5 C E- td S.cj 


" i" 1 1 i ? > 1 C .= ^ '. i | "Si '. 

^| 5 U= Tjj2s g - S|a 








^ (^ ^ hS GO O Ztd C - 








_| 


^ V 












S 






2* 4* 


"TOt^OoS 1 St*3f ffo'cN'5? ^(.^ lo'ST^f? 


I'l^OCNOO tJ ^ri^OOOl . 


P 







Wrt 


o n ^ 






H 


^-(^^^.-W H*-|N K(N-| S H - 


HK-( M* * rt* -t -.1-W H 


H 




! " 


ei ... 


^_, 






: 01 

c : 3 


: . : c I!::::: S 2 


: | 1 w o | : : : :J 







5 O 




:ea ^ * : : : : : g 




ONTINUEt 


Cambridge . 
Billowbridge 


So : : : ^ M "j=- 3 t 

^-S ^ = :T= -Ss^^i 
>> o <2 ' = 2 * "5 2 Jte ^2 . . t 

^--gi|5^g.^2 2*11^8 

v ^s^ giijj s.| ^-i|- .l 


I 9 *" coio S 'a 
Zfc.i.c3M M H UZr-^O S3 Or 




u 




"a ^ S 


fc 




> 

Ed 

Z 


/*^ 


i 5- 

1 -OB ' 


Id -S 
^ | J 




as 
^ 
o 


Cd 

v^ 


33 ^-3 3 
. S- 1 a 


S * 

H .4 

a. P* 






03 




S f- 






LOUCESTE 

v: - A _ 


= .=' . . M eg 5 

cfr J j IJ ^ = 

^ i; " y ? ^ It "l fa 
3|| J J l| || A |K f 


j? "^ & & ^ * * 

"^ 2 1 ^ | S ^ g 

S3 ^T co - 1 

: . z I s o 






O 


3-i^- 3 fc - ?^S- ^CS 


*~* * j ^ LJ ^ 






41 


3^*^ 5 = 'E+r i g^-2QS 








53 2 

-; 


lif 1 S :-lS t ? 


*5J S a '^S'^-'J'c: *- -^ U 

a "i > rrf u 
r^bju ^"cc^^ j^ 






b> 

a 

2 J 


: S Ji ln-2 SJJ T 
!W . -" =: -= "= eu. s 

= I* B S" 1 1 H | I "f 


| ^ s i"^">^ -I J 






w J 


:;j=a ^ J <^ < u^a 


J^ OT - O^W-2 < < 










U ^ y ^^ 






*H 


^l 1 tOWOiOW--!''-'^ t^ DO "fO^f tOt>. O 


c-t 3> V" *.*> 31 n >n ^> ** O 'O Oi 






ja 


_ 1N(N! 0)CN O 








O M 


^ MJ -H - -M 


r5 ^^ ^^ O > ^ r^-^Hf 






Z 


1C^ Ol ' C* t^ < CO < - C 1 * 


o'o y M ^ ^r *o o t7 ^ " ' "* * 






o 

t/5 


i i r 


5 /^w^ : : ^-w--* : : rr : 






tn 

O e 
1 


o y, ; 

i ** GO r J^ 

_ "* ^ CjJ e 


W ^^ l fc 5>J g fl: 










_ T; W 2n ti~2 fc-^ ^- -r '? 






vo i* 




S3 ri c?~* 3 . = S E?-^ ^ /-"^- 






( 


' 2 H "- o - " ot:3a CS " 










"5; ~3 oa <J ~S'3 : 3 "" 








P 


3 iJr = !-^ -2 Jl^'l ?-= 


II 1" I1IJ 0^=3 lily 





VOL. II. NO. 80. 



6 o 



480 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 






a 

ill 



o 



ee-2>Ti> w > to *j c -> 

? 






H^-S~* O- 

o 3 = ff ff 5 1 



s 

c 


f 


3 




Oc_ 


Set 
| 










" v 









&J H 2f T 

I f i" 



o 

co ut *,*, g 



I 2. 



>c 
i? 



Pi "8 



g-g! gi- 
ll 2 S? 

e-3 S-f 

2. a _ 



ir 

* 



CO 

ce2 









2 



- 



o W 
I* 

" SO 





(a o 



t" 1 

0. 




5; 

a 



*! 
3 


W 

-0 



Torkiii^ton, S. Pea 
I nil. -Royal Oak. 



M 
JS 



> (O 



S 3 



cr 

o" 



J* 



IS 



rr 





a 

s 



S 





38 

2. 

I ' 


' 



^ 


z 

i; 
^ 

5- 


[ 

> 


K 
d 

7 : 
t 


FSo^ f 

57S S L 



f 

r 


^ 


2H 

M- 

5 S 


2 

rl 

s o 


a 
r 



! 

? 


OP3 

^ia 

L| S. 


Z > 

ijii 

^- i: 


O 

rl 


? 


1 a 






^ 


i 


pi 


- 






r 


o o 


II 




a 
2 


~ r- 


-a < 5 


^ 












S 1 


S 





" ^i P^ 5 






0- 


2 ! 






O 


S-2 O-d 


^ 




J-a g. 























? 






OS 




a 




a 














I: ^ 






: 








S 3 

rt> 


S^^tw 


i 




i i 














* 2 

^ . -~ M - 






i \ 


09 
^^ 








j> 


s 

--v^' 




5 s \ 














H ' 

























w 

CD 
O 

o 
z 

H 



W 



Co (jt OJ to 



is 

o o 



O 

w 



e 
o <_ 






-13 - 



is ?;e 

S0 = g 

s r =-" 



ft 

at- 1 



o 
w 

C/3 

H 
W 

P3 










vffgif - 



Oh * p I > 
a a : 
a ; 

'l 
03 



O 

a 
pi 

"0 

cc 

o 

^ 

5 n . 



? 



[ ( v ^ C , w 

ES. L-~ s 



ft & M 1 .'"' 



^ ^ I -^ = jS 
o .ere 



MI'S 



o O 

s. s 



w . 

I- - 

3- O 
L>2- 

! il 



**? ^ 



BRISTO 



S 

CR ^ 

a - 

o p- en 



*^ 

,-3 
Bo? 



2. 



O 

S 

O 
M 
in 

H 

S 





3 





o 

ff- 

O 
o 






1 



S- 
W S 



C *^ 

5 5 

r* 






5 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



487 



H 

- 



O 
U 

SO 

H 
Z 

d 

S3 

O 





6 
h 


2 




/"V 


t: a 

^> 
'S 


1 







a 

"g 


8 







ET 


^ 















w j: . ^ 







ss 




85 




Ed 


O LJ 


CO . 




H 


= O" S ^ 


^3-S 




t/5 


rt _^ "3 ^J* 


tc ^5 




U 


S ~ c/} 


*lJ 




u 

i 

P< 


<uU ^ 

"8-5 

^3 "- ,1 - 


If 

O 

03 






u 


fcJ O ^ 

.E" * - CQ 


II 




.0 

Q 
1-1 


ml | 


i"s i 






W 


i ^ ^ 


Tfi 

J J 




a 


.H* ^ 






H 


* 2S 2 ea 


0* C 




O 


<M Ci tO "5 


o ro CM 




O 


ij -M 


^ 








W) -g 










sn 






[? CQ 


c 




t^ 


iCQ 5J 


M 




rt 


^ "n bow ^ ^ 


2 c 






c O ^ C -3 iS 


^v t*^ 









fll C/l 1 






* cn 'O C2 u _c Q 
& o tg ^ S a; 
o *i o g g J - 


'e 5 

= u u 






en fflfofaZb 


Oa H 






i 1 








1 " i 








1 J 


^^ 






g w 


W jg 




fc 


H _j J3 1 

| ^ < 


^ 

a 
^ a 


S 


1/5 

cn 

O 

o 
(4 


>, c PS . ^"[5 
W o . c C^ 

ffi . "ti u "^ 
P u '^ ^ u c i 

-1 1 ll^ld 


o CIRENCESTER. 
A road to Cheltenham 

Mrs. Colchester. 
A road to Stow. 

Whitcombe Park, Sir 


S 

J 

H 

| 

JB 

< 


C/3 

W 


a a u"^"'^ 


a i-yj 


u 
jg 

H 


U 




H 




^ 


^ ** (O ? ao ^- 04 ** i> 


CO 




O 


-. -. _ 


g " 5 **' t " 





o 


-"^o. n i"- oTi" " l * ** 


--H--M 










o 


n 


: 


Of | 




pa 


S 










. ^ 









2 fe s 






s _ 


I 






u S 


71 5 " 






S S5 i ; aj 

*s c c v. -- " 

sjill'al 


fill i o. e 

u j -^ _x u t< 


B 
c 




^i^^J 5 S* j S | 


3 c "^ y ^7 s 

_o g.c o^= d^ 


sg 




oaywas^ij ? ps 


OfflSffl^S ^i 


u 



488 



GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 



TABLE OF DISTANCES. 



Th? Names of the respective Ton-ns are on the top and side, and the square where both meet gives the distance. 



Berkeley 


Gloucester 




Distance 








16 

'!{ 


Berkeley 














4J 


Campder 




... . .. 90 








Cheltenham 


8 


2: 


2C 

'< 


Cheltenham 

t , 




94 








Cirenct-ster 


r 




15 

j 


Cirencester 




gg 








-i^ 






Colford 


:( 


11 


29 


37 


Colford . 




124 










i i 


1' 


40 ! 90 


?S 


j 


Great Dean 




113 










, 








Durslcv 


13 


( 


14 


24 


2C 


18 

4.' 


it 
3 


1 Durslc 




108 








Fairford 


5 
28 


31 


27 




8 




Fairfoi 


d 


, 79 








Leclilade 


37 


30 


20 


IS 


4; 


3 


28 


3 


Leclilade 




75 








Marshlield 


,33 
M 


22 


55 


31 


20 


3' 


1 


21 


33 
18 


34 


Marshfie 


d . 


101 








Mincliin Hu'i)i>ton 


13 


39 


20 


10 


25 


I 


5 


21 


Minchin Ha 








Moreton-on-Marsh . 


30 ( 46 


7 


20 


23 


50 


4 


.30 


24 


25 


4S 


' 
33 


Morton o 










9 


2038 


18 


2616 


7 


24 


34 


w 


42|2o 


.3! 


N ewei 








Northleach , 


22 


34 


20 


13 


046 


3. 


2S 


10 


13 


36 


19 


14 


31 


Nor 


thleach 82 








7 


12 


32 


12 


1220 


18 


10 


20 


23 


27 


7 


32 


it 


14 F 








Stanley Leonard 


12 


939 19 

. ' i 


is 


21 


^ 


3 


23 


36 


; ; 


5 


32 


21 


24 7 








Sto\v.oii-the-\Vold 


2637 12 16ll8 


49 


1' 


33 


ft 


7 


4427 


5 


35 


923 


33t Stow-on-the-Wold 81 








10 12 14 16 12 

i 


24 


i 


620 


23 


24 


^ 


3:, 


19 


16 4 


426' Stroud 101 








I9U'3'25IO 


M 


'9 


18 


21 


6 


5 


33J2S 


19 12 


7'28J 8 TVtburv 98 








W26I9 923 


3021 


23 ( 32 3 j;43 


2, 


, 


IS 


->2 16 


> 322 ! ''02' 'IVu-kfiluirv 103 






i 




23 


7:513, 


.'7 


18 


K 


833 


38 18 


16 


44 


27 


3220 


I5~46 18J1S33 Tliornburv 124 










'4 


8|6030I25 


H 





933 


30|l3 


12 


-j 


31 


31 21 


I647!19'l033 o Wickvvar Ill 










733 13 s ''.'() 


3/2S 


2 28 31 '39 21 


3^ 




14 20' 


2713 ; 3126 ! 73940 Winclicombe 94 






:\V,,itoii undiT-lv.lt!!- 


9 74827:21 


ul'3 


<)29'33 14 


7 


tt 


<28ll9 


12 36' 15 929 d' 4 35 \Votton-under- Ktlgi 1 .. 107 
L 2 1 



GENERAL 



* 



489 



HAMPSHIRE. 



GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY. 



TI1S county is bounded on the north by Berk- 
shire ; ou the east by Surrey and Sussex ; on 
the south by the British Channel ; and on the west 
by Dorsetshire and Wiltshire. In length, from 
north to south, it is about 55 miles ; in breadth, 
from east to west, about 40 ; and in circumference 
about 150. In figure, it is nearly square, with a 
triangular projection at the south west angle. Ill 
Driver's Agricultural Survey, drawn up for the 
Board of Agriculture, its superficial contents were 
estimated at 1,812,000 acres; but, according, to the 
returns of 18 II, the number of acres is only 981, 120. 
The limits of Hampshire, on the south side, are the 
numerous creeks and inlets formed by the sea ; on 
the west and east, they are principally artificial^ 
and, on the north, they arc mostly formed by the 
rivers Blackwater and Enborn. The surface of the 
country is beautifully varied with gently rising hills, 
and fruitful vallies, adorned with numerous scats 
and villages, and interspersed with extensive wood- 
lands. In the northern parts, the air is remarkably 
pure; milder and warmer towards the sea-; and 
every where pleasant anil salubrious. 

FORESTS.] An extensive jwrtion of this county 
is occupied by the New Forest, the Forest of Bere, 
and the Forests of Alice Holt, and Wooler. The 
iirst of these tracts, according to its earliest boun- 
daries, included the whole of that part of the county, 
which lies between the Southampton river on the 
east, the British Channel on the south, and the 
Avon on the west. The advantages it derives from 
this situation, in respect to conveniency of water- 
carriage, are superior to those associated with any 
other forest in England; having in its vicinity seve- 
ral places for shipping timber, among which are 
Hymington, Beaulicu, and Ilcdbridgo; with the 
additional advantage of the remotest of these ports 
being little more than thirty miles from the dock- 
yards at Portsmouth. That this was a woody tract, 
previously to its complete aftbivstation by William 

* Its more ancient name was Natanleod, from Hie British 

VOL. II. NO. 70. 



the Conqueror, may be inferred from its ancient 
name, Itene or YThene, as well as from other cir- 
cumstances.* The memory of that sovereign, how- 
ever, is thought, by modern writers, to have been 
unjustly calumniated on account of the formation of 
the New Forest. In Lambarde's Topographical 
Dictionary, this district is described as " A large- 
portion of Hampshire, which, after the opinion of 
the most and best approved historians, William th 
Conqueror laid to Forest, destroying townes, 
villages, and churches, thirty miles longe." Thii 
is an abridgment of the first monkish accounts of 
the formation of the New Forest; accounts followed 
implicitly (but with increasing aggravations) by 
every annalist, and writer of English history, from 
the conclusion of the eleventh century to the begin- 
ning of the last ; at which aera, Voltaire started . 
doubts with respect to the fact of William's devas- 
tations : and Dr. Warton, in his " Essay on the 
Life and Writings of Pope," concurred with Vol- 
taire, as to the Conqueror's character being in thi? 
instance misrepresented, and his oppressions mag- 
nified. 

To whatever extent the afforestation of that 
monarch might be carried, the act itself was not at- 
tended by those circumstances of outrage and viola- 
tion which the monkish writers have so minutely 
.detailed; the devastation of nanny villages, the ex- 
termination of the inhabitants, and the destruction 
of from twenty-two, to sixty churches. In tracts 
of country which, (from their nature,) must have 
been, in ancient times but thinly peopled, places of 
public worship were sparingly scattered ; and on 
church frequently served a very extensive district. 
Such probably was the case ia the New Forest : for 
if these edifices ever existed in such numbers as are 
said to have been destroyed, some remains of them 
would surely have been discovered in subsequent 
periods, and would even now be discoverable. Ou 
the whole, it may be fairly concluded, that William, 

chieftain, \vhowa? here conquered by CerUic, (lie founder of 
the West Saxon Monarchy. 

OH " being 



490 



HAMPSHIRE. 



" being passionately fond of hunting, and wishing 
to extend the scenes of his favourite amusement, 
fixed on this corner of Hampshire as a spot proper 
for his purpose, and accordingly converted a large 
portion of it into forest : but that the afforestation 
was made without much injury to the subject, or 
offence to religion, from the scantiness of its popu- 
lation and the barrenness of its surface." The 
names of many of the places having been changed 
since the time of the Domesday survey, it is difficult 
to ascertain, what were then the limits of the forest. 
The oldest Perambulation extant is dated in the 8th 
of Edward the First. The boundaries therein de- 
scribed, include all the country from Southampton 
river on the east, to the Avon on the west, following 
the sea-coast as the southern boundary between those 
rivers ; and extending northwards, as far as North 
Chardeford, or North Charford, on the west; and 
to Wade and Orebrugge, or Owerbridge, on the 
east. According to the Perambulation of the 22d 
of Charles the Second, the forest extends from Gods- 
hill on the north-west, to the sea on the south-east, 
about twenty miles ; and from Hardley on the east, 
to Ringwood on the west, about fifteen miles ; and 
contains within those limits about 92,365 statute 
acres. " The whole of that quantity, however, is 
not forest laud, or now the property of the crown ; 
there are several manors, and other freehold estates, 
within the Perambulation, belonging to individuals, 
to the amount of about 2 1,707 acres : about 025 of 
these are copyhold, or customary lands, belonging 
to his Majesty's manor of Lyndhurst ; about 1004 
(now reduced to 387, by the falling in of the lease of 
New Park) leasehold, under the crown, granted for 
certain terms of years, and forming part of the de- 
mised land revenue under the management of the 
Surveyor-General of the crown lands ; about 901 
acres are purprestures, or encroachments on the 
forests : about 1193 acres are inclosed lands, held 
by the master -keepers and groom-keepers, with 
their respective lodges : the remainder, being about 
63,845 acres, are the woods and waste-lands of the 
forest." In each species of this property, the crown 
has different rights or interests. In the freeholds, 
it preserves certain rights relative to deer and game. 
The copyholds are subject to certain small quit-rents 
and fines ; and the timber and trees are the property 
of the crown. The estates granted by lease are the 
entire property of the crown ; and in these leases 
the timber is reserved to the crown. The encroacb- 



* By this act, the crown was empowered to inclose six thou- 
sand acres, " to remain in severally in the actual possession of 
the crown for ever, freed and discharged from all manner of 
right, title, and pretence, whatever, and to be called, made, 
and kept, a nursery for wood and timber only." The crown 
was likewise empowered, so soon as the trees, in all or any 
part of such inclosures, should lie past danger of being hurt by 
cattl'' or derr. to throw open the same, and inclose an equal 
quantity in any other part of the forest ; thus keeping six thou- 
sand acres constantly incloied as a nursery for timber. The 
crown has also a right to keep deer on the uninclosed part of 
the forest at all times, without limitation. By this act also, the 



ments, or purpresture?, eonsist chiefly of cottages 
built by poor people, and small parcels of land ad- 
joining. The lands held with the lodges, are the 
entire property of the crown, not subject to right of 
common, or any other claim. The forest lands, 
containing 63,845 acres, are also the property of the 
crown, subject to certain rights of common pas- 
ture, pannage, and fuel, belonging to the proprietors 
of estates within or adjacent to the forest ; which 
rights, and those of the crown, were defined and 
ascertained by the acts 9th and 10 of William III. 
for the increase and preservation of timber in this 
forest.* 

For local purposes, the New Forest is divided 
into nine bailiwicks, which are subdivided into fif- 
teen walks. Its officers are a Lord Warden, Lieu- 
tenant, Riding Forester, Bow-bearer, two Rangers, 
Woodward, Under Woodward, four Verderers, 
High Steward, Under Steward, twelve Regarders, 
nine Foresters, or Master-keepers, being one to 
each bailiwick; and fifteen Under Foresters, or 
Groom-keepers, one to each walk. The Lord War- 
den is appointed by letters patent under the great 
seal during his Majesty's pleasure ; except for the 
bailiwick of Burley, which has been in grant to the 
Bolton family more than a century ; and the walks 
of Bolderwood and Ironshill, of which grants have 
been obtained for the lives of the present Duke, and 
his sister the Princess Sophia of Gloucester. The 
Lord Warden is in the enjoyment of the manor of 
Lyndhurst, and hundred of Redbridge, or New 
Forest Hundred, and the office of keeper of the 
Decoy Ponds, with the herbage and pannage, and 
rents of free tenants : and he has also possession of 
the King's house at Lyndhurst, with an allowance 
of 70/. per annum for repairs ; but that allowance 
has been for many years paid to a person appointed 
by the Lord Warden as house-keeper of the King's 
house, and called the Lord Warden's steward ; and 
the repairs are done at the charge of the crown. The 
emoluments arising to the Lord Warden, amount to 
21 4/. and to his steward 4S/. besides the 70/. be- 
fore mentioned. This steward is also a regarder. 
The Riding Forester is appointed by letters patent 
during his Majesty's pleasure. His office is to ride be- 
fore the King when he goes into the forest. His salary 
is 500/. per annum, with a fee buck and doe yearly. 
The Bow-bearer's duty is to attend the King with 
a bow and arrows, when in the forest. His salary 
is 40s. per annum, with a fee buck and doe yearly, 

rights of all parties were distinctly ascertained, ami no hardship 
or injustice was done to the neighbouring inhabitants, or pro- 
prietors of estates ; for while the bill was depending, a most at- 
tentive enquiiy \vasmadc, not only into the condition of the 
forest generally, but into the rights as well of individuals, as 
into those of the ctown ; the abuses which prevailed, and the 
means of remedying tliem ; with which view different commis- 
sions of enquiry w-ere i>sued to men of knowledge and consi- 
deration, to which full and distinct answers were returned : and 
it was not until after the fullest investigation on behalf of those 
who had claims on the forest, that the act was passed. 

The 



HAMPSHIRE. 



491 



The office of the Rangers is, to drive the deer, 
which stray into the purlieus, back again into the 
forest. The salary is 2/. 13s. id. per annum, and 
4/. per annum, in lieu of wood formerly allowed ; 
and one fee buck and doe yearly to each Ranker. 
The Woodward (appointed by letters patent from 
his Majesty, during pleasure) has 200/. per annum, 
for himself, besides the salary of the deputy : and 
he also receives perquisites arising from the bark of 
timber assigned for repairs to the tenants of Lynd- 
hurst manor, amounting to about 10/. per annum.* 
The Verderers, who arc the Judges of the Swant- 
mote and Attachment Courts, are chosen by the 
freeholders of the county, by virtue of the King's 
writ. They have neither salary, nor perquisite, 
besides a fee buck and fee doe yearly. The High 
Steward has no salary or perquisites, except an old 
annual fee of five guineas, paid by the Lord War- 
den. This office may be considered as a sinecure. 
The Under Steward's duty is to attend at, and en- 
rol the proceedings of, the Courts of Attachment 
and Swanimote. He also holds the court-leet for 
Redbridge (or New Forest) hundred, and the courts 
baron for the manor of Lyndhurst. His emolu- 
ments depend upon fees arising from the business 
of the Courts, paid by individuals. The. Regard - 
ers, chosen by the freeholders of the county, attend 
the marking of all trees to be felled ; value the tim- 
ber for sale, and attend the sales. They receive a 
fee of 2s. Qd. per day, when on actual duty, which 
(varying in proportion to attendance) amounts to 
about Hi/, per annum. The Master Keepers, and 
Groom Keepers' duty is to preserve the vert and 
venison in their respective bailiwicks and walks. 
The former have no salary or perquisites, except a 
fee buck and doe each annually. The salary and 
perquisites of the Under Keepers, which arose 
chiefly from deer, bronze-wood, rabbits, and swine, 
formerly amounted to from 100/. to 170/. a year; 
but they hare been materially diminished by the 
bronzing having been, abolished by law. Besides 
these officers, there are two others : the Purveyor 
of the Navy, acting for this Forest, and the Sur- 
veyor-General of the Woods and Forests. The 
former is paid as an officer of the dock-yard, and 
has no salary nor emolument from the Forest, ex- 
cept eight loads of fuel-wood yearly, worth about 
4l. The Surveyor-General appoints a deputy, 
whose office is to execute all warrants for felling 
timber for the navy, or for sale of wood and timber, 
or executing any other works in the Forest. The 
emoluments of the principal were, according to the 
reports of the commissioners, in 1789, I/. 8s. Od. 
per day (Sundays excepted) for attendance and 

* The office of Woodward, is wholly executed by the de- 
puty, whose only duty has been to attend on the assigning of 
wood for fuel, to direct the digging of the moor wood, (or 
roots of trees,) and to dispose of il, anil take charge of windfall 
tree', and other trees or wood casually thrown clown in the 
For-t. Such of those trees as are lit Cor the navy, are deliver- 
ed to the purveyor, to be sent to the dock-yard ; and navy 



travelling cxpenoes, during the execution of any 
work in the Forest ; and five per cent, on all mo- 
nies received by him, on the amount of all estimates 
for buildings, repairs, &c. in the Forest; and on 
the amount of the sales of timber, wood, and bark ; 
together with 2s. per tree, as chip money for all 
naval trees. But these are since abolished, as well 
in this Forest as in all others ; and he has now a 
salary of 3000/. a year in lieu of the whole. The 
Surveyor-General's deputy in this Forest, has a sa- 
lary of 50/. per annum, and takes, as perquisites, 
the old posts, pales, and rails, left on repairing the 
fences ; five shillings a year, from each of the 
Regarders ; and one shilling per lot, for every lot 
of timber, wood, and bark, sold in the Forest, 
which is paid by the purchasers. 

Previously to the investigation, by the Parlia- 
mentary commissioners, in the year 1789, the most 
scandalous abuses had prevailed in the neglect and 
destruction ot the timber. If the powers vested in 
the crown, by the acts of 9th and 10th William the 
Third, had been duly exercised, 30,000 acres of 
land, formerly bare, might now have been covered 
with trees from 100 years of age downward, in ad- 
dition to the former woodlands in the Forest. But, 
unfortunately, in a very few years after passing that 
act, the care formerly bestowed on the If orests, was 
discontinued ; the superintendance of the Surveyor- 
General of the crown lands ceased ; and the whole 
fell, by degrees, under the sole direction of a Sur- 
veyor-General of the Woods, a single officer, under 
no effectual check or controul, receiving no official 
books nor records, from bis predecessors, uor obliged 
to leave any to those who succeeded him ; so that no 
regular system of management could have been ex- 
pected or practised ; each new Surveyor entered on 
his office without direction or precedent, and adopt- 
ed such new plan as suited his fancy or convenience. 
These, and various other abuses have been, in a great 
measure, remedied. In this Forest, the quantity of 
timber actually delivered for naval purposes, from 
the year 1761 to 1786, was 23,000 loads of oak, 
and 7003 loads of beech : the average quantity, 
therefore, must be about 885 loads of oak, and 270 
loads of beech. The number of deer killed, tui- 
nually, is about 76 brace of bucks, and 17 brace of 
does ; a few of which are sent to bis Majesty's larder, 
and the great officers of the crown ; the remainder are 
distributed, in fees, to the forest officers, and to the 
proprietors of neighbouring estates, by way of com - 
pensatioit for the damage sustained by them from the 
deer trespassing on their lands. The encroach- 
ments made on the Forest, are always on its out- 
skirts, or contiguous to some hamlet, where a hut 



bills for the value, are issued to the High Woodward: the rest 
are valued by the Regarders, and sold by the Deputy Wood- 
ward, who accounts to the High Woodward, who is account- 
able for the whole to the Crown. The Deputy Woodward, 
besides a salary of 501. has perquisites to the amount of about 
131. I'.'s. Od. and an assignment of four loads of fuel wood. 

cam 



492 



HAMPSHIRE. 



can be raised, and a patch of ground inclosed for a 
garden, without any, or but little observation. 
These inclosures are frequently thrown down by the 
Under-Keepers ; but, to remove a house, of which 
possession has been taken, requires a legal process ; 
and the trespasser is, therefore, extremely assiduous 
in rearing his cottage, and getting into it. " I have 
known," says Mr. Gilpin, " all the materials of one 
of these habitations brought together the house 
built covered in the goods removed a fire kin- 
dled, and the family in possession, in the course of 
a moonlight night." Many of these little tene- 
ments have been so long occupied, and have 
passed through so many families, that they are 
now effectually secured as private property. The 
scenery of the New Forest abounds in beautiful 
landscape. The inhabitants are chiefly poachers 
of the most systematic .and destructive class. " Its 
woody scenes," observes Gilpin, " its extended 
lawns, and vast sweeps of wild country, unlimited 
by artificial boundaries, together with its river 
Tiews, and distant coasts, are all, in a great de- 
gree, magnificent. It must still, however, be re- 
membered, that its chief characteristic, and what 
it rests on for distinction, is not -sublimity, but syl- 
van beauty. Its lawns and woods are every where 
divided by large districts of heath : many of these 
woods have formerly been, as many of the heaths 
at present are, of vast extent ; running several 
miles, without interruption. Different parts too, 
both of the open and of the woody country, are so 
high as to command extensive distances ; though 
no part can, in any degree, assume the title of 
mountainous." Besides heath, lawn, and wood, 
there are, in some parts, extensive bogs ; the most 
^jonsiiderable of these is at the place called Long- 
sladc Bottom, in the road between Brokenhurst 
and Ringwood ; it extends about three miles, and 



* The Cadenham oak, so called, from Us being situated 
near the village of that name, is regarded as one of the curiosi- 
ties of the New Forest, it having long been famous for its pre- 
mature vegetation, its buds appearing every year, in the depth 
of winter. The tree stands at a short distance from the road, 
near a small inclostire ; and, in summer, has nothing to distin- 
guish it from the surrounding oaks. Alter the buds have un- 
folded themselves, they make no further progress, as the leaves 
immediately shrink from the season, and die. During the 
remainder of the winter, the tree continues torpid, but again 
vegetates at the usual season. The unusually early germination 
of this tree, like that of the Glastonbury thorn, is, by the su- 
perstition of the foresters, attributed to the influence of old 
Christmas day ; and indeed it has been ascertained, that in 
some years, the leaves have not appeared till the morning of 
that day: it is, however, equally clear, that they have been 
known to shoot forth, both earlier and later, according to the 
mildness and rigour of the season. Other oaks, in this Forest, 
have the same property of earlj germination ; asthe Cadenham 
tree is in so much repute, and resorted to annually by so many 
visitants, that it could not easily supply them all, without some 
foreign contribution 5 . The species of oak that has this pro- 
perty, is most probably the Quercus semperviren'. Another 
celebrated oak of this Forest, noted, also, for its premature 
vegetation, was formerly standing at Canterton, near Stony 



is the common receptacle of all the springs that rise 
in its vicinity. 

The roost interesting part of the Forest, in a 
picturesque point of view, is that confined between 
the Beaulieu river, and the bay of Southampton : 
the water views are very grand ; and the banks 
both of the river and the bay, being richly decorat- 
ed with woody scenery, give them a peculiarly 
beautiful character. In noble distances, and what 
may be more appropriately termed, grand forest 
scenes, tho northern division of this tract is the 
most striking. 

The horses of the New Forest, arc, in general, 
private property ; hut there is a diminutive breed, 
which exists in a wild state. Some times they are 
hunted down by horsemen, who relieve each other ; 
and, at other times, caught with a rope and a 
noose. In the more desolate parts of the Forest, 
there is a kind of wild hog, very different from the 
usual Hampshire breed, and has very many of the 
distinguishing characteristics of the wild boar. 
Asses and mules are also bred, in great numbers, 
in this Forest. 

Gilpin mentions the oaks of the New Forest, as 
having a character peculiar to themselves. They 
seldom rise into lofty stems, he observes, as oaks 
usually do in richer soils ; but their branches, which 
are more adapted to what the ship-builders call 
knees and elbows, are commonly twisted into the 
most picturesque forms. This peculiarity is sup- 
posed to arise from the roots having to pierce 
through a rocky stratum, or hard gravelly bed : 
which obliging them to take a zig-zag course, occa- 
sions their branches to assume a kind of corres- 
pondent direction. Many of these oaks are very 
ancient, and of great bulk.* 

Tlie Forest of Bcre extends northward from the 
Portsdown Hills, and, according to the perambu- 
lation 



Cross, a little to the north of Castle MaKvood, and traditionally 
said to be the very tree against which the arrow glanced that 
was shot by Tyrrel, and caused the death of William Rufus. 
This tree had become so decayed and mutilated, about 70 
vears ago, that the late Lord Delawar, to preserve the remem- 
brance of the spot, had a triangular stone erected, about five 
feet high, a;iid inscribed thus on the respective sides: 

" Here stood the oak tree, on which an arrow, shot 
bv Sir Walter Tyrrel, at a slag, glanced, and struck 
King William the Second, surnamed Uufus, on the 
breast, of which he instantly died, on the second day 
of August, anno. 1100." 



" King William the Second, suraamed Rufus, being 
slain as before related, was laid in a cart belonging to 
one Purkiss, and drawn from hence to Winchester, 
and buried in the Cathedral Church of that city." 

" Anno. 1745. 

" That where an event so memorable had happened, 
might not be hereafter unknown, this stone was set up, 
by John, Lord Delawar, who had seen the tree grow- 
ing in this place." 



The 



HAMPSHIRE. 



493 



tion made in 1688, and now considered as the 
boundary, it includes about 10,000 acres, of which 
one-third are inclosed. This Forest is divided I 
into two walks, respectively named East and West, | 
to each of which are annexed several smaller divi- 
sions, called purlieus, though not properly so, as i 
all of them are subject to the Forest laws. From a ; 
survey of the timber, in this Forest, in the year 
1783, it appears that the quantity then growing, ' 
was only a 28th part of what was standing in the 
year 1608; and" from the many encroachments 
made in modern times, its boundaries were conti- 
nually decreasing. It contains about 200 head of 
deer, from which about seven brace of bucks are 
annually killed. The officers of this Forest are, a 
Warden, four Verderers, two Master Keepers, two 
under Keepers, a Ranger, a Steward of the Swan- 
imote Court, twelve Regarders, and two Agistors. ! 
The Forest of Alice Holt and Woolmer, situated j 
on the borders of Surrey and Sussex, is separated j 
into two portions, by intervening private property : ; 
its limits comprehend about 15,493 acres ; 8094 of ; 
which belong to the crown. On a survey made of i 
the timber of this Forest, in the year 1608, 1301 
oak trees were returned as fit for the use of the 
navy ; and 23,034 loads, as defective : this quan- 
tity has since greatly decreased ; and, in 1783, 
the sound and defective wood together, amounted 
to only 15,142 loads; and those were of trees 
mostly of one age, that is from 100 to 120 years, 
without any having been planted to succeed them, i 
In the division called Alice Holt, which contains 
about 2744 acres of crown lands, the growing tim- 
ber was, ten or twelve years ago, estimated at 
60,000/. 

RIVERS.] The Anton, Avon, Boldre Water, 
Exe, Itchin, and Tese, or Test, are the principal 
rivers of this county. In the north-west parts, 
however, several smaller streams arise. 

The Anton has its origin in the north-west angle 
of the county, and, flowing through part of Ando- 
ver, has its stream increased by the Tilhill brook, 



The descendants of Purkiss, we are told, and of the same 
'name, now live close to the spot, in a neat cottage ; and, ac- 
cording to the tradition of the country, have never been suf- 
ficiently rich to keep a complete team, nor poor enough to 
apply for parish relief, since the event thus commemorated. 
The real circumstances, however, attending the death of Rufus, 
.ire involved in some obscurity; as some of our early histo- 
rians say not a word of any tree being accessary to his fall. 
Eadmer says only, that he was shot through the heart : Symeon 
Dunelmensis, and Hoveden, say, by an arrow, incautiously 
directed. Matthew Paris is the first who affirms, that the 
King's heart was pierced by an arrow obliquely glancing from 
a tree. Alanus de Insulis is quoted, by Baxter, to prove that 
Tynel was cnqaged to shoot Rultis, by Anselm, the Pope's 
legate, and the deed itself is extolled by Alanus, who, in the 
jeign of Henry the First, was promoted to the divinity chair 
at Paris, a* pnlchcriuin racinus. The spot where Rufus fell, is, 
by LHand, called Thorougham ; but no place of that name, 
is remembered. Gilpin imagines it might be what is now called 
Frotham, which is at no great distance. 

VOL. II. NO. 80. 



and afterwards runs into the Tese, about one mile 
below Whirwell. 

The Avon enters Hampshire from Wiltshire, and 
meandering, in several channels, near the western 
edge of the New Forest, is much increased by dif- 
ferent rivulets. Passing Fordingbridge and Ring- 
wood, it flows through a less interesting sandy level, 
towards Christ Church, below which it receives the 
waters of the Stour from Dorsetshire, and conveys 
them, with it, to the sea, in Christ Church Bay. 

The Boldre water originates in various springs, 
which rise in the New Fovest, and mostly unite 
above Brokenhurst ; whence they, in a single 
stream, pass Boldre, and Lymington, to the ocean. 

The Exe also rises in the New Forest, begins to 
widen near Beaulieu, and opens in a broad estuary 
to the sea below Exbury. 

The Itchin rises in the vicinity of Alresford, near 
the middle of Hampshire, and being soon increased 
by the Alnc, flows westward, to King's Worthy. 
There it suddenly turns to the south, passes Win- 
chester, and the Hospital of St. Cross : gliding 
through fertile meadows, it flows by Twyford, and 
passing Bishopstoke, unites its stream with the 
Southampton water, into which it falls about half 
a mile eastward from the town. 

The Tese rises in the neighbourhood of Whit- 
church ; after its junction with the Anton, it as- 
sumes a southerly course ; and passing Stockbridge 
and Romsey, it receives several small rills from the 
New Forest, near Redbridge ; below which it opens, 
and forms the head of the Southampton water : this 
is properly an arm of the sea, extending from above 
Southampton to Calshot Castle. It is exceedingly 
picturesque, from its woody and irregular banks. 
Near Hamble, it is joined by the river of that 
name ; which, swelling from an inconsiderable 
stream, into a broad estuary, descends into it from 
the interior of the county. 

PLANTS.] The remarkable plants of this county, 
arc not very considerable in number ; those most 
entitled to attention, are given in the note below.* 



* sigaricusjimetarius. Egg Agaric ; between Rood Lane 
and Somerset Bridge, Portsmouth. 

Alisma ranuncul*ide. Lesser Water Plantain, in a bog near 
Lindhurtt, in the New Forest. 

Alspecarus aristutus. Monspeliensis. Bearded Fox Tail 
Grass; in the moist pastures of this county, 
near the salt works, and an ancient house, 
called Drayton, about two miles from Ports- 
mouth, over again;t the Isle of Wight. 

Atpltnium scolopeiidrhun. Hart's Tongue; a variety with 
divided leaves, in a lane near Swandmg. 

Asperula cynunchica. Squinancy Wort; in chalky places. 

Asplenium adiantum nigrum. Black Maiden Hair; in hedges 
about Lymington. 

scolopendrium. Hail's Tongue, in hedges in the 

Isle of Wight. 

Atriplcx liltora.Ua. /3. A variety of Grass-leaved Orach ; at 
Portsmouth, and on the shore, near Netley 
Abbey. 



i 



MlNFJULS, 



-194 



HAMPSHIRE. 



MINERALS AND FOSSILS.] The few productions 
ef ' this nature, which Hampshire affords, are prin- 
cipally confined to the cliff's on the coast, in the 
neighbourhood of Lynrington, Hordwell, Christ- 
church, &c. The cliffs near Hordwell are upwards 
of 100 feet high, and abound with large nodules of 

Jtropa belladonna. Deadly Nightshade, orDwale; in Up 
Park. 

Bromui ereclus li. arrcnsis. ' Corn Brome Grass ; at South- 
ampton, amongst corn. 

Carduvt crinphorut. Woolly-Headed Thistle; by the road 
side, near Overlon. 

pratmsis. Meadow Thistle ; on a boggy soil, near 

Setley, in the New Forest. 

Cnucalis latifolia. Purple-flowered Great Bastard Parsley ; 
about Crux Easton. 

Chlora pcrfoliata. Yellow Centaury; by the road side, be- 
tween St. Lawrence and Shanklin, in the Isle 
of Wight. 

Cineraria Alpina. Mountain Rag Wort ; near Basingstoke 
and Andover. 

Ct>nferi'a.pellucida. Transparent Conferva ; ? on submarine 

muttifida. Tufted Conferva ; ) rocksandstones. 

Conuulluria tuultijtoria. Solomon's Seal; in the woods near 
liramdean and Popham Lane. 

Daphne mezcrium. Spurge Olive ; in the woods near Ando- 
ver, plentifully. 

Drosera anglica. Great Sun Dew ; on boggy ground. 

longifolia. Long-leaved Sun Dew ;),. t L 

- rotundifolia. RSund- leaved Sun TN^Forest. 

Frankenia l&tis. Smooth Sea Heath ; near Portsmouth. 
Fucus Abrotanijolius, Jointed Fucus ; 

albidus. White Fucus ; 

bijidus. Bifid Fucus ; 

camiliculatus. Furrowed Fucus; 

* confervoides. Rough Fucus; 

temussimus ; (Withering) on the coast near < 

Christchurch 

crispatus. Branched Laver ; 

Jlbrosus. Fennel-leaved Fucus , 

multijidus. Multifid Fucus ; 

oralis. Ovate Fucus; 

(folium Spurium. Goose Grass, with smoother seeds ; at 

Liphook. 
Gentiana amarella. Autumnal Gentian ; on a hill between 

Carisbrook and Yarmouth. 

Jiliformis. Marsh Centaury ; in marshes. 

Hermann glabra. Smooth Rupture Wort; near Portsmouth. 
Hippwii viilgarit. Mare's Tail ; in a brook, near Basing- 
stoke. 
If'jpuricum cloidcs. Marsh St. Peter's Wort ; on bogs in the 

New Forest. 
Inula erithmoides. Golden Sampire ; in a marsh, near Hurst 

Castle. 
Iris fatidisslma. Stinking Gladwin ; near the shore between 

St. Lawrence and Slecphill, in the Isle of 

Wight. 

Ltaatera arborea. Tree Mallow : at Hurst Castle. 
Lichen pUcatits. Common Hairy Liverwort, in Woodcot 

Wood. 
Lichen uncialis. Perforated Lichen ; on the heath between 

Liphook and Petersfield. 
I.ycnperdon tuber. Solid Pull Balls, or Truffles ; on the 

Downs. 
J ,'simachiu memoruni. Yellow Pinipernell of the woods; 

in the Forest, between Otterborne and South- 
ampton. 

Afelittis melissnphylum. Bastard Balm ; in the New Forest. 
.Mentha rotundijolia. Round-leaved Mint ; by tlie wood side, 

near A 'ion. 



on the 
Coast. 



iron ore, and pebbles, or flints ; many of which con- 
tain fossil shells, or their impressions, of various 
and scarce species. Several specimens were de- 
posited in the British Museum, by the late Gustavus 
Brander, Esq. author of the Fossilia Hantoniensia. 
SOIL, AGRICULTURE, &c.] In this county, the 



Mercurialii arunca. French Mercury ; at Winchester, also 
on the beach near Ryde, in the Isle of Wight. 

Myrica gale. Goule, or Sweet Willow ; in moist places in 
the New Forest, between Blackwater and Bag- 
shot, near the 29th mile stone. 

Narthecium. ossifragum. Lancashire Asphodel ; in bogs near 
Setley, and on Stoney Cross, in the New 
Forest, 

Oenanthe crocata. Hemlock Drop-wort ; in the Isle of 
Wight. 

Orchis abortiva. Purple Bird's Nest ; found in the border of 
a field called Marborn, near Habridge, in Ha- 
liborn, a mile from Alton. 

bifolia. Butterfly Orchis ; on Stoney Cross, in the 

Isle of Wight. 

canopsea. Red-Handed Orchis ; on the banks of 
Carisbrook Castle, and elsewhere in the Isle 
of Wight. 

- pyramidally. Purple late-flowering Orchis ; by the 
road side, between St. Lawrence, and Shank* 
Jin, in the Isle of Wight. 

Orobanche ramosa. Branched Broom Rope ; in corn fields, 
and dry pastures. 

Osmunda regalis. Osmund Royal ; in a bog in the New Fo- 
rest, near Setley. 

J'hi/teuwa orbicutaris. Horned Rampions, with a round head 
or spike of flowers ; in the inclosed chalky 
hilly grounds, by Mapledurham, near Peters- 
field, and on the Downs. 

Pingtticula. villosa. Cornwall Butter Wort ; in marshes. 

Poa Coliacea. Spiked Meadow Grass ; on a wall on the sea 
shore, at Yarmouth, in the Isle of Wight. 

Polypodium thelypteris. Marsh Fern ; in, a very wet bog, 
called White Row Moor, where peat is dug 
up, a mile from Petersfield. 

Pulmonaria officinalis. Bugloss Cowslips, or sage of Jerusa- 
lem; in a wood by Holbury House, in the 
New Foist. 

Roseda lutea. Base Rocket ; between Alton and Cheriton. 

Sambiicus ebulus. Dwarf Elder, or Dane Wort ; near Caris- 
brook Castle, in the Isle of Wight, and near 
Hnusborn. 

Schtinus albus. White-flowered Rush Grass ; in marshes. 

Scripus hnloschcemts. Round-Headed Bulrush. 

Sedrum Anglicium. English Seclum ; on a bank by the road 
side, between Southampton and Hedbridge, 
near the water. 

Splachnum auipullticium, Common Splachnum ; about Itchia 
Ferry, near Southampton. 

Smiphytum pate ns. (Sipthorp.) In Netley Abbey. 

Theiium lynophyllum. Bastard Toad Flax ; at Basingstoke. 

Trifoiium arvense, $. A variety of Hare's Foot Trefoil ; at 
South Sea Castle. 

Tvrrutis hirsuta. Hairy Tower Mustard ; in a chalk pit, near 
Popham L;me. 

Ulra Capillaris. Capillary leaver ; near Christ Church. 

Jitiformis. Filiform Laver ; near Christ Church. 

purpuraiccns. Purplish Laver; near Christ Church. 
- rubra. Red Laver; near Christ Church. 

faceinium myrtiUus. Bilberry ; on Stoney Cross, near Ru-. 
fns's Stone, in the New Forest. 

Viola palustris. Marsh Violet ; on bogs oa llifi heath, near 
Blackwater. 

Zanthium slrumarium. Lesser Burdock ; three miles from 
Portsmouth, in the road to London. 

soil 



HAMPSHIRE. 



soil is much diversified ; but the greatest proportion 
is tending 1 to chalk : and a ridge of chalk hills, or 
downs, may be traced across the county, in the 
parallel of Winchester. On the nortli side, border- 
ing on Berkshire, the soil is deep, and very produc- 
tive : here, great quantities of corn are annually 
grown, and the elm and oak flourish greatly. On 
the hills towards Basingstoke, the land is in gene- 
ral deep, and strong, with chalk beneath : round 
Whitchurch it is less deep, and chalky, but pro- 
duces good crops of corn and saintfoin. From 
Overtoil towards Stockbridge, and thence to Red- 
bridge, a beautiful vale extends, divided into well- 
watered meadows, and producing from two to three 
loads of hay per acre. The land round Andover is 
high, and down-like ; but the soil, though thin, is 
favourable to the growth of barley ; towards Rom- 
sey, it is still more fertile; and the land is well cul- 
tivated, and interspersed with woods, and fine hedge 
row timber. South and south-west of Romsey, the 
country is principally occupied by the New Forest ; 
though very large open tracts still remain. The 
soil of the New Forest is chiefly loam and gravel. 
The vicinity of Redbridge is distinguished by valua- 
ble salt marshes. Eastward of Alton, and border- 
ing on Surrey, the lands are chiefly appropriated to 
the growth of hops, the plantations of which have 
been greatly increased of late years. The hop 
grounds are supposed to occupy about 800 acres : 
the produce varies considerably, but on an average, 
may be estimated at about five cwt. per acre. To- 
wards Petersfield the land is more open, with a con- 
siderable quantity of down ; approaching Ports- 
mouth, it is more inclosed, and interspersed with 
timber and underwood. Round Farehara and 
Warnford, the hills are chalky, and partly covered 
with beech wood : here are also extensive downs. 
The rotation of crops, on the more rich or lowlands, 
is generally wheat, -turnips, Barley with seeds, and 
mowed ; the average produce is from thirty to thirty- 
two bushels an acre : on the high grounds, the 
average produce of wheat is about sixteen bushels 
per acre ; of barley, twenty-two .bushels ; and of 
oats, twenty-four bushels. Peas, rye grass, trefoil, 
Raiuttbin, white and red clover, are also much culti- 
vated. The principal manures, are peat ashes, 
chalk, or lime, marie, and sea-weed. The system 
of drill husbandry is but little practised. The 
plough, on the heavy lands, is mostly drawn by 
tour horses ; light ploughing is performed by a 
single- wheeled plough, and two or three horses. 

WATER MEADOWS.] Hampshire is famous for 
water meadows ; which are extremely productive, 
and, in general, well attended to. The farmers 
are, in many instances, at considerable cxpeuce in 
purchasing a supply of water, besides the first ex- 
pence; which is from five to six pounds per acre, 
exclusive of the continual repair of the sluices, &c. 
They are usually shut up in November, or the be- 
ginning of December, and are watered alternately 
every other week, till the beginning of March, when 



they are fed ofT, for about five' or six weeks, with 
ewes and lambs : the water is afterwards turned on 
as before, till the meadows are fit to be mowed, 
when, in general, they produce from two to three 
loads per acre, and are frequently cut twice in a 
season. Some valuable meadows of this description 
are on the banks of the Itchin. 

ENCLOSURES, &c.] The principal part of this 
county is inclosed ; but large tracts of open heath, 
and uncultivated land, remain in the vicinity of 
Christchurch, on the borders of Dorsetshire, &c. 
The aggregate extent of the waste lands, exclusive 
of the forests, is estimated at between 00 and 100,000 
acres. 

LEASES, TENURES, &c.] A great proportion of 
the land in Hampshire is held under the Bishop of 
Winchester, as well as under the Dean and Chap- 
ter, upon lease for twenty -one years, renewable 
every seven upon paying a fine ; which is injudici- 
ously increased in proportion to the improvements 
that have been made. Many estates belonging to 
other persons, are also held on lease for three lives, 
not renewable ; and others expire at a certain time, 
or at the death of the tenants. 

CATTL*.] Many horses are bred in the forests of 
Hampshire; but they are generally very small; aud, 
from the scantiness of their food, have the appropri- 
ate appellation of Heath croppers. The team horses 
however, are remarkably fine ; the farmers emu* 
lating each other in the appearance of their cattle. 

The cows are not of any particular character; 
the Welsh breed has been introduced ; but as the 
dairies are few, not much attention is given to their 
improvement. 

Hampshire, for its breed of hogs, is proverbially 
famous : and this breed is of the largest kind, tli 
farmers encouraging it as the most profitable. 
Those in the vicinity of the forests are principally fed 
on acorns, and beech-mast, which givo them a supe- 
riority over most others in the kingdom ; their 
weight is from sixteen to forty score. Formerly, 
these animals were chiefly killed for bacon ; but 
great numbers of those for home consumption, art 
now pickled down in large tubs. The bones and the 
lean are previously taken away ; and the fat being 
suffered to continue in the brine, nearly a year be- 
fore it is used, becomes more firm, and profitable 
in the expenditure. 

The real Hampshire sheep is horned, and white 
faced ; this breed has been much improved ; but thri 
South-downs have been introduced, and obtained 
the preference in many parts, as they fatten on a 
less quantity of food. The flocks are in general 
very large ; the whole number of sheep annually fed 
in the county, is supposed to amount to 350,000. 
In the uplands, the practice of folding is general j 
but, in the lower parts, it is little attended to. 

PRODUCE.] In addition to the usual produce, 
noticed under the agricultural head, it mrfy be men- 
tioned, that many hives of bees are kept in different 
parts of the county ; the honey is in general of a fitws 
6 .flavour; 



496 



HAMPSHIRE. 



flavour ; ami particularly that made by the beas who 
obtain their food from the downs. As Hampshire 
does not lie more than three degrees to the north of 
those countries which produce the finest wines in 
France, it has been thought that the vitie might he 
successfully cultivated here. It is possible, also, 
that the olive tree might succeed. 

MANUFACTURES.] Hampshire can boast of very 
few manufactures ; and those are chiefly of cloth, as 
shiloons, and coarse woollens. Large quantities 
of malt are annually made at Andovcr ; and at Wey- 
Hill, in its neighbourhood, is held the greatest fair 
in England for hops, sheep, cheese, and some other 
commodities. At Lymington is a manufacture of 
salt; but this business has much decreased. 

ETYMOLOGY.] The most ancient recorded name 
of Hampshire was Gwent, or Y Went, a term de- 
scriptive of its open downs : and hence the appella- 
tion Caer Gwent, or city of the Gwentians, now 
Winchester. The Lower Gwentians, or Segontiaci, 
derived their name from Isgwont, Isgwetrtwg, or 
Isgwentog, terms allusive to their relative situations 
to the proper Gwentians, and had Vindonum, or 
Siichester, for their chief city. Hampshire was 
caiieu by the Saxons Hamtimscyre, from Hampton, 
since called Southampton, the county town. It was 
afterwards called Hamteschyre, and hence its pre- 
sent names ot Hampshire, and Hunts are derived. 

GENERAL HISTORY.] The ancient inhabitants of 
Hampshire, who had migrated from the Continent, 
in the first ages of the population of Europe, appear 
to have been dispossessed by the Deigns who were 
originally of German extraction, but had crossed the 
Rhine into Gaul, and thence extended their con- 
quests into Britain, between two and three centuries 
previously to the arrival of Ciesar. They consisted 
of various clans, distinguished by their several 
names ; but that which had proved itself the most 
valiant, retained the national name of Belgae in 
token of pre-eminence. This tribe appears to have 
seated itself in the central parts of Hampshire, and 
previously to the Roman invasion, had attacked and 
driven out the Segontiaci, who inhabited the nor- 
thern extremity of the county, and the adjoining 
parts of Berkshire, bordering on the Ken net. Be- 
tween the period oftlte arrival of Caesar, and that 
of the entire subjugation of Britain by the Romans, 
the Bellas had obtained dominion over the greatest 
part of the tract stretching between the British Chan- 
nel and the Severn ; but being at length subdued by 
the Romans under Vespasian, their country was in- 
cluded in the province named Britannia Prima. On 
the departure of the Romans, the government of 
Hampshire reverted to the Britons, who bravely de- 
fended themselves against the Saxnu powers for 
many years ; but their united forces, undo Natan- 
leod, were at length defeated by Cerdic, in a gene- 
ral battle fought in the New Forest. The Saxon 
chief pursuing his victory, founded the kingdom of 
the West Saxons, making Winchester his residence 
and capital j and in that city, Egbert, his descend- 



ant, caused himself to be crowned 'King of all En- 
gland. 

ANTIQUITIES.] 'There are several ancient camps; 
and the Romans had six stations in this county, if 
we reckon Farnham, viz. Calleva now Farnham, 
Vindonum now Siichester, Venta Belgarum now 
Winchester, Ciausentum now Southampton, or 
rather Bittern, iirig;'* near Broughton, and Cunetio 
at Kdgbury near Witchurch. Of the architectural 
antiquities, Audover Church, Basingstoke Chapel, 
Bishop's Waltham Castle, Calshot Castle, Christ- 
church Church, St. Cross's Hospital, St. Diony- 
sius's Priory, Fordiugbridge Bridge, Hyde House 
near Winchester, Holy Ghost Chapel, near Basing- 
stoke, Hurst Castle, Maison Dieu at Southampton, 
Netley Abbey, Odiham Castle, Porchester Castle, 
Rumsey Nunnery, Selborn Priory, Silcheste,South- 
ampton Castle, &c. SmaHwood Castle, Southsea 
Castle, Tichfield Abbey, Warblington Castle, Warn- 
ford Church, Winchester Cathedral, Palace, &c, 
are chiefly entitled to notice. 

CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL DIVISIONS.] Hamp- 
shire is in nine great divisions, (exclusively of the 
Isle of Wight) subdivided into 39 hundreds, &c. and 
comprising 308 parishes, and six parts of parishes. 
It has 13 divisional meetings, and 107 acting county 
magistrates. The whole county, together with the 
Isles of Wight, Jersey, Guernsey, Sark, and Al- 
derney, is comprehended within the diocese of Win- 
chester. 

PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.]. This county 
returns twenty members to Parliament, exclusively 
of those for Newtowu, Newport, and Yarmouth in 
the Isle of Wight; viz. two for the shire, and two 
for each of the following places ; Winchester, South- 
ampton, . Portsmouth, Petersfield, Stockbridge, 
Christchurch, Lymington, Whitchurch, and An- 
dover. 

MARKET Towns.] The market towns in this 
county appear to be as follows : 

Towns. Market Days. 

Alresford Tluirsilay. 

Alton Saturday. '-*: 

Andover Saturday. 

Basingstoke Wednesday. 

Christchurch Monday. 

Farehain Wednesday. 

Fordingbridge Saturday. 

Gosport Thursday. 

Havant v . Saturday. 

Kingsclere Tuesday. 

Lymington Saturday. 

Odiham Friday. 

Ptftersfield Saturday. 

( Thursday, 

Portsmouth { Saturday. 

Ringwood Wednesday. 

Rumsey Saturday. 

( Tuesday, 
Southampton -> Thursday, 

^ Saturday. 

Stockbridge Thursday. 

Whitchurcfl Friday. 

< Wednesday, 
Winchester | Saturday. 

POPULATION.] 



HAMPSHIRE. 



497 



POPULATION.} The population of this county, in 
the year 1700, appears to have been 118,700*; in 
1750, 137,500 ; in 1801, 219,B56 ; of which, 105,007 
were males, and 1 13,989 females ; in 18 1 1 , the males 
were 118,855, and the females 126,225 ; making a 



total of 245,080. In 1801, the number of houses 
was 39,257, in 1811, 44,681. According to the re- 
turns of 1811, the proportion of baptisms was as 
one to 31 ; of burials, one to 49; and of marriage* 
one to 108. 



Summitry of the Population of the County of Hants, us published by Authority of Parliament, in 181 1 . 





HOUSES. 


OCCUPATIONS. 


PERSONS. 


LIBERTIES, Itc. 


Inhabited. 


S'3 

IS. 

k j(| u 

l|3. 

*l 


b'n 

q 

2 

ta 


Uninhabited. 


fa* 

u"S 3 

111 

|I5 


'^ . 

?.H2 U ' 

= T3a 
a ^S . 

BJrtl 

"= -"5 2 
- 5 2 o 
"H-S 


AH other Fami- 
lies not comprised 
in the two pre- 
ceding Classes. 


Males. 


Females. 


Total 
of 

Persons. 


Alton, North 


2092 
889 
4168 
4197 
3083 
2711 
2963 , 
2990 
6279 
4323 

6852 
1573 
1087 


2379 
1. 122 
4603 
4S91 
362'J 
2939 
3220 
3181 
7069 
4966 

9534 
2069 
1324 


7 
8 
21 
21 
24 
13 
528 
14 
71 
36 

154 
33 
11 


47 
17 
93 
78 
54 
44 
78 
128 
129 
155 

108 
C3 
36 


I486 
723 
2608 
3232 
2386 
2106 
1607 
1741 
2473 
2669 

137 
165 
68 


575 
325 
1162 
1026 
811 
543 
846 
1024 
1S39 
1518 

5920 
1485 
949 


318 
74 
838 
633 
425 
280 
767 
416 
2757 
779 

3477 
419 
307 


6038 
2999 
10279 
12240 
9388 
6860 
7314 
6980 
18155 
11955 

18346 
4130 

3229 
942 


6142 
2838 
11019' 
12009 
9164 
7001 
8050 
7804 
18849 
12165 

22221 
'5487 
3476 


12180 
5837 
21298 
24249 
18552 
13fio'l 
15364 
14784 
37004 
24120 

40567 
9617 

6705 
942 


A i ion, South 


Andover . .. 








New Forest East 


New Forest West 




sle of Wight 


Borough of Portsmouth > 
and town of Portsea J 
Town and County of ) 


City of Winchester and 
Soke Liberty J 


Local Militia 






Totals 


43210 


5C926 


441 


1030 


1401 


18024 


11491 


118855 


126225 


245080 





CHIEF TOWNS, PARISHES, &c. 
AX.RESFOJID.] The market town of Alresford, 
containing a population of about 1044 persons, lies 
19 miles N. E. from Southampton, and 57 j S. W. 
by W. from London. It is sometimes called New 
Alresford, to distinguish it from a village of the 
same name, at which there is a handsome seat of the 
Rodney family, distant three quarters of a mile 
N. W. by N. 

Nevy Alresford appears to have been given by 
King Kenewalch, to the Church at Winchester. 
It has been a market and borough-town from time 
immemorial. Bishop Lucy, about the year 1220, 
re-established the market. On May-day 1690, most 
of the town was destroyed by fire. In 1710, it was 
again burned down ; and has since been a third time 
destroyed in a similar way. The town is governed 
by a Bailiff and eight Burgesses. 

To the south-west of the town is Alresford Pond, 
a noble piece of water, covering about 200 acres, 
and forming a head to the Itchin, formerly called 
the AIre river. Bishop de Lucy, under a charter 
from King John, by means of locks and aqueducts, 
rendered the river navigable from Alresford to Win- 
VOL. 11. NO. 80. 



Chester, and thence to Southampton water. The 
head of the pond is formed by an immense mole or 
causeway, nearly 500 yards in length, and formerly 
serving as part of the main road to London, but 
disused since the year 1753. De Lucy obtained for 
himself, and his successors, the entire royalty of 
the river from the reservoir to the sea, besides other 
privileges. Several boats are kept on this lake, and 
the breed of swans, and other water fowl, is en- 
couraged. 

ALTON.] Alton is a respectable market-town, 
pleasantly situated upon the banks of the Wey, 30 
miles N. E. from Southampton, and 47 S. W. by W. 
from London. Its population, the greater part of 
which derive employment from the manufacture of 
corded stuffs, serges, &c. amounted, in 1811, to 
2316. In the neighbourhood of Alton are several 
excellent hop plantations. 

It was at Alton, that Sir William Waller, in De- 
cember, 1643, obtained some advantages over the 
forces of Lord Ilopton, who had taken post in.,the 
town : the regiment commanded by Colonel Bo\vses 
retreated to the Church ; but not having time to 
barricade the dooss, threw down their arms, and 
6 K surrendered ; 



HAMPSHIRE. 



surrendered ; but the Colonel himself refusing quar- 
ter, was slain on the spot. 

Amongst the celebrated men to whom this town 
has given birth may he mentioned William de Alton, 
a Dominican Friar, who lived in the tirae of Ed- 
ward the Second, and wrote on the Universality of 
the Pollution of Mankind by original sin ; John 
Pitts, the Biographer ;* and William Curtis, the 
Botanist. t 

AN DOVER.] The large and respectable market- 
town of Andover, lies on the borders of the Downs, 
near the Anton river, 2-5 miles N. by W. from South- 
ampton, and 63 W. S. W. from London. This 
town is supposed, by Dr. Stukeley, to be the An- 
daoreon of Ravennas ; and probably with truth, as 
several ancient encampments may be traced in the 
vicinity. Here, in the year 99-1 was made the treaty 
between Anlaf, the Dane, and King Ethelrcd, by 
\vhich the former engaged never to recommence hos- 
tilities against the English. The corporation boasts 
an antiquity as remote as the roign of King John ; 
but tiie charter under which it is now governed, was 
granted by Queen Elizabeth. The corporate officers 
consist of twelve capit.il burgesses, from whom a 
bailiff, and two other magistrates, are chosen annu- 
ally, and twelve assistants : here is also a steward, 
recorder, and town clerk. The right of election of 
members of Parliament is enjoyed by the corpora- 
tion. 

The Town Hall is a large modern building of 
brick, with an open space beneath for the markets. 
Among the charitable institutions are, an hospital 
for six poor men, founded by John Pollen, Esq. a 
Free School, founded by John Hanson, Esq. in 
1569 ; and a Charity School for thirty boys. The 
population, in 1811, was 3295. The houses are 

* John Pitts, born in 156(5, received his education at Wyk- 
ham's College, Winchester. Having embraced the Catholic 
religion, he left England, and went to Douay : he taught 
rhetoric, ;md llie Greek language at Rheims, was made Canon 
of Verdun by the Cardinal de Lorraine, and died in 1616. 
He wrote the work De UlustriUis Ariglia; Scriptoribus, con- 
taining an account of the most famous writers of this island from 
the year of the world 2S79, to A. D. 1612. 

J-" William Curtis was the son of a respectable quaker, an 
Apothecary, who instructed him in his own profession, and 
also in the elements of botany. In his twentieth year, he came 
to London, where one of his first pursuits was the study of 
medals ; but the great expence of forming a collection occa- 
sioned him to return with more ardour to natural history, and 
he quickly distinguished himself in the science of entomology. 
This study induced him to a more attentive investigation of 
the plants from which insects derive their support. As his ac- 
quaintance with botanical science increased, his original pro- 
fession became irksome, and he at length quilted it altogether, 
though not till after he had commenced his great work, the 
Flora Londmensis. He then formed a botanical garden near 
the Magdalen Hospital. The great expences which attended 
the publishing of the Flora Londinensis, led him to project the 
.Botanical Mag-izine, which, though less scientific, became 
ipore profitable, and enabled him to form a more extensive es- 
tablishment at Bromptou. There his gardens were opened for 
the advantage of the scientific, at a small annual subscription. 
He died in July 1799, aged about fifty three years. 



principally ranged in two long streets. This is a 
great thoroughfare, and a considerable trade is car- 
ried on here in shalloons and malt. There are two 
or three encampments in the immediate neighbour- 
hood of the town. 

Andover Church, a spacious structure, standing 
at the north end of the town, existed in the time of 
the Conqueror, by whom it was given to the Abbey 
of St. Florence, at Sulmur, in Anjou, and after- 
wards made a cell to that foundation. On the final 
dissolution of the Alien Priories, it was given to St. 
Mary's College, near Winchester. Here was also 
an Hospital for brethren and sisters, founded in the 
12th or 13th century. 

AVIUGTON.] Avington, anciently Abyngton, a 
seat and manor of Earl Temple, (eldest son of the 
Marquis of Buckingham, who obtained it by mar- 
riage with the Lady Anna Eliza Brydges, only 
daughter and heiress of James, last Duke of Chan- 
dos, on whose death, in 1789, that title became ex- 
tinct) lies three miles N.E. by E. from Winchester. 
The manor was, originally, a royal demesne, and 
was given, by King Edgar, to the monastery of St. 
Swithin, at Winchester, in the year 961 ; and con- 
tinued in the possession of that house till the Dis- 
solution, when it became the property of the Clerks 
of Micheldever, in this county, in whom it remained, 
till the reign of Elizabeth, and then passed to the 
Bruges, or Brydges family, afterwards raised to the 
dukedom of Chandos.J Charles the Second was 
frequently the guest of the notorious Countess of 
Shrewsbury, at this mansion ; whence, Avington 
became the scene of that monarch's licentious plea- 
sures, at the time he was meditating to establish his 
royal residence in the palace at Winchester. Be- 
fore the old house was dismantled, a short time be- 



J This family, a branch of a verv noble one of the same name 
on the Continent, was settled at Brugge Castle, in Shropshire, 
at the time of the Conquest. Sir Thomas Brugge married 
Alice, daughter and co-heir of Sir Thomas Berkeley, by Alice, 
his wife, daughter of Thomas, Lord Chandos, sister and heiress 
of Sir John Chandos, Lord Chandos, one ol the original knights 
of the castle; and of whom our history speaks so highly for his 
conduct in the Frencli wars under Edward the Thijd. From 
this marriage arose the connection between the families of Bruges 
and Chandos ; the united honours ot which have descended, 
in an uninterrupted line, to the present time. In the year 
1554, Sir John Bruges, or Brydges, was created by Queen 
Mary, Baron Chandos, of Sudeley Castle, in Gloucestershire, 
and in 1714, the Hon. James Brydges ninth Lord Chandos, 
was created Marquis and Earl of Caernarvon, and Dtike of 
Chandos. James, his grandson, third and last Duke of Chan- 
dos acquired the house and property of Avington, on the death 
of Mrs. Brydges, relict of George Brydges, Esq. son of George 
Rodney Brydge;, Esq. fourth son of Sir Thomas Brydges, in 
the county of Somerset, who married Anna Maria Brudenell, 
the infamous and notorious Countess of Shrewsbury, whose 
former husband, Francis, Earl of Shrewsbury, died inconse- 
quence of a wound he received in a duel will) George Villiers, 
Duke of Buckingham, during the fighting of which, the 
Countess is reported to have held the horse of her gallant, dis- 
guised as a page. 

fore 



HAMPSHIRE. 



499 



fore the unexpected death of the late Duke of 
Chandos, Nell Gwynn's dressing-room continued 
to he shewn. The old green-house was the ban- 
quetting-room, in _ which Charles was entertained. 
The present mansion, which is mostly of brick, has 
been greatly, improved, since it came into the pos- 
session of Earl Temple. It is situated in a well- 
planted and secluded valley, nearly environed with 
high downs, which, from their bare and open state, 
form a singular, though not unpleasing, contrast 
with the scenery immediately contiguous to the 
mansion. Several of the apartments are fitted up 
with great elegance, and are highly enriched by a 
choice collection of paintings, entirely of his Lord- 
ship's forming ; and many of which have been pur- 
chased, by him, from the Orleans and Besborough 
collections. In front of the house, is a piece of 
water, formed from a transparent stream, which 
flows through the valley, by the late Duke of Chan- 
dos. The park, which is about three miles in cir- 
cumference, was also made by him, and was not 
finished till the year 1785 : it incloses, however, 
some fine old timber, and the ground is beautifully 
diversified. 

BADDBSLEY.] North Baddesley lies 3| miles E. 
by S. from Romsey ; South Baddesley is two miles 
E. from Lymington. At the latter was a Precep- 
tory of Knights Templars, the site of which is now 
occupied by a small manorial Chapel. About 50 or 
BO years ago, much curiosity was excited by an elm 
tree, in this village, which sent forth groans, as of 
a person in extreme agony. Various experiments 
were made, and at length the tree was rooted up, 
to discover the cause of the phenomenon, but with- 
out success. 

BASING.] The little village of Basing, or Old 
Basing, two miles E.N.E. from Basingstoke, was 
the scene of a bloody battle between the Danes, 
and the Saxons, commanded by King Ethelred, 
and his brother Alfred, in 871, in which the latter 
were defeated. It'became still more famous, how- 
ever, from the gallant stand made against the 
forces of the Parliament, in the reign of Charles 
the First, by John Paulet, Marquis of Winchester, 
a lineal descendant of Hugh de Port, who, at the 
period of the Domesday Survey, held 55 lordships 
in this county. Basing was the head of these c.\- 
tensive possessions, and appears to have been very 
early the site of a Castle, :is mention of the ' land 
of (he old Castle of Basing,' occurs in a grant 
made by John de Port, to the neighbouring Priory 
at Monk's Shcrborne, in the reign of Henry the 
Second. William, his grandson, assumed the sur- 
name of St. John ; and Robert, Lord St. John, 
in the 43d of Henry the Third, obtained ' a license 
to fix a pole upon the bann of his moat at Basing, 
and also permission to continue it so fortified during 
the King's pleasure.' In the time of Richard the 
Second, Basing was transferred, by marriage, to 
the Poyniugs ; and again, in the time of Henry the 
Sixth, to the Paulcts, by the marriage of Constance', 



with Sir John Paulet, of Nunny Castle, in Somer- 
setshire. Sir William Paulet, Kilt, third in descent 
from this couple, created Baron St. John, of Ba- 
sing, by Henry the Eighth ; and Earl of Wiltshire, 
and Marquis of Winchester, by Edward the Sixth ; 
was a very polite nobleman, and greatly in favour 
at court, through most of the successive changes 
that occurred in the reigns of Henry the Eighth, 
Edward the Sixth, Quee:i Mary, and Queen Eliza- 
beth. He held the office of Treasurer nearly 30 
years, sustaining himself by the courtly maxim of 
" being a willow, and not an oak." He rebuilt the 
Castle at Basing, in a magnificent, and even 
princely, style ; so much so, indeed, that Camden, 
in allusion to the vast expence of living, entailed on 
his family, by its splendour, observes, that " it was 
so overpowered by its own weight, that his poste- 
rity have been forced to pull down a part of it." 
Here, in 1560, he entertained Queen Elizabeth with 
' all good chear,' and so much to her satisfaction, 
that she playfully lamented his great age ; " for, by 
my troth," said she, " if my Lord Treasurer were 
but a young man, I could find in my heart to have 
him for a husband before any man in England. "- 
William, the great grandson of this nobleman, and 
fourth Marquis of Winchester, had also, in 1601, 
the honour of having Queen Elizabeth for a guest, 
for " thirteen dayes, to the greate charge of the 
sayde Lorde Marquesse." During her residence 
here, the Duke of Biron, accompanied by about 20 
of the French nobility, and a retinue of nearly 400 
persons, were lodged at the Vine, the seat of Lord 
Sandys, which had been purposely furnished with 
hangings and plate from the Tower and Hampton 
Court, and with seven score beds and furniture, 
" which the willing and obedient people of the coun- 
trie of Southampton, upon two days warning, had 
brought in thither to lend the Queen." When 
Elizabeth departed from Basing, she affirmed, that 
" she had done that in Hampshire, that none of 
her ancestors ever did, neither that any Prince in 
Christendome could doe : that was, she had, in her 
progresses, in her subjects' houses, entertained a 
royal ambassador, and had royally entertained him." 
John, son of the preceding, and fifth -Marquis of 
Winchester, was the brave nobleman who rendered 
his name immortal by his gallant defence of Basing 
House, in the cause of Charles the First, during a 
tedious succession of sieges and blockades, which, 
with short intermission, continued upwards of two 
years. The Journal of the Siege, printed in Ox- 
ford, in 1615, is one of the most eventful pieces of 
history during the Civil War. The final investment 
appears to have been undertaken by Cromwell, who 
took it by storm, in October, 1615, and burnt it to 
the ground, in despite of the Aimez Loyaulte, 
which the Marquis had written, with a diamond, in 
every window, and which has ever since been the 
motto of the family arms. The plunder obtained, 
on this occasion, is said to have amounted to 
200,000.'. in cash, jewels, and rich furniture. The 



500 



HAMPSHIRE. 



number of soldiers slain before the walls, from the 
first commencement of the siege, is recorded to 
have been upwards of 2000. There is a tradition- 
ary report, that the garrison was purtly surprised, 
through some of the troops being eugag'ed at cards, 
when the assault commenced. From a survey, 
made in 1798, it appears, that the urea of the 
works, including the garden and entrenchments, 
occupied about 14J acres. The form was ex- 
tremely irregular ; the ditches very deep, and the 
ramparts high and strong : some of the remains 
are yet very bold and striking. The site of the 
ruins is particularly commanding : the canal from 
Basingstoke has been cut through a part of the 
works ; and the outward entrenchments have been 
rendered very obscure and imperfect, from recent 
improvements in the grounds. The brave Marquis, 
whose property was thus reduced to ruin, in the 
cause of his Sovereign, lived to the restoration, but 
received no recompense for his immense losses. 
He died in 1674, and was succeeded by his eldest 
sou, Charles, who, when he saw that other men ot 
sense were at their wits' end, in the arbitrary and 
tyrannical reign of Jaines the. Second, thought ft 
prudent to assume the chara'cter of a madman, as 
the first Brutus did, in the reign of Tarquin. He 
danced, hunted, or hawked, a good part of the day ; 
went to bed before noon, and constantly sat at table 
all night. Me went to dinner at six or seven in the 
evening, and his meal lasted till six or seven the 
next morning ; during which time, he ate, drank, 
smoked, talked, or listened to music. The com- 
pany that dined with him, were at liberty to rise, 
and amuse themselves, or to take a nap, whenever 
they were so disposed : but the dishes and bottles 
were all the while standing upon the table. Such a 
man as this was thought a very unlikely person to 
concern himself with politics, or with religion. By 
this conduct, he was neither embroiled in public 
affairs, nor gave the least umbrage to the court ; 
but he exerted himself so much in the Revolution, 
that he was, for his eminent services, created Duke 
of Bolton : he afterwards raised a regiment of foot, 
for the reduction of Ireland.* 

The parish Church of Basing, is a large, ancient, 
and curious structure, standing at a short distance 
from the site of Basing House, with a tower rising 
from the centre : in a niche, at the west end, is a 
figure of the Virgin Mary : the roof is supported 
by round arches, springing from massive columns. 

* Charles, son of tlie above, and second Duke of Bollon, 
assisted in llie great work of the Revolution : and was one of 
the noblemen, appointed at Exeter, in November, 1688, to 
manage the revenues of the Prince of Orange, as Sovereign of 
England. In 1717, he was declared Lord Lieutenant of Ire- 
land. Charles, his eldest son, and third Duke of Bolton, lilled 
several high offices in the state. This nobleman, on the death 
of his first wife, from whom he had long been separated, wedded 
the celebrated Lavinia Beswick, or Fenton, more known by 
the name of Polly Peachem, from her celebrity, irt the per- 
formance of that character, in the Beggar's Opera. 

t The length of the Canal to the river Wey, by which it 



| This edifice was repaired in 1519, by Sir John 
Paulet, who, with his father, John Paulet, Esq. 
and their respective wives, lie buried beneath two 
arched tombs, one on each side the chancel. Be- 
neath the south aisle, is the family vault of the Paulets, 
in which six Dukes of Boltou, with many of their 
noble relations, are deposited. A mural monument 
1ms also been erected, in this Church, to the memory 
of Fnmcis Russel, Esq. F.R.S. and F.S.A. a na- 
tive of Basingstoke, who assisted Mr. Nichols, in 
his History of Leicestershire. He died in 1795. 

BASINGSTOKE.] The large, ancient, and popu- 
lous town of Basingstoke, lies 30 miles N.E. by 
N. from Southampton, and 45 miles W.S.VV. from 
London. It is situated in a pleasant and well- 
wooded part of the county, and commands a consi- 
derable trade from its standing at the junction of 
five great roads. In the Domesday Book, it is 
mentioned by the appellation Basingtoches, and is 
recorded as always having been a royal manor, as 
never having paid tax, nor ever having been dis- 
tributed into hides : it is also noticed in that survey, 
as having a market worth thirty shillings. On the 
establishment of the woollen manufacture, Basing- 
stoke obtained an extensive share in that' Business, 
and has been particularly noticed for its druggets 
and shalloons ; but the manufacture of those articles 
has long ceased. The malting business is, however, 
carried on to a considerable extent, and employs a 
great number of persons. Basingstoke also pos- 
sesses a considerable trade in corn, the transit of 
which is greatly facilitated by a canal that has been 
made from the river Wey, in Surrey, to this town, 
under the authority of an act obtained in 1778. f 

The government of this town is vested in a 
Mayor, Recorder, seven Aldermen, seven capital 
Burgesses, and other officers. The town -hall is a 
large and new edifice. Several schools have been 
instituted here, for the education of youth ; parti- 
cularly a Free School, of some repute ; and a Cha- 
rity School, in which twelve boys are clothed and 
maintained, at the expence of the Skinners' Com- 
pany of London. The population of Basingstoke, 
is about 2(350. 

Here are some remains of an hospital, which was 
founded here, by Henry the Third, for the mainten- 
ance of aged and impotent priests, at the request, 
and on the estate of Walter de Merton, who was 
Lord High Chancellor of England, and afterwards 
Bishop of Rochester : he was also the founder of 

communicates with the Themes, is 37^ miles: the expense of 
culling it, amounted to about 100.000/. A large portion of 
this sum was expended in forming a tunnel, nearly three quar- 
ters of a mile in length, through Greenhill Hill, near Odihani. 
Besides corn and Hour, coul-, timber, manure, and goods of 
almoit every description, are conveyed to different parts of the 
country, by this channel: the first barge arrived at the wharf, 
at Basingstoke, in January, 1794. Among the numerous pro- 
jected advantages that led to the formation of the Canal, was, 
:he piesumed cultivation of Bagshot, and other bedlbs within 
the line of its course. 

' Mertou 



HAMPSHIRE. 



50t 



Merton College, Oxford ; for the reception of the 
incurable fellows or scholars belonging 1 to which 
this hospital was eventually appropriated. 

Westward from the town, at a short distance, is 
the ancient encampment of Windesbury. 

Basingstoke Church is a spacious and handsome 
structure, said to have been built under the auspices 
of Bishop Fox. The living is very valuable. Se- 
veral of the vicars have been eminent for their ta- 
lents and learning. Among them, was Sir George 
Wheeler, the celebrated Eastern traveller, who 
founded a library in a part of the Church ; and 
Thomas Warton, B.'I). Professor of Poetry in Ox- 
ford University, and father of Dr. Joseph Warton, 
and of his brother, the Rev. Thomas Warton. 

At the northern extremity of Basingstoke, on an 
eminence, are the remains of Holy Ghost Chapel, 
so called, from its having been connected with a 
brotherhood, or guild of the Holy Ghost, institut- 
ed by Sir William Sandys, Knt. afterwards first 
Lord Sandys, and Fox, Bishop of Winchester, 
under a licence irora Henry the Eighth. In the 
adjoining burying-ground, called the Liten, are 
several defaced inscriptions, in memory of the 
Cufauds, a respectable family, who were allied to 
the Plantageuets, and who had been settled at 
Cufaud, near the Vine, from the early Norman 
times. Here, also, were several inscriptions to 
the Blundens, of Basingstoke, none of which are 
now remaining. 

Amongst the eminent characters to which Ba- 
singstoke has had the honour of giving birth, may 
be mentioned John do Basingstoke, or Basingsto- 
chius, who became of great repute towards the 
middle of the thirteenth century, as an orator, ma- 
inathematician, philosopher, and divine ; Richard 
White, called also Basingstochius, a Romish exile, 
and King's Professor at Douay, in the time of 
James the First ; James Lancaster, an eminent 
navigator, in the reigns of Elizabeth, and James 
the First ; Dr. Joseph Warton ;* and the Rev. 
Thomas Warton.f 

BEAULIEU.] The village of Beaulieu, (Bellus 

* Dr. Joseph Warton, F.R.S. was horn about the year 1722, 
and very early imbibed a distinguished fondness for letters, from 
the instructions and pursuits of his reverend father, Vicar of this 
parish. He then became a student at Winchester College, and 
afterwards was elected Master. His knowledge of classical 
literature was very extensive, and procured him numerous 
friends among the most cultivated classes of society. His 
poetical talents were chiefly confined to the production of short 
pieces, of which his Ode to Fancy, has been most admired. 
His E^say on the Writings and Genius of Pope, is an excel lent 
work, and remarkable from the circumstance of the first volume 
having been printed nearly 30 years before the second and last 
was submitted to the public. In 1797, appeared his edition of 
the Works of Pope, in nine volumes, octavo, with notes critical 
and illustrative. He died in March, 1800. 

f The Rev. Thomas Warton, B.D. the Poet Laureat, was 
born in 1728; and received the rudiments of instruction at the 
School, of which his father was then Master. At the age of 
fifteen, he was admitted a commoner, and soon afterwards was 
elected a scholar at Trinity College, Oxford. His attachment , 

VOL. II. NO. 81. 



: Locus, a fine-place) lies 6| miles N.E. from Ly- 
mington. The river Exe, over which there is a 
bridge, is navigable up to this village. Here is a 
manufacture of coarse sacking. 

The ruins of Beaulieu Abbey are beautifully si- 
tuated on the eastern banks of the river. The de- 
lightful valley which surrounds these venerable re- 
mains, is of a circular form, bounded by well-wood- 
ed hills, and, in itself, consists of a rich variety of 
ground. The Abbey was founded, A. D. 1201, by 

! King John, for monks of the Cistercian order ; a 
class of religious to which that monarch had been, 
previously, particularly adverse. The King, it is 
said, after various oppressive measures exercised 
against the Cistercians, summoned the Abbots and 
principals of that order, to Lincoln, whither they 
hastened, flattering themselves that he would there 
confer upon them some marks of his grace and 

I favour. Instead of this, say the monkish histo- 

i rians, " the savage monarch ordered the Abbots to 
be trodden to death, by horses : but none of his at- 
tendants being found sufficiently cruel to obey the 
sanguinary command, the ecclesiastics, dreadfully 
alarmed, retired hastily to their inn. In the course 
of the ensuing night, when the monarch slumbered 
on his bed, he dreamt that he was standing before 
a Judge, accompanied by the Cistercian Abbots, 
who were commanded to scourge him severely with 
rods and thongs ; and, when he awoke in the morn- 
ing, he declared, that he still felt the smart of the 
beating. On relating this dream to a certain eccle- 
siastic of his court, he was advised to crave pardon 
of the Abbots, whom he had before so barbarously 
treated ; and assured, that the Almighty had been 
infinitely merciful to him, in thus revealing the 
mysteries of his dispensations, and affording him 
paternal correction. The King, adopting this 
counsel, ordered the Abbots to attend him ; and, 
contrary to their expectations, received them with 
kindness :" and the remembrance of his dream still 
continuing to influence his conduct, he shortly after 
granted a charter for the foundation of the Abbey 
of Beaulieu. It was greatly enriched by succeed- 
to books, and the early maturity of his menial powers, were 
very unusual ; and he was quickly distinguished as well by 
various poetical productions, as by his critical acumen, ami 
knowledge of classical literature. His editions of Theocritus, 
and of the smaller poems of Milton, are highly curious and va- 
luable. His most eminent production is the History of English 
Poetry, in three volumes quarto ; a fourth volume was in the 
press at the time of his decease. He also published Observa- 
tions on the Fairie Queen of Spenser, two volumes, 1762 ; and 
a History of the Parish of Kiddington ; the hitter of which is 
regarded as one of the best specimens of parochial history ever 
published. He died at Oxford, in May, 1790; having long 
previously been chosen a Fellow of Trinity College, and made 
Camden Professor of History in that University. He was con- 
sidered " as one of the chief literary characters of his age ; equal 
to the best scholars in the elegant parts of classical learning ; 
superior to the generality in literature of the modern kind ; a 
poet of fine fancy, and masculine style ; and a critic of deep 
information, sound judgment, and correct taste." 

OL 



502 



HAMPSHIRE. 



ing grants ; and, at the Dissolution, its possessions 
were estimated at the annual value of 428/. 6s. 8rf. 
The manor of Beaulieu, with all its rights, privi- 
leges, and appurtenances, (the rectory and right of 
of patronage excepted,) was granted to Thomas 
Wriothesley, Esq. afterwards Earl of Southamp- 
ton. In the reign of William the Third, this estate 
became the property of Ralph, Lord Montague, 
afterwards created Duke of Montague, by marriage 
with the heiress of the Wriothesleys. His son, 
John, second Duke of Montague, transmitted it to 
his daughters, Isabella and Mary, from whom, by 
intermarriages, the manor has descended to the 
Lord Beaulieu, and the Duke of Bucclengh. The 
circumference of the manor embraces an extent of 
28 miles, and the clear annual revenue amounts to 
between 4000/. and 5000/. The immediate pre- 
cincts of the Abbey were encircled by a stone wall, 
the remains of which are richly mantled with ivy. 
An edifice, nearly square, now called the palace, 
but originally built for the Abbot's lodging, was 
converted into a family seat after the Dissolution. 
Over the entrance, is a canopied niche, in which 
stood the image of the Virgin Mary. The hall is a 
well proportioned room, handsomely vaulted, the 
ribs springing from pilasters, and spreading over 
the roof in beautiful ramifications. Eastward from 
this edifice, is a long building, supposed, from the 
extent and height of the apartments, to have been 
the dormitory ; beneath it, are several good cellars. 
The ancient kitchen is also standing, and near it is 
the refectory, a plain stone edifice, with strong but- 
tresses : this is now the parish Church of Beaulieu ; 
the Abbey Church, which stood to the north-east, 
having been entirely destroyed. On the west side, 
is the ancient rostrum, or pulpit, from which lec- 
tures were read when the monks were assembled at 
their meals below. The site of the Abbey Church 
may be traced by the uncvenness of the ground ; 
but not a vestige of th building is remaining. 
Fragments of demolished tombs are occasionally 
dug up here, this having been the burial-place of 
various illustrious personages ; ami, among them, 
of Queen Eleanor, mother of King John. Some 
traces of the cloisters are yet distinguishable, and 
of some of the offices of the Monastery. Some 
fields, spreading along a gentle declivity, with a 
southern aspect, still bear the name of the Vine- 
yards ; and several of the fish-ponds are yet entire, 
and abound in fish. Whilst Beaulieu Abbey was 
invested with the privilege of a sanctuary, its walls 
afforded a temporary protection to Margaret of An- 
jou, Queen of Henry the Sixth ; who, returning 
from the continent, in expectation of being reinstat- 
ed in her former dignity, was informed of the 'im- 
prisonment of her husband, the destruction of his 
army, the death of the Earl of Warwick, and the 
elevation to the throne of Edward the Fourth. - 
.Another celebrated fugitive, to whom this Abbey 
afforded sanctuary, was Perkiii Warbec'k, who, after 



many vicissitudes, was executed at Tyburn, in 
1499. 

BELLEVUE.] This delightful residence of Josiah 
Jackson, Esq. is situated near Southampton, on 
the west side of the Itchin. The house is a superb 
modern edifice, commanding an exquisite prospect 
over the Southampton water. The shrubberies and 
gardens are extensive, and furnished with plants of 
almost every description. 

BENTXEY.] Bentley, or Bentley Green, 5| miles 
N.E. by E. from Alton, is a cheerful and well-built 
| village, the houses scattered with neat gardens, in 
front. Fences of white thorn, many of them regu- 
larly dipt, run on each side of the road, for ten 
miles to and from the village. The country is 
! pleasant, presenting a mean between hill and flat ; 
which a number of scattered houses and villages 
render lively. 

BEVIS MOUNT.] Bevis Mount, or Padwell, the 
i seat of Edward Home, Esq. derives its former ap- 
! pellation from the celebrated Sir Bevois, the Saxon 
hero of Southampton, whose real history, like that 
I of St. George, is involved in all the mystery of ro- 
I mance. The mount was, originally, a vast pile of 
I earth, rising in a conical form, from a foundation 
i of great extent ; and is traditionally said to have 
been thrown up by Sir Bevois, to obstruct the 
! Danes, in their endeavours to cross the Itchin. 
At high water, the tide forms a bay, at the foot of 
this eminence, and the beauty of the prospect is 
i then so much increased, that a former possessor of 
1 this estate, Charles Mordaunt, Earl of Peterbo- 
rough, would never suffer his grounds to be in- 
spected, by strangers, unless the river was at its 
i height. Bevis Mount was, for some time, the resi- 
| deuce of the poet Sotheby, the elegant translator of 
\ Wieland's Oberon. 

BITTERN. On the western bank of the Itchin, 
| opposite Bevis Mount, lies Bittern Farm, a sort of 
1 circular peninsula, formed by the winding of the 
I river, and the undoubted site of the Roman Clau- 
sentum. Fragments of Roman bricks are still vi- 
! sible among the rubbish of a decayed wall on the 
' eastern side : and a long series of Roman coins 
i has, at different times, been dug up here, with va- 
1 rious urns, fragments of pottery, and other anti- 
quities. 

BOLDRE.] The ancient village of Boldre, men- 
tioned HI the Domesday Book, by the name of Bov- 
reford, lies two miles N. from Lymington, on the 
opposite bank of the river. Boldre Church was in 
existence at the beginning of the twelfth century, 
and still displays some interesting specimens of its 
original architecture. The north aislo appears to 
i have been added, about the reign of King John : 
: in one of the windows, are the arms of Lewis, the 
I Dauphin of France, who had been invited into 
! .England, during that troublesome reign ; and of 
', some Of the Barons who favoured the cause of 
Lewis. The Church is finely situated on an emi- 
nence 



HAMPSHIRE. 



503 



ncnoe to the north of the village, nnd commands a 
variety of pleasing views. The Rev. William Gil- 
pin, (author of Remarks on Forest Scenery, &c.) 
the late exemplary Vicar of this parish, founded two 
schools here, in 1791, for the instruction of twenty 
boys, and twenty girls. To provide a permanent 
fund to defray the annual charges of these schools, 
Mr. (jilpin appropriated the whole of his drawings 
and sketches, which he divided into 89 lots : and, 
after his decease, in 1804, they were sold by auction, 
in London. The Poor House, at Boldre, is on a 
respectable establishment, to the plan and execution 
of which, Mr. Gilpin largely contributed. The 
Parsonage House, at Vicar's Hill, enjoys a view 
of some of the most beautiful scenery in the county. 

BOTLEY.] This is a most respectable village, 
four miles S.W. by W. from Bishop's Waltham. 
It has a considerable flour trade ; several mills 
being worked by the water of the Harable riyer, 
which is navigable for boats to this place. The 
Church, nearly a mile distant to the south, has a 
font, very ancient and curious. Botley lias, for 
several years, been the residence of Cobbett, the 
political writer. 

BRAMSHILL.] At Bramshill, a mile and three- 
quarters N.W. by N. from Hartford Bridge, is the 
mansion of the Rev. Sir Richard Cope. Seated on 
a bold eminence, in a spacious park, it forms one of 
the most commanding objects in this county. It 
was the residence of the last Lord Zouche, and is 
reported to have been built, by him, as a palace for 
Prince Henry, son of James the First ; but it was 
never completed. Had the whole been executed, 
according to the original design, it would have been 
one of the most splendid and striking edifices in the 
kingdom. 

BROADLANDS.] Broadlands, one mile S.of Rom- 
sey, is the seat of Lord Viscount Palmerston, pur- 
chased of the St. Barbe family. The house is a 
neat edifice of white brick, standing on the eastern 
side of the Test, which flows through the park. 
The collection of paintings, made by the late Lord 
Palmerston, and preserved in the mansion, is ex- 
tremely fine. 

BROCKENHURST.] The ancient village of Brock- 
enhurst, the Broceste of Domesday, is very plea- 
santly situated, four miles N. by W. from Lyming- 
ton. The Church is of a date prior to the Con- 
quest. The font is a very antique and curious 
piece of workmanship ; evidently formed when the 
custom of total immersion was prevalent. The site 
of the Church is an artificial bunk of earth, appa- 
rently raised, that the Church might become more 
conspicuous to the adjacent country ; as the village 
lies in a bottom, anciently embosomed in wood. In 
the Church-yard, is a venerable oak, of immense 
magnitude, and a noble yew tree, more than 60 feet 
high, and five feet in diameter. 

Brockeiilmrst House, the seat of Theophilus 
Foulks, Esq. is a handsome modern building, 
standing in a pleasant park, and commanding a 



grand and picturesque view. Amongst the trees 
which adorn the park, are some venerable Oaks, 
probably of an age long prior to the Conquest. 
From this grand fore-ground is preaented an ex- 
tensive forest view. 

Watcombe House, in Brockenhurst Park, was, 
for three years, the residence of the philanthropic 
Howard. 

To the south-west of Brockenhurst, various tu- 
muli, or barrows, are scattered ; several of which, 
were opened by the Rev. Mr. Warner, who sup- 
posed them to have been constructed about the time 
when the Britons, under Natanleod, or Ambrosias, 
and the Saxons, under Cerdic, were contending for 
empire. 

BHOUGHTON.] About a mile to the north of the 
Roman road, and four miles W.S.W. from Stock" - 
bridge, is the little village of Broughton, supposed 
to occupy the site of the Roman station, Brige. 
In the Church-yard, is a tomb, inscribed to the me- 
mory of Miss Ann Steele, a native of Broughteq, 
who published two volumes of poems, on sacred 
and moral subjects, under the assumed name of 
Theodosia. Another Miss Steele, of the same fa- 
mily, who married the Rev. Mr. Dunscombe, pub* 
lished a poem, intituled Danebury Hill, from the 
name of an eminence north-west of Stockbridgej 
on which are the trace* of an ancient encampment. 

BUCKLER'S HARD.] The populous village of 
Buckler's Hard, chiefly inhabited by shipwrights, 
&c. is situated in a beautiful valley, on the bunks of 
the Boldre water. Many frigates, and men of war, 
have been built here, the situation being very con- 
vent for the purpose. Buckler's Hard is included 
in the extensive manor of Be&ulieu ; and here,, pre- 
viously to the peace of 1748, John Duke of Monta* 
gue, the then proprietor, proposc4 to establish 
town, intending it as a depository, and refining 
place for sugars brought from the island of St. 
Lucia, in the West Indies. St. Lucia being de 
clared neutral, at the peace, the Duke's property 
there was lost; and the projected building of thy 
town was relinquished. 

BUROHCLKRE.] This village, 7i mjles N. from 
Whitchurch, is seated umW a high hijl, pn the top 
of which is a military camp, surrounded v.itli u 
large trench. Here is an extensive prospect uil 
round the .country ; and here was a beacon, which} 
when set on fire, gave notice to all tlio neighbouring 
parts, of the approach of an enemy. 

BURSLEDON.] At the village of Bursledon, 4| 
miles E.S.E. from Southampton, several fine ves- 
sels have, at different times, been built for the Bri- 
tish navy. On the waste, eastward from this vil- 
lage, the troops, which the Earl pt'Aloira conducted 
to Osteiid, in 1704, assembled and encamped ; find 
here, in the summer of 1800, \va,s tin- rendezvous. of 
a part of the army with which Sir Ralph A^er- 
crombic defeated the French Inyim-ibles in Egypt. 

BUR.Y HOUSE.] Bury House, between three ami 
four miles N. from Dibdeo, is Bury House, the pro- 

pei-ty 



604 



HAMPSHIRE. 



perty of Sir Charles Mill, Bart, and with the appur- 
tenant manor, is held by the singular tenure of pre- 
senting the King, whenever he enters the confines 
of the New Forest, with a brace of milk-white 
greyhounds. A breed of these dogs is constantly 
preserved, by the family, in readiness. His present 
Majesty received this compliment in 1789. Various 
Roman coins, &c. have been found in the neigh- 
bourhood. 

CSDLAND.] Cadland, the seat of Robert Drum- 
mond, Esq. five miles S. by E, from Southampton, 
includes an area about five miles in circumference, 
inclosed as a park, presenting much finely diversi- 
fied scenery. The house stands on a gentle emi- 
nence, near the banks of the Southampton water. 
The grounds contain much fine old timber. 

CALSHOT CASTLE.] On a singular tongue of 
land, which projects nearly half way across the 
Southampton water, is Calshot Castle, a small 
fortress, constructed by Henry the Eighth, as a 
safeguard to Southampton Bay. It has still a gar- 
rison, though but ill-adapted for defence. The sur- 
rounding prospects are very beautiful. 

CAM'S HALL.] On the east side of the lake or 
inlet of Portsmouth harbour, which runs up to 
Fareham, is Cam's Hall, an elegant moderij build- 
ing, the seat of John Delure, Esq. 

CATHERINE'S HFLL.] About a mile and a half 
N. from Christchurch, and a mile W. from the 
Avon, on a ridge of hills, called St. Catherine's, 
are numerous and extensive remains of ancient en- 
campments. 

CHRISTCHURCH.] The ancient market and bo- 
rough-town of Christchurch Twyneham Saxonice 
Twynambourne, or Tweon-ea lies 2i-| miles S.W. 
by W. from Southampton ; and 97j miles S.W. 
by W. from London. It is situated, as its Saxon 
names imply, between two rivers, the Avon and the 
Stour, which unite their streams at a short distance 
below the town. It was called Christchurch, from 
its ancient Church and Priory, consecrated to 
Christ. The town, if not of British, was probably 
of Roman building. The late Gustavus Brander, 
Esq. in ascertaining the ichnography of the demo- 
lished Priory, discovered, within the foundations, a 
cavity about two feet square, which had been cover- 
ed with a stone, carefully cemented with lead into 
the adjoining pavement, and contained about half a 
bushel of bird's bones, such as herons, bitterns, 
cocks, and hens, mostly well preserved. Extraor- 
dinary as such a phajnomenon may seem, observes 
Warner, " there is no difficulty in accounting for it, 
if we advert to the superstition of the ancient Ro- 
mans, and to the practices of the early Christians. 
Among (he former, many different species of birds 
were held in high veneration, and carefully preserv- 
ed for the purposes of sacrifice, and augurial divi- 
nation. Adopting the numerous absurdities of 
Egyptian and Grecian worship, these tolerating 
conquerors had affixed a sacredness to the cock, 
the hawk, the heron, the chicken, and other birds : 

6 



the bones of which, after their decease, were; not 
unfrequently deposited within the walls of the tem- 
ple of the deity, to whom they were considered as 
particularly appropriated. It seems, then, proba- 
ble, that the spot on which the Priory of Christ- 
church was erected, had, originally, been occupied 
by some heathen temple ;" as " it was a common 
practice with those Who undertook the conversion 
of the heathens, to fix on such spots for their new 
places of worship, as had been hallowed, in the 
opinion of the converts, by ancient consecration." 
Ethelwold, cousin-german to Edward the Elder, 
took possession of this town, during his short- 
lived revolt, in the reign of the latter Prince. It 
continued a part of the royal demesne till the reign 
of Henry the First, who gave it to Richard de Re- 
! pariis, or Redvers, with many other possessions of 
immense value. This powerful Baron is supposed 
to have strengthened the town by walls, and to have 
erected a Castle here, though Norden has recorded 
the latter to have been raised by Edward the Elder. 
Christchurch remained in the Redvers family, with 
a short alienation by the marriage of a daughter, 
till the time of Edward the Second, when it was 
released to that sovereign, by Isabella de Fortibus. 
In the 22d of Charles the Second, it appears to 
have belonged to Edward, Earl of Clarendon, 
whose family continued owners till the close of the 
17th century, when it became the property of Sir 
Peter Mew ; by whose descendants, it was trans- 
mitted to the late J. Clark, Esq. who bequeathed 
it to Sir George Tapps, Bart. The Right Hon. 
George Rose, the present proprietor, became pos- 
sessed of it, by purchase, in 1790. The principal 
parts of the Castle, now remaining, are the ruins 
of the keep, or citadel, and of an ancient stone 
building, probably the state apartment. It appears 
to have been an elegant structure. 

The Priory was a very ancient foundation ; so 
ancient, indeed, that we have no records of the 
time of its original establishment. Its inmates were 
secular canons of the order of St. Augustine. Wil- 
liam Rufus bestowed the Church and Convent on 
Ralph Flambard, Bishop of Durham, who levelled 
the ancient buildings with the ground, and built a 
new Church, which was solemnly dedicated to 
Christ. When the possessions of this Priory were 
surrendered to Henry the Eighth, their annual nett 
value was estimated at 312/. 7s. 9d. Henry the 
Eighth granted the site of the Priory to Stephen 
Kirton, and Margaret, his wife ; and, in 1540, the 
Priory Church, and the Church- yard, and alt ap- 
purtenances, were granted to the Churchwardens, 
and inhabitants of the town for ever. About 50 
years ago, the late Gustavus Brander, Esq. pur- 
chased the site of the Pric ry. Some remains of the 
wall, which inclosed the Conventual buildings, are 
yet standing ; and, without it, to the south-east, is 
a meadow, still called the Convent Garden ; in a 
field, adjoining to which, are the vestige of several 
fish-ponds and stews. What seems to have been 

the 



HAMPSHIRE. 



505 



the lodge of the Priory, is occupied by a miller : 
and, from the initials J. 1). which appear on various 
parts of the building', it is thought to have been 
erected during 1 the time of John Draper, the last 
Prior. 

The Church a very large and interesting build- 
ing has been greatly altered since the time of Bi- 
shop Flatribard ; but it still displays some consider- 
able portions of his work, particularly in the nave, 
the south-western aisle, and the northern transept. 
The ancient stalls for the canons still remain : three 
of them have carved canopies : the whole number is 
36. The under sides of the benches of the stalls, 
and of many other seats, exhibit a curious series of 
grotesque and satirical representations, supposed to 
refer to the arts of the mendicant friars, who began 
to establish themselves. in England, in the 13th cen- 
tury. In one of these pieces of carved work, a friar 
is represented, under the emblem of a fox, (with a 
cock for his clerk,) preaching to a set of geese, 
who, unconscious of the fallacy, are greedily listen- 
ing to his deceitful words. In another, a zany, 
(which is intended to characterise the people at 
large,) whilst he turns his back upon a dish of por- 
ridge, has it licked up from him by a rat, (under 
which form we .again recognise the friar,) who takes 
this opportunity of committing the theft. Under 
another of the seats, is a baboon, with a cowl on 
his head, reposing on a pillow, and exhibiting an 
enormous swollen paunch. The ascent to the altar, 
is by a flight of four steps ; on the uppermost of 
which, ii an inscribed stone, in memory of Baldwin 
de Redvers, the second of that name, who died in 
1216. The altar-piece is a curious specimen of 
ancient carving in wood, supposed by Warner, to 
be coeval with Bishop Flambard. " It represents 
the genealogy of Christ, by a tree springing from 
the loins of Jesse, who is displayed in a recumbent 
position, supporting his head with his left hand. 
On each side of Jesse is a niche ; in one of which is 
David playing on his harp ; and, in the other Solo- 
mon, in a musing attitude. Above these the Virgin 
is displayed, seated, with the child Jesus in her lap, 
and near her Joseph, with the magi, and the pro- 
jecting heads of an ox and an ass ; in allusion to 
the circumstance of our Lord's birth." These are 
again surmounted by shepherds and sheep, in high 
relief; the former looking upward to a group of 
angels, immediately over whom, God the Father, 
decorated with wings, extends his arms. Exclusive 
of these figures, most of which are mutilated, there 
are two-and-thirty smaller ones of different saints, ' 
placed in regular corresponding niches, which any- 
one, well skilled in the Roman calendar, might 
identify, from the attributes or emblems they all 
individually bear : nine large niches are now desti- 
tute of the images that formerly ornamented them. 

On the terminations of the groins of the roof, 
above the Concamcracio, or open space behind the 
altar, are small half-length figures, bearing music 
scrolls, and wind and other musical instruments. 

VOL. ii. so. 81. 



Under the altar is a subterraneous Chapel, or crypt, 
in which the vestiges of a small altar may yet be 
discerned. In this part of the fabric, north from 
the altar, is a beautiful, but mutilated Chapel, which 
was erected by the venerable Margaret, Countess of 
Salisbury, for her burial-place, in the reign of Henry 
the Seventh. The roof, or vaulting, is intersected 
in a very elegant manner, having a representation 
of the Holy Trinity, within a circle in the centre, 
and a figure of the Countess, kneeling at tho feet of 
God the Father. At the eastern extremity are the 
Montacute arms, with supporters, and the motto, 
Spes mea in Deo est; and beneath these a shield, 
with the five wounds of Christ embossed upon it. 
The hexagonal pilasters, which support the Chapel, 
are highly enriched with sculptured ornaments : it 
has two fronts, one on the north-east side, and the 
other towards the altar. The original beauty of 
this structure was barbarously defaced by the Com- 
missioners who visited the Church at the Dissolu- 
tion. 

The eastern extremity of the Church is formed by 
a spacious Chapel, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, 
and supposed to have been built by the West family, 
ancestors to the Lord Delawar, about the conclu - 
sion of the fourteenth century. On each side of the 
altar is a tomb, in the respective walls, presumed to 
contain the remains of Alice, wife of Sir Thomas 
West, who died in 1395 ; and Thomas, her son. 
The arch of each recess displays elegant light shafts 
of Purbeck marble. Immediately over tliis Chapel, 
is a large room, called St. Michael's loft, which 
has been set apart, and used as a Free Grammar 
School Room, ever since the year 1662. A school 
is known to have existed in this town, so early as 
the time of the first Baldwin de Redvers. 

At the west end of the Church, rises a square and 
well-proportioned embattled tower, which seems to 
have been erected in the fifteenth century, by the 
Montacutes, Earls of Salisbury. The great win- 
dow is nearly 30 feet high, and embellished with 
tracery : above it, is a figure of the Saviour, stand- 
ing in a canopied niche, with his right hand raised, 
a cross in his left, and a crown of thorns on his head. 
The prospect, from the summit of the tower, is very 
extensive and beautiful. Amongst the sepulchral 
memorials, in this pile, are various slabs, covering 
the remains of Priors and Canons, most of which 
have Lad brasses, displaying the full-length effigies 
of the deceased ; and also inscriptions round tho 
verge of each stone, in Saxon or Gothic characters ; 
the most ancient of these marks the burial-place 
of Richard Mauri, who died Prior, in the year 
1297. In a small chantry, near the north transept, 
in front of which it formerly stood, is a curious 
altar-monument, with the full-length effigies, in 
alabaster, of a Knight and his Lady, traditionally 
recorded to have been erected to the memory of a 
Sir John Chidiock, of Dorsetshire, and his wife ; 
the former of whom perished in one of the battles 
fought during the struggle between the rival house* 
6M of 



HAMPSHIRE. 



of York anil Lancaster. The Knight is arrayed in 
armour, with his feet resting on a lion couchant : 
round his neck is a collar of SS. ; the Lady is 
attired in the mitred head-dress, and close garb of 
the fifteenth century. A monument has been raised 
here in memory of the late Gustavus Brander, Esq. 
who bequeathed a sum of money for the purchase of 
the organ. 

The building of this Church was expedited, ac- 
cording to a monkish legend, by the assistance of 
heaven, " a supernuraary workman being always 
observed during the hours of labour ; though, at 
the times of refreshment, and receiving wages, only 
the stated number appeared. By his aid, every 
thing prospered till the fabric was nearly finished, 
when, on raising a large beam to a particular situ- 
ation, where it was intended to be fixed, it was 
found to be too short ; no remedy appearing, the 
embarassed workmen retired to their dwellings. 
On returning to the Church the ensuing morning, 
they discovered that the beam had been placed in 
its right position, ai.d was now extended a foot 
longer than was requisite. Speechless with sur- 
prise, the additional workman occurred to their 
thoughts ; and, on recovering their tongues, they 
agreed, that no other than our Saviour could have 
assisted them ; and, on this account, concludes the 
story, was the edifice dedicated to Christ. The 
miraculous beam is still pointed out by the finger of 
credulity." 

The right of election, for Parliamentary repre- 
sentatives, is exercised by the Corporation, which 
consists of a Mayor, a Recorder, Aldermen, Bai- 
liffs, and a Common Council ; in all 24 persons : 
but Browne Willis, and others, have stated the real 



* This is chiefly occasioned by a bar ur ledge of sand, that ex- 
tends from the point called Hengislbury Head, on the Hamp- 
shire side, to St. Christopher's Cliff, in the Isle of Wight. The 
situation of this bar is occasionally shiited, and that from two 
circumstances ; either a succession of heavy rains, which in- 
crease the force of the waters discharged into the bay by the 
rivers Avon and Stour, or by sea storms, attended by southerly 
winds. Another circumstance peculiar to this harbour, and 
the neighbouring port of Poole, in Dorsetshire, is that of every 
tide producing two high waters. This phenomenon, so inex- 
plicable from the general law of tides, is occasioned by the si- 
tuation of this coast with respect to the Isleof Wight, and from 
the contraction of the ch?:'.nel by the jutting out of the point of 
land, on which Hurst Castle stands. The tide flows into this 
channel from the west ; and, though at Hurst Castle it sets in 
with uncommon violence, it does not meet the tide that passes 
round the island, till it has reached Spithead : now the passage 
being too narrow for all the water to pass through, the time of 
high water at H^ngistbury Head, is of course much earlier than 
either at Portsmouth or Chichester; at the full and change of 
the moon, the difference is three hours and a half. When the 
water begins to ebb, by flowing offfroui the west, the contrac- 
tion in the channel, at Hurst Castle, operates in a contrary 
direction; and, by confining the water that has spread itself 
over the whole surface of the Southampton water, and of the 
channel within the Island, gives the water in Christchurch bay, 
an opportunity of (lowing off much quicker, by which means it 
becomes so low, that the water that now pours through with 
great velocity at Hurst Castle, is sufficient to produce a second 
rise in Christchurch and Poole harbours, of nearly three feet. 



right to reside in the inhabitant householders, pay- 
ing scot and lot. According to the returns, iu 1811, 
the population of Christchurch, amounted to 1553. 
Many of the inhabitants derive employment from 
two large breweries established here ; others are 
employed in the salmon fishery, on the Avon and 
Stour, or in fishing round the neighbouring shores, 
which abound with various kinds offish. The poorer 
class of females, are mostly engaged in knitting stock- 
ings ; and many children are employed in Cox's ma- 
nufatory of watch-spring chains. The Poor House is 
conducted on an excellent plan, by which consider- 
j able sums are annually saved to the parish. Tho 
I former expenditure has also been materially less- 
ened by the establishment of several friendly so- 
cieties. 

From the hotel, at Christchurch, which is fitted 
up with every convenience, is a beautiful view of the 
sea, of the Needle Rocks at the west end of the Isle 
of Wight, &c. The bay or harbour of Christchurch, 
is spacious ; but it is too shallow and dangerous to 
be frequented by vessels that draw more than five 
feet and a half of water.* 

COLEMORE.] The village of Colemore, 5| miles 
S. by W. from Alton, is entitled to notice, as the 
birth-place of the celebrated astronomer and mathe- 
matician, John Greaves. f 

CRANUURY HOUSE.] Cranbury House, the seat 
of Sir Nathaniel Holland, Bart, better known as 
Nathaniel Dance, Esq. one of our finest painters, is 
one of the most delightful situations round South- 
ampton ; enjoying beautiful prospects of the Isle of 
Wight, Southampton river, &c. 

CROSS, St.] About one mile S. by W. from Win- 
chester, on the hanks of the Itchin, stands the 

f This gentleman was born in 1602. His father, who was 
rector of the parish, had four sons : John, the object of our im- 
mediate notice; Nicholas, Proctor cf Oxford University, in 
1640, and afterwards Dean of Dromore, in Ireland ; Thomas, 
Canon of Peterborough ; and Edward, Physician in Ordinary, 
to Charles the Second, who created him a Baronet. John, hav- 
ing received his early education under his father, at the age of 
fifteen, was entered of Haliol College, Oxford ; but afterwards 
removed to Morton College, where he obtained so much repu- 
tation, that in 1628, he was admitted perpetual fellow, and ob- 
tained the degree of Master of Arts. To increase his know- 
ledge of the mathematics, he studied the Oriental languages ; 
and, receiving pecuniary assistance from Archbishop Laud, he 
sailed for Egypt, in 1637. At Constantinople, he experienced 
a flattering reception from the illustrious patriarch, Cyril Lucar, 
who greatly assisted him in his search afier valuable Gri-ek and 
Arabic manuscripts; to purchase which, at whatever price, he 
had obtained a commission from Archbishop Laud. Proceed- 
ing to Egypt, the antiquities of Alexandria, and the pyramids, 
or sepulchres of the Egyptian Kings, were the objects of his re- 
search : his observations on these stupendous monuments, were 
published in 1645, under the title of Pyramidographia. He 
embarked for Europe, in 1639. Four years afterwards he was 
appointed Savilian Professor of Astronomy. On the triumph 
of the Parliament, he was expelled from the University, which 
he quilted with deep regel. He then repaired to London ; and, 
to render a trifling patrimony adequate to his maintenance, 
commenced the publication of his v\rilings. He died, in 1652, 
and was interred in St. Beimel' s Church. 

ancient 



HAMPSHIRE. 



507 



ancient Hospital of St. Cross ; an institution which 
has retained more of its original character, than any 
other similar remnant of ancient piety and charity in 
this island. " The lofty tower," observes Milner, 
in his history of Winchester, " with the grated door, 
and porter's lodge beneath it ; the retired ambula- 
tory ; the separate cells ; the common refectory ; 
the venerable church ; the black flowing dress, and 
the- silver cross, worn by the members ; the conven- 
tual appellation of ' brother,' with which they salute 
each other ; in short, the silence, the order, and the 
neatness that here reign, seem to recal the idea of a 
monastery to those who have seen one, and will give 
no' imperfect idea of such an establishment to those 
who have not had that advantage. This, however, 
never was a monastery, but only an hospital for the 
support of ancient and infirm men, living together in 
a regular and devout manner." The original founder 
was the Bishop Henry de Blois, who instituted it, 
between the years 11 3-2 and 1130, for the mainte- 
nance and residence of thirteen poor men ; and the 
relief of 100 others, the most indigent that could be 
found iu the city, but of good characters ; each of 
whom was ordered to be provided daily with a loaf 
of bread, three quarts of small beer, and two messes 
for his dinner, in a hall appointed for the purpose, 
and called Hundred Mennes Hall. Here was also 
an endowment for a master, a steward, four chap- 
lains, thirteen clerks, and seven choristers. Be- 
fore the time of Bishop Wykeham, who was ap- 
pointed to the See of Winchester in 136B, the reve- 
nues of this hospital had been appropriated to pur- 
poses very different from the intentions of the founder; 
and that prelate, being determined to reform the ex- 
isting abuses, succeeded, after a tedious litigation, 
both in the. spiritual and temporal courts He then 
re-established it on a secure and well ordered foun- 
dation ; tlw propriety and good effects of which were 
so apparent, that his successor, Cardinal Beaufort, 
being determined to engage in some permanent 
charity, resolved rather to enlarge this institution, 
than to found a new one. He therefore endowed it 
for the additional support of two priests, and thirty- 
live poor men, who were to become residents ; and 
three hospital nuns, who were to attend upon the 
sick brethren : he also caused a considerable portion 
of the hospital to be rebuilt. The present establish- 
ment is but the wreck of the two ancient institutions ; 
it having been severely fleeced, at the reformation. 
Instead of seventy residents, as well clergy "as laity, 
who were here entirely supported, besides 100 out- 
members, who daily received their meat and drink, 
the charity consists at present but of ten residing 
brethren, and three out-pensioners, exclusive of one 
chaplain and the master. Certain doles of bread, 
however, continued to be distributed to the poor of 
the neighbourhood ; and what is, perhaps, the only 
vestige in the kingdom, of the simplicity and hospi- 
tality of ancient times, the porter is daily furnished 
with a certain quantity of good bread and beer, of 
which every traveller, or other person whosoever, 



that knocks at the lodge, and calls for relief, is en- 
titled to partake gratuitously. The buildings of 
this hospital composed two courts ; but the south 
side of the interior quadrangle has been pulled down. 
On the east side of the first court is the f?imi3r?B=S|5eu> 
mstytil, which is about forty feet long, and is now 
converted into a brew-house: on the west is a range 
of offices ; and on the south, with portions of other 
buildings, the lofty and handsome tower gateway, 
erected by Cardinal Beaufort, whose statue, in his 
Cardinal's habit, is represented kneeling in an ele- 
gant niche in the upper part : two other niches, of 
the same form, but deprived of their statues, appear 
on the same level. In the cornice over the gates of 
this tower, we behold the Cardinal's hat, with the 
busts of his father, John of Gaunt ; of his royal 
nephews, Henry the Fourth, and Henry the Fifth ; 
and of his predecessor, Wykeham : in the spandrils, 
on each side, the founder's arms. The centre boss, 
in the groining of the gateway, is carved into a curious 
cross, composed of leaves, and surrounded with a 
crown 01 thorns : on the left is the door of the porter's 
lodge. On entering the second court, the first ob- 
ject is the ancient and interesting Church of St. 
Cross, which extends a considerable way into tin* 
court, and destroys its regularity on the east side. 
This edifice is built in the Cathedral form, with a 
nave and transept, and a low and massive tower 
rising from the intersection : the whole length of the 
Church is 150 feet ; the length of the transept is 1'20 
feet. The architecture of this structure is singularly 
curious, and particularly deserving the attention of 
the antiquary, as it appears to throw light on the 
progress, if not the origin of the pointed, or En- 
glish style. Milner considers the entire fabric as 
the work of Bishop de Blois, with the exception 
" of the front and upper story of the west end, 
which are of a later date, and seem to have bcew 
altered to their present form about the time of Wyke- 
ham. The vaulting of this part was evidently made 
by the second founder, Beaufort, whose arms, toge- 
ther with those of Wykeham, and of the hospital, 
are seen on the centre orbs of it : that at tbe east end, 
by the Saxon ornaments with which it is charged, 
bespeaks the workmanship of the first founder De 
Blois." The great west window is richly ornamented 
with painted glass, placed in it at the expence of the 
master, Dr. Lockmau, and consisting of ancient 
figures of saints ; and various arms, of modern exe- 
cution. In the choir are sixteen stalls, over which 
are curious sculptures of the most illustrious person- 
ages of scripture history. The most curious funeral 
memorials in this fabric, are an ancient brass, in 
memory of John de Campden, the friend of Wyke- 
ham, and master of this hospital ; and a modern 
mural monument for Wolfran Cornwall, Ksq. a 
late speaker of the House of Commons- Iu different 
parts of the pavement are numerous glazed tiles, 
with hatched and other ornaments ; some of them 
are inscribed with the monosyllables tyaiiffi u3.pj3Dffi,. 
(Remember,) in the black letter characters used in 

the 



508 



HAMPSHIRE. 



the fifteenth century. The west wing of the re- 
maining buildings of this hospital consists of the 
apartments of the brethren, each of whom has three 
small chambers for his own use, together with a 
separate garden. The south side of the court, being 
out of repair, was pulled down some years ago. 
On the north side is Beaufort's tower before men- 
tioned ; ami adjoining to it, the refectory, or com- 
mon hall, the rpof of which is composed of Irish 
oak, and left open to the timbers. The master's 
apartments, which are spacious and convenient, ad- 
join the hall : in the windows of one of the galleries 
is some curious painted glass. On the east side, 
extending from the north transept of the Church, 
is an open portico, 135 feet in length, anciently 
called the Ambulatory ; above it is the ancient In- 
firmary, and some chambers called the Nuns' rooms, 
from their having been allotted to the three hospital 
sisters, on the foundation of Cardinal Beaufort. 
St. Catherine's Hill, or College Hill, which is only 
separated from the meadows of St. Cross, by the 
different branches of the river Itchin, has already 
been mentioned for the ancient entrenchment, on its 
summit. On this eminence also, near the top, on 
the north-east side, is the form of a labyrinth im- 
pressed on the turf by the continued coursings of 
the students of Winchester College, who frequently 
thread its mazes in the full spirit of exercise and 
youthful enjoyment. 

CRUXEASTON.] The village of Cruxeaston, 6| 
miles N. N. W. from Whitchurch, was once famous 
for its grotto, constructed by nine sisters, of the 
name of Lisle, and celebrated by Pope. Only the 
shell of the grotto remains ; the estate having passed 
into other hands, it was suffered to go to ruin. 
The front was of flint ; the interior studded with 
shells, scoriae of iron ore, and other substances : 
it contained a seat for each sister, with a niche for 
the presiding magician.* 

CUFFNELLS.] Near the centre of the New Forest, 
about a mile W. from Lyndhurst, stands Cuflfnells, 
thedelightful residence of the Right Hon. Go. Rose. 
It possesses many fine advantages of scenery, which 
cannot fail to gratify the eye of taste. In the grounds, 
the little which nature required has been admirably 
supplied by art. The mansion which occupies a 
rising ground, embosomed with trees, is calculated 
more for internal convenience, and domestic com- 
fort, than splendour. It was the property of the 
late Sir Thomas Tancred, of whose heirs it was pur- 
chased about thirty years ago, by Mr. Rose. The 
south front is formed by a drawing room, thirty-six 
feet by twenty-four; the library, forty-two feet by 

* Edward Lisle, Esq- the father of the nine sisters, died at 
Cruxeaston, in 1722. He had twenty children, seventeen of 
whom survived him: he was author of a work entitled, "Ob- 
servations upon Agriculture." One of his sons, Ur. Thomas 
Lisle, was author of Porsenna, Kinp of Russia, and other in- 
genious productions, preserved in Dodley's Collection : he 
died Rector of Btirghclere, in 176j-(i. Margaret, the younger 
sister possessed great talents for painting ; three of her pieces in 



twenty-four ; a handsome vestibule, and the con- 
servatory : the latter, filled with a choice assemblage 
of indigenous and exotic plants, communicates with 
the library, which is supposed to contain one of the 
most valuable private collections in the kingdom. 
It came into the possession of Mr. Rose from the 
late Earl of Marchmont, who died in 1792 ; and to 
whom Mr. Rose was sole executor. A whole length 
portrait of the Earl, in his robes, as worn at the 
coronation, occupies the place over the chimney in 
this apartment. In the drawing room is a half 
length of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, by Sir 
Godfrey Kneller. Here is also an original picture 
of William the Third, with whom Sir Patrick Hume, 
afterwards created Earl of Marchmont, returned to 
England ; and a few other original portraits of inti- 
mate friends of the Earl, who were remarkable as 
statesman or authors. Their Majesties honoured 
Cuffnells with their presence, in the years 1801 and 
1804. 

DANEBURY HILL.] Eastward of Stockbridge, is 
Danebury Hill, a long elevated ridge, running 
nearly E. and W. and terminating abruptly in a 
point. On the top is a circular Roman entrench- 
ment, in good preservation. On the W. and N. W. 
of the camp are several barrows ; one of them, about 
a mile distant, has the name of Canute's Barrow. 
Five miles N. W. from Danebury Hill, is another 
considerable camp, on the summit of Quarley Mount, 
and supposed to be a British work opposing that of 
the Romans at Danebury. In this neighbourhood, 
various tumuli are scattered over the downs. 

DraDEN.] At Dibden, formerly an eminent vil- 
lage, three miles S. W. from Southampton, was a 
fishery and a salt- work at the time of the Domesday 
Survey. The Church is old, mean, and incommo- 
dious. In the church yard is an immense yew tree, 
the shaft of which is about 30 feet round near the 
root. About 140 acres of marsh and mud-lands 
were securely embanked here, a few years ago, at 
the expense of Lord Malmsbury. 

DENNIS.] On the banks of the Itchin, at a little 
distance from Portswood House, stand the ruins of 
the ancient Priory of St. Dyonisius, vulgarly called 
St. Dennis's Priory, which was founded by Henry 
the First for the Black Canons of St. Austin. A 
farm house occupies part of the site, which belongs 
to General Stibhert, of Portswood House. Here 
are some stone coffins, converted into troughs, Ice. 

DOGMERSFIELD PARK.] Two miles E. by N. from 
Odiliara, is Dogmersfield Park, the seat of Sir 
Henry Mildmay, Bart. The Archbishops of Can- 
terbury had a palace here as early as the twelfth 

crayons are preserved by Lord Caemavon ; two of them at 
High-clere house, are copies of ancient portraits of Sir Richard 
and Lady Kingmill, admirably executed. On the trees of the 
grove surrounding the Grotto, she painted the portraits of seve- 
ral of her acquaintance, in a manner which produced a singu- 
lar effect, as they appeared to form parts of the trees them- 
selves. This Lady lived till betweeu ninety and a hundred 
years of age. 

century. 



HAMPSHIRE. 



soy 



century. Some extensive foundations, supposed to 
belong to this building, were discovered here a few 
years ago. The present mansion is a very exten- 
sive building, seated on an eminence, in a park 
containing about 700 acres, and commanding some 
distant views of the open country. It has two fronts, 
and contains several spacious and elegant apart- 
ments, decorated with some good paintings of the 
Italian, Venetian, and Flemish schools. In the 
library is a very valuable collection of books, amount- 
ing to upwards of 5000 volumes, among which is a 
choice collection of Topographical Works. The 
park includes a great diversity of ground, and is 
very beautifully wooded. The Shrubbery and plea- 
sure grounds were laid out by Ernes. Near the 
house is a lake of about forty-four acres. Immedi- 
ately adjoining the park, lies an extensive common, 
covered with oak trees and hollies, and in many 
parts bearing a striking resemblance to the New 
Forest. In the new plantations, considerable atten- 
tion has been given to the cultivation of ash timber. 

EAGLEHURST.] On the sea coast, N. E. of the 
hamlet of Leap, stands a whimsical kind of build- 
ing, called Eaglehurst, or Luttrell's Folly, having 
been erected by the Hon. Temple Luttrell. Raised 
as a prospect house, it occupies a beautiful and com- 
manding eminence, which has been formed into a 
terrace, extending a considerable way along the 
beach. This edifice is in the form of a lofty tower, 
in which are the banqueting and sitting rooms, fitted 
up in a very expensive and splendid fetyle ; the offi- 
ces are detached. This estate now belongs to the 
Earl of Cavan. 

ELING.] Eling, an extensive parish, and an- 
ciently a place of note, lies five miles W. by N. 
from Southampton. In sinking a well here, a few 
years ago, a quantity of fossil shells was discovered, 
88 feet from the surface. About two miles S. W. 
from Eling, is the beautiful Forest Lawn, called 
Hound's Down. It abounds with deer, and is re- 
garded as one of the best pasture grounds in the 
New Forest. The landscape is also eminently 
beautiful. 

ELLINGHAM.] At Ellingham, 2| miles N. by W. 
from Kingwood, was a cell founded in the reign of 
Henry the Second, by William de Solanis, subor- 
dinate to the Abbey of St. Saviour in Normandy, 
but at its dissolution given by Henry the Sixth to 
Eton College. Some remains of the ancient build- 
ing are supposed to exist in the nave of the Church. 
The altar piece is a fine painting of the day ol'judg- j 
inent, presented by the late Lord Windsor, one of ! 
whose ancestors brought it from the bay of Cadiz, ; 
where a lauding was effected in the year 1702, and j 
several churches plundered. A plain stone in the ! 
Church yard is inscribed to the memory of Dame ! 
Alicia Lisle, whom the blood thirsty Jefferies con- ' 
demned to be executed at the age of eighty, for 
si-creting two dissenting ministers after the defeat of 
the Duke of Monmouth at Sedgemoor. Her hus- 
band, Colonel John Lisle, was one of the Lords 

VOL. n. no. 82. 



Commissioners of the vireat Seal in the time of 
Cromwell, and a judge on the trial of Charles the 
First ; circumstances which probably led to the con- 
demnation and murder of the Lady, who was a 
known royalist, and had a son in the King's army 
that fought against the Duke of Monmouth. The 
Colonel, who retired to the Continent on the eve of 
the restoration, was proscribed by the Parliament of 
Charles the Second, and is said to have been shot 
dead at Lausanne, in Switzerland, by three ruffians 
engaged for the purpose by some of the royal family. 
The grand-daughter of this ill-fated couple married 
Lord James Russel, fifth son of the first Duke of 
Bedford, and brother to the unfortunate Lord 
Russel. 

ELVETHAM.] About 1| mile S. S. E. from Hart- 
ford bridge, is Elvetham, formerly a place of con- 
siderable extent ' and magnificence, anil celebrated 
from a splendid entertainment given here by the 
Earl of Hertford to Queen Elizabeth, in the year 
1591. The entertainments were continued four 
days ; and, in addition to the delights of the table, 
consisted of a splendid displav of pageantry, inter- 
mixed with discharges of artillery and fire works, 
and enlivened by music, dancing, and singing ; 
with occasional orations spoken by the characters in 
the pageants. William, grandson of the nobleman 
who thus entertained Elizabeth, sold Elvetham to 
Robert Reynolds, Esq. whose daughter, Priscilla, 
married Reynolds Calthorpe, Esq. from whom the 
present owner, Lord Calthorpe, is maternally de- 
scended. The mansion, which had been consider- 
ably reduced, and greatly dilapidated from neglect, 
was repaired by the late Lord, and rendered an 
eligible residence. The Park and grounds include 
an area of about two miles in circumference. 

EMS WORTH.] Emsworth, famous for its oysters, 
lies two miles E. by S. from Havant. It is an im- 
proving place. Many small vessels are employed 
here ; and the inhabitants derive additional suste- 
nance from ship building, rope making, &c. In the 
winter of 1739, a swan was killed in the harbour, 
having a collar round its neck, bearing the royal 
arms of Denmark. 

EWSHOT."" - Evsliot, four miles E. from Odiham, 
is an interestl g and delightful residence : the man- 
sion is span otis,a nd the grounds are diversified and 
beautiful. It s now, or was recently, the seat of 
11. Maxwell, Eeq. 

EXBURY.] Eight miles E. by N. from Lymington 
is Exbury house, the seat of Colonel Blitlord, author 
of the History of Greece. The views are extremely 
fine : this demesne is about eight miles in circum- 
ference. 

FAREHAM.] The market town of Farcham go- 
verned by a bailiff and other officers lies l\\ miles 
E. S. E. from Southampton, and 7;J S. W. from 
London. Though " only a fischar village," in Le- 
land's time, it is now a respectable and populous 
town, chiefly inhabited by persons employed in mari- 
time pccupations. It is indebted for its whole im- 
6 N portance 



510 



HAMPSHIRE. 



portance to the naval establishment at Portsmouth. 
Sloops, and smaller vessels, are built here ; and a 
considerable trade in corn and coal is carried on. 
The population, as returned under the late act, was 
8325. The situation is pleasant, and is enlivened 
by various handsome scats in the neighbourhood. 

FoRDiNGBRinai;.]-r-The little market town of 
Fordingbridge lies on the north-west side of the 
Avon, 16 milos W. by N. from Southampton, and 
fl2i S. VV. by W. from London. At the time of the 
Domesday Survey, it had a Church, and two mills. 
Here is a manufactory of checks and bed ticks, and 
A calico printing ground. The inhabitants of this 
parish, as returned under the late act, amounted to 
2259. 

FORTON.] Near the pleasant and populous hamlet 
of Forton, on the road from Portsmouth to Gosport, 
stands the French prison, an extensive range of 
buildings with an hospital, &c. secured by a strong 
iuclosure, and strictly guarded. Near Forton lake, 
A creek of Portsmouth harbour, about a mile to the 
north of Gosport, stands the New Military Hospi- 
tal. The buildings consist of four pavilions, joined 
by an arcade, with offices, &c. In each pavilion 
are six large wards, and accommodations adapted 
for attendants. On the north side of the Lake, is 
the magazine, where, a smaller building, on an 
island above, contains all the powder destined for 
the service of this port. The magazine is bomb 
proof, and strongly arched; near it are the ruins of 
an ancient Castle, called Borough Castle, which 
Tradition ascribes to King Stephen. 

FREF.MANTLE.] About a mile and a half north- 
west from Southampton, is Freemantle, the seat of 
John Jarret, Esq. The interior of the mansion is 
very elegantly ornamented ; particularly a parlour, 
the sides of which are veneered with choice marble. 
The library and drawing room are tastefully orna- 
mented with arebusque paintings. Two neat lodges, 
of artificial stone, have been erected here. 

GODSHILI..] At Godshill, formerly Godmanescap, 
2| miles E. by.N. from Fordingbridge, is an ancient 
encampment, defended by a double trench and ram- 
parts, and secured by the steepness of the hill, which 
is overgrown with oaks. 

GOSPORT.] Gosport lies 17f miles, S. E. by E. 
from Southampton, and 78{ S. VV. from London, 
which, though in Leland's time, only a village, 
inhabited by fishermen, is now an extensive market 
town, with a considerable trade, particularly in 
aimes of war, from its contiguity to Portsmouth. 
Its importance, indeed, is so great, that it has been 
regularly fortified on the laud side, by a line of bas- 
tions, redoubts, counterscarps, &c. which extends 
from Weovil to Stoke, or more properly, Alverstoke 
.Lake. Within the works on the YVVovil side, is the 
King's brewery and cooperage, with an immense 
i-ange of^tore houses for wine, malt, hops, &.C. 
This place communicates with the sea by means of a 
large bason and canal, with extensive quays, where 
vessels of considerable burthen can take iu their 



stores. Many small sloops belonging to Weovil arc 
employed in the conveyance of stores to the ships 
the harbour. On the Weovil side are also the ne'n 
barracks, an extensive range of buildings, with 
every convenience for a great number of men. The 
approach to Gosport by water is extremely line, as 
the various forts, and large piles of building in its 
vicinity are then seen to great advantage : and the 
town itself, considered as a seaport, is well built, 
and handsome. The principal street extends west- 
ward from the harbour to the works, but is some- 
what obstructed by the market house ; others run 
parallel with this, and, like it, arc crossed by \arious 
lesser streets, &c. Exclusively of these, different 
ranges of buildings extend along the shore, and near 
the fortifications, for the most part consisting of 
respectable dwellings. 

Gosport is a chapelry to the neighbouring village 
of Alverstoke. The Chapel is a spacious building, 
standing in a large well-planted cemctry, to the 
south of the town. The organ was formerly the 
property of the Duke of Chandos, of Canons. Here 
is a large meeting house for Dissenters, and a 
Chapel for Roman Catholics. Several Charity 
Schools have been established here by subscription ; 
with some alms houses for distressed widows ; and 
a large-, airy, and commodious workhouse for the 
poor. Fish and vegetables are sold here in great 
plenty ; the latter are brought from a considerable 
distance inland, and also from the Isle of Wight. 
Here are several breweries, and a Tery extensive 
iron foundry. 

The amusements of the more respectable classes, 
in this town, are sought in a monthly assembly, with 
occasional concerts : a neat theatre has also been 
erected. The population of the parish of Alverstoke, 
including the inhabitants of this town, was returned 
under the act of 1811, at 12,212; the number of 
houses at 2145. The population of Gosport alone 
was 7788 ; of which, 3483 were males, and 4305 
females. 

The police is well regulated. The connection be- 
tween Gosport and Portsmouth is preserved by th 
numerous ferry boats that ply across the harbour^ 
which in this part is about three quarters of a milfe 
over. 

The Royal Hospital at Haslar, or Haslar Farm, 
for the reception of sick and wounded seamen, was 
built between the years 1740 and 1762, on the re- 
commendation of the late Earl of Sandwich. "It 
is situated within 400 yards of the extremity of the 
point of land which bounds the west side of the en- 
trance to Portsmouth harbour, and consists of an 
extensive front, and two wings, each consisting of 
two distinct ranges of building. These stand within 
the airing ground, which is almost a mile in circum- 
ference, and surrounded by a wall twelve feet high. 
Opposite the grand entrance is a neat military pavi- 
lion, or guard house, where a constant guard of 
| marines is kept to prevent desertion. The extent of 
tne grand front, or centre building, is 189 yar^ls : 

the 



HAMPSFIIRE. 



511 



the pediment displays a sculpture, in Portland atone, 
of the royal arms, with the figures of navigation and 
commerce, (the former pouring balm upon the wounds 
6f a sailor,) and other appropriate ornaments : the 
length of each wing is about 184 yards. The wards 
are all uniform, 60 feet long, and twenty-four broad ; 
each containing accommodations for twenty patients, 
with apartments for nurses, &c. Several other 
buildings are also within the walls for the use of the 
Governor, Lieutenants, and other officers and ser- 
vants belonging to the establishment, which consists 
6f more than 200 persons : the Chapel is 'a neat edi- 
fice, 72 feet in length, and 30 broad. Upwards of 
2000 sick or wounded men can be admitted at the 
aame time into this hospital. The regular expences 
of the establishment in salaries, &c. is upwards of 
SOOO/. annually." 

At the distance of about three quarters of a mile 
south-west from Haslar Hospital, is Fort Monktou, 
a modern regular fortification, exceedingly strong, 
and defended by thirty-two pieces of heavy ord- 
nance : to the westward, ranges a strong redoubt ; 
which, with the fort, effectually secures this part of 
the coast. To the westward, a high and massive 
stone wall lias been erected, to preserve the land 
from the ravages of the sea. Still further to the east, 
and near the extremity of the neck of land which 
bounds the entrance of the harbour on this side is the 
Block House, a very strong fort, defended by a bat- 
tery of extensive range and power. 

GRANGE PARK.] At a short distance from Nor- 
thington, is Grange Park, which was the seat of the 
Henleys nearly a century and a half, and till their 
extinction on the death of the late Earl of Northing- 
ton ; after which, the estate was sold to Henry 
Drummond, Esq. the celebrated banker. The 
house was built by Sir Robert Henley, Master of 
the King's Bench office, from the designs of Inigo 
Jones; and Horace Walpole pronounces it one of 
Ills best works. Its situation is low ; but the grounds 
are varied and beautiful. 

GROVE PLACE. Grove Place, the seat of Sir C. 
Rich, Bart, stands about five miles from Southamp- 
ton, on the Rumsey road. The situation is pleasant 
-and picturesque. 

HACK WOOD PARK.] Hackwood Park, the seat of 
Thomas Orde Poulett, Baron Bolton, in right of his 
Lady, the daughter of Charles, last Duke of Bol- 
tow, is situated about two miles S. W. from Old 
Rasing. The demesne is very extensive : the sur- 
face is boldly irregular, and partakes of the beauti- 
ful character of the neighbouring chalk downs. The 
scenery is picturesque; and the views are diversified 
by large groves of fine oak, ash, and beech trees, in- 
terspersed with thorns of extraordinary size and 
luxuriance. The soil is peculiarly congenial to the 
beech trees, which rise to an immense height, with 
boles of uncommon girth, and large and spreading 
branches : these trees, covering large tracts, both 
in the park, and on a contiguous farm, assume, at a 
distance, the appearance of n extensive forest. 



The mansion, situated towards the western boun- 
dary of the Park, is encompassed by about 100 acres 
of pleasure grounds, disposed into lawn, terrace, 
shrubbery, and a noble wood, in which are many of 
the finest trees of the whole estate. Over these tho 
ivy has been suffered to grow; and by its rising to 
the highest brandies, and thence hanging in rich and 
loose chains of thick foliage, it produces a very'sin- 
gular effect of beauty. Various improvements have 
been made in the pleasure grounds, by Lord Bol- 
ton, particularly on the south, which had been origi- 
nally arranged in the old style, by terraces, flights 
of steps, with pedestals and statues, leading to a 
great reservoir of water, and terminated by angular 
ramparts, bastions, &c. The views from the house 
were also intercepted by high yew-tree hedges, 
skirting long and formal avenues. In the wood near 
the house are two ornamental buildings, used in the 
summer for purposes of recreation. One of these 
is in a part which was formerly used as a menagerie 
for aquatic birds ; and there is still within its circuit 
a considerable sheet of fine w;iter. This building 
has a very handsome front, of the Doric order, witli 
an open colonadc in the centre, and a small, neat 
apartment, on each side ; the whole assuming the 
appearance of a vestibule. The other building is 
situated in a part called the French Garden ; aud 
the grounds immediately surrounding it, were, in- 
deed, formerly twisted into shapes, which fully en- 
titled it to that appellation. It consists of lour equal 
fronts, with a central dome, having somewhat of the. 
heavy character which marked the general style of its 
architect, Sir John Vanbrugh. The apnrtraent 
within is spacious, and is handsomely stuccoed, and 
paved with marble. It is said to have been used as 
a music room, during the time of the third Duke.. 
The wild umbrageous vistas opening from three of 
the fronts, and decorated with flowering shrubs, and 
double ftlossomiug fruit, trees, are striking and beau- 
tiful. The lower parts of the wood are in a state of 
wild and luxuriant nature, with coppice plants and 
shrubs, sheltered beneath lofty timber trees. In tlu> 
midst of this wilderness, is a space containing above 
four acres, assuming the form of a vast ancient 
theatre, the boundary of which is composed of elms 
closely planted, and rather inclining inward, so as 
to project their lofty heads, anil extended branches, 
over the sides and ends of the area : tire stage is a 
flat lawn, at the lower end, from which seats of turf 
gradually rise in sweeping divisions, leaving one 
grand broad passage in the middle, from (he bottom 
to the top, which terminates in a large circular re- 
cess, having in the midst the ruins of a circular 
Grecian temple, which, from the remains, appear* 
to have been constructed with great elegance. The., 
most striking view of this theatre is obtained from 
the entry through the thicket at the bottom of tho 
stage. The whole of these pleasure grounds, with 
the adjoining parts of the Park, are thought to have 
formerly composed one large wood ; ami they appear 
to have been connected with Busing House and Cns.-. 

' tte 



HAMPSHIRE. 



tie by long avenues of chesnuts, some of which still 
exist4 and long steins, of considerable height,- have 
grown lip from the undecayed parts of others. It 
was then appropriated to the favourite diversion of 
hawking ; and the name which it seems originally 
to have borne, was Hawking Wood. The Park 
tjontains between 500 and 600 head of deer. 

The house was originally a lodge, built in Queen 
Elizabeth's time, and used as a place of meeting 
for the company assembled for the purpose of hawk- 
ing, and as a banquetting room after the sport was 
over : the lodge now forms the central part of the 
building. Alter the demolition of the principal seat 
at Old Basing, a dwelling was formed out of the 
ruins of 1 lie lower house ; and here John, Marquis 
of Winchester, and his son, afterwards first Duke 
of Bolton, occasionally resided. Hackwood appears 
to have been completed about the year 1688, as the 
great exterior pipes from the roof, the :nsterns, 
cheeks and backs of grates, &c. bear that date. 
The general form of the house, as tlvn altered, 
v.'iis a large central building, connected with two 
considerable wings by open corridors. Various 
alterations have since been made ; and in the time 
-of the last Duke of Bolton, the great Hall, which, 
in its original state, was open from the ground- 
floor to the roof, had a new floor introduced at 
the height of twenty feet : the space below it, was, 
at the same' period, adapted to the reception of 
some very fine old wainscot, (brought from Ab- 
'botstone, near Alresford) enriched by most excel- 
lent carving by Gibbons. Various other improve- 
ments were also then made ; the corridors were 
closed in ; and some good offices were erected, 
'together with the stables, and a spacious riding 
house. Notwithstanding these alterations, the man- 
sion was found in many respects inconvenient, when 
it came into the possession of Lord Bolton, who 
has erected a new front on the north, about twenty 
four feet from the old one, and connected with the 
old wings by a sweep of more grace and utility. 
By this means, an excellent entrance Hall has 
been formed, forty feet, by twenty four; several 
of the old apartments have been enlarged, and 
various new ones added, so as to render the whole a 
handsome and complete family residence. Amongst 
numerous fine portraits in this mansion is, a full 
length of the Marchioness of Winchester, who vali- 
antly aided in the defence of Basing Castle; and 
also wrote a journal of the proceedings relating to 
the siege : the Castle was taken during her absence. 
Here is also a three-quarter portrait of the third 
Duke of Bolton, who married Miss Fenton, the 
original Polly Peachem of the Beggar's Opera. 

HAMBLE.] At the little village of Humble, or 
JIamble-en-le-Rice, 4| miles S. E. from South- 
ampton, was anciently an alien Priory of Cister- 
cians, a cell to Tyrone Abbey, in France. 

HAVANT.] The neat and respectable market-town 
of Havant, which consists chiefly of one long street, 
crossed by a second at right angles, lies 2'2 miles 



E. by S. from Southampton, and 66 S.W. from 
London. Its population, supported chiefly by fowl- 
ing and fishing, is about 1824. The market was 
granted by King John. The Church stands in the 
centre of the town : it is in the form of a cross, 
with a tower rising from the intersection. 

HAYHNG.] Hayling Isle, a short distance S. 
from Havant, includes about 5000 acres of land, 
completely surrounded by the sea, and divided into 
the parishes of North Hayling, and South Hayling. 
The land is, in great part, arable ; and lets, on an 
average, for about fifteen shillings an acre. The 
principal branch of trade is the making of salt, 
which has been an article of manufacture here time 
immemorial. One saltern, and two fisheries, are 
recorded in the Domesday survey. The manor be- 
longed to the Monastery at Winchester, but was 
alienated, and afterwards granted by Henry 'the 
First, to a Priory which had been founded here 
previously to the Norman Conquest. Its posses- 
sions were subsequently given, by Henry the Fifth, 
to his new foundation of Carthusians, at Sheen. 
On the dissolution of the lesser Monasteries, the 
lands of Hayling Priory were granted to the Col- 
lege at Arundel : and, on the surrender of that Col- 
lege, they were re-granted to Henry, Earl of Arun- 
del, in whese i'amily they remain. A small Church 
has been built in each parish. The houses are prin- 
cipally constructed of brick, manufactured on the 
island : their number, in 1811, was 127 ; that of in- 
habitants, 020. Here is an establishment belonging 
to the Excise, to prevent smuggling. Over the bar 
or bed of sand, at the entrance of Langstone har- 
bour, which lies between this island, and that of 
Portsea, is sufficient depth of water for- vessels of 
from 30 to 70 tons ; and several of those sizes are 
employed in importing corn and coal. The oyster 
fishery was formerly considerable here. The con- 
vict ships are stationed in the harbour of this is 
land. 

HENGISTBURY HEAD] This promontory, gene- 
rally called Christ Church Head, from its apparent 
connection with that Church, as viewed from the 
sea, forms the western termination of Christ Church 
bay. About a mile .from the extremity of the point, 
the cliff dips for a considerable distance, and the 
estuary of the Stour and Avon is there only sepa- 
rated from the sea by a narrow neck of land. 
Across this is an ancient entrenchment, in length 
about 080 yards. Near the northern termination, is 
a large barrow, in which human bones, and an urn. 
have been found. The entrenchment is thought to 
have been of Saxon origin ; though some have at- 
tributed it to the Danes, as the harbour was so pe- 
culiarly well adapted to shelter their small vessels. 

HiGHCLKiiu.] About eight miles N. by W. from 
Whitchurch, is Highclere, the seat of the Earl of 
Carnarvon. It anciently belonged to the Bishops 
of Winchester, who had a house and park here. 
In 1552, it was granted by Edward the Sixth, with 
the mapor and i'ree warren of Burghclere, to Wil- 
liam 



HAMPSHIRE. 



513 



liam FitK-William, Msq. afterwards Sir William, 
one of <he gentlemen of his beil-cliamber. This 
grant was annulled by Queen Mary, but renewed by 
Elizabeth, in the first year of her reign, and the 
estate continued in possession of the assigns of Sir 
William Fitz-William till it was purchased by Sir 
Robert Sawyer, Attorney-General to Charles the 
Second, and James the Second.* The mansion is 
situated on a rising ground, in a noble park, up- 
wards of 13 miles in circumference. Part of it was 
built upon the old site, by the Hon. Robert Herbert : 
but it has been greatly enlarged and improved by 
Lord Carnarvon. It is a brick structure, stuccoed, 
in a modern style of architecture, and more distin- 
guished for elegance, than splendour of appearance. 
Various portraits are preserved here, with other 
good paintings, and cabinet pictures ; but the chief 
glory of Highclere is its park and pleasure-ground*, 
of which few places of similar extent in the inland 
parts of the kingdom, can boast of surface more 
varied, or scenery more interesting. " The most 
striking feature of the purk, is Sfdon Hill, the ascent 
of which begins about half a mile to the south from 
the house : the summit ol this eminence boldly rises 
upwards of 400 feet in perpendicular height above 
the level of a neighbouring valley, and is crowned 
with a ruined arch, backed by venerable woods ; the 
plantations on its sides are also disposed with great 
beauty : and the drives, which wind along to the 
summit, present various extensive views over the 
park and surrounding country. Beacon Hill, to 
the south-east of this, and just without the park 
, gtite, forms a striking contrast to it, not a single 
tree appearing thereon. The entrance into the park 
from Winchester, is between these hills, by an arch- 
ed gateway, bearing a trophy of arms over the prin- 
cipal arch. On the opposite side of Sidon Hill, is 
ji castellated lodge, ' bosom'd high in tufted trees,' 
of a triangular form, with a turret at each angle. 
The view from Tent- Hill, a bold elevation on the 
northarn side of the park, with a grove on its sum- 
mit, is very extensive. The house is seen at a mile 
and a half distance, with Sidon Hill, and its plan- 
tations, magnificently rising in the back-ground : in 
front is a most luxurious display of wood and water. ' 
To the right, Milford water appears in the dis- 
tance ; this extensive sheet derives peculiar charms 
from its secluded situation, and the venerable anti- 
quity of the surrounding woods, in which it is com- 
pletely enveloped. On this water is a pile of build- 
ing, comprehending a dining-room, kitchen, and 
other appendages. From this spot, drives' have 
been formed through the plantations to Clare Brow, 
where the prospect of the house, and surrounding 
scenery, is very fine. Extensive rides, admitting 



* lie resided at Highclere, the latter years of his I if.-, ami 
\vas buried in the p.irish Church, which he rebuilt. Hi<; only 
laughter, Margaret, married Thomas, Earl of Pembroke ; anil 
ly Sir Robert Sawyer's will, this property devolved upon her 
second son, the Hon. Robert Herbert; and, his death, in 

VOL. n. NO. 82. 



beautiful views, have also been made through Pen 
Wood, a large tract of oak, interspersed with abun- 
dance of hollies, many of them of uiisiHual size. 
Several ornamental buildings have been erected in 
different parts of this demesne. 

Beacon Hill, mentioned above, is remarkable for 
an ancient camp, which occupies its fiat summit, and 
which, though so conspicuously situated, and in 
such excellent preservation, has scarcely been no- 
ticed by antiquaries. Within the area, are several 
vestiges of ancient huts, probably of British origin, 
as they are of a circular form, rather elevated, with 
a small depression in the centre ; and on removing 
the thick moss, appear pitched with Hints ; upon a 
ridge to the north is a turf elevation, apparently 
intended as an out-post. On a plain, about a mile 
from this camp, are seven tumuli, or barrows, of 
considerable size ; and three of much less elevation. 
The largest is about 100 yards in circumference, and 
ten or twelve feet high. About a mile and a half 
eastward from Beacon Hill, on an eminence called 
Ladle Hill, is a circular encampment, including an 
area of nearly eight acres ; and at a little distance 
north-north-east, on the declivity of the hill, is an- 
other small circular work, probably intended as an 
out-post. Southward of the larger camp are three 
barrows. 

HIGH CLIFF.] In the neighbourhood of Hengist- 
bury Head, is High Cliff, which obtained consider- 
able celebrity from a sumptuous mansion erected 
here by the late Earl of Bute, for the advantage of 
the sea air, and extent of the prospect. The danger- 
ous nature of the situation, however, and other cir- 
cumstances, have occasioned this seat to be neg- 
lected, and part of the building to be taken down. 

HORDWELL.] The parish of Hordle, or Hord- 
well, lies 4 miles W. S. W. from Lymingtoii. On 
the sea coast, within the manors of Milford and 
Hordle, traces of the ancient Salinac, or Salt works, 
may yet be discovered at low ebbs of the tide. From 
the bold and lofty eminence, called Hordwcll Cliff, 
is a grand view of the ocean, which here appears to 
compose a capacious bay : its eastern extremity be- 
ing formed by the Isle of Wight, and its western 
point by Hengistbury Head. Hordwell Church ap- 
pears to be as ancient as the reign of Edward the 
Confessor. Christopher Clarke, some time Lord 
of this manor, died in 1730, at the ago of 112. The- 
cliffs on this coast abound with fossil shells, a stra- 
tum of which is thought lo range through the whole 
of (he New Forest, in a north-eastern direction. In 
some places on this coast, the violence of the waves, 
combining with the effects of the springs, is recorded 
to have incroached upon the land a quarter of a mil* 
within the last 40 or 50 years. 



1769, it came to hi* nephew, the Earl of Carnarvon, who pur- 
chased of the Bishop of Winchester, under the act tor the re> 
<lr nipt ion of the land-tax, the manors of East Woixllay, A-li- 
rnar.sworth, Itching-jell, and \ewtowii..f<'rmii)g the reiuaiiuler. 
of the ancient bailiwick of liighclrre. 
H o 



514 



HAMPSHIRE. 



HURSLEY.] The extensive parish of Hursley lies 
5\ miles S. W. by W. from Winchester. In the old 
mansion of Hursley Park, Richard, the son of 
Oliver Cromwell, resided during great pnrt of the 
time that his father held the Protectorate, and hither 
also he retired for a short period previously to the 
restoration, and to his voluntary exile on the Conti- 
nent. He returned to England abont 1680; and 
some years afterwards instituted a process against 
his daughters, who, having obtained possession of 
the Hursley estate, refused to deliver it up, but 
offered him a small annuity in lieu of his right. On 
this occasion lu> was obliged to appear in Westmin- 
ster Hall, where the Lord Chief Justice Holt treated 
him with great respect, allowed him to appear cover- 
ed, indulged him with a seat on account of his age, 
p. ml made au order in his favour. On leaving the 
court, Richard rambled into the House of Lords : 
when the house broke up, a stranger to his his- 
tory asked him if he had ever heard or seen any 
thing like it before ? "Never" he replied, "since 
I sat in that chair ;" pointing, at the same time, to 
the throne. After the death of Richard, his daugh- j 
ter sold the family estate to Sir W'illiam Heathcote, 
Bart, for 34 or 35,000/.* 

Hursley lodge, the seat of Sir William Heath- 
cote, Bart, grandson to Sir William, who pur- 
chased the estate, is a substantial, spacious man- 
sion, situated in a pleasant park. The ancient manor 
house was entirely taken down, in consequence of 
a vow made by Sir William, that, because it had 
belonged to the Cromwells, " he would not let one 
stone or brick remain upon another, even in the 
foundations." During the pulling down of the old 
house, the dye of a seal was found, which being 
very rusty, was supposed to be a Roman weight, 
and was bought as such from the workman, who 
discovered it, by Sir William Heathcote. When 
cleaned, however, it proved to be the seal of the 
Commonwealth of England ; and was supposed, by 
Vertu, who saw it in 1760, to be the identical seal 
which Oliver took from the Parliament. The Park 
is well stocked with deer, and the woods and shrub- 
beries are extensive and well laid out. 

HURST CASTLE.] On the sea coast, in the neigh- 
bourhood of Lymington, is Hurst Castle, a fortress 
consisting of a circular tower, strengthened by semi- 
circular bastions. It was erected by Henry the 
Eighth, for the defence of this part of the Channel. 
This fortress is situated near the extremity of an ex- 
traordinary natural causeway, or point of land, 
which runs two miles into the sea, in a south-east 
direction, and approaches the Isle of Wight. Within 
a mile compressed within these narrow limits, the 
tide rushes through the strait with redoubled force, 
and has deepened the Channel to a depth of twenty- 
eight fathoms. The causeway itself, at high water, 

* Richard died at Cheshunt, in Hertfordshire, in July, 1712, 
at the age of eighty-six: his remains were removed to llursley 



scarcely exceeds 200 yards in breadth ; it is covered 
with loose gravel and pebbles. Within this Castle, 
Charles the First was confined for several days in 
December 1048, the month immediately preceding 
that in which he was beheaded. Here also was im- 
prisoned, thirty years, a Roman Catholic Priest, 
named Atkinson, who was condemned to perpetual 
confinement, merely for exercising the duties of his 
function. He died in October, 1729, at the age of 
seventy-four. The Castle has still a garrison ; 
though, since the rise of Portsmouth, and the station 
of a fleet there, the works have been suffered to fall 
to decay. 

HURSTBOURNE PARK.] This beautiful seat of the 
Earl of Portsmouth is situated about a mile west of 
Whitohurch. The house occupies an elevated site, 
commanding various extensive and fine prospects : 
it consists of a centre and two wings, connected 
with the body of the house by colonnades ; in the 
eastern wing is the library and Chapel ; the other 
contains the offices and servants' apartments. In 
the centre part are several noble rooms, decorated 
with numerous valuable paintings. This structure 
was erected by Mr. Meadows, from the designs of 
Wyatt. From the south or principal front, the 
ground gradually slopes to a large piece of water, 
which winds through the Park. The Park is de- 
lightfully wooded, and abounds with fine deer and 
timber. 

HYTHE.] At the beautiful little hamlet of Hythe, 
on the Southampton river, is the ferry to the town of 
Southampton. The marine and sylvan prospects 
from this village are eminently beautiful. 

KEMPSHOT.] Kempshot Park and manor, the 
ancient seat of the Pink family, lies 3 miles S. W. 
by W. from Basingstoke. The house is a large 
and handsome brick building. The last of the 
Pinks sold the estate about half a century ago, and 
it has since passed through various hands. Robert 
Pink, celebrated as a philosopher and a divine, was 
horn here in the reign of Elizabeth. 

KINGSCLERE.] The market town of Kingsclere 
lies nine miles N. E. by N. from Whitchurch, and 
55| W. by S. from London. It is a small place, 
of mean appearance, and now only remarkable for 
having been a seat of the West Saxon Kings ; though 
Camden mentions it as having been a considera- 
ble market town. The Church is a small stuccoed 
building, with a low tower. The population in 1811 
was 1683. It is probable that the palace of the 
Saxon sovereigns was connected with Freemantle 
Park, to the south, as that is known to have been a 
royal residence in King John's time. The mansion, 
which stood in a very exposed and bleak situation, 
was pulled down a few years ago by Mr. Blount, 
and the Park has been ploughed up. 

LEAP.] This is a little hamlet on the sea shore, 

Church for burial, and were interred in the chancel near those 
ofhisuife, and of several cf his children, and relations. 

nine 



HAMPSHIRE. 



515 



nine miles E. by N. from Lymington, lying- nearly 
opposite to Cowes, it is the common place of em- 
barkation from this part of the county to the Isle of 
Wight. It is inhabited chiefly by persons who unite 
the employments of fishing and fowling. Great 
quantities of wild ducks and widgeons, are bred in 
the rushes and sedges of a small creek, eastward of 
Leap, and in the covers of the various little rough 
islands which rise upon its surface. 

LEONARD'S, ST.] On the road to Beaulieu, from 
Park Farm, are the ruins of the Barn and Chapel 
of St. Leonard, anciently the principal Grange be- 
longing to Beaulieu Abbey. The Barn was of great 
magnitude, measuring 226 feet in length. Within the 
end walls, is a barn of considerable size, constructed 
with the old materials. The remains of the Chapel 
evince it to have once been extremely beautiful. At 
the east end, on each side the altar-piece, is an 
elegant niche, aciorued with lateral pinnacles, richly 
embossed, and a Saracenic arch, crowned with a 
cross. 

LICHFIELD.] This place, five miles N. from 
Whitchurch, seems, from its name, to have been the 
site of a battle, as this compound literally signifies a 
field of carcasses. The Roman road from Old 
Sarum to Silchester, is very visible on the downs 
of this and the adjoining parishes of Sydmonton and 
Kingsclere. 

LYMINGTON.] The ancient market and borough 
town of Lymington, enjoying a population of 2641, 
is sixteen miles S. W. by S. from Southampton and 
95| S. W. from London. It occupies the declivity 
of a gentle eminence, on the western bank of the 
Lymington river, about a mile from its confluence 
with the sea. Warner imagines that a town or vil- 
lage wasfonned near this spot by the Britons. That 
the Romans were acquainted with it is evinced, by 
the contiguity of Buckland Rings, and by the evi- 
dence of Roman coins, discovered here in 1744. 

In the Domesday. Book, Lymington occurs under 
the name of Lenture. In the reign of Henry the 
First, Lymington, with the Lordship of the Isle of 
Wight, the borough of Christchurch, and other 
lands jo the county, were granted to Richard de 
Ripariis, or Redvers, a powerful and opulent 
Baron. In this family it continued till the reign of Ed- 
ward the Second, when it was released to that King, 
by Isabella de Fortibus, the heiress, with the Lord- 
ship of the Isle of Wight, &c. but his claim was an- 
nulled by the Parliament. This manor, however, 
appears to have been afterwards restored. In the 
reign of Henry the Eighth, it again fell to the crown, 
on the decapitation of Henry Courtney, Earl of 
Devonshire. Few local events are recorded of this 
town : though Tradition affirms, that it has been 
thrice burnt by the French; and saved only a fourth 
time from undergoing the like fate by the prudeut 
conduct and fortitude of a woman. The distinctive 
epithets, old and new, applied to different parts of 
the town, appear, in a certain degree, to counte- 



nance these popular relations. Whatever may be 
the antiquity of Lymington, it does not seem to have 
attained much importance, till it brcame the pro- 
perty of Baron de Redvers ; when a port being es- 
tablished, the wines of France, and other foreign 
commodities, were unshipped at its quays. It also 
became famous for its salt works, though thie manu- 
facture is supposed to have been carried on here at a 
much earlier period ; and here is still the most con- 
siderable manufacture of marine salt of any upon tin* 
coast. 

Lymington Church divides the old from the new 
part of the High Street; and though originally a regu- 
lar pile, with aspire in the centre, is now extremely 
informal, through different alterations. The only se- 
pulchral memorials worth noticing, is a tablet, sur- 
mounted with a fine bust, by Rysbrach, to the iue- 
rnory of Charles Colborne, Esq. who died in Way, 
1747 ; and a neat mural monument, with a bas-relief 
of shipping, by Bacon, in commemoration of Josias 
Rogers, Esq. who died in 1795, Captain of his 
Majesty's frigate, Quebec. 

The right of election for members of Parliament is 
vested in the Mayor and Burgesses. 

The situation of this town, on the banks of a navi- 
gable river, so nearly contiguous to the sea, is ex- 
tremely favourable for its trade ; but this advantage 
was formerly much greater than at present, as, by 
the injudicious construction of la dam, or causeway, 
to the north of the town, the depth of the river has 
been considerably lessened, and its channel gradu- 
ally contracted by the accumulation of mud deposited 
by the tides, which had previously been carried off 
by the freshes. Formerly, vessels of more than 500 
tons burthen could he brought up to the quay ; but 
now the water will scarcely allow a vessel of 300 
tons. The scenery on the banks of the Lymington 
river is very beautiful. 

LYNDHURST.] The delightful little village of 
Lyndhurst is 9| miles \V. by S. from Southamp- 
ton. It has, from the formation of the New Forest, 
been considered as a sort of capital to it ; and here 
was anciently exercised the jurisdiction of the Chief 
Justice in Eyre for this forest. All the forest courts, 
under the jurisdiction of the Verderers, are still held 
here; as well those of attachment, &c. as the Swa- 
nimote ; the former are held on such days as the 
presiding judges appoint, three times in a year; the 
latter, on the 14th of September annually. The 
King's house, though an indifferent residence, is 
occupied by the Lord Warden whenever he visits 
e forest. An ancient stirrup is preserved here, 
said to have been used by William Rufus, at the 
time he was shot by Sir Walter Tyrrel. The King's 
stables are very large, and were probably considered 
magnificent when first erected, which appears to 
have been about the time of Charles the Second. 

MAL&ANGER.] Malsanger, in the parish of Oak- 
ley, about 4{ miles W. by S. from Basingstoke, in 
celebrated as te birtl* place of William Warham, 

Archbishop 



HAMPSHIRE. 



Archbishop of Canterbury, in the reigns of Henry 
the Seventh and Eighth.* 

MALWOOD.] The area of Malwood Castle com- 
prises many acres : its keep is occupied as one of 
the lodges belonging to the New Forest. Castle 
Malwood cottage, the seat of Mr. Drummond, en- 
joys a lofty and pleasant situation. 

MAVI.EDURHAM.] About two miles S. from Peters- 
field is Mapledurhara, once the seat, and residence 
of Gibbon the historian, whose father purchased the 
estate in the reign of George (he First. The manor 
has since been repeatedly sold. At Butster Hill, a 
short distance to the south, Aubrey places a con- 
siderable encampment. 

,MEON.] The village of East 3Icon lies four miles 
W. by S. from Petersfield ; that of West Meon, 7$ 
N. E. from Bishop's Walthatn. They were botli 
formerly the property of the Bishop of Winchester. 
In East Meon Church is a very ancient font, exactly 
resembling that in Winchester Cathedral, and sup- 
posed to be the work of the same artist, and pre- 
sented by the same Bishop. 

MEHDON CASTLE.] The site of this ancient for- 
tress, or palace, is in the parish of Hursley, amongst 
the possessions of the Heathcote family, already de- 
scribed. It belonged to the Bishops of Winchester, 
and was built by Bishop de Blois, about the same 
time that he built the Castle at Wolvesey. It was 
strongly fortified ; but appears to have become ruin- 
ous in the fourteenth century. Only a shapeless 
mass of ruin, supposed to have formed part of the 
keep, now remains. Merdon is conjectured, by 
Milner, to be the place where Kynewulph, King of 
the West Saxons, was murdered by Kyenard, bro- 
ther to the tyrant Sigebert, whom he had succeeded 
on the throne. 

Merdon belonged to the Protector, Richard, son 
of Oliver Cromwell, in right of his wife, the daugh- 
ter of Richard Major, Esq. of Hursley. 

MOTTISFONT.] The parish of Mottisfont is 4| 
miles N. N. W. from Romsey. Mottisfout House, 
the seat of Sir Charles Mill, Bart, is a spacious and 
venerable edifice, on the site of a Priory of Augus- 
tine canons, founded by Willi.ins Briwere, in the 
beginning of the reign of King John. The Lord 
Sandys, " That lately died," observes Lelaiul, 
M made an exchange with the King, and gave Chel- 
sey by Westmistre for Mottisfont Priory in Hamp- 
tonshire^ where he begun to translate the old build- 
ing of the Priory, and to make a fair manor place, 
but the -work is let'te onperfecte." After the sale, 
hi 1651,; of the Vine, near Basingstoke, the ancient 
seat of the Sandys, this became the principal resi- 
dence of the family, in whose possession it continued 



* Tliis prelate received the early part of his education at 
Wyikliam's 'College, Winchester, and afterwards removed to 
NewColfegp, Oxford; 'Henry tlie Seventh 'intrusted liim with 
si-ver;l -importaNt'officcs; so -that lie was at" once a Divines a 
Lawyer, and a Statesman. He was successively Keeper of the 
R'olls, Ambassador to Philip, Duke of Burgundy, Keeper of 



! till about the year 1700, when Edwyn, the last male 
j heir, dying without issue, the estates were divided 
! among his six sisters, and Mottisfont fell to the share 
! of Margaret, who had married Sir John Mill, Bart, 
of Tatchbury, in this county, from whom the pre- 
sent possessor is descended. A curious ancient 
I painting, preserved here, appears to have belonged 
to the Priory, and is supposed to represent in com- 
partments, two events in the life of the celebrated 
Thomas Aquinas. In one compartment lie is repre- 
; sented as receiving a visit from St. Peter and St. 
i Paul, after having passed three days and nights in 
; fasting and prayer, in order to discover the meaning 
! of a particular passage in Isaiah ; the other repre- 
| sents him as busy in writing, while the Holy Spirit, 
i in the form of a dove, is dictating at his ear; and his 
: friend Bonaventure observing him at the door, which 
i stands partly open. The gardens and pleasure 
grounds at Mottisfont, contain several fine plane 
trees, and are well laid out. 

MOYLES COURT.] This ancient seat of the Lisle 
family, already mentioned, is a good building, situ- 
' ated in a pleasant little park, in the neighbourhood 
| of EHingham. 

NETLEY ABBEY.] In a beautiful situation, 2f 
miles S. E. from Southampton, are the ruins of Net- 
ley Abbey, formerly called Letley, or Pleasant 
Place, and also Ed ward- Stow, by which name it 
occurs in a charter (A. D. 1251) granted by Henry 
the Third, who is generally considered as its founder. 
Amongst its subsequent benefactors were Edmund, 
Earl of Cornwall, Robert. Ver, and Walter de 
Burg ; the latter invested it with lands in the county 
j of Lincoln, which he held of the King, in capite, by 
the service of presenting him with a head piece, lined 
with fine linen, and a pair of gilt spurs. Its inmates 
were of the Cistercian order, originally from the 
neighbouring Abbey at Beaulieu. At the dissolu- 
tion, their number was thirteen; and the annual 
value of their possessions, was from 100/. to 160/. At 
that time, the Rhetorica Ciceronis was the only book 
in their library. lu 1537, Henry the Eighth granted 
the site of the Abbey to Sir William Paulet after- 
wards Marquis of Winchester ; from whose family 
it appears to have passed to that of the Earls of 
Hertford ; as Edward Seymour, son of the Pro- 
tector Somerset, who was restored to the titles of 
Earl of Hertford, and Baron Beauchamp, by Queen 
Elizabeth, resided here and entertained his royal 
mistress in the year 1560. Towards the end of the 
17th century, it became the property of the Mar- 
quis of Huntingdon ; and has since passed through 
several families to Sir Nathaniel Holland, Bart. 
who obtained it by his marriage with the widow of 



the Broad Seal, Bi<hop- of London, Chancellor of England, 
aiid Archbishop of Canterbury : the latter situation he held from 
the y?ar 1504 till the time of his death, in August, 1532 ; but 
many of his privileges were .usurped by Wolsey, who supplanted 
him in the royal favour. His portrait, by Holbein, is yet 
preserved at Lambeth Palace. 

the 



HAMPSHIRE. 



617 



Into N. Dance, Esq. with the -ancient manor called 
Woolstan House, which occupies a fine situation on 
the Itchin. The ruins of the Abbey occupy the de- 
clivity of a hill, rising -gently from the water; but 
so environed by beautiful woody scenery, as to be 
almost secluded from observation, except on a near 
approach. The destruction of the Abbey Church or 
Chapel, according to Browne Willis, commenced 
about the period when it was inhabited by the Mar- 
quis of Huntingdon, who converted the nave, or 
west end, into a kitchen and offices. Sir Bartlct 
Lucy, as appears from this writer, (but others say 
the Marquis of Huntingdon,) sold as much of the 
materials as could be taken away within a limited 
time, to a Mr. Walter Taylor, a builder, of South- 
ampton, soon after the beginning of the last cen- 
tury, for the purpose of erecting a town house at 
Newport, and dwelling houses at other places. A 
fatal accident which befel Mr. Taylor, in consequence 
of this purchase, has been regarded by the vulgar as 
a judgment inflicted by heaven, for his undertaking 
to destroy a sacred edifice. The narrative of this 
event is given as follows : " Alter Mr. Taylor had 
made his contract, some of his friends observed in 
conversation, that they would never be concerned in 
the demolition of holy and consecrated places : these 
Words impressed his memory so strongly, that he 
dreamed, that, in taking down the Abbey, the key- 
Stone of the arch over the east window fell from its 
place, and killed him. This dream he related to 
Mr. Watts, (lather of Dr. Isaac Watts,) who advised 
him -not to have any personal concern in pulling 
down the building ; yet this advice being insuffi- 
cient to deter him from assisting in the work, the 
creations of sleep were unhappily realized ; for, on 
endeavouring to remove some boards within the east 
window, to admit air to the workmen, a stone fell 
upon, and fractured his scull. The fracture was not 
thought mortal ; but in the operation of extracting a 
splinter, the surgeon's instrument entered the brain, 
and caused immediate death. Whether this acci- 
dent occasioned a direct stop to be put to the demo- 
lition of the Abbey is uncertain, but the superstiti- 
ous gloom which it generated, has had an evident 
tendency to the preservation of the ruins in more 
modern times." The Chapel was built in the form 
of a cross, and was originally a very elegant struc- 
ture, in the English style of architecture ; but its 
beautiful roof, richly adorned by ramifications spread- 
ing from the intersections of the groining, has fallen 
in, its north transept is destroyed, most of its win- 
dows are bereaved of their tracery, and many other 
parts are mutilated. On the north side of the inter- 
section of the transept, are the remains of a spiral 
staircase, to the upper part of the tower, which is 
said to have been ornamented with pinnacles, and to 
have served as a mark for seamen. Various devices, 
and armorial insignia, supposed to be those of the 
benefactors to the Abbey, may be traced on the 
ruins thnt strew the ground. Many parts of the 
ruins are finely mantled with ivy : aud the various 

VOL. II. NO. 82. 



trees that have sprung up among its mouldering 
walls, greatly increase the picturesque appearance 
of the whole," which is thus beautifully described, by 
Sotheby : 

" Within the shelter'd centre of tlie aisle. 

Beneath the ash, whose growth romantic spreads 
Its foliage, trembling, o'er the funeral |)ile, 
' And all around a deeper darkness sheds ; 
While through yon arch where the thick ivy twines, 
Bright on the silver'd tower the moon-beam shines, 
And the grey cloister's roofless length illumes, 

Upon the mossy stone I lie rechn'd, 

And to a visionary world resign'd, 
Call the pale spectres forth from theforgotten tombs." 

The other parts of the monastic buildings which 
remain, are all dilapidated. The Abbot's kitchen, 
as it is called, though more probably an ancient 
crypt, adapted to that use by the Earls of Hert- 
ford, is a curious vaulted apartment, about 48 feet 
long, and 18 broad. The chimney, or fire-place, 
is of a very singular form ; nearly opposite to it, is a 
dark vault, or aperture, said to terminate in a cop- 
pice at some little distance from the Abbey. The 
Chapter house, which formed a square of about 36 
feet, was of elegant architecture ; and the Refectory, 
about 45 feet in length, and 24 in width, and some 
other apartments, may also be distinguished. These 
buildings, with others, appear to have inclosed a 
quadrangular court, of which the Chapel bounded 
the south side. A moat, which surrounded the Ab- 
bey, may yet be traced ; and at a short distance, 
overhung with trees and underwood, are two large 
fish ponds. Near the Abbey, approaching io the 
river, are the ruins of the small ibrt called Netley 
Castle, which was erected by Henry the Eighth, at 
the same period that he built Calshot, aud other 
Castles in this vicinity. The views over the water 
from this fort are good, but the building itself i? 
scarcely entitled to notice. 

NEW-TOWN.]. Newtown, formerly the property of 
the Milford family, but now the seat of II. C. Plow- 
den, Esq. lies 12} miles N.l>y E. from Waitdmrch. 
The house is large and handsome, and, from a cir- 
cular room at the top, is an extensive and diversified 
view. Here is a Free School. 

ODIUAM.] The incorporated market town, of 
Otlilmm, formerly a free borough belonging to the 
Bishops of Winchester, lies 37 miles N. E. from 
Southampton, and 41} W. S. W. from London. 

The parish of Odiham is very extensive, and in- 
cludes some of the best arable land in this part of 
the county : hops are also cultivated here wilh groat 
success. The population, in 1811, was 1101. At 
the courts-Ieet, hoMen here, the constables, and 
other officers, are chosen for many of the adjoining 
villages. Here was formerly a royal palace, nnd 
park : the only part which remains has been con- 
verted into the residence of a farmer, and is railed 
the Palace, or Place Gate. The Church is a large 
ancient structure, built with brick ; juiA near it is 
an old alms house. A litUe west of the Church is 
Qj au 



HAMPSHIRE. 



an immense chalk pit. About one mile N. W. from 
the town, are the remains of Odibain Castle, the 
.origin of which is anterior to therein of King' John, 
When it belonged to the See of Winchester, and be- 
came celebrated for its resistance against the army 
of Lewis, the Dauphin of France. In the year 
1299, it w?is granted, with the town, park, and 
Inindred of Odiham, to Queen Margaret, as part of 
her dower. Becoming again vested in the crown, it 
was finally bestowed, in 1617, on Edward, Lord 
Zouche, and his heirs for ever. The extensive pro- 
perty of Lord Zouclie in this neighbourhood, was 
purchased, about 70 years ago, out of the court of 
Chancery, into which it had been thrown on the de- 
mise of the last representative of the Zouche family, 
by the late Sir Paulet St. John, grandfather to Sir 
H. P. St. John Mildmay, the present owner. The 
original extent and form of the Castle cannot now 
be ascertained ; but some of the ditches may yet be 
traced. .Here David Bruce, King of Scotland, who 
was made prisoner at the battle of Neville's Cross, 
near Durham, was confined for eleven years ; and 
enly obtained his release, by paying 100,000 marks, 
and giving hostages for his future conduct. The 
town of Odiham gave birth to Lilly, the celebrated 
grammarian.* 

PARK FARM.] Nearly close to the sea shore, and 
about two miles from Sowley, is Park Farm, origi- 
nally one of the granges belonging to Beaulieu Ab- 
bey. It is embosomed in fine woods, through which 
occasional views are admitted of the Isle of Wight, 
and the neighbouring channel. The granges, or 
farms, appertaining to Beaulieu Abbey, had the 

Erivilege of having divine service celebrated in them, 
y a bull granted by Pope Alexander the First. 
The Chapel of Park Grange is yet standing, though 
much dilapidated: it unites at the south-east end 
with the farm house, a massive stone building, of 
equal antiquity. 

PETERSFIELD.] The market and borough town 
of Petersfield lies 24 miles E. N. E. from South- 
ampton, and 55 S. W. from London. It is a 
chapelry to the parish of Buriton. This town is of 
considerable antiquity ; but, being situated on the 
high road to Portsmouth, it is now chiefly supported 
by travellers. Its first charter of incorporation was 
granted by Queen Elizabeth, who vested its govern- 
ment in a mayor and commonalty, and empowered 
them to return two members to Parliament. The 
right of election, as determined by a committee of 
the House of Commons, in 1727, " is in the free- 
holders of land, or ancient dwelling houses, or sham- 
bles built upon ancient foundations, within the said 
Near the Chapel is an equestrian statue 



borough." 



* \Villiam Lilly, born about 1466, became a student at 
Magdalen College, Oxford, which he iiuitted when he had at- 
tained tin; degree of B. A. and went to Jerusalem ; on his re- 
turn, he studied Greek at the Isle of Rhodes. He afterwards 
travelled to Rome. In 1509, he returned to England ; and 
grammar, poetry, and rhetoric, in London, with so 



of William the Third, an a lofty pedestal, inscribed 
to his memory by the late William Joliffe, Esq. 
The population of Petersfield, in 1811, was 1280. 

PILEWELB HOUSE.] Near Lymington, is Pile- 
well House, a handsome family seat, enjoying a fine 
view from the Needles to Spithead. An extensive 
lawn, belted by a shady walk, with occasional open- 
ings, stretches from the house to the sea side. 

POPHAM.] Popham, seven miles S. W. from 
Basingstoke, was the ancient seat of, and gave name 
to the family of Popbam, which afterwards extended 
itself into the counties of Somerset and Wilts. 

PRTCHSTER.] The narrow branch of the sea, 
which separates Portsea island from the main land, 
on the N. W. side of Langstone harbour, connects 
the latter with Portsmouth harbour, a principal sta- 
tion of the Roman navy, at the head of which is the 
strong fortress called Portchester Castle. The 
origin of this structure is not accurately known ; but 
this spot was certainly occupied by a fortress, suc- 
cessively possessed by the Britons, Romans, Saxons, 
and Normans ; and the modes of building practised by 
the three latter, are yet discoverable in the walls and 
towers of tho present Castle. By the Bvitons it was 
denominated Caer Peris ; an appellation which was 
altered by the Romans to that of Portus Magnus, 
from the Roman name of the harbour : its modern 
name of Portchester is evidently Saxon. This Cas- 
tle is situated on a neck of land, jutting out a con- 
siderable way towards the middle of the harbour. 
It is a noble pile, of a quadrangular form, surround- 
ing an area of between four aud five acres ; and still 
in sufficient preservation to be used as a place of 
confinement for prisoners of war ; from 3000 to 5000 
of whom have been occasionally secured here. The 
walls are from eight to twelve feet thick, and about 
eighteen high, having in many places a passage 
round them, covered with a parapet : it has eigh- 
teen towers, of various shapes and magnitudes, in- 
cluding those of the keep ; and is defended on the 
north, west, and south sides, by a ditch varying in 
breadth, and .fifteen feet deep : on the east are two 
ditches, which extend to the water, and have pro- 
bably been filled by the influx of the tide. The en- 
trance of the west side is thirty feet deep, and four- 
teen wide under a square tower ; on the inside over 
the gate, are two projecting figures, somewhat re- 
sembling Egyptian sphynxes. In the east wall, 
nearly opposite this gate, is another of like dimen- 
sions : there are likewise two sally-ports. Th 
keep encompasses a parallelogram of sixty-five by 
one hundred and fifteen feet. It has four towers ; 
three of them standing on the outside wall ; one of 
these, which is much larger than the rest, forms the 



much success, that, in 1510, he was appointed first master of 
St. Paul's School. He was intimate with the most learned men 
of his time ; and obtained the particular eiilogiums of Erasmus, 
/or his skill in the languages, and grammatical science!. He 
died of the plaguin 1522. 

orth-enst 

II. : 



HAMPSHIRE. 



519 



north-east angle of the square; Hie f fourth tower 
stands atthe south-east corner of thh building. There 
are many rooms, several very large, and some 
arched with stone ; among them is one which appears 
to have been u Chapel: the entrance is through a 
gate on the south side, only eight i'cet wide. Se- 
veral of these towers, as well as part of the walls, 
are now in ruins. Many Roman coins, and Roman 
medals, have been dug up here at different times. 
The extent of the outward walls, exclusive of the 
projecting parts of the round corner towers, is about 
620 feet on the north and south sides ; and 610 on 
the east and west. Tha Sacellum of the Praetorium 
of the Romans is supposed, by King, to have been 
on the spot now occupied Hi thesitaof the parish 
church, which is an edifice of great antiquity dedi- 
cated to St. Mary, standing within the outer court, 
and nearly opposite to the east entrance. Though 
part of it has been rebuilt, and other parts repaired 
et various puriods, it still displays many specimens 
of Saxon architecture. Here it was that Henry the 
First founded the Priory of Black Canons, after- 
wards removed to Southwick. Within the Church 
is a monument to the memory of Sir Thomas Coru- 
\vallis, Kt. Groom Porter to Queen Elizabeth, and 
James the First, who died in November, 1618 : his 
bust represents him with short hair and beard, and 
a sash over his shoulder. The font is curious. In 
the year 1299, the town and castle of Portchester, 
with the forest, then valued at 16/. 13s. were settled 
on Quern Margaret, as part of her dower. This 
Castle descended from the Not tons of Southwick, 
in the same manner as their other estates, to the 
late Robert Thyslewayte, Esq. of whose family it 
has been rented by government. The prisoners of 
war are lodged in ranges of wooden buildings two 
stories high, erected on th north side of the great 
court, which is separated from the south side by a 
double picketing, so disposed as to leave a passage 
through the Castle from gate to gate. In another 
range of building, which extends towards the middle 
of the area from the south side of the east entrance, 
is the cookery, &c. The south-west quarter of the 
area is parted off, as an airing place; and a certain 
number of prisoners, in proportion to the whole, are 
daily admitted to walk here : within this division 
also is the hospital for the sick. Round the north- 
west angle of the Castle, beyond the moat, is a 
parade and barracks for the soldiers who guard the 
prisoners. According to some, the Roman Gene- 
ral Vespasian landej here on his first arrival in Bri- 
tain; but this has been contradicted by others on 
better testimony. That several of the Saxon in- 
vaders landed here, is, however, certain, and par- 
ticularly Porta with his sons, Bieda and Megla, by 
whose aid Cerdic was enabled to establish the king- 
dom of the West Saxons. The village of Portches- 
ter, or Portchester Street, is about a mile long, 
vanning on the road towards Fareham ; from which 
it is distant about 2| miles, E. S, E. Hero, about 
20 years ago, the sea rose so. high ia tremendous 



storm, that boats went to the extremity of the vil- 
lage ; the banks having in many places been broken 
down by the strength of the waves. The publicans 
of Portchcster and Southwiek, enjoy the peculiar 
privilege, under charter from Elizabeth, of being 
exempted from having any soldiers billeted on them. 

PORTSDOWN HILL.] This is a narrow, lofty emi- 
nence, running E. and W. nearly seven miles : the. 
upper part consists of chalk, broken into vast bil- 
lows; the lower part is a brown loam. The pros- 
pects from the summit arc of great extent, and con- 
siderable variety. On the eastern extremity of the 
hill, a telegraph was erected during the last war. 
In the month of September, 1810, in working the 
chalkpit, near the telegraph, a tumuli:*, or barrow, 
was broken into, and ten human skeletoiib were dis- 
covered in good preservation. This tumulus is, in 
form, a parallelogram ; in the direction east and west 
about 100 feet, in breadth about 20 feet, and tho 
height uniformly about six feet. The interm;-nts 
were in distinct graves, about three feet a^ai i, some- 
containing more than one skeleton. The graves 
were in a regular direction, and the bodies placed 
with the head to the west. It is probable, that thoso- 
interred therein were slain in battle near the spot ; 
as, in the skull of one of them, an iron top of a pike 
was found, which had entered about three inches. 
Near the bottom of the hill is Purbrook, late the sent 
of Charles Taylor, Esq. by whose attention to agri- 
culture, the surrounding lands were greatly im- 
proved. The mansion is a handsome building. 

PORTSMOUTH AND PORTSBA.] Portsea island, 
which includes the naval arsenal of Portsmouth 
within its limits, ia wholly surrounded by the sea ; 
its eastern boundary is formed by Portsmouth har- 
bour, its western side by Langs tone harbour, and 
a narrow channel communicating between them, se- 
parates it from the main land ou the north ; the high 
sea washes its southern shores, la circumference, 
it is about sixteen miles ; its length from north to 
south is nearly five ; and its breadth, in the widest 
part, between three and four. The cultivated land 
is chiefly arable ; and some of the farms arc of con* 
siderablesize : on the land side it is defended by ex- 
tensive fortifications, called the lines ; and next 
the sea, by various forts and batteries. On the east 
side are several salterns, and a large tract of extra- 
parochial hind ranging along the borders of Lang- 
stone harbour. Part of the manor belongs to the 
college at Winchester, it having been granted to the 
New Minster by Queen Ethelfleda, wife of King 
Edgar. The communication with the- main Innd is 
by two bridges, secured by a triple entrenchment ; 
the one for the entrance, the other for t!;e departure, 
of passengers. Hence, a direct roads extends to 
the important towns of Portsmouth and Portsea ;. 
the former of which lies 18 nrics, S. E. by E. 1'rosu 
Southampton, and 73 S. W. from Londoji ; and 
the latter, 17 miles S. E. by E. from Southampton, 
and 73 j S. W. from London. These places, thongli 
separated iu the more minute regulations of local 

polity 



620 



HAMPSHIRE. 



polity, cnn hardly be considered as forming more 
than one town : they ure, indeed, both included 
within the limits of the borough of Portsmouth, both 
governed by the same magistrates, and both admit- 
ted to a participation in the same immunities. 
Portsmouth, as the more ancient town, has pre- 
served its dignity and precedence in still being the 
seat of the civil and military establishments ; it is 
also the residence of the Port Admiral : its streets 
are likewise more spacious ; and, in general, its 
houses and buildings are superior. Portsea, 
however, is far the larger and more populous town ; 
and has the advantage in having both the dock-yard 
and gun-wharf within i(s precincts. 

Portsmouth is affirmed, by Camden, to have been 
indebted for its origin to tbc retiring of the sea from 
the upper parts of the harbour, which rendering 
Portchrstcr less convenient, the inhabitants remov- 
ed to Portsea Isle, and built Portsmouth. The 
earliest historical notice concerning if, appears in 
the Saxon Chronicle, sub anno 501, which styles it 
Portesmuthc, as the author imagines, from Porta, 
the Saxon chieftain, who landed here ; but more 
probably from its situation at the mouth of the port 
or harbour. Here Robert, Duke of Normandy, 
landed with a strong army, in 1101, with intent to 
dispute the possession of the throne with his bro- 
ther Henry the First ; but the interference of the 
great barons caused him to relinquish his design, 
and consent to terms of conciliation. Portsmouth 
soon afterwards seems to have attained considerable 
importance ; Henry the First passed the Whitsun 
week here in 1123 ; and, in 1140, the Empress 
Maud landed here, with her brother Robert, the 
brave Earl of Gloucester, and marched hence to 
Arundel. In 11 93, Richard the First granted the 
town its charter, in which, after declaring that he 
retains Portesmue in his own hands, with all that 
belongs to it, he grants to its burgesses the privi- 
leges of an annual fair for fifteen days, and a weekly 
market : with all the immunities, &c. enjoyed by 
Winchester and Oxford. In consequence of this 
charter, the inhabitants requested the presence of 
the itinerant Justices, and presented Henry the 
Third with three casks of wine, to prevail on him 
to command their attendance. In the beginning of 
the reign of Richard the Second, the town was 
burnt by the French ; and several attempts have 
been since made to destroy it by the same means. 
Edward the Fourth began to secure the port by for- 
tifications ; and Richard the Third carried on .and 
extended the works. In the reign of Henry the 
Eighth, it had become the principal naval arsenal 

* In Uin tetgflj Francis the First, having quarrelled with 
Henry, fitted out a vast fleet, under (lie command of D'Anne- 
baul, Admiral of France ; who, in July, 1544, J-aine off the 
isle of Wight, and stretched along the shore to St. Helen's, 
with intent to destroy Poilsmonth. The English fleet, under 
Viscount Lnle, in the Great Harry, anchored off Spithead to | 
receive them ; and a distant cannonade continued for two days 
between the two fleets; but the French at length hauled their 



of England.* Even in the time of Edward the 
Sixth, Portsmouth was almost the only naval -sta- 
tion, and the only dock-yard that could be consi- 
dered as a national one. In the reign of Charles 
the First, Portsmouth was appointed as the ren- 
dezvous of the armament -destined to relieve flic 
Protestants in Rochelle, then besieged by Cardinal 
Richelieu. The Duke of Buckingham, who had 
come from town purposely to hasten the prepara- 
tions, was here assassinated, by the enthusiast, Fel- 
ton, a Lieutenant in one of the regiments ordered 
for embarkation. The house in which the Duke 
was stabbed, was No. 10, in the High Street, and 
is, we believe, yet standing, nearly opposite to the 
meeting-house. During the civil wars, Portsmouth 
was garrisoned for the Parliament. Charles the 
Second was married in this town to Catherine, tho 
Infanta of Portugal : this monarch improved and 
enlarged the fortifications, particularly by surround- 
ing South Sea Castle with a kind of star fort ; but 
this was partly blown up by accident, in the year 
1759; soon alter which, 6937/. was granted by the 
Parliament for improving the works. William the 
Third also made considerable additions ; and many 
others have been completed since the year 1770, at a 
vast expence. The most recent fortifications are 
those on the Portsea side : and here the line is so 
well secured, that the approaches of an enemy could 
only be matle in front ; and even there but on few 
points. 

The surrounding country is so low, as to be com- 
pletely commanded by the elevation of the works, 
which are faced with stone, as far as the angles of 
the parapet. The ditches are wide and deep ; and 
the whole line is further strengthened by strong and 
capacious outworks. At the head of the creek 
which separates Portsea from Portsmouth, is an 
extensive ravelin which connects these works with 
those of the latter town : the communication be- 
tween the towns is preserved by a long bridge, 
which leads to St. Thomas's Gate. The fortifica- 
tions on the Portsmouth side, extending along the 
beach, from the town to South Sea Castle, form a 
noble semicircular terrace, which is planted with 
elms, and being kept in excellent order, makes a 
delightful promenade, upwards of a mile in length. 
From the platform, which is more immediately the 
resort of company, is an extremely fine sea-view, 
including the anchorage at Spithead, and the Isle of 
Wight in the distance : the more contiguous scenes 
are scarcely less beautiful. The great and pro- 
gressive increase in the naval establishments and 
trade of Portsmouth, and the vast augmentation of 



wind, and, after plundering some part of the isle of Wight, 
retired to their o-n coasts During the engagement, the Mary 
Rose, one of tlie largest of the English ships, and commanded 
by Sir George Carew, was overpowered by the weight of her 
own ordnance, and heeling greatly, the v.ater rushed in at her 
port holes, and sunk her : by this accident, nearly 600 men, 
with Sir George, frere drowned. 

buildings 



HAMPSHIRE. 



521 



buildings dependant thereon, at length rendered (he 
town ly far too small for its population ; and, early 
in the last century, an open common on the north 
side, was chosen as the most convenient spot for 
additional houses. As these hecame inhabited, new 
ones were erected, and were again rapidly increased 
by others, till th? new buildings assumed the ap- 
pearance of a spacious suburb, and were denomi- 
nated, the Com. non,. or Portsmouth Common. In- 
creasing with an almost unparalleled rapidity, the 
offspring outgrew its parent town, which lying 
within the old fortifications, presented no vacant 
space for additional buildings. Assuming conse- 
quence with extent, its original name of the Com- 
mon was discarded ; and, in an act of Parliament, 
passed in 1792, for paving, and otherwise improving 
the place, it is designated, " The Town of Portsea." 
Even in the suburbs of this new town, and beyond 
the fortifications by which it is environed, several 
ranges of building have, of late years, been erected. 
The dock-yard, and the gun-wharf, are both on 
the Portsea side ; yet, though close to the town, 
they are rigidly excluded from all connection with 
it, but what depends on the requisite accommoda- 
tions of the workmen employed. The dock -yard is 
very extensive, and contains within its precincts 
every article of which the navy can be in want. 
The number of its buildings is considerable ; they 
consist of immense store-houses, handsome resid- 
ences for the principal officers, a spacious and elegant 
mansion for the commissioner, an academy for naval 
instruction, a ne.it Chapel, extensive workshops, 
mast-houses, &c. The entrance from the town is by 
a lofty gateway, with a smaller one on the right ; 
these are carefully attended, so that no strangers 
can be admitted without proper authority. The 
porter's residence is a large building to the left. 
Passing the mast-houses, and a handsome modern- 
built guard-house, the Pay Office attracts attention : 
this has every convenience for its purpose ; and be- 
neath is a spacious piazza, to shelter those who can- 
not be immediately admitted to the upper offices in 
bad weather. The Royal Naval Academy next 
arrests the sight : it consists of a centre and two 
wings, furnished with every accommodation for the 
important office of instruction. An excellent plan 
of education has recently been established here, for 
a superior class of apprentices to shipwrights. In 
oua of the wings, is a fine model of the Victory, a 
first rate of 110 guns, which was lost near the 
Race of Alderney, in 1774, with upwards of 1000 
men, while under the command of Admiral Bal- 
ohen. On the top of this building, is an excellent 
observatory. Somewhat further is the Commission- 
er's house, a spacious building, consisting of a cen- 
tre, with an elegant portico, and two wings. Here 
his present Majesty resided during his visit to 
Portsmouth, after Lord Howe's victory, on the 1st 
of June, 1794. This mansion has been built since 
<he year 1773 : behind it is a large and well-dis- 
n. NO. 82. 

i 



posed garden. A long range of store- houses suc- 
ceeds ; and, to the right of these, a neat modern 
Chapel, in the cupola of which is hung the bell that 
belonged to the unfortunate Royal George, lost 
while careening at Spithead. Not far distant is the 
new Guard-House, having a handsome portico, 
fronting the entrance to Cumberland Street. Pass- 
ing the Anchor-Wharf, where niu-hors of every 
dimension are kept ready for immediate service, 
the Rope-House attracts i.otice. This is a spa- 
cious pilf, three stories high, 1094 feet in length, 
and in breadth, 51. The cables are twisted in the 
lower story ; in the upper ones, the various pro- 
cesses of spinning the hemp, and preparing the 
threads, are carried on. Leaving the stables, niul 
other buildings on the right, and passing various 
store-houses, and piles of timber for the service of 
the yard, the visitor enters a square, the east side of 
which is formed by a row of handsome houses, in- 
j habited by the principal oflicers, and the north and 
south, by a variety of offices, store-houses, &c. ; 
the west side is open. In the centre of this square, 
on a marble pedestal, is a gilt statue of William 
the Third, in a Roman habit, the gift of Cou tiel 
Richard Norton, of Southwick Park. The area of 
the square is used as a repository for timber. Pro- 
ceeding to the vast building called the Anchor 
Forge, the sight and hearing are confounded by 
the terrific din, and glaring scenes of the placn. 
The labour of the Cyclops in the caverns of /Ktna, 
cannot be more faithfully represented. Many of 
the anchors that are here wrought, weigh from 
40 to 90 tons each. The next impressive objects 
which demand the attention of the visitor, are the 
ships of war upon the stocks ; the height, t!ie im- 
mense size, the solidity and compactness of the 
frame-work, and the bold curvatures formed by tha 
spreading sides of these ' bulwarks of the ocean,' 
cannot fail to excite the most lively interest. The 
jetty heads, with the bason, and docks, arc next in 
order, and, with the ships in the harbour, present 
a grand and interesting spectacle : to which the 
extraordinary capaciousness of the new range of 
docks, &c. greatly contributes. These immense 
works are rendered perfectly convenient for their re- 
spective purposes, and while the ships continue under 
repair, are kept completely dry ; though alongside 
the jetties in their immediate vicinity, the depth of 
water is so great, that the largest first-rates lie 
close to the shore. The rigging-houses deserve 
particular attention, as well as many other parts of 
this celebrated arsenal. Great improvements have 
been made in all the departments of the yard within 
the last 40 years ; and, in addition to the other 
machines employed to facilitate labour, several 
steam engines have been set up. 

The number of workmen employed, varies con- 
siderably, according to the business to bo executed, 
and to the degree of dispatch that may be neces- 
sary. In peace, upwards of 2000 men arc com- 
6 Q inoidjr 



HAMPSHIRE, 



raonly engaged ; bat in war, this number is fre- 
quently doubled, and even 5000 persons have been 
employed here at one time. 

Here, as at Plymouth, the workmen have an 
extra allowance of sixpence per day in lieu of chips, 
which were formerly considered as perquisites. 
Though every precaution that can be devised, is 
taken to guard against fire, three great conflagra- 
tions have occurred here since the year 1760. The 
first of these appears to have been accidental ; but 
the second was, probably, the effect of design, as 
the last undoubtedly was. The first commenced in 
the night of the 3d of July, and raged for a long 
time, with amazing fury. The night had been ex- 
tremely tempestuous ; the thunder was awfully loud, 
and the flashes of lightning were uncommonly vivid : 
the weather had also been uncommonly sultry. 
Many hundred tons of tar, oil, and other combus- 
tibles, were consumed, besides 1050 tons of hemp, 
600 tons of cordage, and about 700 sails. The fire 
was attributed to lightning ; and a watchman de- 
posed, that a meteor or fire-ball, passed near him, 
about ten minutes before the fire broke out : it was 
remarked also, that the windows of the hemp store- 
house had that night been left open in order to air 
it. The second fire occurred in the morning of the 
27th of July, 1770 ; and, from various circum- 
stances, occasioned great suspicions of its having 
been purposely ignited. The effects were more 
tremendous than had accompanied the former : the 
store-house for pitch and tar, was rapidly destroy- 
ed ; and immediately afterwards, the flames burst 
out in four different parts at once, and that with 
such extreme vehemence, that the destruction of the 
whole yard was fully expected. The wind, how- 
ever, shifted to a favourable quarter ; and, by the 
active exertions of the workmen, assisted by a body 
of seamen and marines, and the voluntary aid of 
numerous individuals, the progress of the fire was 
arrested, and at length finally overcome. The 
third and last fire was on the 7th of December, 
1776 : in this instance, the incendiary was dis- 
covered, and suffered the punishment of death : his 
real name was John Aitkin ; but the appellation by 
which he is most known, is that of Jack the Painter. 
He is supposed to have acted under foreign in- 
fluence ; and his attempts had previously excited 
considerable alarm at Plymouth and Bristol. His 
plans were deeply laid ; and, to effect his designs, 
he had invented a very ingenious machine. He 
contrived to conceal himself in the dock-yard, and 
lodging his machine among the cordage, he set fire 
to it : in the morning he passed the gates without 
being seized, and on the same day, the fire broke 
out, though earlier by some hours than had been 
intended. Assistance being immediately given, 
and the wind blowing towards the water, the flames 
were prevented from spreading in any considerable 
degree ; but the rope-house, and some adjoining 
store-houses, were consumed. The incendiary soon 
quitted Portsmouth, but was apprehended about 



two months afterwards'; and the whole progress of 
!iis villany being traced, he was condemned at Win- 
:hester, on incontestible evidence, and was executed 
near the dock-gates on the 7th of March, 1777. 
Previously to his suffering 1 the penalty of the law, 
lie made all the reparation in his power, by pointing 
out some effectual measures for securing the dock- 
yards from similar disasters. 

The gun wharf comprises several ranges of build- 
ing for the reception of the naval and military artil- 
lery, stores, &c. On the wharf is the grand depot 
for guns, carronades, and mortars, with shot and 
shells of almost every dimension and weight : these 
are ranged in immense piles of a pyramidical form. 
Here also, in times 6f peace, the guns from all the 
ships that are laid up in ordinary at this port, are 
lodged ; each ship's guns being kept in a separate 
tier, while the carriages are deposited in the same 
regular manner in proper store houses ; so that all 
may be re- delivered at a moment's notice. The 
small armoury is a spacious building, sufficiently 
large to contain arms for 25,000 men ; the arms are 
arranged under various figures in exact order : the 
rooms below are appropriated to the artificers who 
are employed in keeping the arms in perfect readi- 
ness for service. The houses inhabited by the store- 
keeper, and other officers, who have the care of the 
ordnance, are handsome structures. The principal 
buildings on the Portsmouth side, are the Victual-* 
ling office, the Government house, the houses of the 
Lieutenant-Governor, and Port Admiral; and the 
Marine and Military Barracks. The Victualling 
office comprehends several extensive ranges of build- 
ing, including a noble house for the Agent Victual- 
ler, and a large store house, running the entire 
length of St. Thomas's Street, and containing the 
provisions and liquors for the supply of the navy : 
in the other buildings the beef and pork are prepared 
and salted, the biscuits baked, &c. The grain for 
the latter purpose is ground at the King's mill, a 
building on the Portsea side, erected on piles, ait an 
expence of nearly 7000/. The mill is worked by a 
stream of salt water, admitted from the harbour by 
means of a great sluice on the creek which separates 
the towns. The sluice, or mill dam ; is closed at 
high water ; and, on the ebbing of the tide, the 
water is again worked back into the harbour. The 
Government house is situated at the upper end of the 
grand parade ; this is reputed to have originally 
formed part of a " faire Hospitale," or Domus Dei, 
founded for twelve poor men, by the Bishop Peter 
de Rupibus. It displays, however, but little re- 
mains of its monastic origin: and it now forms a 
very eligible residence. Near it is the ancient 
Chapel belonging to the Hospital, which has been 
repaired and assigned to the use of the officers and 
soldiers of the garrison. The residences of the 
Lieutenant-Governor, and of the Port Admiral, are 
handsome and convenient buildings; particularly 
the latter, which is situated in the high street, and 
has been fitted up in a very elegant manner. 

Th. 



HAMPSHIRE. 



5'23 



- of Portsnronth, as already stated, re- 
ceived its first charter from Richard Coeur de Lion, 
since which various charters have been granted by 
succeeding Kings : that under which it is now 
governed, .was bestowed by Charles the First. The 
corporation consists of a Mayor, Recorder, twelve 
Aldermen,, an unlimited number of Burgesses, and 
some interior officers. The right of election, as de- 
termined in the. reign of William the Third, is vested 
in' the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses: the num- 
ber of voters is about 110. 

The public business is transacted at the Town 
Hall, a large building, injudiciously placed near 
the middle of the high street, with an open space for 
th'e markets beneath: this edifice was repaired and 
enlarged in the year 1796. In the High: Street is 
also the White House, or Town Prison, having dif- 
ferent apartment* for classing the prisoners. A 
new gaol, which had long been greatly wanted, was 
finished here, about the year 1809. 

Portsmouth Church is a spacious building, erected 
at different periods : the tower, which is the most 
modern part, is 120 feet high, forming a good mark 
for seamen. Behind the altar is a cenotaph, in 
memory of the Duke of Buckingham, having in the 
centre a marble urn, in which the heart of that ill- 
fated nobleman is said to be deposited : the Duke's 
body was buried in Westminster Abbey. 

Portsea Church is situated at Kingston, a hamlet 
about two miles distant : this circumstance, and the 
augmented population of the town, have occasioned 
two neat Chapels to be built here : these are res- 
pectively dedicated to St. George and St. John. 
The internal arrangement of St. John's Chapel is 
particularly elegant ; the altar is placed in a semi- 
circular recess, separated from the body of the 
Chapel by a screen of Corinthian columns, fluted ; 
the ceiling is richly decorated with stucco-work. 
This Chapel was consecrated in the year 1789. Be- 
sides these places of worship, there are ten or twelve 
meeting houses within these towns and the immedi- 
ate vicinity. 

Amongst the charitable institutions is a Free 
Grammar School, founded in the last century, by Dr. 
Smith, a physician of this town, by whom it was 
placed under the patronage of the Dean and Chap- 
ter of Christ Church, Oxford. Several other schools 
of more effective use have been established here ; 
one of them, under the patronage of a friendly so- 
ciety, is kept in the Society Hall. Here is also an 
alms house for eight poor widows. Within these 
years, the ladies of Portsmouth and Portsea have 
established a society for the relief of the wives and 
children of sailors and soldiers, and other necessi- 
tous person, in sickness and lyings-in. 

The poor of both parishes are chiefly employed in 
picking oakum ; but the general system under 
which they are managed is very distinct ; and the 
rates are in consequence much higher at Portsmouth 
(ban at Portsea, where the regulations are most 
judicious. The poor house of Portsmouth is an old 
Q 



building, standing in a very dissolute part of the 
town, and much confined; that of Portsea occupies 
a more, open spot abont a mile distant, having a 
large area and garden within its walls : at Portsea, 
also, the parish officers may be considered as hold- 
ing their appointments for life, as they are always 
re-chosen annually. They are generally shipwrights 
belonging to the dock, who are deserving of prefer- 
ment, and nominated on vacancies, by the principal 
officers of the yard. Many improvements have been 
made in btoth towns within the last' 40 or 50 years. 
The paving of Portsmouth was completed in 1775, 
at an expence of nearly 9000/. levied under an act 
passed in 1768: the paving of Portsea did not com- 
mence till 1792. The ancient regulations of watch' 
and ward are yet enforced at Portsea; and a cer- 
tain number of the inhabitants parade nightly, or 
find substitates for that purpose: in some parts, 
however, the expence of watching and lighting is 
defrayed by subscription. In Portsmouth, the 
charges of lighting anil watching are defrayed by a, 
rate raised under a particular act of Parliament. 

The trade of these towns, even in time of peace, 
is now very considerable. The annual fair, or Free 
Mart, as it is called, originally granted by Richard 
the First, is still held in the High Street, and still 
lasts dnring its original term of fifteen days. No 
person can be arrested within the precincts of 'Ports- 
mouth during its continuance. The markets are. 
well supplied with all kinds of provisions. 

In Broad Street, which forms part of the western 
suburb, or Portsmouth point, is the Custom House, 
a large and convenient structure, with an extensive 
establishment, including several fast-sailing cutterSr 
for the prevention of smuggling. The place where 
the merchant ships lie, is a large bay between the 
gun wharf and th'e point,' having the advantage of 
an excellent quay, and all its appropriate appen- 
dages-: this communicates with Portsmouth by a 
large gate, denominated the Quay Gate, leading 
directly to the Victualling ofti'cc ; and with Poitsea, 
by a road which posses the King's mills and gun 
wharf. At the point, and close to the mouth' of the 
harbour, is a spacious and convenient Bathing house. 
At high water, Portsmouth point is completely in- 
sulated ; and the communication with the town is 
then by a draw bridge. 

Subscription assemblies are held at the Crown inn, 
with occasional concerts, &c. These, however, 
have less influence than the pleasures of the Theatre, 
which is generally crowded. Two newspapers- 
are published at Portsmouth, and the literary cha- 
racter ofthe place is in an improving state. 

The water, from the want of reservoirs, or aque- 
ducts, is generally carried about in carts, and sold 
for daily use. The springs in the vicinity, however, 
might be formed into a head sufficient for the regu- 
lar supply ofthe town, by pipes. 

The population, &c. are thus stated in the re- 
tirns made under the act of I8J1. Portsmouth; 
houses, 1103; inhabitants, 7 103. Portsea: houses, 

5o75 j 



524 



HAMPSHIRE. 



5575 ; inhabitants, 31365; Guildable part, or vici- 
nity oi'Porlsea, beyond the b,orough limits ; houses, 
430: inhabitants, '2099. The whole number ol 
houses in the district is, therefore, 7090 ; and that 
of inhabitants, 40557. The chief part of those who 
inhabit Portsea and its vicinity, are the artificers 
and labourers belonging 1 to the dock yard, and per- 
sons employed in retail trades, &c.* 

In the celebrated react) of Spithead, immediately 
ofl'the entrance of Portsmouth harbour, at about the 
distance of a mile, the Royal George lies buried in 
the ocean. This ship carrying 100 guns, and con- 
sidered as one of the finest in the navy, was sunk by 
accident in August, 1782. Some repairs being 
wanted on her keel, she was hove on one side, and 
while in that situation, a sudden squall from the 
north-west threw her broadside on the water, and 
the lower deck ports not having been lashed down, 
slie filled, and sunk in about three minutes 1 . Her 
brave Admiral, Kempenfelt, and upwards of 400 
of her crew, besides '200 women, perished in her; 
though every assistance was immediately given by 
the boats of the fleet. The body of her gallant com- 
mander was never found ; but a cenotaph in Alver- 
stoke Ciiurch, records his talents, and his virtues. 
During the late war, L'Impetueiix, of 74 guns, one 
of the prizes taken by Lord Howe, on the 1st of 
June, 1794, took fire in Portsmouth harbour, and 
was burnt to the water's edge. On the 1st of May, 
1795, the Boyne, of 98 guns, also took fire, and 
blew up, with a tremendous explosion. .Several 
boats were destroyed, and about 20 men perished, 
by this shocking accident. 

PORTSWOOD HOUSE.] At Portswood, two miles 
N. by E. from Southampton, is Portswood House, 
the seat of Giles Stibbert, Esq. formerly a General 
in the service of the East India Company. It is a 
handsome building, on an eminence, commanding a 
fine view over the Itcbin, and the Southampton 
water, which, when the tide is up, forms a wide 
lake in front. The surrounding scenery comprises 
a great variety of country, embellished with hanging 
Woods, and gently rising hills. The extensive plea- 
sure grounds are laid out with much judgment. 
The house was erected, from the designs of Mr. 
Crnndeii about 40 years ago ; but has since been 
greatly improved. Some very fine paintings em- 
bellish the different apartments. 

POULTON'S.] Three miles S. W. from Romsey, 
is'Lord Mendip's seat, called Poulton's, which em- 
braces a circumference of about five miles, of beau- 
tiful wooded country. The grounds laid out by 
Brown,- present a pleasing specimen of bis skill. 
The house occupies a low and secluded site. 

PKUVE PARK.] Preve Park, near Basingstoke, 

* Jonas Haiiway, a celebrated philanthropist, was born at 
Portsmouth i,ii the 12rh of August, 1712. He was bred a mer- 
chant, and luv'uig formed aeon iiert ion wit It a commercial house at 
St.. Pt -tersbiirgh, it occasioned him to travel into Persia, of which 
journey he published an ;;cc*>mit. He afterwards settled in 
London, -ami, in the intervals of business, devoted his whole 



enjoying a fine view of Portsmouth and Spithead, 
was the seat of the late Sir Nash Grose, one of the 
judges of the court of King's Bench. 

REDBRIDGE.] The populous village ot Red- 
bridge, '3{ miles N. W. by \V. froin Southampton, 
is of very remote origin. It is mentioned in Bede's 
Ecclesiastical History, ,by the appellation Readford, 
or Reedford, this was afterwards changed to Rod- 
bridge, and thence to its present name. Here was 
a monastery, in the infancy of the Saxon church; 
and Cynbreth or Cimberth, Abbot, about tTie. year 
687, is recorded to have converted, and baptised, 
the two brothers of Arvandus, the sovereign of the 
Isle of Wight, before their execution by commanjt 
of Ceadwalier, King of Wessex, who had conquered 
that isle. Redbridge has a considerable fade in 
coals, timber, corn, &c. and shipbuilding has been 
carried on here for a great length of tune. The 
Andover canal terminates here, and the whole place 
has a very busy appearance. The bridge," partly 
ancient and partly modern, unites with anew cause- 
way, continued over the marshes to the village of 
Totton. 

RED RICE.] About two miles N. of Danebury 
Hill, embosomed in woods, and surrounded by open 
downs, is Red Rice, the seat of II. Errington, 
Esq. 

RINGWOOD.] The little market-town of Riiig- 
wood, 14 miles W. by S. from Southampton, and 
90{ S. by W. from London, is of considerable an- 
tiquity. It is situated on the east side of the Avon, 
which here spreads frequently over the meadows, 
into a broad sheet, studded with islets. In the 
Saxon times, it was a place of considerable im- 
portance. Here Caraden has erroneously placed 
the Ilegnum of the Itinerary, which others, with 
greater probability, have fixed at Chichester. The 
inhabitants, about 3270 in number, are principally 
employed in the manufacture of woollen cloths and 
stockings ; and in the making of strong beer and 
ale : the Ringwood beer standing high in estima- 
tion. 

ROTHERWICK.] At Rotherwick, 4| miles W. by 
S. from Hartford Bridge, is Tilney Hall, one of 
the possessions of the late Sir James Tilney Long 1 , 
Bart. Anciently, here was also a seat belonging to 
the family of More. 

RUMSEY.] The large and ancient market-town 
of Rumsey, or Romsey, situated in a flat part of 
the county, surrounded by pleasant meadows, ren- 
dered productive by the overflowing waters of the 
Anton, is eight miles N.W. by N. from Southamp- 
ton, and 73 S.W. by W. from London. Here was 
a considerable Abbey, founded for Benedictine nuns, 
by Edward the Elder, whose daughter, Elfreda, 

time to the projecting, and establishment of societies for bene- 
volent purposes. The Marine Society, and the Magdalen 
Hospital, were amongst the number: and, for his exertions in 
behalf of the former institution, he was appointed a commis- 
sioner of the navy. Hedied inl78fi. r .. 



HAMPSHIRE. 



5*5 



was the first Abbess. About the year 992, the 
abbey was plundered by the Danes ; but the nuns, 
robes, and chief valuables, had been previously re- 
moved to Winchester, for safety, by the Abbess 
Elwina. In the year 1085, Christina, a cousin 
to Edward the Confessor, took the veil here ; and, 
to her care, was entrusted the education of Ma- 
tilda, daughter of Malcolm, King of Scotland, and 
afterwards wife to Henry the First. In the next 
reign, Mary, daughter of King Stephen, became 
abbess here; but was afterwards prevailed on to 
quit her charge, by Matthew, younger sou of The- 
oderic, Earl of Flanders, to whom she was married. 
This gave so much offence to the Papal See, that 
all the thunders of the church were levelled at the 
devoted pair ; and the unfortunate Mary was at 
length constrained to return to her convent, even 
after she had borne her husband two children. 
Henry the Eighth granted the site of the abbey to 
the inhabitants of the town ; and afterwards to 
John Bellow, and R. Bigot. Little of the con- 
ventual buildings are now standing, except the 
venerable and interesting abbey church ; on the 
leaded roof of which grows a very fine old apple- 
tree. The Church bears various evidences of the 
period in which it was erected, which was the mid- 
dle of the tenth century. Since that period, how- 
ever, parts of it have been rebuilt, or altered into 
the pointed style. Several ancient memorials of the 
abbesses that have been interred here, still remain. 
Here is an elegant monument to the memory of 
Frances, Viscountess Palmerston, who died in 
"child-bed, in 1769 ; and a flat stone in remembrance 
of Sir William Petty, ancestor to the Marquis of 
Lansdown, inscribed " Here lies Sir William 
Petty." Another remarkable monument was erect- 
ed here for John St. Barbe, Esq. and his lady : it 
is ornamented with their busts, and the effigies, in 
full length, of four of their sons. Both husband 
and wife died in 1059. On the monument, is the 
following curious inscription : 

" An Epitaph upon John St. Barbe, Esq. the sonne 
of Henry St. Barbe, Esq. and Grissel, his wife, the 
daughter of John Pynseiit, Esq. He died about the 
42nd yeare of his age, and she the 22nd veare of her 
age, leaving fower sonncs, Henry, John, Francis, and 
Edward, slept in the Lord. 



"(1) Earth's Rich in mind of piclious ilusl {4} whom nature, wedlocl^grace, did lie 



(.') and faithful one* 
eae just (5) In 



* The figures denote the reading. 

t Sir William Pelty was a native of Rurnsey, where his 
father pursued the occupation of a clothier. He was born 
May 16, 1623, and, from his earliest years, manifested un- 
common ingenuity. At 15, he was master of French, Latin, 
and Greek ; and had also attained a competent knowledge of 
those branches of mathematical bcience which relate to naviga- 
tion. Medicine and surgery were his favourite studies: to in- 
crease his acquaintance with anatomy, he went to the schools 
in France. Hejafterwards obtained a command in the English 
navy, and bent his attention to ship-building. In 1648, he 
taught anatomy and chemistry at Oxford, where he was created 
M.D, In 1650, he was made Professor of Anatomy, in that 
University, and a member of the College of Physicians in Lon- 
don. Two years afterwards, he was appointed physician to the 

VOL. II. NO. 83. 



. 

(2) Since in herboweU rest tlieae just (5) In one u-i chain of vanity 

(6) whose silent bones 

(7) dead here doe rest, yet left noi earth (9) because such ri'hteouse and their we* 

(10) In fame and slate 

(8) bat brought fower iouns (o uci I'ect birth ( 1 1) shall flourish here .tad ihal! IB deed 

( I -i :riuraph o'er fate." 



" An anagram upon their Names iG r "|| St. Barbe, 
" Be in shares in blest glorie." 

"The memory ol the wicked shall rott, but the remcmbrince of the just shall li"fr 
ever." 

The outer wall of the south transept presents & 
singular piece of sculpture, in basso-relievo, repre- 
senting our Saviour on the cross : and, near it, is a 
square hole or recess in the wall, the use of which i 
unknown. The outside of the north transept dis- 
plays marks of cannon-balls, traditionally said to 
have been fired against it, during the civil wars. 

Rutnsey is governed by a mayor, recorder, six 
aldermen, twelve burgesses, and inferior officers. 
The Audit House, is a large square building, near 
the centre of the town, standing on piers, with an 
open space beneath for the market-people : it was 
erected by the late Locd Palmerstou, in 1744. The 
Town Hall is a small old building, near the Hun- 
dred Bridge, which divides Rumsey-Infra from 
Rumsey-Extra. A large meeting-house, for Pres- 
byterians, was built here a few years ago. Three 
small schools have been established, by Sir William 
Petty, - St. Barbe, and Mrs. Nowes. The 
town had, formerly, a considerable clothing trade ; 
but that business is now reduced to the manufacture 
of a few shalloons. Here are some paper works; 
and a sacking manufactory. The population is 
about 3300. t 

SELBORNE.] Selborne, anciently a market -town, 
but now a pleasant and sequestered village, is si- 
tuated on the western skirts of Woolmer Forest, 
4| miles S. by E. from Alton. Here was a priory 
of canons regular, of the order of St. Augustine, 
founded by Bishop Peter de Rupibus, in 1232. 
The first considerable benefactor, after the founder, 
was Sir Adam Gurdon, a bold and daring out- 
law, who supported- the Barons, iu the reign of 
Henry the Third ; and, even after the defeat and 
death of Montfort, Earl of Leicester, fed the flames 
of war from his own resources. His residence ap- 



army in Ireland, where he acquired considerable affluence. 
He there found leisure to pursue and to develope, the subtle 
principles of political economy. In 1661, he was knighted by 
Charles the Second ; and, in 1662, he published his celebrated 
Treatise on Taxes and Contributions. In 1663, he constructed 
a double-bottomed ship, for the purpose of sailing against wind 
and tide ; but this invention was not attended with sufficient 
success to ensure its adoption. His death, occasioned by a 
mortification in his foot, occurred on the 16th of December, 
1687. His property is supposed to hae then produced a 
yearly income of 15,0001. His books and manuscripts were 
extremely select and valuable. Giles Jacob, Esq. author of 
the 1/aw Dictionary, and of the Lives and Characters of En- 
glish Dramatic Poets, was also a native of llumsey. He died 
in 1744, aged 54. 

6 R pears 



5-26 



HAMPSHIRE. 



pears to luwe been at Temple, Jn this parish ; and 
to this vicinity lie retired, and entrenched himself 
in the woods towards Farnham, on the discomfiture 
of his party. "Occasionally quitting his fastnesses, 
lie spread desolation and terror through the ad- 
jacent country ; till the fame of his deeds having 
determined the gallant Prince Edward to effect his 
downtal, he was attacked in his ramp, by a body of 
forces, commanded by the Prince in person. Find- 
ing all lost, he endeavoured to escape ; but, being 
pursued by Edward, was overtaken, wounded, and 
thrown to the ground. The magnanimity of the 
Prince was equal to his bravery ; and his great- 
ness of mind determined him to convert an enemy 
to a friend : he raised the fallen veteran, pardoned 
him, and introduced him to the Queen, who was 
then at Guildford, that very evening. This unme- 
rited and unexpected lenity, melted the heart of the 
rugged Gurdon at once ; he became, in an instant, 
a loyal and useful subject, was trusted and employ- 
ed in matters of moment, by Edward, when King, 
and confided in till the day of his death." Amongst 
the gifts made by Gurdon, to the priory, was that 
of a piece of land near the church, called the Pley- 
stow, or Playplace, now the Plestor ; this was no 
sooner granted, than the prior procured a ciiarter 
for a market. The priory continued to flourish till 
the loth century, when dissentions arising among 
the canons, it was gradually deserted, and at length 
dissolved, and its possessions were granted to Mag- 
dalen College, Oxford, in 1482. The Priory build- 
ings have all been demolished. 

Selborne was formerly a royal manor ; and Editha, 
Queen of Edward the Confessor, is mentioned in 
Domesday Book, as a former owner : that record 
also notices a church here ; and it is probable that 
the low massive columns which support the roof of 
the present fabric were parts of the ancient edifice. 
The altar-piece is decorated with an excellent paint- 
ing, by Albert Durer, representing, in two compart- 
ments, the offerings of the Magi : this was pre- 
sented to the parish, by the Rev. Gilbert White, 
author of the Antiquities of Selborne. 

SHERBORNE.] East Sherborne, is 2| miles N. 
N.W. from Basingstoke. At West, or Monk's Sher- 
borne, three miles N.W. from Basingstoke, was a 
Priory of Benedictines, founded by Henry de Port, 
in the reign of Henry the First, and afterwards 
given to the Abbey of St. Vigor, in Normandy. It 
iiow belongs to Queen's College, Oxford. 

SHINGLES.] On the coast, not from Hurst Cas- 
tle, is an island called the Shingles, which some- 
times rises 15 or 20 feet above the water ; and, at 
other times, totally disappears. It shifts its situ- 
ation, also raising itself, at one time nearer the Isle 
of Wight ; and,, at another the coast of Hampshire. 
The mystery of it is this : in that part of the chan- 
nel, lies a vast bank of pebbles, so near the surface, 
that it is beaten up into an island by the raging of 
the sen, sometimes on one side, and sometimes on 
the other, as the tides and currents drive : from the 



same causes, also, all the prominent parts of it are 
easily dispersed, and the island v mishcs. 

SiLciibSTER.] at ven miles IN', by W. from Ba- 
singstoke, is rtilehester, the Caer Secont, or ^ e- 
goiit, ot the Britons, nd Vimlomim oi the Romans, 
one of the most perfect of the ancient stations in 
the south 01 England. From its el*.vated site, it 
comnuin<ls very extensive prospects over the sur- 
rount! ng country. Its name, Caer Segont, was 
obtained through its having been the chiel city of 
the- r?egontiaei. That it was a principal Roman 
station, is evinced not only by its magnitude, and 
the mode of construction observed in the building of 
the walls by which it was encompassed, but also by 
the various Roman roads which branch off in dif- 
ferent directions, and by numerous vestiges of Ro- 
man occupation that have been discovered here. 
Camden, on the authority of Nennius, and Gerva- 
sius Durobornensis, affirms, that, the usurper Con- 
stantine, was invested with the purple in this city, 
in the year 407. The British King, Arthur, is aho 
said, though erroneously, to have been crowned 
here ; as, in his time, the former splendour of Sil- 
chester was only attested by its bare walls, and 
heaps of ruins : it having been destroyed by the 
fierce Ella, on his march to Bath, about A. D. 493. 
Whether the Romans found this city so strongly 
fortified, that they judged it expedient to build their 
walls according to the original plan, cannot be as- 
certained ; but, it is certain, that in this instance, 
they departed from the form generally observed in 
the construction of their stations ; the walls making 
an irregular octagon. The inclosed area is nearly a 
mile and a half in circumference ; and contains about 
100 acres, which have long been cultivated. The 
Church and Church-yard, are also within the walls, 
with a farm-house, and its offices. The ground 
slopes gently from the centre to the south, in which 
direction a small spring flows that rises near the 
farm-house : other small springs also rise here, so 
that parts of the fosse which surrounds the walls are 
generally filled with water. On the south side, the 
walls are the most perfect, and in some places mea- 
sure nearly 20 feet high ; the general height is from 
15 to 18 or 20 feet. The foundations of the streets 
may yet be traced running in various parallel lines 
across the area : the four principal streets commu- 
nicate with the entrances, which were on the north, 
east, south, and west sides : besides these, there are 
now two other entrances, which have been formed as 
waggon or cart ways. An open space, near the 
centre of the area, is supposed to have been the site 
of the forum, from the foundations of a large, build- 
ing, and other remains that have been dug up here. 
On the south side, are traces of a small postern, or 
sally-port, running beneath the wall, and called by 
country people, Onion's Hole, from a fabled giant of 
that name, affirmed to have made this city his resid- 
ence. In correspondence with this idea, the coins that 
have been dug up here, are frequently called Onion's 
pennies. Various inscribed stones have been found 



in 



HAMPSHIRE. 



627 



in this station ; but again lost or destroyed through 
the ignorance of the peasantry. C.umlen found 
many coins of Constantino the Younger ; and 
Gotigh mentions a person named Stair, who for- 
merly kept a public-tiouse in the neighbouring vil- 
lage of Aldermaston, and had a great collection of 
coins, both brass and silver, from .Julius Caesar to 
the latest Emperors, found hereabouts ; and some 
gold and silver, British : two onyx seals ; one with 
a cock, picking out of a cornucopia, &e. One spot, 
called Silver Hill, where are foundations of large 
buildings, has yielded a great quantity of silver 
coins. In, or near the Temple, or Forum, above- 
mentioned, Stair found twelve or more pedestals, 
and fragments of stone statues, too imperfect to 
bring away : he had also a small alabaster head of a 
man, with curled hair, about three inches high, and 
said that many copper penates had been found : he 
had a sword with two serpents encircling the hilt, 
found within the walls. Amongst the various relics 
of antiquity that have been more recently discover- 
ed, are some gold coins, rings, &c. now in the pos- 
session of the farmer, who rents the estate. Roman 
bricks ami pottery are frequently dug up. Neck- 
laces of blue beads, or links, saws, bells, swords, 
and masons' tools, have likewise been found here ; 
and also a curious Roman eagle in steel, which was 
shewn to the Society of Antiquaries by a former 
Bishop of Carlisle. About 150 yards from the 
north -east angle of the 'walls, is a Roman amphi- 
theatre, the form of which is similar to that near 
Dorchester, with high and steep banks, now cover- 
ed with a grove of trees, and two entrances. The 
area is commonly covered with water : in one part, 
close on the south side, which credulity now repre- 
sents as unfathomable, appears to have been the 
cavca, or den, where the wild beasts were kept 
before they were let out into the arena. At about 
.300 yards from the wall is a bank and ditch, cover- 
ing nearly two-thirds of the city : and, about one mile 
and a half to the north-west, near a small village 
called the Soak, are remains of a camp ; and, half 
a mile from that village, a bank and ditch, of several 
miles extent, which may be part of a Roman road to 
Spinae. 

The country round Silchester, is extremely wild 
and romantic, presenting a continued succession of 
hill and dale. The road which leads from the south 
entrance of this ancient city to the north gate of 
Winchester, appears, from Stukeley, to have been 
called Longbank, and Grimsdyke ; and that which 
leads by Andover to Old Saruin, to have been nam- 
ed the Portway. Another road which issues from 
this station on the north, crosses Mo timer Heath, 
at right angles with the Bath road, and has several 
tumuli on each side. Here were traces of several 
ntrenched camps, the largest of which is on the 
cast side of the road leading to Reading. The side 
running north and south, is now the boundary line 
between tle counties of Hampshire and Berkshire. 



In the centre of the area, is a small barrow; and,' 
on the opposite side of the road, at the distance of 
100 yards are several others. This was, probably, 
the scene of one of the many battles fought between 
the West Saxons and the Danes in the course of a 
year. This opinion is corroborated by the circum- 
stance, that, at a short distance from the camp, are 
two small farms ; one of which is called Alfred'* 
Acres ; and the other Dane's Acres : near the same 
spot are also several little cottages, one of which a 
constructed in a very peculiar manner, and bears 
the name of Dane's House; the timbers, or ribs, 
which compose the sides, are of solid oak, rising 
from the ground, and meeting in the centre, and 
thus assuming the appearance of the keel of a ship, 
reversed : each rib is about two feet wide, and one 
thick. 

A few years ago, a somewhat similar phasnome- 
non was observed on this heath, to that which was 
onco noticed at the Souterfell, iu Cumberland. 
" Two gentlemen from the vicinity of Reading, 
riding acros it, (we believe in regimentals,) observed, 
as they thought, some soldiers galloping along the 
brow of a low hill, rising from a valley, which was 
partly involved in a mist, or fog. Surprised at the 
appearance of cavalry in this secluded situation, they 
hastened to the spot ; but the objects vanisbed as 
they approached, leaving them strongly impressed 
with the singularity of the adventure." 

SOMBOIJRNE.] Little Sombourne, the property of 
Walter Smith, Esq. brother to Mrs. Fitzherbert, is 
2| miles S.E. by S. from Stockbridge ; King's Som- 
bourne, or Sombourue Regis, three miles S.W. by W. 
from the same town, though now only a little village, 
was part of the ancient demesne belonging to the 
crown, before the Conquest, and is recorded in the 
Domesday Survey, as having two churches. John 
of Gaunt is said to have had a seat, or palace, here ; 
and the tradition is supported by the appearance of 
a large mansion in ruins, in a neighbourhood abound- 
ing in yew trees, which appear to have been assi- 
duously cultivated, about his age, for the purposes 
of archery. About 100 yards from the church, is 
a bank of earth, supposed to have been built for tli 
exercise of archers : between a half and three- 
quarters of a mile distant, is also an area <>f about 
39 acres, which tradition obscurely notices as a 
large fish-pond, now converted into water-mea- 
dows ; and, on the opposite side of a brook, that 
washes this ground, is a large tract of about 400 
acres, called the Park, now held under the duchy of 
Lancaster, by lease. In the church, within a re- 
cess on the north side of the chancel, is an ancient 
tomb, with a mutilated efligy of cither an eccle- 
siastic, or a lady. 

SOMERFORD GRANGE.] This farm, about two 
miles E. of Christchurch, belonged to the prior} in 
that town ; and, at the Dissolution, was given to 
John Draper, the last prior, with the manor. The 
principal buildings are a ruined brick house, appa- 
rently 



328 



HAMPSHIRE. 



rently of the time of Charles the First ; and a more 
ancient chapel, of stone, adjoining it on the east. 
lu the grounds are several large fish-ponds. 

SOUTHAMPTON.] Southampton, privileged by 
King John, as a county in itself, lies 76| miles S.W. 
by W. from London. It returns two members to 
Parliament ; and the town is governed by a Mayor, 
Recorder, Sheriff, two Bailiffs, uine Magistrates, a 
Town Clerk, 24 Common-Councilmen, and other 
officers. Its population, in 1811, was 9617. 

This delightful town, which is equally adapted 
for health, pleasure, and commerce, is bounded on 
the east, by the river Itchin, which flows past the 
ancient city of Winchester, and on the west by the 
Tese or Anton, which rises near Whitchurch. It 
occupies a kind of peninsula, the soil of which is a 
hard gravel ; and, as the buildings rise from the 
water with a gentle ascent, the streets are always 
clean and dry. The approach from the London 
road is uncommonly striking and grand ; in fact, it 
is almost unparalleled in the beauty of its features, 
for the space of two miles. At first appear an ex- 
panse of water, and the distant Isle of Wight, the 
charming scenery of the New Forest, and South- 
ampton itself, in pleasing perspective. Elegant 
seats, and rows of trees, nearer the town, line the 
road on both sides ; and, on entering the place, by 
one of its most fashionable streets, that venerable 
remain of antiquity, the Bargate, gives a finish to 
the scene, and fixes the favourable impression al- 
ready formed. 

Struck with the beauty and convenience of the 
situation, the Romans had a station in this vicinity. 
The present Bittern, lying about two miles from. 
Southampton, on the Itchin, was undoubtedly the 
site of the ancient Clausentum, as has been satis- 
factorily proved by the remains of the walls, and the 
frequent discovery of Roman coins. When, or on 
what occasion, Clausentum was destroyed, is wholly 
unknown. The opposite side of the river, offering 
facilities which Clausentum did not possess, might 
probably be a principal cause of its desertion, and 
of the rise of Southampton, anciently Hamtun, 
supposed to have been derived from An, or Ant, the 
British name of the river and estuary, and tun, or 
ton, a lotcii. South was doubtless prefixed to distin- 
guish it from North Hamton. It is not improbable, 
indeed, that Southampton was a place of some note 
among the Britons ; but the first authentic accounts, 
commence jn the ninth century. During the fierce 
and sanguinary invasions of the Danes, who in- i 
fested the English coasts without intermission, for 
almost two centuries, old Hamtun was more than 
once involved in fire and blood. In the year 838, I 
under the reign of Ethelwolf, these formidable 
pirates, with a fleet of 33 gallies, landed here, and 
committed horrible devastations ; but, being repuls- 
ed by Wolphaud, the governor of the county, were i 
ultimately defeated and driven to their ships. In > 
the year 981, they again landed, and committed their 
usual enormities ; and, about twelve years after, 



headed by Sweyn, King of Denmark, and Olave, 
King of Norway, they repeated their former cruel- 
ties and devastations. Emboldened, however, by 
the pusillanimity of Ethelred, they did not, on this 
occasion, confine themselves to the sea-coast ; but, 
seizing on all the horses they could find, they car- 
ried the terror of their arms into the more inland 
counties ; and, such was the weakness of the En- 
! glish, that, instead of attempting to repel them, 
| they were glad to buy off the two leaders, with a 
i promised reward of 1(5,000/. : and, until this sum 
i could be raised, Sweyn and Olave sat down, uiinio- 
I Icsted, at Southampton. All the exertions of Ed- 
mund Ironside were unable to recover what the im- 
becility of his predecessors had lost ; and, after 
repeated contests, he was compelled to yield up half 
his kingdom to the Danish leader, Canute. It wae 
at Southampton, that Canute ridiculed his flattering 
courtiers, by sitting crowned, and in his royal robes, 
on the bank of the river, and commanding the tide 
not to approach his footstool ; but. the sea, deaf to 
his commands, and regardless of his threats, conti- 
nued its wonted course, and wetting his Majesty's 
feet and robes, he started up, and upbraided those 
sycophants with the grossness of their flattery, in 
pretending that all nature obeyed him ; adding, let 
this convince you, and all the world, that the power 
of the greatest monarch is poor and weak, and that 
: none is truly worthy of the title of King, but He 
whose will being an eternal law, the heavens, the 
earth, and sea, obey. 

The ravages of the Danes had so reduced the 
inhabitants, and diminished the consequence of 
Hamtun, that in the Domesday survey, we find it 
contained only 79 men in demesne, though it was 
then a burgh, a proof of its being a place of some 
trade and importance in the Anglo-Saxon times. 
Henry the Second gave it the first charter of incor- 
poration, which was confirmed by Richard the First, 
John, and Edward the Third. On the accession of 
John, he gave the farm of Southampton, with the 
port of Portsmouth, to the burgesses of the former 
town, in consideration of an annual payment into 
the Exchequer, of 200/. by weight. With such ex- 
tensive powers and privileges, Southampton began 
to increase in wealth and commerce. A brisk wine 
trade was carried on with France ; the stannaries 
were removed hither, and the port revenue rose to a 
considerable sum. After rising in prosperity for 
some ages, Southampton received a sudden check, 
in the reign of Edward the Third, during the con- 
test which arose between Philip de Valois, and that 
Prince, about the right of succession to the French 
monarchy. A French fleet, of 50 gallies, sailed up 
Southampton river, in October, 1338; and, after 
plundering the inhabitants of their property, reduced 
the town to ashes. They did not, however, effect 
this with impunity. The son of the King of Sicily, 
and several distinguished persons of their party, 
were slain, and the remainder were at last obliged 
to take shelter on board their ships. This disaster, 
6 for 



HAMPSHIRE. 



529 



for a time, was deeply foil ; but, the inhabitants, 
recovering from tbeir consternation, began to re- 
build the town, and to supply it with ('ouble ditches, 
strong 1 walls, and watch towers. Richard the Se- 
cond added a lofty castle, raised on an artificial 
mount, for the defence of the harbour; and, from 
this period, Southampton seems to have been pro- 
tected from foreign violence. It was at South- 
ampton, that the gallant army, which gained im- 
mortal honour in the fit-id of A^-incourt, assembled, 
before its embarkation, in 14 15. The spot on 
.which it encamped, called West-port, is now en- 
tirely covered with water. While Henry the Fifth 
was waiting at this place, for a favourable wind, a 
conspiracy was formed, which, had it not been de- 
tected, must have ruined all his plans. The Earl 
of Cambridge, Lord Scrope, of Masham, and Sir 
Thomas Grey, of Heton, were the principal con- 
spirators. Some writers attribute this conspiracy to 
the influence of French gold ; but others, with 
greater probability, ascribe its origin to the alliance 
of the Earl of Cambridge, second son to the Duke 
of York, with the family of the Earl of March, 
whose sister he had espoused. The plot, which 
had for its object, the assassination of the King, 
was revealed by the Earl of March ; and the above- 
mentioned noblemen being immediately arrested, 
were brought to trial, condemned, and executed in 
this town. Lord Scrope, who had been a parti- 
cular favourite with the King, was hanged, drawn, 
and quartered ; the others were beheaded : their bo- 
dies were interred in the chapel of the Domus Dei, or 
God's House ; where the following inscription, in 
commemoration of this event, was erected by a pre- 
decessor of the present Earl of Delaware : 

RICHARD, EARL OF CAMBRIDGE, 

LORD SCROPE, OF MASHAM, 

Sra THOMAS GKEY, OF NOUTHUMBERLAND, 

CONSHRED.TO MURDER KING HENRY V. 

IN THIS TOWN", 

.As HE WAS PREPARING TO SAIL WITH HIS ARMY AGAINST 
CHARLES THE SIXTH, KING OF 

FRANCE ; 

FOR WHICH CONSPIRACY 
THEY WEKE EXECUTED AND BURIED NEAR THIS 

PLACE, 
IN THE YKAR, M.cccc.xv. 

, At the time that that the deadly feuds between 
the houses of York and Lancaster raged in all their 
fury, during the reign of Edward the Fourth, a 
fierce skirmish, between the partizans of the Red 
ancl White Roses, broke out here, in which several 
of the inhabitants fell. The Yorkists being at 
length victorious, Edward hastening to Southamp- 
ton, commissioned Tibetot, Earl of Worcester, to 
sit in judgment, on his vanquished foes, who had 
been taken prisoners, when they wcra put to death, 
and their bodies impaled. 

The ancient state of this town, is thus described 
by Leland : " There be in the fair and right strong 
wall of New Hampton, eight gates. Over Bar- 
. VOL. n. NO. 83. 



gate, by North, is the Domus civica, and under it 
is the town prison. There is a suburb, and a grent 
double dyke, well watered, on each hand, without 
it. The East gate is strong, not so large as Bar-, 
gate, and in its suburbs stands St. Mary's Church. 
To the South gate joins a Castelet, well ordnanced 
to be at that quarter of the haven. There is another 
mean gate, a little farther south, called God's house- 
gate, of an hospital, founded by two merchants, 
joined to it; and not far beyond it, is Water-gate^ 
without which is a quay ; West-gate is strong, and 
has a quay without it. Theue are two more gates-. 
The glory of the Castle is in the dungeon, which is 
both large, fair, and strong, both by work and the 
site of it. 

" There be five parish churches in the town. Holy 
Rood Church standeth in the chief street, which is 
one of the fairest streets that is in any town in Eng- 
land, and is well built, for timber building. There 
be many fair merchants houses, and in the south- 
east part was a College of Grey Friars. Here was 
also an Hospital, called God's House, founded by 
two merchants, impropriated since to Queen's Col- 
lege, Oxford." The Castelet mentioned above i* 
still standing ; but, as the vicinity to Portsmouth, 
and the strength of our marine, render it no longer 
necessary as a defence, it is converted into a prison 
for debtors. Near it, on a platform, is a single 
piece of ordnance, but a very beautiful one, given 
to the town by Henry the Eighth. 

At this time Southampton exhibits a very different 
appearance from what it must hate done in that of 
Leland. Th High Street, however, still maintains 
the pre-eminence which he assigned it, but the 
"timber buildings" hare disappeared, and stone has 
chiefly been substituted. In its width, bend, and 
beauty, it greatly resembles the High Street of Ox- 
ford ; but is superior to it in its commencement with 
the Bar, and its termination with the quay. In this 
street are shops, which might vie with any in London, 
and their apartments are frequently let to summer 
visitants, which are equally pleasant and commo- 
dious. Conduits dispersed at proper distances, 
supply it with excellent water, which is brought, 
from a considerable distance, by pipes ; and, ex- 
cept in the eastern part of the town towards St. 
Mary's, the streets are well paved aid lighted, and 
regularly patroled by watchmen. Many new and 
elegant piles of building have arisen within the last 
few years. Albion Place, Moira Place, Bruns- 
wick Place, and various other assemblages, do 
honour to the taste and opulence of their projectors 
and proprietors. 

The trade of Southampton, from the neglect of 
the harbour, has of late years much declined. Ita 
chief intercourse is with Portugal for wiueaml fruits, 
and with the islands of Jersey, Guernsey, Alderney, 
and Sark. Several sloops arc-coutiimally passing 
and ivpnssing between those islands and Southamp- 
ton, which, exclusive of goods, carry away annu- 
ally a limited quantity of linen wrought woql, which, 
6s by 



HAMPSHIRE. 



by act of Parliament, must be sent from, or reland- 
cri and duty paid at this port. In return they im- | 
port large quantities of coarse worsted hose. There 
is, likewise, during times of peace, a frequent com- 
munication between Southampton and Havre de 
Grace. The merchants have also a few vessels en- i 
gaged in the Baltic trade ; and a coal ship or two 
is generally seen unloading at the quay. The wine 
and timber merchants of Southampton are numerous 
and respectable. A carpet and silk manufactory 
are both established here ; and at South Stonehatn, 
a few miles distant, are mills for manufacturing 
blocks and pumps for the navy. To facilitate the 
communication between Southampton and Salisbury, 
an act of Parliament was obtained some years ago for 
cutting a navigable canal from the platform at South- 
ampton, to join the Anilover navigation at Red- 
bridge ; ami, likewise, a cut from Northam to 
Hound well, adjoining Southampton, to connect 
with the, Winchester navigation. 

A bridge has also been thrown over the Itcbin at 
Northam, and another over the Bursledon river, by 
which the road to Portsmouth has been shortened by 
several miles, and the necessity of ferrying across, 
in a great measure obviated. 

All former charters which have been granted to 
Southampton, were confirmed by Charles the First. 
The Mayor is Admiral of the liberties from South 
Sea Castle to Hurst Castle, and half seas over from 
Calshot Castle to the Isle of Wight. In the Mayor's 
court small debts are recovered. In the Guildhall, 
where the quarter sessions are held, all causes are 
tried ; and except for capital crimes, offenders of 
every description are here arraigned and heard. 
The market house is a large modern fabric ; in the 
upper part of which is a very elegant apartment ap- 
propriated as the Council Chamber of the Corpora- 
tion. The markets are extremely well supplied with 
fish and all sorts of provisions. 

A College of Grey Friars formerly stood in the 
south east part of the town. The Hospital, called 
God's House, is a very ancient foundation, founded, 
as it is said, by Gervasius and Protosius, two bro- 
thers, and merchants. In process of time it was 
impropriated to Queen's College, Oxford, on con- 
dition that a certain number of poor scholars of that 
College, should be maintained from a fund of sur- 
plusages. The society at present consists of a war- 
den, four old men, and as many women, who have 
each a small weekly allowance. The adjoining 
French Church was founded about the year 1567, 
for the Walloon Protestants. Its congregation, 
however, now consists chiefly of persons from the 
islands of Jersey and Guernsey. Service is now 
performed according to the rites of the Church of 
England, but in the French language. 

Southampton Castle staads near the middle of the 
south part of the town. From the High Street, the 
approach to it is up Castle Lane. The area of the 
Castle seems to have been of a semicircular form, 
4>f which the town wall to the sea, formed the 



diameter. The Keep stood on a very high artificial 
mount, and from its ruins a small round tower has 
been constructed, from the leads' of which there is 
a delightful bird's eye view of Southampton, and of 
the environs, lying like a map before the eye of the 
spectator. The high mount, and circular form of 
the Keep, " says Sir II. Englefield, indicate an 
antiquity much higher than the time of Richard the 
Second, who probably only repaired and strength- 
ened the Castle." This ingenious and learned an- 
tiquary seems to think it of Saxon origin. The 
Castle was purchased a few years ago by the Earl 
; of Wycombe for an occasional residence. 

The ancient walls of Southampton are in some 
places quite destroyed, and only an antiquary can 
; trace their course ; in others they still present a 
j venerable appearance. Fronting the area of the 
; public baths and rooms, they are of a great height, 
i and exhibit a peculiar mode of building ; and, though 
j very ornamental, little calculated for defence or 
security. Towers appear to have been erected at 
| certain distances, several of which still remain. 
The whole of the circuit of the walls is computed to 
i be a mile and a quarter, though the present town 
cannot be less than three miles round. 

The Bargate, the principal, and formerly the 
only approach to Southampton by land, is a splen- 
did remain of the fortification of this place. The 
north front, which is supposed to have been erected 
in the reign of Edward the Third, is semi-octagonal, 
I flanked with two lower semicircular turrets, and 
| crowned with large and handsome open rnachicol- 
lations. The arch of entrance, which is long and 
deep, is highly pointed, and adorned with a profu- 
sion of mouldings. Above the arch, on a row of 
sunk pannels, alternately square and oblong, is a 
shield in relief, charged with the arms of England, 
Scotland, Paulet, Tylney, Abdy, Noel, Mile, Wynd- 
ham, &c. These arms, however, are not of ancient 
date, and from a minute inspection of the compo- 
nent parts of this curious gate, Sir Henry Engle- 
field is of opinion that the internal centre must have 
been erected in the early Norman times, or even 
before them. The front towards the High Street, 
is modern, plain, and uninteresting, except that in 
a central niche, it contains a whole length statue of 
Queen Anne, stiff and formal enough. Over the 
arches of the two foot and carriage ways, is a spacious 
Town Hall, fifty-two feet by twenty-one, with which 
a room for the grand jury communicates. The win- 
dows in these apartments, withinside, bear marks of 
antiquity. From the leads, the whole of this noble 
gate may be traced, and great part of the tower may 
be seen. Two lions sejant, cast in lead, guard the 
entrance of Bargate, and on this side there are like- 
wise pourtrayed two gigantic figures, representing 
Ascupart and Sir Bevois of Southampton, his re- 
doubted conqueror. 

A causeway, planted with trees, and nearly half 
a mile in length, runs from the South Gate and 
platform at Southampton. It is called the Beach, 

and 



HAMPSHIRE. 



531 



rind in its whole length it commands a view of tlie 
Southampton water, enlivened by a multitude of ves- 
sels, and closed by the Isle of Wight. Near its 
eastern extremity is the Cross House, and Itohin 
Ferry ; the former is a small round structure, with 
four divisions, or apartments, opposite to the car- 
dinal points, and intended for the accommodation 
of passengers waiting for the ferry boat. Here the 
ferrymen do homage to the Mayor and corporation, 
whenever the perambulation of the boundaries of the 
town is performed ; and in return for the permission 
of landing on the demesne of the town, engage at 
all times to carry over gratis, the Burgesses and 
their families. 

The town contains six parishes, and five churches; 
all of which were in existence as early as the time of 
Henry the Second, who gave four of them to his 
Priory of St. Dionysius. 

St. Michael's is a very ancient and curious build- 
ing, with :i low tower rising from the centre, finish- 
ed by a lofty and well proportioned octagonal spire, 
constituting a sea mark for vessels entering into this 
port. In the north aisle of the chancel is a hand- 
some monument, in commemoration of the Lord 
C'hancellor Wriothesley ; and in the opposite aisle, 
on the south, is a most curious antique font, of 
black marble. 

All Saints Church, an elegant modern structure, 
was erected since the year 1792, in place of a former 
Church, which had been found too small. It was 
built by Mr. Hookey, from the designs, and under 
the direction of the late Mr. Revely. The front of 
this building, which is in the High Street, is sixty 
fee.t six inches wide, and is adorned with four three- 
quarter columns of th Ionic order, four feet diame- 
ter, and thirty-six feet high, supporting a pediment 
on each side of which the angles are finished with 
autae, or Grecian pilasters. The three central spaces 
are filled in the lower part, by three wide and com- 
modious arches for the entrance doors, with fan 
lights over them to light the vestibule ; and on each 
side between the column and the pilaster, is a semi- 
circular-headed window, lighting the gallery stair- 
cases: in the second range are five plain niches. 
The entablature is continued round the Church. 
At the east end is a turret, rising from a square 
basement, and consisting of six Corinthian columns, 
supporting a circular entablature, on which is an 
attic, with three faces for the dial, crowned by a 
dome : this, from its elevated situation, can be seen 
many miles each way. The altar is within a reces- 
sed arch, very elegantly ornamented. The interior 
length of the Church, including the vestibule, but 
omitting the recess for the altar, is ninety-five feet ; 
its breadth, sixty-one feet ; its height from the pave- 
ment to the middle of the ceiling, forty -seven feet. 
The substruction of this Church is divided into 
arched vaults, or catacombs, so contrived as to pre- 
vent any nuisance arising from the practice of in- 
terment : as an additional precaution, the coffins, 
which must be of lead, are always inclosed in stone. 
6 



The remains of Captain Carteret, the celebrated 
circumnavigator, and of the late Bryan Edwards, 
Esq. of Springfield, near Southampton, author of 
the History of the West Indies, are deposited in 
this structure. 

Holy Rood Church is a large building, with ft 
tower at the south-west angle, and a colonnade in 
front, vulgarly called the Proclamation, where the 
hustings are erected, and the poll taken, on the 
election of the representatives for this town. The 
interior is handsome, and had formerly a regular 
choir, many of the stalls of which yet remain. Here 
amongst other monuments of the Stanleys of Poul- 
tons, is one, executed by Rysbrach, to the memory 
of Miss E. Stanley, sister to the late Right Hon. 
Hans Stanley, with the following elegant inscrip- 
tion by the poet Thomson, who has also celebrated 
this accomplished woman in his seasons : 

Here Stanley, rest! escap'd this mortal strife, 
Above the joys, beyond the woes of life. 
Fierce pangs no more thy lovely beauties stain, 
And slernly try tliee with a year of pain. 
No more, sweet Patience, feigning oft relief, 
Limits thy sick eye to cheat a parent's grief: 
With tender art to save her anxious groan, 
No more thy bosom presses down its own. 
Now well earn'd peace is thine, and bliss sincere, 
Our'sbe the lenient, not unpleasing tear. 
O born to bloom, then sink beneath the storm ! 
To shew us virtue in her fairest form ; 
To shew us artless Reason's mortal reign, 
What boastful science arrogates in vain: 
Th' obedient passions, knowing each the part, 
Calm light the head, and harmony the heart. 
Yes, we must follow soon, will glad obey, 
When a few suns have roll'cl their cares away : 
Tir'd with vain life, will close the willing eye ; 
'Tis the great birthright of mankind to die ! 
Blest be the breeze that wafts us to the shore, 
Where death-divided friends shall part no more, 
To join thce there, here with thy dust repose, 
Is all the hope thy hapless mother knows. 



Born 1720. 



Died 1738. 
J. THOMSON. 



Miss Stanley was not only mistress of the En- 
glish and French, but in a high degree of Greek 
and Roman learning. The Parsonage of Holy 
Rood Church is an old and curious edifice. 

The Churches of St. Mary, and St. Lawrence, 
are not particularly remarkable. The parish of 
St. John was annexed to that of St. Lawrence in 
the year 1706 ; and its Church has been long pulled 
down. 

Various other buildings, in different parts of the 
town, display considerable antiquity, and particu- 
larly the spacious mansion in Porter's Lane, near 
the site of the Water Gate, which has been minutely 
described by the ingenious pen of Sir H. G. Engle- 
field, who conjectures it to have constituted a part 
of the palace, occasionally inhabited by the Saxon 
and Danish sovereigns : the length of the front of 
this building is 111 feet. 

Amongst 



HAMPSHIRE. 



Amongst, the ancient institutions in this town not 
yet mentioned, was an Hospital for Lepers, long 
previously to the dissolution, given t the Priory of 
St. Dionvsius. St.. John's Hospital, a less ancient 
establishment, tor the instruction of six boys in the 
wooll.-n manufacture, was given, some years ago, 
to the Poor House by the Corporation, with the 
consent of the heir of the founder. The Poor House 
is a large modern and convenient building. A Free 
Grammar School was established in Southampton 
by Edward the Sixth, in an old building in Winkle 
Street, now used as a carpet manufactory, from 
which, many yfars afterwards, it WHS removed to 
v its present situation, an ancient mansion, known by 
the name of West Hale : the dining room has a 
stuccoed ceiling in compartments, and is supposed 
to be at least as ol<i s the time of Henry the Eighth. 
"The muster is appointed by the Corporation; but 
the original plan has been departed from, t!e scholars 
being chiefly boarders. A Charity School for ten 
boys lias also been established here, by means of a 
donation bequeathed previously to tiie year 1760, 
by Alderman Taunton, of this town : ome part of 
the produ.ee of whose bequept is appropriated, under 
a decree of the Court of Chancery, to the appor- 
tioniug of meritorious fema!e ses - 7ats on their mar- 
riage. Sunday Schools were instituted here in 1786 ; 
the overplus of the funds, which arise from gifts, 
and annual subscriptions, are appropriated to the 
support of a School of Industry ; for the more com- 
plete instruction of twenty-live girls taken from the 
Sunday Schools. Near the entrance of the town, 
on the right, is a neat building, or range of Aims- 
Houses, erected about five-and-twenty years ago, 
for the accommodation of eighteen poor widows, 
who are allowed two shillings each, weekly, from 
the produce arising from a bequest by Robert 
Thorner, Esq. of Baddesley, who died in 1690. 

The attractions which Southampton presents for 
sea bathing, and other healthful purposes, are in- 
creased " by a Chalybeate spring, rising about 100 
yards to the westward of Bargate, and much in re- 
pute for its' medicinal qualities. The baths are con- 
venient; and every attention is paid to the accom- 
modation of the numerous visitants, who frequent 
'this town during the bathing season. The great in- 
fl'.tx 6f company of late years, has, indeed, given 
origin to many improvements. The assembly rooms 
are beautifully situated near the West Quay, and 
'Very elegantly fitted up; the long room was built in 



,;,-. ' ' 

* The celebrated Dr. l^aac Watts was born at Southampton, 
..in.Jalv, .176.4 His fattier kept a hoarding School ; but voung 

Watts appears to have been vyry eaily sent to the Free School 
"in rids town, where his 'proficiency became to conspicuous, that 
'a subscription was proposed to support him at the University; 
.this scheme, however, failed, from his resolution to take his 
.iii.t \vitli i he Dissenter-. About the age of twenty-two he be- 
u^ime domestic tutor to the son of Sir John-Iiarlopp, after which 
"In- w;is appointed to succeed Dr. Chauncey, as pastor to a reli- 
igiotls congregation. In 1712, his health was irreparably injured 

It) a violent fever; in consequence of which he was prevailed 

}- . ..A 



1781, the ball room about six years afterwards. A 
theatre was erected here in 1766 ; but this, though 
subsequently enlarged, being still found inadequate 
to accommodate the numbers that frequently sought 
admission, a new one on a more extensive and com- 
modious scale, was built, on the site of St. John's 
Hospital, and opened en the 12th of September, 
1803. Additional recreation is derived from the 
races, which are annually held on Stoneham Com- 
mon, about three miles from the^town ; and from an 
annual sailing match, instituted by G. H. Rose, 
Esq. Near the town, on the north, arc barracks 
for the reception of cavalry, occupying about two 
acres of ground.* 

SOBTHINGTON.] At Sonthington, formerly Sud- 
ington, four miles S. E. from Whitchurch, was a 
preceptory of Knights Templars, who are conjec- 
tured to have had the Gurdon manor house, and 
manor of Temple, bestowed on them by Johanna, 
daughter of Sir Adam Gurdon. 

SOUTHWICK.] At Southwick, three miles N. E. 
by E. from Fareham, was formerly a Priory of 
Black Canons, which was the scene of the marriage 
of Henry the Sixth, with Margaret of Aujou. The 
Priory was originally built at Portchester, by Henry 
the First, in 1133, but was shortly afterwards re- 
moved to Southwick, where it flourished till the 
Dissolution. In 1235, the Canons procured the 
grant of a market and a fair to be held here, but the 
former has been long disused. The site and de- 
mesnes of the Priory were granted to John White, 
Esq. and descended from him, by the female line, 
to Colonel Norton, who signalized himself in behalf 
of the Parliament, during the civil wars. His grand- 
son, Richard, bequeathed Southwick, and all his 
other estates, to the amount of 6000/. per annum, 
with personal property of the value of60,000/. to 
the Parliament of Great Britain, in trust for the use 
of " the poor, hungry, thirsty, naked, strangers, 
sick, wounded, and prisoners, to the end of the 
world." The will was set aside, from the evident 
marks of insanity which appeared to have dictated 
its clauses. 

Southwick Park includes the site of the Priory, 
only a small part of which now remains. The manor 
house is a large ancient building, having two wings 
terminating in gable ends, and embattled. In this 
edifice two monarchs have been entertained ; Charles 
the First, and George the First. The former was 
here when the Duke of Buckingham, whom he had 

on, by Sir Thomas Abnty, to reside with him ; end in his 
family he continued during the remainder of his d;ns. He 
died in his seventy-fifth year. His writings are numerous, and 
much valued ; particularly those which relate to the instruction 
of youth. His Treatise on Logic hss been admitted us a class 
book into the Univer-ities ; and his Improvement of the Mind 
is equally valuable for the purposes of education. His Trans- 
lation of the Psalms is much approved. The merit of his 
labours procured him an unsolicited diploma, which he re- 
ceived from Edinburgh and Aberdeen in 1728. 

accompanied 



HAMPSHIRE. 



accompanied thus far from London, was assassi- 
nated by Felton. 

SOWI.KY.] At this place, a little to the eastward 
ofPilcvvell, is an extensive sheet of water, covering 
nearly 140 acres of ground. It was formerly deno- 
minated Fresh -water, as appears by ancient char- 
ters, and considered as forming a boundary to the 
possessions of Beaulieu Abbey. It is in many parts 
very deep, and teems with excellent fish ; its waters 
are now applied to turn the wheels of two large mills 
belonging to some iron works. 

STOCKBIUDGE.] The little market and borough 
town of Stock bridge, consisting chiefly of a range of 
houses on each side of the high way, lies 18 miles 
N. by W. from Southampton, and 66i W. S. W. 
from London. Its inhabitants are principally sup- 
ported by the passage of travellers ; this being a 
considerable thoroughfare, though possessing but 
little trade of its own : the inns and public houses 
are numerous. A new bridge was built some years 
ago. Stockbridge is a borough by prescriptive 
right ; but it does not appear to have returned any 
members to Parliament, till the first of Queen Eliza- 
beth: the right of election is possessed by all who 
pay church and poor rates. The ingenious Sir 
Richard Steele, who represented this borough in the 
reign of Queen Anne, carried his election against a 
powerful opposition, by the merry expedient of 
sticking a large apple full of guineas, and declaring 
it should be the prize of that man whose wife should 
first be brought to bed after that day nine months : 
this, we are told, procured him the interest of the 
women, who are said to commemorate Sir Richard's 
bounty to this day, and once made a strenuous offer 
to procure a standing order of the corporation, that 
no man should ever be received as a candidate, who 
did not offer himself upon the same terms. The 
government of the town is vested in a bailiff, con- 
stable, and sergeant 'at maee. On Iloughton Down, 
about two miles westward, is a good race course. 
The population in 1811, was 603. 

STONEHAM.] South Stoneham lies three miles 
N. and North Stoneham, 4 N. N. E. from South- 
ampton. In the latter, is Stoneham Park, the seat 
of the late John Fleming, Esq. The house is an old 
building, seated rather low, but it has been much 
improved and enlarged. The Park is extensive, 
and well wooded ; it abounds with deer ; and at the 
upper end has a pleasant summer house, from which 
the. prospects are very fine : the grounds were laid 
out by Brown. Adjoining to the house is the parish 
church ; against the south wall of which is a superb 
monument to the memory of the late Admiral Ilawke, 
Avho was buried here. Previously to his decease, 
he inhabited the old mansion, between one and two 
miles to the south. The monument, fourteen feet 
high, is finely composed of white and variegated 
marble, bearing the family arms, with appropriate 
decorations, and a representation of the battle with 
Conflaas in Quiberou Bay, anno 1759; from the 
VOL. n. NO. 83. 



original painting by Serres. It bears the following 
inscription : 

" D. O. M. 

" This monument is sacred to the memory of 

" Edward Hawke, 

" Lord Hawke, Baron of Towton, in the county of York, 

" Knight of the Bath, Admiral and commander of the 

" Fleet, Vice-Admiral ot Great Britain, &c. 

" Who died October 17th, 1781, aged 72. 

" The bravery of his soul was equal to the dangers lie 
encountered ; the cautious intrepidity of his delibera- 
tions superior even to the conquests he obtained. The 
annals of his life compose a period of naval glory, un- 
paralleled in later times; for wherever he sailed, vic- 
tory attended liim. A Prince, unsolicited, conferred 
on him favours which he disdained to ask." 

Admiral Hawke was created a Baron, in May, 
1776. Another inscription records the death of 
Catherine, his Lady, daughter of Walter Brooke, 
ESM. of Walton, in Yorkshire, who died in the year 
i 175ti. This Church is also the burial place of the 
Flemyngs, who have been interred here from the 
time of James the First. On the tomb of Sir Thomas 
Flemyng, Kt. afterwards Lord Chief Justice of 
England, are the effigies of himself, and his Lady : 
the former died in 1013, in his sixty-ninth year, and 
is represented in his official robes ; the latter in the 
courtly dress of the times. 

STRATFORD SAY.] Stratford Say, the seat of 
Lord Rivers, 6{ miles N. E.frorn Basingstoke, was 
anciently the property of a family named Say, after- 
wards Sir Nicholas Dabridgecotirt, Knt. Sheriff of 
Hampshire in 1389. In the latter family it con- 
tinued till the reign of Charles the First, when it 
was purchased by Sir William Pitt, who, dying in 
1636, was buried in the parish church. The late 
Lord Rivers, fourth in descent from Sir William, 
was created a Peer, in May, 1770. The house 
stands in an extensive Park, but rather low ; the 
scenery is pleasing. 

STRATTON PARK.] The parish of East Stratton. 
lies 5 miles N. N. W. from New Alresford ; and 
West Stratton lies 6{ miles S. E. from Whitchurch. 
Stratton Park, the seat of Sir Francis Baring, Bk 
formerly belonged to the Dukes of Bedford, and 
was a favourite hunting residence of the late Mar- 
quis of Tavistock, who is said to have had a large 
part of the ancient, mansion here pulled down, lest 
his successors should prefer it to Woburn. 

SUTTON, BISHOP'S.] Bishop's Sutton is 1| mile 
E. S. E. from New Alresford. The Church pre- 
sents some remains of Norman architecture. It 
contains various sepulchral memorials ; amongst 
which are brasses of a man (in plate armour, with- 
out helmet) and his wife, the inscription gone ; and 
several ancient slabs turned face downward. The 
ancient font, now disused, is octagonal, on a stand 
of niche work; the modern one is a clumsy square 
bason, on a cylindrical pedestal. 

SYDJIANTON.] In this parish, seven miles N. by 

E. from Whitchurch, stands Sydraantou house, the 

6 T eeat 



534 



HAMPSHIRE. 



eat of Admiral Sir Robert Kingsmill, which was 
granted to his ancestors John Kingsmiil and Con- 
stantia, bis wife, by Henry the Eighth, on the dis- 
solution of the monasteries ; the building 1 is irregu- 
lar, it having been erected at different periods. 
Part of Sydmanton, comprehending 704 acres, be- 
longed to the Abbey at Romsey, and pays only one 
acre of wheat, and one of barley, in lieu of recto- 
rial tythes ; and forty pounds annually in lieu of 
vicarial tythes. 

TATCIIBURY MOUNT.] Tatchbury Mount, five 
miles S. W. by S. from Romsey, is supposed to 
have been an ancient military station ; and also a 
royal hunting seat. Here is a neat mansion, with 
plantations. The prospects are very fine. 

TICHBOHNE.] Tichborne (contracted from De 
Itchin-Bourne, alluding to the situation of the manor 
on the chief spring of the Itchin river) which lies 2{ 
miles S. W. from New Alresford, is the seat of Sir 
Henry Tichborne, Bart, whose family was settled 
here before the conquest. The old mansion was 
pulled down a few years ago, and a handsome 
edifice erected on its site. 

TicimiiLD.] The little market town of Tichfield, 
with a population of 3227, lies near the Titchfield 
river, three miles W. from Fareham. The Church 
is a spacious fabric, of the architecture of different 
ages: the north side is said to have been built by 
William Wyckham ; the south aisle is more ancient. 
In the south chancel, is an interesting monument to 
the memory of Sir Thomas Wriotbesly, first Earl 
of Southampton ; Jane, bis Lady ; and Henry, their 



son, the second Earl. 



On the north of the town are the ruins of Tich- 
field house, the ancient seat of the Wriotheslys, 
erected by the first Earl of Southampton, on .the site 
and with the materials of an abbey, founded in 1231. 
The entrance gateway, and the old stables, yet re- 
main, and are worthy of notice. Charles the First 
was concealed here after his escape from Hampton 
Court, in 1617, and previously to his again resign- 
ing himself to the power of Colonel Hammond, who 
conducted him to the Isle of Wight. 

TOWNHILL.] About two miles W. of Botley, is 
Townhill, the seat of the late Nathaniel Middleton, 
Esq. who erected a spacious and elegant mansion 
here, on an eminence commanding some fine views. 
Several neat villas adorn the country, between this 
mansion and Southampton, particularly Midanbury 
Lodge, the property of R. Johnson, Esq. Bittern 
Lodge, the seat of James Dott, Esq. and Chessel, 
the residence of David Lance, Esq. 

TWYFORD.] Twyford (six miles S. by W. from 
Melton Mowbray) with the neighbouring village of 
Ovvslebury, belongs to Sir H. 31ildmay, Bart. The 
mansion house at Twyford, called Shawford, was 
built in the beginning of the last century, by Holi- 
day Mildmay, Esq. with the materials brought from 
the convent at Marwell. Alderman Holiday be- 
queathed, in 1058, the sum of 1G,000/. to be laid 
out in laud for the benefit of his daughter, (wife of 



Sir II. Mildmay,) and her heirs* With part of this 
sum, these estates were purchased, in 1660, from 
the Seymour family. In the village of Twyford 
was a Catholic seminary, where Mr. Pope was 
partly educated. In the church is a fine mural 
monument, by Nollekens, to the memory of the late 
Jonathan Shipley, Bishop of St. Asaph, who died 
in 1788, in his seventy-fourth year. 

VINE.] The Vine, formerly 'a celebrated seat of 
the Lords Sandys, but now belonging to the Chute 
family, lies about three miles S. W. from Stratfield- 
Say. Camdcn says, it derived its name from the 
vines which were introduced into this country in the 
time of the Emperor Probus. Its situation is low : 
the grounds, though well wooded, are not exten- 
sive : a little stream crosses the lawn, which ex- 
tends from the north front of the house. The man- 
sion is a long range of brick building, with wings : 
many alterations have been made in it since thetima 
of its erection, by the first Lord Sandys, and par- 
ticularly by the speaker Chute, under the superin- 
tendance of Webb and Inigo Jones. Further im- 
provements were effected by the late John Chute, 
Esq. who fitted up the interior in a grand style, 
and erected a fine Grecian stair case. He also be- 
gan the small chapel, or tomb room, adjoining the 
ancient and curious chapel in this mansion, which 
the first Lord Sandys repaired and embellished. 
On each side of this chapel are stalls, or seats, 
curiously carved : the three windows at the east end, 
are glazed with fine painted glass, brought from 
Boulogne, with most of the pavement, which con- 
sists of tiles of various sizes, each of them having 
a figure, motto, or device upon it. The three 
upper compartments of the windows contain subjects 
from the New Testament ; the lower compartments 
have the figures of Francis the First, with bis two 
wives, Claude and Margaret, and their tutelar 
saints. 

Here is an altar tomb, to the memory of Chaloner 
Chute, Esq. who is represented in his robes, as 
Speaker of the House of Commons, by a recumbent 
figure, sculptured by Banks, from a painting by 
Vandyke, still preserved in this mansion ; with a 
painting by the same artist, of his second wife 
Dorothy, Lady Dacre. Several curious marbles, 
brought from Italy by the late J. Chute, Esq. with 
Greek and Latin inscriptions, are preserved here. 
The lower part of one of the wings is occupied as a 
green-house, above which is a long gallery, wain- 
scoted with oak, and curiously carved with the arms, 
cyphers, and other devices, of most of the nobility 
that composed the court of Henry the Eighth in the 
time of Lord Sandys. Here are also a few full- 
length portraits : among them are Henry the Eighth ; 
Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk ; Sir Francis 
Bacon, Lord Verulam ; the Duke of Buckingham ; 
and a three-quarter length of a nun, of the ancient 
family of the Cufauds. 

UPHA.M.] Uphani, three miles N. N. W. from 
Bishop's Waltham, is celebrated as the birth place 

of 



HAMPSHIRE. 



535 



of the Rev. Dr. Young, author of the " Night 
Thoughts," &c.* 

WALHAMPTON.] Walhampton, the seat of Sir 
H. B. Neale, Bart, lies near Lymington. It was 
givet^ by Richard de Redvers, to the canons of 
Christchurch. Henry the Eighth granted it to Sir 
Thomas Wriothesly, afterwards Earl of Southamp- 
ton ; from whose descendants it came into the pos- 
session of the Earls' of Arundel, and afterwards to 
the Neale family. The grounds, laid out about 80 
years ago, command some pleasing views of the 
Isle of Wight, &c. A swamp of about twelve acres, 
Las been formed into a lake, the sides of which are 
well wooded, and its extremities concealed by plan- 
tations. 

WALTHAM.] The market town of Bishop's Wal- 
thani, with a population of 1830, lies 10 miles 
E. N. E. from Southampton, and 67* S. W. by W. 
from London. The manor, which includes Waltham 
Chace, has belonged, from time immemorial, to 
the see of Winchester. The town was always small, 
but it enjoys a good trade, and sends large quanti- 
ties of leather to Guernsey, London, &c. 

The Bishop's palace or castle, on the south-west 
side of the town, still exhibits traces of its ancient 
magnificence. It was originally built by Bishop 
Henry de Blois, brother to King Stephen. Much 
of its grandeur was probably owing to the architec- 
tural taste of William of Wyckam, who made it his 
favourite residence, and here terminated his career 
at the age of eighty. The area of the outer or base 
court, built by Bishop Langton, is now a farm 
yard ; the remains of several brick chimnies, appa- 
rently of the time of that prelate, are still to be seen 
on the north side. The Great Hall, in the second 
or inner court, the front wall of which remains al- 
most entire, was sixty-six feet in length, twenty- 
seven in width, and twenty-five high, and lighted 
by five large windows, of magnificent proportions : 
the ruins are mantled with ivy. Here are also the 
remains of a tower, about seventeen feet square. 
This castle was demolished in the civil wars : the 
Bishop's Park is now a farm. In the early part of 
the 18th century, this iieighboiirhod was infested by 
a notorious gang of deer-stealers, who, from their 
custom of blackening their faces before they sallied 
forth to commit their depredations in the adjacent 
forests, obtained the name of Waltham Blacks. At 
length their atrocities became so great as to demand 
the interference of the legislature ; and in 1723, an 
act was passed to restrain their enormities. This 
act, called the Black Act, now comprehends more 



felonies than any law that was ever framed for 
domestic regulation. 

WAHBLINOTON.] Three quarters of a mile S. E. 
by E. from Ilavant is Warblington, which gave 
name to the ancient family of De Warblington, who 
settled here about the time of Henry the Third, and 
flourished till the time of Edward the Third ; seve- 
ral of them having filled the offices of sheriffs and 
knights of the shire. The manor having escheated 
to the crown, was given to Ralph dc Montherme, 
second husband to Joan of Acres, daughter of Ed- 
ward the First and Queen Eleanor: from him it de- 
scended to the Montacutes, and from the Monta- 
cutes to the Cottons ; the last of whom bequeathed 
it to Thomas Panton, Esq. in 1736, subsequently 
to which it became the property of Mrs. Ann Mor- 
ris. The ruins, called Warblington castle, are sup- 
posed to have formed part of the ancient mansion of 
the Warblingtons, or of the Montacutes ; most pro- 
bably of the latter. It appears to have been a squar* 
pile of about 200 feet, surrounding a quadrangular 
court: the only part now standing, is the gateway 
and tower. The whole was surrounded by a fosse, 
about ten feet deep, and including about an acre of 
ground. Before the northern angle appears to have 
been a sort of entrenched camp, of five acres, now 
overgrown with wood, surrounded by a bank nearly 
eight feet high, and a ditch of a similar depth to 
that round the castle. The church, which stands at 
a little distance from the castle, is traditionally said 
to have been founded by two maiden sisters, the last 
of the De Warblingtons. 

Several stone coflins are deposited in the aisles ; 
two of which, thought to have belonged to the foun- 
dresses, were opened a few years ago: in one wan 
a perfect female skeleton ; in the other, the remains 
of a skeleton, with the teeth perfectly sound, and 
beautiful, and the hair undecayed. All the coflins 
are similar in form, but of various length, from live 
feet and a half, to seven feet, and gradually dimin- 
ishing from the head to the foot. They are each 
made of one solid stone hollowed out for containing 
the corpse, with receptacles for the head, neck, 
shoulders, arms, legs, and feet, particularly and 
curiously formed. The chancel was formerly paved 
with small square tiles, of various patterns, inlaid 
with a yellow composition ; several of the designs 
are grotesque. 

WAUNFORD.] At Warnford, G* miles X. E. from 
Bishop's Waltham, in the grounds belonging to a 
seat long occupied by the late Marquis of Clunri- 
carde, is a venerable ruin of an ancient mansion, 



* Edward Young was born in 168 1 . His father, who was an ; 
eminent clergyman, died in 1707, and left two volumes of ex- ! 
cellent sermons. The son was educated at Winchester School, ! 
and All Souls College, Oxford, where he studied the civil law, 
after which he ?l<jo<\ candidate for a seat in Parliament, but ; 
was unsuccessful. Me then turned his thoughts to divinity, j 
was ordained, made chaplain to the King, and presented to (lie ! 
living of Welwvn in Hertfordshire, where he died in 1765. 
Dr. Young married Lady Elizabeth Lee, daughter of the Karl 



of Litchfield, and widow of Colonel Lee, by whom he had a 
son who survived him. As a |>i>et he shiiies in his Night 
Thoughts, which abound with sublimities, but are often verv 
obscure. His poem on the Last Day is also a performance of 
great merit. Hesides these works, he wrote the Revenge, nnd 
the Brothers, tragedies; the Centaur not Fabulous, amoral 
satire; Estimate of Human Lite, a sermon; Conjectures on 
Original Composition; the Love of Fame the Universal Pas- 
sion; some papers in the Spectator; and Miscellaneous Poems. 

calk-d 



636 



HAMPSHIRE. 



called King John's House, (more properly St. John's 
House) formerly the property of the St. Johns, 
Lords of Basing. This ruin is about eighty feet 
long, and fifty-four wide ; its walls are four feet 
thick, and constructed of flint set in grout work. 
In some maps, of as distant a date as 1610, this is 
marked as a ruinated place ; and in writings which 
belonged to the Marquis of a still earlier date, it is 
named the Old House. Some have imagined it the 
shell of the original church erected here on the 
spreading of Christianity; but the two Latin in- 
scriptions, on the walls of the present church, which 
stands within about twenty yards, though quoted in 
support of this opinion, are demonstrative of the 
contrary: both of them evince, that the building on 
which they appear, was rebuilt on the ancient site. 
On Old Winchester Hill, rising south from Warn- 
ibrd, some writers have placed a Roman encamp- 
ment. 

WP.Y-HILL.] Wey-Hill, 3J miles W. by N. 
from Aiidover is celebrated for an annual fair, which 
originated in a revel kept on the Sunday before 
Michaelmas day, and was afterwards chartered by 
Queen Elizabeth. The fair commences on the day 
before Old Michaelmas day, for the sale of sheep, 
of which upwards of 140,000 have been sold here in 
one day. On Michaelmas day the fanners hire their 
servants ; next day the sale of hops begins ; and the 
fair generally continues six or seven days, accord- 
ing to the quantities of hops exposed for sale. 
Numbers of horses are also sold here, particularly 
cart-colts; with great quantities of cheese, clothes, 
leather, &c. The bailiff of Andover holds a court 
of pie-powder during the fair, and receives two- 
pence from each booth, or standing. 

WHERWKLL.] At Wherwell, or Whorhwell, 3| 
miles S. S. E. from Andover, was a nunnery, founded 
by Elfuda, second wife of King Edgar, in atone- 
ment for the murder of Edward the Martyr, at 
Corie Castle ; and that of Ethehvold, her h'rst hus- 
band, whom Edgar slew, that he might obtain her 
in marriage. In this nunnery, Elfrida took the veil, 
and was buried. The site was granted to Sir 
Thomas West, Lord Delawar. 

WHITCIJUKCH.] The little straggling market and 
borough town of Whitchurch, lies 24 miies W. by 
E. from Southampton and 56| W. S. W. from Lou- 
don. It is situated in a bottom under the Chalk 
Hills. Its government is vested in a mayor, chosen 
annually at the conrt-leet of the dean and chapter of 
Winchester, to whom the manor belongs. The 
members are elected by the freeholders, nominally 
about seventy ; but as all the freeholds appear to be 
possessed by two noblemen, the real number of 
electors must be regarded as the same. The popu- 
lation, in 1811, was 1407. The labouring classes 



* Wyckham was bom hers A. D. 1324; his origin was hum- 
ble, but liis talents and address were of i superior stamp. Ed- 
ward, loaded him with preferment, anil the bishop proved him- 
self worthy of UU sovrerrign') favours. His skill in architecture 



are chiefly employed in agriculture, and the woollen 
trade. 

WICKHAM.] Three miles and three-quarters S. 
by E. from Bishop's Waltham, over Waltham Chace, 
lies the pleasant village of Wickham, anciently the 
seat of the Uvedale family, one of whom, Nicholas 
Uvedale, when constable of Winchester Castle, be- 
came the patron of William of Wyckham ; and, 
with Bishop Edyngton, first introduced him to Ed- 
ward the Third.* 

Wickham church is a neat structure, with some 
remains of Anglo-Norman architect'. re. Wickham 
corner, the parsonage house, in which Dr. Warton 
passed the evening of life, is agreeably situated at 
the eastern extremity of the village. Several other 
pleasant seats ornament the neighbourhood. 

WIGHT.] The Isle of Wight will be hereafter 
described, amongst the other British isles not yet 
noticed. 

WINCHESTER.] The very eminent and ancient 
city of Winchester lies ll| miles N. N. E. from 
Southampton, and 62| S. W. by W. from London. 
It is seated on the eastern declivity of a hill, gradu- 
ally sloping to the river Itchin, the chalky cliffs of 
which, combined with the whiteness of the surround- 
ing soil, is affirmed by Caunden to have occasioned 
its original name, which was Caer Gwent, or the 
White City, an appellation that, from similar cir- 
cumstances, was also bestowed on two other Bri- 
tish cities, viz. Venta Silurum, in Monmouthshire, 
and Venta Icenorum, in Norfolk. Its present name 
is thought to be a corruption from Gwent-chestre ; 
and not to have been derived, as commonly imagin- 
ed, from the fact of a royal weavery being esta- 
blished here under the Roman Emperors. The 
early history of this city is involved in fable. Its 
origin, unquestionably remote as it is, has been car- 
ried to an era far beyond credibility, and even made 
antecedent to the foundation of Rome itself, by a 
period of nearly one hundred and forty years. The 
celebrated Dunwallo Mulmutius, who is represented 
as contemporary with Darius of Persia, has been 
also brought in to embellish its history, and he is 
recorded as having erected its walls, though on the 
same insufficient evidence, as ascribes its origin to 
Hudibrass, the eighth in succession from Brute, or 
Brutus, a supposed great grandson of jEneas.of 
Troy. " After our city is stripped of all these false 
honours," observes Mr. Milner, " she will never- 
theless still retain a well founded claim to as high an 
antiquity as that of perhaps any other city within the 
compass of the island. It is clear, both from argu- 
ment and authority, that South Britain, at least, 
was first peopled from the opposite coast of Gaul, 
and particularly from the Armorican coast of the 
Celtic Gauls, whom, in language, manners, and 



was very great ; and mo^t of the great works executed in the 
latter days of Edward, were clone under his direction. In 1364, 
lie was made keeper of the privy seal ; and two years afterwords, 
Bishop of Winchester, which he held till his death in 1404. 

religion, 



HAMPSHIRE. 



religion, they so nnicb resembled; that tlie southern 
coast of the same was first inhabited, and that thence 
population gradually spread itself into other parts of 
the country. This being so, and the relative situa- 
tion of the twenty-eight original British cities con- 
sidered, we can have no difficulty in pronouncing 
that the first Celtic settlers, embarking at the near- 
est Armorican port to Britain, that of the Uuclli, 
or Cherburg, from the vicinity of which they must 
often have seen the white cliff's of the Isle of Wight, 
Unded, and established themselves at Cer Peris, 
or Portchester, the only ancient city which is actu- 
ally on this coast. From thence, proceeding up 
the country in a north-west direction, they could 
not overlook that beautiful and commodious spot, 
which possessed the several advantages within it- 
self, or close to it, of a well-watered valley, and 
of fertile fields, for their own support, and that of 
their valuable flocks; of extensive downs inter- 
spersed with covers proper for the chase ; and of 
shady forests necessary for defence, and for the 
mysterious rights of the Druidical religion : here 
then they made their chief settlement on the southern 
coast." The Celtic Britons being afterwards dis- 
possessed by the Belgae, Winchester became, as 
already stated, the chief city of that nation in this 
island, ami retained its pre-eminence till the Belgaj 
were finally subdued by Vespasian, and their capi- 
tal submitted to the Roman arms. Afterwards, 
about the year 50, all the Belgic cities of note, be- 
tween the Anton, or Southampton river, and the 
Severn, were fortified in a regular manner, by P. 
Ostorius Scapula, and garrisoned to defend the 
country from the incursions of the yet unconquered 
Britons. This then is the proper period to which 
the regular construction of the city of Winchester, 
in' a square form, which was that ot the Roman 
camps in general, is to be ascribed, together with 
the city walls, composed of flints and strong mor- 
tar, the substance of which, after so many repairs 
and alterations, still remains. These fortifications 
were not raised, except for the purpose of being 
defended by a garrison : hence there can be no 
doubt but that some Roman legion, or some cohorts, 
were then stationed in this city. These troops, ac- 
cording to their usual custom, had their Castrum 
^Istivum, or summer encampment, in the neigh- 
bourhood, as well as their winter quarters in the 
city itself. We accordingly find the vestiges of this 
encampment in the situation where we should natu- 
rally look for them, on that singular peninsulated 



hill, within a mile of the city, called Catherine Hill ? 
which communicates with the Roman road, between 
Portchestcr and Winchester on one side, and with 
the river which washes its foot on the other. Ou 
the top of this hill we discern the dimensions and 
form of the said Castrum in the bold intrenchment 
which still surrounds it, and which approaches to 
the' Roman quadrangular shape, as nearly as the 
figure of the hill would admit. 

By the Romans the name of the city was changed 
fram Caer Gwent to Veuta Belgarum : many traces 
of the roads made to the surrounding stations, 
during the period of their occupation, are still visi- 
ble, and particularly of those which conduct t 
Vindonum, or Silchester, and Sorbiodunum, or 
Old Sarum : two temples, the one consecrated to 
Concord, the other to Apollo, are also recorded to 
have been built here, by the Romans, in the vicinity 
of the Cathedral. Roman sepulchres have also 
been discovered within these few years just without 
the walls of the city, both to the east and to the 
north ; in nine of them that were opened in the year 
1789, human bones were found; and five of tha 
number contained urns of black pottery, exceed- 
ingly well shaped and tempered, one of them being 
fluted, and the rest plain. A coin, apparently of 
Augustus Caesar, a Roman fibula, ami some other 
antiquities were also discovered in one of the sepul- 
chres. From a comparative examination made by 
| Milner, between various Roman and British authors, 
I there is good reason to suppose, that a considerable 
| district, of which Venta, or Winchester, was the 
capital, became the dominions of Arviragus, or 
i Caractacus, after his release by Claudian. That 
Emperor is recorded to have sent him back into 
Britain, with orders, that he should be reinstated in 
! the government of a part of his inheritance. This 
: was strictly in accordance with the approved policy 
1 of the Romans, in making Kings the instruments of 
their ambition ; and Caractacus, who had also the 
appellation of Cogidubnus, is thenceforth said to 
have become the firm ally of the Emperor, whose- 
names he also assumed, a* appears by the inscrip- 
tion on a stone dug up at Chichester in the hegin- 
i ning of the last century, in which he is literally 
I styled, Tiberius Claudius Cogidubnus, King and 
Legate of the august Emperor in Britain. In his 
family the civil jurisdiction of the district is tradi- 
tionally said to have remained till the death of 
Lucius, with whom the dynasty of British tributary 
Princes is recorded to have expired.* Henceforth, 

Venta 



* The real hiMory of Lucius, celebrated as the first sove- 
reign that embraced Christianity, is enveloped in a mass of 
legendary fable ; and so improbable are (lie transactions as- 
cribed to him, that not only the relation of his conversion to j 
liie Christian faith has be<'n denied, but also I he fact of his very 
existence rendered questionable. On this head, however, 
scarcely any point in our history is more positively, unani- 
mously, or circumstantially asserted, not less by the Britons 
themselves, than by the Saxon, and other antagonists of thq 

TOL. II. HO. 84. 



British writers. Notwithstanding (his evidence, it most be ac- 
knowledged, that truth and fiction are so intimately blended 
in the records which relate to Lucius, that every attempt to 
separate them, seems impossible. The extended sway attri- 
buted to this King at a period when the greatest part of Bri- 
tain was completely subjected to the Romans, is, probalily, of 
all the evcnls of Ins history, that which renders it the most dis- 
putable. After his own baptism, anVl that of hir- Queen, and 
greater part of his subjects, by Faganus, or Fugatiuj, and 
'6 u Davianus, 



538 



HAMPSHIRE. 



i J.. . 



Venta was governed immediately by Roman officers. 
Tliis city is also supposed to have been the princi- 
pal residence of the Emperors Carausius and Allec- 
ttis, who assumed the imperial purple in Britain, 
and whose coins have been dug up in greater num- 
bers here, and in the adjoining fields, than those of 
any two lawful Emperors whomsoever. During 
the latter part of the general persecution carried on 
nuainst the Christians, by Dioclestan, about the end 
of the third, or beginning of the fourth century, 
the cathedral and monastery attributed .to Lucius, 
are said to have been levelled with the ground, and 
all the ecclesiastics either slaughtered or dispersed. 
The cessation of the persecution is ascribed to Con- 
stant'uis (Milorus, in the time of whose successor, 
the great Constantino, the avowed patron of the 
Christians, the Cathedral of Venta is stated to have 
been built on the site of the former one, and in a 
similar form, that of the cross. This second build- 
ing is said to have been dedicated in honour of St-. 
Amphibalus, a priest, and martyr, who, having 
sought refuge in the house of St. Allian at Wrlan- 
cest'er, (St. Alban's in Hertfordshire) was discovered 
and put to death; as was also his kind host, for 
having given him entertainment. 

With the new cathedral the monastery is pre- 
sumed to have been re-established ; and it aspires 
to the honour of having had an Emperor for .one of 
its monks. This was Constans, son of Constantine, 
who, (says Gibbon) after the successful usurpation 
of his father, about the year 407, had been " tempted, 
or compelled, sacrilegiously to desert the peaceful 
obscurity of the 'monastic life," and having been in- 
rested with the imperial purple, had been left to 
command in Spain ; but, on the revolt of Gerontius, 
his bravest general, was made prisoner, and put to 
death. The increasing calamities of the Roman 
empire having occasioned the withdrawing of all the 
Roman troops from Britain, its several provinces 
reverted to the governments of its native chieftains, 
"who appear to have maintained an independent au- 

'Davianus, who had been sent from Rome, for the purpose, by 
Pope Eleiitherius, he is stated to have founded churches in 
each of the twenty-eight cities, which subsisted. in Britain prior 
to the Roman conquest, and which had subsequently been the 
chief seats of the Flamines, or Pagan priests ; settling upon the 
Christian priests, the revenues that the former had enjoyed. 
" With respect to the hierarchy to be established," observes 
Milner, who supports the history of Lucius, " it seemed best 
to Lucius and his prelates, that the same should be observed, 
which before had obtained amongst the Flamines, according to 
which, London, York, and Caerleon, became mrtropolitical 
sees: hence our city of Venta, though the particular object of 
the regard of Lucius, and probably the capital of his dominions, 
was, indeed, left destitute of that pre-eminence, to which, as 
the chief city of the west, it was otherwise entitled ; hut, in 
return, it was honoured with certain distinctions peculiar to it- 
self. Instead of causing one of the heathen temples in it to be 
purified, and consecrated, for the purpose of a Christian 
church, as he did in the other cities, he built our cathedral 
from the ground, upon a scale of grandeur and magnificence 
whicli lias never since been equalled ; and he bestowed upon it 
the right of sanctuary, with other privileges. Moreover, a* in 
this tit; iiad been the chief school in the island, of the Pagan 



thority, till a sense of mutual danger arising from 
the successful enterprises of the Scots and Picts, 
caused them to elect Gortheryn, or Vortigeru, a 
their King. This Prince had previously ruled in- 
the western district, and under his government 
Winchester became the metropolis of the island, and 
was afterwards the residence of his successors, Am- 
brosius, and Uther Pendragon : the former is be- 
lieved to have died by poison in this city. After, the 
irruption of the Saxons- under Cerdic, and the de- 
feat of the united army of the Britons in the New 
FWest, Venta again changed masters, and be- 
came the capital of the West Saxon kingdom. In 
this revolution, the cathedral is stated to have been 
converted into a heathen temple, and made subser- 
vient to the gloomy and impure rites of Thor, 
Woden, Frea, and Tuisc*. The name of the city 
itself was also changed : and from Caer Gwent, or 
Venta Belgarum, it became Wintanceaster, or Win- 
chester. The victorious Cerdic was crowned King 
of the West Saxons, in conjunction with Kynric, 
his son, in 519; and, after several years active war- 
fare, in extending and preserving his conquests, he 
died, and was buried here in the year 534. Front 
this period Winchester continued to be the metro- 
polis of the West Saxons ; but no event of import- 
ance- is' recorded concerning it, till the year 635, 
when the arrival of the apostle Birinus, whom Pope- 
Honorius had deputed to preach the gospel in those 
parts of Britain that were still involved in Pagan- 
ism, materially changed the state of affairs. 

Birinus is stated to have obtained a favourable re- 
ception at the court of Kinegils, who, with his son 
Quilchelm, then swayed the sceptre of the West 
Saxon kingdom ; and, in a short period, his mission 
was rewarded by the conversion of both" those 
monarchs, as well as of a considerable number of 
their subjects. The sudden influence which Biri- 
nus obtained over the minds of the Saxons, is, 
agreeably to the monkish legends of that age, attri- 
buted to the fame of a miracle, which attended hi* 

Flamines, so Lucius annexed to the cathedral here a monastery, 
as our historian calls it, or rather a community of clergy, living 
together in common. When the cathedral was completed, it 
was consecrated in the name of the Holy Saviour; and a reli- 
gious bishop, by name Dnnotus, was vested with the spiritual 
authority and jurisdiction belonging to it." The impmbabili- 
ties of this account, are sufficiently obvious to render it ex- 
tremely disputable ; and several judicious authors regard it as 
altogether fabulous. The ambiguity which attends the time of 
the death of Lucius, as well as (he place of his burial, has also 
been advanced as an argument against the credibility of the 
events recorded in his history. A King who had become so 
famous as Lucius must have been, were the accounts true that 
Christianity was generally established throughout the island by 
his means, could hardly have descended to the grave so ob- 
scurely, as to leave the period of his decease unascertained, or 
the place of his interment undecided. Winchester, as well as 
othe British cities, has been assigned as the scene of the latter; 
but the German writers report, " that a little before his death, 
either resigning his crown, or being dispossessed of it by the 
Romans, he went abroad, and preached the gospel in Bavaria, 
and in the country of the Grisons," 

embarkation 



HAMPSHIRE. 



33D 



J'l 

u 



1 "J 

. - 

embarkation for this island. " Having performed 
the sacred mysteries, he left behind him what is 
called -A corporate, (or communion cloth) containing 
the blessed sacrament, which he did not recollect 
until the vessel in which he sailed was some way 
out at sea. It was in vain for him to argue the case 
with the Pagan sailors who steered the ship, and it 
was impossible for him to leave his treasure behind. 
In this extremity, supported by a strong faith, he 
slept out of the ship upon the waters, which became 
firm under his feet ; in short, he walked in this man- 
ner to land, and having secured what he was anxious 
about, returned, in the same manner, on board the 
vessel, which in the mean time had remained sta- 
tionary in the place where he left it. The ship's 
crew were of the nation to which he was sent, who, 
being struck with the miracle which they had wit- 
nessed, lent a docile ear to his instructions ; thus 
our apostle began the conversion of the West Saxons 
before he landed upon their territory." This legend, 
recorded by several ancient writers, Mr. Milner 
regards as a prodigy so well attested, "that the 
most judicious historians have not dared openly to 
deny it." 

Birinus, by the consent of Kinegils, removed 
from Winchester to Dorchester, near Oxford, then 
a considerable city, and apparently the place where 
Quilchelm kept his court. Here, for the present, 
he established the episcopal see, while Kinegils him- 
self began to collect materials for building a new 
cathedral in his own city, but died before he had 
completed it, in 643. This cathedral is stated to 
have been commenced on the site of the former one, 
and was intended to be the principal foundation of 
the kind in the west ; but the death of Kinegils in- 
terrupted the design ; for his son and successor, 
Kenewalch, being a Pagan, a stop was put to the 
building, and it was not renewed till after the lapse 
of several years, and the conversion of Kenewalch 
to Christianity. The church was then dedicated by 
St. Birinus, in the name of the Holy Trinity, St. 
Peter, and St. Paul, anno 648. About twelve 
years afterwards, and ten after the decease of Biri- 
wis, Kenewajch divided the diocese into two por- 
tions, assigning to that of Dorchester, the jurisdic- 
tion of his possessions in the north part of his king- 
dom, and establishing Winchester as the see of the 
south. Before the death of Kenewalch, which oc- 
curred in 674, the city, and surrounding country, 
was almost depopulated by a plague. St. Hedda, 
the fifth Bishop of the West Saxons, removed the 
remains of St. Birinus, which had been buried at 
Dorchester, to Winchester, and interred them in 
the cathedral. The learned Bishops, Daniel, and 
St. Aldhelm, succeeded St. Hedda ; but no event 
of distinguished importance is recorded of the city 
till tl)i reign of Egbert. The union of the Saxon 
kingdoms under this sovereign advanced Winches* 
ter to the dignity of metropolis of the whole island: 
*nd here the weak Etkelwolpb, Egbert's successor, 






dated his charter for the general establishment of 
tythes, about the year 854 or 855. 

About this period, the commerce of the city is re- 
corded to have greatly increased, and the principal 
inhabitants appear to have formed a Guild under 
the royal protection. This association is said to be 
the first of the kind, recorded in history, by the 
space of a whole century. The celebrated St. 
Swithin, or Swithttn, a native of Winchester, or its 
suburbs, held the see during the greater part of this 
and the following reigns; and by his advice, Ethel- 
bald, Ethelwolph s successor, raised fortifications 
in the vicinity of the cathedral and cloisters, to pre- 
serve them from the destructive fury of the Danes, 
who now began to make incursions into different 
parts of the kingdom, with large armies. The good 
effects of this measure were soon experienced ; for, 
in the next reign, that of Ethelbert, the Danes 
landed a considerable force at Southampton, and 
advancing to Winchester, made themselves masters 
f the city, wherein they committed the most horriov 
and lamentable excesses ; but the cathedral, with 
its adjoining offices, appears to have escaped their 
rage ; a circumstance only to be accounted for, by 
supposing it effectually screened from their depre- 
dations. The Danes were, at length, routed with 
great slaughter, on their retreat to their ships ; and 
the immense spoils which they had taken in the city, 
were recovered. The era of complete disaster was, 
however, not far distant ; and after various despe- 
rate battles fought by the brothers Ethelbert and 
Alfred, afterwards surnamed the Great, Winchester 
was abandoned to Danish vengeance; and among 
the other devastations, all the ecclesiastics belong- 
ing to the cathedral were massacred, and the build- 
ing itself greatly damaged. This event appears to 
have happened either in the year 871, or 873. The 
subsequent success of Alfred restored Winchester 
to some portion of its former splendour, and it again 
became the seat of government ; and the Codex 
Wintoniensis, or general survey of the kingdom, 
which had been made by Alfred's order, was depo- 
sited, with other public records, in this city. Al- 
fred himself began a monastery here for his friend 
and chaplain, St. Grimbald, on the north side of the 
<Cai><eja2]3|>/f3 < 'IWC, or cathedral; intending it 
also, as a burial-place for his own family ; but 
dying before its completion, he was provisionally 
interred in the cathedral, from which his remain* 
wereafterwards removed to the f9CSJHan$$5|>! < S3niWF, 
as the new foundation was then termed. In the 
reign of Athelstan, Alfred's grandson, a remark- 
able combat is said, by local tradition, and various 
historians, to have taken place near this city, be- 
tween the Danish giant, Colbrand, and Guy, Earl 
of Warwick. Many exaggerated circumstances arc 
connected with this battle; but " the ground-work 
of the history," observes Milner, " is founded on so 
many ancient records, and supported by innumer- 
able traditions, as likewise by a great number of 

monuments 



510 



HAMPSHIRE. 



monuments still existing, or tliat existed until of 
late, that to reject it savours of absolute scepticism. 
It seems necessary, however, to add, that our native 
historian, being supported by constant tradition, and 
certain monuments, deserves much more credit, in 
placing the scene of this action iu Hyde Meadow, 
called, from this circumstance, Dane-mark, and in 
arming his Danish champion with a huge battle axe, 
than does the canon of Leicester, who transfers the 
combat to the valley (Chilcomb) on the other side 
of St. Giles's Hill ; and who makes Colbrand fight 
chiefly with a mallet, or huge club, armed with 
iron." 

The prosperity of the city in the reign of Athel- 
stan, may be estimated from the circumstance of 
that sovereign establishing six mints here, for so 
uiany different kinds of money. " These mints were 
placed in the centre of the city, where the pent- 
house at present, stands, but which then seems to 
have iormcd the site of the royal palace." The suc- 
cession of Edgar, surnamed the Peaceable, one of 
the b^st and greatest of the Saxon Kings, increased 
the. importance of Winchester. Amongst the judi- 
cious laws which he established, was that celebrated 
one to prevent frauds arising from the diversity of 
measures, providing a standard legal measure for 
the whole of his dominions. This was the origin of 
the celebrate.! Winchester Measure ; the standard 
vessels made by Edgar's orders, being deposited 
in this city. In the reign of this sovereign, anno 
903, St. Ethel wold, a native of Winchester, was 
appointed to the Episcopal see, and during his pre- 
lacy, he caused the cathedral to be partly rebuilt ; 
and on its completion, in 980, he re consecrated it 
with great solemnity, in the presence of King Ethel- 
red, Dunstun, Archbishop of Canterbury, and eight 
other Bishops; besides a numerous assemblage of 
nobles, and other laity. On this occasion, to its 
former patrons, St. Peter, and St. Paul, was added 
the name of St. Svvithin, whose relics were removed 
from the church yard, where they had been pre- 
viously buried, according to St. iSwithin's own de- 
sire, and re-interred under a magnificent shrine, 
which had been provided lor the purpose by Kinsj 
Edgar.* 

Ethelred, surnamed the Unready, appears to 



* In the prelacy of lliis bishop, ami under the direction of 
Dnnslaii, Ihe married secular canons, who then officiated in 
the cathedral, were expelled, and their places supplied by 
Benedictine monks, brought from the abbey at Atari ngdort 
Similar measures were pursuer! in other parts of the kingdom ; 
but, on the accession of Edward, surnamed the Martyr, El- 
f/ula, his step mother, attempted to ciumge the direction of the 
current, and, by her influence in the province of Mercia, oc- 
casioned three abbeys, which St. Ethclwold had founded, to 
be suppressed, and their possessions given to married clergy, 
men. '\ his brought on the lamous S\nod, which was held in 
the refectory of the cathedral monastery in this city, in which 
it was debated, whether the monasteries in general should be 
dissolved ; the question is said to have been decided by a super- 
natural voice declaring in favour of the monks ! 



have determined on the general massacre of the 
Danes in this city, shortly after his nuptials with 
Enama, the " Pearl of Normandy," in 1002. 
" Here," says Simeon of Duriuim, " the massacre 
began ; and here, as soon as it was completed, 
those unmanly and indecent revels, called the Hock- 
tide Sports, were instituted in memory of the part 
which the English women had borne in it, by Ethel- 
red, and continued, with a short interruption, until 
of late years. The dreadful vengeance taken by the 
Danish King, Swayne, (or Svin,) who landed soon 
afterwards, sickens us by its very recital. With 
respect to our city, which appears not to have been 
summoned by Swayne before the year 1013, it. in- 
stantly opened its gates to the conqueror, submit- 
ting to whatever terms he chose to impose upon it." t 
On the death of Edmund Ironside, Canute at- 
tained the entire sovereignty of the island. Making 
Winchester his capital, he greatly increased the 
riches of the cathedral ; but the most extraordinary 
of all his presents, " was that of his royal crown, 
which he placed over the crucifix of the high altar, 
having vowed never more to wear the same, at the 
time that he proved to his flatterers the emptiness 
of their praises, in hailing him Lord of the Ocean, 
by commanding, in vain, the flowing tide not to 
approach his feet." In this city also, Canute held 
a general meeting of his nobility, at which manj 
equitable and wise laws were passed, for ensuring 
public tranquillity and happiness. Other ordinances 
of a more unpopular and severe nature, were like- 
wise enacted, for preserving the royal forests, and 
beasts of chace. Edward the Confessor held hit 
coronation, which was conducted with great re- 
joicings, in this city. On this occasion, he grantet 
a charter to the cathedral, ordering the donation o>' 
half a mark to the master of the choir ; and a casl 
of wine, and 100 cakes of while bread, to the con 
vent, as often as a King of England should wear hi- 
crown in the city of Winchester. It was during thi 
reign of this monarch, that the remarkable trial o 
the fiery ordeal is registered to have beeu made 01 
the person of Queen Emma. Another rernarkabl 
circumstance, verging on the miraculous, is re 
corded to have happened in this < f ity, in 1053, i 
the sudden death of Earl Godwin, the most power 



f In the devastations that ensued, the &ood St. E'phag , 
who was then bishop, and is recorded to have introduced tl 
use of organs into his c.Hhedial, was seen to ru^h between tl 
murderers and their helpless victims, crying out to the forme , 
"If ye are men, sp;ue at least the innocent, and the unresis - 
ing; or if you want a victim, turn your swords upon me: it i 
I who have so often reproached you with your crimes, that hav : 
supported and redeemed the prisoners \u have made, ai I 
have deprived you of many of your soldiers, by convertii g 
them to Christianity." Whether the solicitations of ti;e prel; u 
were effectual, does not appear; but he tfas himself seize I, 
and imprisoned ; and, after seven months confinement, cruel y 
murdered at Greenwich, on declaring himself incompetent o 
raise the money (3000 marks of gold) which they had demand d 
for his ransom, 

fil 






HAMPSHIRE. 



fill nobleman iu tlic realm, who was supposed to 
have been instrumental in shortening; the life of 
Alfred, the King's brother.* 

The broad seal, now considered as the insignia of 
the chancellor, appears to have been first made and 
kept in this cily, in the reign oi' Edward. .Soon 
after the conquest, Kiiig William founded a castle 
at Winchester, with the same intent as lie had be- 
gun many others in different parts of (lie kingdom 
to prevent a rising of the inhabitants ; and here, on 
St. Giles's Hill, at a subsequent period, the great 
Earl Waltheof was beheaded, after a mock trial, 
for an act of imprudence which he afterwards re- 
pented of, and disclosed. During this reign, Win- 
chester continued to be a principal royal residence; 
though London, which had now risen to great im- 
portance, began gradually to assume the pre-emi- 
nence. 

The chief festival of the year, that of Easter, 
William made an invariable rule to observe in this 
city, with the utmost pomp ; a circumstance in 
which his example was followed by his successor 
Rufus. In the year 1079, the re-building of the 
cathedra], and adjoining monastery, was again 
commenced by Bishop Walkelin, a cousin to the 
Conqueror, of whom he obtained a grant for carry- 
ing on the work, of as much timber as he could fell 
and carry away in three days, from (lie wood called 
Hanepings, (now Hempage,) about three miles east- 
ward from the city. Walkelin completed his build- 
ing about the year 1093 ; and the new cathedral 
was then dedicated, in the presence of almost all 
the bishops and abbots of England. On the de- 
cease of Walkelin, in 1098, Rufus seized on the 
bishopric, and retained it till his accidental death 
in the New Forest, in 1100. Henry, the younger 
brother of Rufus, being on the spot, seized the 
Royal Treasury at Winchester, and was elected to 
the" vacant throne. The same year he espoused 



* An accidental occurrence, in the midst of a great enter- 
tainment, during the festival of Easter, which Edward was here 
celebrating, is slated to have led the Earl to wish, that the 
next morsel which he put into his mouth might choak him, if 
he was guilty of the alledged murder. Ths wish is said to have 
been accomplished ; and Godwin, after a few minutes agony, 
being unable to force the viands either upwards or downwards, 
to have fallen dead under the table. Rapin considers this tale 
as an invention of the Norman monks, to blacken the Earl's 
character; and observes, from other historians, that the death 
of the Earl did noioccurlill the fifth day ot'his illness. 

f In this, reign, a singular transaction is stated in the Saxon 
Chronicle, aim by William of Malmsbury, to have taken 
place at Winchester. The current coin throughout the king- 
dom, having been greatly debased by the different mint masters, 
Ilenry, by the advice of the celebrated Roger, Bishop of 
Sarum, gave orders for them to repair to this city by Christmas 
Jay, anno 1125; here, being separately examined, they were 
all.convicted of the frauds imputed to them, excepting three 
persons of the profession, dwelling at. Winchester, and pun- 
ished by mutilation, and the loss of their right hands. All the 
base money was at the same tiroe cried down, and an. entire 
new coinage ordered to be made by the three artists who had 

*OL. II. NO. 84. 



Matilda, the lineal descendant of the West Saxon 
Kings, in this city, where she had previously worn 
the veil, but not taken the vows, in the abbey of 
St. Mary. This Princess, who is highly celebrated 
in the annals of Winchester, under the title of 
Molde, the Good Queen, was delivered of a son 
here, within little more than a twelvemonth after 
her marriage; and on this joyful occasion, Henry 
granted a charter of additional privileges to the in- 
habitants. The same year, anno 1102, the royal 
Palace, the Mint, the Guildhall, and a number of 
houses, were consumed by a fire, which also destroy- 
ed many of the public records. t After the death of 
Ilenry, Winchester suffered greatly in the distrac- 
tions of the times. Stephen having seized the cas- 
tles of the bishops throughout the kingdom, and 
also committed other violences ngainst the clergy, a' 
synod was held in this city, to protest against the 
injustice that had been used, and, if possible, to 
btain redress. The usurper was then at his palace 
here, but, instead of listening to the deputation sent 
by the prelates, he instantly departed for London, 
leaving the assembled bishops, as well as the citizen* 
in general, highly dissatisfied at his conduct. Iu 
this state of affairs, the Empress Maud landed oh 
the coast of Sussex, to dispute the succession to the 
throne, and the castle of Winchester was secured it* 
her interest; but the city preserved its allegiance to 
the King, 'through the influence of the then bishop, 
Henry de Blois, the usurper's brother. In the 
course of the civil war that ensued, Stephen was 
made prisoner, and great part of the kingdom having 
declared in favour of his opponent, the bishop 
thought it prudent to bend to the prevailing Si-mi- 
raent, and admitted the Empress, and her parti/an*, 
into this city, having previously met them on M'ag- 
dalen Hilt, in solemn procession, accompanied by 
all the religious, and most of the other inhabitants. ; 
One of the first concerns of Stephen, after obtain- 
ing 



preserved their honesty. Henry, also, about the ^ime period, 
caused a standard yard to be made from the length ot his own 
arm, in order to prevent the frauds committed in lue measure- 
ment of cloth ; this is thought to have been deposited with lite 
other standards in this city. 

t The haughtiness of Matilda having occasioned nu-.cii dis 
affection, and the public opinion beginning to veer in favour 
of Stephen, the Bishop neglected to treat the Empress with his 
accustomed defereuce.: and the latter becoming suspicious, 
summoned him to attend her at the castle, where she had fixed 
her residence. On this occasion- he returned the ambiguous 
answer, '.' I will prepare myself;" which he accordingly did, 
by strengthening his castle of Wolvesey, and putting it in the 
best possible state to withstand a siege. Soon afterwards it was 
invested by the troops of the Empress, under the command of 
her natural brother, Robert, Earl of Gloucester, and her uncle 
David, King of Scotland. This event was the ' sigiiiil of insur- 
rection to Stephen's friends, wlio hastening to Winchester, re- 
lieved the prelate, and attacked those who hail besieged him. 
The armies carried on their military-operations, <lunrg -even 
weeks in the heart of the, city. -The party of the Em^rc" ha<l 
possession of- whatever was to the north side of the Higli Street, 
where the houses of the citizens stood in ge.u-ral, together v. it|> 
6 x ..- ti 



HAMPSHIRE! 



ing his release, was 'to strengthen the castle with 
new works ; but while busied in this undertaking, 
a large army collected against him from the sur- 
rounding counlry, and he was obliged to abandon 
his design, nnd save himself by flight. , , , 

During the I'tiriher prosecution of the war, the 
bishop, who had been invested with legatine autho- 
rity by the Pope, held a synod here, in which it was 
resolved that " Ploughs should hare the same pri- 
vileges of sanctuary with churches ; and a sentence 
of excommunication was pronounced by the whole 
assembly, with the ceremony of lighted torches in 
their hands, against all those who should attack or 
injure any person engage;) in the employments of 
agriculture. 1 ' The terms ofpacification entered into 
at Wallinglbrd castle, between Stephen and Henry, 
Maud's son, were ratified at Winchester, with the 
general consent of the kingdom. Many privileges 
were bestowed on the inhabitants of this city, by 
Henry the Second; and, in particular, that of being 
governed by a mayor, with a subordinate bailiff, 
anno 1184. In his reign, the again increasing im- 
portance of Winchester received a considerable 
check by an accidental fire, which commencing at 
the Mint, where a new coinage was fabricating, 
burnt down the greater part of the city. On the 
death of this King, Richard, his son, surnaincd 
Coeur de Lion, possessed himself of the royal trea- 
sury, which is said to have contained valuables, in 
gold, silver, and precious stones, to the amount of 
900,000/. an immense sum, if the difference in the 
value of money is taken into consideration. .Richard 
was crowned at London ; but, after his return from 
captivity in the dungeons of Trivallis, he was again 
crowned with great .solemnity and splendour, in this 
city. 

In 1207, King John held an assembly, at Win- 
Chester, in which a tax was imposed upon the people, 
of a thirteenth of all moreable property. Here also, 
the same year, his Queen was delivered of a son, 

the royal castle. The King's party held the Bishop's palace, 
the cathedral, and whatever else was to tl.e south of the High 
Street: by degrees, also, they forced their enemies from all 
the other quarters of the city, and confined them to the castle; 
but, in effecting this, they made use of a most barbarons strata- 
gem: they threw fire-balls from Wolvesey, upon the houses 
that were possessed by the opposite party ; a destructive mea- 
sure, in which the brave Earl of Gloucester disdained to imi- 
tate them. Thus they destroyed, first the adjoining abbey of 
St. Mary, then the whole north which was infinitely the most 
populous part of the city, together with twenty churches, the 
royal palace, and the suburb of Hyde, with the magnificent 
mona4ery of St. Grimbald, erected there in the preceding 
reign. At length the imperial party were confined to the cas- 
tle,, in which they might long have bidden defiance to their 
enemies had they not heen straitened for want of provisions, 
anil still more for want of water; the stream from the river, 
which flowed round it, having been obstructed by the besieger*. 
The chief object of anxiety to the brave brother and uncle, 
was to save the person of the Empress; and here the fertility 
of her jeniu* came in aid of their valour; She caused a reporl 
to' be sj-read of her illni-ss; and then, after a suitable interval, 
of her death ; taking care, at the same time, to keep out ol 
the -ighl of every one, except a few trusty friends. In short, 



surnaincd of Winchester. In the ensuing year, the 
King granted to the citizens a charter of incorpora- 
tion'," on payment of 200 marks down, and 100 marks 
annually : he also confirmed their former immuni- 
fies, and bestowed some additional privileges. In 
this city also, in the monk's chapter house, King 
John was absolved from the sentence of excommu- 
nication, which had been pronounced against him by 
the Pope, Innocent the Third, to whose legate he 
had made the most abject and disgraceful submis- 
sions. Henry of Winchester, who succeeded his 
father, held his court in this city, during great part 
of his minority; but the advantages arising from the 
King's residence here, were in a great degree coun- 
teracted by associations formed for purposes of rapine 
and plunder, in which not only many of the princi- 
pal inhabitants were concerned, but several belong- 
ing to the King's own household, and body guard. 
These illegal combinations were at length broken 
by the address and spirit of the sovereign ; and 
thirty persons were condemned, and executed, on 
the occasion. 

During the disastrous contests between Henry 
and his barons, Winchester suffered greatly ; both 
parties alternately obtaining possession, and com- 
mitting various acts of violence. After the decisive 
battle of Evesham, several Parliaments were held 
here by the King ; and here also, in the same reign, 
occurred the famous trial of John Plantagenet, Earl 
of Surrey, for cleaving the skull of Alan de la 
Zouch, Chief Justice of Ireland, as he .t upon the 
bench at Westminster Hall.* 

Edward the First held several Parliaments here, 
in one of which the celebrated ordinances were passed 
afterwards known by the name of the Statutes of 
Winchester. The royal residence, however, was in 
a great measure removed ; and with it, of course, 
departed the attendants on the court, and others 
engaged in public affairs, whose expenditure had 
hitherto contributed to the affluence of the city. 



she was inclosed like a corpse in a sheet of lead, and was thus 
suffered to pass in ahorse litter, as it carried out for interment, 
through tin- army of the besiegers; a truce having been granted 
for the purpose. When at a proper distance, she was freed 
from her dismal inclosure ; and mounting a horse, she made the 
best of her way by Luggershall, and Devize?, to Gloucester. 
In the mean time, Earl Robert, with his followers, and the 
King of Scots, taking advantage of the truce, suddenly issued 
from the castle; but being pursued by Stephen's army, the 
Earl was taken prisoner, at Stockbridge : and afterwaroi ex- 
changed for the captive King, as he was of no less value to the 
imperial, than Stephen was to the regal party. 

* This high spirited nobleman had been summoned to pro- 
duce evidence ot the tenure by which lie held his lands, when, 
drawing his sword, he swore that his father and grand-father 
had held their estates by that right, and that he would maintain 
them by the same. This asseveration he fatally verified on the 
person ot the judge; but was acquitted of the murder on his 
trial, upon his solemn oath, " thai he had not struck the de- 
ceased out of preconceived malice, or contempt of the King's 
authority ;" and upon twenty-four persons, of the rank of 
knights, Vho were compurgators, swearing they believed 
uliatthe Earl hadswoin to be true; he was, however, fined in 
the heavy sum of 1200 'marks. 

Tpwards 



HAMPSHIRE. 



Towards the conclusion of this reign, all the liber- 
ties of Winchester were declared void, l>y order of 
the King, whose displeasure had been excited from 
the escape of Bernard Pereres, a foreign hostage, 
who had been confined in the castle undercharge 
of the mayor, and other corporate officers. The 
good oflices of Margaret, the reigning Queen, pro- 
cured a restoration of the privileges of the city; and 
the memory of this benevolent Princess has been 
ever since held in great and deserved estimation by 
the inhabitants. Soon after the murder of Edward 
the Second, a Parliament was caused to be held in 
this city, by the Queen and her paramour, Roger 
Mortimer, in which the illustrious Edmund of Wood- 
stock, Earl of Kent, was attainted of high treason.* 

Winchester was appointed, in the reign of Ed- 
ward the Third, as one of the fixed markets, or 
staples, for wool; and the merchants availing them- 
selves of the solemn promise given by the King and 
his council, not to revoke this order, erected large 
warehouses, and other buildings, for the more con- 
venient management of the trade. The growing 
commerce of the city, was, however, interrupted 
by the destruction of Portsmouth and Southampton 
by the French, in the years 1337 and 1338 ; and 
again by the great plague, which about ten years 
afterwards, spent its first fury in this neighbour- 
hood : but the most destructive event to the prospe- 
rity of Winchester, was the removal of the wool 
staple to Calais in the year 1303. " Henceforward," 
remarks Milner, "her decline from wealth and com- 
merce was sensible and uniform." 

In the year 1388, Richard the Second, and his 
Queen, visited this city ; and here, in 139-2, a Par- 
liament was held, in consequence of London having 
suffered a temporary deprivation of its privileges 
through the royal indignation. Henry the Fourth 
bad tin- solemnities of his marriage with Joanna, 
Dowager Duchess of Bretagne, celebrated in Win- 
chester cathedral, by the venerable Bishop Wyke- 
liant, in 1401. The celebrated Henry Beaufort, son 
of John of Gaunt, and afterwards Cardinal, was 
appointed to the see of Winchester on the death of 
Wykeham, by the above monarch. Henry the 
Sixth was a considerable benefactor to this city, 
which he visited several times ; and in 14 19 he held 
a Parliament here, which continued from the six- 
teenth of June, till the sixteenth of the month fol- 
lowing. In this reign the trade and population had 
no greatly decreased, that the inhabitants, on a peti- 
tion to the King for the renewal of a grant made by 
himself in 1440, represent that 997 heuses were ac- 
tually divested of inhabitants, and seventeen parish 
churches shut up. On the death of Cardinal Beau- 
fort, in 1417, the celebrated Waynflete was elected 
to succeed him by the monks, on the recommenda- 

* Being condemned to ilie, on Ihe day appointed for liis 
execution, he was led to a scaffold eroded before the ca>tle 
sjate; but such was lite general detestation a^'iinst the liloudy 
deed, that no person coulil be prevailed on to become his cxe 



tion of the King, who honoured his installation by 
his own presence. On the pregnancy of Elizabeth 
of York, Henry the Seventh's Queen, that Princess 
was brought to lyo-in at Winchester, from motives 
of state policy, in order to conciliate the Welsh na- 
tion, among, whom a pretended prophecy had been 
industriously propagated, that the posterity of their 
favourite Cadwallader, should regain the sove- 
reignty of Britain. Henry himself affected to trace 
his genealogy to that King ; and the better to fall 
in with the prevailing prejudice, he caused his new- 
born son to be christened Arthur, from the circum- 
stance of his having drawn his first breath in the 
castle traditionally asserted to have been erected by 
the famous British hero of that name. In 1522, 
Henry the Eighth, and his royal guest, the Empe- 
ror Charles the Fifth, spent a week together in this 
city ; on which occasion the celebrated Round 
Table was new painted, and a distich, in honour of 
the illustrious visitors, placed beneath it. " The 
characters in the names of the twenty-four knights, 
and the costume in the dress of the King, were those 
of the reign of Henry the Eighth, and have since, 
at each fresh painting, been copied, though incor- 
rectly. The distich was as follows : 

" Carolns, Henricus vivant ; defensor uterque ; 
Henrious fidei, Carolus ecclcsiae." 

The final dissolution of the monasteries, during 
the prelacy of the celebrated Gardiner, and the con- 
sequent destruction of religious houses, reduced 
Winchester almost to a skeleton of its former gran- 
deur. In 1554, however, it became the scene of 
the meeting, and subsequent nuptials, of Queen 
Mary and Philip, of Spain, which were solemnized 
with great splendour. The restitution of many es- 
tates, which had been alienated from the Bishopric 
during the reigns of her brother and father, were 
restored to the see through the influence of Queen 
Mary ; but Winchester itself had lost its importance; 
and in a charter obtained through the solicitations 
of Sir Francis Walsingham, in the reign of Eliza- 
beth, is described as having fallen " into great ruin, 
decay, and poverty." 

It deserves to be recorded, that the commence- 
ment of the year 1603 was distinguished at Win- 
chester, by the singular occurrence of James of 
Scotland, being proclaimed King of England, by 
the sole authority of the high sheriff* of Hampshire. 
This was Sir Benjamin Tichborne, who on receiving 
intelligence of the death of Elizabeth, hastened from 
his family seat, and issued the proclamation, with- 
out waiting for orders from the privy council in Lon- 
don, who had passed several hours in deliberating 
on this important subject. The spirited and more 
decided conduct of the sheriff, was rewarded by tho 

cutioner-till the evening, when the disgraceful office as m.- 
derUtkt-n by a wretch from one of the prisons, v- ho, to --aye Lit 
own life, consented to decapitate the Kfcil. 

uew 



544 



HAMPSHIRE. 



new sovereign, who granted to hint ami his heirs in , 
perpetuity, the royal castle of Winchester, toge- j 
ther with an annual pension of 100/. during iiis own ] 
life, and that of his eldest son, whom he also 
knighted. Before the expiration of the year, ano- j 
ther transaction, of much celebrity, occurred in this : 
city ; namely, the trial of the great Sir Walter 
Raleigh, Lord Cobharn, Lord Grey do Wilton, and ' 
others, with whom these noblemen had been iinpli- i 
cated through the subtlety of the King's ministers, ' 
on pretended charges of conspiracy. 

During these proceedings, Winchester presented 
some faint images of its former splendour ; but still 
continued to decline during the remainder of this 
reign, though James occasionally visited it in his 
progresses to the west. In the reign of Charles the 
First, the city and castle of Winchester were se- 
cured for the Parliament, by Sir William Waller ; 
but about the conclusion of the year 1643, the cas- 
tle was seized and garrisoned by the royalists, under 
the command of Sir William, afterwards Lord Ogle. 
About this period, a design was entertained of re- 
establishing the King's authority in the adjoining 
counties of Hampshire and Sussex ; and Winches- 
ter was appointed as the general rendezvous of the 
army that was then forming in the west : fortifica- 
tions were at the same time thrown up round the 
city, and particularly on the eastern and western 
sides, where the entrenchments may yet be traced. 
The activity of Waller, and the defeat of Lord Hop- 
ton on Cheriton Down, disconcerted this project ; 
and Waller obtained possession of the city without 
loss : the castle, however, held out for the King ; 
and on the Parliament's troops drawing off to be- 
siege Oxford, in conjunction with the Earl of Essex, 
the city itself was again secured by the royalists. 
The fatal battle of Naseby, in 1645, rendering the 
King's affairs desperate, and admitting time for new 
operations against the few places that were still held 
in his name, an army was dispatched, under Crom- 
well, to reduce Winchester. The place was sum- 
moned on the twenty -eighth of September, and re- 
fusing to surrender, the siege was commenced. 
The chief efforts of Cromwell were directed against 
the castle, which, after a week's defence, capitulated 
on very favourable terms ; but not without some 
suspicion of weakness, or treachery, on the part of 
the governor. The works were immediately de- 
molished, by blowing them up with gun-powder; 
thB fortifications of the city were at the same time 
destroyed, together with the Bishop's castle of 
Wolvesey, and several churches and public build- 
ings. The next great calamity which Winchester 

* The dead were here, no less than in London, carried out 
by-cart loads at a time, and buried on the eastern downs, as 
the turfy mounds there still indicate. Almost all trade and 
mutual intercourse were at an end, and it was not without great 
difficulty, that the necessaries of life were procured; and that 
the third grit calatriity/famiue, was averted, by inducing the 
country people to bring their provisions to a weekly market, 
which was held, with all the jealous precautions possible, upon 



underwent, was a dreadful visitation by the plague, 
which broke out in the metropolis in May, 1665, and 
extended its ravages to this city, very early in the 
following year.* 

In the latter part of the reign of Charles the 
Second, Winchester appeared in a fair way of re- 
trieving some portion of its former splendour, that 
monarch having chosen it as his accustomed place 
of residence, when public business did not require 
his presence in London. He also purchased the 
site and remains of the castle, with the ground be- 
longing to it, on which he began to erect a spacious 
and magnificent palace. His example was followed 
by many of the nobility and gentry, and a number 
of handsome mansions was erected at Ibis period: 
many others were designed, as well as various im- 
provements in the general appearance of the city ; 
but the death of the King, occasioned the entire 
miscarriage of the plan. Even the palace itself was 
left unfinished ; and after being frequently used as a 
prison of war, has been converted into military bar- 
racks. 

Winchester cathedral is one of the most interest- 
ing buildings in England, whether considered with 
respect to the antiquity of its foundation, the im- 
portance of the scenes that have been transacted in 
it, or the characters of the personages with whose 
mortal remains it is enriched and hallowed. The 
structure erected by the Saxon Kings, Kinegils and 
Kenevvalch, is entirely destroyed ; but of that built 
by Elhelwold, the Crypt, beneath the high altar, is 
yet remaining. 

Walkelin began his work by taking down all that 
part of the church that was to the westward of the 
old tower, in the place of which he built up from 
the foundations, the present large and massive 
tower, which hence bore his name ; the lofty and 
capacious north and south transepts, and the body 
of the church of the same height with them, and 
reaching to the full extent of the present fabric. 
Walkelin's buildings were completed in the year 
1093. Abundant specimens of them yet remain. 
The most conspicuous is the square massive tower, 
1 40 feet high, and 50 feet broad, which is in as per- 
fect and firm a state to all appearance, as when it 
was built 700 years ago. 

The alterations that have been introduced into the 
transepts since Walkelin's time, are chiefly found in 
the windows ; many of which have been changed at 
different periods, and in various styles and fashions. 
The next alterations made in the cathedral, were 
executed under the direction of that eminent prelate 
Godfrey de Lucy, who appears to have commenced 

a rising ground, beyond the west gate, where the Obelisk is 
now erected. The custom was for the buyers and sellers to 
keep at a considerable distance from each other, whilst they 
made their bargains; which done, the commodities wore leit 
by the country people upon a large fiat slone, now forming the 
basis of the said Obelisk, and were fetched away by the inhabi- 
tants, who, in return, threw the money agreed upon into a ves- 
sel of water provided for the purpose. 
i 6 the 



HAMPSHIRE. 



the rebuilding of all those parts of St. EUielwold's 
structure eastward of the high altar, which Walke- 
lin had left standing, together with the chapel of 
Our Lady. Dying in 1204, this Bishop was buried 
in the centre of his own works, which are supposed 
to have been completed about three years afterwards. 
The next improvement of the cathedral seems to 
have been undertaken more from a desire to make it 
assimilate with the richly ornamented architecture of 
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, than from 
any particular decay in the structure itself. 

William de Edyngton, treasurer and chancellor 
to Edward the Third, and predecessor in this see to 
William de Wykeham, commenced this work. On 
the death of Edyngton, the completion of his de- 
sign was undertaken by the immortal Wykeham, 
" from his mere Kherality and zeal for the honour of 
God," as appears from an authentic deed, noticed 
by his biographer, Bishop Lowth. By the same 
instrument, the prior and convent agreed to " find 
the whole scaffolding necessary for the work, and 
gave the Bishop permission to dig and carry away 
chalk and sand from any of their lands, as he might 
think convenient and useful for the same purpose." 
The name of the architect who superintended the 
works under Wykeham's direction, was William 
Winford. As much was preserved of the Norman 
building as could be fashioned into the improved 
style ; and the undue massiveness of the pillars is 
thus accounted for, from the necessity of casing 
them with clustered columns. The west end of the 
cathedral was now complete in its kind; but the 
eastern part of it, from the tower to the low aisles 
of D Lucy, was far from being conformable to the 
rest, it consisting of the Norman work of Walkelin, 
repaired and decorated at subsequent periods, when I 
that great and good prelate, Fox, at the beginning j 
of the sixteenth century, undertook to rebuild it. i 
This he accordingly performed, with all the finished 
elegance which the English style had at that period i 
acquired.* 

At the eastern extremity of this venerable pile is 
the Chapel of Our Lady, which exhibits a great 
variety of rich work, but somewhat overcrowded 
with ornament, particularly in the windows. This 
chapel was enlarged early in the sixteenth century, 
in the time of Prior Silkstede, (Fox's cotemporary 
and friend) as appears from his devices, and the re- 
busses of his name, which are carved on different 
parts. On entering the cathedral by the west door, 



* " It is impossible," observes Milner, " to survey the 
works 01 this prelate, either on the outside of the church, or 
Within it, without being struck with their beauty and magnifi- 
cence, in which we find the most exquisite art employed to 
execute the most noble and elegant designs. We cannot fail, 
in particular, to admire the vast, but well proportioned, and 
ornamented, arched windows, which surround this part, and 
give light to the sanctuary ; the bold and airy flying buttresses, 
that, stretching over the side aisles, support the upper walls ; 
the rich open battlement, which surmounts these walls, and the 
elegant sweep that contracts them to tbe size of the great eastern 

VOL. 11. no. 84. 



the attention is first arrested by the vast and lofty 
columns of the nave, which have been judiciously 
made to assimilate with the pointed style, by sur- 
rounding them with clustered pillars and other orna- 
ments. Each column is about twelve feet in diame- 
ter; the space between them, or intercolamniation, 
is about two diameters only. The view into the 
choir is intercepted by a Grecian screen, of the com- 
posite order, designed by Inigo Jones, and executed 
at the expence of Charles the First. This object, 
from the incongruity of its style to the other parts 
of the building, audits hue being different fro:-< 1be 
rest of the stone work, lias an unpleasant effect : in 
the niches on each side the opening in the centry, are 
bronze statuesof Charles, and his predecssor, James 
the First. Amongst the ornaments on the orbs of 
the groining, and on the facia below the open gal- 
lery that extends on each side of the nave, are the 
arms and busts of Cardinal Beaufort, and his father, 
, John of Gaunt; together with their devices, th 
! white hart chained, and other insignia ; as also the 
lily of Waynflete, intermingled with the arms and 
busts of Bishop Wykeham. The space between the 
fifth and sixth columns, on the south side, is occu- 
pied by the tomb and chantry, or mortuary chapel, 
of the last named prelate, who caused them to be 
erected during his life-time, and appointed three 
monks to say mass in the chapel, for the repose of 
his own soul, and the souls of his parents and bene- 
factors. " The design and execution of the work 
before us," observes Milner, " are, perhaps, the 
most perfect specimens extant of the time when they 
were performed. The ornaments in general are 
rich, without being crowded ; the carvings are deli- 
cate, without being finical. The chantry is divided 
in its length, into three arches, the canopies of 
which, according to a later improvement, are carved 
to humour the shape of the art-he*: the middlemost 
of these, which is the largest, is subdivided below 
into three compartments, those on the sides con- 
sisting of two. There are five tabernacles, or niches, 
over the head of the monument within the chapel, 
besides those on the outside of it, and ten others at 
the feet, over the ancient altar, for so many statues 
of Wykeham's patron saints ; the foundation of the 
altar, and a great part of the credence table on the 
right hand of it, are still visible. The marble figure 
of this great man, which lies over his mortal re- 
mains, exhibits his placid and intelligent features, 
and is dressed in the episcopal costume. The bead 

window ; the two gorgeous canopies which crown the extreme 
turrets ; and the profusion of elegant carved work which covers 
the whole east front, tapering up to a point, where we view 
the breathing statue of the pious founder resting upon his 
chosen emblem, the pelican. In a word, neglected and muti- 
lated as this work has been, during the course of nearly three 
centuries, it still warrants us to assert, that if the whole.cathe- 
dral had been finished in the style of this portion of it, this island 
and perhaps all Europe, could not have exhibited a structure 
more beautiful." 



6 y 



546 



HAMPSHIRE. 



rests upon a pillow, supported by two angels ; and 
at the feet are three religious men, ill the attitude of 
prayer." Round the slab on which the figure rests 
is the following inscription, curiously inlaid in 
brazen letters : 

Sfflltttjrtmtts DictusaaSiJfirtjam facet fctc nut bittus ; 
31atiu!<ZEccle<ii3e prwul, reparabit eamque. 
3Urgns rt Bapiftr; probat foot cum niblte paupzr : 
tlonsillis psrites: gi ntevat bene BJtttr, 
S?unc Bocet tastt pittm funtiatio colUgiorum ; 
Droniae primum staf, OTintoniatriu? sminmim. 
3Iitvitec oretisf, ttimulum qufttntqne Dinette, 
Pro t.wti;S mtrttis ut git gibi bita penning,* 

In the time of the civil wars, the statues which 
adorned this chapel were destroyed, and many of 
the other ornaments were either mutilated or erased. 
Since the restoration, it has been twice or thrice re- 
paired ; and a few years ago, it was new painted, 
and partly gilded, by Mr. Cave, of Winchester. 
The charges of reparation are defrayed by Wyke- 
hain's two foundations, New College, Oxford, and 
Winchester College. Beneath the tenth arch, from 
the west end, adjoining to the flight of steps leading 
towards the choir, is the ancient monumental chapel 
of Bishop Edyngton, which, though in a similar 
style of architecture to that of Bishop Wykeham, is 
by no means so ornamental or complete. On the 
tomb within, is the effigies of Edyngtou ; and round 
the slab are Latin inscriptions to his memory, inlaid 
in letters of brass, by which it appears, that he died 
on the eighth of October, 1 366. This chapel is in 
a very neglected and mutilated state. On entering 
the southern transept from the south aisle of the 
nave, the original work of Walkelin presents itself ; 
and here are seen huge round pillars, and vast cir- 
cular arches, piled upon one another to an amazing 
height ; not, however, without symmetry, and cer- 
tain simple ornaments ; whilst other smaller columns, 
without either capitals or bases, are continued up 
the walls, between the arches, to the roof, which is 
open to the view. The west aisle of the transept, 
which is portioned off from the rest, was the ancient 
Sextry, or Sacristy, and now forms the chapter- 
house and treasury : it seems to have consisted of 
two separate offices. The entrance was to the 
north, under two great arches, now stopped up, 
but still adorned with rich Norman work. Against 
the west wall of the transept are certain ancient 
presses, bearing upon them the device of Silkstede, 
the original use of which seems to have been to keep 
the great habits, or large outside garments of the 

* Translation: William, sornamed Wykrham, lies here, 
overthrown by death: He was Bishop of this churrh, and the 
repairer of it. He was unbounded in his hospitality, as the 
poor and the rich can equally prove : He was likewise a sage 
politician, and counsellor of the state. His piety is manifested 
by the colleges which he founded : the first of which is at Ox- 
ford, the second at Winchester. You, who look upon this 



monks, but which are now employed to contain the 
surplices of the choristers and singing men. In the 
south wall, under the clock, is a door, which con- 
ducted into certain offices of the ancient monastery ; 
and on the right, is a calefactory, necessary for pre- 
serving fire for the thuribles, or censors, that were 
used in the ancient service: on the right was ano- 
ther passage into the Sacristy: over this is still seen 
the stair-case leading to the ancient Dormitories, 
from which the monks had a ready passage into the 
choir, to perform their midnight service. The east 
aisle of this transept is divided into two chapels: 
that on the right is called Silkstede's chapel, from 
the circumstance of the letters of his Christian name 
being curiously carved on the open work of. the 
screen which is before it. The adjoining chapel is 
probably that in which the remains of Bishop Court- 
ney rest; this chapel is highly ornamented. With- 
out it, on the left, near the stone steps that lead up 
to the iron gate, are two stone coffins, with their 
lids upon them, standing quite out 'of the, ground. 
On one of them is a mutilated, statue,;, and on .the 
other, a carved figure of a cathedral prior, with all 
his proper ornaments, surrounded by an inscription, 
as follows : , 

S?fc fscet OTillielrtnis ns 35as!>ng, quonuam Prior fettiis 
ccleslae, cujtis animac propitientr SDwtf, et tint pro atuma 
t\ne erabcrit, twjj annojs qaituinagintt tiff? innulgentfae per 
ctpirt,"t 

In the open part of the northern transept, there 
appears to have been five altars; and the whole of 
jl has been decorated with figures of saints,, and 
other embellishments, some of which still remain. 
Against the west wall, at the extremity of the tran- 
sept, are the traces of a colossal figure, evidently 
intended for St. Christopher, carrying the infant 
Jesus ; above it is a partly obliterated representa- 
tion of the Adoration of the Magi. The west aisle 
of the transept consists of two chapels, in one oi 
which is a bold specimen of the horse-shoe arch. 
Under the organ stairs, beneath an arch, is a muti- 
lated bust in stone, of a Bishop, holding a heart 
between his hands. This has been removed from 
beneath an arch, with a corresponding canopy in the 
southern transept, and is traditionally asserted to 
represent Bishop Ethelmar, half brother to Henry 
the Third, who died at Paris, in the year 1261. 
and whose heart was brought to England, and iH- 
terred in this cathedral, according to his own desire 
Lower down the steps, beneath the organ-stairs, i> 
a gloomy chapel, now almost forgotten ; but 'for- 

momiment, cease not to pray that for such great deserts, lit 
may enjoy eternal life. 

) Translation: "Here lies William de Basyng, formerly 
prior of this church, to whose soul God be merciful : and who 
soever prays for the same, shall obtain three years and fifty day 
of indulgence." This VV. de Basyng died in 1295 j'his prerfc 
cessor, of the same name, resigned his priory in 1284, dm 
died in 1288, 

merl\ 



HAMPSHIRE. 



547 



raerly much resorted to at stated periods, and known 
by the appellation of the chapel of the sepulchre. 
This is ornamented with various rude and ancient 
fresco paintings, from the history of the New Tes- I 
tamcnt. In front is a stone coffin, raised a little out I 
of the ground, and carved with a processional cross, ' 
but without inscription, or any other ornament : it 
is supposed to mark the burial-place of one of the 
priors of this cathedral. Over the flight of steps 
which crosses the nave before the entrance of the 
choir, was the ancient rood-loft, which in the Catho- 
lic times was adorned with a rich crucifix, with the 
attendant figures of the Virgin Mary, and St. John | 
the Evangelist, given by Stigand, who was Bishop 
of this see in 1013, and Archbishop of Canterbury in 
1052. The rood-loft is thought to have been re- 
moved on the erection of the screen in the time of 
Charles the First. The choir has a very venerable 
and solemn appearance, and is remarkable for having 
the great tower immediately over it, instead of over 
the space before the entrance, as in most other cathe- 
drals. The tower was evidently intended to throw 
light into this part of the fabric; but in the reign of 
Charles the First, it was injudiciously ceiled,, and 
adorned in the manner it now appears, as the orna- 
ments themselves indicate. In the centre is an em- 
blem of the Trinity, surrounded b.y the following 
chronogram ; the numeral letters that are here 
printed in capitals, being gilt in the original, and 
of a larger size than the others, are easily separated, 
and when placed in proper order, compose the date 
1634, in which year this alteration was made: S!NT 
DoMVs nVjVs pll REGES NVrnlTH, RF.G!T<* 
wVTuIcEs pi*.* The corbels, from which the ribs 
of the vaulting spring, are formed by four busts, re- 
presenting Charles the First, and his father James 
the First, in alternate succession, and dressed in 
the habits of their times : above each bust is an ap- 
propriate .motto. Amongst the other ornaments are 
the arms, initials, and devices of Charles, and his 
Queen Henrietta Maria, who. are also represented 
in profile, by a curious medallion : the arms of the 
then Prince of Wales, of Archbishop Laud, Bishop 
Curie, and Dean Young, are likewise depicted here. 
The stalls, which range on each side of the choir, 
with their miseres,t canopies, pinnacles, and other 
ornaments, are very ancient ; and present a profu- 
sion of foliage, crockets, busts, and human and ani- 
mal figures, boldly designed, as well as executed. 
On the north side the stalls are terminated by tlie 
pulpit, which, with other ornaments, executed in 
cane-work, was given by Prior Silkstede. 

Opposite to the pulpit, on the south-side, is the 
episcopal throne, which, though elegantly construct- 
ed in the Corinthian order, but ill accords with the 

* Translation. M.iy pious Kings be the nursing fathers, 
anil pious Queens the nursing mothers, of this church. 

t Milner observes, that " That sm.ill shelving stool, which 

the seats of the stalls formed when turned up in their proper 

position, is called a inisere : on these the monks and canons of 

ancient times, with the assistance of their elbows on the upper 

6 



prevailing style. This was the gift of Bishop Tre- 
lawny, about the commencement of the last century. 
In the middle of the choir, opposite to the north 
and south doors, is the tomb of William Rufus, th 
last of our sovereigns that was interred in this an- 
cient mausoleum of royalty : his bones, however, 
have been removed, and now repose in one of the 
mortuary chests that rest on the stone partitions 
which form the side enclosures of the presbytery, 
or altar-part of the choir. The tomb is raised about 
two feet above the ground, being of the form called 
Dos d'Ane, and consists of grey marble. Though 
the bones of the king had been long removed, this 
tomb was again opened during the civil wars, and 
among the remaining ashes was found n large gold 
ring, a small silver chalice, and some pieces of 
cloth embroidered with gold thread. The vaulting, 
which covers the whole choir from the tower to the 
east window, is the work of Bishop Fox, and con- 
tains, on the orbs of the tracery, a profusion of 
arms, and other ornaments, curiously carved, and 
richly painted and gilt, in the highest preservation. 
Among them are the bearings and devices of the 
houses of Tudor and Lancaster, together with those 
of Castile, in honour of John of daunt, father of 
Cardinal Beaufort, the latter of whom left money 
for ornamenting the cathedral. Here also are the 
arms of the sees of Exeter, Bath and Wells, Dur- 
ham, and Winchester; over all of which Fox had 
presided. From the altar to the east window, the 
vaulting bears none but pious ornaments, being the 
several implements of our Saviour's passion, namely, 
the cross, crown of thorns, nails, hammer, scourges, 
&c. together with the faces of Pilate, and his wife, 
of the high priest, and many others, all remarkable 
for the ingenuity of their design, and the original 
perfection and freshness which they have retained 
during almost three centuries. The elegant parti- 
tions above mentioned, which separate the presby- 
tery from the north and south aisles, are also the 
work of Bishop Fox ; but some portion of the cx- 
pence of erection was defrayed by the legacy of 
Cardinal Beaufort, and the donations of some other 
benefactor, now unknown. These partitions dis- 
play the arms and mottoes of the above personages, 
with the arms of Edward the Confessor, and the 
date 1525, which marks the period of their construc- 
tion. Upon the top of these partitions, over the 
centre of each compartment, arc ranged six wooden 
chests, containing the remains of several of the most 
exalted persoiuiges that have been interred in this 
cathedral. The first person that appears to have 
collected these perishable remnants of humanity, 
was Bishop de Blois, who lived in the twelfth cen- 
tury ; but v.'lien the choir was rebuilt by Fox, at the 

part of the stalls, half siipporU-J themselves during ccilain 
pons of their long nllires,. not to be obliged always to stand >r 
kneel. This stool, however, is so contrived, that if tin' body 
became supine by >lei p, it naturally tell down, and the person, 
who rested upon it, was thrown forward into the middle oi tiie 
choir." , , 

beginning 



518 



HAMPSHIRE. 



beginning of the sixteenth century, the present 
chests were ordered to be made by that prelate ; and 
the bones being- removed into them, they, were placed 
in the situations which they now occupy. Each 
chest is carved, painted, and gilt, and inscribed 
with the names and epitaphs of the illustrious cha- 
racters whose remains they are supposed tb contain. 
The names inscribed are those of the Kings Kine- 
jgils; Adulphus for Etlielwolph : Kemilph; Egbert; 
Edmund (son of Alfred); Edred; Canute; and 
Ilufus; of Queen Emma; and of the Bishops Al- 
\vyn, Wina, and Stigand.* From the inscription, 
" Mac in cista A. D. 1061 promiscue rccondita sunt 
ossa principum et prrelatorum sacrilega barbarie 
(iisj)ersa A. D. 1642, "f which occurs on two of the 
chests, it appears that the remains of these sove- 
reigns and prelates have been confusedly inter- 
mingled ; and from a late examination of the chests, 
this is clearly evinced to be the fact : it is even pro- 
bable, that the bones had been intermixed bel'ore 
their removal by Bishop Fox. The original epitaph 
on Queen Emma, which once existed iii this cathe- 
dral, is recorded to have been as follows : 

Hie Eminam cisla Reginam continet ista 
DuxitEthelclredus Rex hanc, etpostea Canutus. 
Edwardum paril lia-c, ac Hardi-canutum, 
Qualuor lios regesvidit sceptra tenentes. 
Anglorurn Regum fuit hxc sic mater et uxor.J 

Over the communion table, which is made to re- 
semble an altar, rises a lofty canopy of wood work, 
consisting of festoons, and other carving in alto- 
relievo. This was executed in the reign of Charles 
the First. Beneath the canopy is fixed the cele- 
brated altar-piece by West, representing our 
Saviour raising Lazarus from the dead. Behind, 
and partly concealed by the canopy and altar-piece, 
is a magnificently carved screen, in stone-work; 
supposed to be the richest and most exquisite speci- 

* A few years ago tliese chests were opened by some officers 
f distinguished talents and family, belonging to the West York 
regiment of militia, then quartered in this city. From the 
account communicated to Mr. Milner,' by one of these gentle- 
men, Henry Howard, Esq. ofCorby Castle, in Cumberland, 
the following particulars are extracted. " The first chest, in- 
scribed Kinegils and Adulphus, contains two sculls, and two 
sets of thigh, and leg bones. We measured the sculls and thigh 
bones, to discover whether there was any difference in the size 
from the present race of men ; and found the first scull, from 
the posterior part of the ossa temporis, to measure five inches 
and three quarters ; and the second scull, five inches and a half, 
and one sixteenth of an inch: these measurements, and indeed 
those of the others, prove that there was no superiority of size. 
From the contents of the chest, it does not appear that the bones 
do not belong to the kings with whose names it is inscribed. 
The second chest, inscribed Egbert and Kenui|>h, contains 
threesculls, one of which is very small. Onethigh-bone, want- 
ing a fellow, is very stout, and measures nineteen inches and 
three quarters in I'-nglh ; but the two leg-nones, one of which 
>5 rather deformed, and the two hip-bones belonging to this 
body, are in the chest, and answer exactly. There are also 
two other thigh bones, and two leg bones, that pair; so that, 
with the exception of the third scull, these may.be the bones 
of the aforesaid Kings. Third and fourth chests, bearing the 



men of the pointed style in England. This was exe- 
cuted in the time of Bishop Fox ; and though 
greatly neglected, and clogged with whitewash, still 
exhibits an unrivalled delicacy of workmanship. It 
contains a variety of niches, with richly ornamented 
canopies, beneath each of which was formerly a 
statue ; but these having been demolished on the 
reformation, their places are now somewhat ob- 
surdly occupied by Gn dan urns. On the spandriis 
of the doors are fine carvings in basso-relievo, from 
the history of the Annunciation, &c. of the Blessed 
Virgin. These are coloured, and appear nearly as 
fresh as when executed 300 years ago. Immediately 
above the base-work of the screen, the eye catches 
the rich painting of the east window, which, though 
clouded with dust and cobwebs, 'still glows with an 
astonishing richness of colours. The stained glass 
of this window, however, as well as of the others 
round the choir, are little more than remnants of 
former splendour, most of the figures having been 
mutilated and disarranged at the time of the civil 
wars. They chiefly consist of apostles, prophets, 
and bishops, with appropriate legends and symbols. 
Leaving the choir, and passing into the south 
aisle, the first object that attracts attention, is the 
gorgeous chapel, or chantry, of Bishop Fox, which, 
from the many hours spent by that prelate in this his 
destined place of interment, acquired the appella- 
tion of Fox's study. In an elegant oblong niche 
under* the third arch, lies the figure of the founder, 
which he, for the sake of humility, and public in- 
struction, chose should be represented as an ema- 
ciated corpse in a winding sheet, with the feet rest- 
ing on a death's head. The open-work of the 
arches was originally filled with painted glass ; but 
this was destroyed during the troubles in the reign 
of Charles the first. The roof is ornamented with 
the royal arms of the house of Tudor emblazoned 
and gilt ; and, with the founder's own arms, and 

names of Canute, Rufus, Emma, Wina, Alwyn, and Sligand: 
neither of these contain any scull ; but they are full of thigh 
and leg bones; one set of which, in the third chest, is much 
smaller and weaker than the rest ; this, with (he supernumerary 
scull in the second chest, might possibly have belonged to 
Queen Emma. The fifth chest, inscribed Edmund, contains 
five sculls, andihreeor four thighbones. One of the sculls, 
from the state of the sutures, belonged to a very old man ; ano- 
ther also belonged to an old person ; these, therefore, might 
have belonged to Wina and Alwyn. The sixth, inscribed 
Edred, contains many thigh bones, and lv\o sculls. It is to be 
observed, that the sculls actually at present in the chests, are 
twelve in number, which is also the number of the names in- 
scribed on the same chests. It will also appear, from the size 
of the bones, that there was no difference of stature from the 
present age." 

f Translation: In this chest, in the year 1661, were pro- 
miscuously laid together, the bones of the princes and prelates, 
which h. d been scattered about by sacrilegious barbarism iu 
the year 1642. 

J Translation: Here rests in this chest, Queen Emma. 
She was first married to King Ethelred, and afterwards to King 
Canute : to the former she bare Edward, to the latter Hardi- 
canule. She saw all these four king^ wielding the sceptre ; and 
thus was the wife and mother of English king?. 

favourite 



HAMPSHIRE. 



favourite device, the pelican. The ancient altar has 
been destroyed, together with three large statues, 
and nine smaller ones, that occupied an equal num- 
ber of niches above it, and which are still in good 
preservation. Parallel with the above, and occu- 
pying the entire space behind the altar, is another 
chapel, in which the early conventual mass was 
celebrated every morning, immediately after the 
holding of the chapter: here also was kept the mag- 
nificent shrine of St. Swithin, the gift of King Ed- 
gar, which is recorded to have been of silver, gilt, 
and adorned with precious stones. At the north end 
of this chapel, and corresponding in situation, but not 
in architecture, with Fox's chantry on the south, 
is the chapel of Bishop Gardiner ; an absurd inter- 
mixture of the Pointed and Ionic styles. Gardiner 
was buried in this spot; but his bones are supposed 
to have been removed out of their sepulture, from a 
detestation of his character ; and the chapel itself 
has been much damaged from the same principle. 
The pavement is entirely torn up, with the excep- 
tion of a slab, on which are traces of the following 
inscription in Saxon characters : 

fyfe jarttCnmunBua rtr <Ete(DDi ttgig filing. 

This stone covered the remains of King Edmund, 
whose bones are now supposed to rest in one of the 
mortuary chests of the choir. He died in the year 
870. On the screen which separates the work of 
Bishop de Lucy from that of Fox, on the east side 
of the three last described chapels, is a range of 
canopied niches, in which formerly were statues of 
Christ and the Virgin, and of seventeen of the most 
illustrious benefactors to this cathedral ; but these 
were entirely destroyed by the iconoclasts of the 
seventeenth century. In the lower part of this 
screen is a small arched way, now blocked up with 
tuasonry. This led down a stone stair-case into the 
western crypt, immediately under the high altar and 
sanctuary, which being the destined place for the 
reception of relics, and for the interment of persons 
of eminent sauctity, was hence called The Holy 
Hole ; by which name it constantly occurs in the 
original history of Winchester. This receptacle has 
been erroneously supposed the original burial-place 
of the personages whose bones are now preserved in 
the chests round tike choir: its real destination, how- 
ever, is clearly expressed by a Latin inscription 
over the said vault, which has been thus translated : 
" The bodies of different saints are here buried in 
peace, through whose merits many miracles shone 
forth." In front, and just before the Holy Hole, 
(a slab, or grave-stone, twelve feet long, and five 
feet wide : this had been asserted by some writers, 
to cover the remains of St. Swithin. The inaccu- 
racy of this statement was, however, ascertained in 
the summer of 1797, when the slab was raised, and 
the grave being purposely opened, in the presence 
of several gentlemen, a complete skeleton was found, 
with every rib and joint in its proper place. This 
was at once demonstrative of the falsehood of the 

VOL. 11. no. 84. 



tradition, as the bones of the saint are known to 
have been translated from their original burial-place, 
and the scull to have been carried from Winchester 
to Canterbury, (and deposited there under Christ'* 
altar,) by St. Elphege, on his promotion to the lat- 
ter see. From the traces of a mitre and crosier on 
the slab, and the several appearances attending the 
opening of the grave, Mr. Mil nor supposed the per- 
son interred there, to have been Prior Silkstede. 
The magnificent chantries of Cardinal Beaufort, 
and Bishop Waynflete, occupy the middle arches of 
that part of the cathedral erected by Bishop de Lucy; 
who lies buried beneath a flat tomb of grey marble, 
raised about two feet above the surface of the ground, 
near the centre of his own work, and directly oppo- 
site to the entrance into the chapel of Our Lady. 
Tradition has pointed this out as the tomb of King 
Lucius, the reputed original founder of this cathe- 
dral. The absurdity of this tale is its own refuta- 
tion : its origin is, perhaps, equally obvious ; the 
similarity between the names De Lucy, and Lucius, 
having occasioned the remembrance of the prelate 
to be lost in a fond contemplation of the imaginary 
virtues of the monarch. In the chantry of Beau- 
fort, the figure on the tomb represents the deceased 
in the proper dress of a Cardinal ; viz. the scarlet 
cloak and hat, with long depending cords ending- 
iu tassels, of ten knots each. At the upper end of 
the chantry, under a range of niches, which have 
been robbed of their statues, stood the altar, at 
which, in virtue of his last will, three masses were 
daily said for the repose of his own soul, and those 
of his parents and royal relations. Round the upper 
part of the tomb was an inscription on a brass fillet- 
ing; but this has been long torn off. The features 
of the Cardinal, as represented by the figure, hav 
a very placid cast. He died on the eleventh of April, 
1 447. Bishop Waynflete's chantry is finished in the 
same elegant style as that of Beaufort ; and from the 
great attention that is given by his foundation at 
Magdalen College, to keep it clean, and in perfect 
repair, is in general regarded as the more beautiful. 
The figure of the Bishop appears in his full pontifi- 
cals, of mitre, crosier, casula, stole, maniple, tuui- 
cle, rocket, alb, amice sandals, gloves, and ring. 
He is represented in the attitude of prayer, emble- 
matically offering up his heart; which he holds in 
his hands, in allusion to that passage of the Psalmist; 
" My soul is always in my hands." Waynflete 
died" in 1180. 

The cathedral is terminated, eastward, by the 
spacious chapel of Our Lady, and a smaller chapel, 
inclosed on each side. The former was originally 
built by De Lucy, but was lengthened by the Priors 
Hunten mid Silkstede, whose initials and rebuses 
occur on (he groining, and other parts. The most 
considerable portion of the work was, indeed, com- 
pleted and ornamented by Silkstede, whose por- 
truit, with the insignia of his office, is yet visible 
over the piscina. In this chapel are also (races of 
various fresco paintings, executed ia the time of 
z Jii'.kstedc. 



5,0 



HAMPSHIRE. 



Silkstede, and representing 1 different subjects in 
scriptural, profane, nnd legendary history ; but 
chiefly relating to the miracles, ascribed, by the 
monks, to the prayers of the Holy Virgin. These 
delineations are now in an imperfect state, from the 
various attempts that have been made to deface 
them; yet they are curious, from the knowledge 
which they convey to us of the customs of former 
times. The marriage ceremony between Philip of 
.Spain, and Queen Mary, was solemnized in this 
chapel ; and the chair in which her Majesty sat, is 
yet shewn. 

Southward of the chapel of Our Lady, is Bishop 
Langton's chape), which displays some fine carv- 
ings in oak, of vine leaves, grapes, armorial bear- 
ings, &c. Near the centre of the chapel is the 
bishop's tomb, now entirely deprived of its orna- 
ments, though originally extremely elegant. Lang- 
ton died by the plague, in 1500, having been pre- 
viously elected to the see of Canterbury. The re- 
bus of his name, " a musical note called a long, in- 
serted in a tun, 1 ' 1 occurs on the groining. 

A chapel on the north, is supposed to be that of 
Bishop Orleton. The vaulting is covered with the 
figures of angels. On the north side, is the sepul- 
chre of Bishop Mews, who served as an officer 
(luring all the troubles of Charles the First ; and 
afterwards taking orders, was advanced to many 
church preferments, by the favour of Charles the 
Second ; and was at length promoted to this see. 

Another monument in this chapel, was erected to 
the memory of Richard Weston, Earl of Portland, 
nnd Lord High Treasurer, in the reign of Charles 
the First. On the tomb, is a fine recumbent figure 
of the earl, in bronze ; and, at the side, are marble 
busts of several of his family ; he died in the year 
1634. Amongst the eminent personages interred in 
this cathedral, besides those already mentioned, are 
the following, several of whom have had handsome 
monuments erected to their memory : Hardicanute, 
son of the Danish King, Canute ; Earl Beoru, son 
of Estrith, Canute's sister ; Richard, second son 
of the Conqueror ; the Bishops Peter de Rupibus, 
Henry de Blois, Giffard, John de Pointes, Richard 
Toclyve, Woodlock, Home, Morley, Tremnel, 
Cooper, Hoadley, Willis, and Thomas ; Dean 
Cheyney ; Sir John Clobery, who assisted Monk, 
in planning and effecting the restoration ; Sir Isaac 
Townsend, Knight of the Garter ; the late Earl of 
Banbury ; the late eminent Dr. Joseph Warton ; 



* The history of St. Nicholas, as abridged, by Milner, from 
The Portiforium sen Breviarum, in usum Sanim, from The 
Golden Legend, and from the translation by Surius from the 
Greek of Simeon Metaphrastes, together with its application 
to the carvings on the font, is given in the following extract: 

" The first splendid action in the life of this saint, which 
gave occasion to his being named the patron of children, was 
his saving the virtue of three virgins, which their father, a man 
of noble birth, but reduced to poverty, was tempted to make 
a traffic of. St. Nicholas, to whom his parents had transmitted 
an ample fortune, hearing of this intention, and of the occasion 

6 



and the celebrated Mrs. Montague The monu- 
ments of Bishop Willis, and Dean Cheyney, and 
the medallion of Bishop lloadley, are particularly 
worthy of observation. An ancient figure of acroi- , 
sader, of the princely family of De Foix, in the 
north aisle, is also deserving of attention. 

An interesting object yet remains to be described. 
This is the celebrated and ancient font, the carvings 
of which have frequently exercised the sagacity of 
antiquaries. It "stands," observes Milner, " within 
the middle arch of Wykeham's part of the church, 
on the north side, and consists of a square block of 
dark marble, supported by pillars of the same ma- 
terial ; it is covered on the top, and the four sides, 
with rude carvings, which bespeak its antiquity. 
The most distinguished ornaments of the top are 
doves, emblematic of the Holy Ghost, which appear 
breathing into phials, (surmounted with crosses) 
which are supposed to contain the two kinds of 
sacred chrisms made use of in baptism." The rest 
of the ornaments of this part consist of Saxon zig- 
zag, pellets, &c. On the north and east sides, the 
dove is still repeated in various attitudes, together 
with a salamander, emblematic of fire, in allusion 
to the text, ' He shall baptise you with the Holy 
Ghost, and with fire.' The sculptures on the south 
and west sides, are of more elaborate design, and, 
till elucidated by the researches of Milner, have 
been referred to events very distant from their 
original appropriation. The real age of the font is 
probably that of Bishop Walkelin, the rebuilder of 
this cathedral, and founder of the church at East 
Meon, in which there is a font exactly like it. The 
sculptures have generally been thought to represent 
the most important actions in the life of St. Biri- 
nus ; but Milner has assigned them to " St. Nicho- 
las, Bishop of Myra, in Lycia, who flourished in 
the fourth century, and has been celebrated as the 
patron saint of children. His name, which was 
famous throughout Christendom from the time of 
his tlecease, became much more celebrated in the 
west, upon his relics being carried off" from the said 
city, then subject to the Mahometans, to that of 
Bari, in Italy, in an expedition fitted out for that 
express purpose. This happened about the time of 
the Norman Conquest, a period with which the 
architecture of the church, represented on the south 
side, agrees better than with any other period, either 
more ancient or later."* 

The entire length of Winchester cathedral, is 

545 feet, 



of it, tied up a considerable quantity of gold in a cloth, and, to 
avoid the ostentation of his charity, threw it, by night, into the 
bed-chamber of this unhappy father ; who, awakening, and 
finding a sufficient sum to apportion one of his daughters, im- 
mediately married her to ;i person of equal birth. The same 
circumstance happening the following night, the father took 
care to be upon the watch, the third night, for his unknown 
benefactor; when, discovering St. Nicholas to be the person, 
he fell at his feet, calling him the saviour of his own and of his 
daughters' souls. 

" Let us now inspect the south side of the font, we shall see 

this 



HAMPSHIRE. 



351 



545 feet; the length of the nave, from the west 
porch to the iron door at the entrance of the choir, 
351 feet; the length of the choir, 136 feet; the 
length of the chapel of Our Lady, 54 feet ; the 
breadth of the cathedral, 87 feet ; the breadth of 
the choir, 40 feet; the length of the transept, 186 
feet; the height of the tower, 150 feet. Previously 
fo the year 1632, the cathedral was open as a gene- i 
ral thoroughfare into the close and southern suburbs 
of the city ; but this being considered as a disre- 
spectful custom, a new passage, called the " Slype," 

this history represented, with only those few deviations which 
are necessary for artists, in order to give ;i comprehensive view 
of a complete transaction. A bishop, with his mitre, crosier, 
&c. is seen in front of a Saxon church, representing the cathe- 
dral of Myra. Before him kneels an old man with a long beard, 
who kissing his hand at the same lime receives from it into his 
own right hand, a round mass, curiously tied up at the ends, 
which, with his left hand, he gives to a female figure, as appears 
by the breasts, long hair, and ornaments. Receiving tln.s her 
marriage portion with her left hand, she holds out her right to- 
wards a male figure, with short hair on his head and chin, who 
is proved to be a man of noble birth, and a lit husband for her, 
by the hawk which he carries on his fist. In the intermediate 
space, or back ground, another of these devoted daughters, 
with long hair, and the same kind of fillet that her sister wears, 
is actually celebrating her marriage with a man richly dressed; 
they join their right hands, whilst her left is placed upon her 
breast, and his left holds a purse containing a portion. 

" The next remarkable incident in the life of St. Nicholas, 
is his voyage to the Holy Land. Having embarked for this 
purpose, in a vessel bound to Egypt, he foretold a dreadful 
storm, which soon overtook, and seemed on the point of over- 
whelming it. The sailors, who, confident in their nautical fore- 
sight and skill, had derided the saint's prediction, now, with 
abundance of tears, besought him to pray for their delivery ; 
which, when he had done, the storm was appeased, and they 
arrived in safety at Alexandria. 

" Let us now examine the west side of the font, which, con- 
sisting of four different compartments, is unavoidably crowded. 
The first of these exhibits a ship, with ropes, a mast, and a 
rudder, but without any sail, the sure sign of its being in a 
storm. The vessel admits but of three figures ; of these, one 
is labouring at the helm ; a second, with his hand up to his eyes, 
appears to oe weeping ; and a third, of superior dignity, with 
his face averted, and his hands stretched over the waves, seems 
to be appeasing them by his prayers. 

" St. Nicholas being landed at Alexandria, the fame of the 
above-mentioned miracle, and of another which he had wrought 
at sea, in restoring to life a mariner, who had been killed by a 
fall from the mast, occasioned a great number of persons, la- 
bouring under different disorders and calamities, to be brought 
to him, all which he cured, and relieved, according to their se- 
veral wants. Hence, the next compartment to that which we 
have explained, exhibits two persons with sorrowful counte- 
nances, and in a recumbent posture, denoting their being ill, 
before a bishop, who holding one of them by the hand, seems 
to be raising him up to health ; whilst a third, with uplifted 
hands and joyful countenance, is expressing his astonishment 
and gratitude for the miraculous cure which he has just expe- 
rienced. The lowes! figure of all, with a cup in his hand, be- 
longs to a different subject, as we shall afterwards shew. 

" The most celebrated act, in the life of St. Nicholas, next 
to that of his saving the chastity of the three virgins, was his 
preserving the lives of three young men of his cathedral of 
Myra, whom the corrupt and cruel prefect of thesame, Eusta- 
chius, had condemned to death, whilst the saint was absent in 
Phrygia, appeasing a popular commotion there, which threat- 
ened the worst of consequences. Being informed, by a speedy 
messenger, of what was transacting in the aforesaid city, he 



was then opened, and commemorated by the follow- 
ing anagrams : the first of which is inscribed on a 
pier of the cathedral, near the west entrance of the 
Slype. 

CS ILL PREC 



X 



, 



AC 



AMBULA. 



v. 



ATOR 

' 



Iliac precator liuc viata ambnla ; implying, " That 

flies back to it, and finds the condemned youths at thr place of 
execution, with their necks bared, and a headsman with his up- 
lifted axe, on the point of inflicting the fatal stroke ; when, 
rushing forward, he snatches the instrument of death from his 
hands ; and, being aided by the authority of certain imperial 
officers, of superior rank to Eustachius, whom he had engaged 
to accompany him, for this very purpose, out of Phrygia, he 
orders them to be released, and leads them back into the city 
in triumph. In allusion to this history, we seen in the third 
compartment of this side of the font, three persons in a recum- 
bent posture, ready to be beheaded ; their bodies being cover- 
ed with a kind of mantle, to save the labour of the statuary. 
The executioner stands by them, with an uplifted axe; over whose 
shoulder, another person appears to be giving orders for thr 
tragedy. The holy bishop's figure is the next ; though, to 
prevent the necessity of repeating it in so contracted a space, 
he is represented as attending to another figure, which belongs 
to a different subject. 

" The last story here represented, relates to a miracle ascrib- 
ed to St. Nicholas after his death. It does not occur in Metn- 
phrastes, who confines his narration to the time of the saint's 
life, but is reported at length by Jacobus de Voragine, and is 
alluded to in the Sarnm Breviary. A certain nobleman, being 
destitute of Children, madea vow to St. Nicholas, that if, through 
his prayers, he should be blessed with a son, he would conduct 
him, when of a proper age, to ihe saint's church at Myra, and 
there offer up a golden cup as a memorial of the heavenly 
favour. His vow being heard, he ordered a rich cup to be 
made for his intended ottering ; but, when it was brought lo 
him, he was so much pleased with the workmanship of it, that 
he resolved to keep it for his domestic use ; and caused another 
like it to be made, by way of fulfilling his obligation. Being 
on his voyage to Myra, with his son and both the cups, he or- 
dered him lo reach a little water, for some purpose or other,. in 
that which was first made. Tiie youth, in attempting to per- 
form this, fell overboard, and sunk to the bottom of the sea with 
the vessel in his hand. The father now reflected, with sorrow, 
on his irreligious conduct, in preferring the gratification of his 
fancy to the exact performance of his religious vow. Never- 
theless, he pursued his voyage to Lycia, and placed the second 
cup upon the altar of the saint ; which, as often as he performed 
it, was always thrown off to a distance. At length, howevei, 
whilst the nobleman was offering up his prayers, and the spec- 
tators were meditating on the prodigy they had seen, behold ! 
the lost child suddenly enters into the church, and relates that, 
when he fell into the sea, a venerable biihop had appeared lo 
him, who not only brought him safe to the shore, but also con- 
ducted him to the city of Myru. By way of representing this 
story, we see a child, as appears by his countenance, lying in 
the water, under the rudder of the -hip in one of the former 
cornpaitments, with a cup in his right hand, finHy wrought and 
studded with jewels. It was a contrivance of tl<e t.ituary to 
place the drowning child where the sea had been before repre- 
sented, in order to find room for exhibiting the completion of 
the miracle. Accordingly, we see the same child, a? appears 
by the dress and countenance, in the present compartment, 
bearing the same studded cup in Ivs right hand, and conducted 
by St. Nicholas, who has hold of his left." 

way 



HAMPSHIRE. 



way thou who coniesl to pray ; this way, thou who 
art pursuing tliy journey, walk." The second 
inscription is over an arch, at the east entrance of 

the Slype. / '-|' 

1632. 
CESS1TCOMMUNI PROPRIUM JAM PERGITE QUA FAS.* 

If 

ACR S ILL CII 

/ X \ X v 

S A IT A ORO 

v / / / / 

ERV F 1ST F 



Sacra sit ilia cJmro, serca Jit ista foro; signifying, 
" That way is consecrated to the choir ; this way 
leads to the market." In forming the Slype, the 
great buttress, near the south-west angle of the ca- 
thedral, lias been perforated. The great cloisters of 
the cathedral, which extended 180 feet east and 
west, and 174 feet north and south, were destroyed 
during the prelacy o. Bishop Home, in the reign of 
Elizabeth ; but, on the east side of the quadrangle 
which they formed, is yet remaining a dark, unor- 
uamented, ancient passage, or cloister, nearly 90 
feet in length, which led to the infirmary, and other 
offices of the monastery. Southward of this is a 
door- way that conducted to the chapter-house, the 
site of which now forms the dean's garden. This 
was a magnificent building, 90 feet square, and 
vaulted, having a large pillar in the centre to sup- 
port the same ; being covered on the outside, above 
the dormitories, with sheets of lead, which gave oc- 
casion for its destruction, about the year 1570. 
The refectory, or hall, was about 4 1 feet in length, 
23 broad, and nearly 40 high : it is now divided 
into two stories. Under the refectory and vesti- 
bule, are still to be seen two kitchens, archtd over 
in the Norman fashion, and supported by single 
pillars in the middle of them, with stone trussels, 
curiously carved to support dressers. To the north 
of the kitchen was the cellarer, or steward's quar- 
ters : and beyond that, near the church itself, the 
buttery. The prior's hall, and some other parts f 
his lodgings, now compose the deanery : the former 
has been divided into four apartments. 

When the priory of St. Swithin was surrendered 
to Henry the Eighth, its annual revenues were esti- 
mated at 1507/. 17,v. 2cA Soon afterwards, the site 
of the monastic buildings, and great part of the 
former revenues, were settled on the new establish- 
ment, for a dean, twelve prebendaries, six minor 
canons, two. lay clerks, eight choristers, and other 
members. 



* Translation. Private property has yielded to public 
utility : proceed now by the way that is opened to thee. 

f Wykeham seems, even in his childhood, to have chosen 
the Blessed Virgin as his peculiar patroness, to have placed 
Uimselt under her protection, and in a manner to have dedicated 
himself to her service ; and probably lie might ever after ima- 
gine himself indebted to her special favour for the various suc- 



Amongst the most celebrated institutions at Win- 
chester, is the college, founded by Bishop W'yke- 
hain, between the years 1387 and 1393, on the site 
of an ancient grammar school, known to have existed 
before 1137, and probably much earlier. Wykeham 
had taken the government of this school, in which 
he had himself been educated, into his own hands ; 
and, the year after he had completed his college at 
Oxford, he commenced his foundation in this city, 
intending it as a preparatory seminary for the for- 
mer. The establishment consists of a warden, 70 
scholars, ten secular priests, who are perpetual fel- 
lows, three priests' chaplains, three clerks, 16 cho- 
risters, and a first and second master. The statutes 
drawn up by Wykeham, for the government of this 
college, were considered as so judicious and com- 
plete, that Henry the Sixth adopted them, with 
very little alteration, for his own splendid establish- 
ments at Eton and Cambridge. His satisfaction 
was also evinced by several rich gifts, and a confir- 
mation ot many privileges granted to the college, 
by his predecessors, with some additional liber- 
ties. 

On the confirmation of the act of Henry the 
Eighth, for dissolving colleges, hospitals, &c. in 
the reign of Edward the Sixth, this foundation, 
with that of Eton, and those ot the two universities, 
was favoured with a special exemption. The build- 
ings of this college occupy a considerable space of 
ground, and have, in general, a very venerable as- 
pect. The entrance into the first court is beneath 
" a spacious gateway, the canopy of which is sup- 
ported by the mutilated busts of a king on one side, 
and a bishop on the other ; evidently intended to 
represent the founder and his royal patron, Edward 
the Third. In the centre of the groining, under the 
tower, are seen the arms of the former ; and in an 
ornamental niche on the outside, is a large statue of 
his patroness, the Blessed Virgin, crowned with a 
sceptre in her right hand, and her divine infant in 
her left. The middle tower, over the gate leading 
into the interior court, is ornamented with three 
beautiful niches, having suitable canopies and pin- 
nacles to adorn them. In the centre niche stands 
the statue of the Blessed Virgin, as large as life, 
with a book in her left hand, and her right elevated 
towards the figure of the angel Gabriel, which oc- 
cupied the niche on the same side, and appears to 
be pointing to a label inscribed with the words of 
the salutation, Ave gratia plena. The founder him- 
self, is represented in the third niche, with his mitre, 
and other episcopal ornaments, invoking the prayers 
of his holy patroness. t The same figures are re- 
peated on niches on the south side of this tower; 

cesses which he was blessed with through life. This seems to 
have been the reason of his dedicating his two colleges, and call- 
ing them by her name; over all the principal gates of which he 
has been ca'reful to have himself represented as her votary, in 
the act of adoration to the Blessed Virgin, as his and their com- 
mon guardian. 

whilst 



HAMPSHIRE. 



whilst over the east end of the church, a similar 
statue of the Blessed Virgin, with that in front of 
the first tower is seen, but under a much more gor- 
geous canopy. The magnificent chapel anil hall, 
which form the south wing of the quadrangle, are 
supported hy bold and ornamental buttresses, and 
enlightened by lofty and richly mullioned windows. 
They display the genius of Wykeham, and till the 
mind with admiration and delight. Over the west- 
ern extremity of the hall, and under a similar ca- 
nopy to the last-mentioned statue of the Virgin, is 
the figure of St. Michael transfixing the old dragon. 
A stately tower, with turrets and pinnacles at the 
four corners, stands near the centre of this wing, 
built in the more ornamented style of the 15th 
century, being the work of Warden Thurbern. 
The entrance into the chapel is by a vestibule, with 
a richly ornamented ceiling. The interior has a 
very striking effect, arising from the bold and lofty 
vaulting, which is finely ornamented with tracery, 
and the dim religious light, that is diffused arouud 
from its "storied windows." These display an un- 
common variety of saints of every description, as 
kings, prelates, and nuns ; and in the great east 
window, is represented the genealogy of Christ, 
with the crucifixion, and the resurrection. The 
altar-piece, a painting by Le Moine, of the Saluta- 
tion, was presented by the late head-master, Dr. 
Burton. In the anti-chapel, are the ancient stalls 
that were removed from the chapel, in the year 1681, 
by Dr. Nicholas, with some curious brasses, and 
other memorials of his predecessors, whose remains 
were interred before the high altar. Extending 
from the chapel, southward, are the cloisters, which 
are 132 feet square, and appear to have been built 
early in the 15th century. Here are many ancient 
brasses, some with inscriptions only ; others re- 
presenting priests in their sacerdotal habits. 

In the inclosed area is an elegant building, erect- 
ed as a chantry, in -1430, by John Fromond, a libe- 
ral benefactor to both of Wykeham's colleges : the 
architecture is in the style of that age, and the inte- 
rior has a strongly groined ceiling. This fabric is 
now a library, to which use it was appropriated in 
the year 1627. Amongst the curiosities preserved 
here, is an embalmed ibis, from Egypt. At the 
south-west corner of the second court, is a ilight of 
steps leading to the refectory, or hall, 63 feet long, j 
33 broad, and proportionably lofty. The timbers of 
the roof are curiously worked and arranged ; and 
the corbels display large busts, coloured, of king's 
and bishops. Between the hall stairs, and the pas- 
sage into the chapel, is another passage, leading to 
the play-ground and school : the latter is a plain 
brick building, built by subscription, in 1687, at 
the expense of 2600/. Over the door is a fine 
bronze statue of Wykeham, executed and given to 
*he society, by the celebrated C. G. Cibber, jvho 
was related to the bishop, by marriage : this figure 
has been gilt and painted. The school-room is 00 
feet long, and 3& feet wide. Many prelates, and 
TOL, n. NO. 85. 



other eminent men, have received the rudiments of 
instruction at this seminary : among the latter arc 
enumerated Sir Thomas Brown, Sir Thomas Wot- 
ten, Sir Thomas Ryves ; and the poets Otway, 
Phillips, Young, Somerville, Pitt, Collins, and 
Warton. 

North-east from the college, at a short distance, are 
the ruins of the celebrated episcopal residence, culled 
Wolvesey castle, which was erected on the site of an 
ancient palace, by the bishop, Henry do Blois, in 
1138. Part of the materials made use of in this 
building, ware brought from the royal palace that 
had been raised by the Conqueror, on the north- 
west side of what is at present the cathedral burial- 
ground, and which De Blois had purposely pulled 
down as an encroachment on the church-lands. 
It was dismantled by Henry the Second, on his 
coming to the crown, with the bishop's other castles 
at Waltham and Merdcn. It appears, however, to 
have been repaired, and to have again become a 
place of considerable strength, as Bishop Etliclmar, 
with the other three half-brothers of Henry the 
Third, fled hither, from the Parliament at Oxford, 
to secure themselves from the vengeance of the 
assembled barons. Yet the castle was quickly 
taken, and probably dismantled more effectually 
than before, as nothing further is mentioned of it 
as a place of strength. It still, however, seems to 
have been the accustomed residence of the bishops, 
when at Winchester, till it was finally destroyed, by 
Cromwell, in 1646. The principal ruins which re- 
main, belonged to the keep. Very little remains of 
the west and south wings, the ruins of these having 
probably been cleared away to make room for the 
offices of the new episcopal palace, begun here, by 
Bishop Morley, under the supcrintendance of Sir 
Christopher Wren. The episcopal chapel, at the 
south-west end of the quadrangle, is yet standing ; 
but this, from its style of architecture, is probably 
not of an earlier age than that of Henry the Se- 
venth. The front of the new palace was pulled 
down by the bishop, about 30 years ago. Wolve- 
sey is stated to have derived its name from the ce- 
lebrated tribute of Wolves' heads, imposed on the 
Welsh, by King Edgar : and which, it is positively 
asserted, was ordered to be paid here. The pre- 
cincts of the castle were originally much more ex- 
tensive than they new appear. 

Of Winchester castle, .scarcely any parts are now 
standing. It was built by William the Conqueror, 
and occupied the commanding spot at the south- 
west angle of the city, where the king's house, or 
palace, erected by Charles the Second, now stands. 
This fortress has been the scene of many important 
transactions. In the reign of King John, it was 
besieged, and taken by the Dauphin of France ; but 
in the reign of Henry the Third, it successfully re- 
sisted the attacks of Simon de Moutfort, Earl of 
Leicester, and the barons under his command : the 
city, however, suffered greatly, and many of the 
inhabitants were ill-treated, and even murdered. 
7 A In 



354 



HAMPSHIRE. 



In the reign of Edward the Third, the famou 
Wykeham was for some time constable of this cas- 
tle, and here his first essays in military architec- 
ture arc generally supposed to have been made. 
James the First bestowed the fee-simple of the 
castle on Sir Benjamin Tichborne, and his de- 
scendants, from whom it was seized by the Par- 
liament ; and, after the eastle had been dismantled 
by Cromwell, the estate and remains were granted 
to Sir "VVi'.liam Waller, whose sister had married 
the real owner, Sir Richard Tichborne. Waller, 
or his son, sold the chapel, which has been left 
standing, to certain feoffees, for the purpose of 
converting it into a county hall, to which destina- 
tion it has ever since been applied. The rest of 
the castle precincts were sold to the corporation of 
Winchester, and from them to Charles the Second, 
for the trifling- consideration of five shilling.-) ! In 
the erection of the palace, now called the king's 
house, by this monarch, the ruins of the demolished 
castle were chiefly consumed : the death of Charles 
]>nt an end to the progress of the building, which, had 
it been completed according to the original design, 
given for it, by Sir Christopher Wren, would have 
been the. most stotely edifice of the kind, in England. 
The chapel, now the county hall, was originally dedi- 
cated to St. Stephen, and is supposed to have been 
built about the time of the monarch of that name. 
It is 110 feet in length, and consists of a nave and 
side aisles, but the appearance of the interior has 
been entirely changed. At the east end is sus- 
pended the famous curiosity, called Arthur's round 
table, which tradition has attributed to King Ar- 
thur ; but modern inquiry, with more accuracy, to 
King Stephen, who appears to have introduced the 
use of the round table into this island, to prevent 
disputes for precedency among the chivalrous 
knights of his age. It consists of stout oaken 
planks, painted with the figure of the British Ar- 
thur, and the names of his 24 knights, as collected 
from the romances of the 14th and loth centuries : 
the costume and characters are of the time of Henry 
the Eighth, when it was first painted ; in the centre 
is a rose. Its diameter is 18 feet : in several places 
it has been perforated by bullets, supposed by Crom- 
well's soldiers. The ancient precincts of the castle 
extended nearly to the west gate, which is the only 
one of the original entrances now remaining of the 
kind into this city : the north, east, and south gates, 
hiving been demolished by the Commissioners of 
the Pavement, appointed under an act passed in 
the year 1770. This gate has been much altered : 
part of it is supposed to be of the same age as the 
city walls ; but the machiolation, the grooves for 
-the portcullis, the busts, the shields inscribed in 
cjuatrcfoils, and in general the whole western facing, 
display workmanship of much later date. Adjoin- 
ing to the gate, on the outside, are some remains of 
an ancient chapel, called St. Mary in the Ditch. 
The ruins of the wall, extending on the north side, 
are fringed with shrub and ash trees. At a little 



! distance from the gate are the remains of a turret, 
j which, with another of the same description, de- 
fended the intermediate space of the wall, as far as 
what is called the Hermit's Tower, at the northern 
extremity. The north wall of the city, consisting 
chielly of Hints, and strong cement, retains its full 
height in some places, and is embattled, having 
copings of free stone : the ruins of several turrets 
on this side may also be_traced. On the east side, 
the wall " had the main arm of the river Itchin for 
its military foss ; and this, as appears from a charter 
granted by King Edmund to his sister Edburga, 
and the abbey of St. Mary, was then (before 960) 
navigable in this part. From the east gate, south- 
ward, the wall was extended beyond its original 
bounds, by the founder of Wolvesey castle, so as 
to form an obtuse angle ; and being strongly forti- 
fied with towers, became the outwork of that for- 
tress. 

On the south side, the entrance into the city was 
by a drawbridge. On the south-west part, the 
ancient track of the wall was extended by the forti- 
fications of the royal castle, in the same manner as 
on the Wolvesey side by those of the episcopal pa- 
lace. The original form of the city, as bounded by 
walls, is that of the Roman camps in general, viz. 
a parallelogram, with the angles rounded off; and 
the principal parts of Winchester are still included 
within the space described by this figure. In the 
High Street, and nearly in the centre of the city, 
but partly obscured by the situation of some conti- 
guous buildings, stands the city cross, an elegant 
specimen of the style of the age in which it was 
built, that of Henry the Sixth. It consists of three 
stories, adorned with open arches, niches, and pin- 
nacles, surmounted with small crosses. The re- 
mains of the cross, at the top, still crown the orna- 
mented shaft, which rises from the base ; and, under 
one of the canopied niches, on the second story, is 
a statue generally said to represent St. John the 
Evangelist ; but, from its wanting the appropriate 
symbols of that saint, and from its bearing a palm 
branch, the sure token of a martyr, Milner refers 
it either to St. Lawrence, or St. Ainphibalus : to the 
former of whom the church near which it stands, 
was dedicated ; and the latter was once the patron 
saint of the cathedral. This structure was erected 
by a fraternity of the holy cross, an order which is 
said to have been instituted by Henry the Sixth : 
its preservation has hcen. owing to the spirit of the 
inhabitants who rose in its defence, and drove away 
the workmen employed to take it down, about the 
year 1770, under an order of the Commissioners of 
Pavement, by whom it is said to have been clandes- 
tinely sold to ornament the grounds of a neigh- 
bouring gentleman. The height of this cross is 43 
feet. The ecclesiastical buildings in this city weVo 
formerly extremely numerous ; the churches agd 
chapels alone, amounting to upwards of 90 : and 
several having colleges and monasteries attached 
to them. Scarcely twelve of them now remain; the 
6 others 



HAMPSHIRE. 



others having been destroyed by the effects of war, 
or otherwise. 

The church dedicated to St. Lawrence, nnar the 
city cross, and which can hardly be seen for the 
buildings which surround it, is considered as the 
mother church ; hence the bishop takes possession 
of his diocese, by making 1 a solemn entry into this 
little edifice. The principal parochial church is 
that dedicated to St. Maurice, which was formerly 
collegiate ; the porch, though much obscured, ex- 
hibits specimens of Saxon architecture. 

The Town Hall, or, the "Hall of the Guild of 
the Merchants of Winchester," was rebuilt in 1713, 
on the site of a more ancient hall, erected in place of 
one recorded to have been burnt down in 11 12. 
Here the city archives, the original Winchester 
bushel given by King Edgar, with other measures, 
both for quantity and length, fixed as standards by 
succeeding Princes, and various curious memo- 
rials of antiquity, are still preserved. In front is 
a good statue of Queen Anne, presented by George 
Brydges, Esq. who was a representative of the city 
in seven successive Parliaments. The market- 
house is a neat building, erected in 1772, for the 
sale of butter, eggs, poultry, &c. Before this edi- 
fice was completed, such articles were exposed for 
sale round the City Cros, and in the Pent-House, 
an ancient piazza, extending from the cross, on the 
south side of the High Street. Amongst the other 
public buildings, which require notice, is the ancient 
structure on the north side of the High Street called 
St. John's House, originally founded as an hospital, 
apparently so early as the tenth century. 

This hospital is thought to have afterwards be- 
come the property of the Knights Templars, or to 
have fallen under their administration, as the same 
year in which that order was suppressed, a rich 
citizen and magistrate of Winchester obtained per- 
mission of the King, Edvrard the Second, to re- 
found it " for the sole relief of sick and lame sol- 
diers, poor pilgrims, and necessitated way-faring 
men, to have their lodging and diet gratis there, 
for one night, or longer, as their inability to travel 
might require." Sufficient endowments were at 
the same time given for its maintenance, and the 
management vested in the corporation, who appear 
to have used it as a public hall. At the Dissolution 
the revenues of this institution were, with all the 
moveable property, confiscated to the King's use ; 
but the corporation were suffered to retain the bare 
walls for civil purposes. In 1551, it once more be- 
came a charitable foundation, being endowed for the 
support of six poor widows, by Richard Lamb, Esq. 
Each of these has a separate apartment on the north 
side of the main building. The principal chamber, 
or hall, which is sixty-two feet in length, thirty- 
eight broad, and twenty-eight high, has been fitted 
up in an elegant style, chiefly by a donation of the 
late Colonel Brydges, of Avington, who left 800/. 
for the purpose. The portrait of this gentleman, 
and a very fine whole length of Charles the Second, 



in his robes of state, by Sir Peter Lely, presented 
by the monarch himself to the corporation, are 
among the decorations of this apartment ; and here 
the public feasts, music-meetings, and assemblies, 
are held. In an adjoining room, called the coun- 
cil chamber, are suspended the city tables, which 
display a brief chronological arrangement of the most 
important transactions relating to this city. The 
ancient chapel of the hospital is now used as a Free- 
School. 

The celebrated monastery founded by Alfred the 
Great in this city, called the Ncwen-Mynstre, and 
afterwards Hyde Abbey, originally occupied nearly 
the whole space between the cathedral on the north 
and the High Street. Alfred dying soon after the 
commencement of the work, it was completed by 
his son, Edward the Confessor, and placed under 
the direction of Alfred's friend, St. Grimbald, who 
established it for canons regular. These were ex- 
pelled by Bishop Ethehvold. in 903, and their place 
supplied by Benedictine monks. Alwyn, the eighth 
abbot from St. Grimbald, was uncle to the unfor- 
tunate Kinsr Harold, and, with twelve of his monks, 
assisted that sovereign in the field at the battle of 
Hastings, where he was himself slain together with 
all his companions. This behaviour of the abbot so 
enraged the Conqueror, that he treated the New 
Minster with more than his usual tyranny ; seizing 
upon all his estates, and keeping the abbey itself in 
his hands for a long time, without allowing a new 
abbot to be chosen. Three years afterwards, his 
anger being appeased, he permitted the monks to 
elect a superior, restored some of the abbey lands, 
and gave other possessions in exchange for the re- 
mainder. In the reign of Henry the First, the 
situation of this abbey had become exceedingly un- 
wholesome, through the stagnation of a stream of 
water, which had been brought from the river 
through the heart of the city, to supply the ditches 
which had been dug round the castle erected by the 
Conqueror. This inconveniency, combined witli 
another, that had been endured even from the 
building of the Abbey, namely, the interruption 
that frequently arose from the contiguity of the 
Abbey church to the cathedral, by which the voices 
and organs of the two choirs were confusedly inter- 
mingled, gave origin to a plan for re-building the 
Abbey at a greater distance.' The design being- 
approved equally by the king and bishop, and by 
the inmates of both monasteries, the spot called 
Hyde Meadow, just, without the north wall of the 
city, was chosen for the site of the new edifice. 
Here a magnificent church and monastery were 
erected, chiefly at the cxpence of the king ; and in 
the year 1110, the monks removed to their new 
abode, carrying with them not only the relics of 
the saints Grimbald and Judocus, the latter of 
which had been brought from Picardy, but nlro the 
remains of the illustrious personages that had been 
buried in their old church, and which were now re- 
interred at Hyde. Among the remains thus re- 

iiUrrred 



S50 



HAMPSHIRE. 



interred were those of Alfred, his Queen Alswithn, 
aiul his sons Ethel ward and Edward the Elder ; 
Alfred Elfleda, and Kthelhikla, children of Ed- 
ward the Elder : and King; Edwy. In the reign of 
Stephen, Hyde Abbey was burnt to the ground, in 
the conil a gration occasioned by the fire-halls which 
were thrown on the buildings in the possession of 
the forces of Matilda, from the bishop's castle at 
Wolvesey. In the reign of Henry the Second, the 
buildings were restored with increased magnificence; 
and the possessions of the Abbey having become 
very great, from the various grants it had received 
from many royal and noble benefactors, its abbot 
was invested with the privilege of sitting in Parlia- 
ment. On its surrender to the commissioners of 
Henry the Eighth, in 1538, its annual revenues 
were computed at 865'. 18s. 0|/f. The church, and 
principal offices of the monastery, were demolished 
soon afterwards. Kven the tombs of the illustrious 
dead were broken into; for, according to Lclaiid, 
" two little tables of lead, inscribed with the names 
of Alfred, and his son Edward, were found in the 
monument containing their remains." Very little 
of the monastic buildings are now standing : the 
principal remain is the small and mutilated parish 
church of St. Bartholomew, the east end of which 
is in ruins ; at the west end is a square heavy tower. 
This church never formed part of the Abbey itself ; 
but, like the parish church of St. S within, with res- 
pect to the cathedral, was intended for the benefit of 
the servants, and other lay persons belonging to the 
monastery. Some ruinous out-houses, and part of 
a lara;e barn, comprise the remainder of the ruins. 
On the exact site of the church a new Bridewell 
was erected some years ago, according to the plan 
of Howard, the philanthropist. In digging the 
foundations, many stone coffins, with chalices, 
patins, rings, &c. were met with ; together with 
busts, capitals of columns, and other fragments of 
ornamental sculpture. The most interesting curio- 
sity, however, that has been found among the re- 
mains of this Abbey, is the stone inscribed ALFRED 
REX. Dccckxxxi, in Saxon characters: this was 
discovered about fifty or sixty years ago, and was 
lately in the possession of II. Howard, Esq. of 
Corby Castle, Cumberland. Another of the reli- 
gious establishments of this city, was the tfJtmna 
SJ5l>n$nt, or Abbey of St. Mary, founded by Alswitha, 
Alfred's Queen, ami afterwards the place of her 
retirement on the demise of her royal consort. 
Here also Edburga, a daughter of Edward the 
Elder, passed a devout life, and became abbess. 
In the time of King Edgar, additional endowments 
were bestowed on this foundation by Bishop Ethel- 
wold, who, in conjunction with his friend, the cele- 
brated St. Dunstan, increased the strictness of its 
discipline according to the new regulations pre- 
scribed for the observance of Benedictines. Many 
West Saxon females, of royal and noble parentage, 
were admitted into this community ; and here Ma- 
tilda, the celebrated Queen of Henry the First, and 



direct descendant from Edmund Ironside, received 
her education. The usurpation of Stephen proved 
the destruction of the first Abbey ; for this also, like 
the New Minstre, was burnt by the throwing of 
fire-balls from Wolvesey. In the next reign, the 
buildings were re-instated, towards the expence of 
which Henry the Second is thought to have been a 
considerable benefactor. On the dissolution of the 
lesser monasteries, this Abbey, whose annual reve- 
nues only amounted to 179<*. 7. 2(7. would have 
fallen in the common wreck, if its then Abbess, 
Dame Elizabeth Shelley, had not averted the storm 
by the sacrifice of the manors of Allcanniug and 
Archefount, in Wiltshire, which were alienated in 
favour of Lord Edward Seymour, and Lady Anne, 
| his wife; the latter of whom, the rapacious Henry 
is said to have had " some private reason to oblige." 
The Abbey continued to flourish about four years 
longer, when, at the final dissolution, all its pos- 
sessions were swept away ; the Abbess, and eight 
of her nuns, having small annuities granted them ; 
and the rest of the community being turned out 
without any provision. Scarcely any vestige of the 
conventual buildings can now be traced, excepting 
in a large modern mansion, in the construction of 
which the materials were used. By the name of 
Abbey, however, the whole extent of its ancient in- 
closure is still known. 

An extensive county gaol, from the designs, and 
under the^ direction of the architect, Mr. Money- 
penny, has been recently erected in this city. The 
internal arrangement is agreeable to the plan of the 
celebrated Howard. 

Winchester contains several meeting houses for 
Dissenters of different denominations ; the principal 
of which is the Roman Catholic Chapel, dedicated 
to St. Peter, and standing in the street of that name. 
This structure was rebuilt on the foundations of a 
more ancient chapel, in 1792. The general idea 
was to give a modern imitation of the English, or 
pointed style, with its corresponding decorations in 
the middle ages. 

The altar-piece was painted from a copy of 
Raphael's famous picture of the Transfiguration, 
by Mr. Cave, sen. of Winchester. At the entrance 
of the walk leading to this chapel, is a curious Nor- 
man Portal, that was removed hither from the 
church of St. 3Iary Magdalen's Hospital, which 
stood on a hill to the north of the city, and was 
pulled down a few years ago. St. Mary's Hospital 
is supposed to have been founded by Bishop Tocly ve, 
in the twelfth century. 

The chief magistrate of Winchester had the title 
of mayor conferred on him, by Henry the Second, 
in 1184, some years before that appellation was 
known even in the capital itself. The first charter 
of incorporation was granted by King John ; but 
the charter by which the city is now governed, was 
given by Queen Elizabeth; and, as declared in the 
preamble, " in consideration of the city of Winches- 
ter having been most famous for the celebration of 

the 



HAMPSHIRE. 



3f>7 



the nativities, coronations, sepulchres, and for the 
preservation of other famous monuments of the 
Queen's progenitors." By this charter the govern- 
mi-lit, is vested in a mayor, recorder, six aldermen 
a town-clerk, two coroners, two constables, and a 
council of twenty-four of the "better, discreeter 
and more honest sort," of inhabitants. The firs 
return from this city to Parliament, was in the 
twenty-third of Edward the First. The right o: 
election is vested in the corporation. 

This city has very little trade, but what imme- 
diately arises from its advantageous situation, in the 
very centre of the county; though an ancient wool- 
combing manufactory still exists in it. ; and of late 
years, the silk manufacture has been introduced 
All the public business of Hampshire is, however, 
transacted here ; and there is never an interval oi 
many weeks, without a great conflux of strangers 
on that account, to the great emolument of the in- 
habitants. The same circumstance accounts for the 
number of gentlemen of the law who live here. Its 
Cathedral, and its college* insure to it the resi- 
dence also of a considerable number of superior 
clergy with their families. The upper class of in- 
habitants, being well educated, and consisting of 
fixed residents, who are known to each other, live 
in the most friendly and social intercourse ; and the 
lower ranks are, in general, better taught, and 
more civil, than persons in the same situation in 
most other places. The provisions which the neigh- 
bouring country produces, are of the very best 
quality ; the coverts also abound with game, and 
the rivers teem with trout, and other fish. Its situa- 
tion, in the vicinity of the sea, with which there is a 
direct communication by a navigable canal at least 
as ancient as the reign of King John, affords the 
means of its obtaining the heavy commodities and 
merchandise of other counties, at a reasonable rate. 
When in the height of its prosperity, and possess- 
ing the benefit of the wool-staple, its wealth was 
greatly increased by the multitudes that ilocked to 
its different fairs ; the principal of which were held 
on the neighbouring hills of St. Giles, and St. 
Mary Magdalen. The first of these fairs was at one 
period by far the greatest in England. It was 
originally held for one day only, in virtue of a grant 
from William the Conqueror to Bishop Walkelin ; 
his cousin, William Rufus, extended it to three 
days; Henry the First to eight ; Stephen to four- 
teen ; and Henry the Second to sixteen days. 
During the said time of the fair, the shops were 
shut up, and no business was allowed to be trans- 
acted throughout the whole city, in Southampton, 
or, in short, within the distance of seven leagues 
from the hill in every direction. On the eve pre- 
ceding the festival of St. Giles, when the fair began, 
, the mayor of the city gave up the keys of the four 
city gates, and with them his authority, to a tem- 
porary magistrate appointed by the bishop, and did 
not resume the same until the fair was concluded. 
VOL. n. NO. 85. 



In the mean time, collectors were appointed at 
Southampton, and lledbridge, and on all the road* 
leading to the city, to exact the appointed duties 
upon all merchandise that was brought here for sale. 
Merchants resorted to this fair not only from the 
most remote parts within land, but also from places 
beyond the sea. It formed a kind of temporary city, 
which was entirely mercantile ; consisting of whole 
streets appropriated to the sale of particular com- 
modities, and distinguished by their several names } 
as the drapery, the pottery, the spicery, the stan- 
nery, &c. At length, in the reign of Henry the 
Sixth, this celebrated mart was observed to be on 
the decline ; the stand appointed for those who 
brought certain articles for sale from Cornwall, not 
being occupied. Since that period, various causes, 
and, among others, the decay of the city itself, have 
gradually reduced this fair to its present insignifi- 
cance. St. Mary Magdalen's Fair is now the 
greater, and avast quantity of money is here annu- 
ally circulated on a single day. Numerous im- 
provements in the general- appearance of this city 
have been made since the year 1770, when the act 
for paving, cleansing, and repairing it, was passed. 
The buildings are chiefly disposed in parallel streets, 
branching off at right angles from the High .Street, 
which runs through the centre. For the recreation 
of the superior classes, a neat theatre was built, a 
few years ago ; and additional amusement is derived 
from the race ground, which lies between three and 
four miles to the north of the city. A county hospi- 
tal;, or infirmary, was established here as early as 
the year 1736, and has been the means of relieving 1 
a great number of sufferers. 

WINTNEY.] In the parish of Hartley Whitney, 
a mile and three quarters S. by W. from Hartford 
bridge, was a Cistercian nunnery. waid to have been 
founded in the time of the Conqueror. 

WOOD-MILLS.] Wood-Mills, on the banks of 
the Itchin, are the property of Mr. Taylor, who 
carries on by patent a very extensive manufactory 
of ship blocks, &c. for his Majesty's dock yards. 
The mechanism and facility with which the business 
is conducted are admirable. The spot forms a 
Favourite aquatic excursion from Southampton, and 
in the passage, Bittern, the ancient Clauscntum, 
may be seen to the best advantage. 

FAIRS.] Alresford. Last Saturday in April, 
Holy Thursday, July 5, first Thursday after Oc- 
tober 10, and every alternate Thursday till Christ- 
mass, for sheep, &c. 

Alton. Saturday before May 1, sheep and lambs; 
September 29, cattle and toys. 

Andover. Saturday after Midlent, cheese, horses, 
and leather; M;iy 12, leather and millinery goods, 
November 16, sheep, horses, leather and cheese. 

dppleshaw. May 23, sheep show Friday and 
Saturday, before Wey-IIill, November 4, for sheep. 
Jiuitoii. July 31, millinery goods and toys. 
Basingstoke. Easter-Tuesday, cheese and cat- 
7s 



658 



HAMPSHIRE. 



tie ; Wednesday in Whitsun-week, pedlary, Sep- 
tember 23, cattle, &c. October 1, hiring servants, 
and cattle. 

lieaulieu. April 15, September 4, horses and 
cattle. 

Jitackwater. November 8, sheep and cattle. 

.Botley. Tuesday before Shrove Tuesday, Tues- 
day before Whit-Tuesday, cheese ; July 23, Au- 
gust 19, November 13, cattle. 

Bradiiig. May 12, Octobers, toys. 

Broughton. First Monday in July, toys. 

Christchurch. Trinity Thursday, October 17, for 
horses and bullocks. 

East Mean. September 19, for horses. 

Haling. July 5, toys. 

Ernsworth. Easter-Monday, July 18, for toys. 

Eversley. May 16, October 18, for cattle and 
toys. 

Fareliam. June 29, cheese, and toys. 

firton. May 1. 

Fordingbridge, September 9, pedlary and forest 
colts. 

Giles Hill, near JVinfon. September 12, for cheese, 
leather, and horses. 

Gosport. May 4, October 10, for toys. 

Hambledoil. February 13, for hoi'ses, first Tues- 
day in May, for tops, October 2, for horses. 

Hartley- Ruw. Shrove Tuesday, June 29, ped- 
lary. 

Idavant, June 22, October 17, for toys. 

Haclffield. Good Friday, a periling fair. 

Kuigsc/ere. First Tuesday in April, Easter Tues- 
day, first Tuesday after Old Michaelmas, October 
10, for sheep. 

Lip/iook. First Wednesday in March, Easter 
Tuesday, June 11, for horned cattle, and horses. 

Liss. May 6, ditto. 

Lymington. May 12, October 2, for horses, 
cheese, and bacon. 

Magdalen Hill, near Winton. August 2, for 
cheese, leather, and horses. 

Mfittingley. December 4, for cattle. 

Newport, Isle of Wight. Whit-Monday, Tues- 
day and Wednesday, old horses and toys. 

Newton, Isle of Wight. July 22, for ditto. 

Odihum. Mid-lent Saturday, July 31, cattle and 
toys. 



Oierton May 4, July 18, October 22, sheep, 
Whit-Monday, sheep and toys. 

Petenjield. March 5, and every other Wednes- 
day, for cattle and sheep, July 10, December 11, 
sheep and horses. 

Portsmouth. July 10, for shoemakers, hatters, 
milliners, mercers, cutlers, cabinet-makers, linen 
and woollen drapers, silversmiths' goods, apparel 
ready made, and bed furniture, fourteen days. 

Ports Down. July 26, cheese, bacon, and horses. 

Ringwood. July 10, December 11, for pedlary 
and forest colts. 

Ron-land's Castle, near Havant. May 12, a plea- 
sure fair, and for pigs and sheep, November 12, for 
hogs and horned cattle. 

Ramsey. Easter Monday, August 26, Novem- 
ber 8, for horses, cattle, sheep, and swine. 

Selborne, near Alton. May 29. 

Southampton. February 17, December 15, May 6, 
cattle, and cheese, Trinity Monday, horses, cattle, 
and leather. 

Southxdck. April 5, for horses, and toys. 

StocAbridge.' Holy Thursday, for sheep, July 10, 
for ditto and horses, first Thursday in Lent, cheese, 
October 7, and last Thursday, for sheep. 

Sutton. Trinity T uesday, for toys ; November 6, 
a periling fair. 

Tang/ey. April 15, for sheep. 

Titc/ifield. May 14, for toys, September 25, for 
hiring servants. 

Waltham. Second Friday in May, for horses and 
toys ; July 30, cheese and toys ; first Friday after 
Old Michaelmas, October 10, for horses, stockings, 
and toys. 

West Coxes. Thursday in Whit week, for toys. 

Wet/hill. October 9, for sheep ; the five follow- 
ing days for leather, hops, and cheese. 

Wherwell. September 24, for sheep and bul- 
locks. If it falls on the Sunday, it is kept the 
Saturday before. 

Whitchurch. April 23, third Thursday in June, 
toys ; July 7, October 1 9. 

Wickham. May 20, for horses. 

Winchester. First Monday in Lent, for bacon, 
cheese, leather, and horses ; October 24, for leather, 
horses, bullocks, and sheep. 

Yarmouth. Isle of Wight. July 25, for toys. 



TABLE 



HAMPSHIRE. 



A 

co 



J 

= U 



c j S c .3 

k w n ty:~ 

f " C ^ C ,-S! 






1 ? 11 g 


30 ^ * C W = . 
(5 -^r-j5Q_g 51 


S 


5 

_*, 


8 S ^ ^ 

; * <a pa os o 


l^l 111 ill" 


^ 


-e; 


o .= 03 


> c"* .3- >r.^ ^3 3 . 




CO ; 


a U o .2 s o 

| i 30 S ^.^ H 


iTsU jj sji^'i I'S' 




Z - 


B -"2 -'o tf o ^ S 33 




^ 


< a 


. ? 8 g. u JS* ^2 & 


S" " CJ IU C C *** " C "- ^"^ 





Ko 
< -? 

u- i 


1 ^ ?! f'" 3 Si 1 1 5 


^^ 3 ^5 ^ ^ 5u "* s "^ " 

..trir3 S~ S O^ ^ 
"C/^r^-n^ ?rt'*S! ( w S 


_/ 
5 


o I 


<U CO 5 O O ^r3 - 


-x CT 1 J (JH'XJpg -c .S*"^**^ 


> 


>- S 


2 . a? sT 1 " 3 "^M ? e W c 


Uj ^-^ .^ ^ ^^ ^2 o * S -it 


5 


iii 


. I^ " 4J "^ M 1 - ' O - 


a* w? *:J>~^^ s cl2t3^-^O cr^2 t 


^ 


u> 
o a a 


?^ J -u B a2 . 2 s jj. c- : 

fcfl^" 5> D ^? ^^ C ^ O J5 t/- N 


^ S Is ilisll -* al gll K-f ^"s; 






S ^ > ~ "~ -2 ** > o ^ ^> 


'^'""^-"7E"fi ^^s^ ? o ?K-"H'" o 1 ^_ 


- 




W ft. 


(^^""^"o caJJ ^T _n > ^ "> C/3 L 


a t~";T"K&>~ ; ~~ I ;i,w u * w S ^ 
o *" ^ > C ra *- ._ i> LJ W * ^ ^ sT'c 


- -: 


3 01 


ICi-3-^ fij CJ St-<;o = rfrtiH 






H 3 JB 


S 1 I^S 1 let g 1 1 |a=3 C 


5 . 1. c c . Q 1. S l_ c . d 1. c 1. >4 ^ S -i S 5 c 




z 3 - 


c^.'^-'^;ci i -^ ; r ' '<' 
w. PC --< CQ M- ( j taJ ^^QS >-Jr^ fco~ 


51 .^ ^ ^ ^ 


: 


i 1 s- ss 








en S * 


^ ^ 







if:--* 


C^OD ntoOiO^n co** oo 

^^-CNC-tC^C^COCO ^t-T-^f -^J* "^^ 


1O O OO Oi CM O l^ f 

- C 


) 
t 


. 3 " 


-M -W H -*, ^ 


^ 




co 5 " 2 


C*-rO<N<0ro!N N^ co 


u, - W _ & 0< 


i 


H 


..... jj <) 


j: 




S a g 


;H 5 


4) HH 




CJ 5 S M 


: O o 


to c ^ 




S ? * -8 

< S " 


w -" << 
>- n ig -K -a ^ 

T3 -3 i- -J 

W) >^*C^PHUiO S 3 

<u >-..i; >->~3 py _ S o 


S ^a^ 6 i-S 

"BV, = -S=fl 


, 


b .2 




5 >2 Sj^" ^ "- 


1 


W * J IS 

U! * ^ ' 


-5! !"! Hi .^ 1.1 *j " 


C ti to --- 5 
^3 , S> 




> i o c 

^ M 5 ^ 


J? 3^ ^ ^^ ^^ CO C^H QH Ci ^2 


ca 333 ^K ^s:^ c 




2; S 








e'ej 


* L "* 

3"? 


t/i O 3J '"~~ ~ 

= il| >- ,r 




c * 


o "* 4 ^b 






~ fi u 


^ * J3 r^ 


t- t2 ^ c *^ ^ 




J - a 


2 ^fro 


3 -^ ;~" 

O^^.K*" K, O^J ^ 




SS-I J ^ 

^ " g 1 

XH * 


S "1 . 

S a* i^^ ^ 


'5 "c W S c 
c o n co o ; 

S " SS rf 2 ps u- < 


) 


^4 fc 








OS | BS 

* -f 2 


S _n o i^ 1 

i? ^2^ S 


g u -> 5- ^ 

-.*cc3 '^3 X 7' (2 




U O *s $ 


^J w ^ c/5 


** *Zt .^s'** O c l>- **.. t- 






- O S g o 1 






35 ?> S j 




^ rt *t5 ^^ .? ^^ 




RNEYS THROUGH T 
ted to observe, that the/r 

iS FROM THE COMMENCE 

the! 


. 1 w ST O"S 1 w 

cr 1 ^ y ^^ * ^ 

os w .-s r sj g-3 
^ I'll J JfI 

ll if fl IS*.! 

r\ S *=i ft y (~) c C/2 

J-> > 3~ cn . 
55 -* ca < <a's 

& * 1. '. * .1 " 

_;JK! J OS 


1 1" ll||ffl P 

^ i MSI |g ! i-3 

r l.;rf-j p i n, d 

2 S&5 2s" ^^ ^ etfl - 
O = Z gi^ -Q | 2 S g co 

s ^ico'i.= s ^ d eJj 

.SasJ ^Jl^co J 


t 

"a* 


JD OJ y 

o g. z 

* 8 2 


o 


" ~o 

S fO CO c<5 ro. laij 
O. . 


1 


fe 2 

O '- Q 


, . ^-^..^ ^ ^ 








O ^^ ex <O 


t g ^ >0 CO CO -.1 




, "O 

^ S 


PS . . : 

24 -. : ; : 


5 1 1 




"*" ""^ 


CQ * * S 


C/5 




|H v 


S5 f B' & 


< : : 




-G 


PS h ! - 2 "= 


C3 : 




* 
* 


2 %" i |l 
E^3 a c 1 " 1 o,-a j* 
>^ CO ^" 


c c c fl 
85 S g >J : 2 
0|||| ||| j= 




* 


o"n-2~^v- ^ 


i.J V |J -f a * & 





a"-- j o 



5(50 



HAMPSHIRE. 



I 

2. 
c. 


^i "rri 5 f?ir r^rp? E??I 

M l ? l "-&! |sffll i*l|f 


-rH^ 

'a ? 


1 c E S 


^ ^ E 

i s j 


i - 


sr r* r; t3 ~ &j DM 
: : ~ : M 3 r 3 # 




en : O : 


: *> 








" fS 






2 ^.2 


1 *"* 




i _ 


- Ci O tO <l 1&. f D* t*J J^. V 






00 N>-H > g B h;^,.H H w^MM M- g '*M ~ 


O to to to 

a 01 in co w p^ *> *. e^ <o oj o c 

*"" P5 " " "" H KH 


C3 

J ^ fcO M toOJKSO 
1 Ou (j> tn tO ^O 4^ iLj Oj (C *^4 

, * MNHNr NHNH HZJ ^^ 


-i 






r E^ 


i 

L 
9 

" 


2 S i =35? 

i= o r 

>O ai ^^ d- ___ EH 
.03 r; . S^n 

H =--" a.1. 

^ "C-fi S r-. 

^ ^ O 1-^ t 1 E" 

^2 F-s ^ 
S - 

co H 


to * o" "i ' 
ET ,-," " n ' 1 
If 1 ff o ^ 

? ^ S f j 

SI !1 


3 e S 
' S- - i 

zL 

a a ^ 

i L_rf S" 

JPs: 

i * n. 

L ."'ffl 
? "P 




> ? E" 


"*i ** % 7* * 


=. 



K 



* 



EJ 



23 



f? 3 
? I 



O i^ 3 

N/ 


S 

rt 


C3W> 




o" 







O 


' j- 1 




J? 


H 



^ 2-S 

3 c-o 
5'S 5" 

TO 3 

" 



1-HS3 



a 
> 



S J S 
If 


SVickham.. 
fareham.... 


SS- s| 

?1 B l 

P-U S. 
o : 
: s : 


^5 t: (u 

2 S "^3.5 
S?|Sl.| 

gpilfr 

a : c-- 



















O 



w 

O3 

o 
o 
V. 

S 

a 
ej 


O 



Oo tn *- 



<O 

Kl~ 






IS 
*1 
O 



53 
IS 



> 

3 

s- 
s 



a 

~i o 



~r a 
n - 

o n 

""3 



LYMINGTON 



o 

3 
C. 

cn 



3 3 
O ^ 



u 

> 



I '( O 3 

LI ?-o 



s 

r? I 6 



< ' cr tS) pS-^ ffi ft= 2=3 S Kg 5S-SO 
y. --^Z-- n = a rtgS.oijr 
** -. 




5 
O 
Z 







>T3 

o 



Ig^QlO), 




561 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY. 



THE county of Hereford is bounded on the 
north by Shropshire ; on the north-east, and 
east, by Worcestershire ; on the south-east, by 
Gloucestershire ; on the south-west, by Monmouth- 
shire ; on the west by Brecknockshire ; and on the 
north-west by Radnorshire. Its form is nearly 
circular ; but some detached parishes are situated 
beyond the general outline; of these, Farlow is sur- 
rounded by Shropshire ; Rochford is included in the 
county of Worcester ; and Lytton Hill, in that of 
Radnor: a considerable tract of land, called the 
Futhog, with a few acres on the Devaudin Hill, is 
insulated by Monmouthshire. The greatest extent 
of Herefordshire, from Ludford on the north, to 
the opposite border, near Monmouth on the south, 
is thirty-eight miles ; its greatest width, from Clif- 
ford on the west, to Cradley on the east, is thirty- 
five miles. It comprises about 621,440 acres. The 
general aspect of this county is extremely beautiful : 
its surface-is finely diversified, and broken by swell- 
ing heights, so as greatly to resemble the more cen- 
tral parts of Kent. From many of these elevations, 
the prospects are extremely fine ; but peculiarly so 
from the Malvern Hills on the east, and the Hat- 
terell, or Black Mountains, on the west. The fer- 
tility of the soil is very great ; and the county is 
clothed in almost perpetual verdure. On every side 
a luxuriance of vegetation is exhibited in widely ex- 
tended corn fields, teeming orchards, expansive 
meadows, and flourishing plantations. The courses 
of the rivers and brooks may be traced from any of 
the adjacent eminences, by the rich lines of wood 
which skirt their margins ; much valuable timber is 
also scattered over the county in hedge rows, as 
well as on the sides and summits of the knolls, and 
higher elevations. Every part seems uniformly pro- 
ductive ; except, perhaps, on the northern and 
western outskirts. Upon the whole, Herefordshire 
may be termed a Woodland county ; many species 
of trees growing up spontaneously, and becoming 
strong and vigorous in a very short period The 

TOL. II. NO. 85. 



oak, elm, poplar, and willow, are particularly flou- 
rishing ; hut are seldom suffered to attain full matu- 
rity, unless on the estates of the nobility, and emi- 
nent landed proprietors. Coppice wood is abun- 
dant, the sides and summits of many of the hills and 
upland grounds being covered with extensive plan- 
tations. The ash coppices are valuable and numer- 
ous ; those of alder are also plentiful in low and 
marshy situations ; the former arc regulated under 
a general system, and are cut about once in eight, 
ten, or twelve years, according to the uses for which 
the wood is designed. The principal part of thes 
county is inclosed, and most of the inclosures arc 
bounded by hedge rows. 

RIVERS.] The streams that water Herefordshire 
generally fall from the Welch mountains, and enter- 
ing this county on the western side, keep an .eastern 
course for a time, and then turning southward, unite 
in one channel, and part the counties of Gloucester, 
and Monmouth, falling into the Severn, near its 
month. Its principal rivers are the Wye, the Mun- 
now, the Lug, the Leddon, the Team, the Arrow, 
and the Frome. 

The Wye has frequently been celebrated for the 
extremely picturesque and diversified scenery which 
adorns its meandering channel. It rises near the 
summit of the Plinlimmon hills, in Montgomeryshire, 
flows between the counties of Brecknock and Rad- 
nor, and afterwards enters Herefordshire near Clif- 
ford, the reputed birth-place of the ill-fated fair 
Rosamond. Winding to the east above Clifford 
castle, it loiters beautifully amongst orchards, mea- 
dows, and corn-fields, till it reaches the abrupt and 
commanding eminence of Mawbech Hill : thence 
darting suddenly through the bold arches of Bred- 
wardine bridge, it flows on to Hereford, through a 
more level, though extremely pleasant country. 
From Hereford to Ross, its features occasionally 
assume greater boldness ; though more frequently 
their aspect is placid ; hut at the latter town, wholly 
emerging from u state of apparent repose, it resuiuei 
7 c the 



562 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



the brightness and rapidity of its primitive charac- 
ter, as it forms the admired curve which the church- 
yard of Ross commands. The celebrated spire of 
Ross church, peeping over a noble row of elms, 
here fronts the ruined castle of Wilton, beneath the 
arches of whose bridge, the Wye flows through a 
charming succession of meadows, encircling at last 
the lofty and well wooded hill crowned with the 
majestic fragments of Goodrich castle, and opposed 
by the waving eminences of the Forest of Dean. 
The mighty pile, or peninsula, of Symond's rock 
succeeds, round which the river flows in a circuit 
of seven miles ; though the opposite points of the 
isthmus are only one mile asunder. Shortly after- 
Wards, the Wye quits the county, and enters Mon- 
mouthshire at the New Wear. This river is navi- 
gable to Hereford in barges of from eighteen to 
forty tons ; but either a large or a small supply of 
water is equally fatal to the navigation. The latter 
is experienced during the greater part of every dry 
summer, when shoals barely covered with the stream 
occur very frequently : in winter, heavy rains, or 
snow dissolving on the river's banks, within the 
county, have the effect of gradually adding a few 
inches to the depth ; but when these rush into its 
channel, from the mountains of Brecknock and Rad- 
norshire, they occasion an almost instantaneous 
overflow, and give it a force which defies all the 
ordinary means of resistance and controul. On 
such occasions, the Wye has been known to rise 
15 feet within 21 hours. Considerable quantities of 
land are thus frequently removed from their situa- 
tions on one side or the other, and new channels are 
formed in various places ; to this impetuosity is also 
to be ascribed the want of a sufficient number of 
bridges to render the communication safe and easy 
between different parts of the county. In the whole 
extenl of the Wye through Herefordshire, there was 
only one bridge (at Hereford) till the year 1597; 
an net of Parliament was then obtained for erecting 
a second at Wilton ; and since that time two more 
have been added ; the one at Bredwardine, by an 
act passed in 1762 ; and the other at Witney, by an 
act passed in 1780. The principal fish taken in the 
Wye, is the salmon, which is found in it at all times, 
but only in perfection between the mouths of Decem- 
ber and August. They were formerly more abun- 
dant than at present ; so much so, indeed, that in 
the indentures of apprenticeship at Hereford, it was 
a clause, that the apprentice should not be com- 
pelled to live on them more frequently than two 
days in a week. Their passage up the river is now, 
however, so much obstructed by iron-works, that, 
unless the water is swelled far above its usual 
height, they cannot advance : this circumstance, 
with the illegal practice of taking them in cribs, has 
rendered them less abundant. 

The river Leadon or Leddon, rises above Bos- 
bury, on the east side of Herefordshire, and run- 
ning to the south, gives name to the town of Led- 

7 



bury ; thence flowing into Gloucestershire, it unites 
with the Severn. 

The Arrow enters this county from Radnorshire, 
and flowing to the east, falls into the Lug below 
Leominster. 

The Frome rises near Walfrelow, above Brom- 
yard, and taking a south course, is joined by the 
Loden, near Stretton-Grandison ; when turning to 
the south-west, it unites with the Lug above Mor- 
disford. 

The Lug rises in Radnorshire, but enters this 
county on the north-west side, near Stapleton cas- 
tle : thenee flowing in a south-east direction, it re- 
ceives the Prisley near Leominster ; and afterwards 
inclining to the south, is increased by the waters of 
the Frome and the Arrow. Soon after its junction 
with the former river, it falls into the Wye, near 
the pleasant village of Mordisford. The district of 
country through which this river flows is fine and 
fertile, but less abundant in beautiful scenery than 
the Wye. Like that stream, however, it is sub- 
ject to sudden overflows, and is frequently swelled 
by partial rains, which give it great rapidity and 
force at its junction with that river. These circum- 
stances long operated to prevent its being rendered 
navigable, though three acts of Parliament have 
been passed for that purpose, the last of which was 
in May, 1809, which also provided for making a 
horse towing path on certain parts of the banks of 
the Wye. 

The Team, or Teme, enters Herefordshire from 
the confines of Radnorshire and Shropshire, a short 
distance north-west from Brampton Brian, and 
flowing eastward, runs into Shropshire near Lud- 
low : thence bending to the south, it again enters 
this county ; but soon leaves it for Worcestershire, 
where, having made a. considerable circuit, it once 
more flows on the borders of Herefordshire, of 
which it becomes the boundary for a mile or two 
above and below Whiteborn ; after which it dis- 
charges itself into the Severn, between Malvern- 
chace and Woodbury Hill. In Worcestershire, pearls 
have occasionally been found in the mussel shells of 
this river. 

The Munnow rises on the Herefordshire side of 
the Hatterell mountains, and flowing south-east- 
ward, is joined near Longtown by the Escle and 
Olchron rivulets, which have their springs also near 
the sources of the Munnow ; thence flowing south- 
ward through a pleasant and sequestered vale, it is 
joined near Alterynnis by the Hothny ; after which 
it turns to the north-east towards Pontrilas, and 
near that place is increased by the united streams of 
the Dore and the Werme, which also rise in this 
county ; the former at Dorston (Dore's-town) and 
the latter at Alansmoore. Again turning to the 
south-east, it forms the boundary between Here- 
fordshire and Monmouthshire, till it quits the county 
at Llanrothal, and flowing onwards, is received by 
the Wye immediately below the town of Monmouth. 

PLANTS.] 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



PLANTS.] The rare plants of this county, as 
will be seen by the note below, are by no means 
numerous.* 

MINERAL AND MEDICINAL SPRINGS.] In this 
county, some medicinal springs have been noticed 
as rising on the side of the Malvern hills, and known 
by the name of Holy-wells. Several petrifying 
springs are also met with in the neighbourhood of 
Moccas, Townhope, Llanrothal, Wormcsley, &c. 
and other hilly parts of the county where the soil is 
calcareous. Near Richard's castle, a small spring 
has obtained the name of Bone-well, from the cir- 
cumstance of its frequently emitting, when disturbed, 
small bones, resembling' vertebrae and other bones 
of the frog species. 

AGRICULTURE, SOIL, &c.] In this county, the 
general character of the soil, is a mixture of marie 
and clay, containing a large proportion of calcareous 
earth. The substrata are principally limestone, of 
different qualities; in some parts, particularly near 
Snodhill castle, assuming the properties of marble, 
and becoming beautifully variegated with red and 
white veins. Towards the western Borders, the 
soil is cold, and retentive of moisture; but still ar- 
gillaceous, with a base of soft crumbling stone, 
which decomposes on exposure to the atmosphere ; 
or of nodules of impure lime-stone. The eastern 
side of the county is principally a stiff clay, of great 
tenacity and strength, and in many places of a red 
colour : a great proportion of the hundred of Worrn- 
elow, on the south, is a light sand. Deep beds of 
gravel are occasionally met with in the vicinity of 
Hereford; and the subsoil of several of the hills is 
of silccions grit. Fuller's earth is sometimes dug 
near Stoke ; and red and yellow ochres, with tobac- 
co-pipe clay, are found in small quantities in dif- 
ferent parts of the county. Iron ore has been met 
with in the parts bordering on Gloucestershire, but 
none has been dug of late years; though from the 
considerable quantities that have been discovered 
imperfectly smelted, and from the remains of hand- 
blomaries which have also been found, it has been 
thought that some iron werks Avere established here 
as early as in the times of the Romans. 

The chief part of the cultivated lands of this 
county are under tillage; the produce, however, 
particularly of wheat, is not correspondent to what 
ought to be grown on soils of such extreme ferti- 
lity. This is generally attributed to bad manage- 
ment, especially in the article of manure, which is 
seldom laid on the land in sufficient quantities, 
probably owing to the difficulty of obtaining it. 
Several judicious farmers, however, have success- 
fully deviated from the old routine, which is thus 



Bryum rigidum. Rigid Bryum ; on moist rocks; near Wig- 

inore. 
Conferva rigidu. Rough Conferva; in the river Lug, near 

Mortimer's Cross. 
Lichen furfuraceus. Brawny Liverwort ; on the park pales at 

Croft Castle. 



described by Mr. Duncoiub ; *' A good fallow, 
or a clover ley, well worked, limed, nnd manured, 
produces, on an average, about 20 Winchester 
bushels of wheat per statute acre : in the following 
spring it is sown with peas, sometimes beans, after 
one ploughing, and with no manure ; the produce 
is about 14 bushels per acre; after two plotighings, 
and a partial dressing, or much more frequently 
without any dressing whatever, it is again sown 
with wheat in October; and if this brush crop, as it 
is termed, produces somewhat more than half the 
quantity yielded by the fallow, the grower is satis- 
fied. In the following spring it is sown with barley 
and clover, after two plotighings, but still without 
manure ; and, as might be expected from the ex- 
hausted state of the land, it generally affords a very 
inconsiderable crop. Sheep are turned on the young 
clover as soon as the barley is removed. Sometimes 
oats, or turnips, precede the barley on a small part 
of the land ; and a few winter vetches have occa- 
sionally been introduced, but still without manure, 
or any other preparation than one or two plough - 
ings. After mowing one crop of clover, it is fed 
with cattle in the spring following, and afterwards 
remains for seed. The fallowing then re-com- 
mences, and the same system is repeated. In tins- 
manner one third of this description of arable land 
is constantly under the culture of wheat ; and that 
third, during its preparation for the seed (which is 
sown almost invariably in the broad-cast manner,) 
is termed the odd mark." In the Ross district, 
lime has been used us manure with great success, 
so that the land now produces great quantities of 
barley, peas, wheat, &c. Here the general course 
of crops is as follows; wheat on a clover ley ; tur- 
nips, barley, and seeds ; after two years begin 
again ; wheat, peas, turnips, barley and seeds. 
Generally speaking, the heaviest crops of wheat are 
produced in the vicinity of Hereford, and thence 
through the clays towards Ledbury. The produce 
of wheat on the borders of the county is 100, and 
on the richer lands 200 gallons per acre : this, how- 
ever, alludes to the general run of the county ; for 
300 gallons is not uncommon on Wye side. The 
greater part of the county being composed of a 
clayey soil, the cultivation of barley is not very 
general. Southward, however, where the soil is 
inclined to be sandy, barley is a principal article. 
The produce may be about four quarters per acrej 
but near Ross much more. Peas and beans, are 
sown broad cast. The strong clayey soil is well 
adapted for this crop ; yet the average produce 
cannot be estimated at more than 25 bushels per 
statute acre. Beans are sometimes set, but not in 



Lichen sinttalus. Sinuated Liverwort ; on rocks, and in stony. 

and shady places, near Wigmore. 
Mentha rotundlfolin. Hound-leaved Horsemint; by (lie river 

sick- at Lydbrook near Ross. 
Tarus Bticcata. The Eugh or Yew tree; on the mountains. 

frequent. 

regular. 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



with an Intention of keeping the land 
Turnips are grown under as bad 
as the wheat; they are often sown 
e, on poor and foul lands, after one 
]ngs, and not half the quantity sown 
.. uiiue hoed. Some improvements have, how- 
ever, been made within these few years, both with 
respect to turnips and the artificial grasses. These 
improvements have been made chiefly through the 
means of the Herefordshire agricultural society, es- 
tablished in 1797. 

FARMS, FARM-BUILDINGS, &c.] The greatest es- 
tates in Herefordshire belong 1 to the governors of 
Guy's Hospital, in London, the Duke of Norfolk, 
the Earl of Oxford, the Earl of Essex, and Sir 
George Cornwall, Bart. These estates are divided 
into farms, comprising on an average from 200 to 
400 acres each. The construction of many of the 
farm buildings is rude and unsubstantial : the lower 
part, from one to two feet above the surface, being 
a stone wall, cemented only with mud or clay : on 
this a timber frame work is erected, the vacancies in 
which are filled up by laths interwoven in a basket- 
like manner, and the whole plastered over and 
white-washed. The thick flags that are used to 
cover the roof instead of tiles, increase the weight, 
without adding to the solidity ; and the infirm ce- 
ment at bottom soon mouldering by the weather, the 
whole fabric quickly becomes dilapidated. 

TENURES, &c.] The tenures in the hundred of 
Wormelow are mostly of that peculiar kind called 
Irehinfield ; the leading feature of which tenure is, 
that in all cases where persons die intestate, the law 
of primogeniture has no effect, and the lands are 
equally divided amongst all the sons. One or two 
instance!, also, are to be found of Borough En- 
glish : copyholds are not so frequent in this county 
as in many; leaseholds rre more common, and the 
freeholds comprize about two thirds of the county. 

PRODUCE.] In addition to the various kinds of 
grain, cyder and hops are two important branches of 
the produce of Herefordshire. For the former, 
plantations of fruit trees are found in every aspect, 
nnd on soil of every quality, and under every cul- 
ture ; but " the soil best adapted to most kinds of 
apples (observes Mr. Duncomb) is a deep and rich 
loam, when under the culture of the plough ; on 
this the trees grow with the greatest luxuriance, 
and produce the richest fruit. Some trees, how- 
ever, the styre and golden pippin in particular, form 
exceptions to this general rule, and flourish most in 
a hot and shallow soil, upon a lime or sand-stone. 
The best sort of pear trees also prefer the rich loam ; 
but interior kinds will even flourish where the soil 
will scarcely produce herbage. The apple trees are 



* In the year 1809, the result of a course of experiments was 
laid before the Hereford Agricultural Society, by T. A. Knight, 
Esq. by which it appeared that the strength of the juice of any 
cider apple was in exact proportion to its weight. Thus, the 
juices of the inferior apples were light when compared with the 



divided into old and new sorts ; each class com- 
prises what is called kernel fruits ; that is, the 
fruit growing on its own native roots, a distinction 
from those produced by the operation of grafting. 
The old sorts are the more valuable, and those which 
have been long introduced ; as the Styre, Golden- 
pippin, Hagloe Crabj several varieties of the Har- 
vey, the Brandy-apple, Redstreak, Woodcock, 
Moyle, Gennet-moyle, red, white, and yellow 
Musks, Pauson, Foxwhelp, loan and old Pear- 
mains, Dymock-red, Ten-commandments, &c. 
Some of these names are descriptive of the fruit; 
and others are derived from the places where they 
have been found in abundance. The modern varie- 
ties derive their appellations from such capricious 
and various causes, that a correct list cannot be 
composed : in some instances, the fruit bears a dif- 
ferent name even in the same parish. In selecting 
fruits for cultivation, respect should be paid both to 
the soil and situation of the intended orchard :* 
where both are favourable, no restraint is necessary ; 
but in cold situations, and unkind soils, the most 
early fruits are obviously those which may be ex- 
pected to acquire maturity. The time for gather- 
ing the apples is generally about the middle of Oc- 
tober, but this varies according to the season, and 
sort of the fruit. The prevailing practice in gather- 
ing is to beat the trees with long slender poles, 
called poking lugs, and as the apples fall, women, 
and children are employed to collect them into bas- 
kets ; this mode of gathering, is, however, very de- 
fective, as both ripe and unripe fruits are thus in- 
termixed, which is detrimental to the production of 
good cyder. In some orchards, therefore, two 
gatherings are made ; the first when the apples be- 
gin to fall spontaneously, which is a sure criterion 
of the ripeness ; and again when those that were left 
green become sufficiently mature. The principal 
markets for the fruit liquors of Herefordshire, are 
those of London and Bristol, whence great quanti- 
ties are sent to Ireland, to the East and West In- 
dies, and to other foreign markets in bottles. The 
price of the common cyder is generally fixed by a 
meeting of the dealers at Hereford fair, on the 20th 
of October annually, and on the average of years 
varies from I/. 5s. to two guineas per hogshead, but 
the value of the Styre cyder, even at the press, is 
from 5/. to 15/. per hogshead. In a plentiful year 
the produce of the fruit is almost beyond concep- 
tion, the trees being then loaded even to excess, and 
frequently break under the weight of the apples ; at 
these times, indeed, the branches are generally 
obliged to be supported on props or forked poles. 
This kind of excessive fruitage, however, seldom 
occurs more than once in four years ; the year im- 



juices of the old and approved ports. The forest Styre out- 
weighed every olln-r until it was put in competition with the 
new variety produced by Mr. Knight, from the Siberian crab 
and the Lothian pearmain ; nor could any other juice be found 
equal in weight to the latter. 

mediately 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



mediately succeeding being mostly unproductive. 
In some of these years of abundance, 20 hogsheads 
of cyder have been made from the produce of a 
single acre of orchard ground. The particular era 
when the plantations of Herefordshire acquired the 
peculiar eminence which they yet retain, was during 
the reign of Charles the First, when, by the spirited 
exertions of Lord Scudamore, and other gentlemen 
of the county, Herefordshire became, in. a manner, 
one entire orchard. 

The cultivation of hops lias contributed to raise 
tha value of woodland* in this county, in a remark- 
able degree. It now produces not only a sufficiency 
tor its own consumption, but a vast quantity is an- 
nually sent to the Severn for the Bristol and other 
markets, mostly used in making hoops and hop- 
poles. The land preferred by the planter in this 
district, to be converted into hop ground, is mea- 
dow or old pasture, when it can be had ; but any 
land that has lain for years in grass, is preferred to 
arable. 

CATTLE.] The Herefordshire cattle are regard- 
ed as the finest breed in this island. They are of 
the middle horned kind, with a large and athletic 
form, and from the bright and silky nature of their 
coating, are unusually sleek in appearance. Their 
prevailing colour is a reddish brown, with white and 
bald faces. The rearing of oxen for agricultural 
purposes, is a general practice ; nearly half the 
ploughing of the whole county being performed by 
them ; they are also equally employed in the labours 
of the harvest. After having been worked about 
five or six years, they are generally sold in good 
condition, to the graziers of the adjacent counties, 
who farther improve them for the London markets. 
The usual time of selling them is at Hereford fair, 
when 1000, or 1500, are exposed for sale annually. 
The sheep are no less celebrated than the cattle ; 
they are distinguished by the name of the Ryeland 
breed, from a district in the southern part of the 
county, where the superior varieties are fed. They 
are small, white faced, and hornless ; the ewes 
weighing from 9 to 12 and 14 pounds the quarter; 
the wethers, or wedders, from 12 to 16 and 18 
pounds. In symmetry of shape, and flavour of their 
meat, they are superior to most flocks in England ; 
and in the quality of their wool they are wholly un- 
rivalled. They lamb in February and March ; but 
during winter, and particularly in time of lambing, 
the store flocks are generally confined by night, in 
a covered building, provincially termed a cot ; in 
which they are fed sometimes with hay or barley- 
straw, but much more frequently with peas-haulm. 
Some breeders accustom them to the cot only in 
very severe weather, and in lambing time. Manure 
made from the peas -haulm is excellent, and in large 
quantities ; whilst the practice of cottirig materially 
contributes to the health of the animal, and to the 
fineness of its fleece. The quantity shorn from 
each does not average more than two pounds ; but 
the quality is such as almost rivals that imported 
VOL. ii. o. 80. 



from Spain : the price is sometimes as high as 33$. 
the stone of I -Ml), untrindcd, when coarse wool is 
only worth ten or twelve shillings. A cross has'beea 
made between the Ryeland and new Leicester sorts, 
to the advantage of the breeder, at least on good land, 
but to the detriment of the wool. The preservation . 
of the original fineness of this staple commodity, or 
its improvement, are objects worthy of national at- 
tention ; and the cross between the Ryeland and 
real Spanish breeds, seems the most probable mode 
of effecting them. 

ETYMOLOGY.] This county derives its name from 
its chief town, Hereford, the etymology of which is 
somewhat uncertain. Camden observes, that the 
Britons called the place Trefawith, from the beach- 
trees, and Hcnwith from the old road, before it got 
the name of Hereford. The Britons, however, ac- 
cording to Mr. Gough, did not call it Henwith, 
but Hen-fordd, i. e. the old way ; and from <hes 
words, he supposes the Saxons to hav formed its 
present name, which, in the language of that peo- 
ple, signifies the. ford of the army. 

GENERAL HISTORY.] At the time of the Roman 
invasion, Herefordshire was inhabited by tire Si- 
lures, who also occupied the adjacent counties of 
Radnor, Monmouth, and Glamorgan, together with 
that part of Gloucestershire, which lies westward 
from the Severn. In the British language, this 
district was called, indifferently, by the nearly sy~- 
nonimous names of Esyllwg anil Gwent; word* 
implying an open country of downs, abounding 
with prospects ; hence its inhabitants were denomi- 
nated Gwyr Esyllwg, Gwyr Esyllyr, &c. ; aud 
from their derivatives, Syllrwys. Their language, 
called the Gwenhwyssey, was one of the three prin- 
cipal dialects of Wales ; and several valuable ma- 
nuscripts, written in it, are yet preserved. Tire 
Silures were a brave and hardy people, who 1 nig 
opposed the Roman power, under Caractacus, their . 
King, being made desperate by the Emperor Clau- 
dius's declaration, that they should be exterminated, 
but they were at length defeated by Aulus Plautiiu, 
and their King, Caratacus, or Caractacus, taken, 
and sent to Rome, where he was led in triumph ; 
but they were not entirely subdued till the reign of 
Vespasian, when a Roman legion being placed 
among them, prevented a revolt. This county 
continued under the jurisdiction of the Britons, 
for several centuries after the Saxons established 
themselves in this island ; but, at last, after they had 
settled their seven kingdoms, it was subdued by a 
King of Mercia, who annexed it to his own domi- 
nions. Yet, afterwards, it was perpetually liar- 
rassed by the Welsh, on whose country it border- 
ed ; on which account, Ofta, King of Mercia, 
thought it necessary to make a broad ditch, 100 
miles long, called Offa's dyke, in order to divide it 
from Wales, some traces of which are still visible. 
This county was also fortified with no less than 28 
castles, but the greatest part of them are now en- 
tirely demolished. However, all these precautions 
7 u did 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



<Hd not hinder (he Welsh from making inroads ; 
particularly in 1056, ten years before the reign oi 
William the First, when Griffin, King of South 
Wales, invaded the county, and defeated the English 
two miles from Hereford. The Normans, however, 
soon conquered this county, for they obtained the 
possession of it almost immediately after the con- 
quest. 

ANTIQUITIES.] Two of the principal stations of 
the Itinerary of Antoninus, that is, Magna, now 
Kcnchester, and Ariconium, near floss, with the 
smaller port of Bravinium, or Brandon, are within 
the limits of this county. The Watling Street en- 
ters it, on the north, from Shropshire, near Leint- 
wardine, where it passes the river Tome, and leads 
to the Camp of Brandon. Thence continuing in a 
southern direction, it proceeds by Wigmore, Mor- 
timer's Cross, Street, Stretford, and Portway, to 
Kenchester. Leaving this station, and inclining to 
the south-west, it crosses the Wye, near the Wear, 
and passing Kington, Dore, and Longtown, enters 
Monmouthshire, and proceeds to Abergavenny, the 
Gebannium of the Romans. This road is visible 
ou Four-ways Common, near Madley, and several 
entrenchments occur, in different parts of tbe line, 
as it crosses the county. A second Roman road, 
ultimately joining witli the former at Usk, enters 
Herefordshire, on the south-east from Gloucester- 
shire ; and appears to have connected the stations 
of Glevuin, or Gloucester, Ariconium, Blestium, or 
Monmouth, Bnrrium, or Usk. A third Roman 
road enters this county from Worcestershire, and 
passing Frome Hill, Stretton-Grahsham, or Gran- 
dison, Lug-bridge, Holmer, and Stretton-Sug- 
was, extends to Kenchester. A fourth ancient 
road, called the Ridgeway, is met with to the south 
of the Herefordshire beacon, extending, circularly, 
for several miles towards Eastnor. There are some 
ancient encampments near Hereford, Pembridge, 
Leominster, &c. The other antiquities chiefly en- 
titled to notice, are : Barrington castle, near Ash- 
ton ; Bransill castle, near Ledbury ; Brampton- 
Brian castle ; Bromyard church ; Comfor castle, 
near Leominster; Courtfield Castle; CrasshYld ab- 
boy ; Dorstan castle ; Eccleswell castle ; Eaton 
Tregnore castle ; Goodrich castle ; Gablington cas- 
tle,- Hereford cathedral, &c. Highland castle, near 
Leominster ; Kilpcck castle and priory, Kinnersley 
castle, Leominster church, Lyons Hall castle, Pem- 
bridge castle, Penyard castle, near Ross ; Richard's 
castle, near Ludford ; Snodhill castle, Trenget's 
castle, near Welch Newton ; Trecigo castle, Whit- 
ney castle, Wigmore castle and priory, Wilton castle, 
near Ross ; Wonton castle. 

ROADS.] In this county, the roads have long 
been proverbially bad : they are such, observes 
Marshall, as one might expect to meet with in the 
marshes of Holland, or among the mountains of 
Switzerland. In various parts they are sunk far 
below the surface of the contiguous grounds, the 
floods having washed the soil away, even to the 



bare rock ; and, in other places, the steep ascents, 
and rapid declivities, render them almost impassa- 
ble, especially in bad weather. They are also so 
narrow hi some situations, that two carriages can- 
not pass each other without extreme danger ; and, 
in others, not at all. Even the chief turnpike roads 
very strongly partake of the same general cha- 
racter. 

CANALS.] The inland navigation of this county 
is very imperfect. An immense sum has been ex- 
pended on the Hereford and Gloucester canal, be- 
gun under an act passed in 1701 ; but it is not yet, 
we believe, completed. It begins at Hereford, and 
crosses the Lug, below Sutton St. Michael, and 
Button St. Nicholas ; whence it pursues an easterly 
course by West Hide, Cannon-Frome, Munslry ; 
crosses the Leadon, below Boshury, and pursues a 
southerly course, by Ledbury, Dinnington, to Dim- 
mock ; about two miles below Ledbury, it again 
crosses to the west side of the Leadon ; from Dim- 
mock, it pursues an easterly course for about four 
miles, and twice crosses the Leadon, and passes by 
Pauntley-Upleadon, Newent, (at three miles dis- 
tance), Rudford, and Lassington ; again it crosses 
the Leadon, and a branch of the Seven), thence 
across Alney island, and into the Severn, opposite 
Gloucester ; the total length to Hereford being 35 
miles five furlongs, with 225 feet eight inches lock- 
age. The collateral cut to Newent, is three miles 
long, with a fall of ten feet to the junction. At the 
commencement of this canal, there is a tunnel of 
440 yards ; and another, about the middle of the 
summit, 1320 yards in length. By this canal, a 
communication is opened for the collieries in the 
neighbourhood of Newent, and other tracts of land, 
possessing large and valuable mines of coal, and 
with several lime-stone quarries ; and not only the 
vicinity of Hereford, but the interior of South 
Wales is much benefitted, as thereby a continued 
water-carriage may be had to the several ports of 
London, Bristol, Liverpool, and Hull, to the great 
improvement of the value of lands and .estates in 
the county of Hereford, &c. The Kington and 
Leominster canal, which begins at Kingtou, pur- 
sues an easterly course, and passes by Stanton, 
Kingsland, where it crosses the river Lug, and 
makes a bend to Leorninster; whence it turns, and 
passes between Eye and Berrington, by Orleton, 
Brimfield, where it crosses the Teme ; by Little 
Hereford, Burford, Tenbury, Rochford, and Knigh- 
ton, where it crosses the Rea, and proceeds to Lin- 
dridge, Low, Pensax, through a tunnel to Jones's 
tiole, by Arley, there falling into the Severn, just 
above Stourport. The length of this canal, is ra- 
:her more than 45 miles ; and the total lockage is 
544 feet, viz. 496 feet fall, and 48 feet rise. ' On 
:his canal are two tunnels ; one near Sousnant, of 
1250 yards ; the other at Pensax, of 3859 yards. 
Sfear Tenbury are two collateral cuts for the accom- 
modation of mills. 

PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.] Hereford- 

6 shire 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



shire returns eight members to Parliament, TIZ. two 
for the county, two for the city, two for Leomin- 
ster, and two for Weobley. Ledbury, Ross, and 
Bromyard, also, were formerly privileged to send 
representatives ; but were excused, by petition, on 
the plea of inability to support them. 

CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL DIVISIONS.] The 
county of Hereford, as appears by the population 
returns, is divided into eleven hundreds ; and it 
comprises 213 parishes, and 1-2 parts of parishes : 
it has 11 petty sessions, and 61 acting county ma- 
gistrates. 

Herefordshire is included in the Oxford circuit, 
in the province of Canterbury, and ia the diocese 
of Hereford. 

MARKET TOWNS.] The market-towns of Here- 
fordshire, are as follows : 

Towns. Market Days. 
Broinyurd Monday. 

( Wednesday, 
Hereford ? Friday, 

( Saturday. 

Kington Wednesday. 

Ledbury Tuesday. 

Leominster Friday. 



Town*. Market Days. 

Pcinbridge Tuesday. 

Boss Thursday. 

Webley Thursday. 

POPULATION, &c.] The air of Herefordshire i 
very agreeable and healthy, though somewhat cold, 
from the neighbourhood of the Welch mountains. 
As an extraordinary instance of the longevity of the 
inhabitants of this county, Mr. Sergeant Hoskins, 
who possessed a considerable estate in it, invited 
King James the First, while he was on a progress 
this way, to his house, where, haying elegantly en- 
tertained him, he procured ten old men and women, 
whose ages put together amounted to above a thou- 
sand years, to dance the morrice before him. The 
proportion of baptisms in this county, is 1 in 34 ; 
of burials, 1 in 55 ; and of marriages, 1 in 163. 
In the year 1700, the population of Herefordshire 
was estimated at 60,900 : and in 1750, at 74,100. 
In 1801, the number of houses, in the county, was 
19,763 ; of inhabitants, 89,191 ; of which 43,955 
were males, and 45,236 females. According to the 
returns of 1811, as will be seen at length below, the 
number of male inhabitants was 46,404 ; and that 
of females, 47,689 ; making a total of 94,073. 



Summary qf the Population qf the County of Hereford, as published by Authority .f Parliament, in 181 1. 





HOUSES. 


OCCUPATIONS. 


PERSONS. 


HUNDREDS, &c. 


Inhabited. 


>>3 

gH 
E 8 . 
s SB'S 

il'* 




ob 
c 

2 




Uninhabited. 

. 


Families chiefly 
employed in 
Agriculture. 


Families chiefly 
employed in 
Trade, Manu- 
factures, &c. 


ii-ii 

i, , 

i'sio 

-c * " at 

ijtal 

Ul *"C 

<.s t 


Males. 


Females. 


Total 
of 

Persons. 




2071 
684 
2020 
1253 
974 
2065 
1520 
1492 
942 
2302 
1666 
1583 


2188 
710 
2165 
1323 
1076 
2292 
1721 
1660 
1019 
2494 
1760 
1673 


19 

17 
8 
11 
18 
21 
5 
3 
Ifi 
13 
23 


81 
77 
79 
49 
33 
71 
71 
43 
23 
51 
61 
85 


1564 
584 
1090 
991 
590 
1561 
1172 
1301 
785 
1455 
1327 
179 


433 
108 
582 
260 
336 
493 
408 
266 
166 
723 
347 
922 


191 
18 
493 
72 
150 
233 
141 
93 
68 
316 
86 
572 


5195 
1607 
4865 
2984 
2301 
5467 
3903 
3931 
2315 
5469. 
4404 
3145 
813 


5301 
1650 
4934 
3049 
2420 
5760 
4025 
3950 
2477 
5715 
4227 
4161 


10496 
3257 
9799 
6033 
4721 
11227 
792S 
7881 
4792 
11184 
8631 
7306 
818 


















Wolphy 


Wormelow, Low, and Up... 
Local Militia 




18572 


20081 


154 


724 


12599 


5044 


2438 


46404 


47669 


94073 





568 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



CHIET TOWNS, PARISHES, &c. 
ACORNBURY.] At the village of Acornbury, three 
miles S. of Hereford, was a nunnery of the order of 
St. Augustine, founded and endowed in the time of 
King John, by the wife of Walter de Lacey. The 
estate is now the property of Guy's Hospital, having 
been purchased, with Wilton castle, and other es- 
tates belonging to the Lords Chandos, in the last 
century. The remains of the nunnery have been 
fitted up as a farm house. 

On the summit of Acornbury hill, a hold and ex- 
tensive neighbouring eminence, commanding a de- 
lightful view, are the traces of what was probably a 
summer camp of the Romans. 

ALTYRINNYS.] Three or four miles to the west 
of Dore, ami Ewias Harold, flows the Honddy, 
near the junction of which with the Munnow, is 
Altyrinnys, an ancient mansion, long the seat of 
the Cecils, from whom descended the Lords Burgh- 
ley. The Honddy nearly surrounds the house ; 
both streams are clear and rapid, and the scenery 
on their banks is very picturesque. This estate be- 
came the property of the Cecils about the year 
1091. 

ARCENFF.I.DK.] In former times, a considerable 
district in the southern part of Herefordshire, was 
comprehended by the name of Arcenfelde, Archen- 
felde, or Urchelfield : the first is the appellation 
which it bears in the Domesday Book, the latter arc 
variations of a later period. Herchenfield, says 
Leland, is a great Lordship longing to the Erie of 
Shrewsbury, and lieth betwixt Monmouth and Here- 
ford, about two miles from each of them. It is full 
of inclosures, and of corne and woode. This tract 
was ravaged by the Danes in the year 905, and 
Camalac, a British bishop made prisoner " The 
King," says the Domesday Book, " has in Arceu- 
felde, 100 men, mines four, who hold 73 carucac 
with their men, and pay for custom 41 pints of 
honey, and 20.<r. in< lieu of the sheep which they used 
to furnish, and 105. smoke money, (furnagium) and 
no othw toll or custom, except serving in the king's 
army, if required. If a freeman dies there, the king 
has his horse and arms ; and if a villain, one ox. 
King Gryffin and Blein ravaged this tract in the 
Confessor's reign, and therefore the state of it at 
that time cannot be ascertained." The ninety- six 
men here spoken f, observes Gough, were con- 
sidered by Mr. Blount, to be " liberi homines," yet 
such as held in gavel kind ; and the seventy-three 
ploughs' with their men, lie looked upon as their 
villains ; and that both held all their lands in this 
territory in gavel kind, which are so continued to 
this day. They were free from payments and cus- 
toms, anciently imposed upon the rest of the nation, 
because as a special remark it is said, rec daut gel- 
dam aut aliani consertudinem; unless it be to march 
in the King's army when they are commanded ; yet 
paying, as the rest of Wales did, their talu-fwch, 
and talu-fwn ; tliis last being the furnagium above- 
mentioned, -a payment for fire, and elsewhere called 



smoke silver ; which is still paid to the lords of 
manors in Wales, and in some parts of England, 
to the minister of the parish. They had the chief 
lionour in the army given them : they led the van to 
fight, and brought up the rear in its retreat. They 
have within their circuits, a liberty to arrest for any 
sum whatsoever ; and whoever purchases lands there 
may bequeath them to whom he pleases. The wifo 
here hath the moiety of her husband's lands for her 
dower ; nor is here any forfeiture of lands for felony : 
besides, the King's writ runs not here, as it was 
adjudged in the time of King Edward the First. 
They have also a formal way of judicature of their 
own, after the British fashion : the steward, with 
his officers belonging to the court, being seated, 
there are certain chiefs among them, who hold their 
lands of the lord by suit and doom, in the court of 
this his liberty, and are therefore called doomsmen, 
men of judgment, or such who are to judge of mat- 
ters in controversy. And whereas the king had three 
churches within this liberty, the priests of those 
churches were bound to carry the king's messages 
into Wales ; and each of them were to say two 
masses every week for the king, as appears by the 
Domesday Book. Blount affirms also, that he 
has seen a record, wherein these inhabitants of Ir- 
chenfeld are said to be left, as it were, to their own 
liberty, and to be extra comitatum ; that is, not 
bound up to any strictness by the country laws. 
Lastly, the tenure whereby they hold their lands is 
gavel kind, which is a partition among all female 
children : with this difference only to the eldest son, 
that certain principals, as they call them, pass to 
him as heir-looms, and are not subject to partition ; 
such as the best beast, the best bed and furniture, 
the best table, &c. which tenure, and those other 
enumerated customs, they do for the most part still 
retain, as derived to them from great antiquity, even 
before the Norman Conquest ; for they are recorded 
to have been Consuetudines Walensium tcmpore 
regis Edwardi Confessoris. The customs alluded 
to here were as follow : if any stole from the Welsh, 
a man, or woman, horse, ox, or cow ; he was, on 
conviction, to restore the thing stolen, and forfeit 
20s. but for a sheep, or bundle of manipuli, (i. e. 
cloaths,) 2s. Whoever killed one of the king's men, 
and fled, was to forfeit to the king 20-. for the mur- 
der, and I Os. forfeit if the man belonged to a thane, 
the forfeit to the man's master was to be 10s. If one 
Welshman killed another, the relations of the de- 
ceased were to meet, and plunder the goods of the 
murderer and his relations, and burn their houses, 
till the body was buried about noon of the following 
day: the king was to have his third of the booty, 
and all the rest was to remain to them. Whoever 
was charged with firing a house, and could not 
clear himself by forty compurgators, was to forfeit 
20i - . to the king. Whoever was convicted of con- 
cealing one pint of honey in the custom, was to for- 
feit five pints for one, if his lands yielded so much. 
If the sheriff called them to the shire mot, six or 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



seven of the best were to go with him ; and who- 
ever refused to go on summons, was to forfeit 2s. 
or an ox to the king, et qui de hundred remanet 
wns to pay as much : and the like fine for disobey- 
ing the sheriff's precept to go with him into Wales ; 
for if the sheriff did not go, no one else need. This 
region, or liherty of Urchenfield, continued in the 
crown till Edward the Third's time, when that king 
granted to Richard Talbot, and his wife, and their 
heirs, in exchange for the manor of Hertingford- 
bury, in the county of Hertford, the land and hun- 
dred of Irchent'eld, and the manor ofWormelow, and 
the manor and services of Reynold Grey for the 
manor of Wilton, and of Thomas Ganworth for the 
manor of Kinger. The district of Irchinfield fre- 
quently occurs in Welsh writings by the name of 
Urging, and is stated to have anciently been governed 
by independent sovereigns. It probably included 
Ariconimn as its capital. At present there is no 
hundred of the name of Irchenfield; but the Deanery 
so called, includes the whole hundred of Wonnelow, 
and one parish in Webtree. 

BELMONT.] On a line ascent, close to the banks 
of the Wye, about a mile below Eton Camp, stands 
Belmont, the delightful seat of Mr. Matthews. 
The prospects are very rich, beautiful, and exten- 
sive, terminated on one side by the distant moun- 
tains of Radnorshire; and, on the other, by the 
Malvern hills of Worcestershire. The mansion is 
an elegant building of Bath-stone, erected from the 
designs of Wyatt. The interior is fitted up witli 
much taste, and contains some valuable pictures. 
The grounds are ornamented by some flourishing 
plantations. 

BERRINGTON.] Berrington, the seat and manor 
of the late Right Hon. Thomas Harley, lies about 
3| miles N. N. E. from Leominster. The mansion, 
recently occupied by Lady Rodney, is- a square 
modern edifice, of white stone, situated in a plea- 
sant park. On the north-east, near the angle of 
the roads leading to ~Kye and Brimpfield, is the site 
of a small camp. 

BRAMPTON.] Brampton Brian, about three miles 
north of Lyngen, was an ancient .Lordship of the 
family of Brian Brampton, who resided here from 
about the time of Henry the First, and having in- 
termarried with some of the chief nobility of the 
kingdom, -became extinct in the time of Edward the 
First, when Margaret, a coheiress, conveyed this 
estate in marriage to Robert de llarloy, whose de- 
scendant, the Earl of Oxford, is still owner. The 
castle became the chief seat of the Harleys, till the 
time of the civil wars in the reign of Charles the 
First, when it was twice besieged by the royal forces, 
and at length burnt. The ruins chiefly consist of 
some fragments of walls, and an entrance gateway ; 
flanked by two round towers. The church was 
greatly damaged during the siege of the castle ; the 
body of it was afterwards badly repaired; but the 
tower is a pile of ruins. In the south wall is an 

VOL. II. NO. 80. 



altar tomb, on which lies the cfligics of a lady un- 
known, greatly mutilated. Above this is a lurge 
marble tablet, in memory of Robert llarlcy, first 
Earl of Oxford. Another plain tablet records the 
name of Sarah, (laughter of Thomas Foley, Esq. 
and wife to Edward Harley, Esq. the Earl's 
younger brother. In a space called the Wilder- 
ness, near the church, are some of the largest and 
most flourishing trees in England. On the wes* 
from the church is a large and respectable brick 
mansion belonging to the Hurleys ; and still further 
to the west, is a park, nearly six miles in circum- 
ference,. 

BREDWARDINE CASTLE.] This fortress stood on, 
the banks of the Wye, about two miles above Moccas. 
From the few traces which remain, it appears to 
have been a strong and massive building. This 
place gave name to the family of the famous Thoma* 
Bredwardine, Archbishop of Canterbury in 1319, 
whose progenitors removed from this spot into Sus- 
sex, between one and two centuries before he was 
born. 

BROMYARD.] The little market town of Brom- 
yard lies 13* miles N. E. from Hereford, and IsJU 
N. W. by W. from London. It is irregularly built, 
and badly paved : nearly half the buildings are of 
wood, and very small ; the others are of red brick. 
The church stands on the north-cast side, and is of 
Saxon origin. This structure was repaired a few 
years ago, when the pillars of the nave were height - 
eued to support a new roof; but the original capi- 
tals were preserved. In the north transept la an 
altar tomb in memory of a knight of the Baskervillo 
family, whose effigies is sculptured on the slab. At 
the east end is a tomb in memory of Phineas Jack- 
son, vicar of Bromyard, who died in 1681, having 
made various small bequests for charitable purpose-; 
in this town and neighbourhood. The, population of 
Bromyard township, is about 1100. The Frome 
passes within a short distance to the east of this 
town; and several smuller streams flow on the north 
and west sides. The surrounding country is ex- 
ceedingly beautiful, being variegated with woody 
eminences, teeming orchards, rich meadows, and 
flourishing corn-fields. The villages are inconsi- 
derable, mostly consisting of a few scattered houses. 
BUUUHILL.] On the summit of Burghill, four 
miles N. W. by N. from Hereford, are the remains 
of a square camp ; one mile to the N. are the ves- 
tiges of the Portway, pointing towards Kenehes- 
ter; and three miles to the N. W. is another square 
cam]). 

BURGIIOPE HOUSE.] In the neighbourhood of 
Hampton Court, is Burghope house, formerly the 
scat of the ancient families of Goodyere and Dineley. 
It has mullioned windows, with projecting pointed 
gables, and curious picturesque chimnics. Sir 
John Dineley sold it to Lord Selscy, about 40 years 
ago. 

CI.IHORU CASTLE.] In the village of C'lillltrd, 
7 E ten 



'570 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



ten miles S.W. by S. from Kington, on a bold emi- 
nence, rising; from tbe banks of the Wye, stand the 
picturesque remains of Clifford castle, for nearly 
two centuries the baronial residence of (he Lords of 
Clifford. It was built by William Fitz-Osborne, 
Earl of Hereford, before the Conquest. The ruins 
are chiefly massive fragments of walls, overhanging 
the steep near the river side. The celebrated Fair 
Rosamond is said to have been born in the castle. 
Here, in the time of Henry the First, Simon Fitz- 
WaKer founded a cell of Cluniac monks, subordi- 
nate to the priory at Lewes, in Sussex. 

COMBE.] The little Tillage of Combe, lies 5| 
miles N.E. from Kington, on the eastern banks of 
the Lug. A short distance to the south, on the 
western extremity of Wnpler Hill, are the vestiges 
of an extensive camp. The slope of the eminence 
is finely covered with wood, and its northern ex- 
tremity is washed by a stream, which forms one of 
the sources of the Lug. The banks and ditches, 
high and very deep, are five-fold, excepting on one 
Hide, where the ascent is very steep. 

COURTFIELD.] From the iron works of Bishop- 
Wood furnace, in the neighbourhood of Goodrich, 
the Wye makes a sweep of nearly four miles into 
Gloucestershire; but the space inclosed, is consi- 
dered as a part of Monmouthshire. Within this 
area, is the little church of Welsh Bicknor, and the 
old mansion, and venerable woods of Courtfield, 
the place, according to tradition, from whence 
Henry the Fifth was sent from Monmouth, the 
place of his birth, to be nursed. The cradle in 
which the royal infant was rocked, is yet preserved 
as an invaluable relique. It became an honorary 
perquisite to one of the Rockers, who was an an- 
cestor of the late Rev. Mr. Ball, of Newland, in 

Gloucestershire : on his death, it was given to 

Whitehead, Esq. of French Hay, near Bristol. 

About a mile from Courtfield, to the west, rises 
Copped Wood Hill, from which the prospects are 
extremely fine. Here, at a little building, formerly 
the residence of a warrener, may be seen parts of 
the eight counties of Hereford, Monmouth, Salop, 
Worcester, Gloucester, Glamorgan, Brecon, and 
Hereford. 

COXHAI.L.] Cqxhall, or Coxwall Knoll camp, 
the last post occupied by the gallant Caractacus, is 
about a mile to the north of Brampton-Brian Park. 
Its form is irregular, but somewhat approaching to 
the section of an ellipsis. Brandon camp, the sup- 
posed Bravinium of the Romans, is about three 
miles to the east, on the opposite side of the river 
'feme. It is thought to have been occupied by Os- 
torious Scapula, previously to his decisive victory 
over Caractacus. 

CRASSWEI.L PHIOUV.] Amongst the hills, near 
the rise of one of the branches of the Munnow, 
and between one and two miles S.E. from the bor- 
ders of Brecknock, was Crasswcll priory, a small 
house, subordinate to the order of Grandmount, in 
Normandy. It was dedicated to the Virgin Mary, 



and contained a prior and ton monks, who were 
settled here about the end of the reign of King 
John. 

CREDKNHit.L.] About five miles N. W. by W. 
from Hereford, stands Credenhill, a very high and 
steep eminence, crowned by a vast camp, surroundr 
ed by almost inaccessible works, and forming a 
very conspicuous object for many miles round. 
Its upex includes an extent of about 40 acres, 
bounded by a double ditch and rampart. The ori- 
gin of this strong post has been attributed to the 
Britons ; but Dr. Salmon supposes it to be Roman, 
and used by them as an exploratory camp for the 
defence of the city beneath at Kenchester. The 
view, from the summit, is one of the most extensive 
in the county. The declivity of the hill is finely 
covered with wood. -r.l 

CROFT CASTLE.] Croft castle, between two and 
three miles S.E. from Wigmore, was the ancient 
seat of the Crofts, a Saxon family of distinction 
and celebrity, known to have resided here in the 
reign of Edward the Confessor. The family be- 
came extinct, about the close of the last century. 
The estate is now the property of Somerset Davis, 
Esq. who has also a seat called Wigmore hall, about 
two miles distant : the castle has long been demo- 
lished. An extensive park ranges on an eminence 
to the north from Croft, in the north-western part 
of which is a British camp, with a double ditch 
and rampart, called Croft Aubrey : the prospect 
from this site is very extensive and grand. On an 
eminence to the south-west, above Avemestre, is a 
smaller camp, of a square form, J K *l>niK<- 

DORE ABBEY.] Dore Abbey, so named from its 
situation on the river Dore, twelve miles S.W. by 
W. from Hereford, was founded by Robert, Lord 
of Evvias, about the end of the reign of Henry the 
First. The monks having acquired extensive pos- 
sessions, began the erection of a magnificent church ; 
but the expenses having exceeded their estimate, 
they procured an hortatory letter from Peter de 
Aqua Blanca, Bishop of Hereford, in which an 
abatement of 20 days penance was promised to all 
those who would contribute towards the erection of 
the structure. This indulgence proved effectual ; 
and the church was completed in a very elegant 
manner, in the pointed style. The abbey continued 
to flourish till the dissolution of the lesser monas- 
teries. 

Several ot the abbots became highly celebrated 
from their talents. Among the most eminent cha- 
racters of his age, was Abbot Adams, who, about 
the 13th century, was educated in this monastery. 
j Caducan, or Cadwgan, descended from an ancient 
I British race, for his attainments in the sciences, and 
| knowledge in divinity, was promoted by King John, 
I to the see of Banger, in 1215. Having enjoyed 
this dignity nearly 21 years, he resigned it, by per- 
mission of Pope Gregory, in 1320 ; and, laying 
aside his pontifical robes, assumed the humble garb 
of a monk, in this abbey, and spent the remainder 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



571 



of his days in meditation and prayer. Edward the 
First, ou his accession to the throne, issued a com- 
mission to the then abbot, by which he empowered 
him to receive the oath of allegiance in his name, 
from Llewellyn, the son of Griffin, Prince of Wales. 
In the 3 1st of Henry the Eighth, the site and de- 
mesne lands of Dore abbey, were granted to John 
Seudamore, Esq. of Holm-Lacey. The chapter- 
house, cloisters, and other buildings, were pulled 
down, and the materials sold, with part of the 
church ; but enough of the latter is still left, to shew 
that it was built in the cathedral form, and that its 
architecture was very elegant. John, Viscount 
Scudamore, obtained a license from Charles the 
First, to rebuild this fabric, and to endow it with 
all the appropriated tithes of Dore parish : it was 
not, however, entirely rebuilt, but underwent con- 
siderable repairs. This edifice consists of a nave, 
chancel, and transept, with a well-proportioned and 
massive tower : the transept was completely new 
rooted by Lord Scudamore, whose arms are finely 
carved on the screen which divides the chancel from 
the nave, together with those of England, and of 
the see of Hereford. The communion table is a 
remarkable slab, twelve feet long, and four broad, 
resting upon three elegant pillars : the altar-piece 
is equally singular; it displays a carved represen- 
tation, in wood, of the heart, hands, and feet, of our 
Saviour, pierced and bleeding. Above the altar, 
are three beautiful windows, of painted glass : in 
the centre window, Jesus is depicted ascending into 
heaven ; above him is Moses, and St. John Baptist ; 
and Ircneath the eleven apostles. In the other win- 
dows, are full-length figures of the Evangelists, 
and of St. Peter, St. Andrew, St. James, and St. 
John, with appropriate legends. On the opposite 
side of the chancel, are two handsome monuments 
in memory of the Rev. William Watts, and the 
Rev. Digby Cotes, both of whom were rectors of 
this parish. Behind the altar, is a kind of chapel, 
called a double cloister, the roof of which is sup- 
ported by well-proportioned pillars, of good work- 
manship : here, beneath an arch, is a mutilated 
figure, carved in free stone, said to be the effigies 
of Robert de Ewias, founder of this abbey. An- 
other broken and defaced statue, in the north aisle, 
is said to represent Sir Roger de Clifford, the 
younger, who was also buried here. In the church- 
yard, under an ancient yew tree, is a plain tomb, 
erected in commemoration of the Rev. Matthew 
Gibson, who was rector here, and died iu 1740. 
The abbey lauds are now the property of the Duke 
of Norfolk, who obtained them by his marriage with 
the .heiress of the Lords Scndamore. The parish 
of Dore contains about 5000 acres, about one-fifth 
of which is planted. The buildings are chiefly farm 
houses and cottages, built of timber, with mud walls, 
and lying scattered ou the hills, and in the valleys ; 
the land being extremely diversified and broken. 
DORSTON.] AtDorston, 15 miles W. by N. from 



Hereford, formerly stood a castle, of which there 
are now no remains. The view, eastward, from 
this village, is impeded by a range of -bold emi- 
nences, extending about ten or twelve miles in a 
north-east direction, and known by the appellation 
of King Arthur's hill, Stockley hill, and Mawbach 
hill. On the summit of the first, is an interesting 
memorial of British customs, called King Arthur's 
tablet, " a large and peculiar kind of cromlech, 
the incumbent stone of which, now broken nearly 
in the middle, measures 18 feet in length, and from 
seven to ten feet broad ; its thickness is about two 
feet ; its form more closely resembles an ellipsis, 
than any other determinate figure. The number of 
upright stones that originally supported this slab, 
appears to have been eleven ; but several of them 
are now fallen ; and the top stone has a considerable 
depression at one end : a portion of it has also sepa- 
rated, and the fallen mass fills up some part of the 
vacuity beneath. Other smaller stones are scatter- 
ed near the cromlech ; and on one side is a small 
mound or embankment of earth and stones : on the 
other the ground seems to have been hollowed into 
a somewhat circular form." 

DOWNTON.] Downton, 12 miles N.N.W. from 
Leominster, is the manor and seat of Richard Payne, 
Esq. a gentleman of some literary celebrity. From 
the house, the ground falls rapidly into a beautiful 
little valley, watered by the Teme, which flows in a 
wild and impetuous current over its rocky bed. 
" The opposite bank is finely clothed with luxuriant 
wood, rising 1 in various shapes to its very summit. 
The course of the stream is richly diversified ; its 
channel now contracts, and now grows wider, while 
the wild and solitary path which leads through the 
woods by its side, opens upon many beautiful and rich, 
scenes. In some parts, the stream, shut up be- 
tween high and narrow banks, foams along its 
rocky channel, with tumultuous rapidity ; ami near 
the point where it emerges into the more open val- 
ley overlooked by the mansion, a bridge has been 
thrown, along which the path is continued : in other 
parts, the hanks are less steep, and the prospects 
more extensive ; but in all the views are richly or- 
namented with pendant foliage. The river mean- 
ders through the ground to an extent of about three 
miles, its banks being fringed with wood, rising to 
a considerable height through a great part of that 
distance : indeed the landscapes are peculiarly rich ; 
the most eminent, perhaps, is that which includes a 
mill between one and two miles below the house, 
and, with its adjuncts, composes a scene of uncom- 
mon grandeur and interest." The house, itself^ 
from its towers and embattled walls, assumes the 
appearance of a castle, as it is generally called, 
though it was certainly not designed to imitate a 
Gothic fortress, but rather the military architecture 
of the Greeks and Romans. It is situated on aa 
elevated bank, commanding a lawn bounded by the 
Tcnie, and surrounded l>y an extensive amphithcatru 

o 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



of wood. The house is built with stone, and though 
consisting of several parts of dissimilar characters, 
each partis uniform in itself; tnul the whole from its 
general union with the contiguous scenery, appears 
to great advantage. The interior is fitted up with 
great taste and elegance ; and some of the apart- 
ments are decorated with select paintings. 

DYNMOUE HILL.] This is a considerable emi- 
nence, rising to the south-west of Hampton Court, 
and commanding some extensive prospects. The 
northern view is extremely rich ; on the opposite 
side, the descent commences with irregular decli- 
vities, and romantic breaks, occasioned by quarries : 
these form the foreground of a prospect composed 
of the venerable mansion at Burghope, Burghill 
(already mentioned) covered with wood, and a very 
great extent of Hat country, stretching to the south 
and south-west, where the view is terminated by 
Skerridor Scar, and the Black Mountains of Breck- 
nockshire. Here was formerly a preceptory that 
belonged to the knights of St. John of Jerusalem. 
The lands of this foundation became part of the es- 
tate of Earl Coningsby. 

EASTNOR.] This beautifully situated village lies 
about two miles S. E. by E. from Ledbury. The 
church contains several handsome marble monu- 
ment of the Cocks family. One of them, in me- 
mory of Joseph Cocks, Esq. who died in 1775, was 
executed by Stewart and Sheemaker. Another by 
the same artists is erected to the memory of Mrs. 
Mary Cocks, and displays a figure of Hope, with 
a rich urn, and a boy inverting a torch. A third, 
commemorates the name of John Cocks, Esq. nephew 
to the great Lord Somers : he died in 1771. On 
the south-east of the village is Castle Ditch, the 
seat of Charles Cocks, Baron Somers of Evesham. 
The mansion is situated on a fine, lawn, having a 
rivulet on each side; it is a small plain building of 
white stone, with a portico in front, and projecting 
semicircular wings. The grounds are disposed into 
walks winding through thick shrubberies; the park 
contains some large and flourishing oaks, and the 
surrounding eminences are covered with wood. 
Between one and two miles cast from Castle Ditch, 
in a glen of the Malvern Hills, stood Bransill cas- 
tle, now wholly demolished. From the appearance 
of the site, it must have been exceedingly strong. 

EATON.] About a mile S. E. from Leominster, 
is Eaton, formerly a seat of the Hackluyts. " The 
chief and ancientest of the Hackluyts (says Lcland) 
have been gentlemen in tymes out of memory ; they 
took their names of the forest of Cluid in Radnor- 
shire ; and they had a castle and habitation not far 
from Radnor." William Hackluyt was at the bat- 
tle of Agincourt, and afterwards " set up a house" 
in this township : this mansion is now in ruins, and 
the chapel belonging to it has been converted into 
a hop-kiln. In February, 1800, a female, named 
Margaret Mapps, died at Eaton, at the great age 
of 110. 

About half a mile from Lower Eaton, the resi- 



dence of the Rev. Mr. Philips, on the banks of th 
Wye, is Eaton Camp, a large ancient entrenchment, 
with a single ditch and rampart, in good preserva- 
tion. In the month of February, 1815, some peo- 
ple accidentally discovered that the bank of the 
brook, which runs on the east side of the camp, had 
fallen in, and a quantity of iron and copper, in a 
state of oxydation, attracted attention, which upon 
nearer inspection proved to be old warlike weapons, 
consisting of spears and javelin heads, battle-axes, 
and fragments of other instruments. They are sup- 
| posed to have been at first deposited in large ves- 
sels, as several heavy hoops of iron, from three to 
four feet in diameter, and the parts of rims of differ- 
ent sizes, like those of large pots or caldrons, were 
found ; also many massive rings of various dimen- 
sions, supposed to have been attached to their sides. 
On the first discovery, the people of the vicinity 
carried off great quantities of old copper to Here- 
ford, and disposed of it to the braziers. It is pro- 
bably presumed, that this copper was some part of 
defensive armour. A person residing near the spot 
also found a small copper box, containing what lie 
described as similar to sealing wax, but he unfortu- 
nately destroyed both the box and its contents. 
Many curiosities were also found; such as several 
ornaments of copper, a piece of flint hewn into the 
shape of an arrow head, a battle-axe very perfect, 
and several arrow heads, and a small quantity of a 
composition which is presumed to be the same as 
the contents of the box above mentioned, upon which 
time had not had the least effect. In appearance it 
much resembled red cornelian ; it was very com- 
bustible and if the smallest particle was set on fire, 
it continued burning until the whole was consumed, 
giving a very beautiful and clear flame an odour 
by no means unpleasant was also perceptible. 

ERDESLEY.] At Erdesley near Weobley, as at 
many other places in this county, is the site of a 
demolished castle, or domus defensabilis ; and be- 
tween two and three miles to the north-east, above 
Ahneley, was another building of the same kind. 

EYWOOD.] Eywood, about a mile to the west of 
Titley, is the principal seat of the Earl of Oxford, 
who possesses a considerable extent of landed pro- 
perty in the north-western part of this county. The 
grounds display a great diversity of scenery. 

FALEY COURT.] About two miles south from 
Capler Hill, stands Faley Court, a venerable man- 
sion of the time of Queen Elizabeth. It belonged 
to Sir John Kyrle, an ancestor of the Man of Ross : 

it is now <he seat of Money, Esq. a descendant 

by the female line from the same family. In this 
neighbourhood the Wye meanders in a very sin- 
gular manner, altering its course into completely 
opposite directions, within a very few miles. In- 
closed by one of these reaches of the river, below 
Fawley, is Ingeston house, an old and spacious 
brick mansion, long the resilience of the lloskyns 
family. 

GARNONS.] This place, the seat of J. G. Cotterel, 

Esq. 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



573 



Ksq. is finely situated on the soufh-western accli- 
vity of Bishopstone Hill, and commands various ex- 
tensive and rich prospects. The grounds contain 
some extensive and nourishing plantations. 

GOODRICH CASTLE.] At Goodrich, 4| miles S.W. 
By 8. from Ross, on a finely wooded promontory, 
round which the river flows in a semicircular direc- 
tion, stand the massive ruins of Goodrich Castle, 
for a long- period the baronial residence of the Tal- 
bots, Earls of Shrewsbury. By whom it was origi- 
nally founded is unknown ; though the near affinity 
of its name to that of ' Godricus Dux,' who occurs 
as a witness to the two charters granted by King 
Canute to the Abbey of Hulen, has given birth to a 
not improbable conjecture, that he was the person. 
The Keep is evidently of a date antecedent to the 
Conquest ; but the surrounding works are princi- 
pally Norman ; though various additions and alter- 
ations may be distinguished of the workmanship of 
different periods, even down to the time of Henry 
the Sixth. In its general form, this castle composes 
a parallelogram, with a round tower at each angle, 
and a square keep standing in the south-west part 
of the inclosed area. The common thickness of the 
exterior walls is somewhat more than seven ieet : in 
various places they are pierced with oilet holes. 
The length of the longest sides, including the pro- ; 
jections of the towers, is about 176 feet; that of the j 
south-west and north-east sides, about 152 feet. : 
The Keep stands somewhat in the same manner as 
those at Portchester, Pevensey, and Castleton, close 
to the outward wall of the castle, and, like them, ' 
had no window on the outside next the country. 
It had evidently three rooms, one above the other : 
all of them, however, were very small, being only - 
fourteen feet and a half square ; and the room on 
the first floor had no sort of communication with ! 
the dungeon beneath, which had not even a single 
loop-hole for light and air, but was connected by 
a very narrow passage to a still smaller dungeon, 
strongly secured, under the platform belonging to 
the steps of the entrance, and having a very small 
air-hole on the same side. The original windows 
are the most truly Saxon that can be. 

In tlie second apartment is a fire-hearth ; and in | 
an angle of the walla circular stair-case, leading to j 
the upper story. " To this stair-case is a most re- ' 
markable Saxon door way. The principal entrance j 
'was by a flight of steps on one side, distinct from the 
main building, ami ascending to a platform before j 
the door way leading to the second chamber. The : 
entrance to the dungeon, or lower apartment, was 
under a very remarkable sort of pointed arch, formed 
of quite flat sides, which seems, from the appear- 
ance of the wall around it, and from its peculiar ; 
style, to have been inserted many ages after the 
tower was built, and in the time of Kdward the 
Third. The body of the dungeon is an exact square, 
of twenty-nine feet. The very strongly fortified 
entrance to the custlc, commenced between two 
semicircular towers of unequal dimensions, n<*ar the 
Vol.. it. NO. 86. 



; east angle, and was continued under a dark vaulted 
passage to an extent of fifty feet. Immediately be- 
fore the entrance, and within the space inclosed by 
the fosse, was a very deep pit, hewn out of the solid 
rock, formerly crossed by a draw-bridge, which is 
now gone, but which appears to have exactly fitted, 
and to have closed, when drawn up, the whole front 
of the gateway between the towers. About eleven 
j feet within the passage, was a massy gale, the strong 
iron hinges of which still remain : this gate, and the 
draw-bridge, were defended on each side by loop- 
' holes: and over head by rows of machicolations in th 
; vaulting, for pouring down melted lead, &c. on the 
heads of assailants. Six feet and a half beyond this, 
was a portcullis ; and about seven feet further, a 
second portcullis : the space between these was 
again protected by loop-holes and machicolations. 
About two feet more inward was another strong 
gate; and five feet and a half beyond this, on the 
; right, a small door, leading to a long narrow gal- 
| lery, only three feet wide, formed in tlie thickness of 
the wall, and which was the means of access to tlu: 
loop-holes in the eastern tower, as well as to some 
; others that commanded the brow of the .steep p're- 
; eipice towards the north-east. These works ap- 
pear to have been thought sufficient for general de- 
. i'enee; but a resource was ingeniously contrived for 
greater security in case they had all been forced; 
for a little further on are massy stone projections in 
tlie wall on each side, like pilasters ; manifestly de- 
signed for inserting great beams of timber within 
them, like bars, from one Mde of the pnssasye, 
which was about nine feet ten inches wide, to tiie 
other, so as to form a strong barricado, with earth 
or stones between the rows of timber, which wouM 
in a short time, and with rapidity, form a strong 
massive wall. Beyond these the passage opened into 
the great inner court. The ruins of the chapel run 
parallel with tlie entrance on the left; the style of 
the broken ornaments shows this to huve been re- 
paired and adornod so late as tint reigns of Henry 
the Sixth and Seventh : in one jrart is a very re- 
markable niche ; and near it a smaller niche for 
holy water : on the opposite side is also another 
niche for the same purpose. Beneath the cliapei 
was a deep vault; and over it a chamber, with a 
fire-place, which still appears projecting from the 
wall. Adjoining the chapel, near the entrance, is 
a small octagonal watch towi*r, wliieli rises above, 
the other buildings, ami commands a fine view. 
The buildings between the chapel and the south or 
garrison tower, to the upper part of wliioli a pas- 
sage, or covered way, led along the top of the 
outer wall, are mostly in ruins : Jierc appear to 
have been the stables. Thn garrison tower adjoins 
thu entrance to the keep; Its foundation is a square 
of about thirty-six feet; l>ut the three outward an- 
gles diminish as they ascend, and form triangular 
buttresses, so that the upper part of the tower i 
circular: thu walls arc at least eight feet in thick- 
ness. The entrants to this tower, was so contrived, 
7 i that 



674 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



that there was access to it from every part of the 
walls; it contains three floors, anil in each of them 
is a fire-hearth ; the interior forms an irregular octa- 
gon, about twenty feet in diameter from the angles, 
and about seventeen from side to side. The wall 
that extended between the keep and the west or 
great tower, is in ruins : this tower, which is also 
prcatly dilapidated, appears of more modern con- 
struction than the former. In this appears to have 
been the great kitchen ; the fire-place is still dis- 
tinguishable ; here was a small door-way, or sally- 
port, communicating with a sort of outer ballium, 
which ran on the north-west side, and was inclosed 
by an outer wall. On this side also, and ranging 
between the west tower and north or Ladies' tower, 
Were the state apartments. The hall was a mag- 
nificent room of the time of Edward the First, sixty- 
five feet long, and twenty-eight feet broad: some 
years ago it contained a single benm of oak ' with- 
out knot or knarle,' sixty-six feet long, and nearly 
two feet square throughout its length. On the 
north-west side is the great fire-place ; and behind 
it, projecting into the outer ballium, a vast mass of 
solid stone work, or buttress, which, in its upper 
part, appears to have had some little apartment, or 
guard-chamber. The hall communicated towards 
the north with a kind of with-drawing or retiring 
room, about twenty-nine feet by seventeen and a 
half, in which appears to have been a window look- 
ing into the hall. From this second apartment, a 
passage led into what seems to have been the great 
state room, which was fifty-five feet and a half long, 
and twenty broad. At the upper end, or that to- 
wards the north, are two beautiful pointed arches, 
springing from a well-wrought octagon pillar in the 
middle of the apartment, and resting on corbels at 
the sides: here seems to have been two large win- 
dows. The architecture of this part of the build- 
ing is of the time of Henry the Fifth or Sixth. At 
the north angle of this room is an opening leading 
into the north or Ladies' tower, which is so situated 
on the brow of a high and steep precipice, as to be 
the most defensible part of the castle: from the 
apartment within, which is a neat octagon arch, 
about fifteen feet in diameter, is a most beautiful 
view over the adjacent country. Beyond the state 
roonij ui the north-east wall, is a square recess, 
and loop-hole, supposed to have been formed for 
the lodging and seat of the warden. The ruins of 
this castle are extremely grand ; the massive towers 
are finely mantled with ivy ; and even the great 
ditch is embellished with the luxuriant foliage of tall 
forest trees. Whoever ware its original founder, 
the earliest authenticated record concerning it at 
present known, is of the date of 1204, when it was 
given by King John to William Strigul, Earl Mar- 
shall, to hold by the service of two knights' fees : 
his son, Walter, Earl of Pembroke, died here in 
,the year 1246. It was afterwards conveyed to Wil- 
liam de Valentia, Earl of Pembroke, whose third 
son, Aymer de Valance, became his heir, and was 

6 



murdered in France in 13-28. From him it passed 
to the Talbots, by the marriage of Elizabeth Comyn, 
daughter of Joan, his second sister, with Sir Richard 
afterwards Lord Talbot, who procured a license 
from Edward the Third to have a prison here. This 
Richard was a renowned soldier and statesman, and 
is thought to have expended a considerable part of 
the ransoms obtained from prisoners taken by him in 
the French wars, on the reparation and improve- 
ment of Goodrich castle. His descendant, John 
Talbot, the groat Earl of Shrewsbury, who was 
killed at the battle of Castillon, in the year 1453, 
was first buried at Rouen, in Normandy ; and in the 
enumeration of his titles, on the monument there 
raised to his memory, he is styled, ' Lord of Gode- 
rich and Orchenfield.' His successors were equally 
distinguished for bravery, and were frequently em- 
ployed in offices of great trust : George, the sixth 
Earl, had the custody of Mary, Queen of Scots. 
About this time, the Earl procured license to " alien 
the castle of Goodrich, the manor of Urchenfield, 
Goodrich, Flauesford, and Eccleswall, and the hun- 
dred of Wormelow, with their appurtenances, &c. 
to Henry Cavendish and Richard Croke, and to the 
heirs of the said Henry." That these places were 
.really alienated, is improbable ; as Gilbert, seventh 
Earl of Shrewsbury, was in possession of this cas- 
tle and manor at the period of his death, in the four- 
teenth of James the First. Elizabeth, his second 
daughter and co-heiress, conveyed them in mar- 
riage to Henry de Grey, Earl of Kent, in whose 
family they continued till the year 1740, when, on 
the death of Henry, Duke of Kent, they were sold 
to the late Admiral Griffin, whose son, George 
Griffin, Esq. is now owner. In the civil wars, 
Goodrich castle was alternately possessed by both 
.parties. It was first seized by the Parliament, but 
afterwards fell into the possession of the royalists, 
who sustained a siege of nearly six weeks against 
Colonel Birch. On the 25th of June, 1640, the 
Parliament gave orders that the Countess of Kent 
should be informed, that there was a necessity for 
demolishing the castle, and that on the demolishing 
thereof, satisfaction should be made to her. On the 
1st of March following, they finally resolved that 
the castle should be totally disgarrisoned, and 
slighted : the breaches in the Ladies' tower, were 
said to have been chiefly occasioned by the batter- 
ing of the cannon during the siege. 

In a fertile vale, about a quarter of a mile from the 
castle, on the south, are the remains of Flanesford 
Priory, founded by Richard, Lord Talbot, in the 
year 1347, for black canons, regular of the order of 
St. Augustine. In one of the buildings, now used 
as a barn, and which seems to have been the refec- 
tory chape], are some neat windows in the pointed 
style. 

Goodrich church, at a little distance from the 
priory on the west, contains a curious ancient tomb, 
without either inscription or arms, but reported to 
have been raised in memory of some one of the pos- 
sessors 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



67* 



sessors of the castle. The? chalice used in adminis- 
Inring (he sacrament, at (Joodrich. has a singular 
connection with the events of the civil war. " The 
then vicar, the Rev. Thomas Swift,* was grand- 
father to Dean Swift, and was remarkably zealous 
in his endeavours to support the cause of royalty. 
This drew upon him the determined enmity of the 
adverse party : in March, 1046, he was ejected 
from his living: and in August his property was 
sequestered, and himself imprisoned. On his libe- 
ration, ho still continued privately to pursue the 
duties of his profession ; and travelling from house 
to house among his former parishioners, he cele- 
brated the eucharist from this cup, which he carried 
about with him for the purpose. He died in 1058 : 
the cup was afterwards transmitted to his grandson, 
Dean Swift, who, in 1 720, dedicated it to the ser- 
vice of Goodrich church for ever, as appears from 
an inscription engraven on the bottom of the 
chalice." 

Upwards of a mile eastward from Goodrich, are 
the iron works of Bishop's Wood Furnace, above 
which n dam has been formed by a small stream, 
that rises at a little distance, and whose waters, 
after supplying the business of the furnace, fall into 
the Wye below. Among the works are some power- 
ful engines for stamping the ancient scoriae, &c. to 
powder, which is here re-manufactured to consider- 
able advantage. Great quantities of iron ore, 
brought from Lancashire, are also smelted here. 

HAMPTON COURT.] Hampton Court, 5f miles 
S. S. E. from Leominster, is the principal seat of 
the Earls of Essex. It was built under the imme- 
diate auspices of Henry the Fourth, by his favourite, 
Sir Rowland Lenthall, yeoman of the robes. Ac- 
cording to Lelaud, " he being a gallant fellow, either 
a daughter, or very near kinswoman, of the King's 
fell in love with him, and in continuance was wed- 
ded unto him ; whereupon after, he fell into estima- 
tion, and had given to him a 1000/. by the year, for 
the maintenance of him and his wife, and their heirs, 
among which landes he had Ludlow for one parte. 
This Lenthall was victorious at the battle of Agin- 
court, and toke many prisoners there, by which 
prey he beganne the new buildings of Hampton 
Court, and brought from an hill a springe of water, 
and made a little pool within the top of his house." 
The lady here alluded to appears to have been a 
co-heiress of Richard Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel. 
The estate was for some time possessed by the 
Coningsbies, who purchased it of the Cornewalls, 
Barons of Burford. Frances, the daughter of 
Thomas Earl Coningsby, married Sir Charles Han- 
bury Williams, Knight of the Bath : their daughter 



married William Anne Holies Capet, 
1 of Essex, whose son George, the fifth 



* Lord Clarendon observes, that " the King received no re- 
lief that was more seasonable or acceptable," than a sum which 
this clergyman had collected by mortgaging his estate, and 
every other means in his power, and with which he repaired to 
Raglaml castle,, whither his Majesty had retired alter the bat- 
tie of Nasefoy ; where his distress was very great, and his re- 



Charlotte 
fourth Earl 

Earl of this family, is now possessor in right of 
his mother. The mansion is a large magnificent 
structure, situated on a spacious lawn, and protected 
on the north-east by an eminence covered witli luxu- 
riant foliage. About a quarter of a mile to thfe 
south-west flows the river Lug, which at some dis- 
tance below, is joined by a beautiful little stream, 
that rises in the hills about Locklcy Heath, and 
meanders through the park in a south-westerly 
direction. The buildings surround a quadrangular 
court; having a grand square entrance tower in tint 
centre of the north front ; and at each extremity, 
another and smaller tower, the most eastern of 
which unites with the chapel. The entrance tower 
is deeply embattled, and rnachicolated on both its 
faces. Much of this curious old mansion was de- 
stroyed by incongruous alterations, begun about the 
time of William the Third, and continued during 
the succeeding reigns. Various improvements have 
since taken place. The interior is commodious, and 
many of the apartments are fitted up with great 
taste. During the life of the late Lady Coningsby, 
Hampton Court was remarkable for much of the 
ancient furniture that constituted the magnificence 
of the nobility two centuries ago: amongst other 
things, in one of the rooms, called King Henry's, 
was a bed, the hangings of which were said to be 
those belonging to the bed the king slept on ; they 
were a very fine Scotch plaid. One of the apart- 
ments, furnished in a splendid manner, with crimson 
damask hangings, and bed and canopy of the same, 
yet remains precisely in the same state as when 
used by William the Third, who here visited Tho- 
mas, Baron Coniugsby, a nobleman particularly 
distinguished for his bravery at the battles of the 
Boyneand Aghrim in Ireland. In the library is au 
ebony casket, upon the lid of which are miniatures 
of King William and Lord Coningsby, copied with 
much taste from large pictures, by Lady Essex. 
In this box is the handkerchief applied by Lord 
Coningsby to the wound received by King William 
at the battle of the Boyne. Among the valuable 
paintings preserved here, are some pieces by C. 
Jansen, Holbein, Vandyck, Lely, Kneller, and Rey- 
nolds. One of the most famous among the old pic- 
tures, is said to be an " undoubted original" of 
Henry the Fourth. Depending from the neck is a 
chain and medallion, on which are depicted the 
arms of the Fitz-Alans, Earls of Arundel ; and be- 
neath is the following inscription. " Henry IV. 
King of England ; who laid the first stone of this 
house, and left this picture in it, when he gave it 



sources entirely cut off. The governor, with whom he was 
acquainted, asked his errand. ' I am come,' said he, ' to 
give his Majesty my coat.' As he took it off, the governor 
pleasantly replied, ' It is of little worth.'' Why then,' said 
Swift, ' take my waistcoat: and this being ripped, was found 
to contain 300 broad pieces of gold." 



to 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



to Lental, who sold it to Cornwall of Burford, who 
sold it to the ancestors of the Lord Coningesby, in 
the reign of Henry VI." Here also is to be seen a 
gun, which the late Lord Coningsby caused to be 
made of sword blades, taken from the Irish rebels 
at the battle of the Boyne, on the barrel of which is 
the following inscription, in gold letters : 

" I, in ihe tower became a gun 
In seventeen hundred twenty-one ; 
Earl Coning-by, a prisoner there 
Bespoke and took me to his care ; 
And fit I am for loyal lords, 
Made of I he blades of rebels swords. 
Traitors, beware, when I'm enlarg'd, 
When he or I shall be discharg'd. 
For this, my first and true report, 
Pray use me well at Hampton Court." 

The chapel retains traces of its original appear- 
ance : the roof is of timber work, displaying many 
carved ornaments peculiar to the pointed style, and 
has various whimsical figures dispersed over it. 
Several of the windows contain painted glass in 
various stages of decay : the arms of Lonthall and 
others are yet perfect. 

The circumjacent scenery is in a high degree pic- 
turesque and beautiful. The park, which is be- 
tween seven and eight miles in circumference, con- 
tains some fine timber, and a great number of deer. 
During the floods which frequently occur here, a 
fine cascade is formed by the rushing of the waters 
over a mas* of broken rock. Near the house is a 
good shrubbery, intersected by a pleasant walk. 
More distant is a neat residence for the steward ; 
and at the entrance of the park is a very handsome 
rustic lodge. 

HAHDWICKE.] This is a pleasant little village, 
on the borders of the Golden Vale } 10{ miles S.S.W. 
from Kington. 

HAREWOOD.] Harewood, 5| miles W. by W. 
from Ross, is an ancient residence of the Hoskyns 
family. The mansion is plain, but has been much 
improved, and partly rebuilt by Sir Hungerford 
Hoskyns, Bart. The park contains some fine tim- 
ber. In this neighbourhood, some authors have 
placed the scene of the tragical death of Earl Ethel- 
wold, assassinated by King Edgar. 

HAROLD EWIAS.] About 12?- miles S. W. from 
Hereford, is the village of Ewias Harold, where 
was formerly an ancient castle, founded previously 
to the Conquest. Leland observes, " the fame 
goeth that Kyngc Harold had a bustard namyed 
Harold, and of this Harold part of Ewis was named 
Ewis Harold. The fame is, that the castell of 
Map-Herald was buiidcd of Harold nforn he wns 
kynge; and when he overcam the Walsche men, 
Harold gave this castle to his bastard." Here was 
also a priory or cell of Mack monks, " translatyd 
from Dulesse (Dewlas) village, a myle and upper 
on the broke. Dules village longed to Harold. 
Kil'tus Haraldi fonndyd this at Dnlcs : Robertas 



Trcgoz translated it from Dules to Mapheralt : it 
was a cell to Gloucester :" to which place the 
monks were finally removed in the year 1338, and 
their possessions united to those of St. Peter's Ab- 
bey, their church having been given to this abbey 
early in the 12th century. 

HEREFORD.] The ancient city of Hereford lies 
W.N.W. from London, distant 135 miles. The 
date of its origin is unknown ; but it must have 
been in existence previously to A. D. 676 ; for, 
Peada, or Peda, King of Mercia, having embraced 
the Christian religion, a synod was held here, in 
which it was decreed, that a new see should be 
formed in Mercia ; and, in consequence, Putta was 
chosen as the first Bishop of Hereford. This cir- 
cumstance proves, that Hereford must then have 
been a place of some importance ; and the proba- 
bility is, that it originated soon after the departure 
of the Romans, when Magna Castra, or Kenches- 
ter, the nearest Roman station, was deserted. The 
etymology of its name, which we have noticed, in 
ad verting to that of the county, is not sufficiently 
established to decide this point. Having fixed on 
Hereford as the seat of a bishop, it became a capital 
of the Mercian kingdom, and had a magnificent 
church, as early as the reign of Offa, and even be- 
fore the present cathedral was founded by that so- 
vereign in expiation of the murder of Ethelbert, 
King of the East Angles. The building of the 
latter fabric, and the various gifts made by the mul- 
titudes that came to visit the tomb of Ethelbert, 
greatly increased the celebrity of the place. Under 
the West Saxon Kings, its progress was equally 
flourishing ; and, in or about the time of Athelstan, 
the city was inclosed by walls, to secure it on those 
sides where it was not defended by the Wye. " The 
walls," observes Dnncorube, " which now imper- 
fectly remain, although improved und strengthened 
at various periods, probably stand on the original 
foundations. They are. 1800 yards in extent, and 
inclose the city on the east, north, and west sides : 
towards the south, it has the natural defence of the 
Wye ; and also 50 yards of wall from the western 
angle towards the bridge : the whole of this side is 
550 yards. The gates were six in number, viz. 
Wye Bridge gate, which stood at the south end of 
the bridge ; Friar's gate, which was situated on the 
south-west; Eigne gate, on the west ; Wide Marsh 
gate, on the north ; Bishop's gate, on the north- 
east ; and St. Andrew's, since called St. Owen's, 
on the south-east. Fifteen embattled towers pro- 
jected from the walls, having embrasures in the 
shape of crosses, in the centre and sides, for obser- 
vation, and the discharge of the arrows. The dis- 
tances between these towers, varied from 75 to 125 
yards : the height of the wall, measuring on the 
outside, was lt feet; that of the towers, 31. Thus 
the whole circumference of the city, inclosed by the 
walls and river, was '2350 yards." 

It was at Hereford, that, in the year 039, Athel- 
stan 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



itan made a treaty with the Britons ; compelling 
tiicm to agree to the payment of an annual tribute 
of 20/. in gold, 300/. in silver, and -280 head of cat- 
tie, besides hawks and hounds, in lieu of 66 pounds 
of silver, which they were before bound to pay by the 
laws of Howel Dda. About the middle of the llth 
century, the garrison of Hereford successfullyoppos- 
ed the Welsh, who had made an irruption into the 
Marches ; but were more unfortunate three years 
afterwards, in 1055, when a more formidable army 
entered the county, under the command of Gryffyth, 
a sovereign of Wales, and Algar, Earl of Chester, 
who had been disgraced and banished fr"n the 
court of Edward the Confessor. Earl Ranulph, or 
Ralph, the Governor of Hereford, was induced to 
quit the city, and give battle to the Welsh, within 
the distance of two miles ; but his forces were de- 
feated, and driven back towards Hereford ; and the 
two armies entering the city together, the whole be- 
came a scene of pillage and slaughter. The bishop 
himself, according to some accounts, with seven ca- 



* The castle, observes Duncombe, " occupied a part of 
the south and east sides of the city, having the river \V ve, on 
the south, and being defended by a large and deep moat on 
the north and east sides, to the angle of which the wall of the 
city extended. This city was well calculated for the defence 
of the cathedral, which nearly adjoined it on the west, and 
probably that circumstance occasioned a preference to this par- 
ticular spot, which does not seem well adapted to the general 
defence of the town. The castle comprised two wards ; the 
keep was in the smaller, towards the west, having a strong tower 
on the top, and a dungeon underneath. Leland describes the 
keep to have been " high and very strong, having in the outer 
wall ten semicircular towers, and one great tower within.' Dr. 
Stukeley termed it, ' a very lofty artificial keep, walled for- 
merly at top, and having a wall in it faced with good stone.' 
In the eastern ward, were the gate-house, a chapel dedicated to 
St. Cuthbert, part whereof, says Leland, is ' opere circular! ;' 
a mill, and two dwelling-houses, perhaps intended originally 
for the accommodation of the governor and his attendants. 
' There is a fayre and plentiful spring of water,' continues Le- 
land, ' within the castle ; and that, and the piece of the brooke 
coming out of the ditch, did drive a mill within the castle.' In 
every direction, it must have been capable of very consider- 
able defence against the modes of attack then known : on the 
south, the ground along the eastern ward fell almost perpendi- 
cularly seven yards to the river: on the east, the works stood 
on earth thrown up five yards, with a deep and broad moat in 
front, which were all continued on the north, until they reach- 
ed the wall which inclosed the keep. The dimensions of the 
greater or eastern ward, measuring on the site of the walls, were 
nearly as follow: on the south, 173 yards; on the west, 100; 
on the north, 175 ; and on the east, 196. The smaller, or 
western ward, was nearly 100 yards in extent, on the south anil 
east sides : towards the north and west, were three sides, each 
measuring 65 yards. 'There came also an arnie of a brooke 
that runneth through a great piece of the town dike, by an 
arche made in the town wall into the castle dike, and so com- 
passing half the castle, (that is the east and north sides of the 
larger court,) went into Wye ; so that with the principal! arme 
of this brooke, and with the arme of it going through the castle 
dike, and with the main stream of Wye river, the whole castle 
was environed ; but now the arme of the brooke comeih not 
through the castle, vet it might soon be returned thither. The 
second ward, where the dungeon is, was also environed with 
water ; for a piece of the water, that came through the dike, 
was turned that way.' The entrance was on the north side of 

VOL. ii. HO. 86. 



nons, ami many other persons, were slain within the 
church, which was afterwards pillaged and burnt. 
The flames from the cathedral communicated to the 
city, the greatest part of which was reduced to 
ashes. King Edward, who was then at Gloucester, 
immediately collected an army to revenge these ex- 
cesses ; and Harold, son of Earl Godwin, to whose 
command it was intrusted, advanced into Wales, 
and obliged the late successful invaders to sue* for 
peace. Soon afterwards, Harold returned to Here- 
ford, add fortified it, according to Floriacensis, with 
a ' broad and high rampire.' Other authors also 
ascribe the re-building of its walls and fortifications 
to Harold, who is likewise said to have erected a 
castle. Part of the materials used in the works 
erected by Harold, are conjectured to have been 
brought from the ruins of the Roman station at 
Kenchester.* The Domesday Book contains many 
interesting particulars relative to the customs and 
tenures prevalent in this city and its suburbs. f In- 
deed, it clearly shews the consequence which Here- 
ford, 



the eastern ward, over a great bridge of stone arches, with a 
drawbridge in the middle. ' The castle standeth on the left 
sideof Wye river, and a little beneath the bridge, and is strongly 
ditched ubi non defenditur flumine ; the walles of it be high 
and stronge, and full of great towers: it hath been one of the 
largest, fayrest, and strongest castles in England.' By the side 
of the ditch arose a spring, which superstition consecrated 
to St. Ethelbert : this is situated on Ihe north sidr of the 
western ward, and retains a degree of reputation to the present 
day." 

f Hereford was then governed by an officer, or bailiff, (prat- 
positus,) appointed by the crown, whose consent it was neces- 
sary to obtain, before any inhabitant could leave the city : " he 
might then sell his house to any other person who would per- 
form the usual service ; but one-third part of the price given 
was paid to the King's officer. If any inhabitant was unable, 
through poverty, to discharge the accustomed dues to the crown, 
his house became forfeited ; and the praepositus was to provide 
another tenant, and take care that the clues were collected. 
The owner of an entire dwelling-house within the walls, paid 
sevenpence farthing annually, besides fourpence towards pro- 
viding war horses; he was also obliged to mow grass in the 
King's manor of Marden, ii> ilie month of August ; and to at- 
tend one other day, when ordered by the sheriff, to collect hay 
together. He who kept a horse, attended the sheriff three 
times in the year to the htmdred courts, and to that of Wonne- 
low. When the King hunted in Haywood forest, every house 
was to furnish one man to assist in taking the game. Other 
inhabitants not possessing entire dwelling-houses, provided door- 
keepers for the hall, whenever the King attended in person. 
On the deatli of any one who had served with a war horse, the 
King was entitled to his horse and arms; where no horse was kept, 
ten shillings were paid to the Kini! ; or, in default, possession 
was taken of his house and lands; if any one died without hav- 
ing disposed of his effects, the whole became the property of 
the crown. These customs prevailed 'within the walls : those 
in the suburbs were similar, except that in the latter, the owner 
of a house paid only threepence farthing. Other regulation* 
were common to both ; and wiien the wife of any inhabitant 
brewed, tenpence was paid by ancient custom. There were 
six smiths, ami each of them paid one penny for his forge, and 
furnished 120 ferra from the King's iron, for which each was 
paid threepence ; nor were they subject to any other service 
whatever. There were also seven monryers, one of whom be- 
longed to the bishop. When a coiirtgc took place, every mo- 
neyer paid eighteen shillings for the liberty of procuring bul- 
7 6 lio" 



678 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



ford had attained ; though its inhabitants are, in the 
same record, stated to have been only 103, in the 
time of Edward the Confessor. This enumeration, 
however, must have been made subsequently to the 
storming of the town by Algar and Cryffyth ; as 
the number of houses held under the bishop, are 
also stated in the Survey, to have been only 60, 
though his predecessor had 98. In the reign of 
Henry the First, Walter, Constable of England, 
held in his custody for a time the castles of Glou- 
cester and Hereford : but King Stephen afterwards 
granted to Robert de Bellamonte, Earl of Leicester, 
on creating him Earl of Hereford, " the burgh of 
Hereford, with the castle, and the whole county of 
Hereford," with the exception of certain lands be- 
longing to the church and others Soon afterwards, 
the castle was seized by William Talbot,. a partizan 
of the Empress Maud, who advanced Milo, son of 
Walter, the Constable, before-mentioned, to the 
Earldom of Hereford ; granting, at the same time, 
to him, and to his heirs, the castle and moat of 
Hereford, with other donations. Whilst the castle 
was in the possession of Talbot, it successfully with- 
stood a siege by the royal forces ; but, three years 
afterwards, in 1141, the King invested it, in person, 
with a large army, and, after some resistance, it was 
surrendered to him by Earl Milo, who was divested 
of his honours, but his life was spared. In the 
reign of Henry the Second, Roger, son and heir of 
Milo, was restored to his father's earldom ; and, at 
the same time, was granted to him, " the mote of 
Hereford, with the whole castel, and the third penny 
of the pleas of the whole county of Hereford." Ro- 
ger, however, was afterwards indnced, at the insti- 
gation of Hugh de Mortimer, of Wigmore, to for- 
tify the castle of Hereford against the King ; but, 
both the insurgents were soon reduced by that mo- 
narch, who is said to hare detained the earldom of 
Hereford in his own hands during some time after- 
wards. When the confederated barons, with the 
Earl of Leicester at their head, appeared in arms 
against Henry the Third, one of the first acts of 
open hostility was committed at Hereford, where 
Peter de Aqua Blanca, the bishop, was arrested, 
and imprisoned, and afterwards expelled the king- 
dom, ou account of his being a foreigner, and for 



lion ; and on their return with it, each paid twenty shillings 
<laily to the King during one month ; and the bishop's moneyer 
paid the same to the bishop. When the King came to Here- 
ford, the moncyers coined as much as lie ordered ; but the 
King furnished the silver to make it ; each of the moneyers 
enjoyed the privilege of sac and soke, by which they were 
exempted from customary payments. On the death ot either 
of the King's moneyers, twenty shillings were paid to the crown 
as a relief ; but it he died without having disposed of his effects, 
the King, as in other cases, took possession of the whole. If 
the sheriff went into Wales, the moneyers attended him, and 
every one of them refusing to go, after a summons to that 
effect, paid a fine of forty shillings to the King. Earl Harold 
liacl 27 burgesses under him at Hereford, and these were subject 
Jo the same customs as the others. The bailiff, or chief offifrcr, 
paid annually tvreirc puunds to the King, ami six to Car! Ha- 



his known attachment to the see of Rome. He re- 
turned ; but he was once more seized in his cathe- 
dral, and his wealth was distributed in his own pre- 
sence to the soldiers. Mortimer, who had been no- 
minated Captain-General of all the royal forces in 
these parts, after being discomfited by Llewellyn, 
Prince of Wales, retired to the castle of Hereford, 
which was soon afterwards besieged by the Earl of 
Leicester, and the forces of the Welsh Prince, 
whose attacks were so powerful, that the garrison, 
after some time, abandoned it during the night, 
leaving the city at the complete disposal of the 
besiegers, who partly destroyed it by fire. The 
unconciliating behaviour of the Earl of Leicester, 
who, after the battle of Lewes, had usurped all the 
authority of the state, and kept the King, and his 
so, Prince Edward, so completely under the di- 
rection of his own adherents-, that they were really 
prisoners, though indulged with the semblance of 
liberty, occasioned a powerful confederacy to be 
formed against him by the King's friends, with the 
Earl of Gloucester, and Roger Mortimer, at their 
head. Gloucester had previously retired from Par- 
liament to his estates in Wales ; and Leicester, who 
knew his influence, followed him to Hereford, with 
an army ; and that he might add authority to his 
cause, carried both the King and the Prince along 
with him. This, however, proved the source of all 
his future calamities ; for Gloucester, by means of 
his emissaries, concerted, with young Edward, the 
manner of that Prince's escape, which was soon 
afterwards effected. His escape so invigorated the 
hopes of the royalists, that they immediately formed 
an army, which Leicester was wholly unable to 
withstand ; and that ambitious Earl was shortly 
after killed in the decisive battle of Evesham. 

Subsequently to the death of Llewellyn, and the 
subjugation of Wales, by Edward the First, an 
attempt was made by some of the chieftains of that 
principality, to regain independence ; but the en- 
deavour was unsucessful ; and Mael Gwyn Vy- 
chan, and two of his associates, were first impri- 
soned, and afterwards hanged in this city ; Vychan 
being dragged to execution at the tails of horses. 
In the reign of this monarch, the castle underwent 
various and essential repairs : in the next reign, 



rold ; the above customs being common to the tenants of each. 
The King also received these forfeitures, or penalties, in case 
of particular offences ; for each of which 100 shillings were paid 
to the King, whether the offender was his tenant or not. After 
the Conquest, King William heldHereford in hisowM demesne, 
and the English inhabitants remained subject (otheabove stated 
customs ; but the French inhabitants were exempt from all for- 
feitures, except the three noticed above, on the payment of 
twelvepence annually. The whole town thus paid to the Con- 
cjueror, sixty pounds in silver coin, which, together with the 
emoluments accruing from eighteen manors, which were ac- 
counted for in Hereford, amounted to 3351. 18s. besides the 
mulcts, and other profits, arising from the hundred and countv 
courts." Hereford continued subject to these regulations, far 
some time after the Conquest. 

however, 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



however, it began to be neglected ; and from that 
period was suffered to decay. 

The great council, which deposed Edward the 
Second, was assembled in this city : and here that 
weak monarch's equally unfortunate favourite, the 
younger Spenser, was executed on a gallows, 50 
feet high. Four days afterwards, A. D. 1326, Sir 
Simon de Reding, John, Earl of Aruudel, John 
Daniel, and Thomas de Michaeldure, his chief 
friends, were also put to death in this city. This 
is the last event of historical importance, recorded 
in the annals of Hereford, till the time of Charles 
the First ; except, perhaps, the execution of Owen 
Tudor, husband of Catherine of France, with nine 
other chieftains of rank, who were made prisoners 
at the battle of Mortimer's Cross. 

When hostilities commenced between Charles and 
his Parliament, Hereford is described by Lord Cla- 
rendon, as " a town very well affected, and reason- 
ably well fortified, having a strong stone wall 
about it, and some cannon ; and there being in it, 
some soldiers of good reputation, many gentlemen 
of honour and quality, and 3 or 400 soldiers, be- 
sides the inhabitants well armed." Notwithstand- 
ing these circumstances, Sir William Waller ap- 
pearing suddenly before it, " perswaded them fairly 
to give up the town, and yield themselves prisoners 
on quarter, without the loss of one man on either 
side." Some accusations were afterwards made 
against Sir Richard Cave, who had acted as com- 
mander-in-chief of the forces at Hereford, and was 
charged with " dishonourably giving up the city;" 
but the confusion of the times prevented the en- 
quiries being regularly pursued. The Parliament- 
ary army quitted Hereford shortly after its surren- 
der, and it was immediately re-occupied by a strong 
garrison of royalists, under the command of Barna- 
bas Scudarnore, Esq. Two years afterwards, in 
1645, it was besieged by the Scotch auxiliaries, 
under the Earl of Leven, who commenced his ope- 
rations on the 3lst of July ; but, after an ineffectual 
struggle of upwards of a month's continuance, and 
just as the Earl had completed his preparations for 
storming the city, he was compelled to retreat by 
the approach of the King, with a superior force, 
from Worcester. Though successful in this enter- 
prise, the cause of Charles soon became hopeless. 
Hereford was taken by a detachment of Parliament- 
ary troops, under the command of Colonel Birch, 
Colonel Morgan, and Captain Silas Taylor, who 
are recorded to have obtained possession by the 
following stratagem. " Letters from Col. Birch," 
says Whitelock, "informed the particulars of the 
taking of Hereford : that he hired six men, and 
put them in the form of labourers, and a constable 
with them, with a warrant to bring these men to 

* To elucidate this statement, it may be necessary to remark, 
that the country people had been summoned by the Governor 
of Hereford, to repair to tlic city, for the purpose of assisting in 
strengthening the walls and fortifications, which bad been greatly 



work in the towi ; that In the night, he lodged 
these men within three quarters musquet-shot of 
the town, and 150 firelocks near them; and him- 
self, with the foot, and Colonel Morgan, with tho 
horse, came up in the night after them, and cut off 
; all intelligence from coming to the town, so that 
they were never discovered ; that one night they 
came too short ; but the next night, with careful 
spies and scouts, they carried on their business ; and 
in the morning, upon letting down the drawbridge, 
the six countrymen, and the constable, went with 
their pick-axes and spades to the bridges ; but the 
guard beginning to examine them, they killed three 
of the guard, and kept the rest in play, till the fire- 
locks came up to them, and then made it good tilt 
the main body came up, who entered the town 
with small loss, and became masters of it."* The 
bravery which the inhabitants of Hereford had dis- 
played in resisting the Scotch, was rewarded after 
the Restoration, by a new charter, and an augmen- 
tation of arms, with the motto, INVICT* FIDELITA- 
TIS PREMIUM. 

Hereford cathedral, though deprived of much of 
its venerable appearance, by the fall of the west 
front, in 1786, is still pre-eminently conspicuous. 
This structure, as already mentioned, owes itts ori- 
gin to the murder of Ethelbert, King of the East 
Angles, by the Mercian King, Offa, whose many 
valuable donations to the church which previously 
occupied the same site, and had been dedicated to 
St. Mary, has occasioned him to be sometimes con- 
sidered as the founder of the new cathedral, in the 
construction of which those gifts were applied, 
erected by Milfrid, a viceroy, or provincial gover- 
nor, under Egbert, about the year 825. 

Ethelbert was soon regarded as a saint, and 
many miraculous events were affirmed to have oc- 
curred at the place of his interment. Milfrid, the 
Viceroy of Mercia, was induced to inquire into tho 
truth of these reputed miracles, and the result of 
the investigation proved so satisfactory to him, that 
he determined to erect a new church of stone on 
the site of the former, and in honour of St. Ethel- 
bert. The ample grants made by Milfrid himself, 
were augmented by the revenues arising from the 
gifts of Offa, and still further increased by the nu- 
merous offerings made by the pilgrims who flocked 
in multitudes to the shrine of the murdered King ; 
so that the cathedral was soon completed : but no 
description of its then state is supposed to exist. 
Within less than 200 years, however, it appears to 
have wholly fallen vo decay ; and was rebuilt by the 
munificence of Bishop Athelstan, or Etholstnn, who 
had been appointed to this sec, in 1012, and presid- 
ed till the time of his decease, in 10-55. In that 
same year, the cathedral itself was destroyed by fire, 



damaged during the siege, by the Scotch army ; and that sonie 
of the warrants issued on this occasion, having beiMi micro pu>d, 
gave origin to the stratagem by which the cily was surpri-.e.l. 

daring 



. r >80 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



during the hostile incursion of the Welsh, under 
Gryftyth, ami the Earl of Chester : it continued in 
ruins till about the year J07'2, when Robert cle Lo- 
sing, or Lozinga, was made Bishop of Hereford, by 
William the Conqueror, and soon afterwards com- 
menced a new structure on the model of the church 
of Aken, now Aix-la-Chapelle, in Germany. Lo- 
zinga. died in June, 1095, leaving the cathedral un- 
finished ; but his design was afterwards completed 
by Bishop Ilayndm, Chancellor to the Queen of 
Henry the First, who was invested by the King, 
with the ring and crosier, about the year 1096, 
though he was not regularly consecrated till 1 107. 
lie held the see till his death, in October, 1115. 
The central tower did not accord with the plan pur- 
sued by these bishops, but was built about a cen- 
tury after the decease of the latter, by the Bishop 
Engidius de Braos, or Bruce, 1 who possessed the 
nee from the year 1-200 to 1216 : in allusion to this 
event, the model of a tower is displayed in the left 
hand of his effigies, which lies upon his monument 
in the cathedral. The tower over the centre of the 
ancient west front, appears to have been the next 
addition ; and from the style of its architecture, and 
the character of its ornaments, may be referred to 
the reign of Edward the Second, or beginning of that 
of Edward the Third : about which period also, 
some other alterations were probably made in thu 
interior of the cathedral. 'Further alterations were 
made at subsequent periods : the great west win- 
dow in the above front, was made under the direc- 
tion of William Lochard, a canon in this church, 
who died in September, 115S ; and a beautiful 
north porch was erected by Bishop Booth, between 
the years 1510 and 1535. The choir was fitted up 
and decorated by Dean Tyler, about the year 17-20 ; 
but the last alterations of any considerable import- 
ance, are of very recent date, and have been effected 
since the year 1786, when the tower over the west 
front gave way, and fell to the ground, destroying 
all the parts immediately beneath it, with the ad- 
joining parts of the nave. The west end has since 
been rebuilt under the direction of Mr. Wyatt, and 
the whole cathedral been repaired. 

The general plan of the cathedral is that of a 
cross, with a lesser transept towards the east, and a 
chapel, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, beyond it. 
From the intersection of the nave and transept, 
rises a square stone tower, which had formerly a 
spire of timber upon it, cased with lead, and rising 
Q'2 feet above the battlements ; but this was pulled 
down during the late repairs, to relieve the arches 
of the tower from so much of the superincumbent 
weight. The greater transept is not uniform, its 
north end being more spacious than the south ; yet 
an additional building, now used as the chapter- 
house, but originally employed as the treasury, 
gives its appearance an air of symmetry. The ca- 
thedral destroyed by Gryffth and Algar, is sup- 
posed to have extended beyond the lines of the 
present building-, and particularly towards the 



south-east, where, "near the clbisters of the col- 
lege," Silas Taylor, the antiquary, discovered, 
about the year 1050, "such stupendous founda- 
tions, such capitals, and pedestals, such well- 
wrought bases for arches, and such rare engrav- 
ings, and mouldings of friezes," as left little doubt 
in his mind, but that they formed parts of the 
church erected by Athelstan. The exterior parts 
of the cathedral are very dissimilar in appearance, 
and particularly since the construction of the new 
west front, the architecture of which is extremely 
incongruous. The fall of the western tower was 
preceded by several intimations of its approaching 
fate, and some attempts were made to prevent it ; 
but the decay had become too general to admit of 
this being effected. The arches entirely gave way 
on the evening of Easter-Monday, 1786, and the 
whole mass instantaneously became a heap of 
ruins. 

The expense of rebuilding this portion of the ca- 
thedral, amounted to nearly lS,OOOf. and about 
2000/. more was appropriated to the general repair 
of the central tower, and other parts of the fabric : 
of these sums, 7000/. were subscribed by the clergy 
and laity, and the remaining 13,000/. charged on 
the estates of the church. The incongruity of the 
style of the new work was not the only detriment 
which the cathedral suffered through the fall of the 
tower : oven the foundations of the west front were 
removed more inward, and the length of the nave 
was in consequence considerably diminished. The 
exterior of the nave, on the north side, presents 
much of its original character, though the tops of 
the buttresses, clerestory windows, parapets, &c. 
are modern : the principal windows correspond with 
those of the south side. The porch, which forma 
the grand entrance on this front, and was built by 
Bishop Booth, about the commencement of the 1 Oth 
century, is constructed with four clusters of small 
pillars, supporting as many pointed arches, three of 
which are open to the church-yard, and the fourth 
leads into the cathedral. This porch projects be- 
fore the more ancient porch of the cathedral, which 
is also vaulted with stone, and has ribs which di- 
verge in three directions from each corner ; those 
on the sides form the arch of their respective walls ; 
and those in the middle meet in a centre orb, adorn- 
ed with foliage : similar ribs also meet the orb at 
right angles from the opposite sides. In the east 
wall is a niche, 18 inches high, under a trefoil arch, 
adorned with crockets. At the south-east angle of 
the ancient porch, is a small circular tower, with a 
winding stair-case ; this reaching above the para- 
pet, terminates in pediments, ornamented with 
crockets on the sides, and the heads of animals on 
the top. The north end of the great transept is. 
plain, but the summit is embattled, and its sides 
are strengthened by massive buttresses. On the 
east and west sides, are two very lofty and narrovr 
windows, of three lights, under sharp-pointed arches, 
with small circular columns and mouldings ; abov& 

art 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



arc corbels ; and still higher, on the parapet towards 
the wost, is sculptured a range of trefoil arches ; 
oil the east side, are also two of the ancient 
Norman windows, with arches of a circular form ; 
together with another small and circular tower, 
formed in the angle, and reaching ;ibove the roof of 
the transept. Between this and the lesser transept, 
is a low chapel, built by Bishop Stanbury, about 
the middle of the 15th century, and having two 
windows under obtuse arches. The arches of the 
windows on the north mid east sides of the smaller 
transept, are also of the obtuse form ; and on the 
northern summit of this transept is a low ami plain 
cross : the buttresses between the windows are very 
shelving and prominent. On the north side of the 
chapel, dedicated to our Lady, but now used as the 
library, " are six windows, of the lancet form, sup- 
ported by small circular pillars, similar to those in 
use at the beginning of the 13th century ; and not 
uncommon in the reign of Edward the First. Be- 
tween these are circles excavated in the wall, hav- 
ing in the centres human faces, and other devices ; 
above is a series of intersecting arches and columns, 
the capitals of which are adorned with foliage : a 
plain parapet surmounts the whole. A porch, vault- 
ed and groined with stone, projects on this side, and 
leads to the vaults under the chapel : the outer arch 
is pointed, with a plain round moulding over it ; the 
inner arch is also pointed, but has the zig-zag orna- 
ment : the colours arc plain and circular, and the 
capitals have some foliage on them. The east end 
of this chapel has five lancet windows ; those on 
the sides gradually declining in height from that in 
the centre : between each, on the sides, are two 
niches under trefoil arches ; above are sculptured 
lozenges, and other ornaments, of an oblong form : 
still higher is a series of pointed trefoil arches, with 
battlements, above, and pinnacles at the angles. 
The windows on the south side are also of the lan- 
cet form, but are divided into two lights by a single 
mullion : above them is sculptured a range or series 
of Saxon arches and pillars, intersecting each other : 
still higher is a second series of similar arches ; 
these are without columns, and form what is called, 
the corbel table. A small chapel, built by Bishop 
Audley, at the latter end of the 15th century, pro- 
jects on this side, and forms three parts of a hex- 
agon ; each part contains two windows under the 
flat or obtuse arch, introduced about that period : 
the upper windows are divided into six compart- 
ments, by two raullions and a transom, much or- 
mented ; the head is also ramified into many fanciful 
divisions : the lower windows are smaller, and of 
more simple construction. The parapet above is 
embattled, and has a row of small clustered pillars, 
sculptured immediately under it, and supporting 
'trefoil arches. The south end of the smaller tran- 
sept has two large windows, each divided by mul- 
lions into four principal lights, with cinquefoil arches ; 
the spaces above terminate in a trefoil in the centre, 
and another on each side : the east windows consist 
each of four lights under trefoil arches : on the sura- 
VOL. n. NO. 87. 



mit, towards the south, is a small stone cross. Tlit 
south end of the great transept has " one large win- 
dow under an obtuse arch ; and a second, in a cir- 
cular form above it, which includes a trefoil. Tin 4 
former is divided into six long and narrow lights, 
under cinqucfoil arches ; and the head is similarly 
divided into twelve parts, under trefoil arches : the 
courses of stone about it plainly demonstrate that 
this form is an alteration from the original window, 
and the same is observable in a more pointed win- 
dow towards the west. This side has also a smaller 
window under an obtuse arch, containing three 
principal lights, snb-divMed by transoms, and each 
light is terminated by a cin<|uefoil arch : tho ancient 
form of this modernised window is probably to be 
collected from the Saxon arch, and zig-zag orna- 
ments, of one in the same wall, the use of which 
has been superseded by that described ; but above 
it is still to be seen a corresponding range of Saxon 
arches and columns." The principal windows on 
the south side of the nave, are seven in number, 
with strong projecting buttresses between them. 

The great or central tower has lost much of its 
primitive character from modern reparations. The 
interior of the cathedral is still very interesting ; 
though its former venerable appearance has been 
greatly destroyed by recent alterations, and by the 
removal of various sepulchral memorials, painted 
glass, &c. The north end of the groat transept, 
called St. Catherine's aisle, is now used as the pa- 
rochial church of St. John Baptist. The nave is 
terminated by a plain screen, through which is the 
entrance to the choir, under a pointed arch : abore 
is a large and well- toned organ, over which a noble 
circular arch extends, and supports the west side of 
the tower. The choir is lofty, and well-propor- 
tioned ; it contains 50 stalls, with ornamental cano- 
pies in the pointed style : these, though composed 
of wood, arc- painted of a stone colour ; under the 
seats are carved various grotesque and ludicrous 
devices and figures. Above the oak wainscoting 
on the sides of the altar, are rich open circular 
arches, with others still higher in the pointed style : 
a flight of seven steps leads to the altar, which has 
a sumptuous and elegant appearance. 

In the possession of the Rev. Mr. Russcl, a ca- 
non of this cathedral, is a curious antique portable 
shrine, considered as that of St. Kthelbert. Its 
height is eight inches and a half; its length, seven 
inches ; its breadth, three inches and a half. It is 
formed of oak, covered with plates of copper, ena- 
melled and ornamented with gilding. The front 
and sides are ornamented with figures ; the heads 
of which are in relief; but the back part has only 
four small leaves repeated in square compartment*. 
A red cross is painted within the shrine, on a part 
stained with a dark liquid. The representations 
on the outside are supposed to allude to the circum- 
stances attending the death of Ethelbert. The co- 
lours of the enamels are blue, green, yellow, white, 
and red. 

The eastern termination of the cathedral is formed 
7a ty 



582 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



1>y the chapel of Our Lady, now used as the li- 
brary, and containing a valuable collection of books 
and manuscripts, relating to ecclesiastical history. 
One of the greatest curiosities in this chapel, is an 
itncieitt map of the world, on vellum, illuminated 
with gilt Saxon letters, and having- inscriptions in 
black letter. The different places appear to he 
marked by animals, houses, &c. hut the whole is 
so thickly covered by dirt, that the full design can- 
not be traced. Beneath the library, is a vault, or 
c-rypt, which has of lute years acquired the name of 
Golgotha, from its hating been made a place of 
deposit for the human bones disturbed in the re- 
pairs of the cathedral. The interior of Bishop 
Audley's chapul, which opens into the library, " has 
a vaulted roof, groined with stone, and divided by 
small ribs into various compartments ; the ground 
of which is painted blue ; and the ribs red, with 
gilt edges. The centre orb has a representation of 
the Virgin Mary, gilt, and surrounded with a glory 
of the same : on the orb are the ancient and modern 
arms of the see, and also those of the deanery ; 
others are decorated with foliage, and various ap- 
propriate ornaments. A Gothic screen separates 
this chapel from the library, and is painted and gilt, 
to correspond witli the ceiling. Nineteen saints 
and religious persons are represented on this screen, 
in a range above, and others form a series below ; 
they are placed in compartments, or niches, under 
canopies ; and the whole is well-wrought in stone, 
and richly painted in various colours." In the 
passage, or aisle, on the north side of the choir, 
projecting into the burial-ground, is the chapel 
erected by Bishop Stanbury ; the roof of which is 
vaulted, and adorned with sculptured niches, cinque- 
foils, and other devices. 

The general dimensions of this cathedral, are as 
follows : extreme length, 325 feet ; from the west 
door to the choir, 130 feet ; length of the choir, 
flG feet ; from the choir to the library door, 24 feet ; 
length of the library, 75 feet ; extent of the great 
transept, 100 feet; breadth of the nave and side 
aisles, 74 feet; breadth of the nave, 38 feet; height 
of the body of the church, 91 feet ; height from the 
area to the vaulting, 70 feet. 

The sepulchral memorials are still numerous ; 
though many were defaced, and swept away, at the 
reformation : others were demolished in the time of 
the civil wars, when the library and other parts, 
suffered greatly ; many are concealed by the pews 
in the north transept, " and more (brasses) were 
accidentally sold amongst the old materials, dis- 
posed of after the general repair in 1780. One of 
the most celebrated of the remaining tombs, or 
monuments, is that to the memory of the Bishop, 
Thomas Cantilupe, who died in the year 1282, and 
was canonized in 1310. The reputed sanctity of 
this prelate occasioned his tomb to be visited by 
pilgrims and travellers from all parts of Europe ; 
and it is still regarded with veneration by the Catho- 
lics. Cantilupe is said to have been the last En- 



glishman who obtained the honour of canonization ; 
and Matthew of Westminster records that 1(53 mira- 
cles were performed at this tomb in a short space of 
time. So great, indeed, was the reputation which 
he obtained, that the succeeding Bishops of Here- 
ford waved their ancient arms, which were azure, 
three crowns, or, and had been borne by Ethclbert, 
and the other kin^s of the East Angles, in order to 
assume the paternal coat of Cantilupe, viz. gules, 
three leopards heads jessant, a Heur de lis, or ; 
and these arms have been continued to the present 
time. Under a lofty arch, which opens from the 
aisle of the above transept into the passage next the 
choir, is an altar monument in commemoration of 
Bishop Aqua-Blanca, whose effigies, mitred, and 
clad in episcopal robes, lies on a tomb beneath a 
stone canopy, supported by twelve light pillars on 
each side. The whole is a beautiful specimen of the 
rich and light effect of the pointed style of archi- . 
tecture. This bishop died of the leprosy, in Novem- 
ber, 1268: his heart was interred in a monastery 
which he had founded at Aqua-bella, in Savoy, the 
place of his birth. In the north wall of the library, 
under recessed arches, are two ancient monuments, 
traditionally recorded to commemorate Humphrey 
de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, and his Countess. 
The effigies of the husband represent him in close 
armour, with the hands clasped on the breast, and 
a dog at his feet. Over him is a stone canopy, richly 
sculptured in the pointed style ; and in front of the 
canopy are two human figures sitting ; one holding 
a globe and a scroll, and the other with the hands 
clasped, as in prayer. The effigy of the Coun- 
tess lies under a plain arch, on a tomb, the verge of 
which is studded with roses and human faces in 
alternate succession; she is habited as a nun, and 
has her hands clasped on her breast, and a dog at 
her feet. The Lady Chapel, says Gough, was pro- 
bably erected by this lady, " as the ancient painting 
under the arch," shows her " in a nun's veil, as on 
the tomb, with a church in her hand, and pointing' 
to a chapel at it east end, which she presents to the 
virgin on her throne." Under an arch in the south 
wall, in which are two basons, or cavities, for holy 
water, is placed the mutilated effigies of a lady 
wearing a coronet : on her surcoat were painted the 
arms of England, now almost defaced : this figure 
was dug up some years ago in the entrance to this 
chapel. 

Under another arch, in the same wall, lies the 
effigies of Dean Berew, or Borerue: on the front of 
the arch are several boars passant, with leaves of 
rue in their mouths, in allusion to his name. In 
the passage on the east side of the choir, in arches 
of the walls, are altar monuments of several bishops, 
with their effigies episcopally habited ; and also a 
large slab, beautifully inlaid with brass, in memory 
of Dean Frowcestre, who died in 1529. The effi- 
gies of the Dean is represented under a handsome 
canopy, richly adorned, and supported by saints. 
In the south end of the great transept is an altar 

monument, 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



monument, of alabaster, in commemoration of Alex - 
nndcr Dcnton, antl Anne, his first wife; their effi- 
gies arson the tomb, with that of an infant in swad- 
dling; clothes. Against the west wall of this tran- 
sept is a handsome monument in memory of Dean 
Tyler, who died in July, 1724 ; and of Sarah, his 
lady, who died in November, 1720. 

In the choir, filling up nearly the whole space 
beneath on:: of the arches on the north side, is an 
elaborate monument to the memory of Bishop Bisse, 
and Bridget, his lady, daughter of Thomas, Duke 
of Leeds, and Countess of Plymouth by her first 
marriage. In an arch on the north side of the altar, 
is the tomb of Bishop Bennet, who died in 1(51,5, 
and whose eflig-y lies under a canopy supported by 
black marble columns of the Corinthian order. 
Near this, on an altar monument, is the effigies of 
Bishop Braose, sustaining the model of a tower in 
his left hand : he died in 1215. In the south aisle 
of the nave is an interesting, though mutilated tomb, 
in memory of Sir Richard Pembruge, or Brydges, 
an ancestor of the Lords Chandos, who was knight 
of the garter in the time of Edward the Third, and 
died in 1375. In the opposite aisle, under a point- 
ed arch, is the effigies of Bishop Booth, with his 
head reposing on a pillow, on each side of which is 
an angel : this prelate died in May, 1535. Besides 
the personages already mentioned, many others of 
eminence have been interred in this cathedral : 
among them are tke following Bishops ; Robert de 
Lozing, 1095; Raynelm, 1115; Galfrid de Clive, 
1119; Robert de Betun, 1148; Robert de Melun, 
1167; Robert Foliot, 1186; William le Vere, 1199; 
Mapenor, 1219: Swinfield, 1316; Thomas Charl- 
ton, 1343 ; Trilleck, 131 ; Lewis Charlton, 1369; 
Trevanant, 1389; Stanbury, 1474; Mayo,orMaycw, 
1516; Westfaling, 1601; Lindsell, 1634; Field, 
1636; Croft, 1691 ; Butler, 1802. John Philips, 
the poet, was also buried here, in 1708, at the age 
of thirty-two : an inscribed slab, in the north part 
of the great transept, marks the place of his inter- 
ment. Under the second window of the south aisle, 
is a curious and very ancient font ; the diameter is 
nearly three feet, and the sides four inches in thick- 
ness, leaving a vacuity sufficiently large for the im- 
mersion of infants. On the outside are represented, 
in relief, the twelve apostles in as many nineties, 
under Saxon arches, studded with the nail-head 
ornament, and supported on pillars with foliaged 
capitals, and further ornamented with the spiral 
band, zig-zag, and other corresponding decora- 
tions. Over the figures of the apostles, which are 
fifteen, inches in height, and much mutilated, is a 
broad band encircling the whole, marked in relief 
with a series of ornaments, resembling the letter T, 
alternately inverted : the whole is of common stone, 
and supported on the backs of four sea-lions. 

On the south side of the cathedral was formerly a 
beautiful chapter house, and a chapel of very high 
antiquity. The former stood at a short distance 
from the end. of the great transept, ami was elegantly 



constructed in the pointed style of architecture. 
Its form was decagonal; and the roof was sus- 
tained in the centre by a single pillar, finely orna- 
mented with figures, and other devices : the fan- 
work of the vaulting was extremely finn; the ribs 
sprung from stone arches resting on corbels between 
the windows. Beneath every window was a square 
compartment, containing five niches, in eacU of 
which was a well painted figure, as large as life: 
these re-presented our Saviour, the apostles, and 
various saints, kings, bishops, and ether person- 
ages. The demolition of this structure was com- 
menced during the civil wars, when it was stripped 
of its covering of lead, and exposed to the weather ; 
its destruction was accelerated about the beginning 
of the last century by Bishop Bisse (who pulled part 
of it down, in order to apply the materials to the 
reparations of the episcopal palace,) and has been 
wholly accomplished in the present, by the chapter 
of Hereford, who have taken down the interesting 
remains. 

The ancient chapel, which stood between the 
south side of the bishop's cloisters and the palace, 
was unquestionably Saxon, and of very early date, 
Gough remarks, that it was not improbably antece- 
dent to the cathedral, as well as to the palace ; and 
Browne Willis supposed it Roman work. It was 
wholly built of stone ; the ground plan, indepen- 
dent of the choir, and the space occupied by the 
west front, and its deeply recessed entrance, formed 
a perfect square of about forty-two feet. The in- 
terior was divided- into an upper and lower story; 
the roof was constructed with much skill, and sup- 
ported by four massive columns rising from the 
ground, from which arches were turned every way : 
above the roof rose a square cupola, terminating 
pyramidically. The tipper story, or chapel, was 
dedicated to St. Magdalen, and had several pillars- 
against the walls, formed of entire stone; the lower 
chapel was dedicated to St. Catherine. The prin- 
cipal entrance was on the west, under a retiring 
arch, or series of arches, sixteen or eighteen feet 
deep ; at the outward and inner extremities of 
which were columns of single stones ten feet high: 
there was also an entrance in the middle both of the 
north and south sides: the walls were three feet and 
a half thick. This interesting specimen of the ar- 
chitecture of remote ages, was returned, by those 
who examined it under the commission, as ' ruinous 
and useless,' and orders were given by the bishop 
(Egerton) for its demolition ; though, at the time, 
less than 20/. would have put it into as good repair 
as it had been in during four hundred years ! So 
strongly were the stones cemented together, that 
after one-third of the chapel had been taken down, 
the work of destruction was for a time relinquished, 
on account of the cxpence, which had even then 
amounted to upwards of 50/. 

The Bishop's Cloisters, which form the com tuu- 
nication between the cathedral ami the palace, in- 
close an area of about 100 feet square, appropriated 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



to the purposes of sepulture, and distinguished by 
the name of Our Lady's Arbour : the arches of the 
windows are obtuse, but the windows themselves 
are diversified by various ramifications. The west 
side of these cloisters was destroyed in the time of 
Edward the Sixth, and a Grammar School erected 
on the site : this also having become greatly de- 
cayed, was taken down about the year 1760, and a 
larger building was erected on the spot ly subscrip- 
tion, under au engagement that, in addition to i ; > 
uses of a school, it should be applied to the triennial 
meeting's of the three choirs of Hereford, Worces- 
ter, and Gloucester, and to other public occasions : 
from this application it has been termed the music 
room. The materials of which it is built, are partly 
stone, and partly brick ; its length is eighty feet, its 
breadth forty, and its height the same. This 
school has the privilege ef presenting to fifteen 
scholarships at St. John's College, Cambridge, in 
turn with Manchester and Marlborough ; it presents 
likewise to fifteen scholarships at Brazen-Nose Col- 
lege, Oxford. This school was founded in 138-1, 
nuder the auspices of Bishop Gilbert. The Bishop's 
Palace is an ancient building, pleasantly situated at 
a little distance from the banks of the Wye : its out- 
ward appearance is by no means prepossessing, 
though many of the apartments are fitted up with 
elegance; the gardens are extensive, and occupy a 
gentle declivity contiguous to the river. The 
Deanery and Prebendal houses, the latter of which 
are generally given to theresidentiaries, are situated 
nearly opposite the north-east angle of the cathe- 
dral, but display nothing remarkable. The college 
is a venerable pile of stone building, surrounding a 
quadrangle of about 100 feet, and appropriated to 
the uses of the vicars-choral. This appears to have 
been erected about the time of Edward the Fourth, 
principally from the benefactions of Bishop Stan- 
bury, before which the vicars-choral had their resi- 
dence in Castle Street : besides the apartments for 
the vicars, it contains a spacious common hall, a 
mall chapel, and a library ; but the two latter are 
in a state of dilapidation. The cathedral yard was 
long the burial ground for all the parishes in the 
city, and for many of the adjacent out parishes ; 
but since the year 1791, the city parishes have each 
provided distinct places of sepulture. 

Before the time of the civil wars, Hereford con- 
tained five distinct churches, besides the cathedral, 
viz. St. Peter's, All Saints, St. Nicholas's, St. 
Martin's, and St. Owen's : the church of St. John 
Baptist appears to have been at all times an appen- 
dage to the cathedral. St. Martin's and St. Owen's 
were destroyed during the siege in 1045. St. Peter's 
was founded soon after the Norman Conquest, by 
Walter de Lacy, who had attended the conqueror 
to England, and was rewarded for his services with 
various manors and lands in Herefordshire, arid 
other counties. After the completion of the church, 
the founder was accidentally killed by falling from 
the battlements, as he was inspecting the work : 



; this occurrence, according to the Monasticon, hap- 
i pened in 1085. Hugh de Lacy, son of Walter. 
i A. D. 1101, gave this church, with all its appurtc- 
I nances, to the abbey of St. Peter's at Gloucester. 
! by which donation a religious fraternity, which hi* 
I father had instituted here, in honour of St. Guthlac. 
I became 'subject to that foundation, and was removed 
; into Bye Street suburb. After the dissolution, the 
j great tythes of this church were annexed to the 
] revenues of the see of Hereford. Four chantries 
had been founded here previously to the dissolu- 
, tion : one of them, now the vestry, was originally 
open to the chancel ; the piscina yet remains ; as 
does also another piscina, in the north aisle, where 
j the service of two of the chantries is supposed to 
have been performed. The nave is separated from 
the aisles by octagon columns on the south side, 
and by clustered pillars on the north. On each side 
of the chancel are seven ancient stalls, thought to 
have been designed for the use of the brothers of St. 
Guthlac's priory: these are very elegantly carved 
into pannels, quatrefoils, &c. and have light and 
beautiful canopies of fret work: the seats have 
carved figures beneath them, similar to those of the 
stalls in the cathedral. This church was repaired, 
and partly rebuilt, in the year 1793, at the expence 
of the parishioners. The rectory of St. Owen's was 
united to this in the time of Charles the Second, but 
the right of individual patronage was preserved. 
All Saints Church was given, by Henry the Third, 
to the master and brethren of the hospital of St. 
Anthony, in Vienna, who appear to have formed a 
small society here to superintend their property, as 
early as the twenty-second of Edward the First. 
This edifice has a lofty and well proportioned spire. 
The roof is of timber, with ancient projecting angel 
brackets, pierced pannels, and pendants of foliage 
and flowers. Here are several stalls, supposed to 
have been appropriated to the brethren of the above 
society ; the elbows exhibit grotesque carvings of 
men and animals ; and the lower part of the seats 
are also filled with whimsical representations, par- 
ticularly a monstrous caricature of a monk : the 
canopies are light and elegant, and are beautifully 
ornamented with fret-work of quatrefoils, roses, 
and foliage. Here, as at St. Peter's, were four 
chantries. Under the west end of this fabric, are 
several subterraneous passages and vaulted apart- 
ments. The south porch is embattled, and sup- 
ported by buttresses ; the entrance is under an open 
cinquefoil arch. St. Martin's, which is now an- 
nexed to this parish, was originally the Mother 
Church. St. Nicholas Church is a small edifice, 
which has long been in a state of decay; the chan- 
cel has the appearance of falling two ways, the 
north and south walls both leaning outwards. Here 
were two chantries in honour of the Virgin Mary. 

Besides the churches, Hereford contains a meet- 
ing house for each of the following sects ; Methodists, 
Dissenters, Quakers, and Roman Catholics. 

Several monasteries and religious houses existed 
6 in 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



583 



in this city and its suburbs previously to the refor- 
mation ; but most of them arc now down, and the 
sites are occupied by other buildings.- The oldest 
foundation, independent of that of the cathedral, was 
a community of prebendaries in honour of St. Cuth- 
bert. These prebendaries were removed to St. 
Peter's church, by Walter de Lacy, under the ap- 
pellation of St. Guthlac's Fraternity ; and from 
thence, his son, Hugh de Lacy, again removed 
them into the Bye Street suburb, where a house 
was birtlt for their reception. Here the secular bre- 
thren became a cell of Benedictines, subordinate to 
St. Peter's abbey at Gloucester, and so continued 
till the dissolution. When the building was de- 
stroyed does not appear ; its site continued in the 
possession of the Prices till the beginning of the last 
century, and again came into their possession in 
1751 ; but was finally sold by them, in 1776, to 
William Symonds, Esq. of Hereford. This gen- 
tleman again disposed of it, in 17!).*, to the trustees 
appointed to erect a new county gaol and house of 
correction : and a very extensive building, on the 
plan of the benevolent Howard, has siace been con- 
structed upon the spot. On the north side of this 
city, are some remains of a monastery of black 
Friars, or Friars' Preachers, who were originally 
established in the Port Field, about the year 1276, 
under the auspices of William Cantilupe, brother to 
Bishop Cantilupe. On the dissolution, the site and 
buildings were granted to John Scudamore, Esq. 
of Wilton ; and William Wygmore, Gent, of Shod- 
don ; but early in the reign of Elizabeth, they came 
into the possession of the Coningsby family, from 
whom the estate has descended to the present Earl 
of Essex. The principal vestiges of this establish- 
ment are some decayed offices, and the remains of a 
cross, or stone pulpit, as it was originally built for 
the purpose of preaching from. The south side of 
the prior's, lodgings is tolerably entire. The cross 
is constructed in the form of a hexagon, open on 
each side, and surrounded by a flight of steps, gra- 
dually decreasing as they ascend. In the centre is 
a base of the same figure, with two trefoil arches on 
each side, supporting the shaft of the cross, which, 
branching out into ramifications from the roof of the 
pulpit, and passing through it, appears above in a 
mutilated state : the upper part is embattled, and 
each angle is supported by a buttress. The pic- 
turesque effect of this beautiful remain is greatly in- 
creased by a large alder, which has forced its way in 
four steins through the joints of the steps ; and one 
branch twines round the pillar, and passes out 
through an arch of the hexagon. 

South-east from the ruins of the Black Friars is 
Coningsby hospital, a charitable foundation, begun 
by Sir Thomas Coningsby, Knt. in the year 1614, 
on the site of a small hospital, anciently belonging 
to the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusa- 
lem. They consist of a corporal, chaplain, and ten 
servitors. The chaplain must be a graduate in the 
University of Oxford. Six of the servitors are re- 

YOL. II. NO. 87. 



quired to be soldiers of three years service at least, 
and natives of one of the counties of Hereford, Wor- 
cester, or Salop ; and if six of this description 
should not be found, the deficiency is supplied by 
mariners, born as above, and of three years tried 
employment at sea : the others, five old serving men, 
of seven years service at least ; and in want of better 
maintenance. One of the servitors being a soldk'r, 
is called the Corporal of Coningsby Company, and 
acts as chief or governor on the spot : but the owner 
in fee of Hampton Court (in this county) is con- 
sidered and styled the Commander of the Hospital, 
and the servitors are to address him by that title 
only, ' in memory of those worthy governors who 
once presided over the military society in this place.' 
" On the subject of apparel, the founder directed 
that each servitor should have, on his admittance, 
a fustian suit of ginger colour, of a soldier-like 
fashion, and seemly laced: a soldier-like jerkin, 
with half sleeves; and a square shirt down half the 
thigh, with a moncado, or Spanish cap ; a sword 
to wear abroad ; a cloak of red cloth, lined with red 
baize, and reaching to the knee, to be worn in walks 
or journeys ; and a gown of red cloth, reaching to 
the ancle, lined also with baize, to be worn withiu 
the hospital ; and on the feast of Pentecost, every 
alternate year afterwards, a similar cap and jerkin 
were directed to be given to each member ; the 
whole to be for ever of the said fashion as those deli- 
vered at the first admittance." The subsistence of 
each member is stated in the deed, " to be two loaves 
of good wheaten bread, weighing four pounds each, 
weekly; two full ale-quarts of beer every day ; also 
two cheeses of the best Shropshire sort, of forty 
pounds weight, and three gallons of good and whole- 
some butter, to be delivered yearly, together with 
100 faggots, not less than one yard in length, and 
thirty inches in compass. It was further directed, 
that there should be for ever kept, on good ground 
near the hospital, such a stock of kine as would 
enable every member to purchase one quart of milk 
every day, at the rate of two quarts for one penny 
in the summer, and three pints for a penny in the 
winter. It was also appointed that, on the festivals 
of Christmas, Candlemas, Easter, Whitsuntide, All 
Saints, and on every Sunday throughout the year, 
the members should have a dinner and supper in the 
common hall of the hospital, out of the common 
stock, viz. a piece ef beef roasted at dinner; ami 
at supper, mutton and broth in a competent man- 
ner, with bread ami beer beyond their weekly allow- 
ance; and a fire in the hall on those days, from All 
Saints tide to the first day in Lent. For their fur- 
ther maintenance, the chaplain and corporal were 
each allowed three shillings and fourpence per wivk 
in money, and every other servitor two shillings and 
sixpence each ; such payments to be made every 
Monday in the common hall, after prayers in the 
morning." Sufficient endowments were given by 
the benevolent founder for these purposes; but, 
from the great alteration in the value of money, an<l 
7 i inert >( 



6S6 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



increase of the prices in the necessaries of life, it has 
been found expedient to consolidate the several al- ; 
lowances into money payments, and the corporal 
now receives I/. 13s. id. monthly, and each of the 
servitors I/. 1$. 8-|rf. The vicarage of Bodenham, 
with all its appurtenances, was directed, by a codi- 
cil in the will of the founder, to be given to the suc- 
cessive chaplains. 

Not far distant from Wye bridge, was a house of 
Grey Friars, founded, according to Tanner, by Sir 
William Pembrugge, Knt. in the time of Edward 
the Third ; yet the Worcester annals mention that 
it was flourishing as early as the year 1203. Many 
distinguished persons were interred here; and among 
others, according to Leland, the celebrated Owen 
Meredith, otherwise Tudor, who was beheaded at 
Hereford in 1161. Several of the Chandos and 
Cornewall families are also recorded to have been 
buried in this fabric. In the thirty-sixth of Henry 
the Eighth, the site and premises were granted to 
James Boyle, one of the ancestors of the noble 
family of Boyle, Earls of Cork, Ossory, &c. and 
whose progenitors were settled at Hereford as early 
as the reign of Edward the Third. No vestiges of 
the friary buildings arenow standing. 

Amongst the charitable establishments, those of 
the most ancient tlate are St. Giles's hospital, and 
tst. Ethelhert's alms-house. The former stands 
without St. Owen's gate, and was originally founded 
in the year 1290, for " Fryars Grisey, or Savignian 
Monks." It afterwards became the property of the 
Knights Templars; and being seized by the crown, 
was given, by Richard the Second, to the city of 
Hereford, and appropriated to the purpose of an 
alms-house. The endowments are applied to the 
support of five poor men, who are each allowed 
4/. 10s. monthly ; clothes every third year, &c. 
The hospital was rebuilt in the year 1778, by volun- 
tary subscription : a piece of garden ground is at- 
tached to each residence. St. Ethelbcrt's alms- 
house "was erected in the reign of Henry the Third, 
principally by indulgencies and relaxation of pen- 
nance, granted by the Bishops of Hereford, Coven- 
try, Salisbury, and Ely, to those who contributed 
towards it. The means of support must have been 
very considerable at one period, as it appears, by 
the statutes of the hospital, that alms were distri- 
buted daily to 100 persons. The revenues of this 
foundation, which now amount to (5o/. per annum, 
ure applied to the maintenance of ten poor women, 
each of whom has also an apartment and garden. 
Several other hospitals and alms-houses, both for 
men and women, are distributed through this city 
tuid its suburbs; and various tablets of donations 
for the support of the poor, are hung up in the dif- 
ferent churches. The relief of the sick has also 
been attended to in the establishment of a general 
infirmary for the reception of seventy persons, with 
every convenience for attendants and nurses. The 
original promoter of this useful institution was the 
Jate Rev. Dr. Talbot, Rector of Helenswick. The 
f 



spot of ground on hich the infirmary was built, wai 
given by the late Earl of Oxford ; and the expence 
of the building itself was defrayed by a very ample 
subscription, chiefly raised amongst the nobility and 
gentry of the county : the annual subscriptions in 
furtherance of the objects of the charity amount to 
about 400/. The Infirmary is pleasantly situated 
near the river, a short distance south-east from the 
castle walks : it was first opened for the admission 
of patients on the 20th of March, 1776. The com- 
mittee of subscribers, under whose superintendance 
the concerns of this establishment are conducted, has 
likewise the direction of the Lunatic Asylum, a 
building on the north-east of the Inftrmary, erected 
about lour or five-and-twenty years ago, for the re- 
ception of twenty patients afflicted with insanity : 
this also was instituted by subscription. The educa- 
tion of the youthful poor is provided for by a charity 
school, partly supported by voluntary contributions, 
and partly by revenues arising from donations and 
legacies : here fifty boys, and thirty girls, receive 
instruction and clothing; and small sums are given 
to provide many of them with apprenticeships. The 
Work-house is a convenient building, without the 
Eigne gate, established on a general plan by a union 
of the parishes. 

The new county gaol, occupying the site of the 
priory of St. Guthlac, was completed in 1707, under 
the superintendance of the architect, Mr. John 
Nash. It is inclosed within a high brick wall, 
having a handsome rusticated gateway, with Tuscan 
pillars. The prison is spacious, having a house of 
correction, work-shop, inspection room, infirmary, 
chapel, debtors' rooms, &c. together with four courts, 
having gardens in them. The expence of this edi- 
fice amounted to about 18,650/. The city goal beam 
marks of considerable antiquity, and formerly coin- 
posed one side of Bye Street gate, over which, in 
niches, were two rude representations of human 
figures chained. This gaol contains one small cell, 
and three very high apartments, with a window in 
each ; the whole very dry and clean : a dungeon 
beneath, once used for the purposes of confinement, 
has been converted into a cellar. 

The only vestige of any part of the castle, is a 
fragment at the south-west corner, now converted 
into a dwelling. The area of the outer ward, called 
the Castle Green, is surrounded by an elevated pub- 
lic wa.'k, carried along the site of the walls, and 
much frequented from its pleasant situation : to- 
wards the north and east, this is shaded by a row 
of elms; and another walk, still more elevated, and 
forming a kind of semicircle, IMS been made on the 
site of the lower keep of the castle. The mount in 
the upper ward, on which the principal keep was 
built, still beats the name of the Castle Hill. The 
Shire hall, which stands nearly in the centre of 
Hereford, is supposed to have been erected in the 
reign of James the First, by John Abel, the 'ex- 
pert carpenter,' as he is called in the letter from 
the Governor Scudamore to I*opd Digby, who con- 
structed 



HEREFORDSHIRE: 



587 



tf acted the mills on which the safety of the city so 
much depended during the siege, in 1645. This 
building, in length 84 feet, and in breadth 34, is 
composed principally of wood, and now consists of 
only one floor, supported on three ranges of pillars; 
but, in its original state, it had a second floor, di- 
vided into apartments for the accommodation of the 
fourteen trading companies of the city, viz. bakers, 
barbers, and barher-surgeous, blacksmiths, braziers, 
butchers, clothiers, coopers, cordwainers, glovers, 
joiners, mercers, tanners, tylers, and weavers." 
This floor was removed from motives of safety. 
Under the shire-hall, the markets for grain and fish 
are held : at the cast end, is the batchers' market ; 
and at the west end, the poultry and butter markets. 

Considerable improvement! have been made in 
the appearance of Hereford, since the year 1774, 
when an act of Parliament was obtained for the inclo- 
sure of about 150 acres of waste lands on the north 
side of the city, and which formed part of the tract 
called Wide-marsh. Under the powers vested in 
the commissioners by this act, ten acr.-s of land 
having been set apart for the purpose of electing 
the knights of the shire, exercising the militia, and 
other public uses, the residue Was let on lease, and 
the produce applied to the discharge of the expenses 
incurred by lighting, paving, &c. A series of nar- 
row inclosures, in the form of a circle, and connect- 
ed by temporary fences, was left as a race course. 
The removal of the irregular mass of wooden build- 
ings, termed the Butchers' Row, from the uses to 
which they are applied, and which greatly impede 
the thoroughfare between St. Peter's church, and 
the shire-hall, would be a further improvement. 

Nearly half of the city, with a considerable por- 
tion of the suburbs, forms a district, entitled the 
Bishop's Fee ; within this district, the bishops have 
enjoyed considerable privileges ; and, on particular 
occasions, their authority has altogether superseded 
that of the civil magistrate, by extending over the 
whole city. As lords of this fee, they administered 
justice within their limits, and committed offender* 
to the custody of their own officers, in their own 
peculiar prison, which was situated within the walls 
of the episcopal palace. They restrained and 
judged bondmen and villains, with their children, 
goods, and chattels ; and their tenants were ex- 
cused from the payment of customary burdens and 
impositions. They also held nn annual fair for the 
sale of merchandise within their fee ; during its con- 
tinuance, their power extended to all parts of the 
city ; the markets were transferred from the usual 
places to that appointed by tlie bishop : and a por- 
ter was sworn at each of the city gates, to collect 
the tolls for his use. A bailiff was annually elected 
by u jury, together with a Serjeant a! mace, leather- 
searchers, and alc-conncrs : they regulated the as- 
size of bread and beer ; and courts-baron, lect, and 
picpoudrc, were held ; and presentments, anil other 
usual business, formally transacted. Some of these 
riviloge* are recorded as of long *tauding, even in a 



charter of Edward the Confessor. In former age*, 
they caused many disputes between the bishops ami 
the inhabitants of the city ; disputes which gene- 
rally terminated- in the triumph of the church, and 
the submission of the people. The bishop's courts 
are still held ; but the business transacted consist* 
of little more than the formality of swearing in a 
jury, electing a bailiff, and serjeant, and presenting 
and amercing all who owe suit and service : and 
having been summoned, do not appear. The < ffice* 
of porters, leather-senrchcrs, und ale-tasters, have 
been long discontinued. The original incorporation 
of Hereford has been generally attributed to King 
John ; but, in the great roll of Henry the Third, 
A.iy. 1218, the inhabitants are stated as indebted to 
the Exchequer, in the sum of 110 marks, and two 
palfreys, in return for a charter from that King, 
which not only granted them the town at the former 
fee-farm rent of 40/. per annum, but also allowed 
them to have a guild and society of merchants ami 
traders, with other privileges usually attached to a 
guild; anil further exempted them from tolls, and 
various customary payments. This grant of pri- 
vileges wus confirmed, and occasionally enlarged, 
in the eighth of Edward the Second, the first ami 
fifth of Edward the Third, and the seventh of Ri- 
chard the Second, when the name of bailiff, whicU 
had before been given to the chief magistrate, was 
changed to that of mayor. This charter was further 
confirmed by succeeding Princes to the time of 
James tho First, who, in a new charter of confir- 
mation, consolidated the privileges of the inhabi- 
tants, and ordained, that the corporation should 
thenceforth consist of a mayor, aldermen, and com- 
mon council, having a chief steward, a common 
clerk, a prothonotary, a sword-bearer, and four 
Serjeants at mace : the common-council to consist 
of 31 persons, including the mayor, and six alder- 
men. This charter was wrested from the inhabi- 
tants, in the reign of Charles the Second ; but was 
afterwards restored towards the conclusion of the 
reign of James the Second, and confirmed by Wil- 
liam tho Third, in tho ninth yeiir of his reign. The 
first return of members to Parl ; aincnt, made by this 
city, was in the 23d of Edward the First : the ex* 
pence of supporting them was defrayed by a levy, 
one moiety of which was raised on the inhabitants 
within the king's fee, and the other on those within 
the bishop's, canons, and St. John's fee. The right 
of election is vested in the freemen only. The 
freedom of Hereford i* acquired by serving n regu- 
lar apprenticeship to a freeman resident within th 
liberties, or by marrying a freeman's widow, or the 
eldest daughter of a f'reeiaau, having no male issue ; 
the eldest sons of freemen >m- also entitled ta their 
freedom, after going through certain forms. 

The principal nmnui'.ictuiv that is carried on ut 
Hereford, is that of gloves ; and snme progress 
has been made in the nwutifacttirc <>!' (launels : hats 
are also made. Between 40 and -M) year* n-o, an 
ntttttfipt wus made to establish a manufactory of 



588 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



carpets, broad and narrow cloth, kerseymeres, &c. 
but the death of one of the parties, and a want of 
sufficient encouragement, occasioned it to be given 
up. About the same period, an attempt was made 
to instruct the poorer classes in the art of spinning 
wool ; but tin's design failed ; and the sum of 500/. 
that had been advanced, by the trustees, from a fund 
for employing the poor of the city, the original stock 
of which was bequeathed by .Lord Viscount Scu- 
damore, in 1763, was irrecoverably dissipated. 
The sum originally bequeathed, was 4001. which 
having been put to interest on mortgage, &.c. has 
accumulated to a very large sum, notwithstanding 
the loss here mentioned. 

The Wye bridge w t is founded in the time of 
Henry the First, nt his particular request. The 
present bridge is supposed to have been constructed 
about the end of the Ift'th century : it consists of six 
arches, oue of which was rebuilt after the siege, iu 



* (1) Roger of Hereford was a distinguished writer in the 
time of Henry the Second. He excelled in the knowledge of 
astronomy, and published a treatise on the subject. Metals 
and minerals were equally the objects of his studies. 

(2) Miles Smith, D. D. the son of a flelcher, or maker 
of arrows, in this city, was horn in i5i>0, and was entered at 
Oxford, in 156S. Here, besides obtaining a complete know- 
ledge of the fathers, and Jewish writers, he obtained a thorough 
acquaintance with the Greek, Latin, Chaldaic, Syriac, Arabic, 
and Hebrew languages. James the First employed him in the 
translation of the Bible ; and to him and Bilson, Bishop of Win- 
chester, was the revisal of the whole committed. In 1CI2, he 
was promoted to the see of Gloucester, over which lie presided 
twelve years; and dying in 1622, was buried in our Lady's 
chapel, in his own cathedral. 

(3) John Guillim, the celebrated herald, was born about the 
year 15C5. The early part of his education was received at 
the grammar school, in this city, from which he was removed 
in 1581, to Oxford. When he had left the university, he was 
appointed Portsmouth pursuivant of arms in the London col- 
lege. In 1610, he published his Display of Heraldry, which 
still retains its original esteem. He died in 1621. 

(4) John Davies, a celebrated penman, was writing master 
to Henry, Prince of Wales, son of James the First. In his 
profession, he had no competitor. Granger states, that his 
characters were so small as to require a magnifying glass to 
read them ; and Fuller observes, they were so correct, that it 
required some time to decide whether they were written or 
printed. He died at London, 1618. 

(5) Richard Gerlhinge was a scholar of Davies's, and is said 
to have excelled him in all the branches of the art. Fuller 
says, " When two such transcendant pen-masters shall again 
be born in the same shire, they may even serve fairly to engross 
the will and testament of the expiring universe !" 

(6) Eleanor Gwyiui was born in an humble dwelling in 
Piper Lane ; but, becoming an inhabitant of London, was en- 
gaged in the service of a fruiterer, and thus appeared in the 
lobby of a theatre. Subsequently introduced upon the stage, 
she became a general favourite. Charles the Second, capti- 
vated by her vivacity and humour, made her a partner of his 
bed. She did not, however, immediately quit the theatre, but 
still continued to display her talents in the airy, fantastic, and 
sprightly effusions of the comic muse. " At this period, 1670, 
she was delivered ofa son, who was afterwards created Duke of 
St. Alban's ; and her grandson attained the honours of prelacy, 
and became the proprietor of that very episcopal palace, which 
almost adjoined the humble cot where his maternal ancestor 
first drew her breath." She displayed great liberality, and 



1645, the former having been destroyed to prevent 
the approach of the Scots. The old materials were 
employed iu its construction, but its height was 
considerably reduced ; consequently the appearance 
of the bridge is very irregular. 

llerefortt theatre was the nursery of a Clive, a 
Siddous, and a Kemble : its direction, indeed, was 
for many years in the Kemble family, who had long 
been inhabitants of this city. The present theatre 
is a neat modern building, on the west side of the 
Broad Street, having a pediment ornamented with 
busts, &c. Other sources of amusement are de- 
rived from assembly-rooms, with balls, concerts, 
&c. 

Amongst the persons of eminence born in this 
city, may be. mentioned Roger of Hereford,* (1) Bi- 
shop Miles Smith, (2) John Guillim, (3) John Da- 
vies, (4) Richard Gerthinge, (5) Eleanor Gwynn, (6) 
General Stringer Lawrence, (7) David Garrick, (8) 

Captain 



obtained considerable popular approbation. Her errors have 
vanished in the blaze of her munificence; and her generosity 
in promoting the establishment of Chelsea hospital, will pre- 
serve the remembrance of her name to the latest ages : the idea 
of that admirable institution is said to have originated with her. 
She died in Pall Mall, in 1691. 

(7) Stringer Lawrence was born in 1697: the scene of his 
exertions was the East Indies, where he attained the rank of 
Major-General, and was one of the first to introduce a proper 
degree of discipline among the soldiery. His talents greatly 
contributed to the preservation and extension of the empire in 
India; and, on his death, in 1775, the East India Company 
erected a handsome monument to his memory, in Westminster 
abbey. 

(8) David Garrick was born in 1716. His father, a French 
refugee, had a lieutenant's commission in a regiment of horse, 
then quartered in this city ; but the place of his general resi- 
dence was Lichfield, and thither young Garrick ana his mother 
were removed, as soon as the latter had recovered her health. 
His education was partly obtained at the Lichfield grammar- 
school, and partly under the tuition of Dr. Johnson, who, at a 
subsequent period, accompanied his pupil to London, in search 
of the means of existence. Garrick, 'who had previously been 
an assistant in the wine trade, to his uncle, a Lisbon merchant, 
embarked in the same business with his brother in the metro- 
polis; but a passion for the stage, at length induced him to en- 
gage in the theatrical profession ; and, under the assumed name 
of Lyddal, he made his first public appearance, at the Ipswich 
theatre, in the summer of 1741, in the character of Aboan, in 
Oroonoko. His success was great, and at once determined him 
to make the stage his ultimate pursuit. In the December fol- 
lowing, he appeared at London, at the theatre in Goodman's 
Fields, in the character of Richard the Third. His perform- 
ance of this arduous part obtained general applause ; his fame 
spread with distinguished rapidity ; and he became the univer- 
sal centre of popular admiration. Such crowds attended his per- 
formances at the Dublin theatre, in the summer of 1742, that 
the confined air combining with the heat of the weather, pro- 
duced a fever which proved fatal to many, and was distinguished 
by the name of Garrick's fever. His next engagement was at 
Drury Lane, of which theatre, in 1747, he became a joint-pa- 
tentee with Mr. Lacy, and opened it in the ensuing winter 
under his own management. His exertions were accompanied 
with every degree of success, till the season of 1754, when his 
having engaged a number of foreigners to fill up the parts in 
\ariou* new dances which he had projected to introduce, ex- 
cited a violent opposition. The piece first prepared, was en- 
titled the Chinese Festival. Aware of the impending storm, 

lie 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



Captain James Cornwall, (9) William Havard, (10) 
and Fitzowen Skinner, (11). 

HEREFORDSHIRE BEACON.] The immense works 
of the Herefordshire beacon, one of the strongest 
and most important hill fortresses in Britain, are 
about two miles N. from Bransill castle, on the top 
of one of the highest ridges of the Malvern hills, on 
the borders of Worcestershire. " The vast laboui 
employed in its construction, its amazing buts o: 
ramparts and trenches, its great extent, its weli- 
chosen situation, which commands what was an- 
ciently the only pass through the Malvern hills, and 
which, indeed, is very nearly so even to the present 
hour, its singular irregularity of form, and cvidenl 
dissimilitude to the modes of fortification observed 
by the Danes, Saxons, and Romans, all combine to 
establish its origin, which must unquestionably be 
ascribed to the Britons. The same reasons also 
evince, that it was not constructed for mere tempo- 
rary purposes, but rather for permanent security ; 
as a place wherein an entire district might seek re- 
fuge, with all their possessions, whether of flocks or 
herds, in case of invasion, or any other sudden eraer- 



he obtained a sanction for its performance from the King, by 
whose command it was once played, without any particular dis- 
turbance. On the second night, however, the clamour increas- 
ed to not, and the inside of the theatre was rendered a com- 
plete ruin, the benches being torn up, the lustres and girandoles 
broken, and the scenery destroyed. The life of the manager 
himself was in some danger ; and the protection of the soldiery 
was necessary to preserve his house trom demolition. In this 
state of affairs, it became requisite that the piece should be 
withdrawn, for ever ; and proper explanations being published, 
Garrick again became the general favourite. In 1763, he 
made the tour of France and Italy. In 1776, his increasing 
infirmities compelled him to abandon his profession. His last 
performance was the character of Don Felix, in the Wonder. 
In January, the same year, he sold his moiety of the tlieatre to 
the late U. B. Sheridan, Esq. and two others, for 35, OOO/. He 
died on the 20th of January, 1779, at his house in the Adelphi, 
after an illness of several years. He was buried in Westmin- 
ster Abbey, where a monument has since been erected to his 
memory, with an epitapli from the pen of Mr. Pratt. Garrick 
was the writer of several dramatic pieces of merit, besides nu- 
merous prologues and epilogues. His widow is yet living. 

(D) James Cornwall, who lost his life in the memorable en- 
gagement off Toulon, in 1743-4, was descended from an an- 
cient and honourable Herefordshire family, and was born in 
16^9. He very early attained a respectable situation in the 
navy, and after several appointments, was promoted to the com- 
mand of the Marl borough, of 90 gun*, then with (lie fleet in 
(he Mediterranean, under the command of Admiral Matthews. 
In the subsequent battle between the English squadron, and the 
combined fleet of France and Spain, both his legs were struck 
off, by a chain-shot, as he was gallantly receiving the tire of the 
whole Spanish line, in order to cover the Admiral's ship, the 
Naniur, which had been disable'! in the fi^ht. Though thus 
mortally wounded, he refused to quit the deck, and continued 
the engagement I ill he was killed by the fall of the main and 
wizen masts, which were shot away by the board. His me- 
mory has been honoured by a public monument in Westminster 
abbey. 

(10) William Havard, E<q. who died at Lambeth, on the 
^Zlst of May, 1810, in llie 76th year of his age, was one of the 
partners of (he Hereford bank. His parents kept a small shop 
in Hereford ; and their circumstances were so remote Irom 
affluence, that when, like his countryman, Whiltington, !ie left 

VOL. II. NO. 87. 



gcncy. It is almost impossible for words to con.- 
vey a complete idea of this strong hold. The ge- 
neral shape of the hill (at least of that portion oc- 
cupied by the works,) approaches to an ellipsis. 
The area of the centre and highest part, is an irre- 
gular parallelogram, measuring iibout 180 feet, in 
its longest diameter, and nearly 120 in its shortest : 
this is surrounded by a high and steep rampart of 
stones and earth, now covered with turf; and that 
again defended by a very deep ditch. Considerably 
below this, ranging south-west by south, is a very 
extensive out- work of an oval form, containing a 
sufficient" area for the stowage, and even pasturage, 
of horses and cattle. This is connected by means 
of a narrow slip of land, running beneath the south- 
east side of the upper ditch, with a similar kind of 
bastion, or outwork, ranging eastward, and mani- 
festly intended forsimilarpurposes. Both thesevvorks 
are surrounded by a high rampart and deep ditch ; 
and the inclosed areas have evidently been levelled 
by art as far as the natural shape of the eminence 
would admit. Still lower, are successive ranges of 
ramparts and ditches, very steep, deep, and high, 



his native place to pursue his fortunes in the metropolis, he had 
not sixpence in his pocket on his arrival in London. From this 
period, such was the perseverance, ability, and success with 
which he applied himselt to bu.-iness, that he gradually rose, 
with increasing honour and esteem, from clerk to partner, in 
the house of Mr. Jones, M. P. for Devizes, in Mansion-house 
Street. Thus becoming enrolled in the first class of British 
merchants, Mr. Havard was frequently consulted in the most 
difficult and important adjustments oi merc.mlile accounts; 
and he bequeathed to five daughters more than 10.000/. each, 
the fruits of his own exertions, and personal industry. His 
house, and the hospitalities of his table, were not only "open to 
his countrymen in general, but many ol his youngir triends, 
from Hereford, were aided by his powerful interest, and valu- 
able advice. Nor were these the only prominent features of 
ability and worth in the character of Mr. Havard : the Banks 
of the Lug, and other similar effusions, acknowledge him as no 
despicable poet; but perhaps it is less known, that he not only 
aided Mr. Dibdin, in his work, called The Bye-Slander, but 
also contributed some of those popular productions which are 
so happily calculated to excite the daring of our gallant tars. 
Of these, the well-known words of " My Poll and my Partner 
Joe," were written by Mr. Havanl ; and it is said, tlut 0,00(1 
copies of that ballad were sold, within a very short period alter 
its publication. 

(11) Captain Fitzowen George Sk'nner, though he died 
(June 6, 1810) at the early age of 26, had seen considerable 
service, was admired lor his gallantry, and beloved for his 
many virtues. He was brought up under Sir H. B. Nealr, 
who at that time commanded the St. FiQren/p, and was nilli 
that officer when he brought his ship with si> much judgment 
from nmonnst the mutineers at the Nore. He was also with 
Sir H. 15. Nc.ilc, when he fought three Irigates on the coast of 
France. Early in the year 1808, Mr. S. was appointed to the 
Hindustan, and subsequently (o the Goldfinch sloop, in which, 
on llie 18th of May, 1810, he had a severe action with a French 
corvette, of superior force. His gallant conduct on this occa- 
sion induced bis immediate appointment to the Tiinculo, then 
just launched, and one of the finest sloops in llie service. Un- 
fortunately, he caught a violent cold, by keeping open his ca- 
jin-window, at iiiyht, for the accommodation of a gentleman af- 
licted with an asthma. The rupture of a blooil-vessel ensued, 
and thus his life was prematurely terminated, at the time above- 
mentioned. 

7 K encircling 



390 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



encircling the sides of the mountnin, and rendering 
it nearly, it' not utterly inaccessible. The views 
from the .summit of this majestic work, include a 
vast extent of country ; and Herefordshire, from 
Iliis height, assumes a very distinct character from 
that of the contiguous counties of Worcester and 
Gloucester. It appears to be composed of an im- 
mense continuation of oblong, conical, ami irregular 
hills, principally covered with fine timber ; the deep 
shadows of whose luxuriant foliage project over the 
most beautiful vales, abounding with orchards, corn 
fields, ami hop grounds. The distance in the west, 
is finely marked by the range of the Black Moun- 
tains, and the hills of Radnorshire. The prospects 
to the east and south-east, are yet more extensive, 
including a very large proportion of Gloucester- 
shire ami Worcestershire, which appear spread out 
before the sight, variegated by all the charms of 
nature and cultivation. The Herefordshire beacon 
itself is most eminently conspicuous for many miles 
round ; and forms an object of uncommon grandeur 
and majesty." 

HOI.E-IX-THE-WALL.] Nearly opposite to In- 
geston, on the banks of the Wye, are the remains 
of some ancient buildings, consisting of foundations 
of walls, with huge stones lying about : the site is 
partly occupied by cottages. What is termed the 
Hole-in-the-Wall, is an excavation formed in the 
rocky bank of a neighbouring garden ; but the spot 
in overgrown with brambles, and difficult of access. 
It originally consisted of a flight of steps leading 
downwards to a cavity, sufficiently capacious to 
contain about 20 persons : the roof was supported 
by a single pillar. On the ascent from the Hole- 
in-the Wall, towards Old Gore, is a hollow, extend- 
ing about 100 paces, in which, about five-and-twenty 
years ago, many celts were turned up, that had evi- 
dently been cast, and some of them were rudely 
ornamented ; they were made of a semi-metal, 
nearly as bright as brass. One of them appeared 
to have been finished to a polish. About a mile 
lower down, is another of the numerous ancient 
camps which form a chain on the eminences in this 
part of the country. It occupies the summit of 
Eaton Hill. A farm-house at Eaton displays ves- 



* The Scudamores came into England with the Conqueror, 
and originally settled at Upton, and Norton, in Wiltshire, but 
removed to Holm-Lacey, in the reign of Edward the Third, 
after the marriage of Thomas, younger son of Sir Pfcter 
Scudamore, with Clarice, daughter of Lady Clara, of the 
family of the Lacies, to whom this estate had previously be- 
longe'tl. The Scudamores derived their name from the Cross 
Patcc J'itchee, the Scutum Aniwris Di'cini, which tlu-y origiu- 
ally bore as their arms, and which is ihouchtto have been given 
them in commemoration of some memorable action in defence 
of the Christian faith. Many of this family have been employ- 
ed in distinguished offices ; and some of them have been re- 
corded as eminent patrons of literature. Sir James Scuda- 
more, lather of the first Viscount Scudamore, is the legendary 
' Sir Scudamore,' of Spenser, whose tale, in the fourth book of 
Mie Fairy Queen, is particularly interesting. John, created 
Vittount Scudamore, by Charfes the Fir^t, was highly re- 
spected for Ivis piety and learning. He was the particular 



tiges of an ancient mansioii ; and the surrounding 
grounds are called Eaton Park. 

HOLM LACEY.] Six miles S.E. from Hereford, 
stands Holm-Lacey, a venerable scat belonging 
to the Duke of Norfolk. The late Dnke obtained it 
in marriage with Frances, daughter and heiress of 
Charles Scudamore, Esq. with various other va- 
luable estates in this county and Gloucestershire.* 
The good taste of the late Duke of Norfolk, per- 
mitted the mansion to remain unaltered, as a perfect 
specimen of the style of building preferred by our 
1 immediate ancestors : we can still survey the apart- 
ments which Pope so frequently visited, and where 
he wrote his ' Man of Ross,' in the same state as 
formerly. The family portraits, and the elaborate 
carvings by Gibbons, little inferior to those at Pet- 
worth and Chatsworth, are still a part of their ve- 
nerable ornaments. The apartments are decorated 
with many valuable paintings, by Vandyck, Janson, 
Holbein, &c. In the saloon is a very conspicuous 
portrait of Sir James Scudamore, equipped for a 
tournament. Here is also a capital picture, by Ha- 
milton, of Solomon and the Queen of Sheba, who 
are represented as after their first interview, in a 
gorgeous palace, attended by the high-priest. This 
picture has been exactly copied in stained glass by 
Eginton, for a window in the superb castle at Arun- 
del. Amongst the other pictures are those of Louis 
the Thirteenth, and his Queen ; the latter is depict- 
ed as nursing her infant,' after wards Louis the Four- 
teenth. These were given to the Lord Scudamore, 
when ambassador in France ; they were executed 
by Beaubrun, the court-painter of Paris. In the 
cabinet, is a sketch of the head of the great Lord 
Straffbrd, copied in crayons from Vandyck, by 
Pope, when a guest at Holm-Lacey. This, with 
the exception of the portrait of Betterton, the tra- 
gedian, in oil-colours, which Pope gave to the Lord 
Chief Justice Mansfield, and which is now at Caea 
wood, is supposed to be the only proof remaining of 
his talents as a painter. The grounds at Holm- 
Lacey, are very pleasant : the old garden on th 
south front, was formed on the model of Hampton- , 
Court, in Middlesex, and with a very spacious ter- 
race. The yew trees, which are disposed in straight 



friend of the Duke of Buckingham, and was so affected at the 
untimely death of that nobleman, that he relinquished his pub- 
lic employments, and retired io Holm-Lacey, where he quieted 
the emotions of sorrow, by attending to rural affairs, and has 
been recorded as the first that brought the red-streak apple into 
general esteem. In 1634, he was called from his retirement, 
and sent ambassador to France, where he continued several 
years, conducting the business of his mission with much pru- 
dence and effect. On the breaking out of the civil wars, lie 
took a decided part in favour of the King; and having been 
made prisoner by Waller, at Hereford, his estates underwent a 
temporary sequestration, and he was deprived of his personal 
liberty for a considerable period. He died in 1670. His 
grandson, the last Viscount Scudamore, rebuilt the greatest 
part of the manor-house at Holm-Lacey, about a century ago. 
He was the friend of Pope, who had been introduced to Lady 
Scudamore, by her relation, Mr. Digby ; she was the only 
daughter of Simon, Lord Digby. 



HEREFORDSHIRE 



lines, having been originally clipped into grotesque 
shapes, ami for many years left to regain their foli- 
age, nearly resemble the cypresses of a Turkish 
cemetery. Near the parsonage house is a remark- 
able Pear tree, covering nearly a quarter of an acre. 
For many years together its fruit has yielded from 
twelve to sixteen hogsheads of Perry. Nearly oppo- 
site Holm Lacey, is the pleasant village of Fown- 
hope, about half a mile to the north of which is an 
eminence crowned by an ancient camp ; and about 
twice that distance to the north, is a second camp, 
occupying the summit of another eminence, called 
Capler Hill : the latter camp is double-trenched, 
and called Woldbnry ; the former has no distinct 
appellation. The Capler Hill is finely wooded; and 
from its summit the prospects are extensive and 
rich : the contiguous channel of the Wye forms a 
beautiful object. 

HOPE.] The village of Hope, or Hope-under 
Dinraore, lies 4f miles S. by E. from Leominster. 
In the church, built by the Coningsbies, was buried 
Sir Thomas Coningsby, Knt. the founder of Co- 
uingsby's hospital, at Hereford, who died in May, 
1052 : Humphry Coningsby, Esq. and Anne, his 
wife, daughter of Sir Thomas luglefield, Knt. were 
also interred hero. Here also is a fine marble monu- 
ment, to the late Earl Coningsby, whose remains, 
with those of Margaret his Countess, and an infant 
son, are deposited in a vault -under the chancel ; 
also the remains of the Lady Phillippa Coningsby, 
and others of the family. In a curious manuscript 
account of the funeral procession of the latter Lady, 
after reciting every particular relating to her funeral, 
js the following singular conclusion : " And then, 
the next morning hunting, hawking, and good cheer, 
and so to continue two or three days; and such is 
the end of all flesh." 

HfNTiNGTON.] At Huntington,4f miles W.S.W. 
from Kington, are the ruins of a castle, which an- 
ciently belonged to -the Ducal family of Bucking- 
bain, and gave name to the Hundred. 

IVINGTON CAMP.] At Ivington, three miles S.W. 
by W. from Leominster, is a strong encampment, 
supposed to have been occupied by Owen Glen- 
donr, on his retreat before Prince Henry. Many 
coins of the fourteenth century have been found 
here. 

KENCHESTER.] Five miles W. N. W. from Here- 
ford, is the site of the Roman town of Kenchester, 
the Magna of the Itinerary, which Horsley was the 
first to remove to this station from Old Radnor, 
where it had been erroneously fixed by Camden. 
The distances, as well as the general regularity ob- 
served in the course of the Itinerary, perfectly ac- 
cord in support of this opinion ; and the etymology 
of the appellation Kenchester itself, from Ken, or 
Kyn, first, or chief, and Chester, from Chestre, 
equivalent to the Roman Castra, appears equally in 
favour of this being the real Magna Castra. The 
form of this station is an irregular hexagon, inclining 



to a parallelogram : the area is about four or five 
feet above the level of the adjacent country, and was 
formerly surrounded by ^ wall, the foundations of 
which may yet be traced. Numerous inequalities, 
arising from the foundations, vaults, and ruins of 
buildings, overspread the area ; and great numbers 
of Roman coins, bricks, leaden pipes, urns, burnt 
wheat, and large bones, have been dug tip here. 
Towards the east end is a massive fragment re- 
maining of what is supposed to have been a Roman 
temple: it consists of a large mass of cement of al- 
most indissoluble texture, in which are embedded 
rough stones, irregularly intermixed with others 
that have been squared. This fragment is called 
the Fairies' chair, from a niche which is yet perfect : 
the arch is principally constructed with Roman 
bricks ; and over it are three layers of the same 
materials, disposed lengthways. Here, in l(ib'9, 
a tesselated pavement and stone floor wen; dis- 
covered ; and in the succeeding year, buildings of 
Roman brick were found. About the same time 
Sir John Hoskyiis discovered a Hypocaust, the 
flues of which were of brick. Another tesselated 
pavement, found about 80 years ago, was destroy- 
ed by the vulgar. 

AM aqueduct, or drain, of considerable extent, 
with the bottom entire, was also opened here about 
30 years ago ; and various other vestiges of tho an- 
cient consequence of this city are frequently found. 
The entrances appear to have been on the east, west, 
north and south sides. 

KENTCHUHCH.] At Kentchurch, 13 miles W. by 
S. from Hereford, is the seal of John Scudamorc, 
Esq. The park, which contains some fine timber, is 
between three and four miles in circumference. 
This is affirmed to have been the seat of the eldest 
house of the Scudamore family. 

KINGTON.] The little market and clothing towa 
of Kington, lies ll miles S. S. E. from Warwick, 
and 84 miles N. W. by W. from London. In an- 
cient times, here was a castle, for the defence of the 
marshes. On the summit of Braduor mountain iu 
its vicinity are the remains of a square encamp- 
ment. The church is a singularly formed irregular 
structure. Here is a Free Grammar school, which 
was erected and endowed by a Lady Watkins. 

KILPECK.] At Kilpcck, 8 miles S. W. from 
Hereford, was an ancient castle and cell of Bene- 
dictines :, the former was the residence of the nobl 
family of Kilpec. The priory stood from the castle 
a quarter of a mile. 

KINGSLANU.] This is a neat and pleasant vil-. 
lagc, 4 miles N. W. by W. from Lfominstcr. Th* 
inhabitants have a custom of shading their doors, 
and windows with jessamine, woodbines, and grapc- 
The church is a massive building with an 



vines. 



embattled tower. Margaret, widow of Lord Mor- 
timer, procured a grant of a market and fair for this 
manor, in the thirty-fourth of Edward the First: 
but the former has lojig boi'u disused. " Some sny," 

remarks- 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



remarks Lelaml, " there was a castle at Kingsland, 
near the Parsonage liouse, and that King Merwald 
wa3 buried there." 

LADY LIFT.] The famous eminence denominated 
JLady Lift, lies about two miles S. E. frrtni Sams- 
field. From its summit, the prospects burst upon 
the view with uncommon sublimity aud grandeur. 
This eminence, withalong extent oi beautiful grounds 
to the south-east, composes a part of the charming 
demesne of Foxley, the seat of Uvedale Price, Esq. 
the celebrated author of Essays on the Picturesque. 
The approach to Foxley, from the village of Maw- 
s'el Lucy, is carried near the broken banks of a 
winding rivulet, that flows through the valley be- 
tween the Foxley and Wormesly hills, which attain 
Considerable elevation, and are covered with fine 
trees, forming a kind of woody amphitheatre round 
the mansion. This is a square and plain structure 
of brick, situated on the declivity of the western 
eminence, and commanding some beautiful views 
over the vale of Hereford. Most of the apartments 
are elegantly fitted up, and decorated with a good 
collection ot paintings. Among them is an old man's 
head, by Titian ; a fine head of Old Parr, supposed 
by Rubens ; a large Battle Piece, by Berghem ; a 
storm at Sea, by Vandervelde ; and an upright pic- 
ture of Ruins and Statues. From the liouse, a ride 
of about two miles on the side of the eminence, winds 
through the grounds and plantations towards the 
summit. 

LEDBURY.] About 15{ miles E. by S.from Here- 
ford, and 121 W. JV. W. from London, stands the 
ancient market and borough town of Ledbury. It 
is seated on a declivity, in a little valley, formed by 
the Dog-Hill and other eminences, near the western 
bank of the Leddon. It consists chiefly of two 
streets, crossing each other at right angles : the 
principal street runs north and south, and has a 
middle row near the old market house, which is 
elevated on strong oak piHars, and composed of tim- 
ber and lath plastered and white washed ; the beams 
being coloured black. This mode of building pre- 
vails in the more ancient parts of the town; and 
many of the houses have projecting stories. The 
pavement of this town is bad ; the small stones that 
form it, being pressed into the native stiff' clay, of 
which the soil is composed. 

The town of Ledbury formerly belonged to the 
see of Hereford, to which it was given by a Saxon, 
named Edwin, who imagined himself cured of the 
palsy, through the intercession of St. Ethelbcrt. 
Bishop Bohiui procured for it the charter of a mar- 
ket from King Stephen; but this falling into disuse, 
Queen Elizabeth, in 1584, granted a new charter 
for a market, and two fairs ; the tolls to be given 
to the poor. This borough had once the privilege 
of sending two members to Parliament, but after- 
wards surrendered its right on the plea of poverty. 

Ledbury church is a large building, of Saxon 
origin. The living has two sinecure rectors, called 
Portionaries, because they change their portion of 



tythes, and other returns, every third year; they 
are in the Bishop's gift, and receive institution and 
induction, and these two alternately nominate the 
vicar. Bishop Trevenant made the church collegi- 
ate about the year 1401 ; but the college was dis- 
solved in 1547. The church consists of a nave, 
side aisles, and chancel; a chapel, dedicated to 
St. Catherine ; and a detached tower, terminated 
by a finely proportioned spire, about sixty feet high. 
The west front has a curious Saxon door-way. The 
west windows of the nave and side aisles, are high 
and pointed, having strong buttresses between them, 
bounded by pillars, and terminating in turrets. The 
nave has octagon pillars with pointed arches; and 
was divided from the chancel by a very beautiful 
carved screen, half of which has been removed, to 
make room for a seat for one of the Portionaries. 
The chancel appears to have formed part of the ori- 
ginal building, and displays several short massive 
columns, with semicircular arches : several of the 
ancient stalls remain. On the north side is the 
chapel of St. Catherine ; of whom we find the fol- 
lowing account: " Katherine Audley, or, as she is 
commonly called, St. Katherine, was a religious 
woman in the reign of Edward the Second, and had 
a maid called Mabel, and not being fixed in any 
settled place, she had a revelation, that she should 
not set up her rest till she came to a town where 
the bells should ring of themselves. She and her 
maid coining near Ledbury, heard the bells ring, 
though the church doors were shut, and no ringers 
there. Here then she determined to spend the re- 
mainder of her days, and built an hermitage, living 
on herbs, and sometimes on milk. The king, in 
consideration of her birth, or piety, or both, granted 
her an annuity of 30/." St. Catherine's chapel is 
nearly square, and has five pointed windows, the 
mullions of which spread into rich ramifications, all 
adorned with rosettes. The windows were formerly 
decorated with painted glass. 

Amongst the numerous sepulchral memorials con- 
tained in this fabric, are several ancient and curious 
tombs. In the north aisle is the defaced effigies of 
a lady, unknown, lying on an altar tomb, richly 
ornamented with arches and shields. In the chancel 
are the effigies, in alabaster, of Edward Skynner, 
Gent, of Ledbury, his wife, and ten children. 
Robert Skinner, Bishop of Worcester, and the late 
Lord Chief Justice Baron Skinner, were of this 
family. In the south aisle is the burial place of the 
Biddulph family : it contains eight monuments, the 
most elaborate of which was erected to the memory 
of Michael Biddulph, Esq. of Crofton Hull, Wor- 
cestershire. An inscription records the interment 
of James Baily, of Ledbury, who died in Decem- 
ber, 1674, " aged 100 years and eight months. 
He was younger brother to Humphry Baiiy, of 
Ocul Pychard, and of Samuel Baily, late of Here- 
ford. These three brothers lived the age of three 
hundred years : what one wanted, the other made 
up. Mors rapit omnia." Here also is an inscrip- 
tion 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



.503 



tion in memory of Anne, wife of Ambrose Elton, 
Esq. of the Hazel, and daughter of Sir Edward ! 
Ashton, Knt. and Bart. She had seventeen chil- ' 
dren, of whom she lived to see eleven married; and ' 
of their issue more than 120 persons. Beneath a 
brass figure, is the following epitaph : 

" Say Pater noster for Sir William Callw 
Who loved God well and Alllwlw." 

On another stone the deity, and underneath a man 
kneeling, with these words issuing from his mouth, 
" Miserere mei Detis." On a brass plate on the 
north side the communion table was inscribed- 

" Here lies mayister Robert Preece, 
That in his lyving was lioklen wise. 
For the love of Peter and of Paul 
Pray for mayister Preecu's saul." 

At the east end of the chancel, Charles Godwyn, : 
Bishop Godwyn's son, and Dorothy his wife, lie i 
under a flat stone thus inscribed. 

" Prsibit Dorothea, 
Sequctur Carolus: 
Ambo resurgent. 
God-wyn the one, God-wun the other." 

St. Catherine's hospital, founded here by Bishop 
Foliot, about the year 1232, was for six single men, 
two men and their wives, and two widows. Queen 
Elizabeth re-founded it for a master, seven poor 
widowers, and three poor women, each to be al- 
lowed 6A 13s. -id. annually; besides clothes and 
firing. This allowance has been augmented to five 
shillings weekly. The hospital is an ancient timber 
and plaster building, standing near the market house. 
A Free School, partly supported by rents issuing 
from dissolved chantry lands, and a Charity school, 
have been founded here; besides several alms houses, 
&c. The clothing trade was at one period very 
flourishing ; but the principal business now carried 
on here, is the manufacture of ropes, lines, and 
sacks. Great quantities of cyder are manufactured 
in this neighbourhood ; and the cyder trade is very 
flourishing. The population amounts to about 3,1 36. 
The Bishops of Hereford formerly had a palace at 
Ledbury. 

On the Dog-Hill, north of the town, is Hope 
fr'iid, a pleasant little seat, belonging to Sir II. V. 
Tempest, Bart, and, about two miles southward, is 
the Vineyard Camp, the area and works of which 
have been almost dci'aced by the plough. 

LEOMINSTF.R.} The ancient market town of Leo- 
minster 13| miles N. from Hereford, and 137 
W. N. W. from London is situated in a rich and 
fertile vale, abounding with orchards, hop-yards, 
fine meadows, and arable lands. Leland describes 
its immediate site, as " sumwhat lowe, and all the 
ground very neere about it is farre lower." The 
Lug flows on its north and east sides : two smaller 
streams run through the town, and throe other con- 

VO,L. u. NO. 88. 



siderable rivulets pass it within half a mile. Its 
extent, from north to south, is nearly a mile; and 
from east to west, about half that distance. The 
suburbs are ill-built, and the streets in the centre of 
the town are narrow. The old houses arc of timber 
and plaster, fantastically adorned with curious gro- 
tesque carvings, and coloured white and black. 
The modern buildings, however, are of brick. 
" The towne of Leonminster," observes Leland, 
" is metcly large, and hath good butldinges of tym-- 
bre. The towne, by reason of their principal! wool, 
use greate drapinge of clothe, and thereby it flou- 
rished. Syns of latter days it chanced that the 
cittyes of Hereford and Worcester complained of 
the frequency of people that came to Lcmstcr, in 
prejudice of bothe their markets, in the shy re towne, 
and also in hindringe their drapinge: whereupon 
the Saturday markett was removed from Lemster, 
and a markett on Friday was newly assigned unto 
it: syns that time the towne of Lemster hath de- 
cayed. The antiquity of the towne is most famous 
by a monastery of nunnes that Merwaldus, Kingo, 
of the Marches, built there, and endowed it with all 
the land thereabout, saving only the Lordshipc now 
called Kingsland ; and it is supposed of Clcrkcs, 
that the old name of the towne toke beginning of the 
nunnes, and was called in Welch, Llnn-llheny; 
that is, locus vel fauuro monialium; and not <>t':i 
lion, that is written to have appeared to King Mer- 
wald, upon which vision he began, as it is said, to 
build this nunnery : other Kings of the Marches im- 
mediately following King Merwald, were benefac- 
tors unto yt. Some say that the nunnery was after 
in the Danes wars destroyed, and that after a col- 
lege of prebends set ther: the certainty is known, 
that the Abbey of Shaftsbury had rule at Lemster, 
and possessed much landes there, and sent part of 
the reliques of St. Edward the Martyr to be adored 
there. King Henry I. annexed the laws of Lem- 
ster to his Abbey of Reading, and ther was a cell of 
monks instituted at Lemster by the abbots of Read- 
ing. Some say that the monks of the priory said 
that they had the scull of the head of Merewald, and 
ofEthelmund, Kings of Merch. Mr. Hackluit told 
me, that the body of King Merewald was found in 
a wall in the old church at Wenlok. Ther is but 
one paroche church in Leominstcr; but k is forge,, 
somewhat dark, and of ancient hiuldiug, insomuch 
that yt is a greate likelihood that yt is the church 
that was afore tle conquest. The church of the 
priory was hard joined to the east end of the paroche 
church, and was but a small thing.e. The common, 
fame of the people about Lemster isy that King 
Merewald, and some of his successors, had :\ cas- 
tle, or palace, on an hill side by the town of Lco- 
minster, half a mile off by east; the place is now 
called Comfort Castle, wher now he some tokens 
ofdiches, where buildings have beeu : the people of 
Lemstcr, and thereabouts, come once a year to this 
place to sport and play." The etymology of Lco- 
iiiinster, by Camden,. corresponds with that as- 
1 L aigi!d 



594 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



signed' by Leland. Hill considers it to derive its 
present appellation from being seated at the conflux 
of the Lug and Oney ; the latter appearing to be 
the original denomination of the stream now called 
the Pinsley : thus Lug-Ouey-Minster, would "be 
softened into Leonminster, and Leominster, and 
Lemster. Blonnt, observing that the name of the 
town is spelt Leofminstre in the Domesday Book, 
deduces that appellation from the minster or church 
of L'jof, or Leofric, Earl of Jlercia. 

Merwald was the son of Penda, King of Mercia, 
and brother of Peada, his successor. How the nun- 
nery, founded by him, was restored after its de- 
struction by the Danes, is uncertain ; but it is 
known to have existed here about the beginning of 
the reign of Edward the Confessor. 

At tiie time of the irruption into Herefordshire, 
by Gryffyth, a Welsh sovereign, and Algar, Earl 
of Chester, anno 1055, when those chieftains seized 
upon the town, and strengthened it by fortifications, 
the approach of Earl Harold occasioned the Welsh 
to retire precipitately. Harold having recovered 
the town, is supposed to have strengthened the 
works, and placed a garrison here for the better 
security of the inhabitants. Leominster manor, 
with its appurtenances, consisting of 16 dependent 
estates, had been assigned by Edward the Confes- 
sor, to his Queen Editha ; it was governed by eight 
prajpositi, or bailiffs ; eight bedelli, or beadles ; and 
eight radchenistri, or free tenants ; and it contained 
238 villains, 74 borderers, and 82 men and women 
servants. When the Norman survey was made, 
the manor belonged to the King, and great part of 
the customary rent was paid as composition for salt, 
fish, and eels. Here was a wood six miles in length, 
and three broad ; but part of it was, even then, be- 
gun to be cleared for tillage : an aerie of hawks is 
mentioned in the same record. About the time of 
William Rufus, the fortifications were strengthened 
and enlarged, to secure the town against the incur- 
sions of the Welsh. In the reign of King John, 
William de Braose, or Braouse, Lord of Brecknock, 
a turbulent and high-spirited baron, who had seve- 
ral times been high-sheriff of this county, and was 
possessed of many of the border castles, revolted 
against that sovereign, and making incursions into 
this neighbourhood, seized on Weobley castle, and 
then marched against Leominster. The inhabitants 
knowing his cruel disposition, sought refuge within 
the works ; but, after a few weeks, were forced to 
surrender, when De Braose plundered the town, 
and burnt great part of it, with the priory and 
church, and treated the townspeople with much in- 
humanity. The buildings of that period, are re- 
corded to have been situated more on the western 
bank of the Lug, than at present. De Braose was 
afterwards obliged to seek refuge on the continent : 
but his wife and eldest son, falling into the hands of 
the King, were starved to death, in Windsor castle. 
Subsequently to the defeat 'of the Earl of March, 
by Owen Glendour, that chieftain took possession 



of the town, and confined Mortimer in a common 
dungeon : he also plundered the church of many 
rich ornaments, and levied a heavy contribution on 
the inmates of the priory. After the battle of 
Shrewsbury, Glendour retreated from Leominster, 
and stationed his army in a strong camp, on a hill, 
about two miles to the south. Previously to the 
battle between the Earl of March, and Jasper, 
Earl of Pembroke, in 1460-1, the royal forces were 
strengthened by the garrison of Leominster ; and 
here, after the victory obtained by the former, Mor- 
gan ap Reuther, David Floyde, Esq. and several 
other Welshmen of note, who had been made pri- 
soners, were executed without trial. 

On the death of Edward the Sixth, the endea- 
vours of the Duke of Northumberland, to secure 
the throne for the Lady Jane Grey, occasioned an 
assemblage, near the town, of about 13,000 men in 
the Duke's interest. This force quickly began to 
diminish, as the success of the Princess Mary be- 
came more apparent ; till, at length, the most zea- 
lous partizans of the Duke, alone remained toge- 
ther : and they strongly entrenched themselves on a 
small eminence, called Curnah, or Coursenah hill, 
about one mile west from Leominster, and from 
this tower menaced the town with an assault. The 
inhabitants, who were mostly in favour of the regu- 
lar succession, procured assistance from Hereford, 
from the forces then under the command of the 
Earl of Arundel, and, headed by Philip Hobby, 
Richard Wall way n, and Francis Throckmorton, 
made an attack on the entrenched camp ; and, after 
a hard struggle, defeated and dispersed the adher- 
ents of the Lady Jane. Mary appears to have con- 
sidered the service thus rendered, as of considerable 
importance, for she soon after rewarded the leaders 
with promotion, and granted the first regular char- 
ter of incorporation to this town, with many valu- 
able and extensive privileges. 

In the year 1610, during the prevalence of a con- 
tagious disorder at Hereford, the summer assizes 
were held in this town. One cause decided here, 
shews the severity of the religious statutes then in 
force : Roger Cadwallader, a Catholic priest, a 
native of Stretton - Sugwas, near Hereford, was 
condemned, and executed, and his four quarters 
set up on different sides of the town, for taking 
orders beyond sea. In the time of Charles the 
First, the republicans erected a battery of cannon 
near the church, in order to overawe the inhabitants, 
who were thought to be too favourably disposed to 
the royal cause. 

Leominster manor, with all its appurtenances, 
then valued at 6661. 19s. 8rf. annually, Was given, 
by Henry the First, to Reading Abbey ; in conse- 
quence of which the priory here became subordinate 
to the Abbots of Reading ; and the town itself was 
governed by officers, who held their places under 
their charter. The principal officers were, an upper 
and under bailiff, assisted by a common-council, 
formed of the principal burgesses. After the disso- 
lution 






HEREFORDSHIRE. 



lution of the monasteries, Leoiuinster was held by 
the crown, till the time of James the First, when it 
was granted to the Duke of Buckingham, on condi- 
tion of his paying into the Exchequer, the yearly 
rent of 305/. 1 Is. 5iL Part of this sum was pro- 
bably intended to be paid over to the Queen, Anne 
of Denmark, in whom Leominster, with four of its 
dependent manors, had been vested, as parcel of her 
jointure. During the interregnum, those estates 
were in the possession of Henry Martin, Esq. 
one of the Judges of Charles the First ; but, after 
the restoration, the whole appears to have been re- 
stored to the then Duke of Buckingham, who sold 
a considerable part of the estates to different pur- 
chasers, about the year 1602; and ten or twelve 
years afterwards, the remainder, including the ma- 
nor and borough of Leominster, was taken posses- 
sion of by Major Wildman, an active supporter of 
the Parliament, during the civil wars, to whom the 
Duke was indebted the sum of 1400/. The Major, 
after the revolution, in 1888, sold several of these 
estates, and leased so many others for 21 years, that 
the proceeds of the residue scarcely amounted to 
30/. more than the fee-farm rent payable to the 
crown. He therefore, in 1692, sold all the remain- 
der, including Leominster, to Lord Coningsby, for 
8063/. The Earl of Essex is now the proprietor. 

The whole of that part of the church at Leo- 
minster, appropriated to divine service, was erected 
at the beginning of the last century ; the old church 
hating been partly destroyed, in March 1700, by an 
accidental fire, occasioned by the carelessness of 
Rome plumbers, who had been employed in repairing 
the leads. Soon afterwards, an estimate of the 
charges necessary to put the church into the same 
state in which it was before the fire happened, was 
made on oath, and amounted to 15,5417. 18s. Id. 
The expences of the new fabric, however, exceed- 
ed this estimate by upwards of 2000/. The an- 
cient remains present some interesting specimens of 
Saxon architecture. The south side, which is the 
modern part, is spacious and lofty, and in a plain, 
but neat style. : the roof is sustained on four Tuscan 
pillars. The pews are of oak, and regularly dis- 
posed ; at the west end, is a neat gallery, supported 
by Corinthian pillars : a fine organ was erected in 
this gallery, in the years 1737 and 1738. The altar- 
piece is a painting of the Last Supper, from Reu- 
bens. Most of the ancient monuments were de- 
stroyed by the fire, in 1700. Some curious ancient 
stalls were destroyed at the same time. In the 
church-yard, are memorials of two females, named 
Jofcn Seward, and Mrs. Wheel, both of whom at- 
tained the great age of 103. 

Besides the church, here are four places of reli- 
gious worship, for the Baptists, Presbyterians, Mo- 
ravians, and Quakers : the Baptist meeting-house 
is a neat edifice. 

During the time of rebuilding the church, divine 
service was performed in a contiguous building, an- 
ciently called the chapelle in the Forbury, erected 



by Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury, at thelat- 
ter end of the 13th century. It was afterwards ap- 
propriated to the business of tuition, and thence call- 
ed the school-house ; but has of late years been con- 
verted into a theatre : it is a p ain building, with 
windows in the pointed style. 

Some of the priory buildings are yet Staid- 
ing : among them is the priory-house, which has 
undergone various alterations. Lord Coningsby 
had it fitted up as a county-gaol. It was afterward's 
rented by the corporation, and made a mansion- 
house for the bailiff'; but has since been converted 
into a house of industry. The' oil-mill on the priory 
green, was the corn-mill belonging to the priory. 
The altnery close, was the site of the almery, or 
almsbury, a building from which the doles were de- 
livered to the poor. 

The town-hall, or butter close, is a singular build- 
ing, of timber and plaster : the architect was the ce- 
brated John Abel, who built the shire-hall at. Here- 
ford, and constructed the mills during the siege of 
that city, in 1645. This fabric stands pn' twelve 
oak pillars, now sustained on stone pedestals : the 
brackets and spandriU of the arches above the pil- 
lars, and the upper parts of the building, display 
much carving. Numerous square, and angular 
compartments are iormcd by the disposition of the 
beams at the sides and ends of the structure, which 
also exhibits various shields of arms of those who 
contributed to defray the expence of raising it. 
The weight of the roof was much lessened, and the 
whole fabric repaired some years ago. The Quarter 
Sessions are held here, as well as the assemblies of 
the corporation. In the council-chamber is a half- 
length portrait of Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, 
father to the last Countess of Essex. A new and 
neat little market-house for grain, was erected iu 
the year 1803 : it is of the Tuscan order, with pedi- 
ments and a cupola, standing in a small square to 
the eastward of the High Street. A new gaol was 
built here, about the year 1750. The trade of the 
town is flourishing, and many of the shops are very 
respectable, and well furnished. The clothing; 
trade furnishes employment for n considerable 
number of the inhabitants ; and the hnt trade is 
carried on to some extent. The wool grown in the 
neighbourhood is proverbially excellent ; and the 
cyder and hops Arc also held in much estimation. 

Leominster is governed by a bailiff, chief steward, 
recorder, 21 capital burgesses, a chamberlain, two 
Serjeants at mace, &c. The members of Parlia- 
ment are chosen by the corporation, and inhabitants 
paying scot ami lot : the earliest return was made 
in the year 1204. An alms-house for four decayed 
widows, each of whom has 5/. annually, has been 
endowed here by Mrs. Hester Clarke ; and nume- 
rous other charitable benefactions have been made. 
The population of Leominster is about 3288. The 
site of the castle, or palace, mentioned by Leland,is 
supposed to be the mount to the eastward. 

.] At Uanfrfltber, about a rotte 

and 



596 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



and a half S. from Harewood, was the site of an an- 
cient college, founded, with eleven others, early in 
the sixth century, hy St. Dubricius, Archbishop of 
Caerleon, and king of Urging. " In the foremen- 
tioned region of Urchcnfield," observes Taylor, in 
his history of Gavel Kind, " is a certain parish 
called Ilcn-llan, commonly Hentland, which in the 
English tongue signifies the Old Church; and in 
certain pastures belonging to a farm in that parish, 
there is a place which to this day is called Llan- 
frawtwr, which is as much as to say, the church 
or convent of the brethren ; the site whereof was 
upon a small hill, not half a mile distant from Hent- 
land ; the ruins of which place, with its old founda- 
tions, are yet to be seen, and was a place dedicated 
to holy use : there it was that the great college for 
one hundred students was founded by St. Dubricius, 
the prince of this region, (to repel the progress of 
the Pelagian heresie) who succeeded his grandfather 
Pibanus, and in the days of King Arthur, was made 
Archbishop of Caerleon." The foundations of ex- 
tensive buildings may still be traced here at particu- 
lar seasons, on the summit of an eminence rising 
from the western bank of the Wye, but all the mate- 
rials that were above ground, have been used in the 
construction of walls, &c. even part of the founda- 
tions themselves, have been dug up within memory 
for the same purpose. Some adjacent fields bear the 
names of the Nether-Town Field, and Behind-Town. 
The landholders, or " brinkers," on this part of the 
river, possess the right of fishing in the " Free 
Water," as that part of the Wye is called which 
lies between Holm-Lacey and Strangford, " pro- 
vided they expose the salmon, and other fish that 
are caught, for sale, upon a board fixed up in the 
Hereford turnpike road, between Llanfrother and 
Horewithy." About half a century ago, this cus- 
tom was enforced by the manor court of Wormelow, 
and the fishermen were ordered to carry their fish 
to this board, that, " any woman big with child, or 
poor person, might have as small a peice as a pound." 
This order was probably made merely to try the 
right : the board on which the fish were exposed 
was taken down several years ago. 

At a little distance from Llanfrother, to the S.W. 
is an ancient square camp, called Geer Copp, and 
about two miles to the N.E. on a hill, is a smaller 
camp, called Caradoc, or Cradock, which is also 
the name of a seat here, belonging to the Digby 
family. The mansion is a venerable building, plea- 
santly situated on the Wye. 

LONGTOWN.] At the secluded village of Long- 
town, or Cloudock, 17 miles S. W. by W. from 
Hereford, are some inconsiderable remains of a cas- 
tle, and to the eastward is an eminence, called 
Money Farthing Hill ; probably from coins having 
been found here. 

LONGWORTH.] Longworth, the ancient seat of 
the Walwyn family, is situated between one and two 
miles from Sutton, on the opposite side of the 
Froine. Thomas Wallewayn, who died in 1417, 



bequeathed Longworth to William, his younger son, 
whose descendants have ever since resided here. 
The mansion was rebuilt some years ago. The 
apartments are decorated with some good pictures ; 
and the library contains a. select and valuable col- 
lection of books. The grounds display some fine 
timber. 

LYNGEN.] Nine miles N. E. by N. from King- 
ton, is the village of Lyngen, near the church of 
which, on a mount, was formerly a castle, belong- 
ing to Sir Henry Lingein, who, in the time of 
Charles the First, in whose service great part of 
his fortune was expended, besieged the castle of 
Brampton Brian, and burnt the town, in conse- 
quence of which his estate was sequestrated to 
make good the damages; but after an inventory had 
been taken of his effects, Sir Robert Haiiey, to 
whose use the proceed:, were ordered to be applied, 
waited on his widow, and having asked her if it was 
complete, and she had signed it, presented it to her 
with all his right thereto. Sir Henry had issue by 
this lady (daughter of Sir Walter Pye,) 19 children, 
of whom seven daughters survived ; among whom 
the remains of his estates were afterwards divided. 
At Limbrook, a little village, to the south of Lyn- 
gen, was formerly a cell, belonging to Aveney, in 
Normandy ; and, near the left bank of the Lug, 
was a priory of nuns of the order of St. Augustine, 
founded by some of the Mortimer family, about the 
reign of Richard the First. 

LYONS-HALL CASTLE.] Of this fortress, between 
two and three miles E. of Kington, some fragments 
of the outer walls are all that remains. The estate 
belonged to the late Lord Weymouth. The mauor 
anciently enjoyed a market, and a fair. 

MADLEY.] Seven miles W. by S. from Hereford, 
is the little village of Madley, formerly the site of 
a castle, of which the only memorial is the name of 
Castle Farm. Near the centre of the village is a 
small cross, and in the church yard are the remains 
of another. 

MARCLE.] Much-Marcle, or Great Marcle; five 
miles S. W. by W. from Ledbury, was granted, by 
Edward the First, to 1 Edmund Mortimer, whose de- 
scendants inherited it till the time of the last Roger 
Mortimer, Earl of March. 

Near the church, says Blount, ' stood Mortimer's 
castle, the site visible ; and another, perhaps, more 
ancient, called Ellingham castle, the site overgrown 
with wood, and called the Quarry Wood;' at a lit- 
tle distance from the village. Some ancient muti- 
lated effigies within the church, are supposed to 
represent Blanche, daughter of Roger Alortimer, 
and wife to John Lord Audley, temp. Richard 
the Second ; and the great Roger Mortimer exe- 
cuted at the Elms, in Smithfield, and Joan, his 
lady, daughter of Peter de Genevil. In a small 
chapel, built here by Sir John Kyrle, Bart, is the 
tomb of himself, and his Lady Sibylla. 

In the reign of Elizabeth, Marcley hill, accord- 
ing to Camden, " rose as it were from sleep, and 

for 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



for three days, moved on its vast body with an hor- 
rible noise, driving every thing before it to an higher 
ground." Fuller asserts, that the whole field that 
moved was twenty acres, and that it travelled four- 
teen hours, and ascended eleven fathoms up hill, 
leaving a chasm 400 feet wide, and 5-20 long. Sir 
Richard Baker, has thus detailed the particulars of 
this event in his 'Chronicle of England.' "In 
the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, a prodigi- 
ous earthquake happened in the east parts of Here- 
fordshire, at a little town called Kinuaston. On the 
17th of February, at six o'clock in the evening, the 
earth began to open, and a hill, with a rock under 
it, making at first a great bellowing noise, which 
was heard a great way off', lifted itself up, and be- 
gan to travel, bearing along with it the trees that 
grew upon it, the sheepfolds and flocks of sheep j 
abiding there at the same time. In the place from 
whence it was first moved, it left a gaping distance, 
forty feet broad, and fourscore ells long : the whole 
field was about twenty acres. Passing along, it 
overthrew a chapel standing in the way, removed a 
yew tree planted in the church yard, from the west 
to the east : with the like force it thrust before it 
highways, sheepfolds, hedges, and trees ; made 
tilled ground pasture, and again turned pasture into 
tillage. Having walked in this sort from Saturday 
evening till Monday noon, it then stood still." In 
Taylor's map of the county, the spot of ground 
whose motion gave rise to these various relations, 
is named Wonder; and, according to present ap- 
pearances, was nothing more than a land-slip. 
The land that moved, seems to have been about two 
acres ; but its motion was certainly agreeable to the 
common laws of gravitation. The yew tree is still 
existing; and the chapel bell was dug up a few years 
since. 

MKEND PARK.] Under the west side of Saddle- 
bow hill, about six miles from Hereford, lies Meend 
Park, the seat of Sir Richard Symonds, Bart. The 
house is plain, but the surrounding scenery is very 
beautiful. 

MOCCAS COURT.] Moccas Court, 9f miles W. 
N. W. from Hereford, is a handsome modern build- 
ing, occupying an easy ascent from the Wye, which, 
pouring through the plain, gives interest and ani- 
mation to the scenery. The park, which ranges to 
the south-west, is finely wooded, and includes a 
large portion of the neighbouring eminence : many 
of the views from the ground are extremely fine.* 

MONKLAND.] At Monkland, 2* miles W. S. W. 
from Lcoininster, was a small cell of Benedictines, 
subordinate to St. Peter's abbey, at Conches, in 



* The estate of Mocc;is Court came into the possession of 
Sir G. A. Cornrwall, Bait from his marriage with the daugh- 
ter and heiress of the late Velters Cornew.il!, Esq. who repre- 
sented this county in ^even successive Parliaments. The Corne- 
walls were a younger branch of the CornewalU of Burford, in 
Shropshire, and with them trace their descent to Richard, King 
of the Romans. They obtained this estate, with the neigh- 

VOL. II. NO. 88. 



Normandy. On the suppression of the Alien Prio- 
ries, this estate was granted to Sir Rowland Leu- 
thall, and Edward Windsor. 

MONNINGTON.] Monnington,nine miles W.N.W. 
from Hereford, was the property and seat of an an- 
cient family of that name, who derived it from their 
residence on tliis spot, and one of whom married a 
daughter of the famous Owen Glendour, who is tra- 
ditionally represented to have sought refuge, and (o 
have been buried here. 

About the year 1680, the church was rebuilt. In 
the church yard stood the trunk of a sycamore, 
which being in the workman's way, was cut down. 
Directly under it, about afoot below the surface of 
the ground, was laid a large gravestone without any 
inscription; and that being removed, there was dis- 
covered at the bottom of a well-stoned grave, the 
body (as supposed) of Owen Glendour ; which was 
whole and entire, and of goodly stature. But there 
were no tokens or remains of any coffin. 

MORDEFORD.] This place, five miles E. S. E. 
from Hereford, near the junction of the Lug with 
the Wye, is celebrated in traditional history, as the 
scene of a furious combat between a winged serpent, 
and a malefactor who had been sentenced to die, but 
was promised his pardon, on condition of destroying 
the wily monster. " The abode of this animal is 
said to have been a neighbouring woody steep : his 
depredations were great and alarming ; man and 
beast were alike subjected to his ravages ; and no 
one could be found sufficiently hardy to attempt his 
destruction, till the love of liberty and life, invigo- 
rated a condemned criminal to engage in the peri- 
lous enterprise. The serpent, (continues the narra- 
tive) was wont to resort to a particular spot near th 
confluence of the above rivers, to slake his thirst ; 
and here the assault was made, the man having pre- 
viously concealed himself near the water side. The 
contest was of some continuance, but was at last 
terminated by the destruction of the fell ravager ; 
whose poisonous breath, however, proved fatal to 
the valourous champion, and bereaved him of life in 
the moment of victory. In memory of this event, a 
large green dragon, with expanded wings, anit 
web-footed, is painted on the cast end of Mordeforcl 
church. A variation in the traditioual account re- 
presents the monster thus slain as amphibious, and 
as having been left upon the banks alter a consider- 
able flood." 

MORTIMER'S CROSS.] The little- village of Mor- 
timer's Cross, eight miles N. W. from Leominstcr, 
is situated in a very beautiful valley, bounded by 
considerable eminences covered with fine timber, and 



bouring castle of R -eclwardine, Sec. by marriage with the heiress 
of the Vaughans of Bredwardine ; of whom Sir Roger Yjueiuiu,. 
Knt. was son-in-law to the renowned Silurian, David Giiin, 
and, with him ami lliuir kinsman, Wallrr Llwjtl of Breck- 
nock, greatly contributed to the success of Henry ihe Fifih at 
the battle of Agincourt. 



7 M 



watered; 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



watered by the Lug. This place is cclehrutetl from 
the battle fought between the partisans of the rival 
houses of York and Lancaster, on Candlemas eve, 
1461.* The immediate site of the battle was Kings- 
Innd field, a level, though not extensive plain, in- 
tersected by a brook, and extending southward. 
Here, in an angle of two roads, a neat Tuscan 
pedestal of white stone has been erected, having its 
base inscribed as follows : 

' Tliis Pedssta! is erected to perpetuate the memory of 
an obstinate, bloody, and decisive battle, fought near 
this spot, in thecivil wars between the ambitious houses 
of York ami Lancaster, on the 2d day of February, 
1460, between the forces of Edward Mortimer, Earl 
of March, afterwards Edward IV. on the side of York, 
and those of Henry VI. on the side of Lancaster. 
The king's forces were commanded by Jasper, Earl 
of Pembroke : Edward commanded his own in person 
and was victorious. The slaughter was great on botli 
sides ; 4000 being left dead on the field ; and many 
\VeUh persons, of the first distinction, were taken 
prisoners, among whom wasOwen Tudor, great grand- 
lather to Henry VIII. and a descendant of the illus- 
trious Cadwallader, who was afterwards beheaded at 
Hereford. This was the decisive battle that fixed Ed- 
ward IV. on the throne of England: he was proclaim- 
ed king on the fifth of March following." 

" Erected by subscription, 1799." 

NETHER-WOOD.] Netherwood, an extensive manor 
on the north-east side of Wall Hill, five miles 
N. N. W. from Thornbury was part of the es- 
tate of the Mortimers.; and Roger Mortimer, earl 
of March, was a native of this place. The mansion 
is recorded to have been a noble structure, surround- 
ed by a park of nearly 1000 acres. Here was born 
the great, but unfortunate, Robert Devereux, Earl 
of Essex, Queen Elizabeth's favourite and victim. 

ORLETON.] Orleton, six .miles N. by E. from 
Leominster, was given by the conqueror to Ranulph 
Mortimer, whose descendant, Edward the Fourth, 
held it distinct from the crown lands, and had a par- 
ticular seal, even after he was king, for the con- 
cerns of the earldom of March. 

After Edward's death, the manor \viis annexed to 
. the crown, and was granted by James the First to 
CJeorge Hoptou ; from him it passed through seve- 
ral families to the Blounts, of whom Thomas Blount, 
Esq. was author of the ' Fragmenta Antiqiiitatis,' 
flr ancient Tenures and Customs of some Manors. | 
Besides writing several other works, he made two | 
folio volumes of manuscript collections for a history : 
of Herefordshire. He died in 1679, and was buried j 
in Orleton ^church. Adam de Orleton, Bishop of | 

* A singular phenomenon is said to have occurred when 
this battle was fought, of which the following <lescription is 
given by Speed. "On the verge of this shire, but between 
Ludiow ami Little Hereford, a great batlail was fought by 
Jasper, Earle of Pembroke, and James Butler, Earle of Or- 
inond and Wiltshire, against the Earle of Marche; in which 
three thousand and eight hundred men were slaine; the two 
earles fled: but Owen Teulher was taken and beheaded. This 
lietd was fought upon the daye of the Virgin Mary's purifica- 



Hereford, of Worcester, nnd of Winchester, in the 
reigns of Edward the Second and Third, was a 
native of this place. 

PEMBRrDGE.] The disused market town of Pem- 
bridge, now dwindled into a village, lies five miles 
N. by W. from Weobley. This place gave name to 
the ancient and honourable family of Pembruge, 
Pembridge, or Brydges, ancestors of the Lords 
Cliandos. It was part of the estate of the Morti- 
mers. 

Pembridge Castle, about a mile N. W. from 
Welsh- Newton, is mentioned as early as the seventh 
of Henry HI. when William Lord Cantilupe was 
its governor. The castle is totally demolished, with 
an adjoining chapel, and the park has been ploughed 
up and cultivated. 

PENCOMB.] The Lord of the manor of Pencomb 
(which lies 4f miles W. by S. from Bromyard) 
claims a pair of gilt spurs as a heriot, from the es- 
tate of every mayor of Hereford, who dies in his 
mayoralty. 

PENYARD CASTLE.] About a mile W. from the 
village of Riford, on the Ross road, is the seques- 
tered site of Penyard Castle, which occupied the 
south side of Penyard Hill. This fortress, origi- 
nally of small extent, is reduced to comparative in- 
significance ; the only part remaining is the habita- 
tion of a wood-ward, whose humble dwelling has a 
pointed window, and an octagonal embattled chim- 
ney. In the garden, which occupies part of the area 
of the fortress, some massy fragments of wall may 
yet be seen, with ground arches, and vestiges of 
pillars. In clearing the space for the garden, many 
human hones were discovered, interred beneath a 
mass of small tiles, forced obliquely into the ground ; 
and in digging among the ruins, some years ago, 
a kind of vestibule, or spacious passage, was found, 
with octagon pilasters, having caps and bases in the 
Saxon style. This appears to have been construct- 
ed for the purpose of defending the narrow pas* 
through the woods of Gloucestershire, towards tho 
counties of Monmouth and Pembroke, by the way 
of Walford and Goodrich. Whoever might have 
been its founders, it appears that the Lords of 
Goodrich castle, were at times the Lords of Pen- 
yard Castle. It was demolished in the civil wars. 
After the restoration, it belonged to Anthony, Earl 
of Kent ; but has since passed through several 
hands. The family of Spence, of Hatigwest, irt 
Yorkshire, are recorded to have assumed, about 
the year 1638, as their arms, ' azure, three Peny- 
yard pence, proper.' Guitkin supposes these coins 

lion, in Anno 1461 ; wherein before the battail was strok, ap- 
peared visibly in the firmament three sunnes, which after a 
while joined "all together, and became as before, for which 
cause, as some have thought, Edward afterwards gave the 
sunne in his full brightness for his ba'dge and cognizance." 
Drayton in his " Miseries of Queen Margariie," attributes 
the victory obtained by the Earl of March to this phs- 



nomenon. 



to 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



to have been minted at this castle ; and silver pence, 
of a particular coinage, are sometimes found in the 
ticighbourhcod. 

PrsBURY.] On an cminejice at this place, above 
the park at Hampton Court, are vestiges of a large 
camp, forming one of a continued chain of encamp- 
ments cros-ing this country, in a north-east direc- 
tion. At Upperton, Netherton, Birdenbury, and 
Wall Hill, nrc encampments of a similar nature. 

RAVEN'S CUFF, SYMOND'S YATE, &c.] On the 
river Wye, between Raven's Cliff, and Symond's 
Yate, the prospects are eminently fine. Gradually 
increasing in interest as the river is descended, they 
unfold an immense mass of rocks of great height, 
and nearly a mile in extent. The rocks are, in 
-some places, crested or shrouded by the deep fo- 
liage of ancient oaks ; in others, the cliffs assume 
the sullen port 01 a ruined and mighty castle. The 
shore, on the opposite side, is more level ; from 
which cause, the bold effect of the roeks is greatly 
increased. At Symond's Yate, or Rock, the Wyo 
veers suddenly to the north, and then flowing in a 
semicircular course, again turns off to the south, till 
it reaches the New Weir, and once more changes 
its direction to the south-west. The narrowest part 
of this peninsula is scarcely half a mile in extent, 
though the space infolded by the river, is between 
six and seven miles. The bird's-eye view from this 
eminence, is very beautiful : the interest is much 
increased by an ancient encampment which crowns 
the summit, and by the contiguity of the iron-works 
t the New Weir. The cascade of the New Weir, 
which intersects the channel between Symond's 
Yate, and the Doward hills, has been selected by 
tourists, as one of the most beautiful and majestic 
scenes upon the Wye. A scene, which, in itself, is 
truly great and awful, so far from being disturbed, 
becomes more interesting and important, by the 
business to which it is destined. Here is a chasm 
between two high ranges of hills, which rise almost 
perpendicularly from the water : the rocks on the 
("ides are mostly heavy masses, and their colour is 
generally brown ; but here and there a pale craggy 
shape starts up to a vast height above the rest, un - 
connected, broken, and bare : large trees frequently 
force out their way amongst them ; and many of 
them stand far back in the covert, where their natu- 
ral dusky hue.ls deepened by the shadow that over- 
hangs them. The river too, as it retires, loses itself 
in woods, which close immediately above, then rise 
thick and high, and darken tins water. In the ; 
midst of all this gloom, is an iron forge, covered 
with a black cloud of smoke, and surrounded with 
half-burned ore, with coal and with cinders : the ; 
fuel for it is brought down a path, worn into steps 
narrow and steep, and winding among precipices ; 
and near it is an. open space of barren moor, about 
which arc scattered the huts of the workmen. It 
stands close to the cascade of the Weir, where the j 
agitation of the current is increased by large frag- ! 
meiitf of rocks, jjliii'ich have been swept down by 



floods from the bank*, or shivered by tempests from 
j the brow; and the sullen sound, at staled intervals, 
of the strokes from the great hammer in the forge, 
| deadens the roar of the water-fall. Just below it, 
i while therapidity of the stream still continue*, a ferry 
! is carried across it ; and, lower down, the fishermen 
! use little round boats, called truckles, (coracles,) 
remains, perhaps, of the ancient British navigation, 
| which the least motion may overset, and the slightest 
touch may destroy. All the employments of the. 
people seem to require either exertion or caution ; 
; and tho ideas of force, or of danger, which attend 
: them, give to the scene an animation unknown to 
the solitary, though perfectly compatible with thn 
wildest romantic situation. The eminence called 
the Great Doward, rises to the northward of Sy- 
mond's Yate, bearing, on ils brow, the remains 'of 
an ancient encampment, called King Arthur's Hall, 
from which the ground gently declines to the river. 
i At a short distance to the west, is the Little Doward 
Hill ; and* on the summit of this, also, are vestiges 
i of an ancient camp. In the vicinity, broad arrow- 
i heads have been found ; and, in a place which seem- 
1 ed to have been arched over, an almost entire human 
: skeleton was discovered, whose joints were pretend- 
I ed to be twice the length of those of the present 
; race. Near the hort reach, called St. Martin's 
pool, said to be the deepest spot on the Wye, that 
| river finally quits the county of Hereford. 

RICHARD'S CASTLE.] About eight miles north 
from Leominstcr, stands Richard's castle, which 
took its name from Richard, surnamed Scroop, to 
whom it belonged in the name of Edward the Con- 
fessor. It has passed through various families, and 
1 was lately the property of the Salways. On the 
declivity of the eminence contiguous to the castle, a 
body of royalists, amounting to nearly 2001) horse 
and foot, under the command of Sir Thomas 1/un- 
derford, were surprised in the year 145, by a force 
far inferior, headed by Colonel Birch, and dispersed 
: with much slaughter. Robert Mortimer procured 
a charter of a market and fair for this manor from 
King John ; but both have long betvu disused. 

ROSE HILL.] About three miles 10. from Ross, 
stands Rose or Bury Hill, the undoubted site of a 
Roman station, the Ariconium of Antoninus. Its 
distance from Glevum, (Gloucester,) and IJIesUnn, 
(Monmouth,) nearly accords with those given in the 
Itinerary, viz. 15 miles from the former, and 11 
from tiio latter. Camdca records a tradition of t'.if. 
station Ariconium, having been ruined by an earth- 
quake ; and it is certain, Unit the appearance of the soil 
at Bury Hill, is very different from that of the ad- 
jacent country, which is inclined to red, while this is 
of an extremely dark hue. The area on which the 
city stood, according to tradition, occupied three or 
four fields, and several acres exhibit this darkness 
of soil. About 50 or 00 years ago, great part ofthft 
ground was in an open and rough *t.Ue, with heaps 
of rubbish overgrown with briars ; b.ut tlic pro- 
prietor resolved to inclose :md l^vel it ; and in so 



600 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



doing many antiquities were found, together with 
an immense quantity of Roman, and some British 
coins. Amongst the antiquities, were fibulas, lares, 
lachrymatories, lamps, rings, and fragments of tes- 
sellated pavements. Some pillars were also dis- 
covered, with stones having holes for the jambs of 
doors, and a vnult or two, in which was wheat of a 
black colour, and in a cinerous state. The surface 
is now very little undulated, but a few coins may 
yet he picked up, when, after ploughing, the clods 
are broken by a gentle rain : and innumerable pieces 
of grey and rod pottery lie scattered over the whole 
tract, some of them of patterns by no means in- 
elegant. The coins are chiefly of the Lower Em- 
pire. Some of the larger stones found amongst 
the ruins of this station, and which appear to have 
been used in building, display strong marks of fire. 
A piece of land, near this station, bears the name of 
Kill-Dane-Field, though from what particular bat- 
tle, tradition is silent. 

Bury Hill commands the view of an extensive 
range of country : to the south, rise the rival hills 
of Penyard and Chace ; and westward, is the whole 
fertile tract of Herefordshire, bounded by the moun- 
tains of Monmouth and Brecon. The site of Ee- 
cleswall castle, about a mile south-westward of 
Bury Hill, is occupied by a modern mansion. 
This estate belonged to the Talbots, from whom it 
came into the possession of the Greys, Lords of 
Wilton ; but it has since passed from their de- 
scendants into the hands of other proprietors. 

Ross.] The market-town of Ross, 15 miles 
S. E. by S. from Hereford, and 121 W. by N. from 
London, is seated upon a rock considerably elevated 
above the Wye, on the eastern bank of that river. 
To those who travel over the causeway from Here- 
ford, it presents a commanding and picturesque ap- 
pearance : scars of the rocks jut out from the green 
banks, and the whole is surmounted by the church, 
which is surrounded by lofty trees, and exhibits its 
' heaven-directed spire' from the highest point of 
the eminence. The origin of this town does not 
appear to be remote. A few coins and medals have 
been found here ; but not more than one or two of 
the Roman times, and those probably originally 



* This distinguished pattern of benevolence was born at 
Whitehouse, in Dymock parish, in Gloucestershire. The ex- 
emplary tenor of his actions, his extensive charities, and good- 
ness o( heart, procured him the love and veneration of his co- 
te in poraries ; and, happily for his fame, Pope, during his visits 
at Holm-Lacey, obtained a sufficient knowledge of his bene- 
ficence, thus to render due homage to his worth : 

" Who hung with woods yon mountain's sultry brow ? 
From the dry rock who bade the waters flow ? 
Not to the skies in useless columns tost, 
Nor in proud falls magnificently lost. 
But clear und artless, pouring through the plain, 
Health to the sick, and solace to the swain- 
Whose causeway parts the vale with shady rows ? 
Whose seats the weary traveller repose ? 
Who taught that heaven-directed spire to rise ? 
' The Man of Ross,' each lisping babe replies ! 



brought from the ruins of Ariconium. In the sum- 
mer of 1804, a copper medal, in excellent preserva- 
tion, and of considerable beauty, was picked up 
from a heap of rubbish: it had been struck in com- 
memoration of the triumph of Trajan over the Da- 
cii. Betun, Bishop of Hereford, to whose see this 
manor was attached, procured the grant of a mar- 
ket for Ross, from King Stephen ; and Henry the 
Third constituted it a free borough. Camden only 
notices it as famous for its iron works ; but the lus- 
tre which it obtained from its inhabitant, John 
Kyrle, the celebrated ' Man of Ross,' has given it 
a high degree of attraction.* The house in which 
Mr. Kyrle resided, is now the King's Arms, a re- 
spectable inn, near the entrance of the town from 
Gloucester ; and a tolerable portrait of him is pre- 
served here : the original likeness is in the posses- 
sion of Lord Muncaster. He died in 1724, at the 
age of 8=1, and was buried in Ross church : on his 
monument is a medallion of Charity supported by 
Benevolence. The prospect ground, as it is called, 
adjoining the church-yard, and the walk which ex- 
tends thence for nearly a mile to the southward, 
were formed by his liberality ; but they are not pre- 
served in that order which his memory demands. 
The prospect ground is now merely a field, but 
enough remains to shew that he intended it for a 
parterre ; and the walk has been deprived of many 
of the trees by which it was formerly shaded, toge- 
ther with the seats for the ' weary traveller's re- 
pose :' the summer-house, also, at the termination 
of the walk, is in a state of decay. Along the 
edges of the rock, which forms the foundation of 
this natural terrace, the sand-martin digs his hollow 
nest ; a proof of the high salubrity of the air, which 
is further illustrated by the longevity of the inhabi- 
tants. Amongst the tombs, in the church, and 
church-yard, numerous inscriptions record the me- 
memory of those who have attained to their 80th, 
90th, and even 100th year. Some of the descend- 
ants of Mr. Kyrle, we believe, still reside here ; as, 
on the 6th of August, 1810, Major Kyrle Money 
presided at a meeting, which was holden at Ross, 
for the purpose of celebrating the triumph which 
had been obtained over the tax-office, by the corn- 
Behold the market-place with poor o'erspread ! 
The Man of Ross divides the weekly bread : 
He feeds yon ahnshouse, neat but void of state, 
Where age and want sit smiling at the gate : 
Him portion'd maids, apprenlic'd orphans blest; 
The young who labour, and the old who rest. 
Is any sick ? the Man of Ross relieves, 
Prescribes, attends, the med'cine makes and gives. 
Is there a variance ? enter but his door, 
Balk'd are the courts, and contest is no more. 
Despairing quacks with curses fled the place. 
And vile attorneys, now a useless race. 
***** 

Of debts and taxes, wife and children clear. 

This man possest five hundred pounds a-year. 

Blush, grandeur, blush ! proud courts, withdraw your 

blaze ; 
Ye little stars ! hide your diminish' d rays." 

tnissioners 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



OOJ 



miseioners of property-tax for the Greytroc hun- 
dred. On that occasion, each of the six commis- 
sioners received an elegant silver tureen, which had 
been voted at a former meeting 1 . 

Ross church is a handsome building, having a 
tower, and well-proportioned spire, rising from the 
west end. It contains several monuments of the 
Rndhulls, the ancient proprietors of the manor of 
Rudlmll, in this neighbourhood : among them, arc 
those of Judge Rudhall, and his Lady, of the time 
of Henry the Seventh ; and of Sir Richard Rud- 
hall, who was knighted at Cadiz, in the reign of 
Elizabeth. In the window over the altar, among 
other fragments of painted glass is one representing 
a bishop, with the inscription, Thomas Hereford - 
onsis, in black letter. The views from the church- 
yard, and contiguous prospect-ground, arc much 
ami justly celebrated. 

This town is governed by a sergeant, and four 
constables. The streets are mostly on a descent ; 
and are extremely rough and narrow, the houses 
appearing huddled upon each other. The market- 
house is in a very decayed state, though erected so 
lately as the reign of Charles the Second : it is built 
of stone, and ascended by several steps ; the upper 
part is sustained by semicircular arches, supported 
by three ranges of pillars, the space between them 
being open. The Bishops of Hereford had, at one 
period, a palace here, near the church-yard ; but this 
was in ruins, even in Leland's time : the site is still 
called the Bishop's Court. The population of Ross 
is about 2260. This town is a favourite resort for 
summer parties who visit the Wye ; and boats, &c. 
are kept here for the accommodation of those who 
make water excursions. 

ROTHERAS.] Three miles S.E. by E. from Here- 
ford, stands Rotheras, or Rotherwas, the ancient 
residence of the Bodenham family. The mansion 
is a spacious and handsome fabric : near it, is a de- 
cayed chapel, and. extensive offices, which belonged 
to the ancient manor-house. The grounds are plea- 
sant, and the adjacent wood contains some fine tim- 
ber. The prospect on the south-west, is terminat- 
ed by an eminence called Dynedor Hill, on which 
are vestiges of an ancient camp, traditionally said 
to have been occupied by the Roman General, Os- 
torius Scapula. The views from this eminence are 
Taried, and extremely fine. The hill is cultivated 
to the verge of the entrenchment, the bank of which 
is covered with underwood ; the inclosed area is a 
large corn-field, with several scattered cottages on 
its borders. 

SARNESFIELD.] Sarnesfield is 2| miles W. by S. 
from Wcobley. In the church-yard, is the tomb- 
stone of John Abel, the celebrated architect of the 
market-houses of Hereford, Leominstcr, Kington, 
and Brecknock, who died at the age of 97, in the 
year 1694. This stone displays his own effigies, 
kneeling, with those of his two wives, and the em- 
blems of his profession, the rule, compass, and the 
square : it was designed and sculptured by himseli ; 
VOL. n. NO. 88. 



the epitaph was also of his own writing, as fol- 
lows : 

" This craggy stone a covering is for an architector's bed, 
That lofty buildings raised high, yet now lyes low his head ; 
His line and rule, so death concludes, are locked up in store ; 
Build they who list, or they who wist, for lie can build no 

more. 

" His house of clay could hold no longer ; 
" May Heaven's joy build him a stronger. 

"JOHN ABEL 

" five ut vivas in ritam irlfrnam." 

SHOBDON.] At Shobdon, eight miles W. N. W. 
Vom Leominstcr, is Shobdon Court, the elegant 
seat of William Hanbury, Esq. The park, be- 
tween three and four miles in extent, includes some 
rich and picturesque scenery. Shobdon church, 
which stands near the house, was built by Oliver de 
Merlylond, steward to Hugh de Mortimer, about 
the year 1UO. 

SNODHILL.] N.E. from Crasswell priory, appears 
the site of the demolished castle of Snodhill, which 
Leland describes as ' somewhat in ruine.' Tlws 
earliest notice of this fortress occurs in a record of 
the time of Henry the Third. Richard Neville, 
Earl of Warwick, held it in right of his wife, Anne, 
who, after his death at Barnet Field, settled it on 
Henry the Seventh. Elizabeth granted it to Sir 
Robert Dudley, Knight of the Garter. Leland 
mentions a free chapel and park at Snodhill. 

STOKE.] Stoke, or Stoke-Edith, lies 7 miles 
W.N.W. from Ledbury. It is the principal seat of 
the Foley family in this county, and derives the lat- 
ter part of its name from the dedication of the 
church to St. Editha, daughter of King Egbert. 
It was anciently the property of the Walwayns ; but 
previously to the reign of Henry the Eighth, it had 
passed from that family, and it then came into the 
possession of Sir John Lingein, by marriage with 
the heiress of the Milwafers. His descendants sold 
it to Paul Foley, Esq. about the time of Charles 
the Second, and it continued to be the chief seat of 
the younger house of the Foleys, till the extinction 
of the elder branch at Whitley, in Worcestershire,, 
when the late Lord Foley removed thither ; and this 
estate was left to his second son, the Honourable 
Edward Foley, to whose memory, a handsome mar- 
ble monument of large dimensions, designed by Ta- 
thara, and executed by Blore, was erected a few 
years ago, in Stoke-Edith church. The following 
inscription, giving some account of his family and 
character, forms an elegant tribute of respect justly 
due to his memory : 

" Sacred to the memory of the Honourable Ed- 
ward Foley, second son of Thomas, Lord Foley, am 
Grace, third daughter, and coheiress of Georgo, Lord 
Lansdown. Ilemarried Eliza Maria toley, daughter 
and heiress of John Hodgetls. of Pretooc, in the 
county ot Stafford, Esq. and Elizabeth, daughter and 
' - 



county ui oumvit-tf *-*^. "* --- --r-0- 

heiress of William Koley, Esq. by whom he had issue- 
Edward Thomas, Elizabeth Maria, John Ho<i R ettv 

I hoirus 



602 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



Thomas, and Anna Maria. He was born 16th March, 
1747-8. He died the 22d of June, 1803. The cheer- 
fulness of his temper, and the urbanity of his manners, 
gained him the esteem of all who knew him ; the rec- 
titude of his mind, and the benevolence of liis heart, 
engaged the affections of all who held familiar inter- 
course with him. The warmth and steadiness of his 
attachments endeared him to his friends, and particu- 
larly to the witnesses of his domestic virtues. Hi* 
constant attendance on the church and sacrament, was 
an impressive example to his house and neighbourhood. 
He sat in one Parliament for the borough of Droit- 
wich, and represented the county of Worcester, the 
last 29 years of his life, repeatedly called to the ho- 
nourable trust by the unanimous voice of that popu- 
lous and respectable county, attached to him, by his 
amiable disposition, his attention to their interests, and 
his love of the constitution; u principle which he in- 
herited from his ancestors, and left inviolate to his de- 
scendants." 

The mansion at Stoke-Edith, is a spacious brick 
building, with wings, erected soon after the estate 
was purchased into this family, and standing in a 
very pleasant park, on a kind of terrace. The hall 
displays some fine painting, by Sir James Thorn- 
hill ; and, in the other apartments, is a good collec- 
tion of family portraits. The park and grounds 
are well-wooded, and display some fine scenery, 
considerably improved under the direction of Mr. 
Repton. The shrubberies are extensive, and the 
park is stocked with deer. 

SUGWAS.] At Sugwas, on the bank of the Wye, 
3 miles W.N.W. from Hereford, was a palace and 
chapel belonging to the Bishops of Hereford. This 
was the favourite residence of Bishop Cantilupe, 
and was last inhabited by Bishop Ironsides, at the 
conclusion of the seventeenth century. The palace 
is now a farm-house : the chapel was taken down 
in 1792, and a handsome dwelling erected on the 
site. 

SUTTON COURT.] S.W. from Stoke-Edith, about 
a mile and a half, on the summit of a commanding 
eminence, is St. Ethelbert's camp, traditionally said 
to be the spot where Ethelbert pitched his tents 
when on his journey to the court of King Offa. 
On the west side of the same eminence, is Sutton 
Court, which formed part of the honour of Earl 
Ferrers, and is remarkable from having been the 
residence of the ancient family of the Herefords, 
from the seventh of Henry the Third, till about the 
year 1786, when Sir James Hereford bequeathed it 
to his nephew, who assumed the name of Hereford. 
This gentleman erected a handsome mansion of 
Bath stone, a few hundred yards from the site of 
the old house, and in a more elevated situation. 
The ancient residence is, however, yet standing, 
though somewhat ruinous ; and, with <he old fur- 
niture, is preserved with care. The grounds have 
undergone considerable alteration, by Mr. Repton. 
The family of Hereford held this manor, by the service 
of presenting the King with a pair of gilt spurs 
whenever he should ride over Mordesford Bridge. 

SUTTON WALLS.] Sutton Walls, 4 miles N.N.E. 
from Hereford, is celebrated as the palace of Offa, 



King of the Mercians, where the unsuspecting Ethel- 
bert was treacherously murdered. Sutton Walls 
comprehend a spacious encampment on the summit 
of a hill, surrounded by a single rampart, with en- 
trances to the north and south. The area includes 
about thirty acres, aud is nearly level, excepting 
towards the centre, where there is a low place, call- 
ed Offa's cellar : in digging on this spot, a silver 
ring, of an antique form, was found some years ago. 
This place included in the extensive manor of Mar- 
den, an ancient crown demesne, but given by King 
Offa to the canons of Hereford, then termed the 
presbytery of Marden, in expiation of the murder 
of Ethelbert. Marden church was built over the 
spot where Ethelbert was first buried, and where a 
well, which still exists, and is still called St. Ethel- 
bert's well, is said to have miraculously sprung up. 
This edifice wa* dedicated to his memory, and 
stands within 40 yards of the Lug. This neigh- 
bourhood abounds with good orchards, productive 
of excellent cyder. 

TILTEY.] Tiltey, or Titley, three miles N. E. 
by E. from Kington, was the site of a priory, sub- 
ordinate to the abbey of Tyrone, in France. In the 
second of Henry the Fifth, it was given to the col- 
lege at Winchester, and still belongs to that esta- 
blishment. In the church-yard, is a monument to 
the memory of Edward Harley, Esq. Auditor of 
the Impost, in the reign of Queen Anne. Oa the 
western extremity of Wapley, or Warren Hill, 
north from Tiltey, are (he vestiges of an extensive 
camp. The slope of the eminence is finely covered 
with wood, and its north extremity is washed by a 
small stream, which forms one of the sources of the 
Lug. The banks and ditches are five-fold, except- 
ing on one side, where the steepness of the ascent is 
sufficient security. Stepleton, another border castle, 
was situated about a mile to the north of Presteign, 
a market-town of Radnorshire, just without the li- 
mits of this county, which includes, however, great 
part of Presteign parish. 

TREWIN HOUSE.] About a mile to the south of 
Altyrynnys, stands Trewin house, the residence of 
Mr. Rosier ; near which, on the brow of a precipice 
of the Black Mountains, are vestiges of an ancient 
encampment, the area of which measures 485 feet 
by 240 feet. Beyond the bank, on one side, 
is a more extensive entrenchment, defended by a 
double ditch and rampart. The Rev. W. Coxe, 
supposes the former to be of Roman origin : and 
the latter to have been annexed by the Britons or 
Saxons. The situation, he remarks, was excellent 
as well for an exploratory camp, as for the defence of 
the road which ran near the foot of the eminence. 
WALL HILLS.] N.W. from Ledbury, a mile and 
a half, is a conical eminence, called Wall Hills, the 
lower part of which is surrounded by large trees, 
and the summit crowned by a spacious camp. The 
area comprehends between 30 and 40 acres, appro- 
priated to the growth of corn and hops. Spear and 
arrow-heads, &c. have been found here. 

W-ABMSLBY.] 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



COJ 



WAUMSLEY.] At Warmsley, or Worraslcy, 3j 
miles S.E by S. from Weobley, was a priory of Au- 
gustine canons of the order of St. Victor, founded 
by Gilbert Talbot, in the reign of King- John. 

WEOBLEY.] The ancient corporate and market- 
town of Weobley, lies 11 j miles N.W. by N. from 
Hereford, and 14,l| N. W. by W. from London. 
Many of the houses are well-built modern struc- 
tures, the town having suffered greatly by fire, some 
years ago. The church is spacious and strong, and 
contains two or three ancient burial chapels. On 
the south side of the town formerly stood an ancient 
aaetle, which was taken from the Empress Maud, 
by King Stephen ; it is mentioned, by Leland, as 
being a goodly and fine building, but somewhat in 
decay ; the site is now a bowling-green. The town 
is governed by two constables ; it returns two mem- 
bers to Parliament, who are chosen by the inhabi- 
tants of houses of .?()/. per annum rent and upwards, 
paying scot and lot, and resident therein 40 days 
before the election. Here are two good charity 
schools, the one for boys, and the other for girls. 
The population, in 1811, amounted to 696. 

WKONARD'S, ST.] The parish of St. Weouard, 
7 miles W. by N. from Ross, derives its name 
from the dedication of its church to the British saint 
of that name, whose figure, represented as an old 
man, sustaining a book and an ox, was formerly in 
the north chancel window. Several of the ancient 
family of the Minors, who came with the Conqueror, 
aud were seated at Triago, in this parish, lie buried 
here. 

WHITE CROSS.] About a mile. N.W. from Here- 
ford, on an angle of the road, formed by its branch- 
ing off iu two directions, the one towards Stretford 
Bridge, the other towards Hay, are the remains of 
a stone cross, which is generally called the White 
Cross. The base consists of an hexagonal Wight of 
seven steps, ten feet each iu length at the bottom, 
and gradually decreasing with the, ascent, each step 
being eleven inches in height, and twelve in breadth. 
The first and only remaining stage of the shaft, is 
also hexagonal, its height being six feet, and the 
breadth of each face two feet, exclusive of a pillar 
between each. In these sides are as many niches, 
which contain shields, bearing a lion rampant : the 
niches are under pointed arches, supported on small 
columns. Above is an embattled parapet, with the 
mouldings and base of the second division of the 
shaft ; but this, with all the upper part, has been 
long destroyed : the entire height, in its present 
state, is fifteen feet. The traditionary account of 
the origin of this cross, ascribes its erection to Bi- 
shop Cantilupe, who is said to have been returning 
towards Hereford, from his palace at Sugwas, when 
the bells of his cathedral commenced ringing with- 
out any human agency ; and, in commemoration of 
the miraculous event, lie luiijt the cross on (lie spot 
where the sounds had first attracted his notice. 
Duncumb, however, observes, that, in the year . 



1347, " an infectious disorder ravaged the whole 
county of Hereford ; and, as usual, displayed the 
greatest malignity in the places most numerously 
inhabited : this created a necessity of removing the 
markets from Hereford, and the spot on which the 
cross now stands, was applied to that purpose. In 
memory of that event, Dr. Lewis Charlton, who 
was consecrated Bishop of Hereford, a few yetirs 
afterwards, caused this cross to be erected : the lion 
rampant, was the armorial bearing of this prelate, 
and is repeated on his monument in the cathedral, 
with n similarity which so strictly pervades the 
whole architecture of the tomb and the cross, as to 
afford the strongest presumption, that tins was the 
real origin of the cross described." 

WIGMORE.] Wigmore is ten miles N.W. by N. 
from Leominster. This place, the head of the fa- 
mous barony of the Mortimers, is reputed, observes 
Gough, " one of the most ancient honours in En- 
gland, and has 21 manors that owe suit to the ho- 
nour-court, held here once every six weeks. All 
the circuit of the land wherein these manors lie, Is 
called Wigmore land, and has two constables, and 
gives name to the hundred. The privileges granted 
by our Kings to this honour, were even Jura Re- 
galia, as appears by Stat. Parl. 18th of Edward the 
First." After the Conquest, this honour became 
the inheritance of the Mortimers, who were de- 
scended from Richard, first Duke of Normandy, 
and came into Englaiui, with the Conqueror. On 
an eminence, westward from the village, irregularly 
intersected by ravines, and covered with underwood, 
are the ruins of Wigmore castle, nearly enveloped 
by a mantle of rich ivy. The outward wall is in 
the best preservation, though of this a very consi- 
derable part is destroyed.' Within the area, on a 
high artificial hill, are the ruins of the keep, chiefly 
consisting of massive fragments, overlooking the 
country to the north and east, with much grandeur : 
on the west, the castle is itself commanded by a 
more elevated hill, now covered by a flourishing 
young wood When this building was originally 
founded is unknown ; but it was certainly before 
the time of Edward the Elder, who is recorded to 
have repaired Wigmore. It was forcibly taken 
from Edric Sylviaticus, Earl of Shrewsbury, by 
Ranulph Mortimer ; and it appears to have buen 
soon afterwards rebuilt by William Fitz-Osbornc, 
Earl of. Hereford., "It is impossible," observes 
Gough, " to contemplate the massive ruins of Wig- 
more castle, situate on a hill in an amphitheatre of 
mountains, whence its owner could survey his vast 
estates, from his square palace, with four corner 
towors, on a keep at the south-west corner of his 
double -trenched outworks, without reflecting on the 
instability of the grandeur of a family, whose am- 
bition and intrigues made more than one English 
monarch uneasy on his throne ; yet, not a memorial 
remains of their sepulture." On the hills west of 
the castle, were two parks, now ploughed up, and 

cultivated. 



601 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



cultivated. The northern extremity of the Darvold 
Hill, displays vestiges of a small encampment. 

The village of Wig-more enjoys a very romantic 
situation. Its site is the slope of an immense moun- 
tain of bare rock, and the streets themselves are the 
undisturbed masses of stone ; a circumstance which 
will ever prevent the place from attaining consi- 
derable consequence, as it renders them almost im- 
passable for horses and carriages. The church 
stands on the vry pinnacle of the hill, and close to 
a precipice, the chasms of which are filled with 
lar^e trees. 

Northward of the -village, about a mils, is the site 
of Wigmcre abbey, and grange, founded for Au- 
gustine canons, by Ramilph Mortimer, and his son, 
Hugh tie Mortimer, previously to the year 1170. 
This establishment, continued to flourish till the 
Dissolution, when its annual revenues amounted 
to -30-2/. 12s. 3|. In the abbey church many of the 
Mortimers were buried, and among them, five Earls 
of March ; all of whose monuments were destroyed 
at the Dissolution, with the building itself to the 
bare walls. About half a century ago, a stone 
cotliu was discovered with a small urn, holding 
ashes, with some silver coin in the leaden coffin, 
which contained a body in a perfect state, but it 
mouldered on opening. The lands belonging to the 
grange are let at 5007. a year. 

WILTON CASTLE.] On the Wye, one mile W. 
from Ross, stand the ruins of Wilton castle, which 
for several centuries, was the baronial residence of 
the Greys, of the south, who derived from it their 
first title, and who became owners in the time of 
JSdward the First. The royalist governors of Here- 
ford caused it to be burnt to the bare walls during 
the reign of Charles the First, in the absence of its 
owner, Sir J. Bridges. The remaining towers aje 
luxuriantly mantled with ivy. 

WINFOUTON.] At Winforton, eight miles S. by 
W. from Kington, was a hermitage, founded 
by a monk of Wormeley priory, about the time of 
Edward the First, on a small island formed by the 
overflowing of the Wye. The name, Chapel Close, 
is now the only memorial of this retreat. 

FAIRS.] Brampton. June 22, for horned cat- 
tle, horses, sheep, and wool. 

Bromyard. Thursday before March 25, horned 



cattle and horses ; May 3, Whit-Monday, Thurs- 
day before St. James, July 25, Thursday before 
October 29, for horned cattle and sheep. 

Dot stone. April 27, May 18, September 27, 
November 18, for horned cattle, horses, sheep, and 
pigs. 

Hereford. Tuesday after Candlemas, February 
2, for horned cattle, horses, and hops ; Wednesday 
in Easter week, horned cattle, and horses ; May 

19, a pleasure fair, and toys ; July 1, horned cattle, 
and wool ; October 20, horned cattle, cheese, and 
Welsh butter. 

Huntingdon. July 18, November 13, pedlary, 
horned cattle, horses, sheep, lambs, and a great fair 
for yarn. 

Kings/ami. October 10, for horned cattle, horses, 
hops, cheese, and butter. 

Kington. Wednesday before Easter, Whit-Mon- 
day, August 2, September 4, for horses and cattle 
of all sorts. 

Ledbury. First Monday in February, for horses, 
cattle, pigs, sheep, &c. ; Monday before Easter, 
May 12, for horned cattle, and cheese ; June 22, 
ditto, and wool ; October 2, horned cattle, hops, 
cheese, and pigs ; Monday before St. Thomas, 
December 2 1 , horned cattle, cheese, and fat hogs. 

Leoinimter. February 13, Tuesday after Mid- 
lent Sunday, May 14, for horned cattle and horses ; 
July 10, for horned cattle, horses, \vool, and Welsh 
butter ; September 4, for horned cattle, horses, and 
butter ; November 8, for horned cattle, hops, and 
butter. 

Longtown. April 29, and September 21. 

Orleton. April 24, for horned cattle. 

Pembridge. May 12, November 22, for horned 
cattle. 

Ross. Holy Thursday, horned cattle and sheep ; 
Corpus Christi, for horned cattle and cheese ; July 

20, horned cattle, horses, sheep, and wool ; Thurs- 
day after October 1 0, for horned cattle, cheese, and 
butter ; December 11, horned cattle, and pigs. 

Weobley. Holy Thursday, for horned cattle, and 
horses ; three weeks after Holy Thursday, for ditto, 
and coarse linen cloth. 

Wigmore. April 16, May 6, August 5, for horned 
cattle, horses, and sheep. 



TABLE 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 




H 
S 



KKSQ 



ll 



C 
C 




1 "S 

s 


i 
1 


"0 * 'aQ 

ri "3 

3 IS 

i liij 



u 
t = 
z 


'5 




i 






^j 



ul Q 



C - . 
o C 

S I 



-s 

c 



a 

a 



. 

o- 



d 1 



f E ^ 
"frfffl 

*if j 



I 

; 



s 



& 



i s 



f 






p 

Id 

z 



.. 

ft-eqos 



-; 

*" 



I 



(O O) c: i" oo 

CN CM 5 



*r 
) 



iii 



imi 

3 OfSfflOJ 



SP : 

311 



VOL. 11. NO. 88. 



7o 



606 



HEREFORDSHIRE. 



o o 

a i 



R- 5-S. ffil, 
i 1 S 



< 



jweobley... 


7S 
O 
& 


jPenibrtdge. 


JLeominster. 


T 

c- 

3 


5 
5* 
C 2- 



3 


I Hereford... . 




! 







: 











: 










: 
















: 


: 






5 


KS 

<T. 







to 


to 


4- 


c: 
I 
















a 


- 


*- 


f 


so 


O) 


<O 


f* 


P 


CO 


CO 

Co 


O) 


t-S 


u 

&T 


S! 
5' 


1 

EL 




w 

M 


to 


& 


to 

* 


r 

a 


<. 
o 

a 






O 


10 

va 


~1 


f 


o- 

c 

3 








U 

n 




8 



3 


Pembridge 


minster 








b 
1 


a 
X 














^ 

































t 

tx 

a 






















































: 


: 


I 


: 


| 


















I 

5 




I 





: 


: 


i 


i 






1 

































: 


: 


; 


: 


: 


: 


: 




4- 
vj 


2 


Or 
O 


to 
^J 





c^ 

. CT 


CO 
Ul 




Ot 



HI 

a 
ir 1 

M 



c/. 
H 



H 
cc 




o> 



O 
to 

ta 

< 






t_. 



# 



ffiS- r 
sr?.? 





. 

iy- tr 

' 



e o 

* 



M 




2 

V3 

tn 

Si 



PRESTEIGN 



. b 



I |. 



o 



M 

^ 

CA 

o 
o 




2 1I I 







"Z>X 5 "" * ** "" ** to ' 



<o oo o i- o a 



ts 

a 
o 



HI 

r 



- 



o 

.H 
S 



S 

c- 




O 

CO 

O 
O 



S! 



OF VOL. II. 



BINDING SECT. OUT 19 1971 



DA Dugdale, James 

625 The new British traveller 

D85 
v.2 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 




