

3^' > 












j>i> £C3^2£> 



%£>£>  -.• ; ' 



©Q 1 

2^ ; > 









^he* <V»fe- 2»'-S»- ^J»2> 

^>>v3> -J2, 









w*»- >v 









->;^» 

>>"-^ 
,^1=, 

^^^5 



^^ : •'">' 










































**J\ ffc/fl*-^ 

VA 

n 

on 



CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




T^f: SWICK P^MisheaY>v Jon? Oliev 21" June 1827 



CONCISE DESCRIPTION 



ENGLISH LAKES, 



AND ADJACENT 



MOUNTAINS: 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS TO TOURISTS; 

NOTICES OF THE 

BOTANY, MINERALOGY, AND GEOLOGY OF THE DISTRICT ; 

OBSERVATIONS ON METEOROLOGY; 

THE FLOATING ISLAND IN DERWENT LAKE; 

AND 

THE BLACK-LEAD MINE IN BORROWDALE. 



BY JONATHAN OTLEY. 



FOURTH EDITION. 




KESWICK: 

PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR; 

BY JOHN RICHARDSON, ROYAL EXCHANGE, LONDON ; 
AND ARTHUR FOSTER, KIRKBY LONSDALE. 

1830. 



' 



 ! ' 



PREFACE. 



Guides and Tours to the Lakes have been and continue to be 
offered to the Public in various forms and sizes ; but they are 
chiefly devoted to a single object — the picturesque appearance of 
of the Country ; to the exclusion of other important considerations. 

It is admitted, that the gratification of the eye is a leading 
motive with many of those who make the Tour of the Lakes ; 
but it is not so with all. The reflecting mind will feel more satis- 
faction in having gained some knowledge of the structure, the 
natural history, and productions of the region he has visited. 

As a resident among the objects he attempts to describe, the 
Author of this Manual has possessed many opportunities of 
making observations, which will escape the notice of the transient 
visiter — the compiler from the works of others — or even of one 
who undertakes a tour for the professed purpose of making a book. 

Availing himself of these advantages, and a little experience in 
surveying, he constructed a Map of the District, divested of many 
errors which had been copied into former maps, and containing 
some particulars not to be found in any other. This Map has 
been accompanied with such descriptions, directions, and remarks, 
as were judged likely to be serviceable to the future Tourist ; 
in conducting him through the most eligible paths for viewing the 
varied scenery, and at the same time conveying some information 
on the structure and phenomena of these interesting regions. 






IV. 

The Public have so far appreciated his labours as to enable him 
to dispose of three editions, every one of which has been carefully 
revised, and interspersed with additional matter ; but the original 
design has never been departed from — to comprise as much infor- 
mation as possible in a moderate compass, and to supply a book of 
facts — useful without being either cumbrous or expensive. 

The Lakes have been so often and so copiously dilated upon, 
that a concise description of them is all that has been thought 
necessary ; but the observations upon the different Mountains are 
extended to some length, as they have been hitherto very inade- 
quately and often very inaccurately described. 

A new species of illustration has been introduced into this edition 
—sketches of the outlines of some of the most remarkable ranges 
of mountains as they appear from different stations in the roads, 
_ or places easy of access. This, it is expected, will be found a more 
intelligible mode of communicating their names than any verbal 
description, as well as more easily remembered ; and may obviate 
the necessity of many questions, which are often wished to be put 
when there is none at hand to answer. 



CONTENTS. 



The Lakes 








9 


Windermere 








10 


Ulswater 








14 


Brothers Water 








16 


Hawes Water 








17 


Coniston Water 








17 


Esthwaite Water 








18 


Gr asm ere 








19 


Rydal Water 








20 


Thirlmere 








20 


Derwent Lake 








21 


Bassenthwaite Lake 








25 


Buttermere 








26 


Crummock 








26 


Lowes Water 








27 


Ennerdale 








27 


Waswater 








28 


The Tarns 








30 


Elterwater — Loughrigg Tarn 






31 


Little Langdale Tarn — Blea Tarn — Stickle Tarn 




— Codale Tarn — Easdale Tarn — Hays Water— 






32 


Grisedale Tarn — Red Tarn— Keppel Cove Tarr 


i 




33 


Small Water — Blea Water — Levers Water — 




Low Water — Gates Water — Blind Tarn — 




Beacon Tarn 








34 



VI 



Seathwaite Tarn— Kentmere Tarn— Skeggles 
Water— Blea Tarn— Watendleth Tarn— Angle 
Tarn — Sprinkling Tarn . 

Sty Head Tarn— Dock Tarn— Tarn of leaves— 
Harrop Tarn — Scales Tarn 

Bowscale Tarn — Over Water — Burtness Tarn — 
Floutern Tarn — Burnmoor Tarn — Devoke Wa- 
ter—Eel Tarn— Stony Tarn 
Rivers. — Derwent — Greta — Cocker — Ellen — Eamont 
Lowther — Eden — Petterill — Caldew — Lune — Kent 
Sprint — Mint — Brathay — Rothay — Leven — Crake 
Duddon — Esk — Irt — Mite — Bleng — Lissa — Enn — 

Calder 

Waterfalls 

Lowdore Cascade 

Barrow Cascade — White Water Dash — Scale 
Force 

Airey Force — Stock Gill Force — Rydal Waterfalls 

Dungeon Gill — Skelwith Force — Colwith Force 
— Birker Foree — Dalegarth Force 

Taylor Gill— Sour Milk Gill 
Mountains 

Skiddaw 

Helvellyn 

Scawfell and Pikes 

Saddleback 

Carrock Fell 

Bowfell 

Gable 

Pillar 

Grasmoor . , 

Grisilale Pike 

Black Combe 

Coniston Old Man 

Fairfield 



35 



36 



37 



38 
40 

41 
42 

43 
44 
45 

47 
57 
63 
67 
68 
68 
68 
69 
69 
70 
70 
71 
79 



Vii 



Langdale Pikes 72 

High Street 73 

Wansfell Pike 74 

Witeless Pike   74 

Loughrigg Fell 75 

Mountains of Langdale, &c. from Windermere 97 

Mountains of Ulswater 109 

Mountains of Derwent Water .... 115 

Mountains of Buttermere 125 

Mountains of Waswater 129 

Mountains of Ennerdale ..... 131 

Mountains of Patterdale 137 

Bearings and heights of Mountains . . 76 

Crags 78 

Antiquities 

Druidical Circles . . . . . . 79 

King Arthur's Round Table — Mayburgh — Giant's 

Graves . : 80 

Barnscar — Beacons — Hardknot Castle — Castles 81 

Furness Abbey — Calder Abbey 82 

Shap Abbey 83 

Explanation of Terms • .... 83 

Season for visiting the Lakes • . . 87 
General Directions and Excursions 

Stages in the District 89 

Lancaster 90 

Lancaster to Ulverston and Furness Abbey . 91 

Ulverston 92 

Coniston 94 

Milnthorp to Kendal • i . . : 96 

Kendal qq 

Kendal to Windermere 96 

Bowness to Esthwaite Water and Coniston . 98 

Ambleside 99 

Ambleside to Langdale . 10o 
Ambleside to Eskdale and Wasdale . . .103 



V1U 



Ambleside to Keswick 

Carlisle to Keswick .... 

Penrith 

Penrith to Ulswater 
Excursions to Hawes Water 
Kendal to Hawes Water by Shap 

Keswick 

Round Derwent Lake 
To Borrowdale by Watendleth 
Ride to Buttermere .... 
Drive to Scale Hill and Buttermere . 
Keswick to Waswater and Calder Bridge 
Return from Calder Bridge to Keswick 
Drive round Bassenthwaite Lake 
Keswick to Ulswater 
Whitehaven and Cockermouth 
Cockermouth to Lowes Water, &c. . 

Botanical Notices .... 

Geology of the District . 

Meteorology 

Floating Island in Derwent Lake . 

Black-lead Mine in Borrowdale 



105 
107 
108 
108 
110 
112 
113 
118 
120 
121 
124 
126 
132 
134 
135 
136 
136 
139 
147 
163 
169 
173 



DESCRIPTION 



THE ENGLISH LAKES, 



THE LAKES. 

JL he Mountainous District in which the English 
Lakes are situated, extends into three Counties, 
Cumberland, Westmorland, and Lancashire, which 
form their junction at a point upon the moun- 
tain Wrynose, near the road side. Lancashire 
is separated from Cumberland by the river Duddon, 
from Westmorland by the stream falling into Little 
Langdale ; and the latter county is parted from 
Cumberland by the mountain ridge leading over 
Bowfell to Dunmail Raise. Windermere Lake is 
said to belong to Westmorland, at least its islands 
are claimed by that county, although the whole 
of its western and part of its eastern shores belong 

B 






10 WINDERMERE. 

to Lancashire. Coniston and Esthwaite Lakes, 
with Blelham and the tarns of Coniston, are wholly 
in Lancashire. Grasmere, Iiydal, and Hawes 
Water, with several tarns, lie in Westmorland. 
The head of Ulswater is in Westmorland, but 
below Glencoin it constitutes the boundary between 
that and Cumberland. Derwent, Bassenthwaite, 
Buttermere, Ennerdale, and Waswater, are in Cum- 
berland. 

Before this country became so much the resort 
of strangers, the word Lake was little known to 
the native inhabitants ; but to the ancient termina- 
tion mere, Water was usually superadded, as 
Windermere- Water, Grasmere- Water. 



Windermere having given its name to the 
adjoining parish, it has been thought necessary in 
speaking of the lake itself, to add the word water, 
or lake, by way of distinction. It is the largest 
of the English Lakes, being upwards of ten miles 
in length, measured upon the water ; by the road 
on its banks considerably more. Its greatest breadth 
is about a mile, and depth nearly forty fathoms. 
A strait near the middle of the lake has a public 
ferry-boat on the way between Kendal and Hawks- 
head. 

The numerous islands with which it is enriched, 
are chiefly grouped near the middle of the lake, so 



WINDERMERE. 



11 



as to admit greater scope for the exercise ©f sailing. 
The principal, called Belle-Isle — from the late Mrs. 
Curwen who purchased it into the family — is a 
beautiful plot of thirty acres, surmounted by a 
stately mansion, and encircled by a gravel walk of 
nearly two miles, which strangers are freely permitted 
to perambulate. Besides this, are Crow-Holm, two 
Lilly of the Valley-Holms, Thompsons-Holm, 
House-Holm, Hen-Holm, Lady-Holm, and Rough- 
Holm ; and to the south of the Ferry, Berkshire- 
Island, Ling-Holm, Grass-Holm, Silver-Holm, and 
Blake-Holm. 

Windermere is stocked with a variety of fish, of 
which char are the most esteemed. Char being 
taken by nets in the winter months, are potted, and 
sent to different parts of the kingdom. The prin- 
cipal feeders of the lake are the Rothay, having its 
source in Grasmere ; and the Brathay, issuing from 
Langdale. These two rivers unite their streams 
about half a mile before entering the lake ; and a 
remarkable circumstance is, that the trout and char, 
both leaving the lake about the same time to depo- 
site their spawn, separate themselves into the two 
different rivers ; the trout making choice of the 
Rothay, and the char taking the Brathay. 

This lake is situated in a country beautifully 
diversified by sloping hills, woods, and cultivated 
grounds, with lofty mountains in the distance. Its 
banks are adorned with buildings, which combine 
better with the scenery of this, than they would with 






12 WINDERMERE. 

that of the more northern lakes. Storrs-Hall, the 
mansion of Colonel Bolton, is beautifully situated 
upon a low promontory, and Rayrigg, the residence 
of the Rev. John Fleming, upon a bay of the lake. 
Calgarth-Park, the residence of Mrs. Watson, relict 
of the late Bishop of Landaff, has a lowly, and 
Elleray, the occasional abode of Professor Wilson, 
an elevated situation. The villa of Brathay, and 
that of Mr. Brancker, at Croft-Lodge, are conspicu- 
ous objects near the head of the water. Bowness 
is an irregularly built, but very neat village, on the 
margin of the lake ; it has two inns, and there are 
several good houses in the neighbourhood. The 
church possesses some painted glass, brought from 
Furness Abbey ; and its cemetery contains the 
remains of the late Bishop Watson. Low Wood 
Inn, stands sweetly at the edge of the water ; and 
Ambleside is at a convenient distance for making 
excursions, either on the lake or to the adjacent 
vallies and mountains. 

Some would like to commence their survey of 
Windermere at Newby Bridge, and have the scenery 
to unfold itself as they advance. Others will be 
more gratified by the prospect bursting upon them 
at once in full expansion, as it does from the elevated 
ground, on either of the roads leading from Kendal 
towards Bowness or Ambleside. All the way, from 
two miles south of Bowness to the head of the lake, 
the views are excellent; and every rising ground 
affords something new in the combination. Rayrigg, 



WINDERMERE. 13 

Bank has the most complete view of the whole lake; 
and about Troutbeck Bridge, the range of moun- 
tains extending from Coniston Old Man to Lang- 
dale Pikes, appears to great advantage : the Pikes 
on Scawfell, (the highest land in England,) being 
seen on the left of Bowfell ; and, between it and 
Langdale Pikes, stand Great End and Gable, as if 
guarding the pass at Sty-Head. It is only from 
some parts of the lake that the summit of Helvellyn 
can just be seen, beyond the fells of Grasmere and 
Rydal ; and a peep at Skiddaw is obtained from the 
Guide-Post, on the Cartmel road, a mile and a half 
south of Bowness. 

The Station, belonging to Mr. Curwen, is built 
upon a rock above the Ferry House. It commands 
extensive views of the lake and surrounding scenery; 
and the windows, of stained glass, give a good repre- 
sentation of the manner in which the appearance of 
the landscape would be affected in different seasons. 
A walk or a ride along the sequestered road from the 
the Ferry towards Ambleside, will be found agreeable 
to the contemplative mind ; and during a voyage 
on the higher part of the lake (which ought not to 
be omitted) a variety of both near and distant scenes 
are presented to the view in delightful succession. 
As the boat proceeds from the landing place at Low 
Wood, a person previously acquainted with the 
distant mountains will feel a pleasure in observing 
how the highest Pike on Scawfell seems to march 
b2 



14 ULSWATER. 

forth from behind Bowfell ; and the Gable, from 
behind Langdale Pikes. 

At Newby Bridge, on the foot of the lake, is a 
small inn, where boats, post-horses, and chaise are 
kept. There is another at the Ferry, on the west- 
ern side, where boats and post-horses may be had; 
and the inns at Bowness, Low Wood, and Amble- 
side, are furnished with every requisite accommo- 
dation. 

Ulswater ranks next in point of size, being nine 
miles long, but rather wanting in breadth: yet on 
account of its winding form, the disproportion is not 
so much observed. It has the greatest average 
depth of any of the lakes, being in many places from 
20 to 35 fathoms. The country about its foot is 
rather tame; but its head is situated among some of 
the most majestic mountains, which are intersected 
by several glens or small vallies; and their sides 
embellished with a variety of native wood, and rock 
scenery. 

Three rocky islets ornament the upper reach of 
the lake; they are called Cherry-Holm, W all-Holm, 
and House-Holm, the last of which, though house- 
less, is a fine station for viewing the surrounding 
scenery. — This lake abounds with trout which are 
sometimes caught of very large size ; here are also some 
char, but they are neither numerous nor of the best 
quality. Large shoals of a peculiar kind of fish are 
met with, called here the skelly ; and great quantities 



ULSWATEK. 



15 



of eels are taken in the river Eamont, below Pooley 
Bridge, as they migrate from the lake in autumn. 
At the foot of the lake, the water seems to be em- 
banked by a conglomerated mass of pebbles ; the 
same composition forms the finely wooded hill called 
Dunmallet, which stands like a centinel to guard 
the pass. The borders of the lake are ornamented 
with several handsome villas. Ewesmere hill on the 
Westmorland side commands delightful prospects 
up the lake. On the Cumberland side, Colonel 
Salmond's beautiful residence at Waterfoot, retires 
from the view ; at Hallsteads, on a fine promontory 
with undulating grounds, Mr. Marshall, M. P. has 
an elegant house. Lyulph's Tower is a hunting 
box, built by the late Duke of Norfolk, in his deer 
park; and Airey Force may be seen by application 
to the keeper who resides here. Glencoin is a farm 
placed in a sweet recess, where a brook divides the 
counties of Cumberland and Westmorland. At the 
foot of Glenridding, the Rev. Mr. Askew has a 
tasteful cottage ; and towards the foot of Grisdale, 
the seat of W. Marshall, Esq. stands upon the site 
of the ancient Patterdale Hall. 

The only carriage road lies on the north-west side 
of the water, sometimes on a level with its surface 
and commanding an unobstructed view; at other 
times deeply shaded in ancient woods, permitting 
only occasional glimpses of the lake; but on the 
opposite side the pedestrian will be well repaid for 
a ramble along Placefell and Birkfell. From the 



16 BROTHER WATER. 

slate quarry on Placefell there is a grand view of 
the mountains, just including the highest point of 
Helvellyn; and from many parts of the path the 
views are truly picturesque. If the tourist aspires to 
more extensive prospects, they may be attained by 
climbing the mountain to a certain height; where 
the lower extremity of the lake may be seen over 
the beautiful grounds of Hallsteads. 

This lake, like others, is most advantageously 
seen by commencing at its foot ; so that, whether by 
the road, or a boat, the grandeur of the scenery is 
continually increasing as the traveller approaches 
the mountains ; but the views from the lake are 
more open, and the water itself appears more spaci- 
ous, from the boat on its surface, than from any 
elevation above it. 

There is a comfortable inn at Pooley Bridge, on 
the foot of the lake; and another at Patterdale at a 
little distance from its head. They both furnish 
boats upon the lake: and the long wanted medium 
of land conveyance is now in part supplied; — horses 
and jaunting cars can be had at Pooley Bridge ; and 
a post chaise and horses at Patterdale. 

Brother Water — so called from the circum- 
stance of two brothers having been drowned together, 
by the breaking of the ice — is a small lake, situate 
in that part of Patterdale called Hartshope, on the 
road leading to Ambleside. 



HA WES WATER CONISTON WATER. 



17 



Hawes Water is near three miles in length and 
half a mile in breadth; it is almost divided in two 
parts by the projection of a plot of cultivated land 
from the N.W. side. Its head is encompassed by 
lofty mountains, but they exhibit less variety of 
outline than those of Derwent and Ulswater. Its 
eastern side is bounded by Naddle Forest, the lower 
part completely wooded, and surmounted by the 
lofty Wallow Crag ; beyond which the hill side is 
scattered with aged thorns. The western side has 
more cultivation, and a few farm houses sheltered 
by trees. The houses — with the exception of Mr. 
Boustead's at Measand-beck, and Mr. Holmes'' at 
Chapel hill — are mostly walled without mortar, and 
the deciduous trees associate well with the rest of 
the scenery. Opposite the head of the lake, Castle 
Crag is a prominent feature in the landscape. 

This lake is well stocked with fish of various 
kinds ; but they are chiefly preserved for the table 
of Lowther Castle. 

Lying beyond the usual circuit of the lakes, and 
at a distance from the great roads and places of 
entertainment, Hawes Water is often omitted in the 
tour. But those who can contrive to visit it without 
hurry or fatigue, will find it a sweet retired spot. 



Coniston Water, called in some old books 
Thurston Water, is a lake of considerable mag- 
nitude, being six miles in length ; but wanting in 
that agreeable flexure of shores so conducive to the 



18 ESTHWAITE WATER. 

beauty of a lake. Near its foot however, are some 
fine wooded, rocky promontories; which from cer- 
tain points add greatly to the prospect. It has two 
small islands, but they are placed too near the shore 
to contribute much to its importance. 

As the principal mountains lie on the western side 
and at its head, the best views are in consequence 
obtained in a progress from its foot, on the eastern 
side ; or from a boat on its surface : but those who 
have leisure may be gratified by the variety afforded 
in an excursion quite round the lake. 

Its greatest depth is twenty-seven fathoms. It is 
well supplied with trout and char, the latter are said 
to be better here than in any other lake ; they are 
taken by nets in winter, and it was formerly suppos- 
ed they could not be tempted by any kind of bait ; 
however, of late several have been taken by ang- 
ling, with a hook baited in a peculiar manner with a 
minnow. 

The inn, at Waterhead, is pleasantly situated on 
the margin of the lake, and furnishes parties with 
pleasure boats ; a chaise, and pair of post horses. 

Esthwaite Water is a small placid lake, nearly 
two miles in length, and distinguished by a fine 
swelling peninsula, which reaches far into the water 
from the western side. It is situated near the an- 
cient little town of Hawkshead, in a beautiful open 
valley, which is crowned with gentle eminences, and 



GRASMERE LAKE. 



19 



decorated with an agreeable composition of houses, 
fields, and trees. 

On a pond called Priest Pot, near the head of 
this lake, there is a Floating Island 24 yards in 
length, and 5 or 6 in breadth ; supporting several 
trees of alder and willow of considerable size. Dif- 
fering from one in Derwent lake, which rises oc- 
casionally from the bottom, this remains always 
upon the surface, generally resting against the 
shore; but when the water is high it is frequently 
moved from side to side by a change of wind ; and 
has undoubtedly been thus torn from the bank at 
some remote period. 



Grasmere Lake is not large, but well formed ; 
and placed near the confines of a cultivated valley, 
which, as well as the parish, takes the name of 
Grasmere. The island, containing about four acres 
of verdant pasture, forms a striking contrast to the 
massive wooded islands on some of the neighbour- 
ing lakes. It rises boldly from the water, in a fine 
swelling form ; and its smooth green surface, when 
spotted with grazing cattle, has a beautiful appear- 
ance. Should it, however, be thought wanting in 
trees, there is scarcely an island in Windermere or 
Derwent, but what could supply the deficiency. 
Most of the lakes, in order to be seen to advantage, 
require the progress to be made from the foot, to- 
wards the head of the lake ; but Grasmere being 
completely encircled by mountains, this is not in- 



20 RYDAL WATER THIRLMERE. 

dispensable. The view from Dunmail Raise was 
much admired by Mr. Gray; others have spoken 
highly of that from Townend; and Mr. West chose 
his station on Dearbought hill, on the opposite side. 
In short, from whatever point the approach of Gras- 
mere is made, the prospect is always pleasing. 

There are two good houses for the accommoda- 
tion of travellers : the Red Lion, supplying post 
horses and jaunting cars, is near the Church ; and 
the Swan on the Turnpike road. 

Rydal Water is of smaller dimensions, and 
formed in a more contracted part of the valley ; it 
receives the river flowing from Grasmere lake after 
a course of about half a mile. It is ornamented by 
two picturesque islands, on one of which the herons 
build their nests in the trees; and bordered by 
meadows and woody grounds, surmounted by rocky 
mountains. 

The fish in Grasmere and Rydal Waters, are 
pike, perch, (provincially called bass,) and eels, with 
a few trout. 

Thirlmere — commonly called Leathes' Wa- 
ter, from the family to whose estate it belongs; 
and sometimes AVythburn Water, from the val- 
ley in which it is partly situated — lies at the foot 
of the " mighty Helvellyn ;" upon the highest level 
of any of the lakes, being near 500 feet above the 
sea ; it is upwards of two miles and a half in length, 



DERWENT LAKE. • 21 

and intersected by several rocky promontories ; it 
is divided into an upper and lower lake, and over a 
strait a picturesque wooden bridge leads to Armboth 
House. The depth of this lake, which has been re- 
ported to be very great, has not been found to ex- 
ceed eighteen fathoms. A wooded island, of half 
an acre, lies near the shore, on the lower or north- 
ern part of the lake ; and the surface of the water 
being of late somewhat lowered by opening its out- 
let, a small rock in the upper part has become more 
conspicuous. 

Travellers are commonly satisfied with a sight of 
this lake from the road ; but those who have leisure 
may obtain better views of the lower and finer part 
of the lake, from different stations in the grounds 
near Dalehead House ; and finer still from the other 
side of the water. But the most perfect view of the 
whole lake is from a rocky hill at a little distance 
from the northern end of the water. 

Derwent Lake, near Keswick, is of the most 
agreeable proportions. In breadth it exceeds any 
of the neighbouring lakes, being near a mile and a 
half; although its length is little more than three 
miles. Lakes of greater length generally extend too 
far from that mountain scenery, which is so con- 
ducive to their importance ; but Derwent Lake 
appears entirely encircled ; and visitors are at a loss 
which to admire most, the broken rocky mountains 
c 



24 DERWENT LAKE. 

to those subterranean convulsions by which earth- 
quakes are produced. Although it be admitted, 
that the waves are sometimes greater than could be 
reasonably expected, from any wind which can be 
perceived at the time ; yet it may be doubted 
whether they are ever formed when no wind is stir- 
ring : and if such a term as " Bottom wind' 1 must 
still be retained, I think it ought to be referred to 
the bottom of the atmosphere, rather than the bot- 
tom of the lake. 

The depth of Derwent Lake does not in any 
part exceed fourteen fathoms : a great portion of it 
scarcely one fourth of that measure. It is supplied 
chiefly from Borrowdale, and forms a reservoir for 
the water, which in heavy rains pours down the 
steep mountains on every side ; by which means its 
surface is often raised six or seven feet ; and in an 
extraordinary case has been known to rise a perpen- 
dicular height of eight feet, above its lowest water 
mark. At such times the meadows are overflowed, 
all the way between this lake and Bassenthwaite. 
Its surface being large in proportion to its depth, 
causes it to be sooner cooled down to the freezing 

o 

point ; and it frequently affords a fine field for the 
skaiter. In January 1814, the ice attained the 
thickness of ten inches. 

The fish of this lake are trout, pike, perch, and 
eels. The trout, which are very good, are taken by 
angling, in the months of April and May ; the pike 
and perch during the whole of summer. 



BASSENTHWAITE LAKE. 25 

It would be superfluous to enter into a descrip- 
tion or enumeration of the different views on this 
lake : many attempts have been made to describe 
them — but they must be seen to be duly appreciated. 

Parties navigating the lake may be landed upon 
the different islands, and also to view the cascades at 
Barrow and Lowdore : at the latter place is a pub- 
lic-house where a cannon is kept for the echo, which 
on a favourable opportunity is very fine ; but as 
Don Manuel says, " English echoes appear to be 
the most expensive luxuries in which a traveller can 
indulge. 1 ' 

Bassenthwaite Lake is of somewhat greater 
length than Derwent, but of less breadth, and with- 
out islands. Being further from the mountains, it 
is not viewed with the same interest as some other 
lakes. Its western side is ratheKrtoo uniformly wood- 
ed, the eastern has a greater breadth of cultivation, 
on which side are some fine bays and promon- 
tories ; but here the road recedes too far from the 
lake to exhibit it to advantage. However, tourists 
who have leisure for a ride or a drive of eighteen 
miles round this lake, may obtain some pleasing 
views ; especially from the foot of the lake, and 
from some points in Wythop woods. This lake is 
of less depth than Derwent : pike and perch are the 
principal fish ; salmon pass through it, to deposite 
their spawn in the rivers Derwent and Greta, but 
are seldom met with in the lake. 

r><9 



28 WASWATER. 

tage from the road, by which tourists generally pass 
from Waswater to Lowes Water and Buttermere; 
few like to extend the journey two or three miles 
for any improvement that can be made to the view. 
Pedestrians, anxious to explore the inmost recesses 
of the mountains, may follow the lake to its head, 
and after passing the sequestered farm of Giller- 
thwaite, continue their route four or five miles along 
the narrow dale, by the transparent stream of the 
Lisa, which is fed by the crystal springs issuing 
from the side of the mountain ; they may then make 
their way over one of the mountains, either by the 
pass called Scarf Gap, to Buttermere, or Black Sail, 
to Wasdale head : this way a horse might be taken, 
but it would be found more troublesome than useful. 
This lake is well stocked with trout : here is also 
an inferior kind of char, which enter the river in 
autumn to deposite their spawn; contrary to the 
habits of those in the lakes of Buttermere and 
Crummock. There are two small public houses at 
Ennerdale Bridge, neither of which affords much 
accommodation to travellers. 

Waswater is a lake full three miles in length 
and more than half a mile in breadth. Its depth, 
being lately sounded by some neighbouring gen- 
tlemen, was found to be 45 fathoms, and probably 
some parts may be still deeper ; so that its bottom 
must be at least 15 fathoms below the level of the 
sea : and it is probably owing to its great depth in 



WASWATER. 29 

proportion to the extent of surface, that it has never 
been known to freeze ; the duration of winter not 
being sufficient to cool the whole mass of water to 
that temperature which permits ice to be formed 
upon the surface. 

The mountains environing Waswater are lofty and 
majestic. The Screes* bound the lake on the south- 
east, and extend from near the summit of the moun- 
tain quite into the water ; so that it cannot be passed 
on that side without considerable difficulty and some 
danger. Looking up the lake, Yewbarrow forms a 
fine apex ; Kirkfell pushes forward its bold front on 
the left ; at the head of the dale the pyramidical 
Gable appears conspicuous ; Lingmel comes finely in 
view on the right, over which Scawfell and the Pikes 
reign preeminent ; the Hay Cock may be seen 
through the lateral vale of Bowderdale, and the 
Pillar crowns the head of the branch called Mose- 
dale : Middlefell, running along the margin of the 
lake on the spectator's side, and the Screes on the 
opposite, complete the panorama. In short, Was- 
water affords many peculiarities well worth visiting 
once, but not sufficient to yield that increased degree 
of pleasure in a second and third inspection, that 
would be experienced on Derwent, Ulswater or 
"W indermere. 

* Screes a provincial term signifying a profusion of loose stones, 
the debris of the rocks above, resting upon a declivity as steep as is 
possible for them to remain ; so that the least disturbance in any 
part communicates a motion, somewhat between sliding and rolling, 
which frequently extends to a considerable distance, and takes 
some time before quiet is restored. 



TAENS. 



Langclale Tarn, in the valley of that name, is one 
whose consequence is lessened by the swampiness 

of its shores. Blea Tarn, lying on the high 

ground between the two vales of Great and Little 
Langdale, has a small sequestered farm adjoining, 
and called by its name. A view of this piece of 
water is enriched by the superb appearance of Lang- 
dale Pikes. Stickle Tarn, at the foot of Pavey- 

ark, a huge rock in connection with Langdale 
Pikes — is famous for the quality of its trout. The 
stream falling into Langdale, at Millbeck, in a foam- 
ing cataract, may be seen at a distance. Codale 

Tarn is a small piece of water, containing a few 
perch and eels. It sends a small stream down a 
rocky channel into Easdale Tarn, which is one of 
the largest mountain tarns, seated in the western 
branch of Grasmere vale among rocky precipices, of 
which Blakerigg, or Blea Crag, is the principal. 
Its stream — from its frothy whiteness called Sour- 
milk Gill — is a striking object from the road. 

Tarns in the environs of Ulswater. Hays 

Water is of more extended dimensions than most 
of those called tarns; and is much frequented by 
anglers. The stream from it passes Low Hartshope, 
joining that from Brother Water near the foot of 

the latter. Angle Tarn, lying north of the last, 

upon the mountain separating Patterdale from Mar- 
tindale, is one of the smaller class; but of a curious 
shape, having two rocky islets and a small broken 



I   



TARXS. 



33 



peninsula. Its stream in a quick descent, reaches 

the vale about half a mile further down. Grise- 

dale Tarn, one of the larger class, lies in the junc- 
tion of the three mountains Helvellyn, Seatsandal, 
and Fairfield. The road over the Hause, from 
Grasmere to Patterdale, passing the tarn, is accom- 
panied by its stream down the vale of Grisedale, 
which unites with the parent valley near the Church. 
Red Tarn, also of considerable extent, con- 
taining about twenty acres, is upon the highest 
level of any of the mountain tarns ; being upwards 
of two thousand four hundred feet above the level 
of the sea, little more than six hundred feet below 
the summit of Helvellyn; from whence into it you 

might almost cast a stone. Keppel Cove Tarn 

is posited in a singular manner, not in the bottom 
of the glen, but in a kind of recess formed on one 
side ; it is separated from Ked Tarn by a narrow 
mountain ridge, which branches off from Helvellyn 
and is terminated by a peak called Catsty Cam, 
modernized into Catchedecam ; below which the 
two streams unite to form the brook of Glenridding. 
All these tarns afford good diversion for the angler ; 
Keppel Cove produces a bright well shapen trout: 
— those of Angle tarn are by some considered of 
superior flavour; but when quantity as well as qua- 
lity is taken into account, Hays Water may perhaps 
be allowed the pre-eminence. 



34 TARNS. 

Tarns connected with Hawes Water. Small 

Water, rightly named, lies between Harter fell and 
High Street ; and is passed by a mountain track 
leading from Kentmere to Mardale, over the hause 

called Nan Bield. Blea Water, separated from 

the last by a projection of High Street, lies at the 
foot of a lofty rock called Blea Water Crag. Be- 
fore reaching the valley of Mardale their two streams 
become united. 

Tarns in the Feeders of Collision Water. 



Two or three pools, between the hills on the north 
of Coniston Waterhead, are called simply the Tarns; 
while those in the western quarter have received the 

more dignified appellation of Waters. Levers 

Water, the largest, is situated in a wide valley, be- 
tween the mountains Old Man and Wetherlam. 

Low Water, placed on the Old Man's side, belies 
its name, as it occupies the highest level. Their 
united streams, after a succession of pretty water- 
falls, pass Coniston Church in their way to the lake. 

Gates Water, [Goats Water,] reposes on the 

Old Man's western side, and at the foot of the pre- 
cipitous Dow Crag ; [Dove Crag.] Besides being 
in common with the other tarns stocked with trout, 
it also contains some char. Its stream forms the 
rivulet of Torver. Blind Tarn, a small reser- 
voir of water without a stream, lies near the road to 

Seathwaite, by Walna Scar. Beacon Tarn is a 

small one, near the foot of the lake. 



TARNS. 35 

Belonging to the river Duddon, is Seathw»aite 
Tarn, separated from Levers Water, only by a nar- 
row mountain ridge. 

Tarns appertaining to the river Kent. 



Kentmere Tarn, in the vale of Kentmere, is border- 
ed by morass; and Skeggles Water lies on the 
heath-clad mountain between that and Long-sled- 
dale ; neither of them are possessed of any striking 
features. 

Tarns tributary to Derwent Lake. A second 

Blea Tarn is situated on the heathy mountain be- 
tween Wythburn and Borrowdale. The water, 
nearly two miles after leaving it, is received by the 
Tarn of Watendleth, which covers about a dozen 
acres, in a confined valley of that name, not un- 
worthy of being visited. It is the stream from 
these tarns, which after running two miles further 
along a narrow valley forms the famed cataract of 

Lowdore. Angle Tarn, stocked only with a few 

perch, is at the head of the stream belonging to the 
branch of Borrowdale called Langstreth. At the 
foot of Eagle Crag, this is joined by another stream 
from the branch of Greenup ; and after passing 
Stonethwaite and Rosthwaite, joins the Seathwaite 

branch a little further down the vale. Sprinkling 

Tarn, of irregular shape, reposes under Great End 
Crag; it abounds with excellent trout; but they 
are too well fed, or too wary to be easily tempted 



36 TARNS. 

b\ the bait of the angler. Sty-head Tarn, in 

some maps called Sparkling Tarn, lies about three 
quarters of a mile below the last, near the road 
to Wasdale. The water, which it receives from 
Sprinkling Tarn, seems to have been deprived of 
its nutritive qualities; as its fish are of a very in- 
ferior kind. The stream running from thence to- 
wards Seathwaite, has some fine frothy breaks, and 

one grand waterfall. Dock Tarn, and Tarn of 

Leaves ; one on the east side of Stonethwaite, the 
other between Seathwaite and Langstreth; are bare- 
ly entitled to be mentioned. 

Harrop Tarn, though but a small piece of water, 
is the principal one belonging to Thirlmere. It 
lies on the western side of Wythburn, and its stream, 
called Dob Gill, passing a few houses, joins the 
rivulet in the vale a little before it reaches the lake. 

Scales Tarn, on the east end of the mountain 
Saddleback, is an oval piece of water covering an 
area of three acres and a half, its two diameters 
being 176 and 124 yards, its depth 18 feet; and un- 
inhabited by the finny tribe. Some very exagger- 
ated descriptions of this tarn have found their way 
into the history of Cumberland and other publica- 
tions. From its gloomy appearance, occasioned 
by being overshadowed by steep rocks, its depth 
was supposed to be very great, and it has been 
represented as the crater of an extinct volcano; an 



TARNS. 37 

assumption not supported by present appearances. 
Its stream after nearly encompassing Souterfell is 
called the Glenderamakin, which passing Threlkeld 
joins that from Thirlmere to form the Greta. 

Bowscale Tarn, which empties itself into the 
Caldew, is seated in a basin singularly scooped out 
of the side of a hill. — Over Water lies to the north 
of Skiddaw, in the rise of the river Ellen. — Burt- 
ness Tarn, or Bleaberry tarn, lies on the south-west 
side of Buttermere, in a recess between High Stile 
and Bed Pike : its stream forms the cataract called 
Sour-milk gill. — Floutern Tarn serves as a land- 
mark in passing between Buttermere and Enner- 
dale ; as Burnmoor Tarn does between Wasdale- 
head and Eskdale. — Devoke Water, connected with 
the Esk near Ravenglass, is famous for the excel- 
lence of its trout ; and as a place of resort for water 
fowls. 

There are some other small tarns, of little conse- 
quence in themselves, and seldom seen by strangers ; 
therefore they scarcely require to be noticed. Such 
are Eel Tarn, Stony Tarn, and Blea Tarn, in Esk- 
dale, and the two tarns above Bowderdale in the 
Wasdale mountains. 



d2 



( 38 ) 

THE RIVERS. 

The Rivers of this district are not of large di- 
mensions; but issuing from rocky mountains and 
running in pebbly channels, the water they contain 
is remarkable for its clearness and purity. From 
the central cluster of mountains about Bowfell, 
Scawfell, and Gable, many of them derive their 
origin ; others have their source in the neighbour- 
hood of Helvellyn and High Street. 

The River Derwent has its rise in Borrowdale ; 
its branches are known by different names till it 
reaches the lake, from whence it is called the Der- 
went till it enters the sea. 

The river issuing from Thirlmere commonly call- 
ed St. John's beck, has formerly been called the 
Bure ; the one from Mungrisdale by Threlkeld 
Glenderamakin ; after their junction it takes the 
name of Greta and receives the Glenderaterra from 
between Skiddaw and Saddleback ; passing Keswick 
it joins the Derwent, shortly after that river leaves 
the lake. In heavy rains the Greta sometimes rises 
so suddenly that it inverts the stream of the Der- 
went, so that the lake is for a short time literally 
filled from all quarters. The water issuing from 
Buttermere, Crummock and Lowes Water forms the 
river Cocker, which falls into the Derwent at the 
town named from this circumstance Cockermouth. 
The Ellen rises in the mountains north of Skiddaw, 



RIVERS. 



39 



and passing Uldale, Ireby and Ellenborough falls 
into the sea at Maryport. 

The several becks of Patterdale unite in Uls- 
water, the river issuing from thence is called the 
Eamont ; it receives the Lowther from Hawes 
Water, Swindale and Wetsleddale near Brougham 
Castle, and is afterwards absorbed in the Eden, which 
enters the Solway Frith a little below Carlisle ; hav- 
ing first received the Petterill which rises near 
Greystoke, and the Caldew from the east side of 
Skiddaw. 

Two small streams crossing the road between 
Kendal and Shap fall into the Lune — which at 
Kirkby Lonsdale is a fine river, and crossed by a 
lofty antique bridge ; it is navigable at Lancaster, 
a little below which place it falls into the sea. 

The Kent rising in Kentmere, receives the Sprint 
from Longsleddale and the Mint from Bannisdale. 
It washes the skirts of Kendal, and enters the sea 
near Milnthorp, where it is joined by the Belo. 

The becks of Great and Little Langdale com- 
bined form the Brat/my, and those of Grasmere the 
Rothay, which unite in Windermere : after leaving 
which it is called the Leven, and joins the Crake 
from Coniston upon the sands below Penny Bridge. 

The Duddon rises on the south of BowfelJ and 
separates Cumberland from Lancashire. Unretard- 
ed by any lake, it pursues its course in a pretty 
transparent stream and enters the sea on the north 
of the Isle of Walney. 



40 WATERFALLS- 

The Esk rising on the east of Scawfell, retains 
its name till it enters the sea at Bavenglass ; where 
the Irt from Wasdale and the Mite from Miter- 
dale join it upon the sands. The Bleng passing 
Gosforth falls into the Irt above Santon Bridge. 

The water flowing from the north side of Gable 
has a long meandering stream down Ennerdale ; it 
is called the Lisa till it enters the lake ; afterwards 
it is the Ehen till it falls into the sea half way be- 
tween Bavenglass and St. Bees. The Colder 

rising in Copeland forest, enters the sea near the 
same place. 



THE WATERFALLS. 

Lowdore Cascade constitutes one of the most 
magnificent scenes of its kind among the lakes. It 
is not a perpendicular fall, but a foaming cataract; 
the water rushing impetuously from a height of 360 
feet and bounding over and among the large blocks 
of stone with which the channel is filled ; so that 
when the river is full it is a striking object at three 
miles distance. To the left, the perpendicular Gow- 
der Crag, near five hundred feet high, towers proudly 
pre-eminent ; while from the fissures of Shepherd's 
Crag on the right, the oak, ash, birch, holly, and 
wild-rose, hang in wanton luxuriance. From the 
foot of the fall, where it is usually seen, more than 



WATERFALLS. 



41 



half its height lies beyond the limits of the view, and 
in dry seasons there is a deficiency of water ; yet its 
splendid accompaniments of wood and rock render it 
at all times an object deserving the notice of tourists. 
Winding round Shepherd's Crag towards the top 
of the fall, and looking between two finely wooded 
side screens, through the chasm in which the water 
is precipitated ; a part of Derwent lake with its 
islands, beyond it the vale of Keswick, ornamented 
with white buildings, and the whole surmounted by 
the lofty Skiddaw — forms a picture in its kind sel- 
dom equalled. 

Barrow Cascade, two miles from Keswick, has 
an upper and lower fall, more perpendicular than 
that of Lowdore, and exhibits to advantage a smaller 
quantity of water. From the top of the fall the 
lake and vale are seen in fine perspective. 

White Water Dash, on the north of Skiddaw, 
is conspicuous from the road between Ireby and 
Bassenthwaite ; and viewed from its foot with the 
lofty Dead Crag on the right, is a good picture. 



Scale Force near Buttermere, is the deepest in 
all the region of the lakes : it is said to fall at once 
one hundred and fifty-six feet, besides a smaller fall 
below. The water is precipitated into a tremen- 
dous chasm, between two mural rocks of sienite, 
beautifully overhung with trees which have fixed 



42 WATERFALLS. 

their roots in the crevices; the sides clad with a 
profusion of plants which glitter with the spray of 
the fall. Visiters generally enter from below, into 
this chasm, where the air, filled with moisture and 
shaded from the sun, feels cool and damp as in a 
cellar. Passing the lower, they may proceed to- 
wards the foot of the principal fall ; till the more 
copious sprinkling of the spray compels them to re- 
trace their steps. 

JAirey Force, on Ulswater, is concealed by an- 
cient trees, in a deep glen in Gowbarrow Park. The 
water, compressed between two cheeks of rock, 
rushes forth with great violence ; and dashing from 
rock to rock, forms a spray, which, with the sun in 
a favourable direction, exhibits all the colours of 
the rainbow. 
i 

Stock Gill Force, at Ambleside, falls from a 
height of 70 feet, which is in better proportion to 
its adjacent scenery than if it fell 150 feet, as has 
been represented. It is a combination of four falls 
in one ; the water is divided into two streams, and 
after a moment's rest in the middle of the rock, is 
finally precipitated into the deep, shaded channel 
below. 

Rydal Waterfalls — the upper of which is a 
considerable cascade ; pouring out its water, first 
in a contracted stream, down a perpendicular rock ; 



WATERFALLS. 



43 



and then, in a broader sheet, dashing into a deep 
stony channel. The lower fall, being near the house, 
forms a beautiful garden scene. 

Dungeon Gill is a stream issuing between the 
two Pikes of Langdale. The water falls into an 
awful chasm, with overhanging sides of rock, between 
which, a large block of stone is impended like the 
key-stone of an arch. 

Skelwith Force is not of great height, but it 
has the most copious supply of water of any cascade 
among the lakes. From Skelwith Bridge there is a 
road on the Westmorland side, from whence looking 
down upon the basin, the turmoil of the water ap- 
pears very interesting ; but, as a picture, the fall is 
better seen from the Lancashire side, where the 
Langdale Pikes make an excellent distance. 

Colwith Force is a pretty waterfall ; and is but 
little out of the way, for those who make the tour 
through Little Langdale. 



Birker Force, on the south side of Eskdale, 
is a stream of water emitted between lofty rocks, 
and pouring from a great elevation down the hill 
side in a stripe of foam. 

Dalegarth Force, or Stanley Gill, on the 
same side of the valley, is a sublime piece of scenery. 



46 MOUNTAINS. 

the chase, endeavour to promote their increase in 
the more open parts of the country. Goats are 
scarcely to be seen in these parts, and it is only upon 
the mountains of Martindale that the Red Deer 
are found in their natural wild state. 

Eagles, which half a century ago were frequently 
seen in their lofty flights over these mountains, are 
not now to be met with. Though they built their nests 
in the most inaccessible rocks, the shepherds were 
so bent upon their destruction, that they contrived, 
by the help of ropes, annually to take away or de- 
stroy either the eggs or the young ; till at length 
the species has been wholly exterminated from the 
country ; and the rocks left to be possessed by the 
ravens, buzzards and some smaller species of hawks. 

A small bird called the Dotterel is found upon 
Skiddaw, and other high mountains. Grouse breed 
in parts thickly covered with heath. About the 
latter end of October, woodcocks begin to arrive, 
and are frequently met with in the woods and com- 
mons bordering on some of the lakes. 






MOUNTAINS. 



47 




Latrigg 

A 

igh Row Fell * B 

Little FeU ^ 

Priest Man 

Linthwaite Pike ^P 

Knot Aller Sj 

Threlkeld HaU Fell 



"2 s 



B 3 



n 



>< 



s 

<*> 

•5. 

a. 



a 
s 
a. 

ft 



^ 



^9 

^ to 
s 



56 SKIDDAW. 

ble. It is not those objects that are seldom and 
dimly seen, that ought to receive the greatest atten- 
tion ; but rather such as may be distinctly known 
and properly appreciated. It must not be expected 
that objects at fifty miles distance, should appear as 
distinct as these near at hand ; indeed it often hap- 
pens, that they cannot be seen at all, though the 
air to a moderate distance seems remarkably clear ; 
yet still, a person who undertakes the excursion with 
a disposition to be pleased, will any tolerably fine 
day be sufficiently compensated for his trouble; 
and the more the distant objects are veiled from view, 
the higher will the nearer ones rise in estimation. 

One of the most vexatious circumstances, and 
which not unfrequently happens, is to meet with a 
small cap of cloud upon the summit, that entirely 
excludes all prospect from thence ; in such a case 
the party — if on foot and not over timid — ought to 
be conducted from the south end of the ridge down- 
wards about 600 feet to a part of the mountain called 
Carlside, or to the point of Ullock, where most of the 
objects may be seen that should have been visible 
from the summit, with an unrivalled view of Bas- 
senthwaite Lake : and the homeward journey by the 

hamlet of Millbeck not at all lengthened only in 

parts steeper. A party on horseback might o-o a 
little to the northward from the summit, make their 
descent into the valley of Bassenthwaite, and after 
refreshing at the Castle Inn, return to Keswick on 
the western side of the Lake. 



i 

5 



HELVELLYN. 



57 



Wetherlam ...... 

Old Man— Coniston Fell 

Carrs, or Scars ..... 

Gray Friar % 

Black Combe .^sj| 

Crinkle Crags 

Bowfell 

Scawfell Pike 

Great-end Crag .J) 

w 

Glaramara |a 

Great Gable *%» 

f 
Kirkfell A 

4 

Pillar Fell % 

Honister and High Crag \&d 

High Stile |{€ 

Dalehead and Red Pike ^$L 

V 

Robinson %\ 

Blake Fell 9t 

w 

Witeless Pike ^jk 

Grasmoor f|v 

111 Crags "if 

m 

Grisedale Pike 

F 



£ 



TO 



^ 3 



* 3 



62 HELVELLYN. 

Ill-bell, Fairfield, and many other neighbouring 
eminences ought not to be overlooked; but the 
mountains towards Hawes Water present less variety 
of outline, and those of Martindale are too distant 
to discern the herds of red deer which depasture 
thereon. 

On the sloping side of the mountain about the 
distance of 300 yards, and 300 perpendicular feet 
below the summit, is a spring called Brownrigg Well, 
where the water issues in all seasons in a copious 
stream ; its temperature in the summer months 
being from 40° to 42° : and, when mixed with a little 
brandy, it makes a grateful beverage. 

By traversing the ridge to a little distance, a 
variety of prospects may be enjoyed ; which those 
who return directly leave unseen. Travelling a 
little northward, one of the islands on Windermere 
comes in view ; and at the lower or northern man, 
the lakes of Thirlmere and Bassenthwaite : by 
deviating a little to the westward we see a small 
portion of Grasmere ; and by following the edge 
of the precipice southward, better views of Patter- 
dale present themselves ; and the descent may be 
made to Wythburn, to Dunmail Raise, or by Gris- 
dale Tarn to Grasmere. 

Some have extended their excursion from Hel- 
vellyn to Fairfield, holding on the mountain ridge 
to Ambleside ; but after making the unavoidable 
descent of 1350 feet to Grisdale Tarn, a second 
ascent of 1230 feet will mostly be thought too 



SCAWFELL AND THE PIKES. 



63 



fatiguing. By too long continued exertion, the 
mind as well as the body becomes enervated and 
incapable of enjoyment ; as it has been known in 
some, who travelling through Borrowdale in a morn- 
ing would not overlook the most trifling object, yet 
in the latter part of the same day have passed the 
most interesting scenes on Waswater without making 
any other inquiry than " how far is it to the inn ?" 

Scawfell and the Pikes. — Scawfell is the 
name that has generally been given in maps, to the 
mountain connecting the heads of Borrowdale, Esk- 
dale, and Wasdale. It is the highest ground in all 
this mountainous district, and indeed in that part 
of the united kingdom called England. The se- 
veral lofty peaks by which it is distinguished are 
known in the neighbourhood by different names. The 
two most eminent are stated by Colonel Mudge, to be 
3166 and 3092 feet in height: I have estimated 
their difference at 60 feet; which, from various 
observations made between the two points, I am 
convinced is rather an excess than otherwise. Risino- 
from one of the lowest vallies, the highest point is 
3000 feet above Waswater. 

The lower of these points, lying to the south- 
west, is a bulky mountain — the proper Scawfell; 
the higher rising from a narrower base, has been 
called the Pikes. For want of a designation suffi- 
ciently explicit, strangers have sometimes been mis- 
takenly directed to the secondary point; and to 



/• ' 



6* 



SCAWFELL AND THE PIKES- 



1 



cross the deep chasm of Mickle Door, by which thej 
are separated, is a work of considerable difficulty ; 
although the direct distance does not exceed three 
quarters of a mile. Latterly however it seems by 
common consent, the highest point is called Scaw- 
fell-Pikes ; and since the erection of the large pile 
and staff upon it in 1826, there is no danger of 
mistaking the place. 

Excepting some tufts of moss, very little vegeta- 
tion is to be seen upon these summits. They are 
chiefly composed of rocks, and large blocks of stone 
piled one upon another ; and their weather-worn 
surfaces prove that they have long remained in their 
present state. The prevailing rock is a kind of in- 
durated slate, in layers of finer and coarser materials, 
which gives to the surface a ribbed or furrowed ap- 
pearance ; the finer parts are compact and hard 
as flint, and here the lichen geographicus appears 
in peculiar beauty. 

Scawfell-Pikes may be ascended from any of the 
adjacent vales, but most conveniently from Borrow- 
dale ; yet the distance from a place of entertainment, 
the ruggedness of the ground, and the danger of 
being caught in a cloud — to which, from its situa- 
tion, it is more subject than its neighbours — alto- 
gether conspire against its being visited by any 
other than hardy pedestrians : and strangers are 
cautioned so to calculate their time that night may 
not overtake them on such places. To be envelop- 



SCAWFELL AND THE PIKES. 



® 



ed in a cloud is of itself disagreeable ; cloud and 
night together would be dreadful. 

After passing the hamlet of Seathwaite in Bor- 
rowdale there are various ways of ascending the 
mountain at the discretion of the conductor. One 
way is to leave the Wasdale road at the bridge, 
proceeding by the side of the gill towards Esk Hause, 
(which some of our learned topographers have con- 
verted into Ash-course,) and then turning up the 
back of Great-end, which presents its bold rocky 
front towards Borrowdale, and commands extensive 
prospects. Beyond this there are two unavoidable 
dips and rises before the summit of the highest Pike 
can be gained. Another way is to follow the Was- 
dale road to Sty-head tarn ; from thence, with 
Great-end crag on the right, pass Sprinkling tarn 
and join the beforementioned route. This is per- 
haps the easiest way, but rather circuitous. From 
Sty-head tarn the ascent may be made by steep 
clambering to the top of Great-end, which affords 
fine views by the way, and is nearer than the last. 
But many — after having arrived at Sty-head and 
obtained a sight of the pile — will be inclined to 
take the shortest way, by the foot of the great rocks, 
with a steep ascent at last to the summit. And 
those who take the last mentioned route in their pro- 
gress, should be advised to pass over the different 
summits in returning ; for the sake of the varied 
prospects which they afford. 

The divergency of several vallies from this point, 



(X SCAWFELL AND THE PIKES. 

has been compared to the spokes of a wheel ; and in 
tracing their courses upon a map, the simile may be 
applicable enough ; but, upon the spot, the resem- 
blance is not so striking — the mountains run athwart 
one another in such a way, that little can be seen of 
the intervening vallies. 

As may be expected from its altitude, the pros- 
pect on every side is extensive. We overlook an 
immense assemblage of mountains, which to parti- 
cularize would be thought tedious ; and a mere list 
of their names could convey little information. The 
near ones exhibit the stern grandeur of their rocky 
summits ; but their general arrangement is not so 
splendid, nor their forms so stately, as when viewed 
from Helvellyn, or from the ascent to Skiddaw; 
and there is a deficiency of the rich lowland views 
that may be had from the latter mountain. 

Satiated by mountain scenery, the eye is instinc- 
tively turned towards the sea, which opens to a 
great extent, and shews the various indentations of 
the Lancashire and Cumberland coasts; with the isle 
of Walney stretching from the bay of Morecambe 
to the estuary of the Duddon. The top of Ingle- 
borough may be seen in the distance; but it requires 
a very clear atmosphere to discern the mountains of 
North Wales, which stretch out to the right of 
Black Combe. The Isle of Man is frequently 
visible ; and, when the surface of the sea is covered 
with a thin film of vapour, the effect at first sight is 
curious ; the island appearing more like an object 



J 



SADDLEBACK. 



67 



in the clouds than one seated in the water. The 
fells of Coniston exclude the view of Lancaster 
sands ; but an opening, between the Old Man and 
Dow Crag, directs to the church and castle of Lan- 
caster. Some portions of Scotland appear on the 
right and left of the Ennerdale and Derwent Fells ; 
and we are just permitted to see a part of the lake 
of Windermere, between the Low Wood Inn and 
Bowness ; the eastern side of Derwentwater, part 
of Waswater, with Devoke-water, Sty-head Tarn, 
and a small mountain tarn above Bowderdale. 

From a point a little to the southward, we can 
take a peep into the head of the vale of Eskdale, 
far below us ; and beyond it, a single habitation in 
Seathwaite, near the rise of the Duddon. Passing 
towards Great-end a portion of Crummock lake 
comes in sight ; and from Great-end, and Esk Hause, 
there are more open views towards the head of 
Windermere, and the lake of Derwentwater. 



Saddleback — being at a greater distance from 
the station at Keswick than Skiddaw, of somewhat 
inferior elevation, and the ascent not quite so easy — 
is seldom visited by strangers. It is better situated 
than Skiddaw for a view towards the south, and also 
of the neighbourhood of Lowther and Penrith ; but 
the western view is greatly intercepted. — It has 
formerly been called Blencathera, and it is from its 
shape, as seen from the vicinity of Penrith, that it 
has received the name of Saddleback. Its height is 



68 CARROCK FELL — BOWFELL GABLE. 

2787 feet, and its rock is a primitive clay slate, 
similar to that of Skiddaw. In walking along the 
ridge it is worth while to notice, how the southern 
side is formed into a series of deep ravines and rocky 
projections ; while to the north, it descends in a 
smooth grassy slope : and in a deep hollow, below a 
rocky precipice on its eastern end, a small, dark tarn 
is curiously placed. 

Carbock Fell makes one of the flanks of that 
mountain group, whereof Skiddaw forms the crown. 
It is upwards of 2000 feet in height ; and shews a 
double pointed summit, on which a space appears 
to have been once inclosed by a wall. Its basis is 
a crystalline rock composed of a curious variety of 
materials ; and in its neighbourhood are veins of 
lead and copper, with other mineral substances 
highly interesting to the mineralogist and geologist. 

Bowfell rises proudly in view from Windermere 
and Esthwaite Lakes. It is 2911 feet in height, 
and sheds the rain water into Borrowdale, Langdale, 
and Eskdale. It is easiest of access from Langdale, 
but may be reached from any of the above men- 
tioned vales, or from the vale of Duddon. 

Gable, or Great Gavel — so called from its 
shape — is a fine object as viewed from Wasdale, 
from Ennerdale, or from Crummock Lake ; it is also 
seen from Windermere. It is 2925 feet in height, 



THE PILLAR — GRASMOOR. 



G9 



and is remarkable for a well of pure water on the 
very summit. This is not a spring issuing in the 
common way out of the earth ; but is supplied im- 
mediately from the atmosphere, in the shape of rains 
and dews. It is a triangular receptacle in the rock, 
six inches deep, and capable of holding about two 
gallons ; and by containing water in the driest 
seasons, shews how slight a degree of evaporation is 
carried on at this altitude. The rock of Gable is a 
very hard, compact, dark coloured stone, with gar- 
nets imbedded. 

The Pillar — a mountain rivalling the Gable 
in height — is situated between the vale of Enner- 
dale and that branch of Wasdale head called Mose- 
dale. It presents towards Ennerdale one of the 
grandest rocky fronts any where to be met with ; 
and has derived its name from a projecting rock 
on this side ; which was originally called the Pillar 
Stone, and had been considered as inaccessible, till 
an adventurous shepherd reached its summit in 1826. 
The rock is a kind of greenstone, more porphyritic 
than that of Gable. 



Grasmoor is a bold rocky mountain on the 
eastern side of Crummock Lake ; it is sometimes 
called Grasmire, a name in no wise corresponding 
with its appearance. It rises to the height of 2758 
feet. The side towards the lake is extremely rocky 



70 GRISEDALE PIKE — BLACK COMBE. 

and barren ; but the eastern side is a grassy slope, 
and on its summit is a plain of several acres ; it 
affords a good bird's-eye view of the Lakes of But- 
termere, Crummock and Loweswater, with their 
adjacent mountains ; and a considerable portion of 
the Cumberland and Scottish coasts. 

Grisedale Pike rises to a lofty apex, as its name 
implies ; it is 2580 feet in height, and is well situ- 
ated for a view of the vale of Keswick to the east, 
and a considerable part of the county of Cumber- 
land, with the sea, the Isle of Man and the moun- 
tains of Galloway to the west and north. 

Black Combe, or Coom, stands near the south- 
ern boundary of Cumberland. Forming the extre- 
mity of the mountain chain, it may be seen at a 
great distance ; and is a fine station both for land 
and sea prospects. In 1808, it was made one of 
Colonel Mudge's stations, in the process of the 
Trigonometrical survey. He calculated its height 
to be 1919 feet above the level of the sea. Its sub- 
stance is a rock of clay-slate similar to that of Skid- 
daw, covered by a large tract of peat earth, which 
is cut for fuel, and brought down on different sides 
of the mountain. By the misprint of a single figure 
in the longitude of this mountain in the 3rd vol. of 
the Trigonometrical survey, a great distortion has 
been caused in some maps lately constructed upon 
that basis. 






COttlSTON FELL. 



71 



Coniston Fell. — The highest point of Conis- 
ton Fell is called The Old Man, from the pile 
of stones erected on the summit. It is 2577 feet 
in height, and has a good view of the rocky moun- 
tains, Scawfell and Bowfell, and at a distance, the 
highest point of Skiddaw. Coniston Lake is seen 
in full proportion, with a part of Windermere. 
Two tarns appear upon the mountain, the smaller, 
called Low Water, though on the higher level; the 
larger, Levers Water ; and on the western side of 
the hill, but not seen from the summit, is Gates 
Water, lying at the foot of the precipitous Dow 
Crag. Standing open to the south, unincumbered 
by other mountains, the Old Man commands a com- 
plete view of all the fine bays and estuaries of the 
Lancashire, and part of the Cumberland coast — 
the Isles of Walney and Man — and in the direction 
of the river Duddon, on a favourable day, Snowdon 
and its neighbouring mountains may sometimes be 
distinguished. 

Beginning to ascend at the Black Bull near 
Coniston Church, you meet on your left a stream 
abounding in pretty waterfalls ; the copper mines 
near Levers Water, and slate quarries between Low 
Water and the summit, can be seen by the way ,• 
and the descent may be made at choice more in 
front of the mountain. Those who admire a length- 
ened mountain excursion, may begin the ascent at 
Fellfoot, in Little Langdale, and surmounting the 
Carrs and the Old Man, descend to Coniston. 



72 FAIRFIELD — LAXGDALE PIKES. 

The summit of the hill, as well as the quarries on 
its sides, is of a fine, pale blue, roofing slate. A 
considerable portion of the mountain is formed of a 
very hard rock, which some have denominated 
Petro-silex ; and between this and Coniston Church, 
on the western 6ide of the stream, the commence- 
ment of the darker coloured slate may be observed. 

Faiufield — 2950 feet above the level of the 
sea — makes a fine mountain excursion from Amble- 
side, commencing the ascent at Ilydal, encircling 
Ilydal head, and returning to Ambleside by Nook 
end. Lakes and Tarns to the number of ten, may 
be enumerated in this excursion ; viz : Ulswater, 
Windermere, Esthwaite, Coniston, Grasmere, and 
Ilydal lakes; and Elterwater, Blelham, Easdale, and 
Grisedale tarns : oftener than once, may eight of 
them be reckoned from one station. Here is like- 
wise a good view of the different creeks and inlets 
of the sea towards Lancaster and Ulverston. 

Langdale Pikes,* called Pike of Stickle, and 
Harrison Stickle, are by their peculiar form distin- 
guished at a great distance. They afford some good 
views to the south east ; but being encompassed on 
other sides by higher mountains, the prospect is 
somewhat limited. Harrison Stickle, the higher, is 
2400 feet above the level of the sea : it is more 

* These Pikes should always be distinguished from the Pikes of 
Wasdale Head, by some called the Pikes of Scawfell. 



HIGHSTREET. 



73 



easily ascended, and has the better prospect towards 
Rydal and Ambleside ; but the Pike of Stickle has 
the advantage of catching, through an opening in 
the hills, a view of Bassenthwaite lake, and the foot 
of Skiddaw — from which Harrison Stickle is by 
higher grounds excluded. 



Highstreet may have taken its name from an 
ancient road which now appears as a broad green 
path over this mountain. It is probably the highest 
road ever formed in England, being 2700 feet above 
the level of the sea. — On account of its central situ- 
ation between the vales of Patterdale, Martindale, 
Mardale, Kentmere, and Troutbeck, and being con- 
nected with others at a little distance ; an annual 
meeting was formerly held here, when the shepherds 
of the several vales reciprocally communicated in- 
telligence of such sheep as might have strayed 
beyond their proper bounds ; and to enliven the 
meeting, races and other diversions were instituted ; 
ale and cakes being supplied from the neighbouring 
villages. — Highstreet affords some good prospects, 
but being at a distance from any place of entertain- 
ment it is seldom visited by strangers. Pedestrians 
fond of mountain rambles might, with a guide, pass 
over it from Patterdale into Troutbeck, or Kent- 
mere; or into Mardale, and thence by Hawes Water 
to Bampton — from whence are roads to Pooley 
Bridge, Lowther, Penrith, and Shap. 
g2 



74 WANSFELL PIKE — WITELESS PIKE. 

Wansfell Pike rises to the height of 1500 feet 
above Windermere Lake — a moderate elevation 
compared with many of its neighbours ; yet it is not 
deficient in prospects. It affords excellent views of 
Windermere, Grasmere, and Bydal lakes ; the towns 
of Ambleside and Hawkshead, with the beautifully 
diversified scenery in the neighbourhood. Further 
distant are seen the sands of Milnthorp, Lancaster, 
and Ulverston, with the majestic mountains of 
Coniston and Langdale. In a walk from the pike, 
towards Kirkstone, it is curious to observe Great 
Gable start out, as it were, from behind Langdale 
Pikes, and appearing to separate itself from them 
still further as the spectator makes his progress 
along this ridge. Wansfell may be conveniently 
visited either from Ambleside or Low Wood Inn ; 
and a formation of slaty limestone may be observed 
crossing its southern end. 

AViteless Pike is attached to the mountain 
Grasmoor, and rises with a steep ascent to the height 
of nearly 2000 feet above Buttermere. It commands 
excellent views of the three lakes of Buttermere, 
Crummock, and Loweswater; with the summits of 
all the principal mountains from Helvellyn to those 
of Borrowdale, Wasdale, Ennerdale, and Butter- 
mere. The Isle of Man is also in sight, and a 
considerable portion of the shires of Kirkcudbright 
and Wigton in Scotland. 



LOUGHRIGG FELL. 



75 



Loughrigg Fell — the last, and lowest, but not 
the least worthy of notice — is only 1000 feet above 
Windermere, and 900 above Grasraere lake ; and 
the moderate degree of exertion required to climb 
it, will be amply repaid by the prospects. It is just 
what might be wished in the place where it stands 
— high enough to command a view of the circum- 
jacent vallies ; and not so lofty as to lessen the im- 
portance of the surrounding mountains. Winder- 
mere shews a fine expanse of water, with its orna- 
mented banks ; the town of Hawkshead and its 
environs, with Blelham Tarn, and the irregularly 
shaped Esthwaite «Water ; Loughrigg with its tarn, 
and Langdale with Elterwater ; the beautiful vales 
of Grasmere and Rydal, with their two lakes, and 
the town and highly embellished neighbourhood of 
Ambleside ; are the lowland objects. The circum- 
scribing mountains of Coniston, Langdale, Gras- 
mere, Rydal, Ambleside, and Troutbeck, are at such 
eligible distances that not only their elegantly formed 
outlines, but also their varied surface of rock and 
verdure, can be clearly distinguished. A small 
piece of Coniston Water, and the like of Thirlmere ; 
are just sufficient to shew the place of those two 
lakes. The mountain Skiddaw seen over Dunmail 
Raise, and the top of Ingleborough in the direction 
of the Low Wood Inn ; are extraneous objects be- 
yond the common bounds of the panorama. 



76 



BEARINGS AND HEIGHTS 



Station I. — Scawfell highest point, The Pikes. 

Latitude 54° 27' 24" N. Longitude 3° 12' W. Height 3160 feet. 



Skiddaw 

Ingleborough, Yorkshire . 
Black Combe, Cumberland 
Snowdon, Caernarvonshire 
Holyhead Mountain, Anglesea 
North Barule, Isle of Man 
Sleiph Donard, Ireland . 
Mull of Galloway, Scotland 
Burrow Head, . do. 
CrifFell . . . do. 



BEARINGS 

10° NE 
58 SE 



19 SW 

20 SW 
37 SW 

78 SW 

79 SW 
77 NW 
68 NW 
26 NW 



14, 

38 

IS 

103 

100 

49 

112 

68 

51 

38 



1831 



Station II. — Skiddaw. 

Latitude 54° 39' 12'' N. Longitude 3° 8' 9'' W. Height 3022 feet. 



Wisp Hill, near Mospaul Inn 

Carlisle 

Cheviot Hill, Northumberland 
Cross Fell, Cumberland . . 

Saddleback 

Nine Standards, Westmorland 

Ingleborough 

Helvellyn 

Black Combe 

Snowdon 

Snea Fell, Isle of Man . . 
Sleiph Donard, Down . . . 
Bryal Point, nearest in Ireland 
Mull of Galloway .... 

Burrow Head 

CrifFell 

Ben Lomond, Stirling . . 
Ben Nevis, Inverness . . . 
Queensberry Hill, Scotland . 



9°NE 


45 j 


26 NE 


19 


35 NE 


70 


82 NE 


27 


78 SE 


4 


68 SE 


38 


42 SE 


46 


32 SE 


10 


15 SW 


29 


19 SW 


118 


64 SW 


59 


73 SW 


120 


82 SW 


91 


89 NW 


69 


84 NW 


50 


43 NW 


28 


30 NW 


120 


28 NW 


170 


22 NW 


48 



1940 

2658 
2901 
2787 
2136 
2361 
3070 
1919 
3571 
2004 
2820 



1831 
3420 
4358 
2259 



OF MOUNTAINS. 



77 



Station III. — Helvellyn, 

Latitude 54° 31 ' 43" N. Longitude 3° 0' 21" W. Height 3070 feet. 



Cheviot 

Cross Fell 

Stainmoor 

Ingleborough 

Bidston Lighthouse, Cheshire 
Garreg Mountain, Flintshire 
Old Man, Coniston 
Snowdon ...... 

Snea Fell 

CrifFell 



BKAKINGS 


Distance 
In milei ' 


28° NE 


75 


60 NE 


24 


88 SE 


34 


45 SE 


36 


1 SW 


79 


8 SVV 


87 


21 SVV 


12 


24 SVV 


112 


74 SVV 


61 


40 NW 


38 



2658 
2901 

2361 



Station IV. — Coniston Old Man. 

Latitude 54° 22' 20' N. Longitude 3° & 34" W. Height 2577 feet. 

2188 
2263 
2384 
2270 
2361 
1803 

1845 
3469 
3427 
3571 
1540 
709 
1919 
2004 

3022 



Calf, near Sedbergh . . . 
Great VVhernside, Kettlewell 
Whernside, near Dent . . 

Pennygant 

Ingleborough 

Pendle Hill ..... 

Lancaster 

Moel Fammau, Denbigh 
Carnedd Llewellyn, Caernarvon 
Carnedd David . do. 
Snowdon .... do. 
Penmaen Mawr . do. 
Holyhead Mountain . . . 

Black Combe 

Snea Fell 

Burrow Head 

Skiddaw 



East 


25 


72° SE 


48 


71 SE 


31 


70 SE 


38 


64 SE 


33 


44 SE 


49 


31 SE 


25 


4 SVV 


85 


23 SW 


92 


23 30' 


93 


23 40' 


99 


24 SW 


85 


41 SW 


98 


46 SW 


12 


84 SW 


55 


64 NW 


56 


4 NW 


20 



[ The foregoing tables are inserted to shew the relative positions 
and height of some of the principal mountains beyond the limits 
of the map ; without intending to say, that all of them can be 
discerned from the station under which they are placed. ] 



( 78 ) 

THE CRAGS. 

Some of the most remarkable Crags are — the 
Pillar in Ennerdale ; Honister Crag near Butter- 
mere ; Scawfell Crags, between Wasdale head and 
Eskdale ; Broad Crag on the Wasdale side, and 
Broad Crag on the Eskdale side of Scawfell Pikes; 
Paveyark, in Langdale ; Rainsbarrow Crag, in 
Kentmere ; Saint Sunday Crag, in Patterdale ; 
Wallow Crag near Keswick, and Wallow Crag near 
Hawes Water ; Wallowbarrow Crag, in the vale of 
Duddon ; Castle Crag in Mardale, Castle Crag in 
Borrowdale (said to have been a Roman station), 
and Castle head near Keswick ; Green Crag in Leg- 
berthwaite, sometimes called the Enchanted Castle 
or Castle Rock of St. John's; Gait Crag [Goat 
Crag] in Borrowdale, Gait Crag and Iron Crag 
near Shoulthwaite, and Gait Crag in Langdale ; 
Dow Crag [Dove Crag] in Coniston Fells, Dove 
Crags in Patterdale, and Dow Crag in Eskdale; Bull 
Crag and Littledale Crag in the vale of Newlands ; 
Eagle Crag in Borrowdale, Eagle Crag in Butter- 
mere, and Eagle Crag in Patterdale ; Falcon Crag 
near Derwent Lake ; and a Raven Crag in almost 
every vale — one of the most conspicuous of which 
is that overlooking Leathes Water. 



( 79 ) 



THE ANTIQUITIES. 

A Druidical Circle, 100 feet by 108 in diameter, 
in a field adjoining the old Penrith road, at the top 
of the hill, a mile and a half from Keswick. 



.S 



®® ®<a 



'® 



6 






€> 






©© 



It is formed by rough cobble stones of various sizes, 
similar to what are scattered over the surface, and 
imbedded in the diluvium of the adjacent grounds. 
The largest stands upwards of seven feet in height, 
and may weigh about eight tons. 

A monument of the same kind, but of far larger 
dimensions, called Long Meg and her Daughters, 



80 ANTIQUITIES. 

stands near Little Salkeld, seven miles N. E. of 
Penrith. This circle is 350 paces in circumference, 
and is composed of 67 massy unformed stones, many 
of them ten feet in height. At seventeen paces 
from the southern side of the circle, stands Long 
Meg — a square unhewn column of red freestone, 
near 15 feet in girth, and 18 feet high. 

King Arthur's Round Table is a circular plot of 
ground about forty yards in diameter, encompassed 
by a trench and bank of earth ,• with places of en- 
trance on two opposite sides. It is situated between 
the rivers Eamont and Lowther, rather more than 
a mile from Penrith, on the road to Kendal. 

Mayburgh lies about a quarter of a mile distant 
from the last, between the river Eamont and the 
road to Pooley. An area of near one hundred yards 
in diameter is circumscribed by a mound, formed of 
an enormous quantity of pebble stones, apparently 
gathered from the adjoining lands — surmounted by 
a fence-wall of more modern date, and shaded by 
lofty trees. There is an entrance on one side, and 
near the centre stands a rough porphyritic stone 
about ten feet in height. The dates and purposes 
of these two interesting pieces of antiquity, are left 
entirely to conjecture. 

On the common called Burnbanks, near the foot 
of Hawes Water, there are five tumuli of earth called 
Giants'' Graves. They are from twelve to twenty- 
five yards in length, and about five in breadth ; and 
look more like the burial place of a regiment, than 
of individual beings. 



ANTIQUITIES. 



81 



A plot of ground near the foot of Devoke Water, 
exhibits traces of numerous buildings in the form of 
streets. It appears to have been walled round, and 
is called the city of Barnscar. 

Upon the summits of Grasmoor, Binsey, Carrock, 
and some other eminences, there are remains of 
structures, consisting chiefly of basin-shaped cavities, 
walled round, and apparently intended as Beacons. 
The Beacon, standing in the centre of a large plan- 
tation on Penrith fell, is a more modern erection of 
hewn stone, and commands extensive views of the 
country. On the west side of the mountain Hard- 
knot, a space of about two acres is encompassed by 
the remains of a wall, with places of entrance on 
each of the four sides. There seem to have been 
towers at the different gates and corners, and several 
interior erections ; but being built without mortar 
or cement, there is scarcely any part of the walls left 
standing. It has been called Hardknot Castle. 

Stations retaining the name of Castles, when 
scarcely a vestige of their works remain, are found 
in several places upon the mountains. They are 
generally characterized by pieces of freestone, which 
must have been brought from a distance of several 
miles, at a time when the roads were very imperfectly 
formed. 

Remains of Castles of a more permanent construc- 
tion are to be seen at Cockermouth, Egremont, 
Penrith, Brougham, Dacre, and Kendal. Part of 
that at Cockermouth has been repaired and is in- 



82 ANTIQUITIES. 

habited ; the one at Dacre is used as a farm house ; 
the rest are in various stages of decay. 

Furness Abbey is a ruin well worth the notice of 
the admirer of the works of remote ages. It is situ- 
ate in a narrow dell, in a fertile district of Lancashire, 
called Low Furness. It was founded in 1127, by 
Stephen, afterwards king of England, and involved 
in the general wreck of religious houses in 1537. 
The monks were of the Cistercian order, from 
Normandy. The dimensions of the ruins are ex- 
tensive. The church has been upwards of 300 feet 
in length, and 38 in breadth ; the length of the 
transept near 140 feet ; the height of the side walls 
about 54 feet; and with various apartments and 
offices, the ruins extend from north to south 500 
feet ; besides the Abbot's quarters, which stood at a 
distance, on the site now occupied by the Manor- 
House. The central tower is levelled with the side 
walls, and only one of its stupendous arches left 
standing ; yet enough remains to shew the style of 
architecture, and to give some idea of its former 
magnificence. A few years ago, the proprietor, 
Lord G. Cavendish, caused the rubbish to be cleared 
away ; by which many pieces of sculpture were 
brought to light that had lain buried for centuries. 

Calder Abbey lies about four miles south of Egre- 
mont. It was founded by the second Ranulph de 
Meschines, about seven years after that at Furness 
— on which it was dependent — and on a much 
smaller scale. Some of the walls, with the arches 



EXPLANATION OF TERMS. 



83 



which supported the tower, and a part of the colon- 
nade are still perfect ; but its dignity as a ruin is 
somewhat lessened by the mansion of Captain Irwin 
having been built so closely adjoining. 

On the banks of the river Lowther, about a mile 
west of Shap, may yet be seen some remains of an 
Abbey of still smaller dimensions ; which was found- 
ed about the year 1150. 



EXPLANATION OF SOME TERMS OF FREQUENT 
OCCURRENCE IN THE DISTRICT. 

Barrow, a term often intended to signify an arti- 
ficial hill, is also applied to natural ones. There is 
Barrow on the west side of Derwent Lake, a hill 
1200 feet high ; there is Whitbarrow near Penrith, 
and Whitbarrow near Witherslack : Yewbarrow in 
Witherslack, and Yewbarrow in Wasdale. Latter- 
barrow explains itself, a hill branching from the side 
of a mountain : we have Latterbarrow at the foot of 
Waswater, and Latterbarrow in Ennerdale. 

Knot, a small rocky protuberance on the side of a 
mountain. 

Cop, a little round-topped hill. 

Dod is generally applied to a secondary elevation 
attached to one of the larger mountains ; and mostly 
having a rounded summit. There is the Dod on 
the western side of Skiddaw, another in front of Red 
Pike ; and Starling Dod, nearer Ennerdale. In the 



84 EXPLANATION OF TEEMS. 

mountain range proceeding north from Helvellyn, 
are Stybarrow Dod, Watson Dod, and Great Dod. 
And in Patterdale, Glenridden Dod, and Hartshope 
Dod. 

How generally implies a hill rising in a valley ; 
(the sides of such hills are frequently ornamented 
with dwellings.) There is the How half way be- 
tween the Lakes of Derwent and Bassenthwaite ; 
Pouterhow, at the head of Bassenthwaite lake ; and 
Castlehow, at its foot : Great How near Rosthwaite, 
and Great How near Leathes Water : the How and 
Butterlip How in Grasmere, the How in Ennerdale, 
and the How near Loughrigg Tarn, with several 
others. Numerous diluvial hillocks of a parabolic 
form are found in the heads of several vales — in 
both the Langdales, in Greenup vale in Borrowdale, 
and in the head of Ennerdale, where they are pecu- 
liarly interesting. 

Scar, escarpment, a range of rock; most common 
in limestone districts. 

Sceees, a profusion of loose stones on the side of 
a hill. 

Door, an opening between two perpendicular 
cheeks of rock : as Mickle Door — Coom Door — 
Low Door, modernized into Lowdore. 

Coom in some districts, and Cove in others, de- 
notes a place scooped out of the side of a mountain ; 
there is Black Coom or Combe ; The Coom, and 
Gillercoom in Borrowdale ; Keppel Cove, Brown 
Cove, Red Cove, Ruthwaite Cove and others in the 
side of Helvellyn. 



EXPLANATION OF TERMS. 



85 



Fell, the same as mountain, a large hill. 

Man, a pile of stones on the summit of a hill. 

Cam [comb] the crest of a mountain, as well as 
of a cock: as, Catsty Cam — Rosthwaite Cam. 

Neese [nose] a ridge running from the summit 
of a mountain steeply downwards : as, Gavel neese 
— Lingmel neese. 

The bill of a bird is called its " neb ;" so neb, 
nab, or snab, like ness or neese, means a promontory 
or projecting piece of land, either into a lake or from 
the end of a mountain. There are Landing Nab 
and Rawlinsons Nab on Windermere ; Bowness on 
Windermere, Bowness, Broadness, and Scarness, on 
Bassenthwaite lake ; High Snab and Low Snab in 
the vale of Newlands. 

Hause, the throat, a narrow passage over a height 
between two mountains, as Esk-hause, Buttermere- 
hause. 

Thwaite is a common termination to names of 
places, and is understood to signify a piece of land 
inclosed and cleared. We have Rosthwaite, Long- 
thwaite, Stonethwaite, and Seathwaite in Borrow- 
dale ; all which endings are locally pronounced long 
as whait. There are Applethwaite near Winder- 
mere, and Applethwaite near Keswick, Bracken- 
thwaite in Cumberland, Satterthwaite, and Seathwaite 
in Lancashire, all usually pronounced short as thet. 

Grange, a farm or habitation near the water, as 
Grange in Borrowdale, Grange in Bampton, Grange 
in Cartmel, and Marsh Grange on the river Duddon. 
h2 



86 EXPLANATION OF TERMS. 

Holm or Holme, an island, or a plain by the 
water side. 

Kell or Keld, a spring of water. 

Wath, a ford across a river. 

Syke, in provincial dialect, is a stream of the 
smallest class; as Heron-Syke near Burton — di- 
viding the counties of Westmorland and Lancashire. 

Gill (sometimes wrote Ghyll to secure the 
hard sound of the G) is a mountain stream confined 
between steep banks, and running in a rapid descent. 
These Gills are instrumental in enriching the vallies 
by the spoil of the mountains ; they contribute to 
the formation of a plot of superior land on the side 
of a valley ; or sometimes a low promontory sweep- 
ing with a bold curve into a lake. 

Beck is a term used promiscuously for river, rivu- 
let or brook ; it signifies a stream in the bottom of 
a vale, and to which the gills are tributary. These 
becks receive a name from some dale, hamlet or re- 
markable place which they pass, and in their course 
the appellation is frequently changed ; for instance, 
a stream running north from Bowfell, and receiving 
several augmentations in its progress down Borrow- 
dale is called Langstreth beck ; then Stonethwaite 
beck, Rosthwaite beck, and Grange beck till it en- 
ters Derwent lake, thence it has the name of Der- 
went, to Workington, where it falls into the sea. 



( 87 ) 



SEASON FOR VISITING THE LAKES. 

The season for visiting the Lakes depends much 
upon the taste of the Tourist. They may be seen 
with pleasure at any time from the beginning of 
May to the end of October, provided the weather 
be favourable. Pedestrians will feel the month of 
May an agreeable season, and they will then find 
more room at the inns. Towards the end of June 
many professional gentlemen are at liberty, and 
many students at the Universities find it convenient 
to spend three months among the lakes, thus blend- 
ing instruction with healthy recreation. Large par- 
ties commonly require more time in fitting out, and 
are later in arrival : so that the most busy time is 
generally from the last week in July to the middle 
of September. The artist will prefer the richly 
diversified colouring of autumn, which will be in the 
greatest perfection in the month of October. 

To such as make the tour with a disposition to 
be pleased, every season has its peculiar charms. 
In spring, all nature is in her most cheerful mood. 
It is pleasing to observe the daily progress of the 
different kinds of trees as they spread out their 
leaves, and the different plants as they expand their 
blossoms ; while the feathered choir enliven the air 
with their morning and evening songs. — In the 
middle of summer, all is gay ; the heat of the sun may 
at times incommode, but the lengthened days will 
afford a few hours for retirement in the shade, and 



 I 



88 SEASON FOR VISITING THE LAKES. 

the evenings are free from the chilling blasts preva- 
lent at other seasons. — In autumn, the fields, the 
woods, and the mountain sides, display their most 
splendid variety of colouring, and the air is often 
favourable for distant prospects ; but the days are 
somewhat contracted, and for long excursions more 
early rising is required. — Even in winter, the lakes 
still exhibit the same expanse of water, or else a 
glassy sheet of ice; the mountains — whether naked, 
or partially or wholly covered with a mantle of 
snow — still reign in their wonted grandeur; and 
the waterfalls are occasionally rendered more strik- 
ing by the splendid and fantastic forms in which 
their spray is congealed. 

But it should be kept in mind that more rain falls 
in mountainous than in more open countries, and the 
showers come on more suddenly. The time of the 
tourist should be so calculated as to allow him now 
and then to spare a day ; as there is a probability that 
the greatest part of a day will be sometimes of neces- 
sity spent within doors — when the museums of 
natural history and the exhibitions of paintings will 
be the principal resources. 



( 89 ) 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS: 

WITH XOTICES OF THE VARIOUS OBJECTS PASSED IN 
EACH ROUTE. 



STAGES. 

Lancaster, over Sands to Flookborough 

Flookborough, over Sands to Ulverston 

Lancaster to Milnthorp, New Road 

Milnthorp to Newby Bridge . 

Newby Bridge to Ulverston 

Ulverston to Hawkshead 

Hawkshead to Bowness, by the Ferry 

Ulverston to Ambleside, by Coniston 

Milnthorp to Kendal 

Lancaster to Burton 

Burton to Kendal 

Kendal to Bowness 

Bowness to Ambleside 

Kendal to Low Wood Inn 

Kendal to Ambleside 

Bowness to Newby Bridge 

Newby Bridge to Hawkshead 

Hawkshead to Ambleside 

Low Wood Inn to Penrith 

Low Wood Inn to Keswick 

Ambleside to Penrith 

Ambleside to Keswick 

Keswick to Cockermouth, New Road 

Cockermouth to Whitehaven, by Workington 

Keswick to Penrith 

Penrith to Carlisle . 

Keswick to Wigton 

Wigton to Carlisle . 



M1T.ES. 

16 

6 
14 
15 

9 
16 

6 
22 

8 
11 
11 

9 

6 
12 
14 

8 

9 

5 
27 
19 
25 
17 
13 
16 
18 
18 
22 
11 



In making the tour of the Lakes, various routes 
present themselves ; the choice of which must de- 
pend upon circumstances of taste, convenience, and 



90 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

mode of travelling. Tourists from the north gene- 
rally approach by way of Carlisle; those from the 
south by Lancaster. 

Lancaster is a well built town, containing about 
11,000 inhabitants. It is a sea-port upon the Lune, 
over which there is a handsome bridge, and about a 
mile further up a grand aqueduct by which the 
Canal is conducted across the river. 

The Castle, including the county jail and spacious 
halls for the administration of justice, occupies a 
commanding situation. A great part of the build- 
ing is modern, but there still remains an ancient 
tower called John of Gaunt's Chair, from which 
there is a most extensive and beautiful prospect. 
An ancient Church with a lofty tower stands upon 
the same eminence. The King's Arms, Royal Oak, 
and Commercial are the principal inns. 

Proceeding from Lancaster, several roads lie 
before us. The first and most direct is by Burton 
to Kendal, a distance of 22 miles. Opposite the 
village of Bolton, about two miles to the right, is a 
natural cavern, called Dunald Mill Hole : it is infe- 
rior in extent and grandeur to some in the West Rid- 
ing of Yorkshire and in Derbyshire ; but to those 
who have not an opportunity of visiting others, it 
may give some idea of the nature of these subterra- 
nean cavities. — Warton Crag on the left, and Farl- 
ton Knot on the right of the road, are two stratified 
hills of limestone, rising to a considerable height : 
the latter said to be nearly 600 feet above the road. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



91 



The second line, through Kirkby Lonsdale, is 
rather more circuitous, but the drive along the fertile 
and beauteous vale of Lune is most delightful ; and 
several objects — among which we may enumerate 
Hornby Castle, built by Lord Monteagle ; Thurland 
Castle ; and the ancient bridge at Kirkby Lonsdale, 
with its picturesque accompaniments of rock, wood, 
and water — are well worthy of notice. And those 
who have half an hour to spare, should on no ac- 
count omit visiting the Church-yard, and viewing 
the pleasing landscape which there and along a bank 
leading therefrom is spread before the eye : Casterton 
Hall, the residence of Mr. Carus Wilson, and Un- 
derley Park, the seat of Mr. Nowell, are prominent 
features in the charming scene. — From Lancaster 
to Kendal by this road is nearly 30 miles. 

Should the ruins of Furncss Abbey be an object 
of contemplation, the shortest way is to cross the 
Lancaster and Ulverston Sands, which on a fine 
day, may be considered a very interesting ride. 

FROM LANCASTER TO ULVERSTON AND 
FURNESS ABBEY. 



Miles. 


Miles. 


4 Hest Bank 


4 


10 Kents Bank 


14 


2 Flookborough 


16 


1 Cark 


. 17 


3 Canal-foot 


20 


2 Ulverston 


22 


5 Dalton 


. 27 


2 Furness Abbey 


2'.i 


7 Return to Ulverston 


3G 






92 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



I 



It is to be understood that these sands can only 
be crossed in the absence of the tide, and the proper 
time for setting out may be known at Lancaster. 
Every day, during the time of crossing, guides are 
in attendance to point out the place of fording the 
several rivers, and a stranger should contrive to set 
out in company with some person acquainted with the 
route, or to follow one of the coaches. The distance 
over the sands varies, as the way is obliged to be 
made more or less circuitous according to the state 
of the sands. The Lancaster sands may be esti- 
mated at 10 miles, those of the Leven at 3 or 4. 
The views in crossing extend over the whole expanse 
of Morecambe Bay ; and the different inlets and 
points of land, with the villas, villages and woods 
upon their sides and the lofty mountains rising in 
the distance, make a most delightful prospect. 

Flookborough is a village lying between the two 
sands : it has two comfortable inns fitted for the 
reception of persons resorting to the medicinal 
waters of a spring near Humphry Head, two miles 
distant. At the same distance on the other hand is 
the small town of Cartmel with its ancient Church ; 
and between Flookborough and the Leven sands, 
surrounded by a fine park, lies Holker Hall, the 
seat of Lord G. Cavendish : and on the opposite 
shore of the Leven are the noble woods of Conishead 
and Bardsea. 

Ulverston is a neat town containing 4500 inhabi- 
tants and two good inns, the Sun and BradylTs Arms, 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



93 



il 



it communicates with the river Leven by a canal 
admitting vessels of considerable burthen. 

Those who want courage to venture upon the 
sands, may take the new turnpike road to Milnthorp. 
From Lancaster to Milnthorp is 14 miles: and 
here is the option of the Ulverston or Kendal roads. 
The Ulverston road after passing Heversham and 
Levens, turns to the left, over some large tracts of 
peatmoss, having on the right the isolated ridges of 
limestone, called Whitbarrow,and Yewbarrow, form- 
ing lofty scars, on their western sides, and reposing 
on the slaty rock upon which the road in part is form- 
ed. From Milnthorp to Newby Bridge is 15 miles ; 
here is the choice of continuing the Ulverston road, 
or proceeding along the banks of Windermere, by 
Bowness and Low Wood to Ambleside. 

The new road to Ulverston follows the course of 
the Leven to Backbarrow, where it crosses the river 
by a bridge situated among manufactories of cotton, 
of iron, of pyroligneous acid, and of gunpowder. 
Leaving Hollow Oak on the left, it passes over 
some peatmoss, and presently approaches the sands, 
where it is interesting to meet the flowing tide, as it 
washes against the breastwork of the road. The 
river Crake, which issues from Coniston water, is 
then crossed by a bridge under which the tide flows, 
and we join the old road near a place called Green 
Odd, where small craft take in their lading, consisting 
chiefly of slate, timber, and iron. From Newby 
Bridge to Ulverston is 9 miles. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 






A mile west of Furness Abbey, described at page 
82, from the top of Hawcoat, there is a prospect 
over a richly cultivated country and a part of the 
sea, to a most extensive range of distant mountains : 
and from the more lofty station of Birkrigg the view 
of Furness and the surrounding coast is singularly 
beautiful. Two miles from Ulverston is Conishead, 
generally called the Priory, a place highly extolled 
by Mr. West, who says " it is a great omission in 
the curious traveller, to be in Furness and not to see 
so wonderfully pretty a place. 11 The mansion has 
been several years in rebuilding, and when finish- 
ed will be a splendid residence. — Ulverston is upon 
the slaty rock, Dalton upon mountain limestone, 
and the valley in which Furness Abbey is placed is 
flanked by red sandstone, from which the Abbey 
has been built. Iron ore is procured in large quan- 
tities from veins in the limestone ; good specimens 
of red hematite may here be obtained, with specular 
iron ore, and quartz crystals. 

On leaving Ulverston for the lakes, the road ge- 
nerally preferred leads by Lowick Chapel, where there 
is a good view of Coniston Lake, with the mountains 
at its head, and Helvellyn in the distance; and 
after crossing Lowick Bridge, it proceeds up the east- 
ern side of the lake to Waterhead Inn, distant from 
Ulverston 14 miles. 

At Coniston, besides the views of the lake from 
its banks, and from its bosom in a boat, the lovers 
of landscape beauties may find some pretty walks in 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



95 



the vales of Yewdale and Tilberthwaite. A full 
length view of the lake is obtained in passing over 
the hill called Tarnhows, on the road towards Elter- 
water ; and an excursion to Levers Water and the 
Old Man, on a fine day, would not be thought un- 
interesting. The geologist may amuse himself by 
tracing a stratum of transition limestone, alternat- 
ing with slate, as it bassets out upon the hills, on 
the north-west of the road leading towards Borwick 
Ground ; just beyond which place lime has been 
manufactured, on the left of the road to Ambleside. 
The slate quarries about Tilberthwaite, and the 
copper mines on Tilberthwaite Fell, and near Levers 
Water, may also be visited; and on the road to 
Ambleside, the Brathay flag quarry may be consi- 
dered worthy of notice. 

From Coniston, those who feel no hesitation in 
crossing the Ferry on Windermere, may proceed 
through Hawkshead, by the side of Esthwaite 
Water, to the Ferry; and after taking a view of 
Windermere, from Mr. Curwen's Station-house, 
cross the water to Bowness, distant from Coniston 
Water-head 9 miles. Those who object to crossing 
the water, may either proceed from Coniston to 
Ambleside direct, 8 miles ; or from the Ferry, by 
the western banks of the lake to Ambleside, distant 
from Coniston by this route 14 miles. 

Omitting Furness Abbey, some will proceed 
directly to Kendal. Or for such as wish to enter 
at once upon the centre of Windermere, there is a 



i 1 



96 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

shorter, but inferior road from Milnthorp through 
Crosthwaite and Winster, in one stage of 14 miles. 
From Milnthorp to Kendal, is 8 miles ; the road 
crosses the Kent near the ancient mansion of the 
Howards at Levens ; and passes the castellated 
Hall of Sizergh, the family seat of the Stricklands. 

Kendal is a clean and well built town, of consi- 
derable trade, and a population of 11,000 inhabitants. 
It is situate at the junction of the Carlisle road by 
Penrith, with the Whitehaven road by Ambleside, 
Keswick, and Cockermouth. The King's Arms 
and Commercial are the principal Inns. Here is a 
museum kept by Mr. Todhunter, deserving atten- 
tion, as exhibiting the natural history and antiqui- 
ties of the country : as also a marble manufactory 
carried on by Mr. Webster, where several varieties 
of limestone are worked and polished as marble. 

From Kendal to Bowness is 9 miles, to Low Wood 
Inn 12, and to Ambleside 14 miles. About 8 miles 
from Kendal, on either the Bowness or Ambleside 
road, there is a grand view of Windermere Lake. 
Near Bowness, are eminences of various degrees of 
elevation ; where according to the taste of the party, 
the views may be taken either from a higher or a 
lower station ; and from the road between Bowness 
and Low AVood, the mountains of Coniston and 
Langdale, with Scawfell Pikes, Great End, and 
Gable, appear in a most splendid arrangement. 



GEXEEAL DIRECTIONS. 



97 



Old Man— Coniston Fell 




I 



"3. 



s 

s 



? Si 



^ © 

* I 

to cf$ 



a ^ 



« 



<* 

o 



98 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 






At Low Wood, while the admirer of landscape 
takes his views of the lake and mountain scenery 
from the rising grounds ; and the angler amuses 
himself upon the water ; the geologist may be em- 
ployed in examining the position of the transition 
limestone, and the slate, where they have been 
worked, in two adjoining quarries near the road, 
about a quarter of a mile north of the inn. And 
the neighbourhood of Ambleside affords many plea- 
sing excursions. 



BOWNESS TO ESTHWA1TE WATER AND CONISTON. 

Miles. Miles. 

2 Cross Windermere to Ferry House 2 

4 By Esthwaite Water to Hawkshead 6 

3 Coniston Water Head ... 9 
3 Borwick Ground .... 12 

5 Ambleside 17 

Coniston lake and its environs may be visited 
from Bowness, first crossing the Ferry on Winder- 
mere, and passing beneath the station, which is built 
upon a rock, tastefully ornamented with evergreens 
and flowering shrubs, and may be visited by the 
way. Ascending a long steep hill, there is a re- 
trospect across the lake, and a view of the distant 
summit of Ingleborough. At the top of the hill, 
there is a prospect of the Coniston mountains, and 
a mile further on, Bowfell and Langdale Pikes ap- 
pear in magnificent array. There are some neat 
houses in the hamlet of Sawrey, and Mr. Beck has 
a beautiful seat at Grove on the other side of Esth- 






GENERAL DI11ECTI0NS. 99 

waite Water. Here are sweet views over the ex- 
panded valley in which the town of Hawkshead is 
placed, with its church upon an elevated site. From 
the edge of the water, the Coniston, Langdale, and 
Grasmere mountains may be seen ; and a little of 
the easternmost point of Skiddaw through the gap of 
Dunmail Raise, with Seat Sandal, Helvellyn and 
Fairfield to the right hand. 

Passing through the little market town of Hawks- 
head, where a post chaise is kept at the Red Lion, 
the road lies over high grounds, and has a steep 
descent to the inn at Coniston Waterhead, distant 
from Bowness 9 miles. By taking a boat half way 
down the lake, its principal beauties are unfolded ; 
and the return may be made either by the head of 
Windermere to Bowness 13, or to Ambleside 8 
miles : but it would be a great omission to forego 
the beautiful views that might be had on the road 
from Bowness by Troutbeck bridge and Low Wood 
to Ambleside. 

AMBLESIDE 

Is an ancient chartered town ; but of small extent, 
and its market is little more than nominal. It 
is irregularly built upon a rising ground, com- 
manding good prospects of the adjacent scenery. 
Post Chaises are kept at the Salutation and Com- 
mercial Inns, and there are two other Public Houses 
that accommodate travellers ; besides several houses 
fitted up as private lodgings. 
Here is an exhibition of drawings, and prints, of 



100 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

the lake and mountain scenery ; begun by the late 
Mr. Green and continued by his family. In the 
beginning of a tour, these delineations may be useful, 
in shewing the character of the several parts of the 
country about to be visited ; and on departing from 
the district, a selection — which can be purchased 
at a moderate expense — may serve to revive at a 
future period the pleasing recollection of some fa- 
vourite scenes. Mr. Green depicted the varied 
scenery of this interesting region with an ability and 
industry seldom united in one person ; and his Guide 
will long remain a monument of the assiduity with 
which he pryed into the arcana of the mountains. 

FROM AMBLESIDE TO LANGDALE. 

3 Skelwith Bridge 3 

2 Colwith Cascade ...... 5 

3 Blea Tarn 9 

3 Dungeon Gill 11 

2 Langdale Chapel Stile .... 13 

5 By High Close and Rydal to Ambleside . 18 

The Langdale excursion from Ambleside or Low 
Wood, presents a variety of lake and mountain 
scenery, scarcely to be equalled in a journey of the 
same length, during the whole tour. It may be 
performed on horseback ; but many parts of the 
road will not admit of any kind of carriage, except 
a cart. Passing Clapper sgate, the party may either 
proceed with the river on the left, to Skelwith 
Bridge ; or crossing Brathay Bridge, take the river 
on the right, by Skelwith Fold. At Skelwith 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



101 



Bridge, is a public-house, and a little further up the 
river, a considerable waterfall ; but the road by 
Skelwith Fold, being on a higher elevation, com- 
mands a fuller view into Great Langdale. After 
the junction of the two roads, there is a view of 
Elterwater. The road entering Lancashire at Bra- 
thay, or at Skelwith Bridge, leaves it again at Col- 
with Bridge ; a little above which, is a pretty 
cascade. After passing Little Langdale Tarn, the 
ancient pack horse road, from Kendal to Whiteha- 
ven over Wrynose, takes the left hand ; the one to 
be pursued turns to the right, ascending the com- 
mon to Blea Tarn ; near to which the Langdale 
Pikes exhibit their most magnificent contour. Leav- 
ing the tarn and solitary farm house on the left, 
proceed to the edge of the hill, where you will have 
a fine view of the head of Great Langdale, into 
which the road steeply descends. A curious water- 
fall may be seen in Dungeon Gill, — a stream issuing 
between the two Pikes, and falling among rocks of 
a peculiar flinty appearance. Mill Beck is the stream 
flowing from Stickle Tarn, and gives name to two 
farm-houses, at one of which it may be convenient 
to leave the horses, while visiting Dungeon Gill. 
Following the road down Great Langdale, the 
traveller will arrive at Thrang Crag, where the 
rock in a slate quarry is excavated in an awful man- 
ner ; and soon after pass the chapel, near which is a 
small alehouse. Here, taking the road to the left, 
we come to a second prospect of Elterwater ; and at 



102 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

a little distance on the right, the works lately erect- 
ed for the manufacture of gunpowder. Near the 
farm-house called High Close, there is a fine view 
over Louffhriga; Tarn, with Windermere in the dis- 
tance ; and crossing; a road leading from Skelwith 
Bridge, we come in sight of the peaceful vale of 
Grasmere, near the station recommended by Mr. 
West. The road from thence is formed along the 
skirts of Loughrigg Fell, in a kind of terrace, from 
whence there is a rich view of the lake of Grasmere 
on the left. Further on, the road approaches Kydal 
Water, and soon after passing that, and the village 
of Rydal, the turnpike road is joined, and in a mile 
more the excursion is concluded at Ambleside after 
a most pleasing circuit of eighteen miles. 

A variety of shorter excursions may be made 
from Ambleside ; a walk of seven hundred yards 
from the inn, to the waterfall of Stock Gill, will not 
be neglected ; and one of a mile and a half may be 
taken to the falls at Rydal. A ramble round the 
lakes of Rydal and Grasmere — round, or over 
Loughrigg Fell — a more elevated walk to Wansfell 
Pike — or the still more lofty circuit of Fairfield, on 
a favourable opportunity — will not fail to please 
such as delight in extensive prospects. Those who 
have not already seen Coniston, may make an ex- 
cursion thither : and Ulswater may also be visited 
from hence, by the steep carriage road over Kirk- 
stone, which in the length of three miles and a half 
rises to the height of J 300 feet above Ambleside ; 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



103 



and in two miles and a half falls upwards of 900 
feet to the foot of the hill on the other side. From 
thence the road leads by the small lake of Brothers''- 
water, and through a pleasant valley to the inn at 
Patterdale; distant from Ambleside 10 miles. The 
return may be made the same way, or proceed along 
the side of Ulswater to Penrith, 15 miles more. 
Or it may rather be preferred to stop at Pooley 
Bridge ; from whence Hawes Water and Lowther 
Castle may be visited. Some who travel on horse- 
back might choose a ride over the mountains Wry- 
nose and Hardknot, through the vale of Eskdale 
to Strands in Nether Wasdale, about 24 miles ; and 
next day by Waswater, Styhead, and Borrowdale, 
to Keswick 20 miles. 

AMBLESIDE TO ESKDALE AND WASDALE. 



iles. 


Miles 


3 Skehvith Bridge . 


3 




4^ 


2h Fellfoot 


7 


2 Top of Wrynose . 


9 


2 Cockley Beck 


11 


4 Dawson Ground, Wool Pack 


15 


3^ King of Prussia 


m 


3 Santon Bridge 


21* 


2h Strands, Nether Wasdale 


24 



This tour may be made on horseback, or with 
some little difficulty in a cart ; taking the road to 
Little Langdale as before described, and following 
the old pack-horse road over Wrynose and Hard- 



104) GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

knot, both of which hills are very steep. Near the 
road on Wrynose are the three shire stones of 
Cumberland, Westmorland, and Lancashire. From 
Westmorland we here pass into Lancashire ; and at 
Cockley-beck into Cumberland. From the top of 
Hardknot there is a view of the sea and the Isle of 
Man in the horizon ; and half way down the hill on 
the right are the ruins of a place called Hardknot 
Castle. 

The small river Esk winds along a narrow valley, 
among verdant fields surmounted by rugged rocks, 
and about a mile and a half down the valley is a 
public-house, formerly the sign of the Wool Pack, 
about 15 miles from Ambleside. On the left hand, 
in travelling down the valley, there are two remark- 
able cascades. The first is seen from the road; but 
the other, which lies beyond the chapel, requires a 
walk of more than half a mile to view it. From the 
hamlet of Bout, a dim track leads over Burnmoor to 
Wasdale head ; but the road should be kept, nearly 
to Santon Bridge, when it turns off to the right, to 
the Strands at Nether Wasdale ; where there are 
two public-houses. After seeing Waswater, parties 
on horseback may (and with a cart it will be neces- 
sary) go by Gosforth to Calder Bridge, from 
thence by Ennerdale Bridge, and Lamplugh, to 
Scale Hill, and thence either by Buttermere, or 
Lorton, to Keswick. Sometimes this excursion has 
been varied, by returning from Wasdale, by Ulpha 
to Broughton, and thence by Coniston to Ambleside. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



105 



AMBLESIDE TO KESWICK. 

Ik Rydal U 

3 Swan, Grasmere .... 4^ 

4 Nag's Head, Wythburn . 8.^ 

21 King's Head 11 

C Keswick 17 

The route from Ambleside to Keswick lies through 
the midst of lake and mountain scenery. At one 
mile from Ambleside a road crossing Pelter Bridge 
on the left, leads to Langdale, or round Loughrigg 
Fell. To the right, among ancient oaks, stands 
Rydal Hall, the patrimonial residence of Lady le 
Fleming, who has built and endowed a neat Chapel 
in the village. Above the chapel is Rydal-mount, 
the residence of the poet Wordsworth ; and beyond 
the hall, the Rydal Waterfalls. The next object 
is Rydal water, with the heronry upon one of its 
islands ; and a little further, the extensive slate 
quarry of Whitemoss. The road is then conducted 
to the margin of Grasmere water, and gives a good 
view of that admired vale. At the further end of 
which, between the branches of Easdale and Green- 
burn, stands Helm Crag, distinguished, not so 
much by its height, as by its summit of broken 
rocks, which Mr. Gray likens to " some gigantic 
building demolished ;" Mr. West to "a mass of an- 
tediluvian ruins; 1 ' Mr. Green to the figures of a 
' ; lion and a lamb; 11 and Mr. Wordsworth to an 
"astrologer and old woman; 11 and the traveller who 
views it from Dunmail Raise, may think that a mor- 

K 



106 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



tar elevated for throwing shells into the valley, 
would be no unapt comparison. A road turns off 
on the left, to the Church and the Red Lion Inn, 
the Swan is on the turnpike road, at the distance of 
four miles and a half from Ambleside. 

The long hill of Dunmail Raise is next to be 
ascended. It rises to the height of 720 feet above 
the level of the sea; and yet it is the lowest pass 
through a chain of mountains which extends from 
Black Combe on the southern verge of Cumberland, 
into the county of Durham. Having overcome the 
steepest part of the road, Skiddaw begins to shew 
his venerable head in the distance ; and here is a 
retrospect over Grasmere vale, and through a vista 
of mountains, extending as far as Hampsfield Fell, 
near the sands of Lancaster. At the highest part 
of the road, a wall separates the counties of West- 
morland and Cumberland; and a large heap of stones 
is said to be the cairn or sepulchre of Dunmail, 
last king of Cumberland, who was defeated here by 
the Saxon monarch Edmund, about the year 945. 
The lake Thirlmere or Leathes 1 Water now comes 
in view, and the road passes between the Inn and 
the Chapel of Wythburn, rather more than eight 
miles from Ambleside; and something further from 
Keswick. The mountain Helvellyn is now upon 
the rio-ht ; but the road lies so near its base, that 
the full height of the mountain cannot be seen. 
After passing a little way upon the margin of the 
lake, we come to another steep ascent, where Arm- 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



107 



both-house, the residence of Mr. Jackson, on the 
other side of the water, is a good object ; but Dale- 
head-hall, the manorial seat of Mr. Leathes, on this 
side, is hid by a hill. Having passed the summit, 
there is a delightful view through the vale of Leg- 
berthwaite, with its prolongation of Fornside, and 
Wanthwaite — together constituting what is com- 
monly called St. John's vale — beyond which the 
lofty Saddleback, with its furrowed front, closes the 
scene. 

There is a public-house at the King's Head, six 
miles from Keswick, and a road turns off on the 
right towards Threlkeld, passing under the massive 
rock of Green Crag, sometimes called the Castle 
Rock of St. John's. Near this, a tremendous thun- 
derstorm in 1749, swept away a mill, and buried 
one of the millstones amongst the ruins, so that it 
has never yet been discovered. 

The Keswick road inclines to the left, and sur- 
mounting the cultivated ridge called Castlerigg, 
there is a full view of Derwent Lake, with part of 
that of Bassenthwaite, the town and vale of Kes- 
wick, with its surrounding mountains. It was here, 
that Mr. Gray on leaving Keswick, found the scene 
so enchanting, that he "had almost a mind to have 
gone back again." 

FROM CARLISLE TO KESWICK. 

Tourists from the north, when at Carlisle, may 
proceed towards the lakes, either by Penrith or 



108 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

Wigton : from Wigton towards Keswick, there are 
some good views over the Sol way Frith ; and Bas- 
senthwaite Lake (which some say should be first 
visited) is seen without deviating from the road — 
one of the richest views that it affords, being from 
the top of the pass called the Hause, about four 
miles after leaving Ireby ; there is also a good re- 
trospective view, about five miles before reaching 
Keswick. 

Penrith is a good market town with upwards of 
5000 inhabitants. It is a considerable thorough- 
fare, being situated at the junction of the York- 
shire and Lancashire roads to Carlisle and Glasgow. 
The principal inns are the Crown and George. 
From Penrith to Alston Moor is 20 miles, to Ap- 
pleby 14, to Carlisle 18, to Kendal by Shap 27, 
to Keswick 18. 

Ulswater may be visited from Penrith, either by 
Eamont Bridge and Tirrel, or by Dalemain, to 
Pooley Bridge ; with carriages the former is gener- 
ally preferred. A boat may be taken at Pooley 
Bridge, or the carriage may be driven along the side 
of the lake, by Watermillock, and through Gow- 
barrow Parks, by Lyulpb/s Tower to the inn at 
Patterdale, 15 miles. From whence, either return 
the same way, or pass by Brothers Water, and over 
the very steep hill of Kirkstone, to Ambleside, 10 
miles. Or otherwise, turn off in Gowbarrow Park, 
by Dockray and Beckses, to Keswick 22 miles. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 109 

SwarthFell m 

f 

Cawdale Moor J 

Winter Crag "^s 

Dove Crags | 

\ s 

«\ <>= gi 
HaUen Fell, and Place Fell 1 | ^ | 

m 1 I 

Stone Cross Pike % r. S* 

It *? °° 
BirkFeU || §. ^ 

Dolly Waggon Pike %. "* ^ 

I II 

Nether Cove Head i\ J 5 § 

Helvellyn High Man =L 

Catchety Cam ^W 

Helvellyn Low Man is % 

Herring Pike jf 

Keppel Cove Head |~| 

Raise a J 

Greenside «a 

V 
Gowbarrow ^% 

k2 



110 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



EXCURSIONS TO HAWES WATER. 

There are various mountain passes by which 
Hawes Water may be approached by pedestrians, 
and a way on horseback through Longsleddale, has 
been described with a high degree of colouring in 
some former publications. In planning an excur- 
sion, several things are to be taken into consider- 
ation ; as what kind of conveyance the roads will 
admit of, how that conveyance is to be supplied, and 
at what places refreshment may be obtained. Long- 
sleddale is a valley possessing all the requisites of 
meadows, woods, mountains, rocks, and waterfalls ; 
but they are deficient in that harmony of composi- 
tion which renders some of the more northern val- 
lies so attractive to the tourist. 

The road over Gatescarth, between Branstreeand 
Harter Fell, is steep on both sides, yet such as a 
horse may be ridden, or rather led ; and from the 
highest part there is an extensive view towards the 
sea. The pass from Kentmere, over Nan Bield 
between Harter Fell and High Street, is still more 
difficult. 

Mardale Green, to which the road descends, is 
about 15 miles from Kendal, and the same from 
Penrith ; it is bounded by the mountains Branstree, 
Harter Fell, and High Street. From the last of 
which a narrow ridge, called Long Stile, projects so 
far as to seclude it from the other part of the valley ; 
and beyond this rises the apex of Kidstow Pike. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. Ill 

Here are two or three dwellings, one of which is a 
public-house ; and the Dun Bull on Mardale Green 
will be no alarming or unwelcome object to the 
weary traveller. 

But it will generally be found most convenient to 
visit Hawes Water from Penrith, by way of Eamont 
Bridge ; turning to the right at Arthur's Hound 
Table, to Askham 5 miles ; thence by Helton, and 
Butterswick, to Bampton, nearly 5 more. From 
many parts of the road, the Castle and noble woods 
of Lowther, with the lofty limestone rocks of Knipe 
Scar, are important objects. 

Leaving Bampton Grange, with its church, on 
the left hand, two miles more bring us in sight of 
Hawes Water. Some will content themselves with 
travelling a couple of miles along the banks of the 
lake, and thence return to the Grange for refresh- 
ment. At this place there are two public-houses ; 
but not much fitted for the entertainment of 
strangers. 

Those who wish to penetrate the hidden recesses 
of the mountains, may travel onward to the chapel, 
which is a small building closely embowered with 
yews and sycamores, its walls exhibiting some neat 
monumental inscriptions ; particularly one to the 
memory of one of its ministers, who died in 1799, 
having served the cure upwards of fifty years. 

Here a narrow mountain ridge stretches so far 
across the valley that it seems to forbid all further 
progress ; but turning the end of the hill, the vale 









1 













112 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



expands a little at Mardale Green, where a place of 
refreshment is found about a mile and a half from 
the head of the lake, and ] 5 miles from Penrith. 

KENDAL TO HAWES WATER BY SHAP. 



8£ High Borrow Bridge 

U Shap 

4 Bampton 

2 Foot of Hawes Water 



16 
20 

22 



Four miles before reaching Shap, a road turns off 
to Shap Wells, at the distance of a mile- The 
water is stated by Mr. Alderson, to be a most genial 
sanative saline spring, milder than the Harrowgate 
Purgative Spaw, more active than the Gilsland 
Water, and in its properties nearly allied to that of 
Leamington. 

From Bampton the party may either return to 
Penrith or be conducted into the great road at Shap. 
But to such as make this excursion on foot, or on 
horseback, it will be found a pleasing variety to turn 
off the road a little before arriving at Helton, and 
follow a track over the common called Moor Dovack, 
which affords a fine view of Ulswater and its 
neighbouring scenery, and at Pooley Bridge is a 
commodious inn, from whence the road may be taken 
by Dalemain to Penrith. Parties making their 
quarters for a few days at Pooley Bridge, may visit 
Hawes Water, and Lowther Castle, the magnificient 
seat of the Earl of Lonsdale, most conveniently from 
thence. 



i ; ;s 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



113 






KESWICK. 



Having by different roads conducted the several 
parties to Keswick, it must be made head quarters 
for a while, to examine the curiosities of the place — 
to enjoy the rich scenery in its neighbourhood — 
and to make excursions, some of a few hours, some 
of a clay, and others perhaps of more than one day. 

Keswick has a population of 2000 inhabitants ; 
its principal trade is in the woollen manufactory ; 
here are also several manufactories of black-lead 
pencils, and one of scythes, shovels, and edge tools. 
The principal inns are the Royal Oak and Queen's 
Head; there are other houses where small parties 
may be accommodated, besides many neatly furnish- 
ed private lodgings. Here are two museums, ex- 
hibiting the natural history of the country, and 
numerous foreign curiosities : one was established 
by the late Mr. Crosthwaite, (who published his 
maps of the lakes about forty years ago,) and is now 
kept by his son : the other is kept by Mr. Hutton, 
who has for many years acted as guide to the gentry 
frequenting the Royal Oak inn, and who has assi- 
duously applied himself to the pursuits of botany 
and mineralogy, as each in its turn became the 
fashion of the day. At both the museums and at 
other places, the various mineral productions of the 
country are kept on sale. Post chaise and ponies 
may be had at the inns, with experienced guides for 
excursions by land ; and neat pleasure-boats with 
intelligent boatmen for the water. 







  








1 








1 





114 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

On an eminence at the north end of the town 
Robert Southey, Esq. L. L. D. Poet Laureate, occu- 
pies a delightful situation ; Mr. Pocklington, has a 
pleasant summer residence at Barrow House ; and 
Mr. Stanger, at Dovecote. 

For an introduction to the beauties of Keswick 
vale, a good station will be found on Castlehead — 
a wooded rock in the centre of the Derwentwater 
estate, at the distance of half a mile from the inn, 
and rising to the height of 280 feet above the lake 
of Derwent, which is here finely displayed, with its 
numerous bays and islands. Lord's Island, near 
the shore, was once the residence of the family of 
Derwentwater ; the smaller island of Rampsholm 
lies beyond it ; St. Herbert's Isle nearer the middle 
of the lake ; and to the right Vicar's Isle, on which 
General Peachy has a house. The circumjacent 
mountains of Borrowdale and Newlands make a fine 
panorama. At the head of Borrowdale appears 
Great End Crag, beyond it a part of Scawfell with 
the highest of the Pikes. Looking through the vale 
of Newlands, Red Pike, distinguished by its colour, 
rises over Buttermere. To the eastward, Wanth- 
waite Crags, and Great Dod, form the end of the 
mountain range extending from Helvellyn. To 
the north Skiddaw rises finely, and Saddleback may 
be seen over the trees. Crosthwaite Church is a 
good object in the vale, and over the rising ground 
beyond Bassenthwaite Lake, the mountain CrhTel 
in Scotland shews his head. This may be thought 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



115 



Brand and Glaramara j?3> 

m 

Esk Hause M 

Castle Crag and Great End WW 

Scawfell Pike 

Gait Crag 

Blea Crag 

Bull Crag ^1 

Cat Bell lj|| 

Hindscarth 

Gold Scalp 

Robinson I&stl 

High Stile Wt s? 

if §• 

Red Pike 
Rawling end • 

Causey Pike ^ 

S^l llf 

IU Crags ||%f| 

Barrow Ajwf 

Swinside z§lffl 

Coledale Hause ....'... -ff\ 

Grisedale Pike . • 

fffl 



3 






^ 



116 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



too elevated a station for the eye of a painter ; but 
as a general view of the lake, the town, and valley, 
it is excellent. Some of the lower stations formerly 
recommended are rendered less inviting by the too 
great profusion of wood upon the shores of the lake, 
and upon its islands ; but this rock will always 
remain sufficiently prominent for a prospect ; and 
its substance offers a study for the geologist. 

A walk by the water side, to Friar Crag, at the 
distance of three quarters of a mile, is the favourite 
promenade of the inhabitants of the town, and 
affords much gratification to strangers. On leaving 
the street the prospect is over Crow Park, which at 
the time of the attainder of the late Earl of Der- 
wentwater, was a wood of stately oaks ; but now a 
fine, swelling, verdant field, on which races are an- 
nually held. Beyond this the view embraces the 
vale and mountains of Newlands, with High-stile 
presiding over Buttermere in the distance : in the 
retrospect, Skiddaw rises majestically over the town. 
On the left, lies Cockshot, a hill thickly covered 
with oaks, and a tall silver fir upon its crest ; the 
trees intercept the views from its summit, but a walk 
round its margin may sometimes be taken on account 
of the shelter it affords. Coming in sight of the 
lake, Vicar's Isle is most happily placed, the house 
just appearing among a variety of forest trees with 
which the island seems wholly covered ; but on 
inspection, it is found to be beautifully laid out in 
pleasure grounds, and kept in the neatest order. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



117 



Along the margin of the water numerous boats are 
moored, some belonging to private individuals, others 
kept for the accommodation of visiters ; and at the 
termination of the walk on the low promontory of 
Friar Crag, the eye is saluted with a full prospect 
of the lake, bounded by the celebrated mountains of 
Borrowdale. To the left, near the shore, Stable 
Hills farm is reared upon the site where stood Lord 
Derwentwater's stables at the time his mansion was 
upon the adjacent island. The Parks, part culti- 
vated, part wooded, occupy the rising ground, over 
which Wallow Crag shews his massive rocky front ; 
those, with the lands betwixt the town and lake, 
form the Derwentwater estate, now belonging to 
Greenwich Hospital. Further on lies Barrow House, 
and above it the pastoral farm of Ashness ; beyond 
the small island of Rampsholm pours the far famed 
cataract of Lowdore ; and Castle Crag appears 
between more lofty mountains, like a centinel placed 
to guard the entrance of Borrowdale. To the right 
of St. Herbert's Isle, Catbells with front of brighter 
green, shelve into the lake ; which is chiefly bor- 
dered on that side by the woods of the late Lord 
William Gordon. Looking through^the lateral vale 
of Newlands, Red Pike appears beyond Buttermere; 
and more to the right Causey Pike and Grisedale 
Pike shew their aspiring peaks. 

Excellent views of the vale and mountains are 
also obtained from the Vicarage, from Ormathwaite, 
from many parts of a road leading by Applethwaite 



! 



118 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

and Milbeck along a pleasant elevation at the foot 
of Skiddaw, and from the side of Latrigg. Those 
who admire higher elevations, may climb to the top 
of Latrigg — Wallow Crag — Swinside — Catbells — 
Causey Pike — Grisedale Pike, or Grasmoor; and 
to crown the whole, for once, to the summit of 
Skiddaw. 

ROUND DERWENT LAKE. 

Miles. Miles. 

2 Barrow House, and Cascade . . 2 

1 Lowdore, ditto ... 3 

1 Grange 4 

1 Bowder Stone 5 

1 Return and cross the River at Grange 6 

4| Portinscale 10^ 

li Keswick 12 

A delightful excursion may be made round Der- 
went lake either on horseback or in a carriage. The 
road lies at the foot of the wooded park of Derwent- 
water, with the lake on the right, and the lofty rocks 
of Wallow Crag and Falcon Crag on the left; and 
in many places it commands excellent views. One, 
much admired, is on emerging from the wood to the 
more open common, where the road lies just above 
the margin of the lake. Two miles from Keswick, 
a road on the left leads to Watendleth, and we pass 
Barrow House, the beautiful summer residence of 
Joseph Pocklington, Esq. A fine cascade behind 
the house may be seen by strangers on application 
at the lodge. Another mile brings us to Lowdore, 
— famous for its waterfall. Here is a neat public- 
house, where a cannon is kept for the echo, which is 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 119 

very fine, especially in a still evening. Rather more 
than four miles from Keswick, we have the hamlet 
called the Grange, upon the opposite bank of the river. 

About Lowdore and Grange, the draftsman will 
find employment for his pencil ; and the geologist 
will observe the transition, from the blackish clay 
slate upon which he treads, to the more variously 
aggregated and paler-coloured rocks on his left hand 
and before him. 

The bridge at Grange might be crossed, as the 
shortest route; but it may be recommended to pro- 
ceed forwards another mile to the Bowder Stone — 
a fragment of rock about twenty yards in length, 
and half as much in height, — remarkable for 
being poised upon one of its angles, with a little 
more support towards one end. But it is not merely 
for the sight of this stone, that travellers are advised 
to advance so far. It is chiefly for the prospect 
here obtained into the interior of Borrowdale, which 
expands itself as far as Rosthwaite ; beyond which 
the vale is divided into two parts; the one branch- 
ing off towards Grasmere and Langdale, the other 
towards Wasdale and Buttermere. 

Returning to Grange, the road then crosses the 
river, and is carried along a pleasant elevation above 
the woods of Lady William Gordon, the house, 
formerly called Water End, now Derwentwater Bay, 
standing sweetly sheltered on the margin of the 
lake. From this elevation, the lake, with its islands, 
bays, and promontories, is seen to great advantage. 



120 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



The road then crossing the pleasant vale of New- 
lands, joins the Cockermouth road at Portinscale, 
and reaches Keswick in a circuit of 12 miles. 

KESWICK TO BORROWDALE BY WATENDLETH. 

On a second excursion to Borrowdale, on foot or 
on horseback, the road by Ashness to Watendleth 
may be taken. From a bridge above Barrow Cas- 
cade, there is a splendid view of the valley, with the 
lakes of Derwent and Bassenthwaite ; and a little 
further on, by deviating to the edge of a precipice 
on the right, the waterfall of Lowdore comes in view, 
and the lake appears at an awful depth beneath 
your feet. After losing sight of the lakes, the road 
lies along a contracted valley, by the side of the 
stream which supplies the cataract of Lowdore. At 
the distance of five miles from Keswick, it reaches 
Watendleth, which consists of a few antiquated 
cottages and farm buildings, in colour dark as the 
neighbouring rocks ; just beyond which the tarn is 
placed, amidst a small area of green meadows, sur- 
rounded by wild and uncultivated hills. A track 
leads from thence over the hill, from which there is 
a fine view of the head of Borrowdale ; it then des- 
cends steeply to Rosthwaite, whence the return may 
be made by Bowder Stone to Keswick; a circuit of 
14 miles. To contract this excursion, the stream 
from Watendleth may be crossed about a mile be- 
yond Ashness ; then turning towards Lowdore, there 
is a peculiar view of a part of Derwentwater through 
the opening above the waterfall. 



GENEKAL DIRECTIONS. 



121 



KESWICK TO 
Miles. 



BUTTERMERE. 



Bowder Stone 
Rosthwaite 
Seatoller 
Honister Crag 
Gatesgarth . 
Buttermere 



Miles. 

5 

6 

8 
10 
12 
14 



Through Newlands to Keswick 23 



An excursion through Borrowdale to Buttermere 
may be made on horseback, taking the road as before 
described as far as Bowder Stone : a mile beyond 
which, at Rosthwaite, is a small public house. A 
little further, a road on the left leads by Stone- 
thwaite over the steep mountain pass called the 
Stake, to Langdale. Tourists have sometimes been 
advised, by this track to connect Borrowdale with 
Langdale, in one excursion ; but the better way is 
to explore Langdale from Ambleside, and Borrow- 
dale from Keswick. 

At Seatoller, about eight miles from Keswick, a 
road on the left leads to the black-lead mine, and to 
Waswater ; and here the Buttermere road, turn- 
ing to the right, ascends (by the side of a stream 
broken into pretty waterfalls,) up a steep hill; from 
which there are some fine retrospective views of the 
upper parts of Borrowdale; and Helvellyn soon 
begins to shew his head over the mountains of Wa- 
tendleth. In passing the hause, (which rises 880 
feet above the level of Derwent Lake,) Honister 
Crag in majestic grandeur is presented to the view; 
l2 



Am 



122 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

between which and Yew Crag, the road now sharply 
descends. Both these rocks are famed for produc- 
ing roofing slate of the best quality ; and the edges 
of the road are beautifully tufted with Alchemilla 
alpina. Gatesgarth dale, through which the road 
now goes, (twice crossing and recrossing the stream,) 
is a narrow valley strewed with large blocks of stone, 
fallen from the rocks above; and solemnly shaded 
by the lofty Honister, which towers to the height of 
1700 feet above the vale. We now re-enter upon 
the same soft clay-slate rock, which we parted from 
at Grange, and the change is soon apparent in the 
smoothness of the road. 

Opposite to the farm of Gatesgarth, which is two 
miles from the inn at Buttermere, a shepherd's path 
leads over the mountain, by a pass called Scarf-gap, 
and after crossing the narrow dale of Ennerdale, 
proceeds to Wasdale head over a second and higher 
mountain called the Sail. The crags on the left of 
Scarf-gap are, from their form, called Haystacks ; 
and to the right, three adjoining summits are called 
High-crag, High-stile, and Red-pike. The two 
first are composed of what some would call a por- 
phyritic greenstone rock, the third of a reddish 
sienite. Between the second and third is a small 
tarn, described by Mr. West, as " a large crater, 
that from the parched colour of the conical moun- 
tains in whose bosom it is formed, appears to have 
been the focus of a volcano at some distant period 
of time when the cones were produced by the ex- 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



123 



plosion"! The road, after passing Gatesgarth, 
touches upon the margin of Buttermere Lake, where 
a vein of lead-ore is opened by the way-side, and a 
little further upon the left is the neat sheltered 
cottage of Haseness. From Keswick to the inn at 
Buttermere by this route is 14 miles. 

At Buttermere, a boat is usually taken upon 
Crummock Lake, as well for the views of the sce- 
nery as being the most convenient way of seeing 
Scale Force. It is an agreeable walk of half a mile 
to the water, and after a pleasant little voyage of 
nearly a mile, a walk of three quarters of a mile 
reaches to the fall. Travellers may indeed walk 
from the inn to Scale Force ; but the path being 
wet and unpleasant, a boat is greatly to be preferred. 
If the weather be unfavourable for using the boat, 
a good view of Crummock Lake may be had, by 
riding a mile and a half on the eastern side, to the 
rocky point called the hause. After the necessary 
refreshment at Buttermere, it is an agreeable ride of 
9 miles through the peaceful vale of Newlands, and 
by Portinscale to Keswick. 

On leaving Buttermere we encounter a steep hill, 
but the road, as well as the mountain side, is much 
smoother than the ascent from Borrowdale. In 
about a mile and a half we reach the top of the 
hause, and suddenly glance upon the further edge 
of Derwentwater, with the wooded rock of Castle- 
head, and Saddleback. The valley is narrow at first, 
but further on it is beautifully diversified. 



124 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

DRIVE TO SCALE HILL, AND BUTTERMERE. 



Miles. 


Miles 


2h Braithwaite . . • 


2i 


2^ Summit of Whinlatter 


5 




8 


4 Scale Hill 


12 


4 Buttermere 


18 


9 Through Newlands to Keswick 


25 



The best way for a carriage to Scale Hill or 
Buttermere, is by the old road towards Cockermouth 
over the steep mountain Whinlatter, which in the 
length of two miles rises to the height of 800 feet 
above the valley. After passing the sixth milestone, 
a road turns to the left, crossing a brook and wind- 
ing round the end of a hill, where a fine view is 
presented over the cultivated vale of Lorton, and as 
far as the distant mountains of Kirkcudbright. 

At Scale Hill, a boat may be taken on Crummock 
Lake, from whence the mountains surrounding that 
and Buttermere, may be seen to great advantage. 
The party may be landed for a view of Scale Force, 
and again for a walk to the village of Buttermere, 
and a view of the lake from a hill near it — return- 
ing the same way to Keswick. But should there 
be any objection to taking a boat, the carriage may 
be driven along the side of Crummock Lake, to the 
inn at Buttermere, and the return made through 
the vale of Newlands. This road over the hause is 
very steep, rising to the height of 760 feet in less 
than a mile and a half ; and for a short distance on 
the other side descending very rapidly : but, with 
steady horses, it is quite practicable. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



125 



Whiteside 




? 



1 fc 



-I S 






I 



126 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



KESWICK TO WASWATER. 



Miles 






Miles 


8 


To Seatoller 


. 


3 


1 


Seathwaite 


. . 


9 


3 


Sty Head 


. 


12 


2 


Wasdale Head 




14 


6 


Nether Wasdale, 


Strands 


20 


4 


Gosforth . 


. 


24 


3 


C alder Bridge . 


. 


27 



Those tourists who visit Waswater from Keswick, 
generally make an excursion on horseback for two 
days : by which plan, Borrowdale and Waswater 
are seen on the first day ; and Ennerdale, Lowes 
Water, Crummock, and Buttermere on the second. 
The road up Borrowdale as far as Seatoller, has 
already been described ; from whence the Wasdale 
road is on the left to Seathwaite ;* opposite to which 
on the right, lies the famous Black-lead Mine. Be- 
yond Seathwaite, the road becomes a mere track, fit 
only for horses accustomed to the country. A 
waterfall presents itself to view on the right ; and 
after crossing a rude bridge, the ascent of the moun- 
tain is commenced by a winding path. On passing 
a piece of water called Sty-head Tarn, the bold and 
lofty crag of Great-end appears on the left; and 
beyond it, in towering majesty, the highest of the 
Pikes, rendered more conspicuous by an object lately 

" There is a great discordancy in the spelling and pronouncia- 
tion of local names : this is provincially pronounced Seewhaite ; 
while a place near the source of the river Duddon, with the same 
spelling, is called Scathe t. 



I 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



127 



erected in the prosecution of the trigonometrical 
survey. Great Gable is close upon the right; but 
the grandeur of its form is better appreciated at a 
distance. The highest part of the road at Sty-head 
is 1250 feet above the first house in the vale, and 
here a magnificent view presents itself: the small 
valley of Wasdale head appearing as if sunk below 
the general level, and the sea at a distance seeming to 
rise in the horizon. The lake of Waswater is not 
yet in sight, being hid by a projecting mountain on 
the left, called Lingmel. A steep zigzag track now 
descends on the side of Gable, down which the 
horses may be led ; as it is neither quite safe nor 
agreeable to ride. Crags of the most grotesque forms 
overlook the road, and the side of the hill is profusely 
strewed with stones, in some of which garnets may 
be found imbedded : and in crossing the stream 
which issues between Gable and Kirkfell, a rock of 
reddish granite may be seen, where it is denudated 
by the waters on both sides of the road. 

Wasdale head comprises a level area of 400 acres 
of land, divided by stone walls into small irregular 
fields, which have been cleared with great industry 
and labour ; as appears from the enormous heaps of 
stones, piled up from the surplus after completing 
the inclosures. Here six or seven families have 
their Chapel of a size proportionate to the number 
of inhabitants, and in a style according with the 
situation; and what Mr. Gray formerly said of 
Grasmere, may with equal propriety be applied to 



128 GENEEAL DIRECTIONS. 

this vale : " Not a single red tile, no gentleman's 
flaring house, or garden walls, break in upon the 
repose of this little unsuspected paradise ; but all is 
peace, rusticity, and happy poverty, in its neatest, 
most becoming attire." 

After passing the inhabited part of the valley, 
the road approaches the lake, which shews the purity 
of its water, by the clean blue gravel washed upon 
its shores. As the road proceeds along the margin 
of the lake, the screes on the opposite side form a 
striking object, and the mountains left behind should 
not be forgotten ; retrospective views taken at short 
intervals, will shew the majestic and varied forms 
they assume on being viewed from different points. 

It has been suggested, that YVaswater would be 
more advantageously seen, by reversing the excur- 
sion, so that the principal mountain views would be 
always in prospect on advancing up the vale. As 
far as relates to Waswater alone, this is certainly 
true ; but in what concerns Borrowdale, Lowes 
Water, and Crummock, they are seen to more 
advantage by this route : besides, tourists generally 
congratulate themselves, on having passed over the 
most difficult part of the road on the first day. 

Towards the lower parts of the lake, the shores 
are more rocky ; and the composition of the rock is 
changed, from a kind of greenstone, to a reddish 
sienite. At Crook-head, opposite the foot of the 
lake, Mr. Kawson of Halifax, has built a neat sum- 
mer residence. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



129 



Buckbarrow Pike 



MiddlefeU 




a 



S" 



» a 



M 



ISO GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

A road turns off on the left to Ravenglass ; and 
at the Strands near the Church, there are two 
small public-houses, at one of which it may be 
necessary to take some refreshment, after a morn- 
ing's ride of 20 miles, and none of the best road. 

About four miles further, is the village of Gos- 
forth, where a tall column carved with unintelligible 
characters stands in the church-yard on the right ; 
beyond which the roads from Wasdale, Eskdale and 
Bavenglass become united. We have now left the 
mountainous district, and entered upon one more 
cultivated, where the principal views are to the sea, 
towards which the road seems fast approaching ; and 
the mountain rocks are succeeded by a red sandstone. 
From hence it is nearly three miles of excellent road 
to Calder Bridge, at which place are two neat small 
inns, where lodgings are generally taken for the 
night. Three quarters of a mile above the bridge, 
lie the remains of Calder Abbey, mentioned at p. 82. 
to which it is a pleasant walk. The path leads 
over a rich cultivated plot of ground by the side of 
the river Calder — its banks finely covered with 
wood. The approach to the Abbey is through a 
close avenue, terminated by an archway, appertain- 
ing to a part of the building now converted to farm- 
ing purposes, on emerging from which the venerable 
ruin appears to view. The mansion of Capt. Irwin 
adjoins the Abbey ; and Ponsonby Hall, the resi- 
dence of E. Stanley, Esq. is at a short distance from 
the bridge. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



131 




Crag Fell— Grike 



9 






8- 



132 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



RETURN FROM CALDER BRIDGE TO KESWICK. 



ilea 




Miles 


7 


Ennerdale Bridge . 


7 


a 


Lamplugh Cross 


10 


4 


Lowes Water . . 


14 


2 


Scale Hill 


16 


4 


Buttermere . . 


20 


9 


Keswick . . 


29 



From Calder Bridge there is an excellent road of 
ten miles to Whitehaven ; but that usually taken 
by tourists inclines more towards the mountains, 
which however on this side present no very interest- 
ing features. For some miles the principal prospect 
is over a cultivated country to the sea, with the Isle 
of Man, and the Scotch mountains in the distance. 

About three miles from Calder Bridge, the two 
rival points of Scawfell appear over the neighbour- 
ing mountains, separated by the yawning chasm 
Mickle Door ; and two miles further, the town of 
Egremont is seen through a narrow vale on the left. 
Seven miles from Calder Bridge a part of Enner- 
dale Lake appears in sight ; and after passing the 
hamlet of Ennerdale Bridge, in which stands the 
church and two small public houses, the lake is 
observed from the rising ground in another point of 
view, accompanied by the grand mountain scenery of 
Ennerdale, amid which the Pillar rises conspicuous. 
The road here for a short distance is formed upon 
the limestone rock, which skirts the mountains. 
Turning to the right by the public house at Lam- 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



133 



plugh Cross, in a mile further you pass between the 
hall and the church ; the hall is now rebuilt in the 
shape of a modern farm house, the only remains of 
its ancient grandeur being a gateway, with the in- 
scription, " John Lamplugh, 1595." Two miles 
further, turning round the end of a hill to the right, 
the small lake of Lowes Water comes in view, ac- 
companied by a rich assemblage of mountains. Soon 
after passing this lake, that of Crummock presents 
itself in one of its best combinations ; and crossing 
the river Cocker, you shortly arrive at Scale Hill, 
distant from Calder Bridge rather more than 16 
miles. 

If Buttermere has not been previously visited, a 
boat may be taken upon Crummock Lake, which 
with a walk from the edge of the water to Scale 
Force, will make a pleasing variety. In the mean- 
time the horses may meet the party at Buttermere, 
and the return to Keswick be made through New- 
lands — making this day^ journey nearly 30 miles. 
Those who have seen Buttermere, may save above 
a mile, by taking the carriage road from Scale-hill ; 
along which there is a pleasant view of the vale of 
Lorton ; and also a fine view of the vale of Kes- 
wick in descending the hill from Whinlatter. — 
Those who think this circuit too much for two days, 
may extend it to three, by staying one night at 
Nether Wasdale, and another at Scale-hill. 

To visit Waswater in a carriage from Keswick, 
it will be necessary to go by Scale-hill and Enner- 
m2 



134 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

dale Bridge or Egremont — stopping two nights at 
Calder Bridge, and returning the same way, or hy 
Whitehaven. 

DRIVE ROUND BASSENTHWA1TE LAKE. 



iles. 


Miles. 


5 Bassenthwaite Sandbed . 


5 


3 Castle Inn 


8 


1 Ouse Bridge . 


9 


1 PeelWyke . 


10 


8 Keswick 


18 



This being thought less interesting than most of 
the other lakes, is often reserved to the last ; but 
some have remarked that it ought to be visited first, 
or before the imagination was too much elated by 
the more prominent features of the other lakes. 
However tourists who prefer an easy journey, will 
find objects to please, in a perambulation of 18 miles 
round this lake. On the eastern side the traveller 
would sometimes wish for a nearer approach to the 
lake ; but few would think themselves repaid for 
the trouble of visiting West's stations at Broad- 
ness and Scarness ; there is a pleasant halting place 
at Castle Inn, eight miles from Keswick ; and from 
the foot of the lake the prospect is extensive. There 
is also a public house at Peel Wyke on the western 
side, where the road being now improved and con- 
ducted nearly on a level with the water, is rendered 
very commodious for travelling, and at some turn- 
ings opens to pleasing views. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



135 



Those who are not inclined to make the whole 
circuit of the lake, may be gratified in a ride of five 
miles by the foot of Skiddaw, to a station recom- 
mended by Mr. Crosthwaite, a little above the road 
on the common at the end of a wood of larches. 
Here the principal part of the lake may be seen, with 
the three bold promontories of Bowness, Broadness, 
and Scarness, and in returning (if on horseback) take 
the upper road by Milbeck, Applethwaite, and 
Ormathwaite, where some of the best views of Der- 
went and its environs will be found. From thence 
either take the nearest road to Keswick ; or proceed 
by Mr. Calvert's occupation way along the side of 
Latrigg, and enter the town by the Penrith road. 

KESWICK TO ULSWATER. 

Miles. Miles. 

11 Beckses .... 11 

6 Gowbarrow Park . . 17 

5 Patterdale ... 22 

Return the same way ; or 
10 Pooley Bridge . . 32 

6 Penrith .... 38 



Ulswater may be visited from Keswick on horse- 
back or on foot ; leaving the Penrith road a little 
beyond the second mile-stone, crossing the vale of 
Wanthwaite, and passing over a bleak mountain 
side to Matterdale. Carriages are obliged to con- 
tinue on the turnpike for more than ten miles. 
Neither of these roads offers any thing interesting, 
except the views of St. John's vale, and the moun- 



136 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



tain Saddleback ; till they unite at Dockray : but 
after entering Gowbarrow Park, the prospect of Uls- 
water is presented in one of its richest points of view. 
Airey Force and Lyulph's Tower lie a little to the 
left, and it is then five miles of delightful road to 
the inn at Patterdale. Some who travel in carriages, 
go from Keswick to Pooley Bridge, and thence to 
Penrith or Ambleside ; but the want of post-horses at 
Pooley Bridge is sometimes felt as an inconvenience. 

Parties landing at Whitehaven with the intention 
of seeing all the lakes, may commence with Waswater 
and Ennerdale ; and afterwards Lowes Water, Crum- 
mock, and Buttermere ; or the three last may be 
visited from Cockermouth. 

Cockermoutli is a good market-town with nearly 
4000 inhabitants. It possesses an ancient castle, has 
a handsome bridge over the river Cocker, which 
runs through the town to join the Derwent ; and 
the inns are furnished with every requisite accom- 
modation for travellers. 

Lowes Water — however paradoxical it may ap- 
pear — has its outlet towards the mountains; con- 
sequently, in opposition to the general rule, it is 
best seen by approaching it at the upper end ; and 
the most eligible way from Cockermouth will be by 
the hamlets of Pardshaw, Mockerkin, and Fangs ; 
by which the lake is taken in combination with lofty 
mountains ; and the road from thence to Scale Hill 
affords excellent views of Crummock Lake, with the 
mountains surrounding Buttermere. 



GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 



is: 



Place Fell ;0 

% 

Hartshop Dod 

Cawdale Moor 

Kirkstone Pass 

Red Screes 

Deepdale Park . 

Blease 




3 



a 



138 GENERAL DIRECTIONS. 

From Cocker mouth to Scale Hill by this route is 
about 11 miles. After visiting Crummock and But- 
termere, the party may either proceed through New- 
lands to Keswick, or return through the pleasant 
vale of Lorton to Cockermouth ; and next morn- 
ing by the side of Bassenthwaite Lake to Keswick. 
From whence, as may be found most expedient, the 
tour may be continued to the more southern lakes. 

Or this route might be reversed, by parties com- 
mencing their tour at Whitehaven with an intention 
of seeing all the lakes, and concluding at the same 
place ; by taking first Ennerdale, and Wasdale, and 
going from thence by Broughton to Coniston and 
the other lakes, reserving Buttermere, Crummock, 
and Lowes Water to the last; but those who re- 
quire a conveyance will find a difficulty in procuring 
it on some parts of this route. 

An attempt to enumerate all the permutations, 
that might be made in these excursions ; or all the 
pleasing points, from which the varied scenery of 
this interesting region might be viewed; would 
be an endless and in fact a useless task. Per- 
sons who delight in exploring a country, need only 
be made acquainted with the outlines : they will 
feel more pleasure in finding out the rest. 



( 139 ) 



BOTANICAL NOTICES. 



It is not here intended to attempt a systematic 
arrangement of the botany of the district, nor even 
an enumeration of all the rare plants that may be 
met with, in a region possessing such variety of soil 
and situation — but merely a brief notice of some of 
those which not unfrequently present themselves to 
the observation of the tourist, without going far out 
of his way to seek them. 

In shallow parts of Lakes, where the bottom is 
of peat, the Bullrush* and Common Reed rear 
their heads on high above the water — the leaves 
and flowers of the White and the Yellow Water 
Lily float upon the surface ; and the bottom is 
rendered verdant, chiefly by three kinds of plants, 
namely, the Littorella lacustris, which puts forth 
its long and slender stamina most freely, when in a 
dry summer it is left uncovered by the water ; the 
Lobelia Dortmanna spreads a tuft of radical leaves 
upon the bottom, and in July, shoots up its spike of 
delicate pale flowers above the water ; and the Isoetes 



* The Bullrush is employed in making bottoms of chairs ; but 
Dr. Withering is mistaken when he says that it is used at " two 
years old or still older," the straw invariably dies annually, al- 
though the roots are perennial. 



140 BOTANICAL NOTICES. 

lacustris being one of the few plants which perfect 
their fructification under water, has its leaves pulled 
up by water fowl, in the winter season, to extract 
the seeds which lie concealed in their bases. 

The Chara vulgaris has its habitat in the bot- 
tom of Derwent Lake ; and when drawn into a boat 
it gives out its disagreeable odour. 

The Myriophyllum spicatum is an inhabitant of 
slow streams. The Sparganium natans is found in 
Derwent Lake near Lowdore ; Sparganium ramo- 
sum is plentiful in ditches between Derwent and 
Bassenthwaite Lakes ; and the Typha latifolia in 
Naddale Beck near Keswick. 

The spongy shores of lakes and pools are margin- 
ed with Horse tail, Equisetum limosum. Hippuris 
vulgaris grows in ditches near Cartmel well. 

The various leaved Water Crowfoot, Ranunculus 
aquatilis, grows in the the river Derwent, at the 
head of Bassenthwaite Lake ; and in the Kent at 
Kendal. Mouse ear scorpion grass, Myosotis pa- 
lustris, and Water Plantain, Alisma plantago, in 
shallow ditches. Alisma natans has been said to 
grow in Derwent Lake ; but its existence there may 
be doubted. 

Hemlock Dropwort, Oenantlie crocata, grows in 
the river Brathay and many other places; the 
Yellow "Water flag, Iris pseudacorus, in watery 
places ; Bidens tripartita in a ditch near Lowdore; 
and Eupatoriicm cannabinum near Low Wood Inn 
and in Nether Wasdale. 



M 



BOTANICAL NOTICES. 



141 



Water Cress, Sisymbrium Nasturtium, is com- 
mon in springs and ditches in calcareous soils ; but 
has been rare among the lakes till increased by 
planting. 

Buckbean, Menyanthes trifoliata, and Purple 
Marsh Cinquefoil, Comarum palustre, in swampy 
ground — in the isthmus near Derwent Lake. 

Juncus JWformis and Junius uUginosiis by the 
side of Derwent Lake : the latter on shore is a low- 
creeping plant ; but when rooted under water it 
shoots up leaves like hairs to the length of two feet. 

The meadows subject to lake floods are covered 
with various species of Carea?, and the many headed 
Cotton grass, Eriophorum angustifolium : the 
single headed Cotton grass or Moss crops, Eriopho- 
rum vaginatum, grows on boggy parts of mountains, 
and is the early spring food of sheep. 

Schoemis Mariscus in Cunswick tarn, a small 
piece of water near Kendal — which has proved too 
deep for those who lately attempted to drain it. 

The Lily of the valley, Convallaria majalis^on an 
island in Windermere Lake. Solomon's seal, C. 
multiflora, in Castlehead Wood near Keswick. 

Different species of the Orchis tribe are found in 
the meadows — the Orchis conopsea on Hartley hill, 
Buttermere — the Butterfly, O. bifolia two miles 
from Keswick on the Penrith road ; and Mr. Nelson 
has transplanted the Fly Orchis, Ophrijs muscifera, 
into his garden at Milnthorp. 



142 BOTANICAL NOTICES. 

Lousewort, Pedicularis sylvatica^ in moist pas- 
tures ; P. palustris in wet meadows. 

Golden Saxifrage, Chrysosplenium oppositifolium, 
is common in springs. Various species of Saocifraga 
are found on Helvellyn and in Longsleddale. S. 
aizoides in watery places on Barrow Side near Kes- 
wick. S. granulata near the same place, and at 
Mayburgh. S. stellaris near the summit of Skiddaw. 

Scurvy Grass, Cochlearia officinalis, is abundant 
in springs on the Patterdale mountains ; but is rarely 
found in other parts of the lake district. The Grass 
of Parnassus, Parnassia palustris, grows in moist 
elevated pastures. Bastard Asphodel, Anthericum 
ossifragum, in like situations ; as also the Bonny 
Bird-eye, Primula farinosa, which is found in Lough- 
rigg — between Lowther and Bampton, and near 
Cunswick tarn. Sun dew, Drosera rotundifolia, in 
boggy ground on low mountains. D. longifolia in 
Borrowdale, but more rare. Butterwort, Pinguicula 
vulgaris near the edges of bogs. The Pyrola se- 
cunda has been found by Mr. Hutton, on Castlerigg 
Fell near Keswick ; the Pyrola media, and Impa- 
tiens Noli-me-tangere, by Mr. Just, at Stock-gill 
Force near Ambleside. 

The Cranberry, Vaccinium Oxycoccus, in poor 
boggy ground, near Rydal Water — in Thorn- 
thwaite — and most plentiful in Mungrisdale. The 
Bleaberry, Vaccinium Myrtillus, is common in 
rocky woods, and on mountain sides — in woods near 
Derwent Lake, and on the Dod at the side of Skid- 



BOTANICAL NOTICES. 



143 



claw. Red Cranberry, Cow-berry or red Whortle- 
berry, Vaccinium Vitis Idcea, inhabits loftier situa- 
tions and retains its fruit longer : it reaches the 
summit of Skiddaw, but is more fruitful on the moun- 
tains between Derwent and Crummock Lake. 

Crow-berry, Ling-berry, Empetrum nigrum, 
grows on Skiddaw about one third from its summit, 
in a moist soil — its berries are said to be the food of 
grouse or moor-game. 

Large tracts of peaty moors are covered with Ling, 
Erica, or according to Sir J. Smith, Call una vul- 
garis, which affords shelter for the grouse ; in Au- 
gust its blossoms give the mountains a rich purple 
hue, and it is the source from which bees obtain a 
great portion of their honey : a variety with white 
flowers is rare. Erica cinerea grows in places more 
rocky, some other species are found in Ullock Moss 
and Gosforth. 

Many species of lichens may be found upon the 
rocks, and on the trees ; mosses upon the mountains 
and heaths ; and ferns upon the commons, and in 
the woods. The many-named Creeper, Club-moss, 
Stags-horn-moss, Fox-feet, Wolfs-claw, Lycopodiunt 
clavatum, grows upon dry mountains not very high; 
the alpine, L. alpinum, in more lofty ; and the fir 
leaved, L. Selago, in lofty, and more moist places. 

The sides of mountains with a dry soil are clothed 
to a moderate elevation with Brackens, Pteris aqui- 
lina, which by their changing in September and 
October from a bright to an olive green, and after- 



144 BOTANICAL NOTICES. 

wards to a russet brown, contribute to that autumnal 
colouring which is so much admired. The stone 
fern, Pteris crispa, inhabits higher and more rocky 
situations. Asplenium Adiantum nigrum, is root- 
ed in Castlehead rock ; and a solitary plant has re- 
mained many years in the wall of Crosthwaite 
church. Harts tongue, Asplenium scolopendrium, 
in rents in limestone rocks in Westmorland — and 
in a garden wall at Ormathwaite. Scolopendrium 
ceterach on Troutbeck Bridge. Osmund royal, 
Osmunda regalis, in Ullock moss near Keswick. 

The large early flowering Ulex europceus is the 
common Whin, in the vicinity of Keswick, where it 
is far too abundant — a smaller kind Ulex nanus, 
blossoming in autumn, is more prevalent between 
Pooley Bridge and Askham, in Buttermere and 
Wasdale, and at Bolton wood near Gosforth, where, 
intermixed with a large blossomed heath, it gives an 
appearance of richness to land otherwise barren. 

The common Juniper, Juniperus communis, er- 
roneously called Savin, grows on the mountain 
between Wythburn and Borrowdale, on Place Fell, 
Loughrigg Fell, and most plentiful in the pastures 
between Windermere and Coniston. 

The least Willow, Salix herbacea, on the summit 
of Skiddaw, on Saddleback, Helvellyn, and the 
mountains between Derwent and Crummock Lake. 

Cinquefoil Ladies mantle, Alchemilla alpina, on 
the mountain between Borrowdale and Buttermere, 
and in Wanthwaite Crags. Spignel, Atharnanta 



BOTANICAL NOTICES. 



145 



Meum, on Bristow Hills near Keswick. One Berry, 
Paris quadrifolia, near Stock-gill Force, on the road 
side near Bannerigg, and in Lowther woods. Soap- 
wort, Saponaria officinalis, under the bridge at 
Kirkby Lonsdale. Tutsan, Park-leaves, Hypericum 
Androscemum, and Wake-robin, Arum maculatum, 
are common under hedges near Ambleside, but not 
found in the neighbourhood of Keswick. 

The Wild Vine, Red-berried Briony, Tamus 
communis, ornaments the hedges about Cartmel and 
Windermere lake ; but is rarely found further north. 

Pelitory of the wall, Parietaria officinalis, near 
Cartmel well, and on the walls of Cartmel church. 

Yellow Poppy, Papaver cambricum, in Long- 
sleddale. Yellow-horned Poppy, sea Celandine, 
Chelidonium glaucum, on the coast near Flook- 
burgh. Deadly nightshade, Atropa Belladonna, 
near the same place, and about Furness Abbey. 

Henbane, Hyoscyamus niger, near Flookburgh. 
The great Burnet, Sanguisorba officinalis, com- 
mon in fields. Upland Burnet, Poterium Sanguis- 
orba, on Kirkhead near Kents Bank, and on Kendal 
Fell. The Cowslip is common in calcareous soils, 
but rarely found among the lakes. The yellow 
Primrose ornaments the edges of woods and thickets. 

Thrift, Statice Armeria, on Salt marshes, and 
near the top of Scawfell. 

Lands exhausted by excessive cultivation are 
subject to be overrun by White Tansey, Coltsfoot, 
and Couch Grass, Triticum repens. 
n2 



146 



BOTANICAL NOTICES. 



The Yellow Corn Marigold, Chrysanthemum 
segetum, was formerly so troublesome in some corn 
fields, that the land infested with it was considered 
inferior in value; but by the improved system of 
husbandry it is nearly eradicated. The Great Daisy, 
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum, is still common 
near Windermere and Kirkby Lonsdale. 

The Spindle-tree, Euonymus europeus, on Bar- 
row Side near Lowdore, and near Clappersgate. 

The berry-bearing Alder, Rhamnus frangula, 
in Graithwaite woods — near Rydal Water — and 
Ullock moss near Keswick. Privet, Ligustrum 
vulgare, and White-beam, Crataegus Aria, grow on 
the rocks at Humphry Head. 

The Oak, Ash, and Birch are the principal in- 
digenous forest trees ; much of the underwood is of 
Hasel, which yields large quantities of nuts. 

Stunted Yew trees creep up the perpendicular 
escarpments of the limestone rocks near Humphry 
Head, Witherslack, and Underbarrow. In Borrow- 
dale it makes a more thriving tree ; the bole of one 
near the Black-lead mine is twenty feet in circum- 
ference, and its branches cover an area of twenty 
yards in diameter : another in Lorton vale is still 
more umbrageous. 



( W ) 



THE 

GEOLOGY 

OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 



At the time this essay was first published, the 
structure of the mountainous district of Cumber- 
land, Westmorland, and Lancashire, was but little 
understood ; scientific travellers had contented them- 
selves with procuring specimens of the different rocks, 
without taking time to become acquainted with their 
relative position. Since then, the subject has re- 
ceived more attention from persons conversant with 
geological inquiries ; and the following observations 
have been copied into recent topographical works, 
without reserve or acknowledgement : but little ad- 
ditional information upon the subject has yet been 
given to the public. To such as are satisfied with 
a general outline, these remarks may still be accep- 
table ; and to those who feel disposed to explore 
for themselves, the facts herein stated may be useful, 
in directing them more readily to the objects of their 
research. 

It is a question not fully determined among 
geologists, to what rocks the term primitive, and 
to which that of transition or secondary, ought to be 
applied ; and it has also been disputed whether the 



148 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 



! 



rocks of this district should be regarded as stratified 
or unstratified. It is true they present little of that 
regularity of appearance which is observable in the 
rocks of many other districts ; yet it will be admitted 
on due examination that they are in some degree 
stratified. 

Granite is understood to occupy the lowest place 
in the series of rocks hitherto exposed to human 
observation, and it appears to be the foundation upon 
which all the others have been deposited ; in some 
countries it also constitutes the peaks of the highest 
mountains, protruding itself through all the upper 
or newer formations. That however is not the case 
in the district under consideration. It is here only 
exposed to view in the excavated parts of some 
of the mountains ; or where it rises so far as to form 
hills or ridges, they are of inferior elevation. 

That rock of granite which seems best entitled 
to the distinction of primitive, may be seen denu- 
dated in the bed of the river Caldew, near the north- 
east side of Skiddaw ; and in a branch of the river 
Greta, between Skiddaw and Saddleback, about 
1400 feet above the level of the sea. This granite 
is of a grey kind, composed of quartz, white felspar, 
and black mica. It is traversed in various directions 
by veins of quartz ; in some of which, molybdena, 
apatite, tungsten, wolfram, and other minerals have 
been found. 

A variety of granite with reddish felspar, and 
which from a deficiency of mica, has sometimes been 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 



149 



called sienite, forms the two inferior mountain ridges, 
called Irton fell and Muncaster fell ; it extends to 
some distance on both sides of the river Esk, and 
may be seen shooting up in places, almost as far as 
Bootle, and also at Wasdale head. At Nether- 
wasdale it becomes a finer grained sienite, in which 
form it extends through the mountains quite across 
Ennerdale, as far as Scale Force, and to the 
side of Buttermere Lake. It contains veins of red 
hematite and micaceous iron ore. Another variety 
of granite with reddish felspar in large crystals, is 
found on Shap Fells, and may be observed in situ 
on the road side near Wasdale Bridge, about four 
miles south of Shap. 

Carrock Fell consists of a rock generally referred 
to the class of sienite, varying its appearance in 
different parts of the mountain. It contains (besides 
the usual ingredients of quartz and felspar) hypers- 
thene and magnetic or titaniferous iron ore in various 
proportions. Near this a considerable quantity of 
lead ore and some copper has been procured : the 
lead is smelted and refined hard by, and yields 
a goo,d portion of silver. 

A reddish porphyritic rock occurs on both sides 
of St. John's Vale, from two to three miles east of 
Keswick ; and a vein or dyke apparently related to 
the same, but far more beautiful, (being composed 
of crystals of quartz and bright red felspar, imbed- 
ded in a brownish red compact felspar,) is found on 
Armboth FeU, six miles S.S.E. of Keswick. 



150 GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 

It is not well known what place some of these 
granites, sienites, and porphyries hold in the series 
of rocks : from the scarcity of places at which their 
junction with the slate rock can be seen, it is not 
easy to ascertain whether they have been deposited 
upon that substance or protruded through it : but 
the latter seems the more probable supposition. 

The greatest bulk of these mountain rocks have 
been commonly included under the general appella- 
tion of slate ; although many of them shew no 
disposition to the slaty cleavage. They may be 
classed in three principal divisions. 

Of these divisions, the first or lowest in the 
series, forms Skiddaw, Saddleback, Grasmoor, and 
Grisedale Pike, with the mountains of Thornthwaite 
and Newlands ; it extends across Crummock Lake, 
and by the foot of Ennerdale as far as Dent Hill ; 
and after being lost for several miles, it is elevated 
again at Black Combe. 

If we regard the granite of Skiddaw as a nucleus 
upon which these rocks are deposited in mantle- 
shaped strata, that which reposes immediately upon 
it is commonly called gneiss ; but is rather more 
slaty and less granular than the gneiss of some 
other countries. More distant from the granite, the 
quantity of mica in slate decreases, and it is marked 
with darker coloured spots ; it is then provincially 
called whintin, and is quarried for flooring flags and 
other useful purposes. This again is succeeded by a 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 



151 



slate of softer kind, in which crystals of chiastolite are 
plentifully imbedded ; these crystals gradually dis- 
appear, and the rock becomes a more homogeneous 
clay-slate, which, contrary to general observation, 
has its outgoing at a higher elevation than either 
the granite or the gneiss. 

These rocks are of a blackish colour, and divide 
by natural partings into slates of various thickness, 
which are sometimes curiously bent and waved: when 
these partings are very numerous, though indistinct 
at first, they open by exposure to the weather, 
and in time it becomes shivered into thin flakes, 
which lessens its value as a roofing slate. In some 
places the thin laminse alternate with others of a 
few inches in thickness ; which are harder, and of a 
lighter colour, containing more siliceous matter ; 
they have been by some taken for greywacke slate, 
though apparently belonging to a different formation. 

Rocks of this description have generally been 
represented as stratified, and the strata parallel to 
the slaty cleavage ; but this proposition should not 
be received without some hesitation. If it be sup- 
posed that these varieties of rock (between which 
there is no natural parting) have been deposited 
upon the granite in the order in which they have 
been mentioned ; then, the strata may be said to be 
mantle-shaped round the granitic nucleus ; only in- 
terrupted in its continuity by the anomalous rocks 
of Carrock: but if it be assumed that the stratifica- 
tion follows the slaty cleavage, then it may be said 



I 



152 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 



to have its bearing tending towards the north-east 
and south-west ; dipping generally at a high angle 
to the south-east, and presenting the edges of its 
laminae to the surface of the granite, from the prox- 
imity of which the nature and appearance of the 
rock must be presumed to be altered. 

The rocks belonging to this division do not effer- 
vesce with acids ; they contain no calcareous spar, 
except a little in some of the veins. They are in- 
tersected in places by dykes of a harder kind of 
rock, apparently of the nature of trap or greenstone. 
Veins of lead ore occur in several places ; and have 
been worked between Skiddaw and Saddleback, in 
Thornthwaite, Newlands, and Buttermere ; but one 
in the parish of Loweswater, and one below the 
level of Derwent Lake, are the most productive at 
present in this district. A copper mine had for- 
merly been worked to a great depth in a hill called 
Gold Scalp, in Newlands, and is said to have pro- 
duced a very rich ore, which appears to have been 
the yellow sulphuret or copper pyrites. A little 
cobalt ore has been got in Newlands, and small 
quantities of manganese in various places. A salt 
spring near the Grange in Eorrowdale, has anciently 
been of some repute for its medicinal qualities; 
another has been more recently discovered in work- 
ing a lead mine near Derwent lake. They both 
issue from veins in this rock, but their source re- 
mains unknown. 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 153 

The second division comprehends the mountains 
of Eskdale, Wasdale, Ennerdale, Borrowdale, Lang- 
dale, Grasmere, Patterdale, Martindale, Mardale, 
and some adjacent places ; including the two high- 
est mountains of the district, Scawfell and Helvel- 
lyn, as well as the Old Man at Coniston. All our 
fine towering crags belong to it ; and most of the 
cascades among the lakes fall over it. There are 
indeed some lofty precipices in the first division ; 
but owing to the shivering and crumbling nature of 
the rock, they present none of the bold colossal 
features which are exhibited in this. 

Great variety of rocks are included in this divi- 
sion, but their nomenclature is so far from being 
settled, that should two separate catalogues be made 
out by different persons, they would probably vary 
in a great many items. Some will find greywacke 
and greywacke slate in one of these divisions, some 
in another, and some in all ; while others ridicule 
the name as one invented to supply the defect of a 
better. 

Most of these rocks are of a pale-bluish or grey 
colour, some of them belong to the family of the 
greenstones, some are of a porphyritic, others of a 
slaty structure ; differing however from the slates of 
the last division, inasmuch as these exhibit no dis- 
tinct partings by which they are to be separated. 
A reddish aggregated rock of a coarse slaty struc- 
ture, is to be seen on entering the common on the 



154 GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 

road from Keswick towards Borrowdale. It appears 
to form one of the lower beds of the division, and 
may be traced each way to some distance. It is 
succeeded by the more compact dark-coloured rock 
of Wallow Crag, in which quartz, calcareous spar, 
chlorite, and epidote, are found in veins. Garnets 
are found imbedded in some of the rocks on Castle- 
rigg Fell and Great Gable. An amygdaloid rock, 
containing nodules of calcareous spar, and some- 
times of agate, opal or calcedony, is met with in 
several places ; as near Honister Crag — between 
Bowder Stone and Rosthwaite — on Castlerigg Fell 
near Keswick — and in Wolf Crag on the road to 
Matterdale. A curious mixed rock of basaltic ap- 
pearance is found near Berrier ; it skirts the north 
side of Caldbeck Fells, forms the hill called Binsey, 
and may be seen on the north side of the Derwent 
near to Cockermouth. No organic remains have 
yet been discovered, either in this or the preceding 
division. 

The fine pale-blue roofing slate occurs in beds : 
(called by the workmen veins :) the most natural 
position of the lamina or cleavage of the slate 
appears to be vertical : but it is to be found in 
various degrees of inclination, both with respect to 
the horizon, and the planes of stratification. The 
direction of the slaty cleavage bears most commonly 
towards the north-east and south-west ; while the 
dip or inclination is more variable ; the former may 
be ascribed to some general operation of nature ; 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 



155 



the latter being influenced by local circumstances — 
such as the weight of a mountain pressing upon one 
side, while the other side is wanting a support. 
The direction and inclination of the strata are more 
distinguishable by stripes and alternations in the 
colour and texture, than by any natural partings 
or strata seams ; and the slates are split of various 
thickness, according to their fineness of grain, and 
the discretion and skill of the workman, without any 
previous indication of the place where they may 
be so divided. They do not separate into thin 
flakes, like those of the former division ; but some 
of them, when long used, are subject to a peculiar 
species of decay, which operates most powerfully on 
parts least exposed to the weather. 

Most of the rocks of this division effervesce in 
some degree with acids, but more especially those 
possessing the slaty structure. They are not very 
productive of metallic ores, although they afford a 
considerable variety. Lead ore has been got in 
Patterdale ; copper at Dalehead in Newlands, which 
is near the northern boundary of the division — it 
consists of grey and purple copper, with specimens 
of malachite. A mine at Coniston, near the south- 
ern boundary, produces the yellow sulphuret ; and a 
vein of the same was a few years ago opened at 
Wythburn. Small veins of iron ore are frequently 
met with, but scarcely thought worth notice. The 
famous plumbago or black-lead mine of Borrowdale 
is also situated in this division. 






156 GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 

The third division — forming only inferior ele- 
vations — commences with a bed of dark-blue or 
blackish transition limestone, containing here and 
there a few shells and madrepores, and alternating 
with a slaty rock of the same colour ; the different 
layers of each being in some places several feet, in 
others only a few inches in thickness. This lime- 
stone crosses the river Duddon near Broughton ; 
passing Broughton Mills it runs in a north-east 
direction through Torver, by the foot of the Old 
Man mountain, and appears near Low Yewdale and 
Yew Tree. Here it makes a considerable slip to 
the eastward, after which it ranges past the Tarns 
upon the hills above Borwick Ground ; and stretch- 
ing through Skelwith, it crosses the head of Win- 
dermere near Low Wood inn. Then passing above 
Dovenest and Skelgill, it traverses the vales of 
Troutbeck, Kentmere, and Long-Sleddale ; crossing 
the two intervening mountains in the direction of 
the roads which lead over them ; so that no relation 
can be discovered between the direction of the vallies 
and that of the stratification. It dips to the south- 
east, while the cleavage of the slate with which it 
is associated, frequently inclines in an opposite 
direction. 

Towards the south-east succeeds a series of rocks 
of the same dark-blue colour, and principally of a 
slaty structure : but accompanied in places with a 
rock, which breaks alike in all directions. This 
last has supplied a great portion of the rounded 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 157 

stones found in the beds of the rivers Kent and Lune; 
thus furnishing materials for paving the streets, 
and repairing the roads in the vicinity. 

A rock of fine-grained sienite is observed near the 
foot of Coniston Lake ; and one containing a large 
portion of mica appears in Crosthwaite. The strata 
seams are more distinct in this than in the preced- 
ing division ; but, like that, it is not marked by any 
natural partings in the plane of cleavage. A quarry 
one mile from Brathay on the road towards Hawks- 
head, yields excellent flags for flooring ; and they 
are manufactured into tombstones with good effect, 
by Mr. Webster of Kendal, and by Mr. Bromley 
of Keswick. This quarry affords a good example of 
the stratification (or, as some will have it, the rhom- 
boidal crystallization) of these rocks. The cleavage 
is here nearly perpendicular ; and the strata, being 
from one foot to five in thickness, dip to the south- 
east at an angle of about thirty degrees. In some 
districts the layers are so much diminished in thick- 
ness, that slates and tables are formed in the plane 
of the stratification, instead of that of the cleavage ; 
and this has probably given rise to the notion of 
two distinct cleavages crossing each other under a 
certain angle. Roofing slate (called black slate, to 
distinguish it from the pale-blue of the second divi- 
sion) is manufactured in large quantities in the dis- 
trict between Ulverston and Broughton ; which is 
well situated for shipping either by the river Dud- 
don or by canal from Ulverston. 
o2 



158 GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 

The preference given to the slates from certain 
quarries as requiring less weight for the covering of 
a roof of given dimensions, depends not so much 
upon the specific gravity (which varies at most from 
2750 to 2800, or one part in 55) as upon the fine- 
ness of grain, which enables it to bear splitting thin- 
ner. All the rocks of this division effervesce more 
or less with acids ; they contain some calcareous 
spar and pyrites ; but little metallic ore, except a 
small quantity of galena, with green and yellow 
phosphate of lead, which has been got near Stave- 
ley; and some yellow copper ore in Skelwith. 

Although little notice has hitherto been taken by 
authors of the difference between the roofing slates 
of these three divisons, yet a workman of moderate 
experience will readily distinguish them : and I 
have endeavoured so to describe the peculiarities of 
each, that those who may hereafter be engaged in 
examining similar districts may be better enabled 
to compare them. 

A conglomerate, composed of rounded stones of 
various sizes, from the smallest gravel, to the weight 
of several pounds, held together by an iron-shot, 
calcareous cement, forms a hill of a parabolic shape, 
about 1000 feet in height, called Mell Fell; and 
some lesser elevations extending to the foot of Uls- 
water. These pebbles are apparently fragments of 
older rocks, rounded by attrition, and must have 
been transported from some distance, as their com- 
position does not correspond with the rocks of the 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 159 

neighbourhood. This has been taken by some to 
belong to the old red sandstone formation ; but 
whether it passes under or only abuts against the 
adjacent limestone has not yet, I believe, been clear- 
ly ascertained. 

A large mass of similar composition appears in 
the bed and on the banks of the river Lune at 
Kirkby Lonsdale. Its dip indicates that it should 
pass under the limestone which appears at a little 
distance ; but from other circumstances I am not 
quite satisfied of that being the fact. Something of 
the same kind also appears in the river Mint, from 
two to three miles above Kendal; where it may be 
seen to rest upon the blue rock ; and wherever the 
subjacent rock can be seen it is always deeply co- 
loured by the iron of the conglomerate. A layer of 
similar appearance is interstratified with the red 
sandstone at Barrow Mouth near Whitehaven, and 
a still newer formation of the same kind adjoins the 
Cartmel sands near Humphry Head. 

A superincumbent bed of limestone, by some 
called the mountain, by others the upper transition 
limestone, mantles round these mountains, in a posi- 
tion unconformable to the strata of the slaty and 
other rocks upon which it reposes. It bassets out 
near Egremont, Lamplugh, Pardshaw, Papcastle, 
Bothel, Ireby, Caldbeck, Hesket, Berrier, Dacre, 
Lowther and Shap ; it appears again near Kendal, 
Witherslack, Cartmel, Dalton and Milium, from 
whence for some distance its place is occupied by 



160 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 



the sea, and in the neighbourhood of Gosforth and 
Calder Bridge, a red sandstone intervenes, so that 
the limestone is either wanting or buried under more 
recent formations. It dips from the mountains on 
every side, but with different degrees of inclination ; 
the declivity being generally least on the southern 
side. In the neighbourhood of Witherslack it forms 
lofty isolated ridges, while the subjacent slaty rock 
appears in the lower ground : and it may be seen 
upon the surface as far as Warton and Farleton 
Crags, and even as far as Kellet, before it is covered 
by the sandstone of the coal measures. A remarkable 
exception, however, occurs in Holker Park, where 
the mountain rock is succeeded by limestone, and 
that by sandstone and shale, resembling that which 
accompanies coal — all within a very short distance. 
On the north and west of the mountains, the inclina- 
tion of the newer rocks appears to be greater and 
the strata thinner ; so that the clay-slate of the first 
division is succeeded by limestone, sandstone and 
coal, all in the distance of two or three miles. The 
principal mineral production of this limestone, is 
iron ore, which is raised in great quantities near 
Dalton, and also near Egremont. 

On external parts of this circle various sandstones 
and coal succeed each other. At Bolton in Cum- 
berland, the stratification appears to be mantle- 
shaped round the hill at Catlands, so that the lime- 
stone is overlaid by the coal measures nearly on all 
sides. Quantities of coal are raised in the western 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 



161 



part of the parish, and also to the eastward at Cald- 
beck and Warnel Fell ; and a thin seam of coal 
has been found interstratified with the limestone 
at Hesket Newmarket ; but it is easily understood, 
that it would be in vain to search for coal within this 
limestone circle ; consequently it cannot be found in 
the neighbourhood of the lakes. Coal is raised at 
Greysouthen, Gilcrux, and Plumbland ; and there 
are extensive fields of coal beneath the town of 
Whitehaven, at Workington, and on the south side 
of the river Ellen at Maryport. From Maryport 
towards Carlisle, and thence to Penrith, is a large 
tract of red sandstone of unknown depth. To the 
eastward, the plain of the Eden is bounded by a 
long range of mountains, called by some the British 
Appenines, or the Backbone of England. These 
mountains are stratified, but do not produce coal; 
except at the northern end towards Brampton. 
South-east, coal is found on Stainmoor; and more 
southward, the first appearance of coal is at Hutton 
Roof, between Burton and Kirkby Lonsdale ; and 
near Ingleton, there is an extraordinary assemblage 
of slate, lime, and coal. 

Bowlder stones are often met with, far removed 
from their native rock, but do not appear to have 
been carried over high mountain ridges. The gra- 
nite blocks from Shap fells are carried over a great 
part of Westmorland ; but are not found in the 
neighbourhood of the lakes. Bowlders from the 
sienite of Buttermere and Ennerdale are found on 



162 



GEOLOGY OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 



the west coast of Cumberland ; but not in the vales 
of Keswick or Windermere. The granite of 
Caldew and sienite of Carrock can be recognized in 
bowlders in the neighbourhood of Carlisle ; but are 
not seen to the south of Keswick. The famous 
Bowder Stone of Borrowdale does not come within 
the present description ; but a large block near Skel- 
with Bridge on the road to Grasmere — one near 
Coniston Waterhead, and another near Gosforth, 
as well as many others of smaller dimensions — are 
far more interesting to the geologist, yielding suffi- 
cient scope for conjecture as to the place of their 
origin, and the mode of their removal. 



( 163 ) 



METEOROLOGY. 



Besides the permanent beauties of a country diver- 
sified by hills and dales, mountains and lakes, there 
are transient subjects capable of arresting the atten- 
tion of the contemplative observer ; amongst which 
are — the mists or fogs — forming over the surface 
of lakes — floating along the sides of hills — or col- 
lected into clouds, hovering upon the summits of 
mountains. 

Mountains have been supposed to attract the 
clouds with which their summits are so frequently 
enveloped ; but it is more to their agency in forming 
them, that the accumulation of clouds in moun- 
tainous countries may be attributed. Clouds are 
formed of aqueous particles floating in the atmos- 
phere; and they serve as an awning, to shield the 
earth from the violence of the sun's rays in hot 
weather; and to protect it from the rigour of a cold 
winter's night, by obstructing the radiation of heat 
from its surface. In the clearest weather a portion 
of water always exists in the atmosphere in the state 
of an invisibe vapour ; and the higher the tempera- 
ture, the greater quantity it is able to sustain ; so 



164 



METEOROLOGY. 



that when air, fully saturated with vapour, suffers a 
diminution of its heat, the water is exhibited in the 
form of mists, clouds, dew, or rain. It has been 
stated by the late Dr. Hutton of Edinburgh, and 
more fully exemplified by Mr. Dalton, that the 
quantity of vapour capable of entering into air, 
increases in a greater ratio than the temperature ; 
therefore whenever two volumes of air, of different 
temperatures, are mixed together, (each being previ- 
ously saturated with vapour,) the mean temperature 
is not able to support the mean quantity of vapour; 
consequently its precipitation in the form of clouds 
and rain, is occasioned, not by mere cold, but by a 
mixture of comparatively cold and warm air : and 
on this principle, may be explained many of the 
phenomena of mist or fog, clouds, clew and rain. 

Different portions of the earth's surface, and of 
course the contiguous portions of air, are differently 
heated by the sun's rays impinging upon them in 
various degrees of obliquity ; and this difference is 
naturally much greater in a mountainous than in a 
champaign country; and on two portions of air thus 
unequally heated, being intermixed one with the 
other — either by the ascent of the warmer and 
lighter part, or by a gentle current of the wind — 
the vapour assumes a visible form. 

The temperature of the earth, from a few yards 
below the surface, to the greatest depth hitherto 
explored, suffers little variation between summer and 
winter. It corresponds nearly with the mean tem- 



h 



METEOROLOGY. 



165 



perature of the atmosphere; being here about 48 
degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer. A body of 
water, such as a lake of considerable depth, forms a 
kind of mean between the subjacent earth and the 
superincumbent air: its surface is influenced by the 
temperature of the atmosphere, while its lower parts 
admit of less variation ; consequently the surface 
will in summer be the warmest, and in winter the 
coldest part. So long as the surface of water re- 
tains its fluidity, it helps to meliorate the tempera- 
ture of the air in its vicinity; and the surface being 
frozen, the water contiguous to the ice will always be 
nearly 32°; at the same time the temperature to- 
wards the bottom may be some degrees higher. 

In clear weather, the surface both of the earth 
and of water is warmed in the day and cooled during 
the night; but in very different proportions — the 
water retaining its heat much longer than the land. 
It will sometimes happen in an autumnal evening, 
that the temperature of the air and that of the wa- 
ter of a lake will be equal ; and yet before sunrise 
there will be a difference of twenty degrees or up- 
wards : in this case the air above the water being 
warmer, will contain more vapour than that above 
the land, and on their intermixture a mist or fog 
will be formed ; which will continue to float in the 
atmosphere till it be either dissolved by an increase 
of heat, or being moved into a colder region, be 
deposited in the form of dew or hoar frost. Sir 



166 METEOROLOGY* 

Humphry Davy has observed, that upon some rivets 
on the continent, a mist or fog began to appear as 
soon as the temperature of the air was diminished 
from 8 to 6 degrees below that of the water. This 
will depend upon the previous moisture or dryness 
of the air, and partly on the current of the wind ; 
but a fog is seldom seen on these lakes, until the 
difference of the temperature is more than 12degrees. 
On the disappearance of the sun in a clear even- 
ing, a mist is sometimes observed over a piece of 
moist ground; where it seems to be formed, and for 
some time kept afloat by a kind of contention be- 
tween the heated surface of the earth below it, and 
the colder atmosphere above; but the earth not 
continuing to afford the necessary supply of heat, 
the conflict ceases ; and the vapour settles on the 
grass in the shape of dew. When walking along 
the side of a hill sloping gently towards the west, 
on the early part of a clear dewy morning, it is 
interesting to observe the brilliant circle of light, 
formed round the head of the spectator's shadow, 
by the reflection of the solar rays from that part of 
each globule of dew which is directly opposite to 
the sun. 

One fruitful source of the fog so much complained 
of in the metropolis is smoke, which the cold air 
above, deprives of its caloric before its contents are 
sufficiently dissipated in the atmosphere; so that 
the inhabitants of large towns are enveloped in clouds 
of their own creating, and obliged to burn candles 



METEOROLOGY. 167 

at noon-day, while the country enjoys the brilliant 
light of an unclouded sun. 

It has been a matter of surprise to some, that a 
cloud should seem to remain stationary upon the 
summit of a high mountain, when the air was mov- 
ing at a brisk rate. The warm air of a valley being 
impelled up the inclined plane of a mountain side, 
into a colder region, is not able to support the same 
quantity of vapour ; and a cloud is formed in con- 
sequence : and although the individual particles of 
which it is composed, are continually moving forward 
with the wind ; yet by a perpetual accession of va- 
pour on one side, and dispersion on the other, the 
cloud may continue to occupy the same place, and 
appear to a distant observer as stationary ; although 
its component parts are successively changed : and 
in this manner may the materials of a cloud be 
transported invisibly from the summit of one moun- 
tain to that of another. 

When a dense cloud settles upon a mountain, the 
wind frequently blows from it on one side with an 
increased momentum, while on the opposite side 
its motion is retarded, and a shower commencing 
on the hills, is generally preceded in its course by 
a squall — the air displaced by the falling rain, 
making its escape along the vallies where it meets 
with the least resistance. 

By the unequal distribution of vapour in the at- 
mosphere, the visual rays passing through it suffer 
a variable degree of refraction ; on which account it 



168 



METEOROLOGY. 



is difficult to ascertain, with precision, the altitude 
of different objects by trigonometrical calculation. 
In a morning when the air above is clear, and nearly 
freed from vapour — while that near the surface of 
the ground is charged with as much as it can contain 
without destroying its transparency — refraction is 
at the greatest, objects near the horizon appear more 
elevated than ordinary, and some are brought in 
sight that could not otherwise have been discerned : 
when a little after mid-day — the vapour being more 
equally diffused — the altitude of an object may be 
more accurately observed. 

A covering of snow makes a kind of barrier be- 
tween the internal heat of the earth and that of the 
atmosphere : being a bad conductor, it preserves 
the surface of the earth from the severity of cold in 
winter ; but in spring, excludes it from the genial 
effects of the solar rays. In the meantime the con- 
tiguous atmosphere suffers more extensive variations; 
the greatest extreme of cold being experienced when 
the earth is covered with snow. 



( 169 ) 



FLOATING ISLAND 



DERWENT LAKE. 



The existence of this phenomenon has been 
doubted by some persons, while others, admitting 
the fact, have contended that the term Floating 
Island was improperly applied to this subject, as it 
never changes its situation — being still attached by 
its sides to the adjacent earth under water. Its 
occasional appearance, however, is ascertained be- 
yond a doubt ; and Floating Island being the name 
by which it has always been known, there can be no 
manifest impropriety in retaining the appellation. 

It is situated in the south-east corner of the lake, 
not far from Lowdore, about 150 yards from the 
shore, where the depth of the water does not exceed 
six feet in a mean state of the lake. It has been 
said to make its appearance once in seven years, 
but this is quite uncertain ; it generally rises after 
an interval of a few years, and towards the conclu- 
sion of a warm summer. Its figure and dimensions 
are variable ; it has sometimes contained about half 
an acre of ground, at other times only a few perches % 
but extending in a gradual slope under water, a 
p2 



170 



FLOATING ISLAND. 



much greater portion is raised from the bottom, 
than reaches the surface of the lake. Several large 
rents or cracks may be seen in the earth about the 
place, which appear to have been occasioned by its 
stretching to reach the surface. It never rises far 
above the level of the lake ; but having once attained 
the surface, it for a time, fluctuates with the rise and 
fall of the water ; after which it sinks gradually. 
When at rest in the bottom of the lake it has the 
same appearance as the neighbouring parts, being 
covered with the same vegetation, consisting princi- 
pally of Littorella lacustris, interspersed with Lo- 
belia dortmanna, Isoetes lacustris, and other plants 
common in this and all the neighbouring lakes : 
after remaining some time above the water its ver- 
dure is much improved. For a few inches in depth 
it is composed of a clayey or earthy matter, appa- 
rently deposited by the water, in which the growing 
plants have fixed their roots, the rest is a congeries 
of decayed vegetable matter forming a stratum of 
loose peat earth about six feet in thickness ; which 
rises from a bed of very fine soft clay. A consider- 
able quantity of air, is contained in the body of the 
island, and may be dislodged by probing the earth 
with a pole. This air has been found by Mr. Dal- 
ton to consist of equal parts of carburetted hydrogen 
and azotic gasses, with a little carbonic acid. 

For the last quarter of a century the times of its 
appearance have been as follows. In 1808 from 
the 20th July to the beginning of October ; in 1813 



FLOATING ISLAND. 



171 



from the 7th September to the end of October ; in 
1815 from the 5th to the end of August : in 1819 
from the 14th August to the end of that month ; 
in 1824 from 21st June to the end of September ; in 
1825 it was above water from the ninth to the 23rd 
of September; and in 1826 from the 11th July to 
the end of September : the uncommon circumstance 
of its appearing in three successive years may be 
attributed to the extraordinary warmth of the seasons. 

It would be tedious to investigate every hypo- 
thesis which has from time to time been put forth to 
account for this phenomenon — with the arguments 
for and against each — some assuming water, others 
air, as the chief agent in its production. 

A small mountain stream which pours down a 
rock opposite the place, and runs underground before 
it reaches the lake, has been employed in various 
ways to account for its rising; and many a supposi- 
tion has been advanced, of the way in which air 
might be conveyed or generated underneath it. 

One material circumstance has however generally 
escaped observation : namely, that the air to which 
the rising of this island has been attributed, is not 
collected in a body underneath it ; but interspersed 
through the whole mass : not causing it to float 
" as a reversed saucer would in a bowl of water ;" 
but by enlarging its bulk, and thereby diminishing 
its specific gravity. And the most probable con- 
clusion seems to be, that air or gas is generated in 
the body of the island by decomposition of the vege- 



172 FLOATING ISLAND. 

table matter of which it is formed ; and this gas 
being produced most copiously, as well as being 
more rarefied in hot weather, the earth at length 
becomes so much distended therewith, as to render 
the mass of less weight than an equal bulk of water. 
The water then insinuating itself between the sub- 
stratum of clay and the peat earth forming the is- 
land, bears it to the surface, where it continues for 
a time ; till partly by escape of the gas, partly by 
its absorption, and partly by its condensation conse- 
quent on a decrease of heat, the volume is reduced ; 
and the earth gradually sinks to its former level, 
where it remains till a sufficient accumulation of gas 
again renders it buoyant. 

But as the vegetable matter of which the island 
is principally composed, appears to have been amas- 
sed at a remote period, when the lake was of less 
depth than at present, receiving very little addition 
from the decay of plants recently grown upon the 
spot ; it is reasonable to suppose that the process 
furnishing the gas cannot from the same materials 
be continued ad infinitum : but that there must be 
a time when it shall have arrived at its maximum : 
after which the eruptions will become less extensive 
or less frequent. 



( 173 ) 



THE 



BLACK-LEAD 31INE 

IN BORROWDALE. 



The mineral substance from which black-lead pen- 
cils are manufactured has successively been known 
by the several names of trad, hlack-cawke, black- 
lead, plumbago, and graphite. In the progress of 
chemistry and its application to mineralogy, the 
original term wad was abandoned, probably in 
consequence of the same name being given by the 
Germans to a substance somewhat resembling this 
in appearance but of a different nature, viz. an oxide 
of manganese : the term black-caivke might be sub- 
ject to a similar objection, the word cawke being 
applied by miners to a sulphate of barytes : the 
names of plumbago and black-lead, although still 
retained in common use, tend to convey an erroneous 
idea of the subject, as lead forms no part of its com- 
position, which is found to be principally carbon 
combined with a small portion of iron : and graphite, 
perhaps the least objectionable term, has scarcely 
yet obtained currency. 



174 



BLACK-LEAD MINE 



This mineral occurs in various parts of the world, 
and in rocks of different formation. In this island 
it has been discovered in Invernesshire, in gneiss, 
which is considered as one of the primitive rocks ; 
there it appears to be intermixed with a micaceous 
substance and other hard mineral bodies which ren- 
der it unfit for pencils. In the borders of Ayrshire, 
it is found in the neighbourhood of coal, to which 
it seems too nearly allied : but in no place has it 
been met with equal in purity to that produced from 
Borrowdale, in Cumberland, where it lies in a rock 
of intermediate formation. 

We have no account of the first discovery, or 
opening of this mine ; but from a conveyance made 
in the beginning of the seventeenth century, it ap- 
pears to have been known before that time. The 
manor of Borrowdale is said to have belonged to the 
Abbey of Furness, and having at the dissolution of 
that monastery, in the reign of Henry the Eighth, 
fallen to the Crown, it was granted by James the 
First to William Whitmore and Jonas Verdon, in- 
cluding and particularizing among other things, 
" the wad-holes* and wad, commonly called black- 
cawke, within the commons of Seatoller, or elsewhere 
within any of the wastes or commons of the said 
manor, now or late in the tenure or occupation of 
Roger Robinson, or his assigns, by the particulars 
thereof mentioned, to be of the yearly rent or value 
of fifteen shillings and four pence.'''' By a deed 
bearing date the twenty-eighth day of November, 



in borrowdale. 175 

1614, the said William Whitmore and Jonas Ver- 
don, sold and conveyed unto Sir Wilfred Lawson, 
of Isel, Knight, and several others therein named to 
the number of thirty-six, chiefly inhabitants of Bor- 
rowdale, " all the said manor of Borrowdale, with 
the appurtenances of what nature or kind soever, 
excepted and reserved unto the said William Whit- 
more, and Jonas Verdon, their heirs and assigns, all 
those wad-holes, and wad, commonly called black- 
cawke, within the commons of Seatoller, or elsewhere 
within the commons and wastes of the manor of 
Borrowdale aforesaid, with liberty to dig, work, and 
carry the same, and other their appurtenances what- 
soever." In consequence of which reservation the 
wad or black-lead mine has been ever since held 
distinct from other royalties of the said manor, one 
moiety thereof now belonging to Henry Bankes, 
Esq. M.P. the other half being subdivided into 
several shares. 

This mine is situated about nine miles from 
Keswick, near the head of the valley of Borrowdale, 
in the steep side of a mountain, facing towards the 
south-east, and has been opened at different places 
where the wad had probably appeared on the sur- 
face : the rock in which it occurs is called by Mr. 
Bakewell, a grey felspar porphry ; near the mine it 
becomes of a darker colour, as containing more iron, 
the joints being lined with a ferruginous clayey 
matter: it is intersected in various directions by 
strings, or small rake veins, containing in some 



176 



BLACK-LEAD MINE 



places a little calcareous spar, or other vein stuff, 
and sometimes a superficial glazing of black-lead 
"without the substance ; but the wad is only found 
in sops, or bellies, which appear generally to be 
formed by the intersection or crossing of the veins, 
and are often at considerable distance from each 
other, and found with difficulty. 

Formerly this mine was worked only at intervals, 
and when a sufficient quantity had been procured 
to supply the demand for a few years, it was strong- 
ly closed up until the stock was reduced ; but of 
late, it has been obtained less plentifully, and the 
demand being greater, the working has been con- 
tinued for several years successively. 

An old level, which was re-opened in 1769, was 
found to have been cut through this very hard rock, 
without the help of gunpowder ; and a kind of pipe 
vein which had produced a great quantity of wad, 
having been pursued to the depth of one hundred 
yards or more, much inconvenience was experienced 
in working it: to obviate which, in 1798, an adit 
or level was begun in the side of the hill, which at 
the length of 220 yards communicates with the bot- 
tom of the former sinking ; since which time the 
works have been carried on internally through vari- 
ous ramifications; a survey of which was made a 
few years since by the late Mr. Farey. Through 
this principal level the water now passes off, and the 
produce and rubbish are brought out upon a rail- 
way in a small waggon ; and over its mouth a house 



IN BORROWDALE. 177 

is built, where the workmen are undressed and ex- 
amined as they pass through it on leaving their work. 

Owing to the great value of this mineral, and the 
facilities afforded for disposing of it in an unmanu- 
factured state, the greatest precaution has sometimes 
been scarcely sufficient to keep the workmen from 
pilfering, and those appointed to overlook them have 
not always escaped suspicion ; yet, it is but justice 
to the present manager to state, that for upwards 
of fifty years that he has been employed, he has 
always sustained an unimpeachable character. 

To prevent the depredations of intruders, it has 
sometimes been necessary to keep a strong guard 
upon the place ; and for its better protection, an 
Act of Parliament was passed 25th Geo. 2d. cap. 
10th, by which an unlawful entering of any mine, 
or wadhole of wad, or black-cawke, commonly called 
black-lead, or unlawfully taking, or carrying away 
any wad, &c. therefrom, as also the buying, or re- 
ceiving the same, knowing it to be unlawfully taken, 
is made felony. In the preamble of this Act, it is 
stated to be " necessary for divers useful purposes, 
and more particularly in the casting of bomb-shells, 
round shot, and cannon balls ;" however, its use in 
cleaning and glossing cast iron work, such as stoves, 
grates, &c is now well known to every housemaid. 

Being capable of enduring a great heat without 
fusing, or cracking, it is used in the manufacture of 
crucibles ; and its excellence in diminishing friction 
in wooden screws, and other machinery, makes it 



178 BLACK-LEAD MINE. 

become an ingredient in several anti-attrition com- 
positions ; but effects have been formerly attributed 
to it in dying, and medicine, which were perhaps 
only imaginary. Yet its principal use is in pencils, 
for which Keswick has long been famed ; and in 
their manufactory great improvements have lately 
been made ; but though in the vicinity of the mine, 
the pencil-makers are obliged to purchase all their 
black-lead in London, as the proprietors will not 
permit any to be sold until it has first been lodged 
in their own warehouse. It was formerly used with- 
out any previous preparation, being only cut with a 
saw to the scantlings required, and thus enclosed in 
a suitable casing of cedar wood ; but being generally 
too soft for some purposes, a method of hardening it 
had long been a desideratum ; and a process has at 
length been discovered, by which it may be render- 
ed capable of bearing a liner and more durable point, 
but its colour will be somewhat deteriorated. 

Great quantities of pencils are now made of a 
composition, formed of the saw-dust and small pieces 
of black-lead, which being ground to an impalpable 
powder, is mixed with some cohesive medium : for 
this purpose different substances are employed, some 
of which make a very inferior pencil ; but others, 
being united at a proper degree of heat, and conso- 
lidated by a strong pressure, make a pencil to answer 
for many purposes, (especially where the writing is 
intended to be permanent,) full as well as the 
genuine black-lead. 



IN BQRROWDALE. 



179 



The specific gravity of the best wad, or black 
lead, is, to that of water, as two to one nearly : the 
coarser kind is heavier in proportion, as it contains 
more stony matter. It comes from the mine in 
pieces of irregular shape, and of various sizes, 
requiring no process to prepare it for the market, 
further than freeing the pieces from any stony or 
extraneous matter, which may adhere to them. It 
is then assorted according to the different degrees 
of purity and size, and thus packed in casks to be 
sent off to the warehouse in London, where it is 
exposed to sale only on the first Monday in every 
month. 

In the year 1803, after a tedious search, one of 
the largest bellies was fallen in with, which pro- 
duced five hundred casks, weighing about one 
hundred and a quarter each, and worth thirty shil- 
lings a pound and upwards ; besides a greater 
quantity of inferior sorts ; and since that time several 
smaller sops have been met with ; in the beginning 
of the year 1829, a sop produced about half a dozen 
casks ; the best part of which was eagerly bought 
up at thirty-five shillings a pound ; but since that 
time the quantity raised has been trifling. 

By an account published in 1804 the stock then 
on hand was valued at ^54,000, and the annual 
consumption stated to be about <£ J 3,500. This 
afforded a clue to the assessors of the property tax 
which soon after came into operation; and this 
mine — which #00 years ago had been valued at 



180 



BLACK-LEAD MINE IN BOHROWDALE. 



fifteen shillings and four-pence — was accordingly 
rated at i?2,700 a year. The consumption appears to 
be constantly increasing ; but how far a permanency 
of supply can be calculated upon, is questionable. 
The most prolific part of the mountain may be 
already explored, and the principal body or trunk 
of the mine excavated, so that posterity must be 
contented with gleaning from the branches. 



THE END. 



TEINTED BY A. FOSTER, KIRKBY LONSDALE, 



t: 

_ 4 



J 



5 



i 

1 



^aii 



^jcrccL c: <3ee 















iUffe ^f fares? ._ 



j^i >r C<_C < 



CC CX/.(C 

-cct  cfe-e* l v,.^pgc;cc: 



%^>' «T'C ^ ( C CMC > 



erect,'  ee : ..^ = .,v~ , rC -c<rc,c: 



" <sccjcxc f.« 



7 ( CC.. ;-C* 







