
3y.yv' 










KW 


Slip 






CKjkjJ 

BS® 

'iUW'V, „/* 

 ;. Q/Sfltc 


(k^)'^ivi I'- 1 ' 

HMSBwjk .-.''3' ^i' 

111 



Sifvj^iLii A 




! Vvv *W^« s 


YBHS? 




V' • - 

T u. .V • .IV -,.' 





A - 

• 

*^£- s V 

gfTOi 

ipts 



V 

^^iif 

1 

SSJ* . ^ w 

<c^> : 

3Bg 

A /i / 

ftVVc *v 

v,‘. C.'WW V * 

4 .W^w^lsi 

w 

lllsil 

i 













THE 


BRITISH FLORA; 


COMPRISING THE 

PHtENOGAMOUS, or flowering plants, 

AND 

THE FERNS; 


BY 


WILLIAM JACKSON HOOKER, LL.D. F.R.A. 8c L.S. 

MEMBER OF THE ACADEMIES OF 
LUND, PHILADELPHIA, NEW-YORK, BOSTON, ETC. ETC. 

OF THE IMPERIAL ACAD. NATURAE CURIOSORUM, 

HONORARY MEMBER OF THE ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY, 

AND 

REGIUS PROFESSOR OF BOTANY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW. 


THE SECOND EDITION, 

WITH ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 


“ Call the vales, and bid them hither cast 

Their bells and flourets of a thousand hues.” 


LONDON: 

LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, & GREEN. 


M.DCCC.XXXI. 


HISTOR'CM- 
medical 

'{/BRtfy 


Edward Khull, Printer, Glasgow. 


TO 

ROBERT GRAHAM, M.D., F.R.S. Edinb., F.L.S. 

S[C. Sjc. &;c. 

AND 

REGIUS PROFESSOR OF BOTANY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH. 

My dear Sir, 

Fellow-labourers as we are in the 
same field, occupied professionally in the same pursuit in Sister 
Universities of this country , and alike anxious for the advancement 
of our favourite science ; — these may he considered, in themselves, 
sufficient reasons why I should ivish to dedicate the following pages 
to you. But I have a still stronger inducement ; namely , that I 
may thereby record the friendship which has, I believe, almost from 
the first of our acquaintance, subsisted betiveen us, and which I 
fervently hope may continue during the remainder of our lives. 

That this work may be found useful to your students, as tve/l as to 
my own, and that your zealous endeavours to promote the interests 
of your Class, and of Botany in general, may be reivarcled by the 
most happy success, are amongst the sincerest ivishes of, 

Dear Sir, 

Your faithf ul and affectionate Friend , 


THE AUT1IOF. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
Wellcome Library 


https://archive.org/details/b29289762 


INTRODUCTION. 


The object which the Author proposed to himself, in preparing 
a new Flora of the British Empire, was of a twofold nature : 
lstly, to provide the young Student with a description of our 
native plants, arranged according to the simplest method ; and 
2dly, to afford to the more experienced Botanist, a manual, that 
should be useful in the field as well as in the closet. In regard 
to the first object, the experience of nearly an hundred years 
has proved to every unprejudiced mind, that no system has 
appeared, which can be compared to that of the immortal Swede, 
for the facility with which it enables any one, hitherto unprac- 
tised in Botany, to arrive at a knowledge of the Genus and 
Species of a plant. — The Lin mean Method is, therefore, here 
adopted. 

It has been the opinion of the author, and of many of his 
friends, that, in most of the Floras hitherto published, however 
excellent in other respects, either too much or too little space 
has been devoted to the generic and specific descriptions and 
synonyms ; in the one case, swelling the book to a size, which 
entails both expense on the purchaser, and difficidty in consult- 
ing the several volumes ; in the other, reducing the technical 
characters to the shortest possible compass, so that they can 
scarcely be made available, except to those who are already 
partially acquainted with the plant under examination, or with 
some of its near allies. Between these extremes, the author 
has attempted to steer a middle course, by giving diagnostic 
remarks where, and where only, they have appeared to him 
necessary ; confining the synonyms, with few exceptions, to 
those of the writer who first described the plant, to a good 
figure, and a reference to a single Flora of Great Britain ; and 
by adopting such an arrangement of the subject-matter as would 
best occupy every portion of the page, without rendering it 


Vlll 


INTRODUCTION. 


obsciu'e to the reader. How far his endeavours have proved 
successful, must he left to the experience and judgment of those 
for whose use the work is particularly intended. Should it he 
available in advancing the cause of Botanical Science in this 
country, as the already rapid sale of a large impression leads him 
to hope, the end which was fondly anticipated at the commence- 
ment of the undertaking will he fully accomplished. During 
the progress of the labour, it occurred to the Author that he 
might give additional interest to the volume by subjoining short 
notices of the uses and properties of, or some little historical 
remarks relative to, the species, the origin of the generic names, 
&c. : thereby recommending the pursuit of which it treats, to 
the attention of the many, who are still apt to look upon Botany 
as a dry and profitless employment, a system of hard words, 
destitute of any real utility to mankind. 

Mirbel has well remarked, that “ Ceux qui proscrivent l usage 
des methodes artificielles n’en out point saisi le veritable esprit ; 
ceux qui ne s’attachent qu’ a ces classifications arbitraires, et 
qui negligent l’etude des rapports naturels, ignorent la beaute et 
la dignite de la science — a maxim which it is to he wished 
were more generally acknowledged. For it is unfortunately 
too much the practice of the day, for the one party, having 
devoted an exclusive attention to one or other of these 
Methods, to decry that with which he is unacquainted, or the 
advantages of which he has never had the good fortune to 
experience. The more easy the commencement of a study is 
made, the more votaries will he drawn to it ; and though they 
should attain to no further knotvledge of a Natural Method 
than what has been taught by the imperishable writings of a 
Linnaeus and of a Smith, yet let them be assured that in plants, 
taken individually, and in an isolated manner, there are sub- 
jects that will give ample scope for the employment of the 
talents of the greatest philosophers : in the due contemplation 
of which they may derive both pleasure and advantage to them- 
selves, and be the means of communicating them to others. 

“ The well-directed sight 

Brings, in each flower, an universe to light.” 


INTRODUCTION. 


IX 


Lyonet acquired at least as much honour, and rendered as great 
service to mankind hy his intimate acquaintance with the ana- 
tomy and functions of the organs of a single caterpillar, as if he 
had spent his life in arranging all the known insects of the 
world according to a new and Natural System. 

Nor let it be supposed that the author is advocating the cause 
of an Artificial System, to the exclusion of a natural one ; for if 
any one can be more alive than another to the real advantage 
derivable from a knowledge of the characters of plants, when 
naturally combined, it is assuredly he, whose duty it is to teach 
the Science to those who are destined for the profession of 
medicine. The former method will soon enable the student to 
ascertain the Foxglove , the Cinchonas, the Squill, and innumer- 
able other plants of which he would be ashamed to be ignorant : 
but the study of the latter will alone put it in his power to 
extend his inquiries, and with a prospect of success, to analyse 
other plants of the same Natural Order, among which he may 
expect to find similar or more powerful principles than what 
are hitherto known to us. This alone lays open a wide field 
of usefulness to the Botanist and the Physician ; and with the 
view to so desirable an object, the name of the Natural Order 
to which each Genus belongs is mentioned in the following 
pages ; and in the Appendix will be found a complete list of 
those Orders, so far as British Botany is concerned, together 
with an enumeration of the Genera belonging to them. That 
the remarks upon the Natural Orders could not, owing to the 
limited nature of the present work, be further extended, is the 
less a subject of regret, now that Mr. Linclley has published 
his Synopsis of the British Flora , arranged according to the 
Natural Orders, and his Introduction to the Natural System of 
Botany: and now that the Nouveaux Flemens de Botanique of 
Professor Richard, have been rendered accessible to the English 
reader, by Dr. Clinton’s Translation. The work of Richard 
contains an excellent and a familiar Introduction to, and a Table 
of, the Natural Orders, and ought to be in the hands of every 
one who desires information upon the subject. 

The labour of compiling the Flora of a country by a careful 


X 


INTRODUCTION. 


examination and comparison of specimens themselves, whether 
in a living or dried state, can only be appreciated by those 
who have been engaged in an employment of the same kind. 
The collecting of materials, indeed, in their native hills and 
vallies, upon the sea-shore, in the woods, and among the majestic 
alpine scenery with which the northern parts of our island, 
eminently, abound, generally in the society of friends of a con- 
genial taste, or students full of ardour and enthusiasm, has been 
a very delightful occupation, especially when taken in conjunc- 
tion with “ anticipations of the pleasure we may have to bestow 
on kindred minds with our own, when sharing with them our 
discoveries and our acquisitions.” And the task of describing 
them has, in the present instance, been considerably lightened 
by the valuable assistance afforded by many of the most able 
Botanists of our country, whose names are mentioned, as far as 
was consistent with the nature of the undertaking, when treating 
of the respective plants they have tended to illustrate. Mr. 
Borrer, Mr. W. Wilson, the Rev. Professor Henslow, the 
Rev. J. M. Berkeley, the Rev. J. S. Tozer, and the Rev. 
G. E. Smith, have, in an especial manner, rendered service, 
both by notes and illustrative specimens. The first of these 
gentlemen has kindly undertaken a complete revision of the 
genera Myosotis , Rosa , and Rubus ; whilst to Mr. Wilson, whose 
acuteness and botanical ardour are beyond all praise, I am 
indebted for many important remarks in the present as well as 
in the preceding edition. 

The design of this work would not allow of so many stations 
being given for the rarer plants as could have been wished : and 
hence the Author has been rather anxious to indicate the range 
of the species, than the precise spot where any particular one is 
found. The admirable Botanist's Guide of Messrs. Turner and 
Dillwyn, and the various local Floras, may, for information on 
this head, be consulted with great advantage ; particularly Mr. 
Purton’s Midland Flora, Mr. Jones’ Botanical Tour in Devon 
and Cornwall, the Rev. G. E. Smith’s Plants of South Kent, Mr. 
Winch’s Essay on the Geographical Distribution of Plants in 
Northumberland , Dr. Greville’s Flora Edinensis, and Wood- 


INTRODUCTION. 


XI 


forde’s Catalogue of the plants of the same neighbourhood, Mr. 
Hopkirk’s Flora Glottiana, Dr. Johnston’s amusing and in- 
structive Flora of Berwick-upon-Tweed, the late Mr. Don’s 
Plants of Forfarshire ; and Mr. Mackay’s Catalogue of the 
indigenous Plants of Ireland, which is the fullest list that has yet 
appeared of the vegetable productions of our Sister Kingdom.* 

The present volume may be said to terminate with the Ferns. 
A future one, which is nearly ready for publication, will contain 
the rest of the Orders of the Class Cryptogamia ; and will be 
published in such a form, that it may either be considered the 
second volume of the British Flora , or the fifth of Sir J. E. 
Smith’s English Flora, and consequently as completing the 
description of the Plants of our Island. 

Glasgow, May 1st, 1831. 

* In the short period that has elapsed since the publication of the first 
edition, two other local Floras have appeared ; one, The Plymouth and 
Davenport Flora, by Mr. George Banks, F.L.S., a periodical work, most 
highly creditable to its Author, not only on account of the accuracy and 
originality of the descriptions, hut for the agreeable manner in which they 
are written, and the interesting information blended with them : — the other, 
a Popular Description of the Indigenous Plants of Lanarkshire, by the Rev. 
William Patrick, accompanied by an useful Introduction to the study of 
Botany, and remarks on the Geological formation of that County. 

























BRITISH FLORA 


CLASS I. MONANDRIA. 1 1 Stamen, 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 2 1 Style. 

1. Salicornia. Perianth single, turbinate, fleshy, obscurely lobed. 
Style short. Stigmas bi-trifid. Fruit an one-seeded Utricle , 
included in the enlarged Perianth. — Nat. Ord. Chenopode;e, 
Vent. — Named from sal, salt, and cornu, a horn, from the horn-like 
branches and saline nature of the plants. 

2. Hippuris. Perianth single, superior, forming a very indis- 
tinct rim to the germen. Fruit , a small one-seeded Nut. — Nat. Ord. 
Halorage^e, Br. — Named from famg, ahorse , and ov^ci, a tail. 

(See Valeriana rubra in Cl. III.; Alchemilla arv. in Cl. IV. ; Zostera, 
in Cl. XXI.; Chara, in Cl. XXIV.) 

(Ord. 2. Digynia. 2 Styles. See C'allit riche in CL XXI.) 
MONANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 

1. Salicornia. Linn. Glassvvort. 

1. S. herhacea, Linn, (jointed Glassivort); stem herbaceous, arti- 
culations compressed somewhat thickened upwards and notched, 
spikes cylindrical slightly tapering at the extremity. Hook. Scot, 
i. p. L — stem erect. S. herhacea, E. FI. v. i. p. 2 S. annua, 

1 From | notes, one, and in this sense applicable to the stamen, one stamen ; 
which should here, as the stamens in all of the first 20 Classes, be found in the 
same flower with the pistil. But such is not constantly the case with any of 
the British plants in this anomalous class. Hippuris has often numerous lower 
flowers destitute of stamens ; and many of those of Salicornia have two stamens. 
Chara, by various authors placed here, is assuredly a cryptogamous plant ; Zos- 
tera has the stamens and pistils separate, as has Callitriche, in most instances ; 
hence these two genera are removed to Moncecia. — The really anomalous Gen- 
era, such as Callitriche, and anomalous species, such as Valeriana rubra 
(which has but one stamen), Val. dioica, (which is dioicious, though the rest 
of the species have 3 stamens in the same flower with the pistil), &e. will, in 
general, be found noticed at the end of the respective Classes and Orders to 
which they appear to belong, and they will be referred to the proper stations; 
as above. 

2 From petes, one, and yvtr, here made applicable to the pistil, or style, an 
essential part of the pistil : or, when the style is so short as not to be visible, 
the stigmas are counted. The student will do well to bear in mind the mean- 
ing ol the names applied to the Linnoean Classes and Orders, for they are 
beautifully expressive of their essential characters. 

B 


2 


MONANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


[ Hippuris . 


E. Bot. t. 4 1 5. — S. acetciria, Pallas / 3 . stem procumbent. .S', pro- 
cumbent, E. Bot. t. 2475. E. FI. v. i. p. 2. — S. prostrata, Pallas. 

Salt-marshes, plentiful. Ft. Aug. Sept. Q.— Plant leafless, much 
branched and jointed ; articulations a little thickened upwards, very 
succulent, shrinking much when dry, in which state the upper extremity 
of each articulation forms a two-lobed membranous socket or short 
sheath, which receives the base of the articulation above it. Spikes of 
flowers dense, lateral and terminal, equally jointed with the stem, and 
bearing, at the base of every short articulation, on two opposite sides, a 
cluster of 3 flowers, each composed of a single perianth, apparently quite 
closed at the top, and pierced, as it were, by the bi-or trifid stigma and 
the singie or two stamens: when two, appearing in succession. Mr. 
Wilson observes that the central flower (of the erect var. at least) has two 
stamens, one placed below, the other above, the laterally-compressed 
germen ; and the side-flowers have only one, placed above the germen. 

2. S. radxcans , Sm. ( creeping Glasswort'), stem woody procum- 
bent and rooting, articulations cylindrical spreading and notched at 
the top, spikes oblong obtuse. E. Bot. t. 1691, t. 2467, ( S . 
fruticosa). E. FI. v. i. p. 3, and again p. 3, ( S.fruticosa .) 

Muddy sea-shores, but rare; on the Norfolk and Sussex coasts. 
In the Isle of Sheppey, Kent, Prof. H'cnslow. Near Newry, Ireland, 
Mr. •/. T. Maclcag. Ft. Aug. Sept. 7f . — This scarcely differs from the 
preceding, except in its more branching, straggling, and perennial stem, 
quite woody below, often growing at the edge of a low muddy bank, and 
depending from it. The true N. fruticosa is a very different plant, and 
confined to the south of Europe and north of Africa. — The various species 
of this genus, as well as others belonging to the same natural family, 
and growing abundantly on the coasts in the south of Europe and 
north of Africa, yield a vast quantity of soda, so much employed in 
making both soap and glass ; whence their English name, Glasswort. 

2. Hippuris. Linn. Mare’s-tail. 

1. H. vulgaris , Linn, (common Mares Tail ) ; leaves 6 — 8 or 
10 in a whorl linear. E. Bot. t. 763. E. FI. v. i. p. 4. 

Ditches and, usually, stagnant, waters; less frequent in Scotland. FI. June, 
July. 1(. . — Stem erect, simple, jointed. Whorls of about 8 leaves, which are 
callous at the point. Floivers at the base of each of the upper leaves, the 
lower ones often destitute of stamen. Germen oval, inferior ; within 
its minute rim or border, at the summit, which constitutes the calyx, is 
situated the stamen, with its large two-lobed anther : when young, having 
the style passing between the tw'o lobes. Seed fixed to the top of the 
cell of th e pericarp, and thus inverted. — In deep streams of water con- 
necting the little lakes, or Broads, at Surlingham, Norfolk, this plant 
attains to 2 or 3 feet, with the leaves excessively crowded, 3 and 
even 4 inches in length, pellucid, with an opaque nerve, their points not 
callous ; the whole plant submerged, and consequently barren. Again 
on Ben-y-gloe, in Scotland, at a considerable elevation from the sea, I 
have found a variety, the opposite extreme of this, scarcely 4 inches 
high, and apparently the II. montana of Reich. Ic. t. 86. The arctic H. 
muritima is distinguished by having many elliptical leaves in the whorl. 


Circcea.] 


DIANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


3 


CLASS II. DIANDRIA. 2 Stamens. 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

* Perianth double, inferior, monopetalous, regular. 

1. Ligustrum. Cor. 4-cleft. Berry 2-celled, with the cells 

2-seeiled. — Nat. Ord. Oleineas, Hoffm. and Link Named from 

ligo, to bind; on account of the use sometimes made of its long 
and pliant branches. 

** Perianth double, inferior, monopetalous , irregular. Seeds 
enclosed in a distinct pericarp ( Angiospermous). 

2. Veronica. Cor. 4-cleft, rotate, lower segment narrower. 
Caps. 2-celled — Nat. Ord. Scrophularinje, Juss. — Name of 
doubtful origin. 

3. Pinguicula. Cal. 2-lipped, upper lip of 3, lower of 1, bifid 

segment. Cor. ringent, spurred. Germen globose. Stigma large, of 
2 unequal plates or lobes. Caps. I-celled ; Seeds attached to a cen- 
tral receptacle — Nat. Ord. Lexti bulari.e, Rich Named from 

pinguis, fat ; the leaves being thick and greasy to the touch. 

4. Utricularia. Cal. 2-leaved, equal. Cor. personate, spur- 
red. Stigma 2-lipped. Caps, globose, of 1 cell ; Seeds fixed to a 

central receptacle. — Nat. Ord. Lentibula rite, Rich Named 

from Utriculus, a little bladder. 

*** Perianth double, inferior, monopetalous, irregular. Seeds 4, 
apparently naked, ( closely covered by the pericarp, Gymnospermous .) 

5. Lycopus. Cal. tubular, 5-cleft. Cor. tubular; limb nearly 
equal, 4-cleft, upper segment broader, and notched. Stam. distant, 
simple. — Nat. Ord. Labiate, Juss — Name, from Xvxog, a wolf, 
and <t»;, a foot, from a fancied resemblance in the cut leaves of this 

plant, to a w'olf’s paw : — der Wotfsfuss, in Germ In English, 

Gypsy-wort, because the plant yields a black dye, which is em- 
ployed by Gypsies to render their skin darker. 

6. Salvia. Cal. 2 -lipped, tubular. Cor. labiate, the tube dilated 
upwards and compressed. Filaments with 2 divaricating branches, 

I only bearing a perfect, single cell of an anther Nat. Ord. 

Labia tje, Juss — Named from salvo, to save or heal, in allusion 
to its balmy or healing qualities. 

, **** Perianth double, superior. 

1. CiRCAiA. Cal. 2-leaved, but united into a short tube at the 
base. C or. of 2 petals. Caps. 2-celled; cells 1 -seeded. — Nat. Ord. 
OnagrarIjE, Juss. — Named from the enchantress Circe, either 
fiom the prettiness of its flowers, or as some say, from its growing 
in damp, shady places, where plants used for incantations are found. 


4 


DIANDR1A — MONOGYNIA. 


[Liguslrum. 


***** Perianth single, or none. 

8 . Fraxinus. Cal. 0., or 4-cleft. Cor. 0., or of 4 petals. 

Caps. 2-celled, 2-seeded, compressed and foliaceous at the extre- 
mity. Seeds solitary, pendulous. (Some flowers without stamens.) 
Nat. Orel. Oleine.e, II off m. and Link. — Named from a 

separation, in allusion to the facility with which the wood may 
be split. 

9. Lemna. Perianth single, monophyllous, membranaceous, 

urceolate. Fruit utricular Fronds without distinct stem or leaves, 

floating on the surface of the water, and increasing, not only by 
seeds, but far more abundantly, by gemmae or buds, concealed in 
lettered clefts of the parent frond, which growing out, on 2 opposite 
sides into new plants, and they again producing offspring in the 
same way, while still attached to their parent, present a most curious 
appearance. ' — Nat. Ord. Pisti ace/e, Rich. — Name, Xs/x/x a, of 
the Greeks, from a scale. 

10. Cladium. Perianth single, glumaceous. Glumes of 1 piece 

or valve, 1 -flowered, imbricating ; outer ones sterile. Fruit, a nid 
with a loose external coat, destitute of bristles at the base. — Nat. 
Ord. Cyeeraceee, Juss. — Named from a branch; so called, 

perhaps, from the many branches bearing spikelets. 

(See Salicornia in Cl. I. Sclucnus, Cl. III. Care. v. Cl. XXI. Lepi- 
dium and Coronopus, Cl. XV.) 

ORD. II. DIGYNIA. 2 Styles. 

1. Anthoxanthum. Cal. of 2 valves, glumaceous, 1-flowered. 
Cor. double, each of 2 valves ; the ext. awned ; the int. small, 

awnless Nat. Ord. G ramine.e, Juss. — Name, xJo;, a flower, 

and j'ctvio 5 , yellow; from the yellowish hue of the spikes, especially 
in age. 

See Hierochloe, Cl. III.) 

DIANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 

1. Ligustrum. Linn. Privet. 

1. L. vulgare, Linn. (Privet); leaves elliptico-lanceolate, panicle 
compact. E. Pot. t. 764. E. FI. v. i. p. 13. 

Thickets, and more frequently in hedges. Ft. June, July. If . — A 
lush with opposite, evergreen leaves, which, as the plant bears clipping, 
is frequently planted for fences. Flowers small, white. Berries black, 
globose. 

1 For a more complete analysis ami history of this genus than 1 am here able 
to give, see Lemna minor, trisulca a/ul gibba, in the New Series of Flora Londi- 
nensis ; and for an admirable account of the germination of the seeds in the 
latter species, see a Memoir by W. Wilson, Estp in Part II. of the Botanical 
Miscellany. 


Veronica.] 


DIANDIUA — DIGYNIA. 


2. Veronica. Linn. Speedwell. 

* Spikes or racemes terminal.' ( Roots perennial .) 

1. V. spiedta , Linn. ( spiked Speedwell), raceme spicate, leaves 
oblong obtuse serrated pubescent, the lower ones broader ovate or 
obovate and stalked, stem ascending branching only at the very 
base. E. Bot. t. 2. E. FI. v. i.p. 17. — f3 ; stem-leaves broader, 
approaching to elliptical. I • hybrida , Linn — E. Bot. t. 673. L. 
FI. v. i. p. 17. 

Rare. On dry chalky pastures about Newmarket and Bury .— &. in 
Lancashire, and in Wales, where, in addition to the station discovered 
for it in Ray’s time, Mr. Wilson finds it at Ormeshead, and at Gloddarth 
near Conway. FI. July, Aug. If .. — The V. hybrida seems indeed 
scarcely deserving of being commemorated as a tar., for it differs only in 
its more luxuriant growth, depending probably upon soil. The capsule 
is obcordate, hairy, terminated by a long style. 

2. V. serpyllifolia, Linn. ( thyme- leaved Speedicell), raceme 
somewhat spiked many-flowered, leaves broadly ovate or elliptical 
very obtuse nearly entire glabrous, capsules inversely reniform as 
long as the style. E. Bot. t. 1075. E. FI. v. i. p. 20. — [3. alpina; 
stems prostrate often rooting, racemes short. V. humifusa, Dicks, 
in Linn. Trans, v. ii. p. 288. 

Pastures and roadsides, abundant. — On the Highland Mountains: 
and on Snowdon ; Mr. Wilson. Cheviots ; Mr. Winch. Ft. May — 
July. If . — The var. $. is a singular and very beautiful one, and is often 
gathered and mistaken for V. alpina, which it approaches in the rich 
colour of its flowers. In both, the stems , and sometimes the leaves, are 
more or less pubescent. 

3. V. alpina, Linn. ( alpine Speedwell ); racemes corymbose 
few-flowered, leaves elliptico-ovate serrated, calyx and bracteas 
ciliated, capsule obovate notched tipped with the very short style. 
E. Bot. t. 484. E. El. v. i.p. 19. 

Near the summits of the Highland mountains, but rare. FI. July, 
Aug. If . — About 4 inches high, turning black when dry. Best distin- 
guished from all the varieties of V. serpyllifolia by its more upright growth, 
larger, more acute, and more decidedly serrated leaves, by the fewer, more 
dense, brighter blue flowers, which are more hairy about the calyx and 
bracteas, and by the obovate capsule with its very short style. 

4. V. saxdtilis, Linn. ( blue flock Speedwell); raceme lax few- 
flowered corymbose, leaves elliptical subserrate, stems spreading, 
capsule ovate its valves bifid. E. Bot. t. 1027. E. FI. v. i.p. 19. 

Growing on perpendicular exposed rocks in Scotland, rare. Ben 
Lawers, above Loch-na-gat ; Mael Greadha, on Craig Cailliach and Mael 
Duncrosk; Mr. Wilson; all in the Breadalbane range. FI. July. If . — 

1 V. arvetisis, tripliyllos, arid verna, are placed in the third division, on account 
ot their annual roots , although their inflorescence may more strictly be con- 
sidered spicate or racemose, than as consisting of solitary and axillary flowers. 


6 


Dl ANURIA DIGYN1A. 


[ Veronica , 


Stems slender, procumbent, woody, much branched. Leaves glabrous, 
bright green, when dry almost black, but semipellueid, thin, and dis- 
tinctly veiny. Flowers large, of a most brilliant blue, in corymbs. 

5. V. fruticuldsa, Linn, (flesh- coloured Speedwell); raceme 
many-flowered subspicate, leaves elliptico-lanceolate subserrated 
coriaceous, stems ascending woody branched at the base, capsule 
ovate its valves bifid. 1 E. Eot. 1. 1028. E. El. v. i. p. 18. 

On Ben Cruachan, Argyleshire; Dr. Walker; upon Ben Lawers, 
Mr. Brown (Smith in Engl. Flora). FI. Jply. If -. — lam not aware 
that any other Botanist has ever detected this plant truly wild in the Brit- 
ish dominions than those just mentioned: nor have I been able to see a 
native specimen. As a plant, I believe the species to be truly distinct 
from V. saxatilis, with which, however, it has been confounded by some 
authors. The stems are more robust and erect than in the preced- 
ing. Leaves rigid, pale green, opaque even when dry, elliptico-lan- 
ceolate. Racemes more elongated, especially when in fruit. Flowers 
flesh-coloured in the plant as 1 have seen it growing in Switzerland and 
when cultivated in our gardens. Fruit as in V. saxat., obovate, tipped 
with a style longer than itself ; its valves bifid. 

** Racemes axillary. (Root perennial.) 

6. V. scutelldta, Linn. (Marsh Speedwell); racemes alternate, 
pedicels divaricated reflexed in fruit, leaves linear somewhat 
toothed, stem nearly erect. E. Eot. t. 782. E. FI. v. i.p. 9. 

Wet places and sides of ditches. FI. July, Aug. If .. — Racemes nearly 
opposite. Capsule of 2, flattened, orbicular, membranous lobes. Flowers 
flesh-coloured with darker bluish veins. 

7. V. Anagallis, Linn. (Water Speedwell) ; racemes opposite, 
leaves lanceolate serrated, stem erect. E. Eot.t. 781. E. FI. v. i. 

p. 21. 

Ditches and watery places ; less frequent in Scotland than in Eng- 
land. — FI. July, Aug. If. — Intermediate in appearance, between V. 
scutell. and V. Beccab. yet abundantly distinct from both Stems succu- 
lent, a foot or more high. Leaves varying somewhat in width. Racemes 
long, many-flowered. Pedicels short, never reflexed. Flowers bluish or 
inclining to purple. 

8. V . Beccabunga, Linn. (Brooklime) ; racemes opposite, leaves 
elliptical obtuse subserrated glabrous, stem procumbent at the base 
and rooting. E. Eot. t. 635. E. El. v. i.p. 20. 

Ditches and watercourses, frequent. FI. Summer months. If 

Whole plant glabrous and very succulent. Racemes of many bright blue 
flowers. 

9. V. officinalis, Linn, (common Speedwell); racemes spicate, 
leaves broadly ovate serrated rough with pubescence, stem very 
downy procumbent, capsule obovate deeply notched. E. Eot. 
t- 765. E. El. v. i.p. 22. — /3 ; nearly glabrous. E. El. v. i. p. 22. 
  — V. Allionii, D. Don. MSS. Hook. Scot. v. i.p. 7. 


DIANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


7 


Veronica .] 


Abundant in woods and pastures, especially in dry situations. — g- 
On mountains in Scotland and Ireland. FI. May — July. If. — A 
very variable plant, especially in size. 1 Leaves astringent and bitter ; 
hence sometimes used medicinally and made into tea. 


10. V. hirsula, Hopk. (small hairy Speedwell); racemes slender 
spiked, leaves ovato-lanceolate acute slightly serrated with a few 
scattered hairs, stem procumbent hairy, capsule obcordate entire. 
Hopk. FI. Glott. p. 9. E. FI. v. i. p. 22. — V. setiyera, D. Don, 
J)escr. of Fare PI. of Sfotl. p. 4. 

Dry heathy places in Carrick, Ayrshire; Mr. James Smith. FI. June. 
If. — 1 introduced this with much hesitation into the Flora Scotica. It 
has all the appearance of a starved plant of V. officinalis, and th e flowers 
are very generally abortive. The fruit certainly differs in wanting the 
deep notch at the extremity ; and the plant remains unaltered, in this 
respect, for a succession of years in cultivation. 

11. V. montdna, Linn. (Mountain Speedwell ),* racemes lax 
few-flowered, leaves cordato-ovate petiolate serrated, stem hairy all 
round, capsule orbicular two-lobed membranous much larger than 
the calyx. E. Pot. t. 766. E. FI. v. i. p. 23. 

Moist woods, not unfrequent. FI. May, June. If . — Stems a foot and 
more long, weak, trailing. Leaves large, on stalks about equal to them 
in length. Capsules large, quite flat, and resembling those of a Biscu- 
tella , veiny, their edges denticulate and slightly ciliated. It is strange, 
with such' characters, that this should ever be confounded with the fol- 
lowing species. 

12. V. Chameedrys, Linn. (Germander Speedwell); racemes 
elongated many-flowered, leaves cordato-ovate sessile inciso-serrate, 
stem bifariously hairy, capsule obcordate shorter than the calyx. 
E. Pot. t. 623. E. FI. v. i. p. 23. 

Woods, pastures and hedge-banks, frequent. FI. May, June. "If . — 
Stem procumbent, as in the last species, having two opposite hairy lines, 
and these lines taking different sides above and below each pair of leaves, 
or decussate. Leaves wrinkled, deeply cut in a subalpine var. found by 
Mr. Wilson in North Wales. Flowers large, numerous, very bright blue, 
greeting us at an early season of the year, and hence rendering the plant 
a general favourite. 


*** Flowers axillary , solitary. (Root annual.) 

13. V. hederifolia, Linn. (Ivy-leaved Speedwell) ; leaves all 
petiolate cordate with 5 — 7 large teeth or lobes, segments of the 
calyx cordate ciliated, capsule of two turgid lobes, stem procum- 
bent. E. Pot. t. 784. E. FI. v. i. p. 25. 


1 Mr. Wilson finds two singular varieties near Aber waterfall, North 
Wales: both dwarf, 3 — 4 inches in length, and both having scattered hairs on 
the stem and leaves ; one has these leaves ovate, acute, rigid, tapering gradually 
into a short footstalk : the other has them rotuudate, thin, and membranaceous, 
distinctly stalked. 


8 


DIANDItIA — DIGYNIA. 


[ Veronica. 


Fields and hedge-banks, common. FI. April — June. Q . — Stem weak. 
Leaves rather fleshy, slightly hairy, the upper young leaves alone sessile 
or nearly so ; the terminal tooth or lobe the largest. Peduncles longer 
than the leaves, recurved when bearing fruit. Caps, of two, rounded, 
glabrous lobes, each lobe having 2 large, black, transversely wrinkled, 
oval, gibbous seeds, which are hollowed on the under side. 

14. V. agrestis , Linn, (green procumbent^ field Speedwell) ; leaves 
all petiolate cordato-ovate inciso-serrate as long as the flower-stalks, 
segments of the calyx oblong obtuse, stem procumbent, capsule of 2 
turgid keeled lobes, cells about 6-seeded. E. FI. v. i. p. 24. 
Borr. in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2603. 

Fields and waste places, abundant. FI. Apr. — Sept. ©. — Prostrate. 
Stems 3 — 4 inches long, slightly hairy. Peduncles longer than the leaves. 
Fruit of two round tumid lobes, much smaller than the calyx. Seeds 
large, cupped. 

15. Y.polita, Fries, (grey procumbent field Speedwell ); leaves all 
petiolate cordato-ovate inciso-serrate shorter than the flower-stalks, 
segments of the calyx ovate acute, stem procumbent, capsule of 2 
turgid lobes, cells many-seeded. Beich. Iconogr. v. Hi. p. 45. t. 246. 

— V. agrestis , E. Bot. t. 783. Hook. Scot. i.p. 7. — (3; flowers larger, 
whole plant more luxuriant. V. persica , Poir, (according to Arnott). 

— V.filiformis, Brit. El. ed. i. p. 6. Johnst. FI. of Berio . p.225. 
cum ic. ( not of Vahl .) 

Cultivated fields and waste places, often with the preceding. — Sus- 
sex, (not wild,) Mr. Borrer. Cultivated grounds, Berwickshire, Dr. 
Johnston. FI. throughout the summer. ©. — Mr. Borrer has well illus- 
trated this and the foregoing, V. agrestis, in the Supplement to E. Bot . 
t. 2603. These two and the V. opaca of Fries, (with spathulate segments 
to the calyx,) border very closely upon each other, and are probably often 
confounded by Botanists. 1 have followed Mr. Arnott in considering 
the V.filiformis of the first edition, as a var. of the present. 

16. V. arvensis, Linn. ( Wall Speedivell ) ; leaves cordato- 
ovate serrated the lower ones petiolate the upper or bracteas ses- 
sile lanceolate longer than the flowers which are subspicate, stems 
ascending. E. Bot. t. 734. E. FI. v. i. p. 24. 

Fields and walls, plentiful. FI. in the spring months and in early 
summer. ©. — Very different from the last, especially in its inflorescence, 
which, if the upper leaves be considered bracteas, as they really are (for 
they differ both in size and shape from the cauline ones), is truly race- 
mose or subspicate. The same may be said of the two next species, and 
some continental ones, especially V. acinifolia. 

17. V. triphyllos, Linn. ( blunt-fingered Speedwell ); leaves 
broadly ovate incised, lowermost ones petiolate, upper or bracteas 
sessile digitate, the segments obtuse, flowers subracetnose, the pedi- 
cels longer than the bracteas or the calyx. E. Bot. t. 26. E. FI . 
v. i. p. 25. 


Pinotiicula .1 DIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 9 

Rare ; in sandy fields, about Bury and on the confines of Norfolk and 
Suffolk. Yorkshire? Mr. Tofield. FI. Apr. © .—3— 4 inches high 
with spreading branches. Flowers a very deep blue, the lowermost often 
on very long pedicels. 

18. V. verna, Linn. ( vernal Speedwell) ; leaves inciso-pinna- 
tifid the upper ones or bracteas lanceolate entire, flowers subrace- 
mose, pedicels shorter than the calyx. E. Bot. t. 25. E. FI. v. i. 

p. 26. 

Very rare. Discovered about Bury and Thetford, Suffolk, by Sir John 
Culluni, Bart. FI. April. ©. — A very small, upright, scarcely branching 
plant, allied to V. arvensis . 

3. Pinguicula. Linn. Butterwort. 

1. P. vulgaris, Linn. ( common Butterwort) ; spur subulato- 
cylindrical, as long as the veinless limb of the corolla whose seg- 
ments are very unequal rounded even and all entire. E. Bot. t. 70. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 28. 

Bogs, moist banks, and heaths ; most abundant in the North. FI. 
June. If. — Foliage radical, covered with minute raised crystalline 
points, fleshy, the margins involute. Scapes single-flowered. Floivers 
purple, very handsome, drooping ; palate covered with white, compactly 
jointed hairs. Anthers 1-celled, vertical, placed just beneath the large 
horizontal plate or lobe of the stigma. Style short. Caps, ovate, one- 
celled, bursting half way into 2 valves. Seeds numerous, oblong, rough. 
— The leaves are said to coagulate milk, whence the English name. 

2. P. grandiflora, Willd. {large-flowered Butterwort) ; spur 
notched subulato-cylindrical as long as the veined limb of the 
corolla whose segments are very unequal truncated, the middle one 
of the lower lip notched. E. Bot. t. 2184. E. FI. v. i. p. 29. 

Western part of the county of Cork, in marshy ground, Mr. Drum- 
mond: and at Kenmare, Mr. W. Wilson. FI. May. if . — This plant, appa- 
rently as rare upon the continent as in Britain, and perfectly distinct 
from P. vulgaris, may be easily cultivated for a succession of years. As 
in the P. vulgaris, the old leaves die away in winter, and buds or hyber- 
nacula are formed, which expand into perfect individuals in the spring. 
Few plants can exhibit a more beautiful appearance, early in the year, than 
a cluster of P. grandiflora, blossoming under the shelter of a common 
frame. It is a mass of large deep and rich purple-coloured flowers, well 
contrasted by the pale but bright hue of the leaves. 

3. P. lusitanica, Linn. ( pule Buttemoort) ; spur cylindrical 
obtuse decurved shorter than the almost equal limb of the corolla, 
leaves veiny, and as well as the scape hairy. E. Bot. t. 145. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 28. 

Marshy places and wet moors, mostly confined to the west side 
of the kingdom : never, I believe, found on the east side, and rarely, if 
ever, in the interior. Plentiful in the Hebrides and Ireland : but most 
abundant in the extreme north of Scotland, near Cape Wrath, growing 

c 2 


10 


D1ANDH1A — DIGYNIA. 


[ Utncularia. 


among Jungermanuia cochleariformis and Arbutus alpina. Ft. June, July. 
If . — Much smaller than the two last, with very pale purplish-yellow 
flowers; and leaves of a thin, not succulent, texture. 

4. Utricularia. Linn. Bladderwort. 1 

1 . U. vulgaris , Linn, (greater Bladderwort') ; spur conical, 
upper lip as long as the projecting palate, leaves pinnato-multifid. 
E. Hot. t. 253. E. FI. v. i. p. 30. 

Ditches and deep pools, not unfrequent. FI. June, July. If. — Roots 
much branched- Shoots or runners floating horizontally in the water, 
clothed with capillary multifid leaves, bristly at the margin and bearing 
little cristate bladders. Scape erect, 4 — 6 inches high, with 6 — 8 bright 
yellow flowers in a raceme. Lower lip convex, much larger and broader 
than the upper one, and having a projecting palate, closing the mouth. 
Spur short, deflexed. Filaments curved, thick, resembling those of Pin- 
guicula. Stigma large. 

2. U. intermedia , Hayne, ( intermediate Bladderwort ); spur 
conical, upper lip twice as long as the palate, leaves tripartite, the 
segments linear dichotomous. E. Bot. t. 2489. E. FI. v. i. p. 30. 

Ditches and deep pools, much less frequent than the preceding. 
About Dublin and Bantry, in Ireland, and in Rescobie Lake, Forfar, 
also in Elginshire, Rev. G. Gordon. FI. June, July. If. — This has pro- 
bably been passed bv as the U. vulgaris; but its flowers are smaller, 
of a paler yellow, and have a longer tip. The stems are more leafy, and 
the bladders arise from branched stalks, not from the leaves. It pro- 
pagates itself by buds or gemmae which proceed from the ends of the 
shoots, as does U. minor, and perhaps U. vulgaris. 

3. U. minor, Linn. ( lesser Bladderwort) ; spur extremely short 
obtuse keeled, upper lip as long as the palate, leaves subtripartite, 
the segments linear dichotomous. E. Bot. t. 254. E. FI. v. i. 
p. 31 . 

Ditches and pools, rare; though not unfrequent in many parts of Scot- 
land, extending its range even to Skye. FI. June. July. If. — Smaller 
than the last. Vesicles mixed with the leaves, which latter are glabrous 
at the margin. Flowers very pale yellow, and small. Spur scarcely any. 
Lower lip almost plane; palate scarcely closing the mouth, not project- 
ing beyond the lip. 


1 The British species of this Genus are all aquatics: and their roots, stems 
and even leaves are furnished with numerous, membranaceous, reticulated 
vesicles, which, according to Hayne, are tilled with water, till it is necessary 
the plant should rise to the surface and expand its blossoms above that fluid. 
The vesicles are then found to contain only air, by aid of which the plant 
floats : this air again in Autumn gives place to water, and the plant descends 
to ripen its seeds at the bottom. Mr. Wilson observes, on the bladders of U. vul- 
garis, that “ they have an orifice closed by an elastic valve, opening inwards, and 
of much thinner texture than the bladder, to which it is attached, where the 
crest is placed. Aquatic insects often enter these bladders, and are, of course, 
confined there.” 


Circcea.] 


DIANDUIA — DIGYNIA. 


11 


5. Lycopus. Linn. Gipsy-wort. 

1. L. europckus, Linn. ( common Gipsy-wort or Water Hore- 
hound ) ; leaves deeply and irregularly pinnatifido-serrate. E. 
JBot. t. 1105. E. FI. v. i. p. 34. 

Ditches and river-banks; less frequent in Scotland, FI June, July. 
If . — Stems 2 feet high, erect, four-sided, as in the class Didynami t, ( )rd. 
Gymnospermia, to which very natural groupe, this and the following 
Genus belong, though they are placed here in consequence of hav- 
ing but two stamens. Leaves opposite, nearly sessile, ovato-lanceolate, 
wrinkled, very deeply sinuato-serrate, almost pinnatifid. Flowers small, 
sessile, in dense whorls at the base of the superior leaves, whitish with 
purple dots, hairy within. 

6. Salvia. Linn. Sage or Clary. 

1. S. prcttensis, Linn. ( Meadow Clary or Sage) ; lower leaves 
cordato-oblong irregularly crenate stalked, those of the stem sessile 
semiainplexicaul, bracteas very small, corolla thrice as long as the 
calyx glandular and viscid at the summit. E. Bot. t. 153. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 34. 

Dry meadows and about hedges, England, but rare ; near Cobham in 
Kent. FI. July. If . — Varying in size, from 6 inches to 2 feet high. 
Commonly cultivated in gardens. I have never seen native specimens. 

2. S. verbendca, Linn. ( Wild English Clary or Sage) ; leaves 
sinuated and serrated, corolla much narrower and scarcely longer 
than the calyx. E. Bot. t. 154. E. FI. v. i. p. 35. 

Dry pastures and banks, especially in a chalky or gravelly soil : not 
uncommon in England, but only found about Edinburgh in Scotland. 
FI. June, July. If . — One to two feet high. Lower leaves petiolate, 
ovate, upper ones sessile and acute, less lobed, but more serrated : all 
wrinkled with veins. Bracteas 2, under each whorl of flowers, cordate, 
acute, entire, ciliated. Cal. hairy, segments mucronate. Cor, small in 
proportion to the calyx, purple. Upper lip concave, compressed. 

7. CmciEA. Linn. Enchanter’s Nightshade. 

1. C. lutetidnci, Linn. ( common Enchanter s Nightshade) ; stem 
erect pubescent, leaves ovate acuminate toothed opaque longer than 
the petiole. E. Bot. t. 1056. E. FI. v. i. p. 15. 

Woods and coppices in shady situations, common. FI. June, July. 
If. — Boot creeping. Stem 1 — 1| foot high. Leaves scarcely cordate at 
the base, upper ones narrow-ovate. Racemes, as well as the stems, 
more or less branched. Flowers white or rose-coloured. Calycine leaf- 
lets reflexed. Petals obcordate, patent. Germen very hispid, the hairs 
hooked at the extremity. Found also in Canada and Nepal. 

2. C. alpina , Linn, (alpine Enchanter s Nightshade) ; stem 
ascending nearly glabrous, leaves cordate toothed shining as long as 
the petioles. E. Bot. t. 1057. E. FI. v. i. p. 16.— /3. major, 


12 DIANDRIA — DIUYNIA. [Lenina. 

larger and more pubescent. E. FI. v. i. p. 1G — C. intermedia, 
Ehrfi. 

Woods, coppices and stony places, especially by the sides of lakes in 
the north of England and Scotland. A In similar situations. Smith. 
— FI. July, Aug. If . — This conies very near, it must be confessed, to 
the preceding : but is much smaller, the leaves decidedly cordate and the 
petioles longer. Fruit , which is abundant on C. luteliana, I have never 
observed on this plant. The flowers are the same in both, as to struc- 
ture and colour. I have not seen the var. p. of Smith in this country; 
but if it be the same as the C. intermedia of continental authors, it is 
quite true, that, though larger in the stem and leaves, it yet accords with 
the essential character of our C. alpina. 

8. Fraxinus. Linn. Ash. 

1. F. excelsior, Linn. ( common Ash); leaves pinnated, leaflets 
ovato-lanceolate acuminate serrated, flowers without either calyx 
or corolla. E. Bot. t. 1692. E.Fl.v. i. p. 14. — [3. heterophylla, 
( simple-leaved Ash); leaves simple and pinnated. F. heterophylla, 
Vahl. — E. Bot. t. 2476. E. FI. v. i. p. 14 — F. simplidfolia, 
Willd F. excelsior, var. 2. With. 

Woods and hedges throughout the country, p. Rare in England. 
Smith. I have specimens, from Mrs. Griffiths, gathered in Devonshire. 
FI. in April and May, before the leaves appear. T? . — One of the noblest 
of our trees, remarkable in old individuals for the curving upwards of the 
extremities of their lower pendent branches. There are many varieties. 
The weeping Ash is said to have been first discovered in a field at Gam- 
lingay. By Loch Lomond side the trees vary much in the width of the 
leaflets, some have them all ovate, others quite lanceolate. The F. 
heterophylla may be considered a sort of monstrosity, often with the 
leaflets united so as to form one single leaf. The J/owers are very simple. 
There is no calyx, no corolla. The pistil and stamens, often one of 
each, are sometimes separated, and rise at once from the extremity of the 
flower-stalk. — The wood is very valuable for many purposes, especially 
for implements of husbandry, the young copse-wood for making hurdles, 
and the older for hop-poles. The roots are injurious to pastures by their 
spreading to so great an extent, and extracting the nourishment from 
the soil. 

9. Lemna. Linn. Duckweed. 

1. L. trisulca, Linn. ( Ivy-leaved Duckweed) ; fronds thin ellip- 
tico-lanceolate caudate at one extremity, at the other serrated, 
roots solitary. E. Bot. t. 926. E. FI. v. i. p. 32. 

Clear stagnant waters. Less frequent in Scotland than in England. 
FI. June, July. ©. — Fronds 4 to £ of an inch in length, pellucid at the 
margins, reticulated. Hoots solitary, tipped at the extremity, as are 
those of the rare and beautiful aquatic, Pontederia azurea, with a small 
sheath. 

2. L. minor, Linn. ( lesser Duckweed) ; fronds nearly ovate 
compressed, roots solitary. E. Bot. t. 1095, E. FI. v. i. p. 32. . 

Stagnant waters, common. — FI. July. ©. — About a line or a line 


Anthoxant/aon.] 


DIANDRIA DIGYNIA, 


13 


and a half long ; ot' a rather thick and succulent, but compact texture, 
slightly convex beneath. This is the most abundant of all the species, 
covering the surface of ditches and harbouring numerous insects and 
mollusem, the food of ducks and other waterfowl, whence the English 
name of Duckweed. The young fronds constitute the Lenina arhiza of 
the French authors. The capsule is single-seeded ; seed transverse, 
with its hihun “ directed towards the narrow end of the frond.” 
Wilson. 

3. L. polyrhiza , Linn, (greater Duchceecl ) ; fronds obovato- 
rotundate compressed, roots numerous clustered. E. Bot. t. 2458. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 33. 

Stagnant waters. Flowers unknown in Britain. 0 . — The largest of 
all the species, half an inch long and nearly as broad, succulent, firm, 
faintly striated ; a little convex below, where, and at the margin above, 
it is of a deep purple colour. Roots numerous from a central point. 
The fructification of this species is a great desideratum. 

4. L. gibba, Linn, (gibbous Duckweed ) ; fronds obovate nearly 
plane above, hemispherical beneath, roots subsolitary. E. Bot . 
t. 1233. E. FI. v. i.p. 32. 

Stagnant water, but not very frequent. Rare in Scotland. FI. June 
— Sept. ©. — Size of L. minor, but readily distinguished by its gib- 
bous or even hemispherical lower surface, which is moreover white, 
pellucid, and beautifully cellular, the cells filled with air, (Wilson): 
upper side plane, green, opaque. “ Capsule 4-seeded. Seeds furrowed, 
not transversely placed, but with the hilum towards the top of the cap- 
sule.” Wilson. 

10. Cladium. Schrad. Twig-rush. 

1. C. Mariscus, Br. (prickly Twig-rush) ; panicle much divided 
leafy, spikelets capitato-conglomerate, stem rounded leafy, margins 
of the leaves and keel rough. E. Bot. t. 950, ( Schcenus Mariscus, 
L.) E. FL v. i. p. 36. 

Boggy and fenny places, in several parts of England, as in Norfolk, 
Cambridge, Kent, &c. ; Cheshire. Mr. Wilson. Plentiful in Galloway, 
Scotland, Air. J. Mack ay, 1801 — FI. July, Aug. If . — In habit very dif- 
ferent from Schcenus, as is the fruit. Plant 3 — 5 feet high, leafy : Leaves 
rough, almost prickly at the margin and keel. Glumes ovate, brown, 6 — 7 
in an ovate spikelet ; inner ones the longest, generally the two or some- 
times three innermost ones floriferous ; of which one (“ sometimes 2, 
more rarely all,” Wilson ) bears a coated nut, almost as large as the 
spikelet. Stigmas generally two, sometimes cloven. (Wilson). 

DIANDRIA DIGYNIA. 

11. Antiioxantiium. Linn. Vernal-grass. 

1. A. odoratum, Linn, (sweet-scented Vernal- Grass) ; panicle 
spiked oblong, flowers upon partial stalks and longer than their 
awns. E. Bot. 1. 647. E. FI. v. i. p. 37, 


14 


THIANDRIA RIONOGYNI A. 


[Iris. 

Meadows, woods, and pastures, abundant, often very alpine. FI. 
May, June. If .. — A foot high, yielding an agreeable smell in the act 
of drying, like that of Woodruff ( Asperula odorata), and giving the well- 
known scent to new-made hay. Leaves short. Panicle compact, 
spiked, yellow in age. Valves of the calyx very unequal : this calyx Mr. 
Brown justly considers as 3-flowered, and what are here called the 
two outer valves of a double corolla, as two imperfect outer and lower 
flowers, each reduced to a single awned valve; while the two inner 
awnless valves constitute a central perfect flower. Stamens only 2, in 
which particular it differs from all our other grasses. Mr. Wilson 
observes, that the germen is spurred at the base, and that there is no 
scale there, as in most other grasses. 


CLASS III. TRIANDRIA. 3 Stamens. 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

* Flowers superior. 

1. Valeriana. Cal. a thickened margin to the top of the ger- 
men, at length unfolding into a feathery pappus. Cor. monopeta- 
lous, 5-cleft, gibbous or spurred at the base. Fruit 1 -seeded, 
crowned with the feathery pappus — Nat. Orel. Valeriane^e, 
DeC. — Named from valeo, to be powerful, on account of the medi- 
cinal effects. 

2. Fedia. Cal. small, unequally toothed, crowning the fruit. 
Cor. monopetalous, 5-cleft, gibbous at the base. Capsule indehis- 
cent, 3-celled, 3-seeded : 2 cells generally abortive. — Nat. Ord. 
V a leri a NE iE, F)eC. — Name given by Adanson, but its meaning is 
not accurately known : according to Smith, Fedus is synonymous 
with Hccdus, a hid. 

3. Crocus. Perianth coloured ; tube very long ; limb cut into 
6 equal segments. Stigmas 3-lobed, plaited. — Nat. Ord. Iride.e, 
Juss. — Named from xgoxjj, a thread or filament, from the appearance 
of the saffron of the shops, which is the dried stigmas of Crocus 
sativus. 

4. Triciionema. Perianth petaloid, in (J, deep, equal segments ; 
tube shorter than the limb. Filaments hairy. Stigma bipartite, 
slender. Seeds globose. — Nat. Ord. lit id e/e, Juss. — Named from 
6pi^, a hair, and vtigx, a filament. 

5. Iris. Perianth single, petaloid, 6-cleft, each alternate 
segment longer and reflexed. Stigmas 3, petaloid, covering the 
stamens. — Nat. Ord. Irideze, Juss. — Named from the beautiful 
and varied colours of its flowers. 


fflcocharis.] 


TRIANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


15 


* * Flowers inferior , glumaceous 1 ( dry and chaffy). Seed one. 

6. Cyperus. Spikelets two-ranked, many- flowered; glumes of one 
valve, keeled, mostly all fertile, equal. Bristles none. Style con- 
tinuous and deciduous. — Nat. Ord.Cy pehacem, Juss. — Named from 
xi imigog of the Greeks, which was given to one of this genus. 

7. Schcenus, Spikelets two-ranked, 1 — 3 flowered, outer glumes 
smaller, empty. Bristles small or none. Style deciduous. — Nat. 
Orel. Cyper ace.e, Juss . — Name from kooos, or g-kmvos, a cord, 
because a kind of cordage was anciently made from plants of this tribe. 

8. Rh ynchospora. Spikelets few-flowered, the glumes of one 
valve, imbricated on all sides, the lower ones smaller, empty. 
Bristles several, included, inversely toothed. Style subulate, bifid, 
spreading at the base. Nut crowned with the persistent, more or 
less articulated, style. — Nat. Ord. Cyperace.e, Juss. — Named 
from guyxog, a beak, and gtroa, a seed. (Very different in habit 
from Eleocharis, but too near in generic character.) 

9. Sci'rpus. Glumes of one valve, imbricated on all sides, equal, 
1 or 2 of the outer ones sometimes sterile. Bristles sometimes 
wanting. Style continuous, deciduous, leaving only a small mucro. 
— Nat. Orel. Cyperace.e, Juss — Name, according to Theis from 
Cirs, in Celtic, which makes Cors in the plural, whence chorda in 
Latin, and cord in English ; the stems having been formerly 
employed for the same purposes as those of Schcenus. 

10. Blysmus. Spikelets bracteated, arranged on a zigzag rachis 
into a distichous compressed spike. Glumes of one valve, imbri- 
cated on all sides, the outermost gradually the largest, empty. 
Bristles several or none. Fruit compressed, oval, gradually 

tapering into the persistent style Nat. Orel. Cyperacead, Juss. 

— Named from (S/.vG/iog, source or spring, near which the species 
usually grow. 

11. Eleocharis. Glumes of one valve, imbricated on all sides, 
uniform, scarcely any empty. Bristles (4 — 12) toothed, rarely 
none. Style 2 — 3-fid, its dilated base jointed upon the germen. 

1 This little groupe (with the exception of Nardus, which is a grass) together 
with Cladium in the 2d Class and Kubresia and Carex in the 21st, constitute 
the Nat. Ord. Cyperaceee : and the structure of their flowers is so different from 
•hat of our other British plants, that the same terms can hardly be applied to 
their coverings. They are collected into little spi/tes, and each within a chaffy 
scale, here called, as in K. Flora, a Glume, ( bractea in Lindl. Syn ); within 
this, is often another covering (the true perianth .) membranous and urceolate 
in Carex, in the present groupe consisting of hairs or bristles, which accom- 
pany’ the fruit, and are called hypogynous ; but Mr. Wilson has proved that 
they are not placed immediately at the base of the germen, between it and the 
stamens, as Smith supposes, (E. FI. v. i. p. bO.) but on the outside of the 
latter ; hence Mr. Brown rightly looked upon them as the true perianth of 
the flower. 


1 (> 


TRIANDIUA DIGYNiA. 


\_Phalaris. 


Nut mostly lenticular, crowned with the broad base of the indu- 
rated style. — Marsh plants. Stems simple , leafless, sheathed at the 
base. Spike solitary, terminal, erect, not leafy. Br — Nat. Ord. 
Cypkrace/e, Juss. — Name, iXoq, sXiog, a marsh, and to 

delight, from its place of growth. — This genus, if it ought to be 
kept distinct from Scirpus, is better distinguished by its solitary 
spike than by any character taken from the jointed or dilated base 
of the style. It is again divided by some Botanists; and the genera 
Isolepis Br. and Eleogiton Link, constituted. 

12. Eriophorum. Glumes of one valve, imbricated on all 
sides, nearly equal. Fruit accompanied by very long silky hairs. — 

Nat. Ord. Cyperacea-:, Juss Named from spiov, ivool, and (pi^a, 

to bear. 

13. Nardus. Cal. 0. Cor. of 2 valves. — Nat. Ord. Gra- 
m i n E iE, Juss. — Named from vx$o?, formerly given to an odo- 
riferous substance, but not applicable in this case. 

( Some Junci ; see Cl. VI.) 

OllD. II. DIGYNIA. 2 Styles. 

All in this Order, together with the preceding genus Nardus, 
and A n thoxanthum in the 2d Class, constitute the true Grasses.i 

* Flowers panicled. ( Panicle often very compact, so as to 
appear spiked .) 

t Calyx single- flowered. 

14. Alopecurus. Cal. 2-valved ; valves nearly equal, mostly 
connate at the base. Valve of the cor. with an awn rising from the 
base. — Named from u.Xonrsi', a fox, and ov?a, a tail. 

15. Phat.aris. Cal. of two, erect, carinated valves, larger than 
the two-valved, at length indurated corolla, which is accompanied 
at the base by one or two valves of other imperfect florets. Fruit 

1 Here again we have a structure in the flower, and a habit in the whole 
plant, so different from those of other flowering-plants, that in the former espe- 
cially, peculiar names have been given to its different parts, which it may be 
desirable to explain. The floral coverings, as they are termed, are glumaceous 
or chaffy. The outer of these, which are empty, composed of one, two, or three 
pieces, are here called the calyx, and the pieces the glumes or valves, and they 
seem to hold the place of a calyx in the two-valved, single-flowered genera; 
but often they include many flowers, and with justice are considered bracteas. 
These Messrs. Brown and Lindley call glumes. The inner, generally of a thinner 
texture, is here, as by Linnaeus and Smith, named corolla, its pieces, glumes or 
valves. This is the true perianth and so called by Brown, (palece, by Beauv. and 
Lindl.) Within this and at the base of the germen are generally 2 collateral, 
rarely 1, small scales ( nectary of Linn, and Sin.). The stem is mostly hollow, 
and jointed, and called a culm. It bears at each joint a leaf, which is sheathiug at 
the base and split up on one side, and .at the top of the sheath, just where it 
expands into the blade, is frequently a small projecting membrane, called a 
ligule. 


T HI AND HI A DIGYNIA. 


Agrostis.] 


17 


invested with the hardened corolla. — Named from tpxXos, shining ; 
— canary-seed being very glossy. 

16. Ammophila. Panicle spiked. Cal. of 2 nearly equal, 
keeled valves, longer than the corolla, surrounded at the base by a 
tuft of hairs — Named from xyyog, sand, and qnxos, a lover. 

17. Phleum. Panicle compact. Cal. of 2 valves, nearly equal, 
acuminate, or mucronato-aristate, including the cor. of 2 awnless 
valves. Seed free. — Named from (pxiog , or ipXsas, formerly given, as 
is supposed, to the Peed-mace ( Typha ), to which our grass bears 
some distant resemblance. 

18. Lagurus. Panicle spiked. Cal. glumes of 2, fringed 
valves, lengthened into feathery awns. Outer valves of the cor. 
bifid at the apex, with a dorsal awn — Named from Xxyuos, a hare, 
and ou5«, a tail. 

19. Milium. Panicle spreading. Cal. 2-valved, flattish, her- 
baceous, rather acute, longer than the cor. Fruit invested with 
the permanent hardened cor . — Named either from mille, a thousand, 
on account of its fertility ; or, according to Theis, from the Celtic 
mil, a stone, from the hardness of its fruit. 

20. Gastridium. Panicle contracted, spiked. Cal. 2-valved, 
acute, ventricose at the base, membranaceous, much longer than the 
cor. Cor. of 2 valves, and investing the fruit, outer one mostly 
with a dorsal awn. — Named from yoigr^idiov, a ventricle, or little 
swelling, as is 6een at the base of the calyx. 

21. Stipa. Panicle erect, compact. Cal. of 2 valves, longer 
than the cor. Cor. cartilaginous, involu.e, terminated with a very 
long twisted awn, jointed at the base, and finally separating at the 
joint. — Named from tfruirjj, si/liy, an appellation which the common 
species of the gardens well merits. 

22. Polypogon. Panicle compact, somewhat spiked. Cal. of 
2 valves, equal, larger than the cor., awned at the extremity. Cor. 
of 2 unequal valves, the outer obtuse, awned at the very extremity. 
— Named from toXu, many, and < ruyuv, a heard; from the bearded 
appearance of the panicle. 

23. Calamagrostis. Panicle loose. Cal. of 2 valves, longer 
than the 2 valves of the corolla , which is surrounded by hairs at 
the base, and has the outer valve awned — Named from xotXxyos, one 
of. the Palms, and xy^oo-ns, a genus ot grasses ; a barbarous deno- 
mination, and only admissible on the ground of its being now gen- 
erally adopted. 

2d. Agrostis. Panicle loose. Cal. of 2 unequal glumes, longer 
than the cor. Corolla of 2 unequal valves, the inner sometimes 
wanting, the outer with or without an awn. Seed free. Name 


18 


T III AN D HI A — D I GY N I A. [Sesleria. 

given by tbe Greeks to Grasses, from a field, because they 

are so abundant in open places. 

++ Calyx 2 — or rarely 3-fiowered. 

25. Catabrosa. Panicle spreading. Cal. of 2 valves, mem- 
branaceous, very obtuse, much shorter than the spikelets, 2-or 3- 
flowered, often with a 4th imperfect floret. Cor. 2-valved, coria- 
ceous, membranous only at tbe extremity, ribbed, truncated, awnless, 
erose, nearly equal. — Named from KXTxfigtnrif, a gnawing ; from tbe 
erose extremity of the glumes. 

26. Ai'ra. Cal. of 2 valves, unequal, containing two perfect 
flowers. Cor. two-valved, membranaceous and thin, the outer one 
awned (rarely awnless) near the base. Fruit free. — Named from 
uipa, to destroy. This name was anciently applied to the Lolium 
tenmlentum, (bearded Darnel,) on account of its supposed injurious 
effects: and now to the present genus of grasses, though having little 
in common with it. 

27. Melica. Panicle lax. Cal. of 2 valves, about 2-flowered, 
with the rudiment of a third floret. Cor. 2-valved, awnless. Fruit 
free, covered by the cartilaginous cor. — Name, Melica or Melliga , 
given in Italy to the Sorghum vulgare on account of the sweet 
flavour of its stem (mel, honey) : applied by Linnmus to this 
somewhat allied genus. 

28. Holcus. Panicle lax. Cal. of 2 valves, nearly equal, 2- 
flowered. Cor. 2-valved, upper floret with stamens only and awned ; 
lower, perfect and awnless. Fruit covered by the indurated cor. 
— Name oXjcos, from JXxw, to extract, because it was supposed to 
have the property of drawing out thorns from the flesh. 

29. Arriienatherum. Panicle lax. Cal. of 2 valves, 2- 
flowered : lowermost floret with stamens only and a long twisted 
awn above the base; upper one perfect with a short strait bristle 

below the point. — Named from male, and x9r)g, an awn 

This genus has altogether the habit of Arena , from which it differs 
in the number and structure of its florets. 

30. Hierochloe. Panicle mostly lax. Cal. of 2 valves, 3- 
flowered. Cor. of 2 valves ; the lateral fiorets triandrous, pistil 0 : 
terminal (or central) one perfect, diandrous. Dr . — Cor. perma- 
nently membranous. Fruit free. Sm — Named from 'ago-,, sacred, and 
"/box, or yfiori, a grass : so called by Gmelin, because, in some parts 
of the Prussian dominions, it is dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and 
6trewed before the doors of the churches on festival-days, as the 
Sweet- jhg (Acorus Calamus), is in England. 

31. Sesleria. Panicle spiked. Cal. of 2 valves, nearly equal, 
somewhat awned. Cor. of 2 valves, the outer jagged and awned, 


Bromus .] 


TRIANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


19 


the inner bidentate. Fruit free. — Named from Leonard Sesler, an 
Italian Physician and Botanist. 

32. Panicum. Panicle spiked ; spikes compound. Cal. 2- 
valved, unequal, 2-flowered ; ext. valve minute, sometimes obsolete. 
Florets dissimilar; ext. with anthers only or neuter , 1 — 2-valved; 
ext. valve with the texture of the inner glume; int. perfect, 2- 
valved, cartilaginous, enveloping, and somewhat adhering to, the 
fruit. Br. — Named from Panis? bread; some species being 
used for bread. 

33. Setaria. Panicle in a dense, cylindrical spike. Flowers 
as in Panicum, oidy subtended by a bristly involucre, which includes 
2 — 3 florets — Named from seta, a bristle. — Pennisetum, Br . — 
To this genus the true Millets belong. 

+T+ Calyx 3 -or, mostly many-flowered. 

34. Poa. Panicle lax. Cal. 2-valved, shorter than the florets. 

Cor. 2-valved, valves subovate, bluntish, awnless. Fruit free 

Name, -root, grass or pasturage, from ttxu, to feed ; the whole genus 
affording an abundant pasturage for cattle. 

35. Triodia. Panicle racemed. Cal. 2-valved, many-flowered, 
nearly equal. Cor. 2-valved; ext. one with three nearly equal 
teeth, the middle one strait — Named from rft,, three , and odovg, a 
tooth. 

36. Briza. Panicle lax. Cal. 2-valved. Cor. 2-valved, awn- 
less; ext. one ventricose; int. very small and flat. Fruit adnate 
with the cor — Named from (3pdu, to balance, the spikelets being 
delicately suspended. 

37. Dactylis. Panicle with the secondary branches short and 
very dense, subsecund. Cal. of 2 unequal valves, the larger one 
keeled. Cor. of 2 lanceolate, scarcely awned valves, enclosing the 
fruit. — Except in habit this genus is scarcely distinguishable from 
Festuca. — Named from occ/.-v/.o;, a finger. 

38. Cynosurus. Panicle spiked. Cal. 2-valved, equal, awned, 
having a pectinated involucre. Cor. 2-valved, valves linear-lanceo- 
late ; int. awned below the extremity or awnless. — Named from 
r.uuu, a dog, and ovoa, a teal ; from the shape of its spike. 

39. Festuca. Panicle lax, or coarctate, or spiked. Cal. of 2 
unequal valves. Cor, of 2 lanceolate valves ; ext. acuminate or 
awned at the summit — Named from the Celtic word fest, according 
to Theis, which signifies food, pasturage. 

40. Bromus. Panicle lax. Cal. of 2 valves, many-flowered. 
( or. of 2 lanceolate valves ; ext. one awned below the bifid extre- 
mity. (Inner valve generally fringed at the folds, Sm.) — Named 


20 THIANDUFA — DIGYNIA. [Brachypodium. 

from given by the Greeks to a kind of oat, and that again 

from Qgu/j,et, food. 

41. A vena. Panicle lax. Cat. 2-valved, 2-flowered. Cor. of 
2 lanceolate valves, firmly enclosing the seed : ext. one bearing 
a twisted dorsal awn; upper florets often imperfect. — Name of 
doubtful origin : the ancients applied it to the Brome-grass . — Oat, 
Theis tells us, comes from the Celtic word atan, the Oat ; and 
that again from etan, to cat. 

42. Akundo. Panicle loose. Cal. 2-valved, unequal, many- 
flowered. Cor. of 2 very unequal valves ; all, except the lower 
and imperfect one, surrounded by a tuft of hairs. Fruit free, 
covered by the cor. — Name ; Arundo , the Latin for a Reed ; “ ab 
arendo, quod cito arescat.” De Theis says it comes from am, the 
Celtic word for water. There is abundant room for the exercise of 
imagination in the derivation of names. 

** Inflorescence spiked. ( Solitary jloivers, or spikelets, sessile 
upon a common stalk or rachis. 

f Flowers or spikelets distichous or inserted on cdl sides. 

43. Elymus. Spikelets 2 or 3 from the same point. Cal. 2- 
valved, lateral (both the valves on one side the spikelet), 2 — 3 

flowered, all perfect. Cor. 2-valved Name, eAu//,o;, given by the 

Greeks to the Panic-grasses, perhaps because they grew abundantly 
about Elyma in Greece. ( Theis.) 

44. Hordeum. Cal. lateral, 2-valved, single-flowered, ternate, 
central floret perfect, lateral ones mostlyimperfect(havingoften at the 
back of the inner valve a bristle or abortive floret). Outer valve of cor. 
awned. Fruit incorporated with the cor. — Name of dubious origin. 

45. Tkiticum. Cal. 2-valved, many-flowered ; its valves oppo- 
site, transverse, the sides (not the back of one of them) directed to 
the rachis, nearly equal. Cor. 2-valved, valves lanceolate, ext. one 
acuminate or awned at the extremity: int. bifid at the point — 
There are two natural groupes in this genus : 1st, the large annual 
species, exotic to our country, which are cultivated so extensively 
as Bread-corn; and, 2dly, the smaller perennial species, many of 
which are natives with us. These, some authors look upon as 2 
distinct genera ; Triticum and Agropyrum, Beauv., Lindl. We 
have only to consider the latter genus, or groupe. — Name, Triti- 
cum, “ quod tritum est e spicis because it is thrashed or beaten 
from the spikes. 

46. Brachypodium. Spikelets alternate, remote, cylindrical- 
compressed. Cal. 2-valved, many-flowered ; valves opposite, trans- 
verse, unequal. Cor. 2-valved, the valves lanceolate ; ext. one 
generally awned at the extremity; int. retuse. — Named from 


JHontia.] 


TRIANDRIA TRIGYNIA. 


21 


short, and no vs, a foot ; from the sessile or nearly sessile spikelets. — 
These sessile spikelets and the terminal awn distinguish this genus 
from Bromus, where the British plants of this genus had been 
placed. There are many continental species, which preserve the 
same habit : and the individuals naturally come near to the British 
species of Triticum. Beauvois, perhaps with justice, refers Trit. 
loliaceum to it. 

47. Lolium. Cal. of one valve, solitary, many-flowered. Cor. 

of two valves; ext. awnless or with an awn below the extremity 

Name, “ quasi dolium, doXwv, quod dolosum sit vel adulterinum. 
Fit enim e corruptis Tritici ac. Hordei seminibus.” The ancients, 
as well as the moderns, attributed poisonous qualities to the L. 
temulentum ; and even now it is believed in some countries, that 
the Wheat changes into Darnel. 

48. Rottbollia. Cal. of 2 valves; valves unilateral, sometimes 
combined into one, 1 — 2-flowered. Cor. 2-valved, awnless, im- 
bedded, as it were, in a thick rachis — Named from Rottholl, a Pro- 
fessor of Botany at Copenhagen. 

49. Knappia. Cal. single-flowered, of 2 truncated, nearly equal 
valves. Cor. of 2 unequal, hairy valves, obtuse. — Named in hon- 
our of Mr. Knapp, an English Botanist, author of a work on 
British grasses. 

j-j- Floivers in unilateral spikes. 

50. Sparti'na. Spike compound. Spikelets unilateral. Cal. 
of 2 opposite, lanceolate, compressed, unequal, acuminate valves , 
one-flowered. Cor. of 2, compressed, rather unequal, lanceolate 
valves. Styles united half-way up. — Name derived from its simi- 
larity to the Lygeum Spartum, or Bastard Mat-weed. Esparto is 
a name given to St/pa tenacissima by the Spaniards, who make 
ropes, &c. of it. 

51. Cynodon. Spikes digitate or racemose. Sjoikelets unilateral. 
Cal. 1- flowered, of 2 nearly equal, patent, boat-shaped valves. Cor. 
of two awnless valves; ext. boat-shaped, compressed. Fruit coated 
with the hardened cor. — Named from kvojv, a dog, and odovs, a tooth. 

52. Digitaria. Spikes compound. Spikelets unilateral. Cal. 
1-flowered, of 2 — 3 very unequal, close-pressed, awnless valves : 
ext. very small. Cor. of 2, awnless valves ; ext. convex, embracing 

the flattened int. one. Fruit coated with the hardened cor. 

Named from digitus, a Ji 7 iger. 

ORD. III. TRIGYNIA. 3 Styles. 

53. Montia. Cal. of 2 leaves. Cor. of 5 irregular petals united 
at the base into one. Caps. 3-valved, 3-seeded. — Nut, Ord. 


22 Till A N D III A — MONOGYNIA. [ Valeriana . 

Portulaceve. Juss . — Named in honour of Joseph de Monti , a 
Professor of Botany and Nat. History at Bologna. 

54. IIolosteum. Cal. of 5 leaves. Pet. 5-toothed. Caps. 
1-celled, opening at the extremity with 6 teeth. Seeds furrowed 
on one side, dotted. Embryo folded — Nat. Ord. Caryophylleve, 
Jtiss. — Named from oXo;, all, and o arm, bone, by antiphrasis, the 
texture being the very reverse, soft and delicate. 

55. Polycarpon. Cal. of 5 lpaves. Pet. 5, emarginate. 

Stam. 3 — 5. Caps. 1-celled, 3-valved, many-seeded. — Nat. Ord. 
Paronychiete, St. Hil Named from toXv, many, and xct^og, 

fruit; applied by the ancients to the Polygonum aviculare, to 
which the present genus is somewhat similar. 

TRIANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 

1. Valeriana. Linn. Valerian. 

1. V. rubra, Linn. ( red Valerian); corolla with a long spur, 
stamen 1, leaves ovato-lanceolate. E. Pot. t. 1532. E. FI. v. i. 
p. 42. 

Chalk-pits and old walls : but probably originally the outcast of 
gardens. Chalk-pits in Kent apparently wild, and certainly very abun- 
dant. Its native country is the south of Europe. Ft. June — Sept. 1/ . 
— One foot or more high, glabrous, somewhat glaucous, entire or slightly 
toothed. Leaves, as in all the species of this and the following genus, 
opposite. Flowers fine deep rose-colour, arranged in numerous unila- 
teral corymbose spikes. — This, constituting Centranthus of DeC. and 
assuredly a good genus, I have retained here on account of its affinity 
with the Valerians. For if separated from them, it must be referred 
to another Class, Monandria. 

2. V. dioica, Linn. ( snmll marsh Valerian); flowers dioecious, 
corolla gibbous at the base, root-leaves ovato-spathulate, those of 
the stem lyrato-pinnatifkl. E. Bot. t. 628. E. FI. v. i. p. 43. 

Marshy meadows, frequent. FI. June. If .—Stem 6 — 8 inches high. 
Leaves more or less serrated. Flowers of a pale rose-colour. 

3. V. officinalis, Linn. ( great wild Valerian); corolla gibbous at 
the base, leaves all pinnated, leaflets lanceolate nearly uniform ser- 
rated. E. Bot. t. 698. E. FI. v. i. p. 43. 

Ditches, sides of rivers and moist woods, abundant. FI. June, July 
14 . — Roots tuberous, warm, aromatic and employed in medicine, as those 
of the of Dioscorides, V. LJioscorulis , Sih. which is not the V. P/iu of 
Linn. Cats are very fond of these roots, and the scent attracts rats. 
The leaves are much used by the poor as an application to fresh wounds; 
hence the plant has received the name of All-heal. Whole plant 2 — -1 
feet high ; stems striated. Lower leaves on long footstalks. Flowers 
pale flesh-coloured. 

4. V. pyrenaica, Linn. ( heart-leaved Valerian); corolla gibbous 


TUIANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


23 


Fedia.] 

at the base, leaves heart-shaped dentato-serrate petiolate, upper ones 
with one or two pair of small lanceolate leaflets. E. Bot. t. 1591. 
E. FL v. i. p. 44. 

Woods in Scotland, but surely not an aboriginal native. It is pecu- 
liar, I believe, to the Pyrenees ; but being frequently cultivated in gar- 
dens and its seeds very volatile, like those of the Syngenesious plants, 
it is not wonderful that it should naturalize itself in other countries. 
FI. June, July. If. — Habit of V. officinalis, but very different in its 
foliage. 

2. Fedia. Vahl. Corn-sallad. 

1. F. olitoria, Valil, ( common Corn- Sal/ad or Lamb's Lettuce); 
capsule subglobose inflated, with 3 obscure indexed teeth glabrous, 
flowers capitate. E. Bot. t. 81 1, ( Valeriana Locusta L.j E. El. 
v. i. p. 45. 

Banks and corn fields, especially in a light soil. FI. April— June. 0. 

3 inches to a foot high, dichotomous, more or less rough. Root-leaves 
spathulate, those of the stem oblong, obtuse, entire or with the upper 
ones a little toothed. Flowers pale blue, in terminal compact heads, at 
the base of which are linear-oblong, often divided bracteas, forming a kind 
of involucre. — Frequently cultivated as a sallad. The two emptycells of 
the fruit are singularly inflated. 

2. F. dentata, Vahl, ( smooth narrow-fruited Corn-Sallad) ; cap- 
sule ovate acuminate glabrous ribbed with 1 large and 2 smaller 
upright teeth, flowers corymbose, peduncles with a sessile axillary 
flower. E. Bot. t. 1370, ( Valeriana dentata, Willd.) E. FI. v. i 
p. 45. 

Corn-fields and hedge-banks, but not common. Cornwall, Essex and 

Cambridgeshire, and about Edinburgh. North Wales; Mr. Wilson. 

FI. June, July. If . — Perhaps often confounded with the last, from which 
it is perfectly distinct. Leaves narrower, the upper ones more toothed 
and even pectinated. Flowers flesh-coloured. Fruit obpyriform con- 
vex on the back where is the larger and perfect cell, nearly plane in 
front, where are the two abortive cells : and these are shrunk so as to 
form two projecting lines or ribs; these are terminated by two small 
subulate teeth ; between them is often another little tooth, while the 
perfect cell is lengthened out into a large broad and sharp tooth which 
has generally at its base two smaller slightly inflexed teeth, one on 
each side. I he whole fruit is perfectly glabrous. 

3. F. mixta, Vahl, (sharp-rough fruited Corn- Sallad) ; capsule 
ovato-acuminate clothed with spreading incurved rigid hairs 
obscurely ribbed, with one large and two smaller upright teeth 
flow'ers corymbose, peduncles with a sessile axillary flower. Vahl 
Enum. v. n.p. 21. Dufresne Hist. Val. p. 58. t. 3./. 6, ( Valeri- 
anella mixta .) — Valerianella microcarpa, Loisel. 

Hedge-bank, near Halesworth, Suffolk.— Ft. June. 0 .—This I found 
many >ears ago in the station just mentioned, when I looked upon it as 
• air y- ,uit ed var. of F. dentata, and I have seen no other British spe- 
c men . ut f have received the same plant from various continental 


24 


TKI AN I)RI A — MONOGYNIA. 


[ Crocus . 


Botanists, and find it to be well described and figured (the fruit at least) 
by Dufrcsne. The difference indeed lies wholly in the fruit, but this is 
so remarkable, and so constant in all the specimens I have seen, that 1 
have no hesitation in considering the species truly distinct. 

4. F. eriocarpa, Roem. et Sch. (blunt rough- fruited Com- Sal- 
lad) ; capsule crowned with the prominent cup-shaped oblique 
membranous unequally toothed calyx, and clothed with patent 
incurved rigid hairs, flowers corymbose, peduncles with a sessile 
axillary flower. Desv. Journ. Bot. 1809. p. 314. t. 11. f 2. and 
Dufrcsne Hist. Val. p. 39. t. 3. n. 4, ( Valerianella erioc.) 

Discovered at Ormeshead, Caernarvonshire, by Mr. Wilson, in 1828. — 
FI. June. ©. — Should there be any doubt entertained as to the validity 
of the preceding species, there can, I think, be none respecting this. The 
calyx in the fruit is expanded into a membranous or cartilaginous oblique 
blunt cup, with 6 distinct teeth, the upper one the largest, the rest grad- 
ually smaller : it forms in fact a broad mouth to the top of the fruit. — 
First noticed by M. Desvaux about Poictiers, in France, and his figure 
is admirably characteristic of our Welsh specimens, especially the fruit; 
which, nevertheless, Professor Mertens criticises in his excellent Flora 
Germanica. 

3. Crocus. Linn. Crocus. 

1. C. sativus, Linn. ( Saffron Crocus); stigma protruded droop- 
ing, in three deep linear divisions. E. Bot. t. 343, ( C. autumnalis.) 
E. FI. v. i.p. 46. 

Naturalized in meadows ; having been cultivated abundantly, as it still 
is, about Saffron Walden in Essex, for the sake of its fragrant stigmas 
which constitute saffron. FI. Sept. If. . 

2. C. vernus, Willd. (purple Spring Crocus); stigma erect 
within the flower cut into 3 jagged wedge-shaped lobes. E. Bot. 
t. 344. E. Ft. v. i. p. 46. — C. sativus [3 . Linn. 

Meadows and fields, naturalized. About Nottingham, plentiful. FI. 
March. If . 

3. C. minimus, Red. (least purple Crocus); stigmas erect 
longer than the stamens, included in the solitary flower, leaves 
linear-filiform, bulb with a membranous coat. PI. Lil. v. ii. t. 81. 

Hook, in Bot. Mag. t. 2991 C.prcecox, Haw. in E. Bot. Suppl. 

t. 2645. — C. reticulatus, E. FI. and v. iv. p. 262, (not Bieb.) 

In Sir II. Bunbury’s park at Barton, Suffolk, (assuredly not wild.) 
Mr. D. Turner. FI. March. If . 

4. C. aureus, Sm. (golden Crocus); 2-flowered, stamens longer 
than the stigmas, segments of the cor. oblong incurvo-patent, 
bulb coated with compact fibres. FI. Grcec. v. i. p. 25. t. 35. 
Hook, in Bot. Mag. t. 2986. tlaw. in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2646. 

With the preceding, and equally the outcast of gardens. FI. March. 
If .. — This again Mr. Borrcr considers not specifically distinct from C. 
vucsiacus, Gawl. (C. vernus, Curtis in Bot. Mag.) 


TRIANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


25 


Iris.] 

5. C. nudflorus, Sm. (naked-flowering Crocus ); stigma erect 
within the flower in 3 deeply laciniated tufted segments, equal in 
height with the stamens, flowers appearing before the leaves. E. 
Bot. t. 491. E. FI. v. i. p. 47. 

Between Nottingham Castle and the Trent. FI. Oct. If . — Flowers 
pale purple. I possess specimens from the station now mentioned, sent 
by Dr. Jowitt, which precisely accord with the plant of E. Bot. But 
another species is found by Mr. Wilson in meadows near Warrington, 
equally an autumnal-flowering plant, and the flowers appearing before* 
the leaves ; — having the lobes of the capillaceo-multifid stigma much 
exceeding the stamens in length. 1 have received the same species too 
from the neighbourhood of Halifax. This is the C. speciosus of Mars- 
hal Bieberstein, as proved by comparison with an authentic specimen 
in my Herbarium. That author too notices, in his Flora Taurico-Cau - 
casica, the characters which distinguish it from Smith’s C. nudiflorus. — I 
will not augment the list ol British species ot Crocus, by adding another 
naturalized plant, but content myself with noticing it in this place. 

In all this Genus, the Germen is concealed under-ground, elevated by 
a short peduncle from the root; which peduncle elongates, after the 
decay of the flower, and the capsules appear above ground. 

4. Trichonema. Ker. Trichonema. 

1. T. Bulbocodium , Ker, (channel-leaved Trichonema); leaves 
linear-filiform longer than the scapes, spatha longer than the tube, 
segments of the limb acute striated. E. Bot. t. 2549, (Ixia Bul- 
bocodium). E. FI. v. i. p. 48. 

Grassy hillocks in Guernsey. FI. March, April. If . A small bulbous 
plant, with purplish Jlowers, often inclining to yellow. 

5. Iris. Linn. Iris or Flower de Luce. 

1. I. Pseud-acorns, Linn, (yellow Water -Iris or Corn flag); 
leaves sword-shaped, perianth beardless, its inner segments smaller 

than the stigma. E. Bot. t. 578. E. FI. v. i. p. 48 (3. citrina; 

flowers smaller, segments of the perianth narrower, the inner ones 
more acute, stem taller. Iris Pseud-aeorus (3. Bot. Mag. t. 2239. 

Watery places, wet meadows and in woods, frequent. — ,3. found in 
Ayrshire by Mr. James Smith of Ayr. FI. June, July. If. .—Flowers 
targe, deep yellow in a, much paler in /3. Root large, horizontal, very 
acrid. A piece of it held between the teeth is said to cure the tooth- 
ache, and is otherwise used medicinally; also for giving a black dye, 
and making ink. The seeds, when roasted, are recommended as a sub- 
stitute for coffee. 

2. I. feetidissima, Linn, (stinking Iris); leaves sword-shaped, 
peiianth beardless, its inner segments spreading' aboutas large as 
the stigmas, stem one-angled. E. Bot. t. 596. E. FI. v. i. p. 49. 

Woods, thickets and pastures; frequent in the southern and western 
pmtsof England, rare in the middle and northern counties: not known, 
m a wild state, in Scotland. Ft. May. If Flowers much smaller than 
the last, dull livid purple. The leaves, when bruised, yield a very dis- 

c 


20 TRIANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. [ Rhynchospora . 

agreeable smell, which some have, however, compared to roast-beef, 
whence its common English name, Roast-beef plant. In Devonshire it 
is so frequent that you can hardly avoid walking among it, when her- 
borizing, and being annoyed by the smell. 

6. Cyperus. Linn. Cyperus or Galingale. 

1, C. longus , Linn. ( sweet Cyperus or English Galingale ); 
spikelets linear-lanceolate erecto-patent in doubly compound umbels, 
general involucre very long leafy, partial small, stem triangular. 
lE. Bot. t. 1309. E. FI. v. i.p. 53. 

Very rare. Marsh near St. David’s and at Walton in Gordon, Somer- 
setshire. Near Sea-brook, Kent; Rev. G. E. Smith. Boyton, Wilts; 
Mr. Peate. FI. July. If. . — Root very aromatic and astringent. 

2. C. fuscus, Linn. ( brown Cyperus ); spikelets linear-lanceolate 
fasciculato-corymbose, glumes patent, involucre of 3 unequal leaves, 
stem triangular, stigmas 3. Hook, in FI. Load. New Series, t. 85. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 51. Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2620. 

Marshes, very rare. Meadows near Little Chelsea, where it was dis- 
covered by Mr. Haworth. FI. Sept. 0. — A small plant, only a few 
inches high. — Of the Genus Cyperus, 237 species are described in 
Sprengel’s Syst. Vegetabilium. Most of them are tropical : they gra- 
dually diminish in number as we recede from the tropics: so that, though 
2 species are natives of England, none is found in Scotland. 

7. Schcenus. Linn. Bog-rush. 

1. S. nigricans, Linn, (black Bog-rush) ; stem rounded, spike- 
lets collected into a rounded head shorter than the outer bracteas. 
E. Bot. t. 1121. E. El. v. i.p. 50. 

Wet moors and boggy places. Rare in Scotland, except on the West 
coast. FI. June, July. If .. — Remarkable for its rigid habit, nearly 
setaceous leaves, and the dark brown almost black heads of flowers. 
The style is jointed upon the germen and darker than it. “ Bristles small, 
reddish-brown, spiny, the spines pointing upwards; attached to the recep- 
tacle, as Smith observes, but certainly placed on the outside of the fila- 
ments, — which is the case also in various species of Scirpus, and, as I 
am inclined to believe, in all cases where bristles are to be found at all.” 
(Mr. Wilson.) 

8. Rhynchospora. Vahl. Beak-rush. 

1. 11. alba, Vahl, (white Beak-rush); spikelets in a compact 
corymb as long as the outer bracteas, leaves narrow-linear. E. Bot. 
t. 985, (Schcenus alb. Lin.) E. FI. v. i.p. 52. 

Wet pastures and turfy bogs. FI. June — Aug. If.. — Spikelets of 
floivcrs white or whitish, collected so as to form a level surface at the 
top. In the flowers I find 6 or more bristles, much longer than the ger- 
men, and decidedly placed outside the stamens. Fruit in this and R. 
fusca, obovate, compressed, distinctly margined, tapering at the base into 
a short stalk. Style persistent, thin, pellucid, often greenish, dilated at 
the base, which is not articulated, nor so broad as the seed, but immedi- 
ately distinguishable from the shining nut by its colour and texture. 


Scirpus.] 


TRJANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


27 


It R. aurea, the first species described by Vahl, is to be considered the 
type ot the genus, then must our two British species be separated from 
it, it the fruit and the style are to afford characters : for in R. aurea the 
nut is obovate, indeed, but not at ail compressed nor margined : the 
style is very large, thick, corky, swollen at the base, and remarkably con- 
stricted where it is set upon the germen ; it is moreover grooved on two 
sides. I find but one flower in the spikelets of R. aurea, two in those 
of R. alba. 

2. R. fusca, Sm. ( brown Beak-rush); spikelets in an oval head 
much shorter than the outer bracteas, leaves almost filiform. 
E. Bot. t. 1575, Schcenus fuse. L.) E. FI. v. i. p. 52. 

Bogs, principally in the south-west of England and Ireland.— FI. July, 
Al, g- V  ' Habit of the last, though very different in specific character. 
Heads ol flowers oval, rich brown ; spikelets larger and the stigmas more 
protruded. Smith and Sturm have figured and described only 3 bristles 
to each flower. I find G in the British, as well as in American specimens, 
which are in no respect different from ours. 

9. Scirpus. Linn. Club-rush. 

1. S. lacustris, Linn. (Lake Club-rush or Bull-rush) ; spikelets 
in compound lateral umbels mostly shorter than the rounded almost 
leafless stem. E. Bot. t. 666. E. FI. v. i. p. 56.— (3. glaucus; 
smaller and glaucous. Hook. Scot. v. i. p. 18. S. glaucus, E. Bot. 
t. 2312. E. FI. v. i.p. 57. 

Plentiful on the margins of lakes and ponds . — $. In similar situations. 
FI. July, August. If. . — Root much creeping. Inflorescence truly lateral, 
near the extremity of the stalks, which are very variable in size, 2 — 6 
or 8 feet high, and as thick as a finger at the base. Spikelets often almost 
sessile. Glumes brown, fringed. Stigmas 2 — 3. Fruit obovato-trique- 
trous, accompanied by 5 or 6 bristles. The stems are much used for 
mats, chair-bottoms, &c. and they constitute a very considerable article 
of trade. Coopers employ them for filling up spaces between the seams 
of casks, and their spongy nature admirably adapts them to this purpose. 

I am happy to be confirmed in my opinion, expressed in Flora Scotica, 
that the S. glaucus is but a variety of this, by so acute an observer as Mr 
Wilson. 

2. S. Holoschdmus, Linn, {round- cluster -headed Club-rush); 
stem rounded, spikelets lateral collected into compact globular 
sessile or stalked heads, leaves subulate channelled, bristles to the 
flower none. E Bot. t. 1612. E. El. v. i. p. 57. 

Sandy sea shores, only found in the extreme southern and western 
parts of England. FI. Sept. 1 1 . 

3. S. setaceus, Linn, (bristle- stalked Club-rush); stem com- 

pressed with 1 or 2 leaves at the base, spikelets about 2 termi- 
nal, general bractea erect leafy much shorter than the stem, nut 
ribbed, bristles none. E. Bot. t. 1693. E. FI. v. i.p. 58 Iso- 

lepis setacea, Br. 

Moist gravelly places, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If.. — Stems tufted, 

~ ^ inches high, very slender. Siam . 2. Stigmas 3. 


28 


TRIANDKIA — MONOGYNIA. 


[ Blysmus . 

4. S. triquetcr, Linn. ( triangular Club-rush ); stem triquetrous 
straight at the point, its sheaths leafy, spikelets ovate or oblongo- 
ovate clustered sessile and stalked naked, stigmas 2, fruit smooth. 
E. Bot. t. 1694. E. FI. v. i. p. 60. 

Muddy banks of rivers, near London ; and a var. with spikelets all ses- 
sile was found in Jersey by Sherard. FI. Aug. If. . — Well distinguished 
by its acutely triquetrous stem. 

5. S. carinatus, Sm. ( hlunt-edged Club-rush ); stem rounded 
at the base bluntly triangular upwards, its sheaths leafless, cyme 
terminal decompound, involucre of 2 unequal leaves, spikelets 
oblong, stigmas 2. E. Bot. t. 1983. E. FI. v. i. p. 60. 

Banks of rivers, very rare. About London and on the banks of the 
Arun, Sussex. FI. July, Aug. If- 

6. S. maritimus, Linn. ( salt-marsh Club-rush ) ; stem leafy 
triangular, spikelets terminal clustered stalked and sessile, invo- 
lucre of many foliaceous leaflets, glumes with a mucro between the 
acute segments of the notch. E. Bot. t. 542. E. FI. v. i. p. 61. 

Salt-marshes, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If. — Root creeping, some- 
times swelling into knots or tubers. Leaves frequently longer than the 
stem, flat, acuminate. Stigmas 3. Bristles 3 — 4, accompanying the 
smooth, obovato-triangular/mV. 

7. S. sylvaticus, Linn. ( wood Club-rush) ; stem triangular leafy, 
cyme terminal many times compound, involucre of many folia- 
ceous leaflets, glume entire acute. E. Bot. t. 919. E. FI. v. i. 

p. 62. 

Moist woods and banks of rivers. Abundant in South Kent, (Rev. 
G. E. Smith;) about Killin, at the head of Loch Tay, Perthshire, and 
in very many places in the south of Scotland. It seems to be less fre- 
quent in England. FI. July. If- — A handsome species, bearing innu- 
merable small, greenish, ovate spikelets. Stem 2 — 3 feet high. Leaves 
broadly linear. Fruit with rather long bristles. 

10. Blysmus. Panz. Blysmus. 

1. B. compressus, Panz. (broad-leaved Blysmus) ; lowermost 
bractea subulate somewhat leafy, bristles 6 as long as the style, 
leaves linear flat. Lindl. Syn. p. 280. — Schcenus compressus , 
Linn. — E. Bot. t. 791. — Scirpus car ids, Betz. — Scirpus cari- 
cinus, E. FI. v. i. p. 58. — Schrad. — S. compressus, Pers. — Carex 
uliyinosa , Linn. 

Boggy pastures, by river-sides and near the sea : not uncommon. FU 
July. if. — Stem C — 8 inches high, leafy. Glumes brown, striated. 
Bristles with reflexed spines. — The habit of this and the following 
plant is quite peculiar, and justifies their being formed into a distinct 
genus. The fructification is exactly similar in the two. Mr. Lindley 
characterizes the style as deciduous ; but it is by no means so in my 
specimens. M. de Beauvois’ Genus Nomochloa is the same as this. 

2. B. rufus, Link, (narrow-leaved Blysmus) ; bracteas all 


Elcocharis.] TRIANDR.I A — MONOGYNIA. 29 

equal membranaceous, bristles none, leaves very narrow grooved. 

jS 'chccnus rufus, E. Hot. t. 1010 Scirpus rvfus, Schrad. — E. FI. 

v. i. p. 59. 

Marshy plains ; especially near the sea, particularly in Scotland ; as 
far as Shetland. On the coast of Wales, west of England and west of 
Ireland. FI. July. If • — Slenderer and more rigid than the last, more 
upright: spikes darker, the glumes more membranaceous, thin, not striated 
and more obtuse : in both very broad and convolute. 

11. Eleociiaris. Br. Spikerush. 

1. E. palustris , Br. ( creeping Spike-rush ); stem rounded, root 
much creeping, stigmas 2, fruit lenticular plano-convex shorter than 
the 4 bristles, outer glume smaller than the rest. E. Bot. t. 131, 
{Scirpus pal. LI) E. FI. v. i. p. 63. 

Sides of ditches and wet marshy places, frequent. FI. June, July. If. . 
— “ Root creeping (to a great length), black and shining, as well as the 
external sheaths of the stem. Bristles, in the flower, only 4, longer 
than the ripe fruit, flattened, dilated at the base, and broader than the 
filaments. Receptacle elongated below the insertion of the filaments, so 
that the flower appears to be not quite sessile, as it is in E. multicaulis. 
Germen shorter and broader than in the next species, the style is also 
shorter. Again, the section of the stem is different from that of E, 
viultic., without any central pith, but with longer membranous tubes sur- 
rounded by smaller ones.” Wilson MSS. 

2. E. multicaulis , Sm. {many -stalked Spike-rush ); stem round- 
ed, root scarcely creeping, stigmas 3, fruit obovate triquetrous 
longer than the 6 bristles, outer glumes smaller than the rest. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 64. E. Bot. t. 1 187, ( Scirpus multic .) — Scirpus 
palustris (3 . Linn. Lapp. ed. 2. Hook. Scot. v. i. p. 18. 

Not uncommon, probably, in marshy places throughout the kingdom ; 
but frequently passed by for the E. palustris. — Ft. July. If. . — “ Root 
not creeping. 1 Sheaths of the stem brown, not shining ; the stems are 
always inclined, frequently bent and almost prostrate. Bristles 6, shorter 
and narrower than in the former species, the base not dilated, shorter 
than the ripe fruit. The receptacle is elongated above the insertion of 
the filaments ; hence the germen seems to be attenuated below. Stem 
with a stout central pith, with membranous tubes of looser texture 
interposed between it and the external part. Some of the bristles in 
the flower seem to be attached to the receptacle higher up than the base 
of the filaments, but still 3 of these bristles are at the exterior base of 
those filaments.” Wilson MSS. 


1 Not, indeed, as in A?, palustris • but it certainly sends out root-stocks to the 
length of 2 or 3 inches, from which fibres proceed below and new shoots above. 
I he rants cannot be called simply tufted. I dwell much on the character of 
this arid the preceding species, because I have myself fallen into an error in the 
Ft. Scot, in considering them varieties of each other- Sir J. It- Smith has 
well distinguished them in the Engl. Flora ; and my friend Mr. Wilson, with 
his usual sagacity, has confirmed Smith’s character and detected others, which 
I give in his own words. 


30 


TIUANDIUA MONOGYNIA. 


[ Eriophnrum . 

3. E. paucifl&ra, “Link,” {chocolate-headed Spike-rush) ; stem 

rounded its sheaths leafless, spike ovate naked, the 2 outer 
glumes the largest obtuse but shorter than the spike, stigmas 3, 
style scarcely deciduous not jointed. — Scirpus paitcijiorus, E. Hot. 
1 . 1029. E. Fl.v.i.p. 55 S. Bceothryon, Ehrh. 

Moors in Scotland, not imfrequent. In England rare ; near Yarmouth, 
Norfolk; Anglesea, and Bangor in Wales ; Mr. Wilson. FI. July, Aug. 
If . . — Habit of small plants of E. palustris. Fruit pale, obovate, trique- 
trous, terminated by the withered rigid style, not swollen at the base nor 
jointed, gradually tapering from the obtuse point of the fruit. Roots 
fibrous, sending out jointed runners. 

4. E. ccespitosa, Link, {scaly -stalked Spike-rush ); stem rounded, 
or slightly compressed ( Wilson ), sheaths with subulate leaves, 
their 2 outermost glumes (fertile) longer than the very small spikes 
and terminating in long rigid points, stigmas 3, style deciduous, 
fruit mucronated with the narrow persistent base of the style. 
— Scirpus ccespitosus, E. Eot. t. 1029. — E. El. v. i. p. 55. 

Moors and moist heathy places, every where. FI. June, July. If . — 
A small species, 2 — 6 inches high. Bristles G- Fruit obovate, trique- 
trous, pale yellow, tipped with a mucro, as in most of the true Scirpi. — 
This plant is called “ Deer's Hair ” in the Highlands, and yields an 
abundant food to sheep on the mountains in spring. Upon Ben 
Lawers I have found a variety, having the larger of the 2 outer glumes 
an inch long, 4 tunes the length of the spike. 

5. E. aciculdris , Roem. et Sell, (least Spike-rush ); stem seta- 
ceous compressed grooved, sheaths leafless, spike ovate acute, glumes 
equal acute, stigmas 3, bristles none. E. El. v. i. p. 64. — Scirpus 
acic. E. Eot. t. 749. — Isolepis, Schlecht. 

Sides of lakes, and wet, sandy and marshy places, frequent. FI. July, 
Aug. If . — The most slender and delicate of the spike-rushes. Root 
fibrous with filiform runners. Fruit obovate, oblong, pale yellow, beau- 
tifully impressed with dotted lines, tipped with the almost globose dark 
base of the style. 

6. E. fiidtans, ( floating Spike-rush); stem (or rather floating 
root) compressed branched, spikes ovate, glumes nearly equal 
obtuse, stigmas 2, bristles none, fruit obovate plano-convex, tipped 
with the narrow base of the style. Scirpus jluit. L. — E. Eot. 
t. 216. E. FI. v. i. p. 56 — Isolepis, Er. — Eleogiton. Link , Lindl. 

Ditches and still lakes, and pools of water which are sometimes dried 
up. FI. June, July. If. 

12. Eriophorum. Linn. Cotton-grass. 

* Spike solitary. 

1. E. alpinum , Linn. ( alpine Cotton-grass); stem triangular, 
leaves much shorter than the sheaths, spikes oblongo-ovate. 
E. Eot. t. 3 1 1 . E. El. v. i. p. 67. 


Eriophonm.] TRIANDRI A — MONOGYNIA. 3 1 

Northern bogs, now probably extinct. It is to be feared that there 
is some mistake in regard to its having been found in the Breadalbane 
Mountains. It was discovered in the Moss of Restenat near Forfar, 
by Mr. Brown and Mr. G. Bon: but that bog is drained and the plant 
has disappeared. FI. June. If. 

2. E. vaginatum , Linn. (Hare's-tail Cotton-grass) ; stem above 
triangular, sheaths below with long setaceous leaves, above leafless 
obtuse inflated, spike ovate. E. Bot. t. 873. E . FI. v. i. p. 66. 

Turf-bogs and barren moors, not unfrequent, especially in the moun- 
tainous parts of the north. FI. March — May. If. 

3. E. capitatum, Host, ( round-headed Cotton-Grass) ; stem 
rounded, sheaths below bearing linear subulate leaves, above leaf- 
less inflated obtuse, spike almost globose. E. Bot. t. 2387. E. FI. 
v. i.p. 66 . 

Ben Lawers, by the side of a rivulet near perpetual snow, G. Don. 
Ft. July, Aug. If. 

** Spikes many. 

4. E. polystachion , Linn, (broad-leaved Cotton-Grass); “stem 
round, leaves flat with a triangular point, stalks of the spikes 
smooth, hairs thrice the length of the spikes.” E. Bot. t. 563. E.Fl. 
v. i.p. 67. 

Bogs. FI. April — June. If. 

5. E. pubescens, Sm. (downy -stalked Cotton-grass) ; “ stem 
angular upwards, leaves flat lanceolate with a triangular point, 
stalks of the spikes downy, hairs twice the length of the spike.” 
E. FI. v. i. p. 68. Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2633. — E. angustif. 
Poit. — E. latifolium, Schrad. Germ. v. i.p. 154, (excl. syn.) 

Bogs and marshes, Scotland and Cambridgeshire, (Sm.) Anglesea, 
Mr. Wilson. South Kent, Rev. G. E. Smith. FI. April — June. If. 

6. E. angustfolium, Roth, (common Cotton-grass) ; “stem nearly 
round, leaves linear triangular, channelled towards the base, stalks 
of the spikes smooth, hairs 4 times the length of the spike.” E. Bot. 
t. 564. E. FI. v. i. p. 69. 

Turf-bogs, and muddy meadows, common. FI. April. If. 

7. E. gr&cile , Roth, (slender Mountain Cotton-grass); “stem 
round with 3 slight angles, leaves triangular channelled towards 
the base, spikes longer than the bractea, hairs twice the length of 
the spike.” E. Bot. t. 2402. E. FI. v. i. p. 69. 

On Ben Lawers and the Clova Mountains, in micaceous soil ; G. 
Don. Cwm Idwell, North Wales; Mr. Wilson. FI. July. If. — I cannot 
satisfy myself of the validity of the character's of the many-spiked spe- 
cies of Eriophora. With regard to the E. pubescens, it is certainly very 
common both in America and this country, and I had always taken it lor 
E. polystachion. It is assuredly the E. latifolium of Schrader, for he 
makes its character to depend on the scabrous (not really pubescent) 


TRIANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


32 


[ Alopecurus . 


peduncles. Mr. Wilson has examined E. poly si., E. angust. and E.gracile, 
in a living state, having seen them all growing together in Wales, and 
has sought carefully, but in vain, for permanent characters. 

13. Nardus. Linn. Mat-grass. 

1. N. stricta, Linn. (Mat-grass) ; spike erect slender, the florets 
all pointing one way. E. Bot. t. 290. E. EL v. i. p. 70. 

Moors and heaths, most abundant. Ft. June. If. — A grass of simple 
structure, growing in short tufts, so coarse and rigid that cattle will not 
eat it. Culms and leaves setaceous. Spike long, erect, grooved and 
toothed at short distances for the insertion of the florets. Calves of 
the cor. lanceolate, outer one coriaceous, purplish-green, tapering gra- 
dually into an awn : inner ones smaller, awnless, membranous. Siam. 3. 
Style and stigma single. 

TRIANDRIA— DIGYNIA. 

14. Alopecurus. Linn. Fox-tail Grass. 

1. A. pratensis, Linn. (Meadow Fox-tail Grass); culm erect 
smooth, panicle spiked cylindrical obtuse, calyx-glumes lanceolate 
acute hairy connate at the base, awn twice the length of the corolla. 
E. Bot. t. 759. E. FI. v. i. p. 78. 

Meadows and pastures, common. Ft. May, June. 7/. — 1 J to 2 feet 
high : an excellent grass for cattle. Panicle of a yellow-green colour 
with silvery hairs. Cal. and Cor. much ciliated; in this, as in all the 
species, remarkably compressed. 

2. A. alpinus, Sm. (alpine Fox-tail Grass); culm ascending 
smooth, panicle spiked ovate, cal. glumes ovate abruptly acute hairy 
united at the base, awn scarcely longer than the corolla, “ upper 
sheath inflated thrice as long as its lanceolate leaf.” E. Bot. t. 1126. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 80. 

Discovered by Mr. II- Broivn on Loch na Gaar, in Aberdeenshire. 
It was pointed out to me by Mr. T. Drummond on wet rocks by a water- 
fall on the hills above Clova, Forfarshire. — FI. July, Aug. if. — This 
plant which, even at first sight, is readily distinguishable by its ovate 
panicle and short broad upper leaf, with its inflated sheath (as first 
observed by Mr. Brown in the Appendix to Parry’s 1st Voyage), seems 
to be quite unknown to Botanists abroad, and is very rare indeed in 
this country. It is, however, plentiful in North America and Spitz- 
bergen. 

3. A. agrestis, Linn. ( slender Fox-tail Grass) ; culm erect sca- 
brous above, panicle spiked cylindrical acuminate, calyx-glumes 
acute almost glabrous united as far as the middle. E. Bot. t. 848. 
E. FI. v. i.p. 80. 

Fields and way-sides. June, July. ©. — Readily known by its atte- 
nuated panicles or spikes, frequently of a purplish colour, and by the lan- 
ceolate, acute cal. glumes, which are glabrous or a little rough at the 
keel. Corolla quite smooth, with the awn 3 or 4 times its length. 

4. A. bul bos us, Linn, (tuberous Fox-tail Grass) ; culm erect, 


Pha/aris.] 


TRIANE/RIA DIGYNIA. 


33 


panicle spiked cylindrical acuminate, calyx-glumes acute slightly 
hairy free, root tuberous. E. 13ot. t. 1249. E. FI. v. i. p. 81. 

Wet salt-marshes in England, but rare: near Yarmouth and Wey- 
mouth. In Cardiff marshes, Wales. FI. July. If . — The inflorescence, 
though very dense, is not a true spike. The pedicels mostly hear single 
flowers, hut often another very small abortive one. Calyx-glumes entirely 
distinct to the base. 

5. A. geniculatus, Linn, (floating Fox-tail Grass ) ; culm 
ascending bent at the joints, panicle spiked cylindrical obtuse, 
calyx-glumes united at the base obtuse slightly hairy and fringed, 
awn twice as long as the corolla. E. Bot. t. 1250. E. FI. v. i.p. 82. 

In pools and wet and marshy places, sometimes on dry ground. FI. 
July, Aug. If. 

6. A.fulvus, Sm. (orange-spiked Fox-tail Grass'); culm ascend- 
ing bent at the joints, panicle spiked cylindrical obtuse, calyx- 
glumes united at the base obtuse slightly hairy and fringed, awn 
the length of the calyx. E. Bot. t. 1467. Hook. Scot. i.p. 22, 
(under A. geniculatus ). E. FI. v. i. p. 83. A. geniculatus, Host, 
Gram. Austr. v. ii. t. 32. 

Ponds and ditches ; near Birmingham ; Norwich ; Essex, Mr- E. 
Forster. And in Angus and Fifeshire, Scotland. FI. July. If . — I had 
certainly considered this plant, in FI. Scotica, as not different from A. 
geniculatus. If there be any decisive mark of distinction, it must exist 
in the comparative length of the awn, should that prove constant. 

15. Phalaris. Linn. Canary-grass. 

1. P. canariensis, Linn, (cultivated Canary -grass) ; panicle 
spiked ovate, cal. glumes boat-shaped entire at the point accom- 
panied by the single valves of 2 other florets. E. Bot. t. 1310. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 74. 

Naturalized in many parts of England and Scotland. FI. July. ©. — 
1“ 2 feet high, glaucous. Leaves broad. Spikes handsome, composed 
of large, pale yellow-green calyx-glumes, marked with deeper lines and 
singularly keeled at the back. Canary-seed, as we see it, is not only the 
seed of this plant, but the seed invested closely (as all grass-seeds are) 
with the pericarp, and that again with the hardened corolla, which occa- 
sions its glossy appearance and pointed form. 

2. P. arundindcea, Linn. (Feed Canary-grass) ; panicle erect, 
its branches patent, florets clustered secund, imperfect floret con- 
sisting of a small hairy valve. E. Bot. t. 402, and t. 2160. f. 2. 
E. LI. v. i. p. 74 — Arundo colorata, FI. Br. — Digrapliis arund. 
Trin. and Lindl. 

Sides of lakes and rivers, common. FI. July, Aug. If. — Frequent in 
gardens, (and on the margin of a pond near Cardigan, Rev. T. S. Tozer,) 
with variegated leaves, and called ribband-grass. Very different from 
the last in general habit, but not in essential character. Panicle large, 

6 ^ inches long, often brownish or purplish-green. Excellent for 

securing river-banks ; its roots are creeping, and here and there tufted. 

c 2 


34 


TRIANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[ Phlcum . 


16. Ammophila. Host. Sea-reed. 

1. A. arundinacea, Host, (common Sea-reed, Marian, or Mat- 
weed) ; panicle cylindrical acuminate, glumes acute, hairs one- 
third of the length of the corolla. — Ammopldla arenaria, Lindl. 
Syn. p. 303. — Arundo arenaria, E. Bot. t. 520. E. FI. v. i. 
p. 171 Psamma, Bcauv. 

Sandy sea-shores, frequent. FI. July. If.. — Root much creeping. 
Leaves long, narrow, rigid, involute, glaucous. Culm 2 — 3 feet high. Cur. 
far more rigid than the calyx, the larger valves with a small sinus 
below the point. — Extensively employed in Norfolk and Holland for 
preserving the banks of sand, which protect those countries from the 
inroads of the sea. It is called Muran in Gaelic (Light/.), Marram in 
Norfolk. — A second species, A.baltica, is found on the shores of the Baltic. 

17. Phleum. Linn. Cat’s-tail-grass. 

1. P . pratense, Linn. ( common Cat' s-tail-grass, Timothy-grass); 
panicle spiked cylindrical, cal. glumes truncate mucronate aristate 
ciliated at the back longer than the awn. E. Bot. t. 1076. E. FI. 
v. i.p. 75. 

Meadows and pastures, very common. FI. June. If — Root some- 
times tuberous, and then the plant is the P. nodosum, Willcl. — Cal. 
glumes, as in all the species, extremely compressed, keeled, with a dorsal, 
green nerve, running out into a spreading awn, scarcely half so long as 
the valve. — This grass is the Highland badge of the clan Sutherland, 
whose crest is a Cat. 

2. P. alpinum, Linn, (alpine Cat' s-tail-grass) ; panicle spiked 
ovato-oblong, cal-glumes truncated mucronato-aristate ciliated at the 
back equal in length to the awn. E. Bot. t. 519. E. FI. v. i. p. 7 6. 

Hare ; on the Breadalbane mountains and Garway Moor. FI. 
July. If. — Spike short, purplish. 

3. P. dsperum, Jacq. (rough Cat’ s-tail-grass) ; panicle spiked 
Cylindrical, cal. glumes wedge-shaped mucronate rough, stem often 
branched. E.Bot.t. 1077, (P. paniculatum). E. FI. v. i.p. 76. 

Rare in dry open fields, in the western and midland parts of England. 
FI. July. © . — Culms very leaf)', and the long spikes are partly concealed 
among them. Cal. glumes tumid upwards. 

4. P. Boehmeri, Schrad. (purple-stalked Cat' s-tail-grass) ; pani- 
cle spiked cylindrical, cal. glumes linear-lanceolate acuminato-aris- 
tate downy at the keel. E. Bot. t. 459, (Phalaris ph/eoides, L.) 
E. FI. v. i. p. 77. 

Dry sandy and chalky fields, rare, principally in Norfolk and Cam- 
bridgeshire. FI. July. If . — Culms simple, erect, sparingly leafy, slender, 
shining purple. 

5. P. Michelii, All. (Michelian Cat's tail-grass) ; panicle spiked 
cylindrical, cal. glumes lanceolate acuminate strongly ciliated at 
the back. E. Bot. t. 2265. E. FI. v. i. p. 78. — Phalaris alpina, 
Ucenke. 


TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


35 


Poli/pogon.] 

Rocky parts of the high mountains of Clova, Scotland. FI. July, 
Aug. If. — Distinguishable at once from the preceding species by its 
gradually tapering glumes. 

6. P .armarium, Linn. ( Sea Cat' s-tail-grass) ; panicle spiked 
oblongo-obovate, cal. glumes lanceolate acute ciliated at the back. 
E. Bot. t. 222, ( Phalaris aren.) Hook. Scot. i. p. 2-L E. FI. 
v. i.p. 78. — “ Achnodon and Chilochloa, Link'' 

On loose sand, especially near the sea. FI. May, June. 0 . — Culms 
5 — 6 inches high, many from the same root. Cor. twice as short as the 
cal., membranous, truncated. 

18. Lagurus. Linn. Hare’s-tail -grass. 

1. L. ovatus, Linn. ( ovate Hare s-tail-grass). — E. Bot. t. 1334. 
E. FI. v. i.p. 167. 

Very rare. Sandy fields by the sea in Guernsey. FI. June. ©. — 
The only known species of the genus, remarkable for its soft hairy and 
pale heads of flowers, from among which the long awns are protruded. 

19. Milium. Linn. Millet-grass. 

1. M. effusion, Linn. ( spreading Millet-grass ); panicle gla- 
brous, its branches subverticillate, leaves lanceolate, ligule obtuse. 
E. Bot.t. 1006. E. FI. v. i.p. 87. 

Moist shady woods. FI. June. 2f . — Culms 3- — 4 feet high. 

20. Gastridium. Beauv. Nit-grass. 

1. G. lendigerum , Beauv. ( atoned Nit-grass) ; cal. valves lanceo- 
late acuminate, awn twice their length. — Milium lendigerum, 
E. Bot. t. 1107. E. FI. v. i.p. 87. 

Places where water has stagnated, near the sea, rare. In Sheppey ; 
at Weymouth; and at Gillingham in Norfolk. FI. Aug. If . — 4 to (j or 8 
inches high, with numerous glossy florets , singularly swollen at the base. 
A genus very distinct from Milium. 

21. Sti'pa. Linn. Feather-grass. 

1. S. penndta, Linn, (common Feather-grass) ; leaves rigid seta- 
ceous grooved, awns exceedingly long feathering to the point. 
E. Bot. t. 1356. E. FI. v. i. p. 161. 

Said to have been found in Dillenius’ time in Westmoreland. Ft. 
June. If. — Surely not a native of this country, but of dry places in the 
south of Europe. A great ornament to our gardens in the summer, and 
to our rooms in the winter, for if gathered before the seed is ripe, the 
long feathering awns remain, and a tuft of this plant is almost as beauti- 
ful as the famed tail of the Bird of Paradise. 

22. Polypogon. Besf. Beard-grass. 

1. P . monspel ie ns is , Desf. ( annual Beard-grass) ; awns thrice as 
long as the rather obtuse rough valves of the cal. root annual. 
E. Bot. t. 1704, ( Agrostis panicea). E. FI. v. i.p. 85. — Phlcum 
crinitum , Sm. FI. Br. 


TRIANDRIA — DIGYNJA. 


36 


[ Agrostis . 


Rare, in moist pastures near the sea. In Hampshire and Essex ; near 
Cley, Norfolk. Ft July, Aug. © . — A beautiful grass, rare, but undoubt- 
edly wild in our country; most abundant in the warmer parts of Europe. 

2. P. littoralis, Sm. (perennial Beard-grass) ; awns equal in 
length to the almost glabrous acute valves of the calyx, root peren- 
nial. E. Bot. t. 1251, (Agrostis littoralis). E. FI. v. i. p. 86. 

Muddy salt-marshes, rare. Near Cley, Norfolk, in Essex, and near 
Woolwich. FI. July. 1^.— Very different from the last species; but 
rightly referred, by Sir J. E. Smith, to Po/gpogon. The calyx-valves 
are more acuminated than in F. rnonsp., and they taper more gradually 
into the much shorter awn ; outer valve of the cor. truncate and toothed 
at the points in both. — It was long supposed peculiar to England, but 
is now found in Germany. 

23. Calamagrostis. Adans. Small-reed. 

1. C. epigejos, Roth, ( U ood Small-reed) ; cal. glumes subulate 
their keel rough, panicle erect close, flowers crowded unilateral, 
corolla with a dorsal awn nearly as long as the calyx. Arundo 
epigejos, Linn. E. Bot. t. 403. E. El. v. i. p. 169. (excl. the syn. 
of Hook. Scot., Arundo Calamagrostis.) 

In shady moist places. About London and Norwich ; Kent. Dal- 
rymple Wood, Ayr, Scotland; Mr. Goldie. Ft. July. If. 

2. C .lanceolata, Roth, (purple- flowered Small-reed); cal. glumes 
lanceolate their keel smooth, panicle erect loose, flowers scattered 
spreading, corolla with a very short terminal awn between the bifid 
point. Arundo Calamagrostis, Linn. E. Bot. t. 2159. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 170. 

Moist hedges and in fenny countries, not uncommon. FI. June. If. 
— Panicle much smaller and looser than the last, flowers more purple 
and shining. 

3. C. stricta, Lindl. (narrow Smcdl-reed) ; panicle erect close, 
cal. glumes broadly lanceolate acute, a little rough on the keel, 
corolla as long as the calyx longer than the hairs, with a dorsal awn 
equal to it in length. Arundo stricta, E. Bot. t. 2160. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 171. 

In Scotland; very rare. Discovered by Mr. G. Don, at White Muir 
Marsh, near Forfar ; but it does not now exist there. Near Rescobie, 4 
miles from Forfar, F. Drummond • FI, June. If . — A very distinct 
species ; the smallest of the genus. Panicle 1 — 4 inches long. Cal. 
brown, glabrous except at the keel. Cor. brownish, truncate. Hairs not 
half the length of the flower. 

24. Agrostis. Linn. Bent-grass. 

1. A .canina, Linn, (brown Bent-grass) ; branches of the panicle 
long slender erecto-patent, cal. valves unequal lanceolate rough at 
the keel, corolla of 1 valve with a dorsal awn from below the middle, 
leaves linear. E. Bot. t. 1856. E. FI. v. i. p. 90. — Trichodium, 
Schrad. Lindl. 


A grostis.] TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 37 

Moist heaths and moory places, abundant. Fl. June, July. .—Very 
variable in the size and colour of its flowers, purple or green, and in the 
length of the dorsal awn, which is sometimes included within the calyx, 
at other times considerably exserted. I have never seen more than one 
valve to the corolla, not even the rudiment of a second ; and it is from 
this circumstance that Schrader has constituted of it the genus Tricho- 
dium. But other species of /Igrostis have a very reduced corolla, and 
A. setacea, placed in Trichodium by Mr. Lindley, has assuredly an inner 
corolla present, and that constantly. Smith and Leers have seen an 
inner valve to be sometimes present, even in A. canina ; hence, as the 
former observes, its presence or absence does not here afford a specific 
character. 

2. A. setacea, Curt. ( bristle-leaved Bent-grass ); branches of the 
panicle short close (spreading when in fl. Mr. Tozer), cal. valves 
unequal lanceolate rough at the keel, outer valve of the corolla with 
a long geniculated twisted awn from its base, inner very minute, 
leaves setaceous. E. Bot. t. 1 1 SS. E. Fl. v. i. p. 91. — Tricho- 
dium, Rcem. and Sch., and Lindl. 

Very local, almost wholly confined to the dry downs of the extreme 
south and south-west parts of England ; as Hampshire and Devonshire. 
Mr. To zer of Truro, Cornwall, finds it to be the most prevailing grass 
in his neighbourhood, growing among furze and heath. It is mentioned 
in a list of Scottish plants communicated to me by Mr. D. Don. Fl. 
June, July. 2£ . — The Rev. Mr. Tozer has had the kindness to give me 
numerous specimens of this rare and little-known grass, which was long 
supposed to be peculiar to England. It is now ascertained to be plen- 
tiful in Portugal, the native country of Erica ciliaris and Reseda fruticu- 
losa, which Mr. Tozer has also had the good fortune to find, truly wild, 
in Cornwall : affording an additional proof, if any were needed, of the 
great mildness of the climate in that district of England, and of its 
proximity in that respect to the more southern parts of Europe. Larger 
valves of the corolla white, thin, and membranous, truncate at the top 
with 4 green nerves, of which two, the lateral ones, project into mucros. 
Awn from the very base, rough, truly geniculated and twisted. Inner 
valves very small, truncate and toothed, accompanied on each side at the 
base by a pencil of white hairs. “ On a sunny day the panicle is beau- 
tifully spreading, but it collapses very quickly in cloudy weather, or on 
being gathered.” ( Tozer.') 

3. A. Spica vend, Linn, (silky Bent-grass); panicle spreading, 
cal. valves unequal lanceolate rough at the keel, outer valve of the 
corolla bifid terminated by a long straight awn, inner one smaller 
with a small barren pedicel at its base. E. Bot. t. 951. E. El. 
v. i. p. 89. — Anem a grostis, Trin. and Lindl. 

Rare, in sandy fields which are occasionally flooded, principally about 
London: in Norfolk and Lancashire. Fl. June, July. ©. — A beautiful 
grass, with very slender branches to its ample panicle, which is wavy 
and glossy like silk, well named by old Parkinson “ Gramen agrorum 
vcnli spica." Awn many times longer than the cor., rough. Inner valve 


TRIANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


38 


[Catabrosa. 


of cor. not much smaller than the outer : at its base is a little pedicel, 
destitute of flower, which has a small tuft of hair on each side. 

4. A. vulgaris , With. ( fine Bent-grass); branches of the pani- 
cle smoothish, its branchlets diverging, outer valve of the cor. 3- 
nerved, ligule extremely short and truncate. E. Bot. t. 1671. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 61. — j3. aristata ; outer valve of the cor. awned. A. 
canina. With. — y. pumila ; scarcely 3 inches high. A. pumila. 
Light/. Scot. p. 1081. Jig. in title-page. 

Meadows, pastures, and banks, common everywhere. FI. June, July. 
If — Root creeping, throwing out many, mostly ascending culms , 1 or l| 
loot high. Panicle purplish ; rachis smooth and the branchlets nearly 
so. Cal. glumes lanceolate, smooth, shining, rough on the back. Cor. 
glume of 2 thin, delicate, membranous, unequal valves. Outer one a 
little shorter than the cal., 3-nerved, tridentate, awnlesss in ce, bearing 
an awn of uncertain length, but mostly short in g, arising from the cen- 
tral nerve, a little below the middle of the back; inner valve half as small, 

2- nerved, bifid. — I possess specimens of this species bearing the rudi- 
ment of a second flower upon a rather long foot-stalk, in the same calyx. 

5. A. alba , Linn. ( Marsh Bent-grass) ; branches of the panicle 
hispid, branchlets patent, outer valve of cor. 5-nerved, ligule oblong. 
E. Bot. t. 1189. E. FI. v. i. p. 93. Schrad. Germ. p. 209, 
( descr . excellent ) — A. stolonifera, Linn. E. Bot.t. 1532. 

Pastures, road-sides, and in various other situations, abundant. FI. 
July, August. If. — Plant stouter than the last, and generally taller. 
Culms ascending, often rooting at the base, and throwing out runners. 
Panicle rather contracted, pale green or purplish, branchlets patent. 
Cal. glumes as in A. vulgaris, as are those of the cor., but the outer valve 
has 5 nerves and as many teeth, and the inner one is only faintly 2-or 

3- nerved at the base, nearly entire and obtuse at the extremity. In some 
there is a short awn at the base of the outer valve of the cor.: this con- 
stitutes the A. compressa, Willd., and sometimes the flowers are vivipa- 
rous, which is the A. sylvatica, Linn. I believe all are now agreed that 
the A. stolonifera of authors is the same as A. alba. The famous Fiorin- 
grass of Dr. Richardson and the Irish agriculturists is what I have called 
A. alba, as I ascertained by the aid of specimens, gathered in the com- 
pany of Dr. Richardson himself. I know not of any British awnless 
Agrostides, which may not be reduced either to A. vulgaris, or A. alba. 
The two species are indeed very closely united. 

25. Catabrosa. Beauv. Whorl-grass. 

1. C. aquatica, Beauv. ( water Whorl-grciss) ; panicle with 
whorled patent branches, leaves broadly linear obtuse. — Air a aqua- 
tica, Linn. E. Bot. t. 1557. E. El. v. i.p. 101. 

Banks of rivers, and floating in pools of water. FI. May, June. If   — 
This is very different in habit and generic character from /lira, and from 
any other grass I am acquainted with. Mertens unites it with the long- 
spikeleted Pons, which now, with Smith, form the genus Glycerin; but 
it does not naturally combine with them. Culms, or rather eaudex of 


TRIANDR1A — DIGYNIA. 


39 


Aim . ] 

the root, very long, branched, floating, jointed, sending from the joints 
fibrous radicles below, and culms above, a foot or more long, stout, with 
short broad leaves. Cal. scarcely nerved, thin and membranous, broadly 
oval, obtuse. Cor. of a thick texture, brownish-green, white and dia- 
phanous at the blunted extremity. Mr. Wilson finds, in the wet sand 
of the north shore of the river at Liverpool, a var. not two inches high, 
each calyx containing in general but one perfect flower. 

26. Ai'ra. Linn. Hair-grass. 

* Corolla awnless. Panicle spiked. ( Koc/eria, Pers. Airochloa, 
Lifik, Lindl.) 

1. A .cristata, Linn. ( crested Hair-grass'); panicle spiked smootli- 
ish, leaves hairy. E. Bot. t. 648. E. El. v. i.p. 101 — Poa, Linn. 

Dry pastures ; most frequent in the north, and especially near the sea. 
FI. June, July. If — 6 — 8 inches high. Leaves linear, short, glaucous. 
Spike shining, ovato-lanceolate. Glumes of the cal. acute or slightly 
acuminate, lanceolate, compressed, glabrous or downy and a little 
rough at the keel. Inner valves of the corolla rough, white, delicate, 
reticulated, bifid, with two longitudinal plicae. 

** Corolla atoned. Panicle lax. 

2. A. ccespitosa, Linn. ( turfy Hairgrass); panicle diffuse, 
branches scabrous, florets hairy at the base, rather longer than the 
cal., awn strait inserted near the base of, and not exceeding in 
length, the corolla. E. Bot. t. 1433. E. FI. v. i.p. 102 — Des- 
champsia, Beaav. 

Moist shady places, and borders of fields, plentiful. FI. June — Aug. 
If. — Much tufted. Culms 2 — 4 feet high. Leaves linear, acuminate, 
rough at the margin. Panicle large, silvery-grey or greenish, much 
branched. Spilcelets acute. Cal. valves unequal, lanceolate, subglabrous, 
rather acute, erose. Florets with a few longish hairs at the base : upper 
ones pedunculated ; their valves ovate, obtuse, erose, the outer one with 
5 short teeth, the inner bifid. Mr. Wilson finds it on Snowdon, vivipa- 
rous, with the awn inserted above the middle of the valve; and at Llan- 
berris with a small panicle and purple flowers. 

3. A. alptna, Linn. ( smooth alpine Hair-grass); panicle sub- 
coarctate, branches and pedicels perfectly smooth, florets villous at 
the base; as long as the calyx, awn inserted above the middle and 
scarcely exceeding the cor. in length, leaves linear. E. Bot. t. 2102, 
(A. Icevigata). E. FI. v. i.p. 103. 

Moist rocks on the higher Scottish mountains. Viviparous on Ben 
Cruachan, Rev. Colin Smith; and on Carnedd Llewellyn, Wales, Mr. 
Wilson. FI. June, July. If. — About 1 foot high, very smooth. Leaves 
only scabrous to the touch on the upper side, short. Panicle rather 
small, branches erect ; the lower ones, when viviparous (which they 
mostly are) patent and even drooping. Spilcelets not numerous, larger 
than in A. ccespitosa, and more resembling, as does the whole plant, A. 
flexuosa. Cal., valves equal, quite smooth. Florets with a short tuft of 


40 


TTUANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


[ Melica. 


hair at the base : upper one not pedicelate. Valves of the cor. lanceo- 
late, acute, not compressed. — In A. atropurpurea, Wahl, the panicleis 
fewer-flowered, and the florets are considerably shorter than the calyx. 

4. A. flexvosu, Linn. ( waved Hair-grass ); panicle (when 
flowering) diffuse, florets villous at the base as long as the cal., 
awn jointed inserted near the base of, but much longer than, the 
cal., leaves setaceous. E. Bot. t. 1519. E. El. v. i. p. 104. 

Heaths and hilly places; abundant. FI. July. If. — Habit of the last, 
but taller. Florets larger, and the awns protruded considerably beyond 
the calyx. Valves of the cor. as in the two last species. 

5. A. canescens, Linn, (grey Hair-grass'); panicle rather dense, 
florets shorter than the calyx, awn clavate shorter than the calyx, 
leaves setaceous. E. Bot. t. 1190. E. FI. v. i. p. 105. — Cory- 
nephorus, Beauv. Lindl. 

On the sandy sea-coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk. FI. July. If . — 
Remarkable in this genus for having its awn clavate, and bearing, at the 
joint, a tuft of hairs. 

6. A. caryophyllea, Linn, (silvery Hair-grass); panicle divari- 
cated, florets scarcely villous at the base shorter than the cal., awn 
inserted below the middle jointed longer than the cal., leaves seta- 
ceous. E. Bot. t. 812. E. FI. v. i. p. 106. 

Gravelly hills and pastures, frequent. FI. June, July. If. — 2 — 6 
or 8 inches high. Leaves short, few. Panicle trichotomous. Florets 
silvery-grey. Cal. valves nearly equal, lanceolate, the upper part 
pellucid and white. Valves of the cor. scabrous at the back, unequal, 
apex bifid. 

7. A . prcecox, Linn, (early Hair-grass); panicle somewhat 
spiked, florets scarcely villous at the base about as long as the cal., 
awn twisted inserted below the middle longer than the cal., leaves 
setaceous. E. Bot. t. 1296. E. FI. v. i. p. 105. 

Sandy hills and pastures. FI. May, June. © — 1 — 3 inches high. 
Panicle few-flowered, pale silvery-green. Valves of the cor. lanceolate, 
scabrous, when seen under a good glass; those of the cor. narrow, acu- 
minate, scabrous ; the point bifid. 

27. Melica. Linn. Melic-grass. 

1. M. nutans , Linn. (Mountain Melic-grass) ; panicle nearly 
simple racemed secund, spikelets drooping ovate 2-flowered. 
E. Bot. t. 1059. E. FI. v. i.p. 112. 

Woods, in somewhat mountainous countries; especially in the north 
of England and Scotland. — FI. May, June. If . — One foot or more high, 
leafy. Leaves linear-lanceolate. Cal. glumes ovate, convex, nerved, deep 
purple-brown, margin pale. Valves of the cur. cartilaginous, unequal, 
nerved, outer one large. Between the two perfect florets is the rudiment 
of a third, pedicellate, consisting of a 2-valved hardened cor. without 
either pistil or stamen. 

2. M. unijlora , Linn. ( Wood Melic-grass); panicle branched 


TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


Arrhenatherum.] 


41 


slightly drooping, spikelets erect ovate with only one perfect floret. 
E. Bot. t. 1 058. E. FI. v. i. p. 112. 

Shady woods, frequent. FI. May — July. If. — Imperfect floret on 
rather a long footstalk. Leaves broader than the last, and whole plant 
larger. Scale of one piece, orange-coloured, thick, “ covered by the outer 
glume of the corolla,” ( IVilson.) 

3. M. cccrulea, Linn. ( purple Melic-grass) ; panicle erect sub- 
coarctate, spikelets erect oblongo-cylindrical, floret much longer 

than the calyx. E. Bot. t. 750. E. FI. v. i. p. 113 Molinia, 

Schrank , Lindl. — /3. panicle pale green, spikelets fewer-flowered. 
M. alpina, Don. — M. depauperata , Lindl. 

Wet heathy places and moors, frequent. — j. Clova Mountains, D. 
Bon. FI. Aug. if . — Habit very different from the last, but scarcely dis- 
tinguishable in generic character. Culms 1 — 2 feet high or more. All the 
leaves, which are long and linear, acuminated, springing from the base 
or from a single joint immediately above it. Panicle from 2 — 8 inches 
in length, bluish-purple, rarely, and perhaps only when growing in much 
sheltered situations, green. Cal. valves lanceolate, nearly equal. Florets 
generally 2 perfect and 1 sterile. Anthers large, purple. — Brooms are 
made of the culms in England, according to Withering ; and in Skye, 
Lightfoot says, the fishermen twist them into excellent ropes for their nets. 

28. Holcus. Linn. Soft-grass. 

1. H. mollis, Linn. ( creeping Soft-grass') ; cal. valves acuminate, 
imperfect flower with an exserted geniculated awn, joints of the 
culm with a tuft of hairs, root creeping. E. Bot. t. 1170. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 108. 

Pastures and hedges, common. FI. July. If. — Mr. Wilson well 
observes that this species is distinguished by the acute (or almost acu- 
minate) calyx-glumes and downy joints of the culm. 

2. H. lanatus, Linn. ( Meadow Soft-grass ; ) cal. valves rather 
obtuse mucronate, imperfect flower with a curved awn included 
within the cal., no tuft of hairs at the joints, root fibrous. E. Bot. 
t. 1169. E. FI. v. i. p. 107. 

Meadows, pastures, and woods, common. FI. June, July. If .—Much 
resembling the last in general appearance, but clothed with a softer and 
more abundant pubescence. 

29. Arrhenatherum. Beauv. Oat-like grass. 

1. A. avenaceum , Beauv. (common Oat-like grass). Lindl. Syn. 
p. 305 . — Holcus avenaceus, Scop. — E. Bot. <.813. E. FI. v. i. 
p. 108 . — Arena elatior, Linn. 

Hedges and pastures, frequent. FI. June, July. 1 f . — I am not aware 
that more than one species exists of this genus. The Arena precatoria 
ot Diuill., Aena nodosa of Cullum, Arrh. bulbosum, Dunal and Lindl., 
are but varieties with a knotted or tuberous base to the stem. — 2 — 3 
feet high. Panicle long, loose. Spikelets greenish-brown. 


42 


TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


[Set arm. 


30. Hierochloe. Grnel. Holy-grass. 

1. H. borealis, Roem. et Schult. ( northern Holy-grass) ; panicle 
subsecund, peduncles glabrous, florets awnless, outer valves of the 
cor. ciliated at the margin. Hook. Scot. i. p. 28, id. in E. Hot. 
Suppl. t. 2641. E. FI. v. 1 . p. 110. — Holcus odoratus, Linn. Sm. 
— Hole, borealis, Schrad. 

In a narrow mountain-valley, called Kella, in Angus-shire, G. Don , 
FI. July. If. — A valuable discovery of the late acute Mr. Gr. Don. 
About 1 f. high, glabrous. Leaves linear-acuminate. Panicle brownish, 
glossy. Spilcelets broadly ovate. Cal. valves ovate, acute, rather unequal, 
sometimes a little serrated at the point. Florets rather longer than the 
cal. and the outer valves of a firmer texture, scabrous when highly mag- 
nified, distinctly fringed at the margin, the point sharp, but not awned. 
Central floret the smallest. — Smell resembling that of Anlhaxanthuni odo- 
ratum. In Iceland it is so plentiful as to be used by the people to scent 
their apartments and clothes. 

31. Sesleria. Linn. Moor-grass. 

1. S. cceridea, Scop, (blue Moor-grctss); panicle spiked ovate 
bracteated, outer valve of the cor. with one short terminal awn. 
E. Hot. t. 1613. E. FI. v. i. p. 114 Cynosurus car. Linn. 

Mountains in the north of England and Scotland, especially abundant 
in limestone regions. FI. April — June. If • One of our earliest grasses 
and a very beautiful one. The roots much tufted; plants 6 — 12 or IS 
inches high. Leaves linear, obtuse. Spike of a shining bluish-grey, with 
large yellow anthers tipped with purple. Spikelets generally in pairs, 
oblongo-ovate, the lower ones with an ovate ciliated and toothed bractea 
at the base. Cal. valves ovato-lanceolate, 3-toothed, middle tooth length- 
ened into an awn and often bifid, pubescent at the keel and margin. 
Florets longer than the cal. Valves of the cor. oblongo-ovate : ext. one 
ribbed, pubescent and ciliated or jagged with about 5 teeth, the middle 
tooth lengthened into a short awn ; int. valve bifid at the point. 

32. Panicum. Linn. Panick-grass. 

1. P. Crus-galli, Linn, (loose Panick-grass); spikes alternate 
secund divided or simple, flowers imbricated, the cal. and ext. valve 
of the cor. of the neuter flower hispid awned or mucronated, int. 
valve of the cor. of the perfect floret with a hispid mucro, rachis 
hispid. Er — E. Hot. t. 876. E. FI. v. i.p. 99. — P. Crus-corvi, 
Linn. — Echinochloa , Beauv. Lind/. 

Fields near London : but probably introduced. FI. July. 0 . 

33. Setaria. Beauv. Bristle-grass. 

1. S. vcrticilldta, Beauv. ( rough Bristle-grass) ; panicle spiked 
lobed below, branches whorled, bristles of the involucre rough with 
reversed teeth. — Panicum verticillatum, Linn. — E. Bot. 1. 874. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 98. 

In cultivated fields, about London and Norwich ; probably not indi- 
genous. FI. July, Aug. ©. 


TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


43 


Poa .] 


2. S. viridis, Beauv. ( green Bristle-grass') ; panicle spiked con- 
tinuous, bristles of the involucre rough with erect teeth. — Panicum 
viride, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 875. E. FI. v. i. p. 99. 

Fields, about London and Norwich; scarcely indigenous. FI. July, 
Aug. If. 


34. Poa. Linn. Meadow-grass. 


* Spikelets linear or subcylindrical. Glyceria, Sm. and, in part, Br. 

1. P. aqudtica, Linn. ( Reed Meadow-grass) ; panicle erect very 
much branched, spikelets iinear of about 6 obtuse florets which have 
7 ribs. E. Bot. t. 1315. — Glyceria aqual , E. FI. v. i. p. 116. — 
Hydrocldoa, Hartman , Lind/. 

Sides of rivers, ponds and ditches. FI. July, Aug. If. — 4 — 6 feet 
high, erect. Leaves linear, lanceolate, rough. Ligule short, obtuse. Cal. 
valves small, ovate, obtuse, membranous, smoothish. Ext. valves of cor. 
twice as large as the calyx, int. narrower and bifid at the point. 


2. P. ffuitans, Scop. ( floating Meadow-grass) ; panicle nearly 
erect slightly branched, spikelets linear appressed of from 7 to 1 1 
obtuse florets which have 7 ribs with short intermediate ones at 
the base, root creeping. E. Bot. t. 1520. — Glyceria Jluitans, Br. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 1 1 6. — Festuca, Linn. 

Ditches and stagnant waters, abundant. FI. July, Aug. If. . — Culms 
1 — 3 feet high, thick and succulent. Leaves linear-lanceolate, acute. 
Ligule oblong, pointed. Panicle subsecund, very long, slender, cal. valves 
unequal, small, ovate, membranous, obtuse. Cor. valves ovato-oblong, 
thrice as long as the cal.; outer ones scabrous. The scale is of 1 thick 
fleshy piece, which is the principal character of Mr. Brown’s genus 
Glyceria. — This species is found in New Holland. The seeds constitute 
the Manna of our shops, and they are gathered abundantly in Holland, 
where as well as in Poland and Germany they are used as food. De Theis 
says, “ I have seen the Polanders in the suite of King Stanislaus gather 
these Manna-seeds with great care on the banks of the Meurthe.” 


3. P. maritima, Huds. ( creeping Sea Meadow-grass) ; panicle 
erect subcoarctate (rigid), spikelets linear of about 5 obtuse florets 
which are obsoletely 5-nerved, leaves convolute, root creeping. 

E. Bot.t. 1140 — Glyceria marit, E. FI. v. i. p. 118 Scleroch- 

loa, Lindl. 

Sea-coast, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If. — S — 12 inches high, rigid, 
glaucous. Leaves involute, somewhat pungent. Ligule ovate, bluntish. 
Glumes all firm, cartilaginous, purplish. Cal. valves nearly as large as 
the cor., with mostly 3 ribs. Florets hairy at the base, sometimes purplish. 

4. P .distans, Linn, (reflexed Meadow-grass) ; panicle spreading, 
branches at length deflexed, spikelets linear of about 5 obtuse florets 
which are obsoletely 5-nerved, leaves plane, root fibrous. E. Bot. 
t. 986 — Glyceria distans , E. FI. v. i. p. 118. 

Sandy ground, principally near the sea. Near Dublin, Mr. W. Wilson . 
/*/. July, Aug. if . — One foot high. Leaves linear, plane, not pungent. 
Ligule short, obtuse. Branches of the panicle singularly deflexed, slen- 


44 


TRIANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[Port. 

tier. Spikelets much shorter than in the last species. Glumes mem- 
branous, softer. Cal. valves much smaller than the cor., unequal, larger 
one obscurely 3-nerved. — Allied to the last, but very distinct. 

5. P. procumhens, Curt, (procumbent Sea Meadow-grass ; panicle 

compact ovato-lanceolate disticho-secund (rigid), spikelets linear- 
lanceolate of about 4 florets which are 5-ribbed. E. Bot. t. 532. — 
Glycerin procumb, E. FI. v. i.p. 119 Sclerochloa, Beauv. Lindl. 

Salt-marshes in various places, apparently not uncommon. FI. June, 
Aug. ©. — Culms procumbent, 6 — 8 inches long, glaucous. Leaves linear, 
obtuse. Ligule short, very blunt. Panicle about 2 inches long, branches 
patent, distichous, their spikelets secund. Cal. valves smaller than the 
floret, obtuse, strongly ribbed. Florets oblong, distant upon the rachis. 
Inner valve of cor. membranous, bifid at the point. 

6. P. rigida , Linn. ( hard Meadow-grass') ; panicle lanceolate 
disticho-secund (rigid), spikelets linear acute of about 7 florets 
which are almost ribless, root fibrous. E. Bot. t. 1371. — Glycerin 
rigida, E.Fl.v. i.p. 119. — Sclerochloa, Beauv. Lindl. 

Walls, rocks, and dry barren soils, frequent. FI. June. ©. — Whole 
plant very rigid and wiry, 3 — 5 inches long, ascendant or erect. Leaves 
rigid, linear, setaceous. Ligule oblong, jagged. Rachis angled, sometimes 
at once bearing the spikelets (when it much resembles Triticum loliaceum) 
but more usually throwing out branches. Cal. valves nearly as long as 
the cor., ribbed. Florets almost entirely ribless, linear-oblong, rather 
distant, smooth, bluntish. 

7. P. compressa, Linn. ( flat-stemmed Meadow-grass) ; panicle 
subsecund spreading (afterwards subcoarctate), spikelets oblong of 
5 — 7 obtuse flowers connected by a web, culm compressed, root 
creeping. E. Bot. t. 365. E.Fl.v. i.p. 131. 

On walls, and in dry barren ground, frequent. FI. June, July. If . — 
One foot or more high, rather glaucous. Culms compressed, procumbent 
at the base. Leaves short, linear, acute. Ligule very short, blunt. Panicle 
not much branched. Cal. valves ribbed, acute. Valves of cor. obtuse, outer 
one very obsoletely ribbed ; the lower florets webbed at the base. — Inter- 
mediate as it were between the present and the following division. 

** Spikelets ovate. Poa, Smith. 

8. P. alpina, Linn, (alpine Meadow-grass) ; panicle diffuse, 
spikelets ovate of 4 — 5 acute flowers hairy below (but not webbed), 
leaves broadly linear obtuse, ligule of the upper leaves oblong acute, 
of the lower ones short obtuse. E. Bot. t. 1003. — (3. glomerata; 
spikelets densely crowded. I). Don, MSS. Hook. Scot. i. p. 34. 

Extremely abundant on the lofty mountains of Scotland and Wales, 
and very generally viviparous — /3. Banks of the Esk, G. Don. — FI. July, 
Aug. If.. — C — 12 inches high, nearly erect. Leaves short, linear, obtuse, 
with a very small mucro. Spikelets rather large, close. Cal. valves ovato- 
lanceolate, much compressed ; dorsal rib scabrous, terminating in a 
very short point or awn, with a short lateral rib or nerve at the base. 


TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


45 


Pen.] 


Ext. valves of the cor. ovato-lanceolate, acute ; dorsal rib scabrous, no 
lateral ones : lower part villous ; upper part glabrous, purple, margin 
diaphanous: int. valves notched or bifid at the extremity. 

9. P. lava, Haenk. ( wavy Meadow-grass ); panicle contracted 
lax slightly drooping, spikelets ovate of about 3 flowers which are 
acute connected by a web, leaves narrow-linear acute, ligules all 
lanceolate. E. FI. v. i. p. 122 — Poa fiexuosa, E. Eat. t. 1123. 

Found on Ben Nevis by the late Mr. John Mnckay. FI. July. If.. — 
A very slender subglaucous grass, scarcely able to support the weight of 
its own panicle, which consequently droops slightly. Leaves more nume- 
rous than in P. alpina, and much narrower. Florets very obscurely ribbed, 
all very acute, green and purple, with diaphanous margins. Cal. valves 
nearly equal, pubescent on the keel, as is the cor., which is also webbed. 

10. P. bulbosa, Linn, (bulbous Meadow-grass) ; panicle close 
subspicate, spikelets ovate 4-flowered, florets downy at the keel 
connected by a web, leaves with a white narrow serrated cartilagi- 
nous margin, stems swollen at the very base. E. Eot. t. 1071. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 123. 

East and south of England, principally on sandy sea-shores. FI. Apr. 
May. If. — A singular and very distinctly marked species, soon wither- 
ing after flowering, and then its bulbs are blown about in great quantities 
on the surface of the sand. It forms the principal part of the herbage 
on the Denes at Yarmouth. Sir J. E. Smith mentions the circum- 
stance of the plant, being viviparous at Rome : so are my specimens 
from Germany. 

1 1 . P. trividlis, Linn, (roughish Meadow-grass') ; panicle dif- 
fuse, spikelets oblongo-ovate of about 3 flowers which are acute 
5-nerved connected with a web, culms and sheaths roughish, ligule 
oblong, root fibrous. E. Eot. t. 1072. E. FI. v. i.p. 124. 

Meadows and pastures, common. FI. June, July. If . — 1 — 2 feet 
high. Leaves lineal - , acute. Panicle much branched. — An excellent 
grass for pasturage and for hay : as is the following species. 

12. P . pratensis, Linn, (smooth-stalked Meadow-grass) ; panicle 
diffuse, spikelets oblongo-ovate of about 4 flowers which are acute 
5-nerved webbed, culm and sheath smooth, ligule short, root 
creeping. E. Eot. t. 1073. E.Fl.v.i.p. 125. — (3. angustifolia; 
smaller and with narrower leaves. P. angustifolia, Linn. — y. sub- 

ccerulea; smaller and glaucous. P. humilis, Ehrh. Gram 

P. snbccerulea, E. Eot. t. 1004. 

Meadows and pastures, frequent. — < 3 . “ in woods.” — y. on walls or dry 
places, especially in alpine countries. FI. June, July. If . — Allied to the 
last, but very constant to the character above given . — p and y appear to 
be starved states of the plant. 

13. P. annua, Linn. ( annual Meadow-grass ) ; panicle subse- 
cund divaricated, spikelets oblongo-ovate of about 5 flowers which 
are a little remote 5-ribbed destitute of web, culm ascending com- 
pressed, root fibrous. E. Eot. t. 1141. E. FI. v. i.p. 127. 


16 


TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


[Briza. 


Meadows and pastures, and by road-sides, everywhere. FI. all spring 
and summer. ©. — Culms 6 — 10 inches long, below prostrate and throw- 
ing out roots. Leaves distichous, linear, rather blunt, flaccid, often 
waved, bright-green. Ligule oblong, acute. Cal. valves very unequal, 
ovato-lanceolate, rough at the back, nerved. Ext. valve of cor. ovato- 
lanceolate, acute, white and diaphanous at the margin, keel and base 
hairy. 

14. P. nemoralis, Linn, (wood Meadow-grass) ; panicle slender 
slightly leaning one way lax attenuate, spikelcts ovato-lanceolate 
of about 3 rather distant slightly-webbed flowers, ligule short trun- 
cate, culms subcompressed and sheaths glabrous, root scarcely 
creeping. E.Bot.t. 1265. E.Fl.v.i.p. 129. — (3. glauca ; plant 
smaller and everywhere glaucous. Hook. Scot. i.p. 35. — P. glauca, 
E. Hot. t. 1720. E. Fl.v. i.p. 128. — P.ccesia, E.Bot.t. 1719. — 
P. glauca , (3. Wahl. — E. FI. v. i.p. 128. 

Common in woods and thickets. — /3. abundant on the Welsh and 
Scotch Alps. FI. June, July. If. — 1 — 3 feet high, slender and de- 
licate in all its parts. Leaves narrow, linear, acute. Panicle with 
the branches almost erecto-patent. Spi/celets scattered. Cal. valves 
unequal, ovato-lanceolate, acute, rather obscurely ribbed. Ext. valve 
of the cor. lanceolate, obscurely ribbed, pubescent on the keel and 
hairy at the base, very slightly webbed. Inner valves, as I believe in 
most, if not all of the Genus, bifid at the point. — Sir J. E. Smith has, in 
E. FI. united his P. ccesia with P. glauca; making it his var. g., and 
now when I learn from the same author that it is a plant gathered by 
Mr. Turner and myself on Ben Lawers, I am more persuaded than ever 
that it is but an alpine state of P. nemoralis. Mr. Wilson is of the 
same opinion, an opinion founded on the most careful examination of 
specimens gathered in Wales and Scotland. 

35. Triodia. Br. Heath-grass. 

1. T. deeumbens. Beauv. ( decumbent Heath-grass'); panicle of 
few racemed spikelcts, cal. as long as the flowers, ligule a tuft of 
hairs. E. El. v. i. p. 131. — Poa deeumbens, E. Bot. t. 131. — 
Festuca dec., Linn. 

Abundant in dry mountain-pastures, heaths and moors. FI. July, If. 
— I foot long, procumbent, flowering culms only erect. Leaves linear, 
acuminate, hairy as well as the sheaths. Cal. valves nearly equal, lan- 
ceolate, acute, nerved, with broad, thin margins, scabrous on their keels. 
Ext. valve of the cor. ovate, nerved or ribbed, having a small tuft of hairs 
on each side at the base ; apex with three teeth, middle one the longest, 
forming an awn : int. valve obtuse, entire at the point, ciliated at the 
angles of the fold. — In habit very distinct from Poa. 

36. Briza. Linn. Quaking-grass. 

1. B. media, Linn. ( common Quaking-grass); spikelcts broadly 
ovate of about 7 flowers, cal. shorter than the florets. E, Bot. 
t. 310. E. El. v. i. p. 133. 


Cynosurus.] 


TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


47 


Meadows and pastures, frequent. FI. June. If . — Whole plant very 
elegant. Culms slender, 1 f. or more high. Leaves short, linear, acumi- 
nate. Stipules short, obtuse. Panicle considerably branched, branches 
thread-shaped, divaricating, purple. Spikelets tremulous with the slight- 
est breeze, very smooth, shining purple, more or less green, or greenish 
white, at the edges. Cal. valves very concave, subcompressed. Ext. 
valve of cor. much like the cal., but rather smaller; hit. one minute, 
resembling a flat scale within the outer one. 

2. B. minor, Linn. ( small Quaking-grass'); spikelets triangular 
about 7-flowered, cal. longer than the florets. E. Bot. t. 1316. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 132. 

Fields in the extreme south of England, very rare. About Bath, in 
Cornwall, Guernsey, and Jersey. — FI. July. ©. — Whole plant much 
smaller than the last. Stipules elongated, acute. 

37. Dactylis. Linn. Cock’s-foot-grass. 

L D. glomeraia, Linn, (rough Cock’s-foot-grass); panicle 
crowded secund, cor. acuminate somewhat awned. E. Bot. 
t. 335. E. FI. v. i. p. 134. 

Way-sides, meadows and woods, abundant. FI. July. If. — 1 — 2 feet 
high. Leaves rather broadly linear, acuminate, scabrous. Panicles secund. 
Spikelets of 3 — 4 florets, thickly clustered on the branches, clusters ovate. 
Valves of the cal. membranous, smaller than the cor., lanceolate, acu- 
minate, unequal, glabrous, scabrous at the back of the valves, which are more 
or less obliquely keeled. Ext. valve of cor., subcartilaginous, lanceolate, 
much compressed, scabrous, ribbed, ciliated at the keel, with a short awn 
at the point : hit. bifid at the extremity — Said to be advantageously 
cultivated for cattle. 

38. Cynosurus. Linn. Dog’s-tail-grass. 

1. C. cristdtus, Linn. ( crested Dog's-tail-grass); raceme spiked 
linear, florets with a very short awn. E. Bot. t. 316. E. Fl.v. i. 
p. 157. 

Dry pastures, frequent. FI. July. If.— 1— 1J f. high, slender. 
Leaves narrow, linear, acuminate. Raceme secund. Involucres beauti- 
fully pectinated, one at the base of each spikelet, their divisions linear, 

acute, greenish, subglumaceous, a little curved, rough. Spikelets 3 5- 

flowered. Cal. valves lanceolate, nearly equal, membranous, rough at the 
keel, as long as the floret. Ext. valve of cor. lanceolate, obscurely nerved, 
green, scabrous, especially at the keel, terminating in a short rough awn ; 
int. white, bifid, pubescent at the angles of the fold. — An excellent grass 
for dry pastures. 

2. C. echinatus, Linn, (rough Dog's-tail-grass) ; raceme in an 
ovate spike, florets with awns as long as the cor. E. Bot. t. 1333. 

E.Fl.v.i.p. 137. 

Sandy sea-shores of the extreme south of England, as Kent and 
Sussex; but principally in Jersey. FI. July. ©. 


48 


TRIANDRIA— DIGYNIA. 


[Festuca. 


39. Festuca. Linn. Fescue-grass. 

1. F. ovina, Linn. ( Sheep's Fescue-grass ); panicle subsecund 
subcoarctate, spikelets oblong of about 4 — 5 flowers with short awns, 
culms square upward, leaves setaceous. E. Eot. t. 585. E. FI. 
v. i.p. 139. — f3. (Sm.) rubra; with a purplish panicle. F. rubra. 
With. — y. (Sm.) ccesia ; plant glaucous. E. FI. — F. ccesia, 
E.Bot.t. 1917. — (Sm.) tenu folia ; leaves longer and very slen- 
der more numerous, florets acuminate awnless. F. tenuifolia, 
Sibth. Schrad. — s. vivipara; plant taller, flowers viviparous. F. 
ovina (3. Linn. Hook. — y. Schrad. — F. vivipara , E. Bot. t. 1 355. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 1 40. 

Abundant on dry elevated pastures. — e. Frequent on the mountains 
of Wales and Scotland. Ft. June, July. If.. — Leaves mostly short, often 
curved, smooth or slightly scabrous, much tufted and affording excellent 
food for sheep. Dr. Macculloch says that the greater portion of the vege- 
tation in the Hebrides is composed of this and the following species. 
Culm 4 — 8 inches or a foot high, in the upper part more or less distinctly 
4-sided. Cal. valves much shorter than the cor., acute, subglabrous. Cor. 
ext. valve more or less glabrous, sometimes pubescent upward or even 
hairy, (F. hirsuta, Host,), terminated by an awn, which, though varying 
in size and in 5. obsolete, at the utmost does not exceed half the length 
of the valve. — Whole plant more or less glaucous and having a purple 
tint in the spikelets. F. vivipara, Sm. affords no character by which it 
may be distinguished from F. ovina. I should be more inclined to con- 
sider the F. tenuifolia of Sibth. distinct, than any other of the vars. 

2. F. duriuscula , Linn. ( hard Fescue-grass ); panicle subsecund 
subcoarctate, spikelets oblong of about 6 flowers with short awns, 
stem-leaves nearly plane, radical ones subsetaceous, root fibrous. 
E. Bot. t. 470. E. FI. v. i.p. 141. 

Pastures and waste ground. FI. June, July. If   — The leaves on the 
stem are sometimes convolute, and then they appear setaceous. 1 — lj 
f. high, by which size and its stouter habit, it is better distinguished 
from F. ovina, than by any character I can discover. It is possible that 
viviparous states of this may be confounded with the F. vivipara of 
Smith. 

3. F. rubra, Linn. ( creeping Fescue- grass); “ panicle unilatera. 
spreading, florets longer than their awns, leaves downy on their 
upper side, more or less involute, root extensively creeping.” 
E.Bot. t. 2056. E.Fl. v. i.p. 141 — F. duriuscula, (3. Hook. Scot. i. 
p. 38. 

Light sandy pastures, near the sea, plentiful ; and “ in mountain pas- 
tures and alpine precipices.” FI. July. If. — In deference to the opinion 
of the lamented author of E. Bot. and other able Botanists, I again 
restore this plant, which I had before considered a var. of F. duriuscula, 
to the rank of a species. At the same time I must observe that its only 
characteristic exists in the creeping root ; and may not this be owing to 
a peculiarity in soil and other accidental circumstances ? 


Fcsluca.] 


TRIANDUIA — DIGYNIA. 


49 


4. F. bromoides, Linn, (barren Fescue-grass) ; panicle secund 
racemed, florets shorter than the awn monandrous, culm above 
leafless. E. Bot. t. 1411. E. FI. v. i. p. 142. 

Dry pastures and on walls; less frequent in Scotland, but not rare 
about Edin. FI. June. ©. ( $ . Schrad . .) — G — 8 inches high. Leaves 
linear, setaceous, complicate. Cal. valves very unequal, lanceolate, acu- 
minate, nerved, rough at the keel. Florets about 6 in each spikelet. 
Ext. valve of cor. linear-lanceolate, scabrous, tapering into a strait awn, 
thrice the length of the valve. 

5. F. Myurus, Linn. ( Wall Fescue-grass) ; panicle secund elon- 
gated contracted, florets shorter than the awn monandrous, culm 
leafy in its upper part. E. Bot. t. 1412. E. FI. v. i. p. 143. 

Walls and barren places; frequent in England, not common in Scot- 
land. FI. June. 0. — Much resembling the last, but taller. 1 f. high. 
Leaves shorter, their sheaths longer, and springing even from the upper 
part ot the culm. Panicle often 4 — 5 inches long. Cal. valves and 
florets narrow, rather more scabrous ; awns longer. 

6. F. uniglumis, Soland. ( single-glumed Fescue-grass) ; panicle 
a simple erect two-ranked subsecund raceme, one valve of the 
calyx obsolete. E. Bot. t. 1430. E. FI. v. i.p>. 14-3. — Stipa mem- 
branacea, Linn.? (Sm.) 

On the sandy sea-coast, principally of Sussex. On the coasts of Essex, 
Suffolk, Dorsetshire, and Anglesea. FI. June. ©. ($. Sm.). — This 
plant is remarkable for the suppression of one of the valves of its cal., by 
which the species is at once known. 

7. F. calamaria, Sm. ( Reed Fescue-grass) ; panicle subsecund 
much branched spreading nearly ‘erect, spikelets oblong awnless 
3 — 5-flowered, leaves linear-lanceolate. E. Bot. t. 1005. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 145 — Schedonorus sylvaticus, Beauv. Lindl. — /3. minor ; 
E. FI. v. i.p. 146. — F. decidua, E. Bot. t. 2266. 

Mountainous woods, not uncommon. FI. July. If. — 2 — 3 feet high, 
with large and broad leaves. Cal. valves narrow, linear-lanceolate, very 
unequal, smaller one single-nerved, larger with 3 nerves. Florets rather 
distant upon the rachis. Ext. valve of cor. scabrous, lanceolato-acuminate. 

8. F. lolidcea , Huds. ( spiked Fescue-grass) ; raceme spiked dis- 
tichous, spikelets linear-oblong nearly sessile remote, florets cylin- 
drical awnless, outer valve of cor. obtuse. E. Bot. t. 1821. E.Fl. 
v. i. p. 146 — Schedonorus, Dumort. Lindl. 

_ Moist pastures and meadows, not unfrequent. FI. June, July. If . — 2. f. 
high. Leaves few, short, linear, acute, ltacemcs 2—5 inches long; rachis 
flexuose; spikelets nearly sessile, especially the upper ones, 5 — 6-flow- 
ered. Lai. valves unequal, lanceolate, acute, 7-ribbed. Outer valves of 
the cor. ovato-lanceolate, nerved, diaphanous at the apex and obtuse, 
(hence scarcely agreeing with the generic character;) slightly scabrous 
only on the nerves. 

9. F. pratensis, Huds. (Meadow Fescue-grass); panicle patent 
blanched, spikelets linear many-flowered, florets cylindrical awnless., 

D 


50 TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. [Bromus. 

outer valve of cor. acute, leaves linear, root fibrous. E . Bot. t. 1592. 
E. FI. v. i.p. 147. — Schedonorus, Beauv. Lindl. 

Moist meadows and pastures, common. FI. June, July. 7/ . — 1 — 2 f. 
high. Distinguished at first sight from the last by its panicle, (not spiked 
raceme ); also by the florets, which, though much resembling the last, 
have their outer valve more acute. 

10. F. eldtior, Linn, (tall Fescue-grass) ; panicle patent very 
much branched, spikelets ovato-lanceolate many-flowered, florets 
cylindrical subaristate, leaves linear-lanceolate, root creeping. 
E. Bot. t. 1593. E. FI. v. i.p. 148. — Schedonorus, Lindl. 

Moist meadows, banks of rivers, &c.; not common. FI. June, July. 11 • 

40. Bromus. Linn. Brome-grass. 

1. B. giganteus, Vill. (tall Brome-grass); panicle branched 
drooping towards one side, spikelets lanceolate compressed, florets 
shorter than the awn, leaves linear-lanceolate ribbed. Linn — 
Fcstuca gigantea, E.Bot. t. 1820. E.Fl. v. i.p. 144 — (3. tri flora; 
panicle more erect slenderer with 3 flowers, leaves narrower. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 144. — Festuca trijlora, E. But. t. 1918. — Bromus trifl. 
Linn. 

Shady woods and moist hedges. — g. In Norfolk and near Forfar in 
Scotland : probably not unfrequent. FI. July, Aug. 7/ . — A sea-grass, 

3 — 4 feet high, with broad leaves, having the habit and essential character 
of Bromus, but sometimes arranged by authors with Festuca. Panicle 
large. Spikelets with 3 — 6 florets. Cal. valves very unequal, larger ones 
with 3 ribs. Outer valve of cor. lanceolate, obscured}' ribbed, nearly 
glabrous, membranous at the edge upward. Awn very long, inserted a 
little below the bifid point. 

2. B. dsper, Linn, (hairy Wood Brome-grass) ; panicle branched 
drooping, spikelets linear-lanceolate compressed, florets remote sub- 
cylindrical hairy longer than the strait awn, leaves uniform the 
lower ones hairy. E. Bot. t. 1172. E. FI. v. i. p. 158. 

Moist woods and hedges. FI. June, July. © or $ . Sm. (If.. Schrad). — 

4 — 6 f. high : leaves broad. 

3. B. sterilis, Linn, (barren Brome-grass) ; panicle drooping 
slightly branched, spikelets linear-lanceolate, florets remote sub- 
cvlindrical scabrous shorter than the strait awn, leaves pubescent. 
E. Bot. t. 1030. E. FI. v. i. p. 159. 

Waste ground, fields, and hedges; common. FI. June, July. ©. — 
2 f. high. Remarkable for its long, narrow, much awned and drooping 
spikelets. 

4. B. diandrus, Curt, (upright annual Brome-grass); panicle 

erect slightly branched, spikelets linear-lanceolate, florets remote 
subcylindrical subscabrous about as long as the strait awn, sta- 
mens 2, (3, Schrad.), leaves subglabrous. E. Bot. t. 1006. E. FI. 
v. i.p. 160 B. madritensisy Linn. 


Bromus .] 


TUI ANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


51 


Rare, on sandy barren wastes; principally in the south of England. — 
About Edinburgh, Mr. Arnott. FL June, July. 0. — One foot high. 
Allied to B. sterilis; but the panicle is smaller, erect or erecto-patent, 
often purplish. 

5. 13. secalinus, Linn. ( smooth Rge-B come- grass) ; panicle 
spreading, peduncles but little branched, spikelets oblongo-ovate 
compressed of about 10 subcylindrical glabrous rather remote 
florets longer than the awn. E . Bot. t. 1171. E. EL v. i. p. 151. 

Corn-fields; not rare. FL July, Aug. ©. — 2 — .3 f. high. Leaves 
somewhat hairy. Cal. and ext. valve of cur. broadly ovate ; int. valve 
bifid at the point, the margin strongly ciliated. \\ hen the seeds ripen, 
the upper spikelets are pendulous, and the florets exhibit more evidently 
their distant mode of insertion. 

6. B. velutinus, Schrad. (down)/ Rge- B rome-grciss) ; “ panicle 
spreading scarcely subdivided, spikelets ovato-oblong of 10 — 15 
crowded elliptical downy florets, awns as long as the glumes, 
leaves slightly hairy.” Sm. E. FL v. i. p. 152. — B. multi floras, 
E. Bot.t. 1884. 

Corn-fields, rare. About Edinburgh, Sm. FL June, July. ©. — 
Allied to B. secalinus ; but the awns are longer (at length patent, Schrad,.), 
and the glumes are pubescent : circumstances too liable to vary. 

7. B. mollis, Linn, (soft Brome-grciss); panicle erect close 
compound, spikelets ovate subcompressed, florets imbricated com- 
pressed pubescent, awn strait about as long as the glume, leaves 
very soft pubescent. E. Bot. t. 1078. E. FL v. i. p. 153. 

Meadows, pastures, banks, road-sides, fields, <X:c. every where. FL 
June. . — 1 2 1. high. Panicle ‘2 — 3 inches long. Spikelets standing 
nearly erect. Florets 5 — 1 0. Ext. valve of the cor. convex ; by no 
means forming such cylindrical florets as in the two last species. 

8. B. racemosus, Linn. ( smooth Brome-grciss) ; panicle erect, 
peduncles simple, spikelets ovate subcompressed glabrous, florets 
imbricated compressed, awn strait about as long as the glume, 

leaves slightly hairy. E. Bot.t. 1079. E. FL v. i. p. 154 B. 

pratensis, E. Bot. t. 920. 

Meadows and pastures. FL June, July. ©.(«£. Schrad.).— I fear 
scarcely different from the preceding, except in being more glabrous. 

9. B. squarrosus, Linn. ( Corn Brome-grciss); panicle drooping, 
peduncles simple, spikelets ovato-lanceolate subcompressed, florets 
nearly glabrous imbricated compressed, awn divaricating, leaves 
pubescent. E. Bot.t. 1885. E. Fl. v. i. p. 155. 

Corn-fields, not indigenous. In Somersetshire and Sussex. In 
Scotland; G . Don. Fl. June, July. ©. — A most distinct species, re- 
markable for its spreading awns. 

10. B. arvensis, Linn, (taper Field Brome-grciss) ; panicle 
spreading (at length drooping), peduncles branched, spikelets 
lanceolate compressed, florets imbricated compressed glabrous, 


Till AN DRIA — DIGYNIA. 


52 


[ Avena . 


about as long as the strait awn, leaves hairy. E. Bot. t. 1984. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 156. 

Corn-fields, rare. FI. June, July. 0. — 2 — 3 f. high. Distinguished 
by its rather large, but slender and at length drooping panicle, and spike- 
lets which have mostly a purplish tinge. 

11. B. erectus , Huds. (vpright Brotne-grass) ; panicle erect, 
spikelets linear-lanceolate compressed, florets suhcylindrical remote 
glabrous longer than the strait awn, root-leaves very narrow cili- 
ated. E. Bot. t. 471. E. FI. v. i. p. 157. 

In fields and by road-sides, especially in a sandy soil over chalk. In 
the King’s Park, Edinburgh, Mr. G. Anderson. FI. July. If. . — 2 — 3 f. 
high. This is truly perennial, which does not appear to be the case 
with any other Bromus. Its habit is that of Brachypodium sylvaticum. 
The root-leaves narrow ; spikelets erect. 

41. Avena. Linn. Oat, or Oat-grass. 

1. A.fdtua, Linn, (wild Oat); panicle erect, spikelets droop- 
ing of about 3 scabrous florets smaller than the calyx villous 
below, all awned, root fibrous. E. Bot. t. 2221. E. El. v. i. 

p. 162. 

Corn-fields, frequent. FI. June — Aug. ©. — 2 — 3 f. high. Leaves 
linear-lanceolate- Cal. valves large, membranous, ovato-lanceolate, 
shining at the margins, keeled, acuminate, ribbed. Ext. valve of cor. 
with long fulvous hairs at its base, bifid at the point. Awn to each 
floret long and twisted, and constituting an excellent Hygrometer. — The 
cultivated Oat, A. sativa, differs from this in having one or more upper 
flowers imperfect and awnless, in the shorter awn and absence of hairs 
at the base of the florets. 

2. A. strigosa, Schrad. ( bristle-pointed Oat); panicle erect, 
branches all secund, spikelets of perfect florets each awned as long 
as the calyx and terminated by two bristles. E. Bot. t. 1266. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 163. 

Corn-fields; common both in England and Scotland. FI- June, July. 
©. — Omitted in FI. Scot., though not an uncommon plant in the 
country. I have gathered it in the Isle of Skye, and by Dee-side above 
Mar-Lodge, Aberdeenshire. 

3. A. pratensis, Linn. ( narrow-leaved Oat-grass); raceme erect 
simple, spikelets erect oblong of about 3 — 5 florets longer than the 
cal., leaves glabrous finely serrated, lower ones involute, sheaths 
scarcely scabrous. E.Bot.t. 1204. E.Ff.v. i.p. 164. 

Dry pastures, heathy and mountainous places. FI. July. 2£. — Leaves 
short, finely serrated with minute cartilaginous teeth at the margins, the 
lower ones involute. 

4. A. alpina, Sm. (great alpine Oat-grass) ; raceme slightly 
compound, spikelets erect oblong of about 5 — 6 florets longer than 
the cal., leaves glabrous linear acuminated flat minutely serrated, 
sheaths rounded subscabrous, culm cylindrical. S/n. in Linn. 


Arundo.] 


TRIANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


53 


Trans, v. x. p. 335. E. FI. v. i.p. 165 A. planiculmis, E. Bot. 

t. 2141. Hook. Scot. i. p. 43, (not of Sc/trad.). 

Rocky places on mountains. Ft. June, July. If. — This, it must be 
allowed, comes very near the last species, and is principally distinguished 
by its stouter habit, slightly compound raceme, and especially by the 
broader flat leaves. 

5. A. planiculmis, Schrad. ( flat-stemmed Oat-grass) ; panicle 
erect compound, spikelets erect linear-oblong of 5 — 7 florets much 
longer than the calyx, leaves scabrous broadly linear suddenly acute 
minutely serrated, sheaths flat sharply earinated scabrous, lower 
part of the culm slightly compressed two-edged. Sc/irad. El. 
Germ. v. i. p. 381. t. 6. f. 2, ( not of E. Bot. nor of Hook. Scot.) 

Glen Sannox, on the ascent of Goat-fell from Loch Rannoch, Isle of 
Arran, Scotland ; Mr. Stuart Murray. FI. July. If. — Mr. Murray had 
the good fortune to discover this interesting grass in 1826, and has since 
cultivated it in the Glasgow Botanic Garden, where it preserves all its 
characters, of which none are so striking as the flat, sharply cari- 
nated sheaths and the great breadth of its leaves ; in cultivated spe- 
cimen, (where the plant is nearly 3 feet high,) equalling a an inch in 
breadth. They are, too, almost equal in width throughout; at the ex- 
tremity suddenly coming to a sharp point. Panicle with many, but 
short branches. Spikelets much longer and larger than in A. alpina. 
Florets smaller. 

6. A. pubescens, Linn, (downy Oat-grciss); panicle erect nearly 
simple, spikelets erect of about 3 florets, a little longer than the 
cal., outer valves of cor. jagged, leaves plane downy edges smooth. 
E. Bot. t. 1640. E. FI. v. i. p. 164. — Trisetum pub., Pers. Lindl. 

Dry pastures, especially in chalky or limestone countries. FI. June, 
July. If . — Nothing, as it appears to me, can be more unnatural than to 
place this plant in a different genus from the two preceding. In habit 
it partakes ot the character of the larger-flowered anil “ field species,” if 
I may so call them, of this Genus, ( A. fatua and strigosa,) and of the 
following smaller-flowered one. Mr. Lindley confines the Genus 
Trisetum to T. jmbescens and T.flavesecns. M. Dumortier adds to it 
our A. pratensis and Aira prwcox. 

/. A. flavescens, Linn. ( yellow Oat-grass) ; panicle much 
branched lax, spikelets of about 3 florets equal in length to the 
longer of the very unequal cal. valves, outer valve of the cor. with 
two terminal seta;. E. Bot. t. 952. E. FI. v. i.p. 166. 

Dry meadows, and pastures, frequent. FI. July. If .—It has the smallest 
flowers ot all our Oat-grasses, and may readily be distinguished by that 
circumstance, by the two terminal setae on the outer valve of the cor. 
and by the unequal cal. valves. Floral pedicels downy with a small tuft 
of hairs at the top, and there is a terminal abortive flower, reduced to a 
pedieellated bristle, hairy at its base. 

42. Arundo. Linn. Reed. 

A. Phragmites, Linn, (common Peed) ; panicle spreading, 


54' TRIANDItIA — DIGYNIA. [ Hordcum . 

cal. valves acuminate coloured ribbed and about 5-flowered, leaves 
lanceolate acuminato-cuspidate. E. Bol. t. 401. E. FI. v. i.p. 168. 

Abundant in ditches, margins of lakes, rivers, &c. FI. July. If . — 
6 f. or more high ; the tallest of our Grasses. Parade large, purple- 
brown, at length drooping, very handsome. Valves of the cal. very 
unequal : ext. ovato-laneeolate, many-ribbed ; int. twice its length, thin, 
membranous, obsoletely ribbed. As the flowers advance, the tufts of hair 
increase, at length becoming very silky. — This plant frequently forms 
patches of immense extent, called lieed-ronds in some parts of the 
east of England, which harbour many aquatic birds and the rare Paras 
biarmicus, or bearded Titmouse. An extensive use is made of the culms 
for thatching, garden-screens, for walls and floors which are afterwards 
covered with clay, &c. Fishing-rods, &c. are fabricated of the much 
stouter culms of Arundo Bonax, a native of the south of Europe. 

t 

43. Elymus. Linn. Lyme-grass. 

1. E. arenarius, Linn, (upright Sea Lyme-grass) ; spike clo.se 
erect, spikelets geminate hairy, florets awnless as long as the lan- 
ceolate valves of the cal., leaves involute pungent. E. Bot. 1. 1672. 
E. FI. v. i.p. 177. 

Sandy sea-shores, frequent. FI. (rarely) July. If . — 7 loot much creep- 
ing in the loose soil ; hence it becomes of great value, like the Ammo - 
phila arenaria, for preserving a considerable extent of our own coasts 
and those of Holland from the encroachments of the sea. Culms 3 — 4 f. 
high, glabrous. Leaves glaucous, pungent. Spike 4 — 6 inches long. 
Spikelets of about 3 flowers, on the rachis. Cal. valves 2, lanceolate, 
acuminate. Valves of the cor. resembling them, but the ext. one broader; 
int. bifid at the point, angles of the folds ciliated. — The seeds are said to 
be made into bread in Iceland. 

2. E. geniculatus, Curt, (pendulous Sea Lyme-grass ) ; spike 
lax bent downwards with one angle, spikelets geminate, cal. valves 
subulate glabrous longer than the florets, leaves involute pungent. 
E. Bot. t. 1586. E. FI. v. i. p. 177. 

Near Gravesend, in a salt-marsh : very rare. FI. July. If . . — A very 
remarkable plant, and I believe quite distinct from the foregoing. 

3. E. europceus, Linn, (wood Lyme-grass) ; spike erect compact 
glabrous, spikelets ternate 1 — 2-flowered, cal. valves setaceous, 
florets terminated by a long awn, leaves flat. E. Bot. t. 1317. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 178. 

Woods and thickets, especially in a chalky soil : apparently not rare 
in the midland and northern parts of England, but unknown to Scotland. 
FI. June. If .. — It would appear to me much more natural to unite this 
with Hordeum, as Hudson has done. My specimens have the calyx 
mostly one-flowered, and I do not see how it differs from those Hordea 
which have their lateral flower fertile. In habit too it quite accords, as 
well as in the long awns and subulate cal. valves. 

44. IIordeum. Linn. Barley. 

1. H. murhmm, Linn. (Wall Barley) ; cal. valves of the inter- 


TR1ANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


Triticum.) 


55 


mediate floret linear-lanceolate ciliated, those of the lateral florets 
setaceous scabrous. E. Eot. <.1971. E. El. v.i. p. 179. 

Waste ground, by walls and road-sides: common in England, rare in 
Scotland. About Edinburgh; and at Elgin, Rev. G. Gordon, which is 
its most northerly range. FI. June, July. ©. 

2. H. pratense , Huds. (Meadoio Barley ) ; all the cal. valves 
setaceous and scabrous. E. Bot. t. 409. E. FI. v. i.p. 180. 

Moist meadows and pastures in England, frequent : rare in Scotland, 
il Ir. Neill finds it about Salisbury Craigs. FI. July. ©. 

3. H. maritimuni, With. (Seaside Barley); cal. valves srnooth- 
ish, the interior one of the lateral florets semi-lanceolate, the rest 
setaceous. E. Bot. t. 1205. E. El. v. i.p. 180- 

Light dry pastures and sandy ground near the sea, not rare in England. 
In Scotland it has only been found in Angus-shire by Mr. G. Don. FI. 
July. ©. — All our British species of this genus are admirably character- 
ized by the form, &c. of their cal. valves. The present is the smallest 
species, procumbent at the base and more glaucous than the rest. 

45. Triticum. Linn. Wheat or Wheat-grass. 

* Spikelets distichous. 

1. T. caninum , Huds. ( fibrous-rooted Wheat-grass) ; cal. valves 
atvned with 3 — 5 ribs and about 5 awned florets, leaves plane, root 
fibrous. E. Bot. t. 1327. E. FI. v. i. p. 184. — Elymus can. Linn. 

Woods and banks, frequent. FI. July. If. — Best distinguished from 
the following by its fibrous root. 

2. T. repens, Linn, (creeping Wheat-grass, or Couch-grass ); 
cal. valves many-ribbed with from 4 — 8 awned (rarely awnless) 
florets, leaves plane, root creeping. E. Bot. t. 909. E.Fl. v. i.p, 182. 

Fields and waste places, every where. FI. throughout the summer 
months. If. — In habit between the preceding and the foregoing, having 
a glaucous tint when growing near the sea. Leaves plane, or nearly 
so. Spile/els smaller and less compressed than in T. junccum. Cal. and 
ext. valves of the cor. with from 5 — 9 nerves, acute or terminated by an 
awn of greater or less length. — Pest of the corn-fields, and difficult to be 
extirpated on account of its long creeping roots. Mr. Wilson finds it 
viviparous, in which state it is mentioned by Dunwrtier. 

3. T. junceum, Linn, (rushy Sea Wheat- grass) ; valves of the 
cal. obtuse much ribbed with 4 — 5 awnless florets, leaves involute 
pungent, root creeping. E. Bot. t. 814. E. FI. v. i.p. 182. 

Sandy sea-shores, frequent. FI. July. If . — Whole plant glaucous, 
rigid, 1 | — 3 f. high. Spike long. Spikelets oblong, much compressed, 
distant, sessile. Cal. valves oblongo-lanceolate, often with 3 teeth at 
the point. Ext. valves of the cor. similar, with 5 nerves. 

4. T. cristalum, Schreb. (crested Wheat-grass) ; valves of the 
cal. subulate keeled awned scarcely nerved with about 4 awned 
florets, spikelets much crowded. E. Bot. t. 2267. E. FI. v. i. 
p. 184. 


56 


TIUANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[Lolium. 


Sea-side between Arbroath and Montrose (G. Don); where, however, 
I should fear it cannot be considered wild. It is a native of the south- 
eastern parts of Europe. Fl. July. If. 

** Spikelets secund. 

5. T. lolidceum, Sin. ( dwarf Sea-Wheat Grass); valves of the 
cal. indistinctly 3-nerved obtuse of many avvnless florets, root fibrous 
annual. E. Bot.t. 221. E. FL v. i. p. 186. — Catopodium , Link , 
Lindl. 

Sandy sea-shores of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex. North Wales and 
Isle of Man, Mr. Wilson. East coast of Scotland, not unfrequent. Fl. 
June, July. 0. — Singularly stiff and wiry, as much so as Poa rigida, 
which it greatly resembles; branching from the very base, 3 — -1 inches 
high. Leaves linear, rigid, plane. Spikelets more or less distant, secund, 
lower ones sometimes compound. Ext. valve of the cor. broadly ovate, 
concave. 

46. Brachypodium. Beauv. False Brome-grass. 

1. B. sylvaticum, Beauv. (slender false Brome-grass); spike 
drooping, spikelets nearly cylindrical secund hairy, awns longer 
than the florets. Lindl. Syn. p. 297. — Festuca sylv., E. Fl. v. i. 
p. 149. — Bromus sylv., Poll. — E. Bot. t. 729. 

Woods and hedges, not frequent either in Scotland or England. 
Fl. July. If- — 2 f. high. Leaves broadly linear-lanceolate, very hairy. 
Cal. valves unequal, laneeolato-acuminate, much nerved. Ext. valve of 
cor. linear-lanceolate, much nerved, scabrous, rarely hairy ; hit. one 
truncate, margins ciliated. 

2. B. pinnatum, Beauv. (Heath false Brome-grass); spike erect, 
spikelets nearly cylindrical distichous hairy, awns shorter than the 
florets. Lindl. Syn. p. 297 . — Festuca pinn., E.Fl.v.i.p. 150. 
Bromus pinn., Linn. — E. Bot. t. 730. 

Open fields and heathy places, on chalky soil ; in Yorkshire, Oxford- 
shire, and Kent. Fl. July. If — A very graceful plant. 

47. Lolium. Linn. Darnel. 

1. L. perenne, Linn, (perennial Darnel or Rye-grass) ; spike- 
lets much longer than the cal., florets awnless linear-oblong com- 
pressed, root perennial. E. Bot. t. 315. F. Fl. v. i. p. 173. 

Way-sides, pastures and waste places, frequent. Fl. June, July. If. — 
1 — 2 f. high. Spike with the general aspect of Triticuvi repens ; some- 
times, from luxuriance, compound. Florets linear-oblong, nerved. — A 
most valuable grass for the agriculturist, and frequently employed with 
clover for artificial pasture and hay. 

2. L. arvense, With, (short-awned annual Darnel) ; spikelets 
equal in length with the cal., florets with short soft (imperfect) 
awns, root annual. E. Bot. 1. 1125. E. Fl. v. i. p. 174. 

Fields, with the following, of which it is now generally thought 
but a var. Fl. July. Q . 


TRI ANURIA — DIGYNIA. 


Bigitaria.] 


57 


3. L. temulentum, Linn. ( bearded Darnel) ; spikelets equal in 
length with the cal., florets as long as the rigid awns, root arttmal. 
E.Bot.t. 124. E. FI. v. i. p. 174. 

Corn-fields, not common in Scotland. FI. July. ©. — Mr. Wilson 
finds this plant with an awn of such a dubious character, that it seems 
quite intermediate between the present and preceding species. 

48. Rottboli.ia. Linn. Hard-grass. 

1. II. incurvata, Linn. ( Sen Hard-grass ); spike cylindraceo- 
subulate, cal. 2-valved, valves united at the base. E. Dot. t. 760. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 175. — Ophiurus, Beauv. Lind l . — (3. spike filiform 
nearly erect. R.Jiliformis, Roth. 

Sea-shores ; but not common. On the south-west and east of Scot- 
land.— 3. near Aberlady, Scotland ; G. Bon. Near Dublin, Mr. W. Wilson. 
FI. July, Aug. 0. — Plant from 2 — G or 8 inches high, more or less 
curved, especially in the curious spike. 

49. Knappia. Sm. Knappia. 

1. K. agrostidea, Sm. (early Knappia ). E. Bot. 1. 1127. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 84 — Agrostis minima, Linn. — Mibora, Adans. Lindl. — 
Chamagrostis, Borh — Sturmia , Hopp. 

Sandy pastures by the sea, rare. Essex, near the mouth of the Thames; 
Wales, and S.W. coast of Anglesea, frequent ; II. Davis. FI. March, 
April. 0 — A beautiful and minute grass, of which only one species is 
known. Root fibrous. Stems several from the same root. Leaves short, 
linear, rough, equal in length with their white, inflated sheaths. Cal. of 
2, dorsal ly compressed, truncated, purplish valves. Cor. of 2, white, 
delicate, very hairy, jagged valves, the outer one much the largest and 
embracing the inner. Styles long, filiform, hairy. Fruit beautifully dotted. 

50. Spartina. Willd. Cord-grass. 

1. S. stricta, Sm. (twin-spiked Cord-grass); spikes 2 3 erect 

with very smooth stalks, outer valves of cal. smallest. E. FI. v. i. 
p. 135. — Dactylis stricta, E. Bot. t. 389. 

Muddy salt-marshes, on the east and south-east coasts of England. FI. 
Aug. 11 . — A remarkably stiff, rigid plant, quite unlike any other native 
grass. Stems 6 — 8 inches, or a foot and more high. Culms concealed by 
the sheathing bases of the short pungent involute leaves. 

51. Cynodon. Rich. Dog’s Tooth-grass. 

1. C. Dactylon, Pers. (creeping Dog's- Tooth-grass); spikes digi- 
tate 3 — 5, cor. glabrous subciliated longer than the cal., with a 

beardless bristle at the base of the interior valve. Br E. FI. v. i. 

p. 95. — Panicum Dactylon , Linn E. Bot. t. 850. 

Hare : on the sandy shores of Cornwall, near Penzance, Rev. J. S. 
Tozer. FI. July, Aug. y. . 

52. Digitaria. Scop. Finger-grass. 

1 . D. sanguinalis, Scop, (hairy Cock's-foot or Finger-grass) ; 
leaves and sheaths hairy, florets oblong glabrous tbeir margins 

i) 2 


58 TIUANDUIA TUIGYNIA. [ Holosteum . 

scabrous. E. FI. v. i. p. 96. — Panicmn sanguinale, Linn — 
E. Hot. t. 819. 

Rare in sandy cultivated fields : it formerly grew in Battersea Fields, 
near London. Other habitats, given in the British Floras for this plant, 
belong, in Mr. Borrer’s opinion, to the next species. FI. July, August, 
©. — From a span to a foot high, branched at the base, erect or as- 
cending. Leaves and sheaths hairy, the latter have small tubercles, from 
which the hairs spring. Spikes 3 — 5, digitated. Spikelcts secund, 2 to- 
gether, oppressed to the flattened rachis. Cal., outer valves very small : 
inner nearly equal, plane, of which the ext. one is oblong, ribbed and 
downy or slightly scabrous at the margin ; ribs glabrous. 

2. D. humifusa, Pers. {glabrous Cock's-foot or Finger-grass ) ; 
leaves and sheaths glabrous, florets ovate pubescent. Hook, in 
E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2613. — Sgntherisma glabrum , Schrad. Germ, 
v. i.p. 163. t. 3. f. 6. 

Rare : on loose sand at Weybridge, Sussex, Mr. Borrer; who says 
that the Ipswich D. sanguinalis is this, and who thinks that the Norfolk 
and Suffolk stations, assigned to that plant in Engl. FI., probably belong 
to the present. Once found at Dalbeth, near Glasgow, Mr. Hophirk. FI. 
July, Aug. ©. — Generally smaller and more humifuse than the preced- 
ing, of a purpler hue. Leaves and sheaths quite glabrous. Spikes fewer, 
2 — 4 in Mr- Borrer’s specimens. Florets more ovate and more convex, 
outer of the two larger calycine valves purple, downy, and ribbed. Rich- 
ard in Pers. Syn. appears to be the first who discriminated this as a 
species, and Schrader has admirably described it, and figured the flower. 

TRIANDRIA— TUIGYNIA. 

53. Monti a. Linn. Blinks. 

1. M. fontdna, Linn. ( Water Blinks or Water Chickweed.) 
E. Bot. t. 1206. E. FI. v. i.p. 187. 

Rills, springy and wet places. FI. June, July. © . — Whole plant 
succulent, varying considerably in size. Stem prostrate and rooting. 
Leaves small, opposite, spathulate. Peduncles nearly terminal, often 
forked. Flowers white, at first drooping. Stam. upon the corolla, short. 
Germen and capsule roundish. Seeds 3, subreniform, dotted. — The 3. 
major of Willd. and De Cand., (M. repens of Gmel. FI. Bad.) is not 
uncommon in Scotland, and is found in Anglesea by Mr. Wilson. 

54. Holosteum. Linn. Jagged-Chickweed. 

1. H. umbellatum, Linn, {umbelliferous jagged- Chickweed) ; 
leaves elliptical ovate acute, flowers umbellate, peduncle pubes- 
cent viscid, pedicels reflexed after flowering at length erect. 
E. Bot. t. 27. E. FI. v. i.p. 187 — Cerastium umbellatum, Huds. 
— Hook, in FI. Loud. N. Scr. t. 13 . 

Rare, on old walls about Norwich and Bury. FI. April. ©. — A sin- 
gular and interesting plant, which I have incorrectly referred to Ceras- 
tium in FI. Lond. It is indeed the original Holosteum of Linnaeus, and 
the other species that have been arranged with it, will probably be found 
to belong to different genera. 


Galium.] 


TETRANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


59 


55. Polycarpon. Linn. All-seed. 

1. P. tetraphyllum, Linn, (four-leaved All-seed) ; triandrous, 
petals notched, stem-leaves in fours, those of the branches opposite. 
E. Bot. t. 1031. E. FI. v. i. p. 376. 

Southern coasts of England ; particularly Devonshire, Dorsetshire, 
and Portland Island. FI. summer months. 0 . 


CLASS IV. TETRANDRIA. 

(4 Stamens , equal in height.) 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

* Perianth double. Cor. monopetalous, superior.' Seed 1 . 

1. Di'psacus. Involucre many-leaved. Cal. double: ext. very 
minute, forming a thickened limb to the germen; int. cup-shaped, 
entire. Receptacle chaffy, spinous. Fruit angular, with 8 pores or 
depressed points, crowned with the double cal. (Flowers densely 

capitate.) — Nat. Ord. Dipsace.e, Juss Named from difaoj, to 

be thirsty ; the upper connate leaves containing water in their 
hollows. 

2. Knautia. Involucre many-leaved. Cal. double : ext. mi- 
nute ; int. cup-shaped. Fruit compressed, with 4 pores or 

depressed points, upon a short stalk Nat. Ord. DipsacEjE, Juss. 

— Named in honour of Christopher Knaut, a Botanist of Saxony, 
who flourished in the latter half of the 17th century. 

3. Scabios a. Involucre many-leaved. Cal. double : ext. mostly 
membranaceous and plaited ; int. with about 5 bristles. Fruit sub- 
cylindrical, crowned with the double cal. (Flowers densely capi- 
tate). — Nat. Ord. Dipsaceas, Juss. — Named from Scabies, the 
leprosy, the infusion or decoction of some of the species having 
formerly been employed in curing cutaneous diseases. 

** Permntli double. Cor. monopetalous, superior. Seeds 2/ 
(leaves whorled, Rubiacece.) 

4. Galium. Cor. rotate, 4-cleft. Fruit a dry, 2-lobed, inde- 
hiscent pericarp — Nat. Ord. Rubiacece, Juss. — Named from -ya/.a, 
milk : the plant having been formerly employed to curdle milk. 


1 This groupe consists of plants of the Nat. Onl. Dipsacea:, on which see 
an excellent Memoir, published by Mr. Coulter, at Geneva, 1823. The outer 
calyx is called by that author an involucellum. 

2 1 his little groupe belongs to the first division of the Rubiacece of Juss. 
Stellat^e, Linn. Lincll. In some of the Genera, especially Galium , the cal. 
forms so small a rim or margin to the germen as to be scarcely visible : the 
tubular part being incorporated with the germen. 


60 


TET K A N D R I A — MO N 0G YN I A. 


[' Curnus . 


5. Rubia. Cor. rotate or campanulate, 3 — 5 cleft. Fruit a 2- 
lobed Bern/. — Nat. Orel. Rubiace^e, Juss. — Named from ruber, 
red, from the red dye afforded by its species, especially Rubia 
tinctorum , which produces the true Madder or Turhey-red of 
commerce. 

6. Asperula. Cor. funnel-shaped. Fruit without any dis- 
tinct margin to the cal. — Nat. Ord. Rubi ace.e, Juss . — Named 
from asper, rough, owing to the roughness of some species of the 
genus. 

7. Sherardia. Cor. funnel-shaped. Fruit crowned with the 
cal. — Nat. Ord. Rubiaceae, Juss . — Named in honour of Jas. 
Sherard, an English Botanist and Patron of Botany, whose fine 
garden at Eltham in Kent gave rise to the famous “ Hortus Eltha- 
mensis” of Dillenius. 

*** Perianth double. Cor. monopetalous, inferior. Seeds 2 
or many. 

8. Exacum. Ccd. 4-cleft. Cor. 4-cleft, salver-shaped, mar- 
cescent, the tube swelling. Anthers opening longitudinally. Stig- 
ma entire. Caps. 1-celled, 2-valved. Seeds attached to 2 sutural 
receptacles, which at length separate with the opening of the two- 

valved Caps. — Nat. Ord. Gentianeae, Juss Name, £g, out, and 

xyu, to conduct, anciently applied to the Erythrcea Centaurium, a 
genus allied to this, and which was supposed to have the property 
of ejecting poison from the stomach. 

9. Plantago. Cor. 4-cleft, the segments reflexed. Starn. 

very long. Caps, of 2 cells, 2-or many-seeded, bursting all round 
transversely Nat. Ord. Plantagine^e, Juss. — Name of doubt- 

ful origin. — All the species are mucilaginous and astringent. 

10. Centunculus. Cor. tubular, 4-partite. Stcim. short. 

Caps, of 1 cell, many-seeded, bursting all round transversely 

Nat. Ord. Primulace*, Vent. — Name, it appears, anciently given 
to the Pimpernel, a genus allied to this; and derived, according to 
Theis, from Cento, a covering, because it was a little weed that 
covered the cultivated fields. 

( Some Gentianae. See Cl. V. Ord. II.) 

**** Perianth double. Cor. of 4 petals. 

11. Epimedium. Cal. of 4 leaves, caducous. Pet. inferior, 
with an inflated nectary on the upper side. Pod 1-celled, 2- 
valved, many-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Berber ideje, Vent. — Name of 
obscure origin ; applied by Dioscorides to some plant which grew 
plentifully in Media. 

12. Cornus. Cal. of 4 teeth. Petals without a nectary, supe- 
rior. Nut of the drupe with 2 cells and 2 seeds. — Nat. Ord. 


TETRANDRIA — TETRAGYNIA. 


Potamogeton.] 


61 


Caprifoliace/e, Juss — Named from Cornu, a Horn ; owing to 
the hard nature of the wood. 

(See Cardamine and Coronopus, in Cl. XV.) 

***** Perianth single. 

13. Parietaria. Perianth 4-fid, inferior. Filaments of the 
stam. at first incurved, then expanding with elastic force. Fruit 
1 -seeded, enclosed by the enlarged perianth. (One or more of the 

central florets without stamens.) — Nat. Orel. Urticeae, Juss 

Named from paries, a wall, the species frequently growing on old 
walls. 

14. Alchemilla. Perianth inferior, 8-cleft, the 4 alternate 
and outer segments the smallest. Fruit 1-or 2-seeded, surrounded 

by the persistent perianth — Nat. Orel. Rosace.e, Juss Named 

from the Arabic dlkemclyeh, alchemy , from its pretended alchemi- 
cal virtues. 

15. Isnardia. Cal. 4-cleft, superior. Petals 4, or wanting. 
Stigma capitate. Capsule obovate, 4-angular, 4-valved, 4-celled, 
many-seeded, crowned with the calyx. — Nat. Orel. Onagrariae, 
Juss. — Named after Antoine d'Isnard, a Botanist and Professor at 
Paris, in the beginning of the last century. — As the Genus is now 
characterized here, and by De Candolle, it contains many species 
of Ludwigia. 

16. Sanguisorba. Perianth 4-lobed, superior, coloured, with 
4 scales or bracteas at the base. Fruit 1-or 2-seeded, sur- 
rounded by the persistent base only of the perianth. — Nat. Ord. 
RosACEiE, Juss — Named from sanguis , blood, and sorbeo, to take 
up or absorb; from the supposed vulnerary properties of the plant. 

ORD. II. DIGYNIA. 2 Styles. 

17. Buffonia. Cal. of 4 leaves. Cor. of 4 entire petals. 
Caps, flattened, 1-celled, 2-valved, 2-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Caryo- 
phylle.e, Juss. — Name given by Sauvages in honour of the cele- 
brated Buffon, “ who had indeed very slender pretensions to 
botanical honour ; a circumstance supposed to have been indicated 
by Linnteus in the specific name tenuifolia.” (Sm.) 

(See Alchemilla in Ord. II. Some Gcntianse and Cuscuta in Cl. V.) 

ORD. III. TETRAGYNIA. 3 Styles. 

t 

18. Ilex. Cal. 4 — 5-toothed. Cor. rotate, 4 — 5-cleft. Stig- 
mas 4, sessile. Berry sphmrical, including 4, 1-seeded nuts. 
(Some flowers destituteof pistil). — Nat.Ord. Celastrinea;, Br.— 
Named from ac, sharp, in Celtic, according to Tlieis ; but this is a 
very forced derivation. 

19. Potamogeton. F/oivers sessile upon a spike or spadix, 


G2 


TETRANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


[ Dipsacus . 

which issues from a sheathing bractea or spatha. Perianth single, 
of 4 scales. Anthers sessile, opposite the scales of the perianth. 
Pistils 4 : which become 4 small nuts; Embryo curved. — Nat. 
Orel. Alismace^e, De Cand — Named from crorctyoc, a river, and 
yurov, a neighbour. All the species grow in the water, and often 
present as beautiful an appearance in clear streams and ponds, as 
the Fuel do in the ocean. They protect the spawn of fish, and 
harbour innumerable aquatic insects, affording food by their roots 
and seeds to aquatic birds. — Chamisso and Schlechtendal have 
well illustrated this Genus; see Linncea , v. ii. p. 159. 

20. Ruppia. Flowers 2, on a spadix arising from the sheathing 
bases of the leaves, which perform the office of a spatha. Perianth 
0. Drupes 4, pedicellate, their nuts one-seeded. — Nut. Ord. 
Alismace«, Rich — Named after Henry Bernard Ruppius, 
author of Flora Jenensis, in 1718. 

21. Sagina. Cal. of 4 leaves. Petals 4, (shorter than the 
calyx.) Capsule l-celled, 4-valved. — Nat. Ord. Caryophylle#:, 
Juss. — Name, (signifying meat which fattens,') is little applicable to 
any of the minute plants belonging to this genus. 

22. Mcenchia. Cal. of 4 leaves. Petals 4 (as long as the cal.). 
Caps, of one cell, opening with 8 teeth at the extremity. — Nat. 
Ord. CaryophyllejE, Juss . — Name given in compliment to 
Conrad Mcench , Professor of Botany at Hesse Cassel. 

23. Till^a. Cal. 3 — 4-partite. Pet. 3, or 4. Caps. 3 or 4, 
two-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Crassulace.e, De Cand . — Named after 
Michael Angelo Tilli, an Italian Botanist, who wrote in 1723 a 
catalogue of the plants in the Medical Garden of Pisa. 

24. Radiola. Cal. of 4 leaves united to their middle, and 
mostly 3-cleft. Petals 4. Caps, of 8 cells and 8 valves. — Nat. 
Ord. L INE/E, De Cand . — Named from radius, a ray, I presume 
in consequence of the ray-like segments of the calyx. 

(See Cerastium tetrandrum in Cl. X. Ord. III.) 

TETRANDRIA— MONOGYNIA. 

1. Dipsacus. Linn. Teasel. 

1. D. Fullbnum, Linn. (Fullers Teasel ); leaves subconnate, 
scales of the receptacle hooked at the extremity, involucres spread- 
ing (reflexed, Sm.'). E. Dot. t. 2080. F. FI. v. i. p. 192. 

Waste places and hedge-banks ; but rare and scarcely wild. Ft. July, 
Aug. $ . — Stem 4 — 5 feet high, very angular and prickly. Leaves large, 
oblong, or oblongo-lanceolate, obtusely and irregularly serrated, some- 
times, especially the upper ones, connate. Involucre spreading, about as 
long as the head of flowers. Flowers in oval heads, pale purple or whit- 


TF.TIt AN D It I A — MONOG Y N I A . 


Scabiosa.] 


03 


ish. — Used in dressing cloth, for which purpose the hooked scales of the 
receptacle are admirably calculated. These hooks become obsolete by 
long cultivation in a poor soil, anil there is every reason to believe that 
jD. FuHortum is but a var. of 1). sylvestris. 

2. D. sylvestris, Linn, (wild Teasel); leaves opposite rarely 
connate, scales of the receptacle strait at the extremity, involucres 
curved upward. E. Eot.t. 1032. E. EL v. i. p. 193. 

Road-sides and hedges, not rare in England : less frequent in Scot- 
land. Inch Colm, near Edinb., Maughan. River-sides, about 2 miles 
from Ayr, Mr. James Wilson. FI. July'. $ . 

3. D. pildsus, Linn. ( small Teasel); leaves petiolate with a 
small leaflet at the base on each side, involucres shortly deflexed. 
E. Eot. t. 877. E. FI. v. i.p. 193. 

Moist hedges, but not common. In several places in Norfolk and 
Suffolk. Arundel Castle, Sussex; Mr. Fairer. Guildford, Surrey; 
.7. S. Mill, Esq. Rare in Scotland; Lightfoot. FI. Aug. Sept. £ . — 
Stem slender, 2 — 4 f. high, angular, rough with short reflexed prickles, 
which are longer and resembling bristles on the peduncles. Leaves 
ovato-acuminate, serrated, eared at the base. Heads of flowers rather 
small, round, hairy. Scales straight; blossoms white. Anthers white, 
much protruded. Fruit 4-sided, with 2 depressed dots, according to 
Mr. Coulter, on each face in the upper part. 

2. Knautia. Linn. Knautia. 

1. K. arvensis, Coult. ( Field Knautia); heads of many flowers, 
outer calyx with very minute teeth, inner with 8 — 16 somewhat 
awned cilia. Coult — Scabiosa arvensis , Linn. — E. Eot. t. 659. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 195. 

Pastures and corn-fields, frequent. FI. July. If. — 2 — 3 f. high. 
Radical leaves lanceolate, slightly serrate, hairy. Heads o 1 floivers large, 
convex, lilac-purple : outer florets large, with their segments unequal, the 
lower ones very large, and forming a sort of ray around the head; inner 
florets with equal segments. 

3. Scabiosa. Linn. Scabious. 

1. S. succisa, Linn. ( Eevil' s-bit Scabious); corollas 4-cleft 
their segments equal, cauline leaves dentate, heads of flowers nearly 
globose. E. Eot. t. 878. E. FI. v. i. p. 194. 

Meadows and pastures, common. FI. July, Aug. If . — Foot as it were 
cut off abruptly, or bitten, ( radix prannorsa). Stems nearly simple. 
Leaves hairy, rather stiff'; radical ones ovate, mostly petiolate, those of 
the stem oblong. Flowers purplish-blue. 

2. S columbaria , Linn. ( small Scabious) ; corollas 5-cleft radiat- 
ing, stem hairy, radical leaves oblongo-ovate crenate or lyrate, 
those of the stem pinnatifid with linear segments. E. Eot. t. 1311. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 195. 

Pastures and waste places, most abundant in chalk countries : rare 
in Scotland ; near Arbroath, Ayrshire, with w hite fl.; G. Hon. Plen- 


64 


TETRANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


[Galium. 


tiful near Montrose, and at Blackford ; Mr. Murray. FI. July, Aug. If. . 
Scarcely a foot high, hairy. Lower leaves on rather long footstalks ; 
cauline ones cut into narrow, linear or setaceous pinnae. Flowers pur- 
plish-blue. Involucre of narrow leaves, longer than the flowers. Inner 
cal. with 5 bristles. 

4. Galium. Linn. Bed-straiv. 

* Fruit glabrous. Flowers yellow. 

1. G. verurn, Linn. ( yellow Bed-straw) ; leaves about 8 in a 
whorl linear grooved above, flowers in dense panicles. F. Bot. 
t. 660. E. FI. v. i. p. 208. 

Dry banks, sandy places anil sea-shores, common. FI. July, Aug. If . — 
Readily distinguished by its yellow flowers , and linear, deflexed leaves. 
Gerard tells us that the milk of the best Cheshire cheeses used to be 
coagulated with this plant. According to Lightfoot the Highlanders 
employ the roots, 1 and principally the bark of them, to dye red; boiling 
them with the yarn and adding alum to fix the colour. In the Isle of 
Coll, one of the Hebrides, these roots are taken up in such quantities as 
by frequent digging to injure materially the plants of Triticum junceum. 
Cares; arenaria, &c. among which they grow, and which are so useful in 
binding the sand of the shores, ( Maculloch ). The Highlanders employ 
the plant also as a Rennet to curdle milk, combined with the leaves of 
the stinging Nettle ( Urlica clioica ) and a little salt. 

2. G. cruciatum, Linn. ( Crosswort Bed-straw, Mug-wort ); 
leaves 4 in a whorl ovate hairy, flowers polygamous clustered 
lateral, peduncles 2-leaved. E. Bot. t. 143. E. FI. v. i.p. 199. 

Hedge-banks and thickets, common. FI. May, June. If. 

** Fruit glabrous. Floivers white. 

3. G. palustre , Linn. ( white Water Bed-straw); leaves 4 — 6 
in a whorl oblongo-lanceolate obtuse tapering at the base, and as 
well as the lax spreading branched stem, more or less rough. 

Hooh. Scot. i.p. 51 a. stem and leaves smoothish. G. palustre, 

E. Bot. t. 1857. E. FI. v. i.p. 199. — /3. nerves at the back and 
margins of the leaves, and angles of the stem, distinctly rough with 
mostly reflexed prickles. G. Witheringii , E. Bot. t. 2206. E. FI. 
v. i.p. 200. 

Sides of ditches, lakes and rivulets. FI. July. If. — “ The transition 
from the smooth to the rough state of this plant may be observed on 
the borders of pools, and it is only in very wet situations that it corres- 
ponds with the description in E. FI. of G. palustre. In dry situations, 
especially by road-sides (in Wales) where the earth has been recently 
disturbed (in the neighbourhood of marshes) it assumes the state of 
G. Witheringii, but is very luxuriant and branched. In marshes, not 
liable to be overflowed, and in boggy ground, it is in every respect like 
that described in E. FI. under G. Witheringii." Wilson MSS. The plant 
turns blackish in drying- and the upper leaves are generally unequal in size. 

1 Curtis says these roots yield a better red than madder. The plant should 
be cultivated, and perhaps others of this natural groupe, all allied to the true 
madder, and the dyeing qualities of the roots correctly ascertained. 


Galium.] 


TETRAND11IA — MONOGYNJA. 


65 


4. G. nliginosinn, Linn. ( rough Marsh Bed-straw) ; leaves 6 
in a whorl lanceolate mucronate their margins and the stem rough 
with reflexed prickles. E.Bot.t. 1972. E. Fl.v.i.p. 201. 

Wet meadows and sides of ditches. FI. Aug. If . — Distinguished by 
the lanceolate leaves , tapering at the base and shortly acuminated at their 
points into a mucro. Bristles on the plant all reflexed. 

5. G. saxdtilc. Linn. ( smooth Heath Bed-straw) ; leaves 6 in 
a whorl obovate mucronate, stem very much branched prostrate 
smooth. E. Bot. t. 815. E. FI. v. i, p. 201. 

Heathy spots and hilly and mountainous pastures, abundant : in some 
places the ground being almost white with it during summer. FI. June, 
Aug. If. — Plant small, turning almost black in drying. Leaves often 
rough at the margins, of a thickish and rather soft texture. Fruit, as 
Sir J. E. Smith well observes, becoming reddish after the corollas fall, 
and then, when fertile, minutely granulated on the surface. 

6. G. erection, Huds. ( upright Bed-straw) ; leaves about 8 in a 
whorl lanceolate mucronate their margins rough witli prickles 
pointing forward, panicle much branched, stem glabrous flaccid, 
segments of the corolla mucronato-acuminate. E. Bot. t. 2067. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 202 — j3. leaves downy on the underside. 

Hedges and pastures, not common. In Norfolk : at Portslade, Sussex, 
and near Cambridge, Borrer. Portobello, near Edinburgh; Maughan. — 

near Plymouth; Mr. G. Bants. FI. June, July. If . — “ Differs from 
G. uliginosum by the edges and adjoining portion of the disk of the 
leaves above, bearing a double row of hooked prickles all pointing for- 
ward, in its larger size, stouter habit, glaucous hue, and larger, less 
obovate, leaves. Th e flowers are larger, far more numerous and crowded 
into dense, terminal, compound panicles ; each segment of the corolla 
tipped with an awn-like point.” Sm. in E. FI. — Scarcely any genus 
requires illustration more than Galium. The present species is by 
Sprengel considered the same as G. lucidum of Allioni, and G. rigidum , 
Till. Roemer and Schultes, again, pronounce it G. provinciate, Lam. — 
Piof. Mei tens refers it with certainty, upon the authority of a specimen 
received from Mr. Turner, to G. lucidum. Mr. Banks has sent me 
specimens, agreeing in every particular with the E. Bot. plant : except 
that the leaves are all minutely, but distinctly and thickly, downy on the 
underside. 

7. G. cinereum, All. (prey spreading Bed-straw) ; “ leaves 
6—8. in a whorl linear bristle-pointed with marginal prickles all 
pointing forward, stem weak much branched, fruit smooth, corolla 
tapering.” Sm — E. FI. v. i. p. 203. — G. diffusion, Don in Hook. 
Scot. i. p. 52, (according to Smith.) 

Banks of the river Leith near Slateford, 3 m. from Edinburgh, Don ; 
and near Kinnaird, Angus-shire. ( v . FI. Scot.), G. Dun. FI. Aug. If .— 
Of this I know nothing but from the notes of Mr. G. Don, which I pub- 
lished in Ft. Scot, and from the description of Smith, who says that it 

C i?,^ eS ver y near erection, and that experience must prove how far its 
differences are constant. 


66 


TETRANDIIIA MONOGYNIA. 


[ Galium . 


8. G. aristatum, Linn. ( bearded Bed-straw ) ; “ leaves 6 in a 
wl)orl stalked lanceolate flat reticulated with veins bristle-pointed 
with minute marginal prickles pointing forward, stem much branched 
spreading smooth, seeds smooth kidney-shaped separated, corolla 
taper-pointed.” Sm. — E. FI. v. i. p. 204. 

In Angus-shire, but not common; G. Don. FI. July, Aug. If.. 

9. G. Mollugo, Linn. ( great Hedge Bed-straw) ; leaves 8 in a 
whorl elliptical mucronate rough at the margin, flowers in loose 
spreading panicles, segments of the corolla mucronate. E. Bot. 
t. 1673. E. FI. v. i. p. 208. 

Hedges and thickets; less frequent in Scotland. FI. July, Aug. If. — 
Stems very long and straggling. Prickles on the margins of the leaves 
pointing forward. 

10. G. pusillum, Linn. ( least Mountain Bed- straw) ; “leaves 8 
in a whorl linear-lanceolate hair-pointed entire somewhat hairy, 
panicles terminal forked, fruit very smooth.” Sm — E. Bot. t. 74. 
E FI. v. i. p. 206. 

Limestone hills, near Kendal and about Matlock, Derbyshire : and 
near the lake of Killarney, Ireland. — Portland and Strathblanehills and 
lower rocks of Clova in Scotland; G.and D. Don. FI. July, Aug. If. 
— I have never been so fortunate as to see this plant in a good state, 
and foreign authors seem to be little, if at all, acquainted with it. 

11. G. parisiense, Linn. ( Wall Bed- straw) ; leaves about 6 in 
a whorl lanceolate mucronate rough at the margins, peduncles 
axillary their branches divaricated slender subtrichotomous, stems 

slender rough. — G. gracile, Mertens and Koch a., fruit hispid. 

G. parisiense. Linn G. litigiosum, Be Cand. Ic. PL Gall. p. 8. 

t. 26. — G. gracile, Wallr. — G. gracile u. Mert. and Koch — 13. fruit 

glabrous, slightly tuberculated. G. parisiense, Tenore G. angli- 

cum , Ihtds. E. Bot. t. 384. E. El. v. i. p. 209 G. gracile, (3. 

Mertens and Koch. 

13. Walls and dry sandy soils, but rare : in Kent and various parts of 
the east and south-east of England, especially on old walls. FI. June, 
©. — On comparing this with the G. parisiense of continental authors. 
1 think it will appear evident that it is but a glabrous-fruited var., such 
as is also found on the continent. The G- parisiense of Tenore, for 
example, has the fruit quite glabrous. 

12. G. sacchardtum , All. (warty-fruited Bed-straw) ; leaves 6 
in a whorl lanceolate their margins rough with prickles pointing 
forward, peduncles axillary 3-flowered, fruit reflexed waited. — 
G. verrucosum, E. Bot. t. 2173. E. El v. i.p. 204. — Valantia 
Aparine , Linn. 

Corn-fields, rare. Discovered by Mr. G. Don in corn-fields in the 
Curse of Cowrie, Scotland. Near Malton, Yorkshire; Mr. 11. Miller. 
FI. June — Aug. ©• — Prickles of the stem reflexed. The 2 lateral 
flowers on each peduncle, are sterile, and fall away, one from each side of 


Nubia.] 


TETRAN DRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


67 


the large warted fruit, which, togetlier with the marginal prickles of the 
leaves pointing forwards, essentially distinguish this from G. tricorne. 

13. G. tricorne, With, {rough-fruited Corn Bed-straw); leaves 
about 8 in a whorl lanceolate their margins midrib and angles of 
the stems rough with reflexed prickles, peduncles axillary 3-flowered, 
fruit reflexed granulated. E. Bot. t. 1641. E. FI. v. i. p. 206. 

Dry chalky fields, in England : Isle of Thanet, in Surry and near Stam- 
ford, Lincolnshire. In Oxfordshire, Yorkshire, Gloucestershire, Nor- 
folk, Suffolk (Rev. G. It. Loathes in Herb, nostr.) and the Isle of Wight. 
FI. July. ©. 

14. G.spurium, Linn, (smooth-fruited Corn Bed-straw) ; leaves 
about S in a whorl their margins as well as the stem rough with 
reflexed prickles, peduncles axillary many-flowered, fruit smooth 
spreading. E. Bot. t. 1871. E. FI. v. i. p. 206. 

Corn-fields near Forfar, rare ; G. Don. FI. July. ©. — Allied to the 

2 last species in its short axillary peduncles : but in general habit coming 
so near G. Aparine, that except by the glabrous fruit, it is scarcely to be 
distinguished from it. Sprengel asserts them to be the same. 

*** Fruit hispid. Flowers ivhite. 

15. G. boredle, Linn, (cross-leaved Bed-straw) ; leaves 4 in a 
whorl lanceolate 3-nerved glabrous, stems erect, fruit muricated. 
E. Bot. t. 1 05. E. FI. v. i. p. 209. 

Moist rocks, frequent in the north of England, Wales, and Ireland. 
Ft. June, J uly. If. — In very shaded places and clefts of rocks, the stems 
are long, and straggling. Flowers numerous, crowded, white. Bristles 
of the fruit hooked. 

16. G. Aparine, Linn. (Goose-grass or Cleavers); leaves 6 — 8 
in a whorl lanceolate hispid their margins midrib and angles of the 
stem very rough with reflexed bristles, peduncles axillary, stem weak, 
fruit hispid. E. Bot. t. 816. E. FI. v. i. p. 210. 

Hedges, abundant. FI. June, July. ©.—Habit of spec. 12, 13, 14; and, 
like them, annual. Plant straggling among bushes. Flowers few, 2 or 

3 together, on short, simple footstalks, arising from the axils of the leaves. 
Bristles ot the fruit hooked, which by their means catches hold of the 
coats of animals, and is widely dispersed. The seeds have been recom- 
mended as a substitute for coffee. 

5. Rubia. Linn. Madder. 

1. R. peregnna, Linn, (wild Madder), leaves 4 — 6 in a whorl 
lanceolate persistent glossy the margin and keel rough with reflexed 
prickles, flowers 5-cleft. E.Bot.t. 851. E. FI. v. i. p. 211. 

Stony and sandy ground, in the south-west of England. Anglesea, 
Mr. Wilson. Surely Dr. Mitchell, in Linn. Corresp. v. ii. p. 449, must 
be mistaken in saying that this is “ plentiful all over the sandy islands of 
the west of Scotland." See E. FI. v. i. p. 2 11. FI. June— Aug. If — 
v cry nearly allied to It. tinctorum ; from which, according to be Can- 
dolle, it is distinguished by its “ firmer and harsher texture, its persistent 
leaves, its larger flower, always 5- cleft, with the lobes of the corolla broad 


68 


TETRANDfUA — MONOGYNIA. 


[Exacum. 


and oval at their base, suddenly contracted into an acerose point.” 
Again, Mr. Wilson justly remarks that the corolla is rather rotate 
than campanulate, (or funnel-shaped, as in R. tinctorum ); the segments, 
after the escape of the pollen, spreading, with convex surfaces, concave 
in the newly-opened flowers. 

6. Asperula. Linn. Woodruff. 

1. A. odordta, Linn. ( sweet Woodruff) ; leaves about 8 in a 
whorl lanceolate, flowers panicled on long stalks. E. Bot. t. 755. 
E. El. v. i. p. 196. 

Woods and shady places, plentiful. FI. May, June. If . — About 6 
inches high, erect. - Flowers white. Whole plant very fragrant, like 
Anthoxanthum, especially when in the act of drying. 

2. A. Cynanchica , Linn. (Small Woodruff, Squinancy-ivort) ; 
leaves linear 4 in a whorl, upper whorls with 2 opposite leaves 
reduced to stipules. E. Bot. t. 33. E. FI. v. i. p. 198. 

Warm banks, especially in chalky countries. Not found in Scotland 
or Wales. FI. June, July. If.. — Flowers generally lilac. One pair, in 
the whorl of the uppermost leaves, is reduced to small lanceolate stipules, 
exhibiting beautifully the real character of the stipules of the Rubiacece 
in general, of which the Stellatce are considered by most authors to con- 
stitute a groupe. 

3. A. arvensis , Linn. ( Field Woodruff) ; annual, leaves G — 10 
in a whorl linear-lanceolate obtuse, flowers aggregate terminal sur- 
rounded by long ciliated bractese, fruit glabrous. Banks , in Plym. 
and Davenp. FI. ined. — Lob. Ie. t. 801. f. 2. 

Near Davenport, Mr. Banks. ©. — Specimens of this plant have 
recently been communicated to me, by Mr. Banks, author of the accu- 
rate Flora above quoted, which were gathered in a situation, to all 
appearance wild, and where, if originally introduced from the opposite 
continent, they may assuredly be considered naturalized. By Romer and 
Schultes this is given as a native of all Europe, except Britain. The root is 
annual, and the flowers bright blue : the fruit large and very conspicuous. 

7. Sherardia. Linn. Sherardia or Field-Madder. 

1. S. arvensis, Linn, (blue Sherardia); leaves about 6 in a 
whorl, flowers terminal sessile capitate. E. Bot. t. 891. E. FI. 
v. i.p. 196. 

Corn-fields, especially in a light gravelly soil, frequent. FI. June — 
Aug. 0. — A small, slender, branched and spreading plant. Leaves obo- 
vato-lanceolate, acute, their margins rough, upper ones 7 — 8, forming an 
involucre to a small sessile umbel of pale blue flowers. Cal. of 4 segments, 
two opposite ones bifid ; these bifid ones correspond to the line where 
the fruit separates into two one-seeded portions, each of which is crowned 
with three teeth ; one, being the single tooth or segment of the cal. ; the 
other two, each half of a double one. 

8. Exacum. Linn. Gentianella. 

1. E .fflifbrme, Sm. (least Gentianella) ; leaves linear-lanceolate 


Plantago.] 


TETRANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


69 


sessile, stem dichotomous slender, peduncles elongated. E. Bot. 

t. 235. E. FI. v. i.p. 212. Hook, in FI. Bond. N. Ser. t. 86 

Gentiana Jiliformis, Linn. 

Sandy turf-bogs ; in the extreme south and south-west of England. 
In Ireland it is found near Cork, upon Dursey Island, and at Glcngariff, 
Mr. IV. Wilson. FI. July. ©. — A small, slender and graceful plant, with 
yellow flowers, differing from Gentiana in the number of stamens and 
divisions to the cal. and corolla. 

9. Plantago. Linn. Plantain. 

1. V. major, Linn. ( greater Plantain ); leaves broadly ovate, 
mostly on longish footstalks, scape rounded, spikes long cylindrical, 
dissepiment of the capsule plane, each cell many-seeded. E. Bot. 
t. 1558. E. FI. v. i.p. 213. 

Pastures and road-sides, frequent. FI. June, July. If . — Leaves all 
radical, more or less spreading, with 7 nerves, entire or toothed, glabrous 
or pubescent. Petioles varying in length, sometimes as long as the leaf, 
ribbed. Spike dense. At the base of each flower is a concave bractea. 
Cal. of 4, minute leaflets. Caps, ovate, 6 or 8 seeds in each cell . — Spike 
sometimes leafy, with the leaves disposed in a pyramidal form. Hopk. 

2. P. media , Linn. ( hoary Plantain) ; leaves ovate sessile or 
tapering into short and broad footstalks, scape rounded, spike cylin- 
drical, dissepiment of the capsule plane, each cell 1 -seeded. E. Bot. 
1. 1559. E. FI. v. i. p. 214. 

Meadows and pastures, less frequent in Scotland. FI. June, July. If. 
— Stamens long, with dark purple filaments. Spike shorter than in P. 
major, and more silvery from the shining scariose corollas : but a more 
essential difference is in the cells of the capsule, which are but 1-seeded. 

3. P. lanceolata , Linn. ( Ribwort Plantain) ; leaves lanceolate, 
scape angular, spike ovate, dissepiment of the capsule plane, each 
cell 1-seeded. E. Bot. t. 175. E. FI. v. i. p. 214. 

Meadows and pastures, often too abundant. FI. June, July. If . — 
The leaves and scape are observed by Mr. S. Murray to yield strong 
fibres. The spike has the bracteas sometimes, b}' luxuriance, converted 
into leaves ; and sometimes a new scape and spike grow out horizontally 
from among the bracteas. Lightfoot mentions a var. with globular 
heads : this is probably the same as 1 have found at a considerable ele- 
vation upon the mountains of Scotland, with short leaves; long and 
slender scapes, hairy and scarcely angular ; with small dark brown almost 
globular heads ; the bracteas more or less hairy. This is scarcely different 
from the P. montana of authors, P. quinquenervia of Schleicher’s Cata- 
logue. 

4. P. maritima , Linn. ( Seaside Plantain) ; leaves linear 
grooved fleshy woolly at their base, scape rounded, spike cylin- 
drical, dissepiment of the capsule plane, each cell 1-seeded. 
E. Bot. t. 175. E. FI. v. i. p. 215. — [3. major ; leaves almost plane 
inclining to lanceolate toothed glabrous, scape densely hairy. — y. 
minor; leaves linear-lanceolate densely hairy as well as the scape. 


70 


TETRANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


[Corn;/.?. 


Grassy pastures by the sea-side ; frequent near the margin of fresh 
water lakes anil on theses of mountains sloping down to them, as by 
Loch-Lomond, and on the summits of the highest mountains. — p. On the 
island of Cumrae, among rocks. — y. Among rocks by the House of Skail, 
Pomona, Orkney ; G. Anderson, Esq. FI. June — Sept. 1 (.. — Varying 
much in size and in the breadth and hairiness of its leaves and scapes: 
sometimes the leaves are almost filiform, often lanceolate ; in the curious 
var. found by Mr. Anderson, they are clothed with short, dense hairs ; 
— always very succulent. 

5. P. Coronopus, Linn. (Buck' s-liorn Plantain ) ; leaves linear 
pinnatifid, scape rounded, dissepiment of the capsule with 4 angles 
(thus forming 4 cells), 1 seed in each cell. E. Bot. t. 892. E. FI. 
t’. i.p. 216. 

Gravelly sterile soils, inland and upon the coast. El. June, July. ©. 
— Leaves mostly spreading, very variable in size and pubescence, pinna- 
tifid ; segments often toothed or again divided. Scape hairy. Spike 
mostly cylindrical. In small plants growing on Staffa, I have seen spe- 
cimens with the spike ovate, composed of not more than 7 or 8 flowers ; 
whilst the leaves and scapes were quite hispid. 

10. Centunculus. Linn. ChafFweed. 

1. C. minimus , Linn, (small Chafficeed or Bastard Pimpernel); 
flowers sessile, corolla without glands at the base. Sm — E. Bot. 
t. 531. E. El. v. i. p. 217. 

Moist sandy or gravelly places, about London, in Kent, Bedfordshire, 
Norfolk, Suffolk, the south of Ireland, and lowlands of Scotland : not 
frequent ; but probably often overlooked on account of its small size. 
FI. June, July. ©. — Plant 1 — 2 inches high, more or less branched. 
Leaves alternate, ovate, glabrous. Flowers extremely minute, sessile, 
axillary, solitary. Cor. pale rose colour, withering upon the capsule. 

11. Epimedium. Linn. Barrenwort. 

1. E. alpinum, Linn, (alpine Barrenwort); root-leaves none, 
stem-leaf tw ice ternate. E. Bot. t. 438. E. El. v. i. p. 220. 

Subalpine woods ; doubtful if really a native or an outcast of gardens. 
Bingley woods, Yorkshire. On Carrock fell and Skiddaw, Cumberland. 
Near Glasgow and Edinburgh, (FI. Scot.). FI. May. If .. — Stems several 
from the same root, erect, simple, bearing each a triternate leaf: base of 
the petiole swollen : leaflets heart-shaped, extremely delicate, ciliated at 
the margin, hairy beneath, serrated ; lateral ones inequilateral. Panicle 
shorter than the leaf, springing from the swollen base of the petiole. 
Flowers reddish; nectary white, resembling an inflated membrane. An- 
thers very curious, of 2 cells, opening by two valves which spring back 
upwards, and suffer the pollen to escape. — Another species has been 
found on the North-West coast of America, having G stamens. 

12. Cornus. Linn. Cornel. 

1. C. sanguinea, Linn, (wild Cornel or Dogwood) ; arborescent, 


Alchcmilla .] 


TET II A N D Ii I A — MON O G Y N I A . 


71 


brandies strait, leaves opposite ovate green on both sides, cymes 
destitute of involucre. E. But. t. 249. E.FL v. i. p. 221. 

Woods and thickets, particularly on a chalk or limestone soil ; scarcely 
wild in Scotland. Ft. June, July. Tj . — 5 — C feet high. Bark in the 
older branches dark-red, as are the leaves before they fall ; these are 
strongly nerved, entire, slightly hairy beneath. Cymes of numerous white 
flowers at the ends of the branches. 

2. C. Suecica , Linn, (dwarf Cornel) ; herbaceous, leaves all 
opposite ovate glabrous, flowers few umbellate surrounded by a 4- 
leaved petaloid involucre, and springing from the axil of the forked 
extremity of the stem. E. Bot. t. 310. E. EL v. i.p. 221. 

Alpine pastures in Northumberland and Scotland : especially in turf 
bogs on the Highland mountains. FI. July, Aug. If . — Root creeping. 
Stems about 6 inches high. Umbel terminal, from the axil of 2 young 
branches, which do not exceed the general flowerstalk in height, till the 
fruit is ripe. Drupes red, said by the Highlanders to create appetite, 
and hence called, Lus-a-ehraois , plant of gluttony. (Light/.') 

13. Parietaria. Linn. Wall-Pellitory. 

1. P. officinalis, Linn, (common Pellitory-of-the-wall ) ; leaves 
ovato-lanceolate 3-nerved above tbe base, “ involucre in two por- 
tions, each of about 7 segments, in each portion are 3 flowers with 
a fertile one between them.” Wilson. — E. Bot. t. 597. E. FI. 
v. i.p. 222. 

Old walls and waste places, among rubbish. FI. during the summer 
months. If . — Stems often procumbent upon the wall, reddish, pubescent. 
Leaves alternate. Flowers small, hairy, purplish, clustered in the axils of 
the leaves. “ Involucre in 2 portions, of about 7 segments each, and 
between them is placed a fertile flower, whose perianth is entire, closely 
surrounding the pistil. In each portion of the involucre arc 3 flowers 
apparently lertile,” (Wilson), but of which the central one has only a 
pistil. I lie lateral ones have stamens and pistil. Filaments jointed, in 
which peculiarity exists the elastic property by which the pollen is so 
copiously discharged. This is remarkably the case in a hot summer’s 
day. Fruit black, shining. Pericarp closely investing the seed. For a 
full account of the curious structure of the flowers of this plant, see 
Flora Londinensis. 

14. Alchemilla. Linn. Lady’s Mantle. 1 

1. A. vulgaris, Linn, (common Lady's Mantle ) ; leaves plaited 

many-lobed serrated. E. Bot. t. 597. E. FI. v. i. p. 223. (3. 

minor ; leaves very pubescent. A. hybrida, Pers. 

Alpine pastures, abundant. FI. June, July. If . — One foot high, or 
more. Radical leaves large, on long footstalks, those of the stem with 
connate toothed stipules, upper ones sessile and very small, lobes G — 9. 

1 Mantle of Our Lady (the Virgin Mary), therefore not “ Ladies' Mantle," 
as written by many authors. 


TETRANDRIA MONOGYNI A. 


72 


[Sanguisorba. 


Flowers in many rather lax, corymbose, terminal clusters, yellow-green. 
Germens 1 — 2. Seeds 1 — 2. Style lateral. 

2. A. alpina, Linn. ( alpine Lady's Mantle ) ; leaves digitate 
serrated white and satiny beneath. E. Bot. t. 244*. E. FI. v. i. 
p. 224. 

Mountains in the north of England, North Wales, and especially Scot- 
land. Ft. July, Aug. If . — One of the most elegant of our native 
plants. Inflorescence similar to A. vulgaris; hut the leaves very differ- 
ent, and the leaflets are beautifully silky on the underside. 

3. A. arvensis, Sin. ( Field Lady's Mantle or Parsley Piert ); 
leaves trifid pubescent, lobes deeply cut, flowers sessile axillary. 
E. Bot. t. 1011. E.Fl.v. i. p. 224 — A. Aphanes, Willd. — 
Aphanes arvensis, Linn. 

Fields and gravelly soils, and on wall-tops, where there is any covering 
of soil. FI. May — July. ©. — Stems branched, leafy, 4 — 5 inches long, 
frequently prostrate. Leaves alternate ; stipules large. Slum, varying 
in number. Germens 1 or 2. 

15. Isnardia. Linn. Isnardia. 

1. I. palustris, Linn. ( Marsh Isnardia ) ; stem procumbent 
rooting glabrous, leaves opposite ovate acute stalked, flowers axil- 
lary solitary sessile apetalous. DC. — E. FI. v. iv. App. p. 264. 
Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2593. 

Very rare. In a pool at Buxtead, Sussex ; Mr. Borrer. FI. July. 
©. — A most interesting addition to our British Flora, discovered in 
1827. It is frequent on the continent of Europe, in North America and 
the temperate parts of Asia. 

16. Sanguisorba. Linn. Burnet. 

1. S. officinalis, Linn, (great Burnet) ; glabrous, spikes ovate, 
stamens about as long as the perianth. E. Bot. t. 1312. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 218. 

Low moist meadows and pastures, on a calcareous soil ; chiefly in the 
north of England ( Sm .) ; more rare in the lowlands of Scotland. FI. 
June, July. If .. — 1 — 2 f. high, branching upward. Leaves pinnate with 
a terminal leaflet ; the rest of the leaflets opposite, all ovate, somewhat 
cordate at the base, glabrous, strongly serrated, petioled : at the base of 
each pair of petioles are two small toothed appendages in the larger 
leaves ; these are wanting in some specimens. Heads of flowers much 
crowded, dark purple. Limb of the perianth in 4 ovate segments, its 
tube enveloping the germen and having at its base 4, ciliated scales or 
bracteas ( calyx of many authors). Seed 1, rarely 2. — This and the pre- 
ceding genus are allied to the plants in the Class Icasandria, (liosacece.) 

2. S. media , Linn. ( oblong Burnet); spikes cylindrical. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 2 1 9. 

Pastures, in the west of Scotland; G. Don, in F. FI. FI. July. If. — 
“ Taller and larger than the foregoing, with a much longer and truly 
cylindrical spike, of rather pale flowers. Mr. Don, who sent it, had 
scarcely an idea of its being more than a variety.” Sm. 


Pvtamogcton.] 


TETRANDRIA TETRAGYNIA. 


73 


TETR AND II I A— DIG YNI A. 

17. Buffonia. Sauv. Buffonia. 

1. B. annua, DC .{annual Buffonia ); stein loosely panicled 
from tlie base, branches spreading short firm, striae on the calyx 
strait parallel, capsules scarcely so long as the cal., leaves subulate 
spreading at the base. DC. — B. tenuifolia, E. Bot. t. 1813, 
(scarcely of Linn.). E. El. v. i. p. 225. 

8aid to have been found in Flukenet’s and Dillenius’ time, both about 
Boston in Lincolnshire, and on Hounslow Heath : but no one has seen 
it there since. Sir Joseph Banks was persuaded that, in Lincolnshire, 
the Bupleurum tenuissimum had been mistaken for it. FI. June. ©. 
(Sm.) — Linnaeus’ B. tenuifolia is perennial, and is the B. perennis of 
He Cand. 

TETRANDRIA— TETRAGYNIA. 

r 

18. Ilex. Linn. Holly. 

1. I. Aquifolium, Linn, (common Holly) ; leaves ovate acute 
shining waved with spinous teeth, peduncles axillary short many- 
flowered, flowers subumbellate. E. Bot. t. 496. E. El. v. i.p. 221. 

Frequent in hedges and woods, especially in a light or gravelly soil. 
FI. May, June. Tj . — A small evergreen tree of great beauty, with smooth 
grayish bark. Leaves alternate, deep shining green, very rigid, the upper 
ones quite entire, the lower ones generally edged with strong sharp 
spines. This difference in the foliage has not escaped the notice of 
Poets. Th e flowers are somewhat umbellate, and spring from the axils of 
the leaves. Cal. slightly hairy, small. Cor. white. Berries bright scarlet. — 
Excellent for fences, as it bears clipping. The wood is hard and white 
and presents a beautiful surface ; whence it is much employed for Turners’ 
work, for drawing upon, for knife-handles, &c. Of the bark, bird-lime 
is made. With the leaves and berries our houses and churches are 
adorned at Christmas, a relic probably of Druidism, during the preva- 
lence of which Dr. Chandler tells us, “ houses were decked with them, 
that the sylvan spirits might repair thither and remain unnipped by 
frost and cold winds, until a milder season had renewed the foliage of 
their darling abodes.” — Innumerable varieties of this plant are reared by 
gardeners, mainly depending upon the variegation of their leaves and 
spines, and the colour of the berries.— The Holly (Creil Thionn, in 
Gaelic), is the badge of the Clan Drummond. 

19. Potamogeton. Linn. Pond-weed. 

* Leaves all opposite ; stipules none. 

1. P. densus, Linn, (opposite-leaved P oral- weed) ; leaves all 
opposite amplexicaul ovato-acuminate or lanceolate. E. Bot. 
t. 397. E. El. v. i.p. 230. 

Ditches, frequent. FI. June, July. If. — Peduncles short. Head of 
flowers small, rounded. Leaves keeled below, middle nerve or rib of 
many longitudinal cells, with 2 and sometimes 3 lateral parallel veins on 
each side, the inner one the strongest. 

E 


74 


TETRANDRI A — TETRAGYNI A. [ Potamogeton . 


** Leaves alternate, all submersed, with adnate stipules. 

2. P. pectindtus, Linn. ( Fennel-leaved Pond-weed ); leaves dis- 
tichous setaceous single-nerved sheathing by means of their adnate 
stipules, spike interrupted. E. Pot. t. 323. E. FI. v. i. p. 236. 
— P. marinus, Linn. 

Rivers, lakes, and salt-water ditches. FL July. If • — General habit 
not much unlike liuppia maritima. Chamisso and Schlechtendal make 
2 species of this ; the one having small fruit or nuts, not keeled at the 
back, (their P. flliforrnis) : the other having large fruit, twice the size of 
the former and keeled at the back, (their P. pectinatus). I scarcely know 
whether these characters are sufficient to constitute species. If they 
are, our plants, at least all that I have seen in fruit, and there is no differ- 
ence in the foliage, will belong to P. flliforrnis. The latter I possess from 
Gouan, marked P. marinus. Probably it is the one alluded to by Dille- 
nius as having “ large heads of flowers" when growing in salt-water, (see 
F. FI. p. 237); and should be sought for by those who live in the neigh- 
bourhood of salt-marshes. 

*** Leaves alternate, all linear, submersed ; stipules free. 

3. P. pusillus, Linn, (small Pond-weed); leaves narrow-linear 
3 — 5-nerved with obscure connecting veins, peduncles elongated. 
E. Bot. p. 215. E. FI. v. i. p. 235 — j3. major ; stem more com- 
pressed, leaves broader, spike somewhat interrupted. P. eompres- 
sus, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 418. E. FI. v. i. p. 233. 

Ditches and still waters. FI. July. If .. — The stem is here, as in all of 
this division, more or less compressed. The leaves are more or less 
acute ; the spikes oblong, compact or a little interrupted. I quite agree 
with Chamisso and Schlechtendal who unite the P. compressus with 
P. pusillus. 

4. P. gramineus, Linn, (grassy Pond-weed) ; leaves broadly 
linear obtuse 3-nerved with few and obscure connecting veins, 
peduncle scarcely longer than the oblongo-oval spike. E. Bot. 
1 . 2253. E. FI. v. i. p. 235 — P. obtusifolius, 3Icrf. and Koch. — 
Cham, et Schlecht. in Linneea, v. ii.p. 178. t. 4 .f. 8. 

Ponds and ditches ; Deptford, Norwich, Yorkshire, (E. FI.) Lan- 
cashire, Mr. Wilson. FI. July. If. — Nearly allied to the last, but 
stouter, darker -coloured and with short peduncles, scarcely longer than 
the stipule of the leaf from the axil of which they spring. The middle 
nerve or rib is accompanied by many parallel oblong reticulations, as is 
well observed by Smith. 

5. P. acutfolius, Link, (sharp-leaved Pond-weed); leaves linear 
acuminate with 3 principal and numerous close parallel intermedi- 
ate nerves occupying the whole surface, spikes oval compact about 
equal in length with the short peduncle. Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. 
t. 2609. 

Rare? Hitherto only found in marsh-ditches at Amberley, Henfield 
anil Lewes, Sussex, Mr. Borrer. FI. July. If . — The numerous, closely 


Potamogeton.] TETRANDRIA — TETRAGYNIA. 75 

placed, parallel nerves well distinguish this and the following species from 
their congeners. 

6. P. zosterccfolius, Schum. (Grass-wrack-like Pond-weed) ; 
leaves broadly linear acute with 3 principal and numerous close 
parallel intermediate nerves occupying the whole surface, spikes 
cylindrical upon long peduncles. Reichenb. Iconogr. t. 1 75. f 308. 
Cham, et Schlecht. in Linncea, v. it. p. 182. t. 4 ./ 10. — P. cuspi- 
datus, Sclirad. — E. FI. v. i.p. 234. 

Rare? Rivulet at Hovingham, Yorkshire. Mr. Teesdalc. Lakes of 
llescobie and Forfar, G. Don. I have it from the latter station, gathered 
by Mr. Drummond. FI. July. 7f . — Larger than the last; with peduncles 
3 — 4 inches long, and spikes cylindrical, an inch long. 

**** Leaves alternate, ovate or lanceolate, all submersed ; sti- 
p tdes free. 

7. P. crispus, Linn, (curled Pond-weed) ; leaves lanceolate 
waved and serrated 3-nerved, fruit beaked. E. Bot. t. 1012. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 233. 

Ditches and rivers, frequent. FI. June, July. If . 

8. P. perfoliatus, Linn, (perfoliate Pond-weed) ; leaves cordato- 
ovate amplexicaul 7-nerved with smaller intermediate nerves. 
E. Bot. t. 168. E.Fl. v. i.p. 229. 

Ditches and lakes, frequent. FI. July. Id .—Peduncles rather short, 
thick. Spikes oblongo-ovate. 

9. P. lucens, Linn, (shining Pond-iceed); leaves elliptic-lanceo- 
late mucronate with several opposite pairs of parallel nerves spring- 
ing from the midrib connected by reticulations, spikes cylindrical 
many-flowered. E. Bot. t. 376. E. FI. v. i.p. 231. 

Lakes, pools, and streams, abundant. FI. June, July. If. — The largest 
of our species, and very beautiful in the nervation of its leaves. Cham- 
isso and Schlechtendal include this in a division of the Genus which has 
sometimes floating and coriaceous leaves (folia accessoria), they change 
its name to P. Proteus, and consider the P. heterophyllus a variety of ft. 
To me they appear distinct ; but aquatic plants of all kinds are extremely 
liable to vary. 

***** Leaves alternate, upper ones floating, broader than the 
rest; stipules free. 

10. P. heterophyllus, Schreb. (various-leaved Pond-weed) ; 

uppei leaves elliptical stalked floating slightly coriaceous, lower 

ones lanceolate membranaceous sessile, flower-stalks swelling up- 
wards.” E. Bot. t. 1285. E. FI. v. i.p. 229. 

Pools and ditches, in various parts of the country. FI. June, July. 

• Mr. Wilson finds this sometimes without floating leaves, when it 
seems intermediate between P. lanceolatus and P. rufescens. 

11. P. lanceolatus, Sm. ( lanceolate Pond-weed); submersed 


TETRANDUIA — TETRAGYNIA. 


70 


[Potamogclon. 


leaves lanceolate tapering at the base membranaceous with about 
5 — 7 nerves and transverse veins, near the middle nerve are small 
chain-like reticulations, floating leaves elliptic-lanceolate subcoria- 
ceous many-nerved petiolate, peduncle about as long as the leaves, 
spikes elliptical — / 3 ; floating leaves none. P. lanceolatus, E. Dot. 
t. 1985. E. FI. v. i. p. 232. 

Pools and ditches. — «. and £. growing together in Anglesea. Rev. 
H. Davies. Angus-shire, G. Don. Kincardineshire, Mr. Maughan. 
In the Losie, by Elgin, Rev. G. Gordon. FI. July. If . — This plant has 
been very little understood till Mr. Wilson found it growing in a small 
rivulet in Anglesea, having a moderately swift stream. Floating leaves 
are always found where the current is slow. The chain-like reticulations 
are only distinguishable near the mid-rib on the submersed leaves, the 
floating leaves being elegantly overspread by them.” ( Wilson in lilt.) 
This is quite correct, and the portion of chain-like reticulations increases 
gradually upwards. The difficulty is now to distinguish this plant from 
the preceding, than which, however, it is much smaller and more deli- 
cate in all its parts. Sir J. E. Smith considered the P. setaceus of Linn, 
and Huds. and FI. Brit, to be probably the same as the present ; but 
this can hardly be. 

12. P. rnfescens, Schrad. ( reddish Pond-weed); submersed 
leaves lanceolate membranaceous many-nerved with connecting 
veins and many linear reticulations at the midrib, floating ones 
subcoriaceous on long stalks. Cham, et Schlecht. in Linncea, v. ii. 
p. 210. — P.Jlni terns, E. Dot. t. 1286. E. FI. v. i.p. 230, (not of 
Doth.) 

Ditches and slow streams in many parts of England; Anglesea, Mr. 
Wilson. Near Glasgow and Forfar; in the Gaddie, at Premnay, Aber- 
deenshire, Rev. G. Gordon. FI. July. If. — “ This does, in some situa- 
tions, much resemble P. lucens. The coriaceous floating leaves are 
nearly as acute as the lower ones, differing only in their firmer texture 
and in being stalked, the ribs, shape, and size are much the same in both. 
The lateral ribs or nerves are by no means separate at the base of the 
leaf, but arise from various parts of the central rib ; some of them one- 
third the length of the leaf from its base; they are from 6 — 7 in num- 
ber on each side, 2 of them more evident than the rest : flower-stalk not 
thickened upwards.” ( Wilson in lilt.) It is remarkable for its reddish- 
olive colour, and is perhaps better known by its general aspect, size, and 
hue, than by any character that can be applied to it. To me, the above 
species with floating leaves seem gradually to pass into one another. 

13. P. oblongus, Viv. (blunt-fruited broad-leaved Pond-weed); 
“ floating leaves coriaceous, lower ones submersed or all floating, 
(leafless petioles none) nuts minute blunt at the back.” Cham, et 
Schlecht. in Linncea, v. ii. p. 214. t. 6. J. 19. “ Viviani, Fragm. 
FI. It. i. t. 2.” 

Ditches near Ilenfield? Mr. D. Turner. FI. July. If — I introduce 
this on the authority of specimens received by Chamisso and Schlechten- 
dal from Mr. Turner, never having seen the plant. The fruit is described 


TETR AN D RI A TETR AGY N I A . 


77 


Sagina.] 


arul figured as quite rounded and olituse on the hack, whereas in the 
following species it is decidedly acute, (when dried only. IVils.) 

14. P. ndtans, Linn. ( sharp-fruited broad-leaved Pond-iveed) ; 
lower leaves linear submeinhranaceous or wanting, upper elliptical 
coriaceous floating, all on long stalks many-nerved distinctly cellu- 
lar, fruit carinated. E. Eot. t. 1822. E.Fl. v. i. p. 228. 

Stagnant waters and slow streams, frequent. FI. June, July. If. — 
Very variable, in the size of the plant, and in the shape of its floating 
leaves, which are more or less elongated, sometimes linear-lanceolate, 
obtuse at the base or decurrent with the footstalks. The lower leaves 
appear to me to differ from the submersed leaves of all the others 
(except the last perhaps,) in having their substance composed of the 
same small, but distinct, cells or reticulations as the floating ones. 
These submersed leaves are frequently wholly wanting, especially when 
the plant grows in very shallow water. Chamisso and Schlechtendal 
describe the lower petioles as leafless, but this assuredly is not always 
the case. 


20. Ruppia. Linn. Ruppia. 

1. R. maritima , Linn. ( Sea Ruppia ). E. Eot. t. 136. Hook, 
in El. Lond. t. 50. E. FI. v. i. p. 237. 

Salt-water pools, and ditches. FI. July, Aug. If. — Stems slender, 
filiform, flexuose, branched, leafy. Leaves linear-setaceous, with sheaths 
sometimes narrow and small, at other times large and inflated. Spadix 
at first very short, included in the sheath or spatha , with 2 green Jlmvers, 
one above another on opposite sides, and quite destitute of perianth. 
Anthers large, sessile, subquadrate, bursting horizontally, 1-celled. Mer- 
tens and Koch say that each pair is, in fact, the 2 cells of 1 anther; and 
that there are, in reality, but 2, sessile stamens. Pollen, a tube with 3 
globules, 1 in the middle and 1 at each end of the tube. Germcns 
resembling 4 minute tubercles in the centre between the anthers. At 
the time of flowering, the spadix lengthens remarkably, to the height of 
5 or 6 inches or more, and becomes spirally twisted, so as to bring the 
blossoms to the surface of water : but Mr. Wilson observes the fruit to 
be submersed in every stage. When the germens swell, their base is 
elongated into a footstalk, one or two inches long. Each then becomes 
an oblique, ovate, acuminated drupe. This drupe is sometimes more 
beaked than at other times, and the sheaths of the leaves are sometimes 
but little dilated ; then the plant becomes It. rostellata of Koch, and of 
Reichenbach in his Iconog.t. 174. f. 306, which indeed is the more 
common state of the plant with us. I have only seen such large sheaths 
as are figured for the true 11. maritima, Linn. (Reichenb. Iconog.t. 174. 
f. 307.), on specimens from the south of Europe. Yet the latter author 
quotes my figures in Flora Lond. as admirably characteristic of his 
maritima. 


21. Sagi'na. Linn. Pearl-wort. 

1. S. procumbens, Linn, (procumbent Pearl-wort ); perennial, 
glabrous, stems procumbent, leaves shortly mucronate, petals much 
shorter than the calyx. E. Eot. t. 880. E. El. v. i. p. 238. 


78 


TETRANDRIA — TETRAGYNIA. 


[ TilUca. 


Waste places, and dry pastures, frequent. FI. May — Aug. If . — Stems 
spreading, 2 — t* inches long, in alpine situations growing amongst Sper- 
gula subulata , from which it is with difficulty distinguished : and often 
sending out roots from different parts of the stem at the insertion of 
the leaves, and these throwing up new plants. Leaves linear-subulate, 
connate, membranous at the margins at the base, tipped with a short 
pellucid point or mucro. Peduncles solitary, axillary and terminal, about 
an inch long. Flowers at first drooping. 

2. S. apetala, Linn. ( annual small-flowered Pearl- wort ); 
annual, stems slightly hairy erect or ascending, leaves aristate 
fringed, petals much smaller than the calyx. E. Bot. t. 881. 
E. El. v. i. p. 240. 

Dry gravelly places, on walls, &c. frequent, and sometimes growing 
upon the sea-shore with the following species. FI. May, June. 0. — 
Slenderer than the last, smaller and annual. Leaves narrower, more 
bristle-pointed, more glaucous and slightly hairy at the margins, some- 
times glabrous. Stems also hairy. Petals always present, according to 
Mr. W. Wilson, obcordate, or wedge-shaped and truncated. 

3. S. maritima , Don, ( Sea. Pearl-wort ); annual, glabrous, stems 
erect or procumbent only at the base, leaves fleshy obtuse, petals 
none, calyx rather longer than the capsule. Don's Hort. Sicc. Br. 
n. 155. E. Bot. t. 2195. Hook, in FI. Loud. N. S. t. 115. — 
S. stricta, Fries. — Svensk, Bot. t. 562. f. 2. 

Sea-coast of England, Ireland, Scotland, not unfrequent. FI. May, 
Aug. 0. — A very distinct and well-marked species, with a reddish or 
purplish tinge, especially on the stems and calyces. Quite glabrous. 
Petals altogether wanting. Cal. blunt, longer than the capsule. Leaves 
without any apiculus, fleshy, “ rounded at the back,” (Wilson). 

22. Mcenchia. Ehrh. Mcenchia. 

1. M. erecta, Sm. (upright Mcenchia). E. FI. v. i. p. 241. 
31. glaucci, Pers — Sagina erecta , Linn E. Bot. t. 609. 

Pastures, in a gravelly soil. FI. May. 0 . — Stem 2 — 4 inches high, erect, 
or frequently a little reclining at the base, glabrous as well as the leaves, 
which are opposite, linear-lanceolate, acute, rigid, glaucous. Cal. leaves 
large, acuminate, white and membranous at the margin. Pet. lanceolate, 
entire, as long as the calyx. Capsule as in Cerastium. 

23. Tillasa. Linn. Tillsea. 

1. T. muscosa, Linn. (31ossy Tillcea ); stems branched and 
decumbent at the base, flowers axillary sessile mostly 3-cleft. 
E. Bot. t. 1 1 6. E. FI. v. i. p. 242. 

On moist barren sandy heaths, in various parts of England, not found 
in Scotland. A troublesome weed in gravel walks in some parts of 
Norfolk and near London. FI. May, June. ©. — A minute succulent 
plant, scarcely 2 inches high, allied to Sedum: with small reddish, opposite, 
oblong, blunt leaves. Cal. leaves mostly 3, bristle-pointed. Petals very 
small, almost subulate, white, or tipped with rose-colour. 


Borago.'] 


PENTANDllIA — MONOGYNIA. 


70 


24-. Radiola. Gmef. Flax-seed. 

1. R. mi Her/ r ana, Sm. ( Thy me- leaved !• lax-seed), F. Hot. 

t. 890. E.F/.v.i.p. 243 R. linoides, Gmel. — De Cand . — 

Linum Radiola, Linn. 

Moist gravelly and boggy soils, in many (daces. FI. July, Aug. ©.— 
A very minute plant, 1 — 2 inches high, repeatedly dichotomous. Leaves 
distant, ovate, entire, glabrous, under a high power of the microscope 
appearing dotted. Flowers axillary and terminal, stalked, solitary, on 
short peduncles. Cal. segments united so as to form a monophyllous 
many-toothed calyx. 


CLASS V. PENTANDllIA. 5 Stamens. 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

* Perianth doable, inferior. Corolla monopetalous. Germen 
deeply 4 -lobed. Fruit with 4, (or fewer by imperfection ) appar- 
ently naked seeds.— Nat. Orel. Boragine^e, J)e Cand. (Asperi- 
folise, Linn.) 

t Th roat of the corolla naked. 

1. Echium. Cor. irregular, its throat dilated, open and naked. 

Stigma deeply cloven Named from vyjg, a Viper ; because this, 

or some allied plant, was supposed to be an effectual remedy against 
the bite of that animal. 

2. Pulmonaria. Cal. with 5 angles, 5-cleft. Cor. funnel- 
shaped, its throat naked. — Named from Palmo, the lungs ; from 
the use formerly made of this and other BoRAGiNEiE in pulmonary 
affections. In the present instance, the spotted leaves, resembling 
the lungs, were the principal recommendation. 

3. Lithospermum. Cal. in 5 deep segments. Cor. funnel- 
shaped, its orifice naked. — Named from XiOog, a stone, and ffmgpu, 
a seed ; from its shining, very bard seeds or nuts. The English 
name Gromwell, has the same origin in the Celtic : graun, a seed, 
and mil, a stone. 

ft Throat of the corolla more or less closed with scales. 

4. Symphytum. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. swollen upwards, its throat 
closed with connivent subulate scales. — Named from augifivin, to 
unite ; from its imagined healing qualities. 

5. Borago. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. rotate, having its mouth closed 
with 5, obtuse and emarginate teeth. — Named from Cor , heart, 1 and 
ago, to bring : thence corrupted into Borago, or as the French spell 
it, Borrago. 

1 Hence the old adage ; “ I Borage, always bring Courage.” 


80 


PENTAN DItIA — MONOGVNIA. 


{Primula. 


6. Lycopsis. Cul. 5-cleft. Cor. funnel-shaped with a curved 
tube , the mouth closed with convex, connivent scales. Nuts con- 
cave at the base. — Named from Xunog, a wolf and o^/g, a face; from 
a fancied resemblance in its gaping flower to the head of a wolf. 

7. Anchusa. Cal. 5-cleft or 5-partite. Cor. funnel-shaped, tube 
straight, its mouth closed with convex, connivent scales. Nuts con- 
cave at the base. — Named from wyypvtfa, paint. The roots of one 
species, A. tinctoria , yield a red dye which was used in former 
times to stain the face. 

8. Myosotis. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. salver-shaped, the lobes obtuse, 
tbe mouth half closed with short rounded valves. Nuts perforated 
at the base. — Named from gug, vog, a mouse, and ovg, wrog, an ear; 
from the shape of the leaves. 

9. Asperugo. Cal. 5-cleft, unequal, with alternate smaller 
teeth. Cor. (short) funnel-shaped, its mouth closed with convex 
connivent scales. Nuts covered by the folded and compressed 
calyx. — Named from asper, rough ; eminently applicable to this, 
even among the groupe of Asperifolicc. 

10. Cynoglossum. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. (short) funnel-shaped, its 
mouth closed with convex, connivent scales. Nuts depressed, fixed 
to the style or central column — Named from y.uuv, a (Joy, and 'yXudsa, 
a tongue; from the shape and texture of the leaf. 

** Perianth double, inferior. Corolla rnonopetalous. Seeds 
covered with a distinct capsule. 

11. Anagallis. Cal. 5-partite. Cor. rotate. Stamens hairy. 
Capsule bursting all round transversely. — Nat. Ord. Primulace/e, 
Vent. — Named from wixy-Xau, to laugh. Pliny says the Anagallis 
excites pleasure : and Dioscorides that it removes obstructions of 
the liver which create sadness. 

12. Lysimachia. Cal. 5-partite. Cor. rotate. Stam. not dis- 
tinctly hairy. Caps. 1-celled, 10-valved. — Nat. Ord. PimiuLACEiE, 
Vent. — Named in honour of king Lysimachus, according to some; 
according to others from Xuffig, a dissolving, and j, battle. The 
English name, it will be at once seen, has a similar meaning. Pliny 
says it tames restive horses. 

13. Cyclamen. Cal. campanulate, ^ five-cleft. Cor. rotate, the 
mouth prominent, the segments reflexed. Caps, globose, 1-celled, 
opening with 5 teeth. — Nat. Ord. Pkimul ace.-e, Vent. — Named 
from -MX/.og, a circle, probably from the circles formed by the spiral 
peduncles. In French, Pain de por< t cau, and in English Sow-bread, 
because the large tuberous roots are eagerly sought by swine, not- 
withstanding their highly acrid nature. 

14. Primula. Cul. tubular, 5-toothed. Cor. salver-shaped, its 


So/auum.] l’ENTANDKIA — MONOGYNIA. Hi 

tube cylindrical, its mouth open. Caps, opening with 10 teeth.— . 
Nat. Ord. Primulace/e, Vent — Named from primus, first, on 
account of the early appearance of the tlowers in the commoner 
species. 

15. Hottonia. Cal. 5 -partite. Cor. salver-shaped, with a short 
tube. Stamens inserted at the mouth of the tube. Stigma globose. 
Caps, globose, (valveless, Spr., opening with 5 teeth, Sm.) tipped 
with the long style. — Nat. Orel. Primulace.e, Vent. — Named after 
Pierre Hotton, a Professor at Leyden during the latter half of the 
17th century. 

16. Menyanthes. Cal. 5-partite. Cor. funnel-shaped, the seg- 
ments hairy within. Stigma 2-lobed. Capsule l-celled; seeds parietal. 
— Nat. Orel, allied to Gentiane^e, Br — Name, a month, 
and ccvt)c;, a flower. Sir J. E. Smith says the blossoms continue in 
perfection about a month. 

17. Villarsia. Ccd. 5-partite. Cor. rotate, the limb often 
ciliated. Cups, l-celled. Seeds parietal. — Nat. Orel, allied to 
Gentiane.e, Br. — Named in compliment to 31. ele Villars, author 
of Flore du Dauphine. 

18. EltYTHRAiA. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. funnel-shaped, marcescent, 
its limb, short. Anthers at length spirally twisted. Style erect. 
Stigmas 2. Ceips. linear, 2-celled. Br. — Nat. Ord. Gentiane/e, 

Juss Named from i^ud^og, red, the colour of the flowers in most of 

the species. 

19. Datura. Cal. tubular, deciduous. Cor. funnel-shaped, 

plaited. Stigma 2-lobed. Capsule ^ four-celled, 4-valved 

Nat. Orel. SoLANEiE, Juss. — Named from its Arabic appellation 
Tdtorak, (Forskal). In some parts of the East Indies it is called 
Datura. 

20. Hyoscyamus. Ccd. tubular, 5-cleft. Cor. funnel-shaped, 

oblique. Caps. 2-celled, opening with a lid Nut. Ord. Solane^e, 

Juss. — Named from v;, log, a Hog, and y.vxuog, a bean. Hogs are 
said to eat the fruit, which bears some resemblance to a bean. The 
seeds do not prove injurious, though the plant be esteemed poisonous. 

21. Atropa. Cal. 5-partite. Cor. campanulate, the lobes equal. 

Siam, distant. Berry of 2 cells Nat. Orel. So lane.*, Juss 

Named from Atropos, one of the Fates ; in allusion to its deadly 
quality, whence also its Eng. name elwale, (deuil, Fr., dolor, Lat.) 

22. Solanum. Ccd. 5 — 10-partite. Cor. rotate. Anthers open- 
ing with 2 pores at the extremity. Berry roundish, 2-or more 
celled. — Nat. Ord. Solanete, Juss. — Name of doubtful origin. 
According to some from Solamen, on account of the comfort or 
seduce derived from some species as a medicine. 


82 


PENTANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


[Lobelia. 


23. Verbascum. Cal. 5-partite. Cor. rotate, irregular. Stum. 

declined, often hairy. Caps, of 2 cells and 2 valves Nat. Orel. 

Solane/E, Juss. — Name altered from Barbascum, from Barba, a 
beard; in allusion to the shaggy nature of its foliage. 

24. Convolvulus. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. campanulate, plicate. 

Stigmas 2. Caps, of 1 — 3 cells, with as many valves. Cells 1 — 2- 
seeded Nat. Orel. Convolvulace m , Juss. — Named from con- 

volve , to entwine: whence, too, the English name Bindweed. 

25. Polemonium. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. rotate. Siam, inserted 
upon the 5 teeth or valves which close the mouth of the corolla. 

Stigmas 3. Capsule 3-celled, 3-valved Nat. Ord. Polemonia- 

ceie,Juss. — Named from m~ki\haq,ie:ar : according to Pliny this plant 
having caused a war between two kings who laid claim to its dis- 
covery. 

26. Azalea. Cal. 5-partite. Cor. shortly campanulate, regular. 
Stam. inserted at the base of the cor., strait. Anthers bursting 
longitudinally. Caps. 2 — 3-valved, 2 — 3-celled ; dissepiment 
formed by the indexed margins of the bifid valves. Seeds attached 
to a central, at length free, receptacle. — Nat. Ord. Ericeze, Juss. — 
Named from ct^xteos, parched, arid: because in such places the 
plant grows. 

27. Vinca. Ceil, 5-partite. Cor. salver-shaped, the segments 
oblique, spirally imbricated in the bud. Follicles 2, erect. Seeds 
naked (destitute of seed-down) — Nat. Ord. Apocyneze, Juss . — 
Name; supposed from vincio, to bind , as the trailing stems do those 
plants which grow in its neighbourhood. 

* * * Perianth double, superior. Corolla monopetalous. 

28. Samolus. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. salver-shaped, its tube short, 
with 5 scales (imperfect stamens') at its mouth, alternating with the 
lobes. Capsule half-inferior, 1-celled, many-seeded, opening with 
5 valves. Seeels upon a large central free receptacle. — Nat. Orel. 
allied to Primulace^:, Br. — Named, some say, from the island 
of Samos, where Valerandus a botanist of the 16th century is 
alleged to have gathered our Samolus, Valerandi. Others, as Theis, 
derive it from seen, sedutary, ami mos, a hog in Celtic ; because it 
was used by the ancients for curing diseases of hogs. 

29. Jasione. Cor. rotate, in 5 deep segments. Anthers united 
at their base. Stigma club-shaped. Caps. 2-celled, opening at the 
top. ( Flowers collected into ei head, within a many-leaved Invo- 
lucre.) — Nat. Orel. Lobeli ace.e, Juss — Name, supposed from 
iov, a violet, from the blue colour of the flowers, applied by Pliny 
to some esculent plant. 

30. Lobelia. Cor. irregular, 2-lipped, cleft longitudinally on 


Viola.] PENTANDRIA MONOGYNlA. 83 

the upper-side. Anthers united. Stigma hairy. Capsule 2 — 3-cel- 
led, the upper free part 2-valved — Nat. Orel. Lobeliace;e, Juss. 
— Named in honour of Matthias Label or L' Obcl, a Ideming, hut 
naturalized in England, where he published several learned botani- 
cal works. 

31. Phyteuma. Cor. rotate, in 5 deep segments. Filaments 
dilated at the base. Stigma 2 — 3-cleft. Caps, of 2 — 3 cells, burst- 
ing at the side. ( Flowers in dense bracleated spikes or heads .) — 
Nat. Ord. Campanulacea, Juss. — Name, (pv rtupx (the same as 
(puro'j, a plant), given, par excellence, to some medicinal plant by the 
ancients, but which probably bore little or no relation with the 
present. 

32. Campanula. Cor. campanulate or subrotate, with 5 broad 
and shallow segments. Filaments dilated at the base. Stigma 2-5-fid. 
Caps. 2 — 5-celled, bursting laterally, rarely at the extremity — 
Nat. Ord. Campanulaceje, Juss. — Named, from the usual form 
of the corolla, Campana, a bell. 

33. Lonicera. Cor. irregular. Ferry 1 — 3-celled, many- 
seeded. — Nat. Ord. Caprifoliace;e, Juss. — Named in honour 
of Adam Lonicer, a German Botanist. 

**** Perianth double , inferior. Corolla of 4 or 5 petals. 

34. Rhamnus. Cal. urceolate, 4 — 5-cleft. Petals 4 — 5, some- 

times wanting. Stamens opposite the petals. Ferry 2 — 4- celled, 
2 — 4-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Rhamneje, Juss . — Name, in 

Greek, a brunch ; from its numerous branches. 

35. Euonymus. Cal. flat, 4 — 5-cleft, having a peltate disk 
within. Pet. 4 — 5. Stam. alternating with the petals, inserted 
upon glands at the margin of the disk. Caps, with 3 — 5 angles, 
and as many cells and valves. Seeds with a coloured fleshy arillus. 
— Nat. Ord. Celastrine/K, Br. — Named from Euonyme, mo- 
ther to the Furies, in allusion to the injurious effects produced by 
the fruit of this plant. 

36. Impatiens. Cal. of 2, deciduous leaves. Pet. 5, very irre- 

gular, lower one cucullate with a spur. Anthers united. Capsule 
of 5, elastic valves Nat. Ord. B a lsamin ead, Rich. — Name (im- 

patient); from the sudden opening of the valves of the capsule, when 
the fruit is touched. 

37. Viola. Cal. of 5 leaves exterided at the base. Pet. 5, un- 
equal, the under one spurred at the base. Anthers connate, 2 of 
them spurred behind. Capside of 1 cell, and 3 valves — Nat. 
Ord. Violarieae, DC. — Name: — Various are the Etymologies 
of this familiar word, for it is nearly the same in all languages. 
According to some from iov, (being the food of the metamorphosed 


PENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[Cuscuta. 


84 

Io) the Greek appellation. “A vi olendi,” (from the power of its 
scent), according to others. And again “ quod juxta vias nasci 
amat because it loves to grow by way-sides, where it introduces 
itself to the notice of passengers. The reader may determine for 
himself. 

***** Perianth double , superior. Corolla of 5 petals. 

38. Ribes. Cal. 5-cleft, bearing the Petals and the Stamens. 
Style divided. Perry 1 -celled, many-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Gnos- 
sularieas, De Cand. — Name: Ribes was a word applied by the 
Arabic Physicians to a species of Rhubarb, Rheum Ribes. Our 
older Botanists believed that it was our Gooseberry ; and hence 
Bauhin called that plant Ribes acidum. 

39. Hedera. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. broadest at the base. Style 
simple. Perry with 3 — 5 seeds, crowned by the calyx — Nat. Ord. 
Capuifoliaceje, Juss — Name of uncertain origin. 

****** Flowers incomplete. 

40. Glaux. Perianth single, inferior, campanulate, coloured, 
of 1 piece, 5-lobed. Caps, globose, 1-celled, 5-valved, with about 
5 seeds. — Nat. Ord. Primulacete, Vent. ( Plantagine.f,, Don.) 
— Named from yXctvzioy, given to a plant of a sea-green colour, or 
because it grew near the sea. 

41. Illecebrum. Cal. of 5 leaves, "cartilaginous, subeucullate, 
ending in an awl-shaped point. Pet. 0, or reduced to 5 subulate 
scales. Capsule superior, with one seed, covered by the calyx. — 
Nat. Ord. Paronyciii.e, St. Hit. — Name, i/lecebrci, an enticement 
or attraction , anciently given to a showy tribe of plants, now con- 
fined to a genus possessing few charms. 

42. Thesium. Perianth 4 — 5-cleft, persistent. Stain, with a 
small fascicle of hairs. Nut inferior, somewhat drupaceous. — Nat. 
Ord. Santa lace^e, Pr. — Name of doubtful origin. 

ORD. II. DIGYNIA.— 2 Styles. 

* Perianth double, inferior. Cor. monopetalous. 

43. Swertia. Cal. 4— 5-partite. Cor. rotate, with 2 nectari- 
ferous glands at the base of each segment. Caps. 1-celled, 2-valved. 
— Nat. Ord. Gentianeaj, Juss. — Named after Emmanuel Swert, 
a Dutch botanist, who published a Florilegium in 1612. 

44. Gentiana. Cal. 4 — 5-cleft. Cor. subcampanulate, funnel- 
or salver-shaped, tubular at the base, destitute of nectariferous 
glands. Styles often combined. Caps, of 1 cell, 2-valved. — Nat. 
Ord. Genii an eje, Juss — Named from Gentius, King of Illyria, 
who, according to Pliny, brought into use the species so much 
valued in medicine, the bitter Gentian, G. lutea. 

45. Cuscuta. Cal. 4 — 5-cleft. Cor. campanulate, 4 — 5-lobed. 


UmbcUifcr(C.\ PENTANDItIA — DIGYNIA. 85 

Caps, bursting all round transversely at the base, 2-celled, with 

the cells 2-seeded Parasitical leafless plants, with love/ twining 

Jiliform stems. — Nat. Orrf. Convolvulace®, ,/uss. — Name, the 
same as xura-bHx, probably from the Arabic Keshout. ( T/ieis .) 

** Perianth double ,‘ superior. Petals 5. Seeds 2 — Nat. Ord. 

Umbellifer®. 

This is so extensive and so perfectly natural a groupe, and the genera 
which compose it are with such difficulty distinguished the one from 
the other, that I shall here offer a few remarks, with a view to render 
the study of them more easy to the young botanist. All our Umbelli- 
ferous plants are herbaceous ; they have leaves which are alternate, 
mostly very compound, with dilated and sheathing bases. But what 
characterizes them best, and gives the name to the Natural Family, is 
the circumstance of the flowers, in almost every instance, being arranged 
in compound umbels, with or without Involucres. The Germen is in- 
ferior, (enveloped by, and adherent with, the tube of the calyx,) 2-celled, 
presenting just below where the petals are inserted, a thickened margin, 
or sometimes teeth or segments, the only free part of the calyx. There 
are 5 Petals, entire or heart-shaped, often bifid with an incurved point 
between the 2 lobes, equal or unequal. Stum. 5, spreading : these, as 
well as the petals, are inserted upon a fleshy gland or ring, which is 
more or less covered by the dilated base of the styles. Styles 2, united 
at their base into a 2-lobed, fleshy disk, which covers the top of the 
germen. Stigma capitate. Fruit of 2, single-seeded, indehiscent Peri- 
carps, or carpels, as they may be conveniently called, eventually separ- 
ating, each with its style and for a time suspended by a central, filiform, 
and generally bipartite column or axis. They are variously shaped, and 
variously marked with longitudinal ridges • The number of these ridges 
upon each carpel is .5, more or less apparent, sometimes obliterated, 
separated by interstices, which are more or less prominent. Of these 
ridges, so important in distinguishing the generic characters, one occu- 
pies the middle of the back, one is situated on each side, at or near the 
margins, and there is one on each side, between the marginal ones 
and the dorsal one ; the latter or intermediate ones, together with the 
central one, constitute the 3 dorsal ones. These 5 are the primary 
ridges ; because they are always, however indistinctly, present. The 
lateral ridges form either in themselves the margins of the carpels, when 
they are termed marginal; or they project to a little distance from the 
margins, when they may be considered accessory ; or they may be sit- 
uated on the plane, or inner face of the carpels, and can then only be 
seen by separating the two carpels. Between the primary ridges are 
sometimes 4 others, (secondary,) one in each interstice. Within the coat 
of the carpels are often longitudinal ducts, or canals, filiform or clavate, 
replete with an oily or resinous substance, and generally coloured ; so 
that they are frequently visible without dissection. These are called 
vittce, and rank next to the ridges in discriminating genera. They seem 

1 In tiiis Division, so much of the calyx is incorporated with the germen, 
and so minute are the segments, or free portions, that at first sight, (as in the 
2d Dio. ot the Cl. IV, Galium, &r.) it appears as if petals only were present. 


86 


PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


[Apium. 

to be tolerably constant in each genus, as to the number of them lodged 
in the interstices, between the ridges ; but on the inner face of the car- 
pels, they are inconstant. The arrangement of the Umbelliferse which I 
have here adopted, is almost entirely that of Dr. Koch, in the Nova 
Ada Acad. Naturce Curiosorum, for 1824. The parts on which the marks 
of distinction depend are assuredly minute, and in vain will the student 
hope to make himself master of this extensive and important tribe of 
plants, without devoting his earnest attention to the subject, and care- 
fully analyzing the parts of the flowers, and, more especially, the fruits. 

Subord. I. Seed or Albumen plane in f ront. Orthospermte. 

* Umbels simple, or imperfect : no Vittee to the fruit. 

I. Hydrocotyle Tribe. Fruit laterally compressed. Carpels 
convex or acute on the back. 

46. Hydrocotyle. Cal. obsolete. Pet. ovate, entire, acute, 
plane at the extremity. Fruit laterally compressed and flat, biscu- 
tate. Carpels with 5 filiform ridges, of which the central dorsal 
one and the lateral ones are often obsolete, and the two interme- 
diate ones arched, without vittee. Seed compressed and keeled. — 
Named from cows, water, and xoruto j, a cup or vase. The leaves 
are a little depressed, and stalked in the centre, and may thence 
somewhat resemble a cup or platter. The plant grows in watery 
places. 

II. Sanicula Tribe. Fruit ovato-globose. 

47. Sanicula. Cal. of 5 teeth, leafy. Pet. erect, obovate, with 
long inflected connivent points. Fruit terete, subglobose. Carpels 
densely clothed with hooked prickles, without ridges, with many 
vittee. Seed semi-globose. — Universal involucre lobed ; partial of 
many leaves. — Name derived from sano, to heed ; because this plant 
was supposed “to make whole and sound all inward wounds and 
outward hurts.” 

** Umbels compound, or perfect. Vittee various, rarely none. 

-j- With primary ridges only. 

III. Ammi Tribe. Fruit laterally compressed or didymous. 

48. Cicuta. Ced. of 5 teeth, leafy. Pet. obcordate, with an 
inflexed point. Fruit roundish, contracted at the side, didymous. 
Carpels with 5 nearly plane, equal ridges, of which the lateral ones 
are marginal. Interstices with single vittee, which in the dry fruit 

are more raised than the ridges. Seed terete Universal involucre 

of few leaves, or 0 ; partial of many leaves. — Name : Cicuta was 
a term given by the Latins to those spaces between the joints of a 
reed of which their pipes were made ; and the stem of this plant 
is similarly marked by hollow articulations. 

/ 

49. Apium. Cal. obsolete. Pet. roundish, entire, with a small, 


JEgopodium.) PEN TAX DIM A — DIGYNIA. at 

closely involute point. Fruit roundish, laterally contracted, didy- 
mous. Carpels with 3, filiform, equal ridges, of which the lateral 
ones are marginal. Interstices with single vittce, outer ones frequently 
with 2 — 3 vittce. Seed gibbous, convex, plane in front. — Universal 
and partial involucres 0. — Name, upon, water, in Celtic; from the 
places where the plant grows. 

50. Petroseli'num. Cal. obsolete. Pet. roundish, incurved, 
entire, scarcely emarginate, contracted into an indexed segment. 
Fruit ovate, lateral, contracted, subdidymous. Carpels with 5 fili- 
form equal ridges, of which the lateral ones are marginal. Inter- 
stices with single vittce. Seed gibbous, convex, plane in front. — 
Universal involucre of few, partial of many leaves — Differs from 
Apium in the petals being contracted into an oblong segment, and in 
having the fruit ovate, and subdidymous.— Name, mrgoff, a stone ; 
because it is a native of rocky or stony places. 

51. Trinia. Cal. obsolete. Pet. of the barren plant lanceolate, 
subemarginate, with a contracted involute point ; of the fertile ovate, 
with a short indexed point. Fruit laterally compressed, ovate. 
Carpels with 5 prominent, filiform, equal ridges, of which the late- 
ral ones are marginal. Interstices without vittce or nearly so : but 
with a distinct canal under each ridge. Seed gibbous, convex. — 
Involucres various. — The two kinds of petals, the dioecious plants, 
and the vittse or evident canals beneath the ridges, together with a 
peculiar habit, constitute this a very distinct genus — Named in 
honour of Dr. C. B. T> inius, a learned botanist of St. Petersburgh, 
Author of a Species Graminum , & c. 

52. Helosciadium. Cal. of 5 teeth, or obsolete. Pet. ovate, 
entire, acute, or rather obtuse and apiculated, the point straight or 
indexed. Fruit laterally compressed, ovate, or oblong. Carpels 
with 5 filiform, equal, slightly prominent ridges, of which the lateral 
ones are marginal. Interstices with single vittce. Seed gibbous 

or rounded, convex, nearly plane in front. — Involucre various 

Name eXos, a marsh, and <nax%iov, an umbel. 

53. Si'son. Cal. obsolete. Pet. broadly obcordate, deeply 
notched and curved with an indexed point. Fruit laterally com- 
pressed, ovate. Carpels with 5 filiform, equal ridges, of which the 
lateral ones are marginal. Interstices with single, short, club-shaped 
vittce. Seed gibbous, convex, plane in front. — Universal and partial 
involucres of fetv leaves ; partial subdimidiate. — Name, according to 
Tbeis, originating in the Celtic sizun, a running brook ; some of 
the plants formerly placed in this genus delighting in such situations. 

54. TEgopodium. Ccd. obsolete. Pet. obcordate, with an in- 
dexed point. Fruit compressed laterally, oblong. Carpels with 
5 filiform ridges, of which the lateral ones are marginal. Interstices 


88 


PE NTA N D R I A — DIG YNI A. 


[CEnanthc. 


without vittce. Seed tereti-convex, plane in front. — Universal and 
partial involucres 0. — Differs from Carum only in the absence of 
vittcC. — Named from xtyog, a goat, and srsj, a foot ; the leaves 
being cleft something like a goat’s foot. 

55. Carum. Cal. obsolete. Pet. obcordate. Fruit laterally 
compressed, oblong. Carpels with 5, filiform, equal ridges, their 
inner faces plane. Interstices with single vittce. Seed tereti-convex, 

plane in front. — Universal and partial involucres various Name 

derived, according to Pliny, from that of the country Caria. 

56. Bunium. Cal. obsolete. Pet. obcordate, with an indexed 
point. Fruit laterally contracted, linear-oblong, crowned with the 
conical immarginate base of the strait styles. Carpels with 5, equal, 
filiform, obtuse ridges, with many vittce. Seed tereti-convex, plane 

in front Universal involucre 0 ; partial of few leaves. — Named 

from fiovvo;, a hill, where the plant delights to grow. 

57. Pimpinella. Cal. obsolete. Pet. obcordate, with an in- 
flexed point. Fruit laterally contracted, ovate, crowned with the 
swollen base of the reflexed styles. Carpels with 5 filiform equal 
ridges, of which the lateral ones are marginal. Interstices with 
many vittce. Seed gibbous, plane in front. — Universal and partial 
involucres 0. — Name altered, as Linnaeus informs us, from bipen- 
nula , twice pinnated. 

58. Sium. Cal. of 5 teeth, or obsolete. Pet. obcordate, with 
an inflexed point. Fruit laterally compressed, or contracted and 
subdidymous, crowned with the reflexed styles with their depressed 
bases. Carpels with 5 equal, filiform, rather obtuse ridges. Inter- 
stices with many vittce. Seed subterete. — Universal involucre va- 
rious ; partial of man y leaves. — Name derived, according to Theis, 
from the Celtic word siw, water. 

59. Bupleurum. Cal. obsolete. Pet. roundish, entire, point 
closely involute, broad, retuse. Fruit laterally compressed, subdi- 
dymous, crowned with the depressed base of the styles. Carpels 
with 5 equal and winged, filiform and sharp, or slender and obso- 
lete ridges, of which the lateral ones are marginal. Interstices with 
or without vittce. Seed tereti-convex, plane in front. — Involucres 

various. Leaves undivided Named from (Saj, an or, and ciXsojov, 

a rib, in allusion to the ribbed leaves of some species. 

IV. Seseli Triue. Fruit rounded, (on a transverse section ,) or 
roundish, or with the carpels compressed on the bach. 

CO. (Enanthe. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, with an in- 
flexed point. Fruit subterete, crowned with the strait styles. Car- 
pels with 5, blunt, convex ridges, of which the lateral ones are mar- 
ginal and a little broader. Interstices with single vittce. Seed tereti- 


PENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


89 


Mcumi] 


convex; axis none. — Universal involucre various; partial of many 
leaves. Flowers of the ray on long pedicels, sterile ; those of the 
disk sessile or shortly pedicellate, fertile. — Named from o/vjj, a vine, 
and xvi)o;, a flower, alluding to the vinous smell of the blossoms. 

61. /Etiiusa. Cal. obsolete. Pet. obcordate, with an indexed 
point. Fruit ovato-globose. Carpels with 5 elevated, thick, acutely 
carinated ridges, the lateral ones marginal and a little broader, bor- 
dered by a somewhat winged keel. Interstices with single vittce. 
Seed semi-globose. — Universal involucre 0; partial of 3 unilateral 
drooping leaves. — Named from xfou, to burn, on account of its 
acrid quality. 

62. Fceniculum. Cal. obsolete. Pet. roundish, involute, nar- 
rower apex obtuse. Fruit subterete. Carpels with 5 prominent, 
obtuse, keeled ridges, of which the lateral ones are marginal and a 
little broader. Interstices with single vittce. Seed subsemiterete. 
— Universal and partial involucre 0. — Named from fcenum, hay, 
its smell being compared to that of hay. 

63. Seseli. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, with an indexed 
point. Fruit oval or oblong, subterete, crowned with the reflexed 
styles. Carpels with 5 prominent, filiform or thick, elevated corky 
ridges, of which the lateral ones are marginal and often a little 
broader. Interstices with a single vitta. Seed subsemiterete. — - 
Universal involucre various; partial of many leaves. — Named from 
aG'cXi, originally applied to some plant of this kind. 

64. Ligusticum. Cal. of 5 teeth, or obsolete. Pet. obcordate, 
with an indexed point. Fruit subterete, or slightly and laterally 
compressed. Carpels with 5 sharp, somewhat winged, equal ridges, 
of which the lateral ones are marginal. Interstices with many vittce. 
Seed subsemiterete. — Universal involucre various; partial of many 
leaves. — Named from Liguria, where the old Ligusticum Levisli- 
cum abounds. Hence, too, our word Lovage. 

65. Silaus. Cal. obsolete. Pet. obovate, submarginate with an 
indexed point, appendaged, or sessile and truncated at the base. 
Fruit subterete. Carpels with 5 sharp, somewhat winged equal 
ridges, of which the lateral ones are at the margin. Interstices with 

many vittce. Seed subsemiterete Universal involucre of few leaves, 

or none ; partial of many leaves Scarcely different from Ligusti- 

cum, except in its yellowish, nearly entire, (not acutely emarginate) 
petals, truncated and sessile at the base. — Name of dubious origin. 
It was applied by Pliny to some herb. 

66. Meum. Cal. obsolete. Pet. entire, elliptical, the point 
incurved. Fruit subterete. Carpels with 5 prominent, acutely cari- 
nated, equal ridges, of which the lateral ones are at the margin. 


90 


PENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[ Heracleum . 


Interstices with many vittce. Seed subsemiterete. — Universal invo- 
lucre of few leaves or 0; partial of many leaves. — Name ; supposed 
to be the of Dioscorides. 

67. Crxthmum. Cal. obsolete. Pet. elliptical, entire, involute. 
Fruit subterete. Carpels (spongy) with 5 elevated, sharp, somewhat 
winged ridges, of which the lateral ones are a little broader and 
marginal. Seed subterete, free, abundantly marked with vittce . — 
Universal and partial involucres of many leaves . — Name from y.yd, i, 
barley ; from a fancied resemblance between the fruit of this plant 
and a grain of Barley. 

V. Angelica Tribe. Fruit much and dorsally compressed , with 

a double winy on each side. 

68. Angelica. Cal. obsolete. Pet. elliptical-lanceolate, entire 
and indexed at the point. Fruit subeompressed, 2- winged. Carpels 
with 3 elevated dorsal ridyes, the lateral ones spreading into the 
broad wings of the fruit. Vittce various. — Universal involucre 
scarcely any. ( Archangelica and Angelica, Hoffin.) — Named 
Angelic, from its cordial and medicinal properties. 

VI. Selinum Tribe. ( Peucedanum Tribe DC.) Fruit much 
and dorsally compressed, dilated at the margins into a single 
{though formed of 2 margins) even icing, not thickened at the 
edge. 

69. Peucedanum. Cal. of 5 teeth, or obsolete. Pit. obovate 
or obcordate, point indexed. Fruit much dattened dorsally, with 
a broad thin margin. Carpels with the ridges nearly equidistant, 
the 3 intermediate ones filiform, the 2 lateral ones more obsolete, 
contiguous to or combined with the margin. Seed fiat on its inner, 
face. Interstices with single vittce . — Universal involucre various ; 
partial of many leaves . — Named from 7nvx.-/i, a Pine tree, and ^«vo?, 
dwarf on account of a resinous substance, said to he extracted from 
some of the species. 

70. Pastinaca. Cal. nearly obsolete. Pet. roundish, entire 
involute with a sharp point. Fruit much compressed dorsally, with 
a broad fiat border. Carpels with very slender ridges, the 3 inter- 
mediate ones equidistant, the 2 lateral ones remote, contiguous to 
the border. Interstices with single evident vittce. Seed tiat. — 
Universal and partial involucres of few leaves . — Different from He- 
racleum in the entire, involute petals, and filiform, not clubbed, 
vittm ; in the remote lateral ridges from all the rest of this Tribe ; 
and from Peucedanum also by the involute petals. — Name derived 
from pastus, food. 

71. Heracleum. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, point in- 
dexed ; outer ones often radiant. Fruit remarkably and dorsally 


Caucalis.] PKNTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. V 1 

compressed, with a broad and plane border. Carpels with very 
slender ridges, 3 of them dorsal, equidistant, 2 lateral ones remote, 
contiguous with the border. Interstices with single (evident) club- 
shaped vittce. Seed flat. — Universal involucre deciduous ; partial of 

many leaves Named from Hercules, who is said to have brought 

this, or some allied plant, into use. 

VII. Tordylium Tribe. Fruit much and dorsally compressed, 
dilated at the margins ivitli a wing, ivhich is headed, or waved 
and thickened at the edge. 

72. Tordylium. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, point in- 
flexed ; outer ones radiant, bifid. Fruit remarkably compressed 
dorsally, with an accessory, thick, often crenated margin. Carpels 
with very slender ridges, 3 of which are dorsal and equidistant, the 
2 lateral ones contiguous to the thickened margin. Interstices 
with one or 3 vittce. Seed flat.- — Universal and partial involucres 
of many leaves. — Name, according to Linnaeus, derived from rogi/oj, 
a turning-lathe, and sAAw, to turn; from the nearly orbicular seed- 
vessels. All that we can say with certainty, is, that it is the 
rogouXiov of the Greeks. 

f-j- With primary and secondary ridges. 

VIII. Daucus Tribe. Fruit somewhat dorsally compressed or 
rounded , with the lateral primary ridges on the inner face of the 
carpels, the secondary ones dilated into distinct prickles, or ivhich 
are united into a wing at the base. 

73. Daucus. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, point inflexed ; 
the outer often radiant and deeply bifid. Fruit dorsally com- 
pressed. Carpels with 5 primary ridges, filiform and bristly, of 
which the 3 intermediate ones are dorsal, the 2 lateral ones on the 
inner face ; the 4 secondary ridges equal, more prominent, with one 
row of prickles, which are slightly connected at the base. Inter- 
stices under the secondary ridges, with single vittce. Seed plane in 
front — Universal and partial involucres many-leaved, the former 
often primary. — Name, the dxvxog of Dioscorides. 

Subord. II. Seed inflexed at the margin or deeply furrowed 

in front. 

f With primary and secondary ridges. 

IX. Caucalis Tribe. Fruit contracted or rounded, with the 
lateral primary ridges on the inner face of the carpels, all the 
secondary ones dilated into prickles or setce. 

74. Caucalis. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, point inflexed; outer 
ones radiant and deeply bifid. Fruit slightly laterally compressed. 
Carpels with 5 primary, filiform, bristly or prickly ridges, of which 


92 


PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


[Cheeraphyllum. 


the 3 intermediate ones are dorsal, having 1 — 3 rows of prickles, 
the 2 lateral ones on the inner face ; the 4 secondary ridges more 
or less prominent, bearing 1 or 2 rows of prickles. Interstices 
under the secondary ridges with single vittce. Seed involute. — Uni- 
versal and partial involucres many-leaved Named from /.sen, to lie 

along , and xauAoj, a stem, i.e. trailing upon the ground. 

75. Torilis. Ccd. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, point indexed ; 
outer ones larger and bifid. Fruit contracted at the side. Car- 
pels with 5 primary bristly ridges, of which the 3 intermediate 
ones are dorsal, the 2 lateral ones on the inner face; the secondary 
ridges obliterated by the numerous prickles which fill the interstices. 
Interstices with single vittce beneath the prickles.' Seed with the 
margin involute. — Involucre various ; partial of many haves. — 
Name of doubtful derivation : perhaps, as Smith suggests, from 
regs io, to carve or emboss ; in allusion to the fruit. 

With secondary ridges only. 

X. Scandix Tribe. Fruit compressed or contracted at the side) 
elongated, generally beaked. 

76. Scandix. Ccd. obsolete. Pet. obovate, with an indexed 
point. Fruit laterally compressed, with a very long beak. Car- 
pels with 5 obtuse equal ridges, the lateral ones marginal. Inter- 
stices without ridges, or obsolete vittce. Seed tereti-convex, with 
a deep furrow in front. — Universal involucre 0, or of few leaves ; 
partial of 5 — 7 leaves. — Named from a-y.ia, to prick; because of the 
sharp and long points to the seeds. 

77. Anthriscus. Cal. obsolete. Pet. obcordate, with an 
indexed, generally short, point. Fruit contracted on the side, 
rostrate. Carpels subterete, without ridges, the beak alone with 5 
ridges. Seed tereti-convex, deeply furrowed in front. — Universal 
involucre none; partial of many leaves. — Name given by Pliny 
to a plant, allied probably to this genus, but whose derivation we 
are ignorant of. 

78. ChjEROphyllum. Cal. obsolete. Pet. obcordate, with an 
indexed point. Fruit laterally compressed or contracted. Car- 
jiels with 5 obtuse, equal ridges, of which the lateral ones are mar- 
ginal, with a deep furrow on the inner face of the carpels. Inter- 
stices with single vittce. Seed tereti-convex, furrowed in front. — 
Universal involucre 0, or of few leaves ; partial of many leaves. — 
Differs from all the Ammi Tribe in the tleep furrow in front of 
each carpel. — Named from yjapn, to rejoice, and ipvXKov, a leaf: 

1 Fi'om the dense prickles of the interstices, the whole fruit appears to be 
covered with prickles without order; but such is seen to be not the case when 
the fruit is attentively examined. 


rENTANDUI A — DIGYNIA. 


93 


Smyrnium.] 


hence our word Chervil , applied to the cultivated Authriscus Cere- 
folium, whose leaves have an agreeable smell. 

79. Myrrh is. Cal. obsolete. Pet. obcordate, with an indexed 
point. Fruit laterally compressed. Seed with its sides involute, 
covered by a pericarp, formed of 2 membranes, the exterior having 
5 equal, acutely carinated ridges, hollow within, closely adnate to 

the interior. Vittce none Universal involucre 0; partial of many 

leaves Name derived perhaps from Myrrha, myrrh ; the foliage 

of one species at least possessing an agreeable scent. 

XI. Smyrnium Tribe. Fruit turgid, compressed or contracted 

at the sicle. 

80. Echinophora. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, with an 
indexed point, the extremity often long, bifid. Flowers of the ray 
sterile, on long stalks, fertile central and solitary. Fruit ovate, sub- 
terete, lodged in the receptacle, with a protruded beak. Carpels 
with 5 depressed, waved and striated, and equal ridges. Inter- 
stices with single vittee, vittce covered with a cobweb-like mem- 
brane. — Universal and partial involucres many-leaved. — Name 
derived from t^tvog, a hedgehog, and cpsocj, to bear ; in reference to 
the prickly nature of the plant. 

81. Conium. Cal. obsolete. Pet. obcordate, with an indexed 
point. Fruit laterally compressed, ovate. Carpels with 5 promi- 
nent, waved or crenated, equal ridges, of which the lateral ones are 
marginal. Interstices with many stria:, without vittce. Seed with 
a deep narrow groove in front. — Universal involucre of few leaves ; 
partial of 3 leaves on one side. — Name ; -/.uvnov of Theophrastus, 
from -/.oms, a cone or a top, whose whirling motion resembles the 
giddiness produced on the human constitution by the poisonous 
juice of this plant. 

82. Physospermum. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, with an 

indexed point. Fruit laterally contracted. Carpels reniformi- 
globose, didymous, each with 5, very slender, equal, dliform 
ridges, of which the lateral ones are placed within the margin. 
Interstices with single vittce. Seed involutely semi-lunar Uni- 

versal and partial involucres of many leaves. — Named from <puUx, 
a bladder, and <7%tyiu,, a seed. 

83. Smyrnium. Cal. obsolete. Pet. lanceolate or elliptical, 
entire, with an indexed point. Fruit laterally contracted. Carpels 
reniformi-globose, didymous, each with 3 dorsal prominent sharp 
ridges, the 2 lateral and marginal ones nearly obsolete. Interstices 
with many vittce. Seed involute. — Involucre various. — Named 
from rgvgvct, synonymous with gv^u, Myrrh; from the scent of the 
juice. 


94. 


PENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[ Ulmus. 


Subord. III. Seed, in front, with the base and apex curved inward. 
XII. Coriandrum Tribe. Fruit contracted at the side and 

didymous or globose, tuifh the primary and secondary ridges 

wingless, and often scarcely distinct. 

84. Coriandrum. Cal. of 5 teeth. Pet. obcordate, point in- 
dexed ; outer ones radiant, bifid. Fruit globose. Carpels with 5 
primary ridges, depressed and wavy, of which the 2 lateral ones 
are placed in front of an accessory margin to the inner face : the 
4 secondary ridges more prominent and carinated. Interstices 
without vittce, the inner face of the carpel having 2 vittce. Seed 
hollowed in front, covered by a loose membrane. — Universal invo- 
lucre 0 ; partial on one side. Carpels cohering, separated with 
difficulty — Named from zopg, a Bug, in allusion to the intolerably 
fetid smell of the bruised foliage. Sir J. E. Smith retains in this 
genus the Biforis of Spreng., which has a fruit of 2 lobes. 

** Perianth double, inferior. Petals 5. 

(See Staphylea in Ord. III.) 

85. Chenopodium. Perianth single, inferior, 5-cleft, persistent 
and unaltered, closing upon, but not wholly enveloping, the fruit. 
Seed solitary, orbicular. — Nat. Ord. ChenofodEjE, De Cand. — 
Named from yya, %nvo;, a Goose, and ttw, a foot ; from the shape 
of the leaves in some species. They are more or less employed a3 
potherbs. 

86. Beta. Perianth single, half-inferior, 5-cleft, persistent. 

Seed 1, reniform, imbedded in the fleshy base of the calyx 

Nat. Ord. Chenopode/E, De Cand Name derived from the 

Celtic belt, according to Theis, which means red. 

87. Salsola. Perianth single, inferior, 5-cleft, persistent, 
enveloping the fruit with its base, and crowning it with its broad, 
scariose limb. Seed solitary, its cotyledon spiral. — Nat. Ord. 
Ciienodopodete, De Cand. — Named from sal, salt. From many 
of this tribe abundance of alkaline salt is obtained, as implied by 
the name of our only British species. 

88. Herniaria. Cal. deeply 5-cleft, persistent. Siam., 5 
fertile and 5 sterile filaments inserted upon a fleshy disk. Stigmas 
nearly sessile. Fruit indehiscent, 1 -seeded, covered by the calyx. — 
Nat. Ord. Paronychie/e. St. HU. — Named from the plant hav- 
ing been supposed to be useful in the cure of Hernia. 

89. Ulmus. Perianth single, superior, persistent, 4 — 5-cleft. 

Capsule compressed, winged all round, (a Samara), 1 -seeded 

Nat. Ord. Ul mace/e, Mirb. — Named, according to Theis, from 
the Anglo-S^xon Elm. Ulm is, however, still the German word 
for this tree. 

(See Scleranthus in Cl. X. Polygonum in Cl. VIII.) 


Statice.] 


PENTANDRIA — PENTAGYNIA. 


95 


ORD. III. TRIGYNIA. 3 Styles. 

* Floivers superior. 

90. Viburnum. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. of 1 petal, 5-lobed. Ferry 
inferior, usually 1 -seeded. ( Leaves simple.) — Nat. Orel. Capri- 
foliaceje, Juss. — Name of doubtful origin. 

91. Sambucus. Cal. 5-cleft. Cor. of 1 petal, rotate, 5-lobed. 
Berry inferior, 3-or 4-seeded. ( Leaves pinnated ). — Nat. Orel. 
Caprifoliaceje, Juss . — Named from tT-xg^v/.ri, a musical instru- 
ment, in the construction of which this wood is said to have been 
employed. 

** Floivers inferior. 

92. Staphylea. Cal. 5-partite, coloured, with an urceolate 
disk at the base. Pet. 5. Styles 2 — 3. Capsule membranaceous, 
of 2 — 3 cells. — Nut. Ord. C elastrine m, Br., De Cand. (Sta- 
ph yle a c;e.e, Lindl.) — Named from erxtpuXri, a bunch of grapes, its 
flowers being in racemes. 

93. Tamarix. Cal. 5-partite, persistent. Cor. of 5 petals. 
Stam. 5 — 10. Stigmas sessile, feathery. Caps. 1-celled, 3-valved, 
many-seeded. Seeds pappose — Nat. Ord. Tamariscinete, Des- 
vaux . — Named from the Tamarisci, a people who inhabited the 
banks of the Tamaris, now Tambra , in Spain, where the Tamarisk 
abounds. 

94. Corrigiola. Cal. inferior, of 5 leaves, permanent. Pet. 5, 
not exceeding the calyx. Seed solitary, naked. — Nat. Ord. 
Paronychie/E, St. HU . — Named from corrigia, a strap or thong ; 
formerly applied to the Polygonum aviculare on account of its 
long pliant stems; and now to a plant which is somewhat similar 
to it in habit. 

(See Chenopodium in Ord. II. Stellaria in Cl. X.) 

ORD. IV. TETRAGYNIA. 4 Styles. 

95. Parnassia. Cal. deeply 5-cleft. Petals 5. Nectaries 5, 
heart-shaped, fringed with globular-headed filaments. Capsule 
1-celled, 4-valved, each valve bearing a longitudinal, linear recep- 
tacle with numerous seeds — Nat. Ord. Droseraceac, De Cand. 
(Saxifrages, Sm., Lindl.) — Named from Mount Parnassus; to 
which place, indeed, the plant is by no means peculiar. 

ORD. V. PENTAGYNIA. 5 Styles. 

96. Statice. Cal. of 1 piece, funnel-shaped, plaited, dry and 
membranaceous. Pet. 5, united at the base, bearing the stamens. 
Capsule with 1 seed invested with the calyx. — Nat. Ord. Plum- 
bagine/E, Juss — Named from vrxn'Cyi, to slop, from its supposed 
qualities in checking dysentery. 


96 


rENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


[Ech'mm. 


97. Li'num. Cal. of 5 leaves, persistent. Pet. 5. Caps, glo- 

bose, mucroiiate, with 10 valves and 10 cells. Seeds ovate, com- 
pressed Nat. Ord. Linete, De Cand. — Named from Lin, 

thread , in Celtic, ( Theis ); the parent of many words in Latin, 
English, and French. 

98. Sirbaldia. Cal. in 10 alternately large and small seg- 
ments. Pet. 5, inserted on the calyx. Capsules 5, indehiscent, 
in the bottom of the calyx, 1 -seeded. (The number of stamens is 
very liable to vary, and the capsules are sometimes 10.) — Nat. Ord. 
RosaceyE, Juss. — Name given in honour of Robert Sibbald, who 
wrote on the Nat. History of Scotland about the latter end of the 
17th century, and who published a figure of our Scottish species 
of this genus. 

(See Cerastium and Spergula in Cl. X.) 

ORD. VI. HEXAGYNIA. 6 Styles. 

99. Drosera. Cal. 5-cleft. Pet. 5. Caps. 1 -celled, 3-valved, 
many-seeded. — ( Plants with leaves clothed with beautiful glandular 

hairs.) — Nat. Orel. Droseracea:, J)e Cand Name derived 

from Sgoro;, dew. The glands exude a pellucid fluid, which makes 
this plant appear as if it were covered with dew. In Latin Ros- 
solis, the same as the English Sun-dew. 

ORD. VII. POLYGYNIA. Many Styles. 

100. Myosurus. Cal. of 5 leaves, prolonged at the base. 
Pet. 5, their claws tubular (nectariferous). Capstdes indehiscent 
(seeds of most authors), 1 -seeded, collected upon a very long 
columnar receptacle — Nat. Ord. RanunculaceyE, Juss. — Name, 
yj;, yvos, a mouse, and eu»«, a tail ; from the elongated receptacle 
of germens or seed-vessels. 

(See Ranunculus Ficaria in Cl. XIII.) 

RENTANDRIA— MONOGYNIA. 

/ 

1. Eciiium. Linn. Viper’s Bugloss. 

1. E. vulgare, Linn, (common Vipers Bugloss); stem herba- 
ceous simple hispid with tubercles, leaves linear-lanceolate hispid, 
flowers in lateral spikes, stamens longer than the corolla. E. Rot. 
t. 181. E.Fl.v.i.p. 268. 

( )n old walls, fields, and waste grounds, especially in a sandy or gravelly 
soil: common in the Surrey hills, with pale fl. FI. June, July. $ . — 2 — 3 
f. high, ltoot-lcaves spreading, petioled. Spikes of flowers lateral, secund, 
recurved, forming in fact one long compound spike or raceme. Corolla 
very beautiful, at first reddish-purple, then brilliant blue. At Duneansby, 
Caithness, I have seen it with white flowers, anil the Rev. Prof. 1 lenslow 
finds it so at Coblnun, Kent. Echium italicum is not now considered a 
British plant. 


Lithoapcnnuw .] 


PENT.VN DRI A — MOXOGYNI A. 


97 


2. Pu lmonari a. Linn. Lungwort. 

1. P. officinalis, Linn. ( common Lungwort) ; leaves scabrous, 
radical ones ovato-cordate petiolate, upper ones of the stem sessile 
ovate. E.Bot.t. 1 IS, (excl. the root-lutvcs, which belong to the 
next species.) E. FI. v. i.p. 26 1 . 

oods and thickets, rare. Durham, Bedfordshire ; more frequent in 
Hampshire. Near Edinburgh and Glasgow: but scarcely wild. FI. 
May. If .. — About 1 foot high. Stem-leaves all more or less ovate, lower 
ones petiolate, upper ones sessile ; all with short hairs anti frequently 
spotted. Flowers purple. 

2. P. angustifolia, Linn, {narrow-leaved Lungwort); leaves 
scabrous, radical ones petiolate, upper ones sessile, all lanceolate. 
E. Bot. t. 1628. E. FI. v. i. p. 262. 

Woods and thickets, rare. Isle of Wight, and New Forest, Hamp- 
shire; and in Flintshire. FI. May, June. y —Much taller than the 
preceding and very different in the shape of its foliage, which is seldom 
spotted. 

3. Lithospermum. Linn. Gromwell. 

1. L. officinale, Linn. ( common Gromwell , Grey Mill or Grey 
Millet); stem erect very much branched, leaves broadly lanceolate 
acute nerved rough above, hairy beneath, tube of the corolla as long 
as the calyx, nuts smooth. E. Bot. t. 13d. E. FI. v. i.p. 254. 

Dry, waste and uncultivated places, and among rubbish : rare in 
Scotland. FI. June. y. — 1 to 14 foot high. FI. pale yellow. Nuts 
whitish-brown, highly polished ; seldom more than 2 or .3 ripening in each 
calyx. My friend Captain Le Hunte has submitted these seeds or nuts 
to analysis, and obtained the following results. The stony shells of GO 
seeds weighed upwards of 7 grains. Heated to redness, these 7 grains 
were reduced to 3, of which 4- 1 Oths of a grain were pure silica. There 
was also a considerable quantity of phosphate of lime and iron. 

2. L. arvense, Linn. ( Corn Gromwell or Bastard Alkanet) ; 
stem erect branched, leaves lanceolate acute hairy, calyx a little 
shorter than the corolla, its segments patent when containing the 
ripe wrinkled nuts. E. Bot. t. 123. E. FI. r. i. p. 255. 

Corn-fields and waste ground. FI. May, June. Q.— Corollas white. 
Lalycine segments thrice as long as the fruit. 

3. L . purpuro-ceerulcnm, Linn. ( creeping or purple Gromwell); 
barren stems prostrate, leaves lanceolate acute, corolla much longer 
than the calyx. E. Bot. t. 117. E. FI. v. i. p. 256. 

Thickets in a chalky soil, rare. Near Denbigh, in Wales ; and Taun- 
ton, Somersetshire; Marychurch, Devon; Darenthwood and Greenhithe, 
Kent; Carsewell Bay, Glamorganshire. FI. June, July, y.— Distin- 
guished fiom the 2 preceding species by its large and bright blue Jloiucrs . 

“r. L. maritimum, Lehin. {Sea- side Gromwell); stems procum- 
bent branched, leaves rough with callous dots ovate, upper ones 
lanceolate, all fleshy and glaucous, nuts smooth. Book. Scot. i. 

V 


08 


PENTANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


[Lycopsis. 

p. G8. E. FL v. i. p. 256 — Pulmonaria maritima, Linn. — 
E. Bat. t. 368. 

Sea-coast among sand or loose stones, rare, and only in the north of 
England : Wales, Mr. IV. IVi/son; plentiful in the north and west of Scot- 
land. Between Portran and Skerries, Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackap. FI. 
May, June. "4 . — This is quite a northern plant, extending to the arctic 
regions: and in habit is sui generis. Lower leaves on footstalks and 
acute ; upper ones sessile. Flowers somewhat racemed, of a beautiful 
purplish-blue: lube of the cor. short. Whole plant very glaucous; and, 
when the bloom is rubbed off, rough callous points are seen upon the 
surface, which become white and almost stony in drying, when the rest 
of the plant is nearly black. Mr. S. Murray has observed that the flavour 
of the plant resembles that of oysters. 

4. Symphytum. Linn. Comfrey. 

1 . S. officinale , Linn. ( common Comfrey); stem winged above, 
leaves ovato-lanceolate attenuated at the base and very decurrent. 
E. Bot. t. 817. E. FI. v. i. p. 263. 

Banks of rivers and watery places, frequent. FI. May, June. 4- — 
2 — 3 f. high, branched above. Root- leaves ovate, petiolated. Racemes 
in pairs, secund, drooping. Corollas large, yellowish-white, often purple. 

2. S. tuberosum , Linn. ( tuberous-rooted Comfrey); stem simple, 
leaves ovato-oblong attenuated at the base, upper ones only slightly 
decurrent. E. Bot. t. 1502. E. El. v. i.p. 263. 

Shady woods and river-banks ; frequent in Scotland, particularly in 
the lowlands: rare in England. Durham, Mr. Robson. FI. June, 
July. 4 . — Resembling the last; but it is very distinct. Upper leaves, from 
which the peduncles spring, generally in pairs, large, ovato-lanceolate, a 
little decurrent ; whereas those of S. officinale are very narrow, and run 
down into winged appendages to the stem. 

5. Borago. Linn. Borage. 

1. B. officinalis , Linn. ( common Borage) ; lower leaves obovate 
attenuated at the base, segments of the corolla ovate acute spreading. 
E. Bot. t. 36. E. FI. v. i. p. 264. 

Among rubbish and waste ground ; but scarcely indigenous. FI. June, 
July. $ . — Whole plant very hispid. Stem-leaves petiolate and eared at 
the base ; uppermost ones sessile. Cor. large, brilliant blue, with very 
prominent stamens. The supposed invigorating qualities of this plant, 
which gave rise to the name, are now discredited. It forms an ingre- 
dient/ with w ine, water, lemon and sugar, in a favourite English drink 
called a cool tankard. 

6. Lycopsis. Linn. Bugloss. 

1. L arvensis , Linn. ( small Bugloss); leaves lanceolate re- 
pando-denticulate very hispid, calyx erect while in flower. E. Bot. 
t. 938. E. FI. v. i. p. 267. — Ancliusa arvensis, Lehm. 

Corn-fields and hedge-banks, frequent. FI. June, July. ©.—Whole 
plant very hispid ; hairs or bristles seated on a white, callous tubercle. 
Lower leaves lengthened into a petiole, upper ones sessile, semiamplexi- 


Myosoiis.) PENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 99 

caul. Racemes leafy. Flowers small, bright blue ; differing from those 
of Anchusa in the curvature of the tube. 

7. Anchusa. Linn. Alkanet. 

1. A., officinalis, Linn, (common Alkanet) ; leaves oblongo-lan- 
ceolate, spikes crowded unilateral, bracteas ovato-lanceolate as Ion" 
as the calyx. E. Bot. t. 662. E. FI. v. i. p. 258. 

Waste ground, rare; perhaps not indigenous. On the Links at Hart- 
ley Pans, Northumberland. It is said to have been found at Kilsyth 
and Arnbrae; and at Addington, 8 miles from Glasgow. FI. June, July. 
If- 1 — -feet high, rough and hispid. Cor. deep purple, the segments 
of the limb rather narrow. 

2. A. semper virens, Linn. ( evergreen Alkanet ); leaves ovate, 
lower ones upon long stalks, peduncles axillary, flowers subcapitate 
accompanied by two leaves. E. Bot. t. 45. E. FI. v. i. p. 258. 

Waste ground, among ruins and by road-sides, in many places both 
in England and Scotland: but often, I fear, the outcast of a garden;— 
certainly wild in Devon and Cornwall, Rev. J. S. Tozer. FI. May, June. 
If. .—Flowers of a beautiful blue. The shape of the corolla is, as Sir 
J. E. Smith observes, rather salver than funnel-shaped, and thus is with 
difficulty distinguishable from Myosotis. Daily experience teaches us 
that the more natural the families, the greater is the difficulty of framin" 
decided marks of distinction in the genera. 

8. Myosotis. Linn. Scorpion- grass. 

(For the specific characters, synonyms and observations on this "enus, 
I am indebted to my valued friend, W. Borrer, Esq.) 

1. M. palustris , “ KiphofF, ( great Water Scorpion-grass or 
Forget-me-not ); fruit smooth; calyx with strait appressed bristles, 
when in fruit campanulate open shorter than the divergent pedicels, 
limb of the corolla flat longer than the tube, pubescence of the 
stem spreading (or wanting.) E.Bot.t. 1973. Hook. Scot.i.p. 67, 
( including M. ccespitosa.) Reich, in Sturm, cum ic. Hook, in FI. 
Loud. ed. 2. cum ic. E. FI. v. i. p. 249. — M. scorpioides palus- 
tris, Linn. Sp. PI. v. i.p. IS8. Sin. FI. Brit. v. i. p. 212. M. 

scorpioides, Curt. FI. Loud. fuse. 3. p. 13 . 

Ditches and sides of riv ers, abundant. FI. during the summer months 
If— A very beautiful, though common plant, and considered to be the 
emblem of friendship in almost every part of Europe. About 1 foot high. 
Flowers among the largest of our species, bright blue with a yellow eve 
and a small white ray at the base of each segment. — Mertens and Koch 
in their Flora of Germany, and after them Lejeune and Courtois, cite 
M. laxiflora and M. strigulosa of Reich., as varieties of M. palustris. 
The figure of the former, in Sturm, shows a much shorter calyx, and 
appressed hairs on the stem, such as are found on M. ccespitosa.— Per- 
haps M. repens, Don, may be specifically distinguished by the deeply 
divided calyx (which I pointed out long ago to Sir J. E. Smith), and 
the copious pubescence of that part. Its racemes are not always, 
although very often, leafy. Its synonyms are 

Al. ripens, Don, MSS. “ Reichenb. in Sturm, cum ic .” — M. palustris, p. 


100 


PENTANDTUA — MONODY NI A. 


[ Myosolis. 


llook. Scot. i. p. G7. — M. palustris, 3. Mcrt. and Koch , derm. v. ii.p. 42. 
This is found in moist situations in Scotland by Mr. G. and D. Dun, 
and by Mr. Backhouse 1 in the higher parts of Yorkshire. 

2. M. ccespitosa, Schultz, ( tufted Water Scorpion-grass'); fruit 
smooth; calyx with straight appressed bristles, when in fruit campa- 
nulate open shorter than the divergent pedicels, limb of the corolla 
concave equalling the tube, pubescence of the stem appressed. 
Reich, in Sturm, cum ic. Sprang. Sgst. Veget.v. i.p. 557. E. FI. 
v. i.p. 250. Mertens and Koch, Germ. v. ii.p. 242. — Borr. in 
E. Bot. Sitppl. t. 2661 — M. lingulata, Lelim. Asperif. p. 110. 

Common in watery places, both on clay and bog. FI. May, June. 
©. or $ . (If . or $ . Sm.) — Root fibrous, not creeping, annual or bien- 
nial. Stem throwing out fibres from the lower joints. Caly. v sparingly 
sprinkled with appressed, white bristles, cleft more deeply than in M. 
palustris, perhaps less than in M. repens, Don. Corolla varying in size, 
but usually not much exceeding the calyx. — Lehmann gives M. lingulata 
as a plant with which he was but imperfectly acquainted, and which he 
expected Schultz to publish with that name in the Suppl. to his FI. Stuttg. 
It appears, however, in that work with the less appropriate appellation 
of M. ccespitosa. Fries had previously {FI. Holland, in 1827,) called it 
M. maritima; but in his later works he has adopted the name lingulata . 2 

3. M. alpestris, Schmidt, {Rock Scorpion-grass) ; fruit smooth ; 
calyx with straight and a few curved bristles deeply 5-cleft, when in 
fruit campanulate strait shorter than the slightly spreading pedi- 
cels, limb of the corolla flat longer than the tube, root-leaves on 
long stalks. Lehm. Asperif. p. 86. Reich, in Sturm, cum ic ? Hook. 

in FI. Bond. N. S. t. 145. Mcrt. and Koch, Germ. v. ii.p. 44 

M. rupicola, E. Bot. t. 2559. — M. suaveolens, Wcildst. and Kit 

Willd. En.p. 176. Reich, in Sturm, cum ic M. alpina, Don , 

Herb. Brit. n. 205 — M. sylvatica, (3. Fries, p. 64. 

Highland mountains, at a great elevation. But I am not sure that it 
is found, except on the Breadalbane range; extending as far as Schechal- 
lion. FI. July, Aug. If. — 4 — G inches or even a foot high, with patent 
leaves. Lower leaves on very long footstalks. Nothing can exceed the 
beauty of the large blue flowers, which are at first so compact as to be 
almost capitate, then lengthened into racemes. Austrian specimens have 
rather a larger proportion of curved bristles on the calyx than our British 
ones. Fries doubts if the synonyms of Mertens and Koch belong to 
the same species, because they, as Lehmann had done before, refer M. 

1 Mr. Backhouse observes to me that the brarteas among the pedicels are con- 
stant ; the lacinite of the calyx narrower and shorter than in 31. palustris, full 
half as long as the calyx, and the whole plant smaller. The calyx is nerved. 
It flowers earlier by two months in the higher parts of Yorkshire, than 31. 
palustris does in the lower. II. 

2 In the useful Etium. PI. Germ, et Ildv. of Steudcl and Ilochstetten, 31. 
caspitosa of Schultz is considered the same with la.ri flora of Reirhenb., and 31. 
ripens of Don is doubtfully quoted under 31. lingulata of Schultz. Again, in 
the FI. Germ, of Bluff and Fingerhuth, 31. laa flora of Reichenb., 31. repens 
of Reichenb. and Don, ( commutata of Uoem. et Schultes), and 31. ccespitosa, 
are retained as species, and no notice is taken of 31. lingulata. 


Myosolis.] 


PENT AN DIM A — -MONOGYNI A. 


ini 


suaveolens, W. and Iv. to it. Of that plant I have seen no authentic 
specimens; but the figure of it in Sturm agrees better with our species, 
than that named alpestris does. Lehmann reduces to M. alpestris, also, 
the M. lithospermifolia, Horn. But the sample in our herbarium has 
more the habit and leaves of M. ccEspilosa; although its calyx most 
resembles ill. alpestris. 

4. M. sylvatica, Hoffm. ( upright Wood Scorpion-grass); fruit 
smooth ; calyx with spreading uncinate bristles deeply 5-cleft, when 
in fruit ovate (closed) shorter than the divergent pedicels, limb of 
the corolla flat longer than the tube, root-leaves on short dilated 
stalks. Le/tm. Aspcrif. p. 85. Reich, in Sturm , cum ic. Mart, and 
Koch , Germ. v. ii. p. 43 — M. scorpioides, y. Huds. Angl. p. 78. 
FI. Brit. v. i. p. 2 1 3. 

In dry shady places ; chiefly in the North of England and Lowlands 
of Scotland : Essex and Kent, Dillenius. Holt, Norfolk, Rev. R. B. 
Francis. FI. June, July. If. — Various authors and cultivators pro- 
nounce this plant perennial, (Fries says “perennans,” Wahlenberg 
“ subperennans,”) whilst the following species is indubitably annual ; 
between which and the present individual I can point out no other dis- 
tinctive characters more satisfactory than the somewhat more deeply 
divided calyx of M. sylvatica , its shorter and less remarkably hooked 
bristles, the broader and flatter corolla, and the greater size of the whole 
plant. 

5. M. arvensis, Hoffm. (Field Scorpion-grass); fruit smooth; 
calyx with spreading uncinate bristles i 5-cleft, when in fruit ovate 
closed shorter than the divergent pedicels, limb of the corolla con- 
cave equalling the tube. Lchm. Asperif.p. 90. Hook. Scot. i.p. 67, 
(excl. syn.) Borr. in E.Bot. Suppl. t. 2629.— 31. intermedia, Link, 
Eninn.v. i. p. 164. Reich, in Sturm, cum ic. — M. scorpioides, a. 
arvensis, Linn. Sp. PI. p. 188. FI. Brit. p. 212. 

Very common in cultivated ground, hedgebanks, groves, &c. FI. 
June, Aug. ©.—Although Linnaeus included other plants, now regarded 
as species, in his ideas of M. scorpioides and arvensis, and even preserved 
as such in his herbarium a specimen of the next species, yet, as it is 
evident from FI. Suec. that this is what he held to be the type of the 
var., I think it best to follow those botanists who have named it M. 
arvensis. Fries asserts that every Swedish botanist knows it to be the 
“ ipsissimam M. arvensem, Linn.” It is moreover the only one usually 
found in cultivated fields. This species and M. sylvatica are inextri- 
cably confounded in E. FI. — M. arvensis, With, (and probably M. 
arvensis, a. Willi. Sp. PI.) includes this species and M. sylvatica anti 
M. versicolor. — M. arvensis, p. Willi, is doubtless the same as M. versi- 
color, y. Lehrn., and a stranger to the British Flora. 

6. M. collina, Hoffm. (early Field Scorpion-grass) ; fruit smooth; 
calyx with spreading uncinate bristles, when in fruit ventricose open 
equalling the diverging pedicels, limb of the corolla concave shorter 
than the tube, (raceme usually with one distant flower at the base.) 
Reich, in Sturm, cum ic. Borr. in E. But. Suppl. subfol. 2629. — 


102 


PENTANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


[Myosotis. 

M. arvensis, Link, Enum. v. i. p. 64. E. Eat. t. 2558. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 252. — 31. ctrvensis, y. Wald. FI. Suec. v. i.p. 120. (excl. 
syn.) — M.hispida, “ Schlecht.” Mert. and Koch, Germ. v. it. p. 47. 

On sandy-banks, wall-tops, and other very dry places. Near Edin- 
burgh, 13r. Greville. FI. April, May; usually quite dried up by mid- 
summer. ©. — This is not a general plant, and appears to have been 
unknown to Lehmann. Reichenbach in Sturm cites under it M. verrta, 
Opitz, a plant referred by Mertens and Koch to the 31. stricta, Link, 
to which our N. American specimens named 31. verna by Nuttall, 
seem to belong. It does not appear evident that 31. stricta has been 
found in Britain, and I know not why Reichenbach has fixed on it as 
the 31. arvensis' of Sibthorpe. It is the 31. scorpioides arvensis, Ehrh, 
Herb. n. 41, in Sir J. E. Smith’s copy; and Smith himself, no doubt, 
alludes to that identical specimen, when he says that his own 31. arvensis 
has sometimes several axillary flowers. There is almost always, in Bri- 
tish specimens, one distant flower at the base of the primordial raceme 
only. Reichenbach, Bluff, and (if Mertens and Koch be right as to 
Hoffman’s 31. collina) Hoffman, refer to 31. collina, Ehrh., — (that is to 
his 31. scorpioides, collina') as the present plant. Now, the 31. scorpioides 
collina, in Sir J. E. Smith’s copy of Ehrhart, is 31. versicolor; but it is 
very possible that Ehrhart may have confounded the two plants, and 
given our true collina in some of his sets. If otherwise, the present 
species should bear the name of “ 31. hispida, Schlechtendal though 
prcecox or fugax would be more applicable as specific designations. 

7. M. versicolor, Lehm. (yel/oiv and blue Scorpion-grass'); fruit 
smooth ; calyx with spreading uncinate bristles, when in fruit oblong 
(closed) longer than the almost erect pedicels, limb of the corolla 
concave shorter than the exserted tube. E. Idot. t. 2558, ( ad calc.') 
Reich, in Sturm, cum ic. (minus bona.) E. FI. v. i. p. 253. — 31. 
arvensis, y. versicolor, Pers. Syn. v. i. p. 156. — 31. arvensis, (3. 
minor , Roth, Germ. v. ii.p. 223. — 31. scorpioides, collina,' Ehrh. 

Pl.Exsicc. n. 51, (according to Smith’s copy) 31. scorpioides , (3. 

Hucls. Ancjl. p. 78. Sm. FI. Brit. p. 212. E. Bot. t. 480. (fig. 
sinist.) — 31. scorpioides, y. Linn. Sp. PI. p. 189, 

Common in wet meadows, &c. as well as dry places; hence varying 
much in height. FI. Apr. June. ©. — Lehmann quotes “il/. versicolor , 
Herb. Ehrh." as well as “ 31. collina, Ehrh. Herb." Among Sir J. E. 
Smith’s specimens, I found 31. versicolor, as 31. scorp. collina, but no 
specimens of Ehrhart named versicolor. — Wallroth (Sched. Crit. p. 72,) 
joins 31. versicolor and 31. stricta. Link, under the name of 31. collina, 
Ehrh.; and adds a var. p. simplex, Pers., to which he cites 31. pusilla, 
Loisel. and Rcemer and Schultes as synonyms. Mr. Bentham’s speci- 
mens in our herbarium of 31. pusilla , are very near to 31. stricta, but 
appear different in habit, and have very few hooked bristles, but abun- 
dance of straight ones, on the calyx. 31. versicolor is distinguishable 
at once from 31. stricta, (which is 31. versicolor, p. Lehm.) by its stalked 
racemes. In 31. stricta, the flowers begin among the leaves, sometimes 
from the very base of the stem; I believe, too, that none of them are 
yellow, and that they have a much shorter tube. Lehmann says that 


Anaga/lis.] PENTANDUIA — MONOGYNIA. 103 

the blossoms of J I. versicolor retain unchanged their respective colours. 
Fries asserts the contrary. I have not attended to this point, but, cer- 
tainly, it is always the upper, consequently the younger flowers, that are 
yellow. 

9. Aspeiujgo. Linn. Madvvort. 

1. A. procumbens, Linn. ( German Madwort). E. Bot. t. 36. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 263. 

Waste places in the north : Durham. About Dunbar, and near Edin- 
burgh. Purfleet; Mr. Alchorne. FI. June, July. Q. —Stems procumbent, 
angular, rough with short hooked prickles. Leaves oblongo-lanceolate, 
solitary or opposite, or 3 — 4- nearly from the same point of the stem, 
lower ones petiolate, all rough and slightly hispid. Flowers blue, axil- 
lary, solitary. Peduncles short, at first erect, then curved downward. 
Cat. small, much enlarged in fruit. 

10. Cyngglossum. Linn. Hound’s-tongue. 

1. C. officinale, Linn, (common Hound' s-tongue) ; stem-leaves 
lanceolate attenuate at the base sessile downy, stamens shorter than 
the corolla. E. Bot. t. 921. E. EL v. i.p. 260. 

Waste grounds and by road-sides ; less irequent in Scotland. Ft. 
June, July, $ . — Whole plant soft to the touch, dull green, of a fetid 
smell; often 2 feet high. Lower leaves on long footstalks. Flowers 
purplish-red. Fruit very rough. 

2. C. sylvdticum, Hienke. (green-leaved Hound' s-tongue'); stem- 
leaves lanceolate broad at the base shining sessile slightly hairy 
and scabrous especially beneath, stamens shorter than the corolla. 
E. Bot. t. 1642. E. El. v. i.p. 266. 

Rare, shady places, by road-sides, &c. in the middle and east of Eng- 
land. Carse of Gowrie in Scotland, G. Dun. Near Balbriggan, Ireland, 
Dr. Scott. FI. June, July, $ . — Distinguished readily from the last by 
its more or less shining and brighter- coloured leaves, free from pubes- 
cence, and their different figure. Root-leaves ovato-lanceolate, on very 
long footstalks. 

11. Anagallis. Linn. Pimpernel. 

1. A. arvensis, Linn, (scarlet Pimpernel or Poor Man s Wea- 
therglass'); leaves ovate sessile dotted beneath, margin of the corolla 
crenate piloso-glandulose. E.Bot. t. 529. E. Fl.v. i.p. 280. — (3. 
ccendea ; margins of the corolla toothed scarcely at all glandulose. 

A. ccerulea , Schreb E. Bot. t. 1823. Hook, in FI. Loud. N. S. 

E. FI. v. i. p. 280. 

Corn-fields, frequent. 0 . not rare in similar situations. Ft. June, July. 
©. — Flowers generally bright scarlet, sometimes blue, and Mr. John 
Dillwyn has found at Penllegare, 8. Wales, specimens with the flowers of 
a clear white, with a small, well-defined, bright purplish-pink eye in 
the centre of every corolla. The Rev. Professor Henslow has proved, 
by cultivation from seed, that A. ccerulea and A. arvensis are varieties 
of the same. 

2. A. tenella, Linn. ( Bog Pimpernel) ; stem creeping filiform, 


104 


PENTANDTUA — MONOGYNIA. 


[Lysimachia. 

leaves ovate or roundish stalked. E. Eot. t. 530. E. FI, v. i. 

p. 281. 

Wet mossy bogs ; frequent in England, more rare in Scotland. FI. 
July, Aug. If . — A beautiful little plant, as are all of this Genus : — 2 — 4 
inches long. Leaves small. Flowers large in proportion to the size of 
the plant, on rather long footstalks. Cor. subcampanulate, pink or rose- 
coloured. 

12. Lysimachia. Linn. Loosestrife. 

1 . L. vulgaris, Linn. ( great yellow Loosestrife ) ; leaves ovato- 
lanceolate opposite or ter-quaternate, panicle many-flowered ter- 
minal. E. Eot. t. 76 1 . E. FI. v. i. p. 277. 

Sides of rivers and wet shady places : less frequent in Scotland. FI. 
July. If. — Erect, 2 — 3 feet high. Leaves nearly sessile, glabrous or 
downy beneath. Panicle large, leafy, much branched. Corollas large, 
yellow, handsome. 

2. L. thyrsiflora , Linn. ( tufted Loosestrife ) ; leaves opposite 
lanceolate, racemes many-flowered stalked lateral. E. Eot. t. 176. 
E. FI. v. i.p. 278. 

Wet marshes and water-sides, very rare in England ; Yorkshire, Hert- 
fordshire and Anglesea. More frequent in Scotland : near Forfar, and 
at Duddingston Loch on the east ; Canal-side near Fossil, and near 
Rossdhu, by Loch Lomond : in the former place most abundant and 
growing in the water. FI. July. If. — 1 — 2 feet high. Flowers nume- 
rous, small, collected into dense, axillary, peduncled racemes. Number 
of the parts of the flower very variable. Cor. deeply cut into very nar- 
row segments, yellow, and as well as the cal. spotted with orange. 

3. L. punctata, Linn, (four-leaved Loosestrife ) ; erect, downy, 
leaves ovato-lanceolate whorled petiolate, peduncles 1 -flowered 
wliorled axillary. Roem. et Schultes, Syst. Veget. v. iv. p. 125. 
Jacq. Austr. v. iv. t. 366. 

Moist banks of rivers, rare. Discovered by the late Mr. Nathan 
Backhouse, in 1803, on the margins of the Skern, north of Darlington, 
most frequent on the west side of the river, both above and below the 
rail-way bridge. Ft. J uly. If . . — I labit of L. vulgaris : erect, with whorled 
leaves, 4 — 5 in a whorl. Whole plant downy. Leaves sometimes dotted, 
not so in my specimens from Germany. Flowers in whorls, on stalks 
each bearing a single blossom, yellow, dotted with deeper colour. This 
species had long lain in the herbarium of Mr. Backhouse, under the 
name of L. vulgaris: but on examining it with a little attention, Mr. 
James Backhouse soon determined it to be the L. punctata, and kindly 
communicated the particulars respecting it to me. It will probably, ere 
long, be found in other situations. 

4. L. Nemorum, Linn. ( yellow Pimpernel, or Wood Loosestrife); 
leaves ovate acute, stem creeping, peduncles 1-flowered solitary, 
calycine segments linear-subulate, stamens smooth. E. Eot. t. 527. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 278. 

Woods and shady places, frequent. FI. during the summer months. If . 


Primula.] 


l'ENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


105 


5. L. Nummuldria , Linn. ( creeping Loosestrife, Money-wort or 
Herb-Twopence); leaves subcorclate obtuse, stem prostrate, pedun- 
cles l^flowered solitary, calycine segments ovate acute, filaments 
glandular. E. Bot. t. 528. E. FI. v. i.p. 279. 

Shady places and pastures. FI. June, July. If. 

13. Cyclamen. Linn. Sow-bread. 

1. C. hedcrafolium, Willd. ( Icy-leaved Cyclamen or Sow- 
bread) ; “ leaves heart-shaped angular finely toothed their ribs and 

footstalks roughish.” E. FI. v. i. p. 273 Cyclamen europceum , 

E. Bot. t. 5-18. 

On a bank at Bramfield, Suffolk, I). E. Davy, Esq.; scarcely indige- 
nous. Ft. Apr. If. — Leaves springing from the top of the large, tuber- 
ous root. Cor. white or flesh-coloured. Scapes spirally twisted after 
flowering, so as to bury the seed-vessels in the earth. 

14. Primula. Linn. Primrose. 

1. P. vidgaris , Huds. ( common Primrose); leaves toothed wrin- 
kled, scape single-flowered, limb of the corolla flat. E. Bot. t. 4. 
E. FI. v. i.p. 270. — P. veris, y. acaulis, Linn.—Henslow. 

Woods, hedge-banks anil pastures, abundant. FI. April, May, and 
till June on the mountains of Scotland. If . — If the scapes are traced to 
their very base, they will be found to spring from one common point and 
to constitute a sessile umbel. 

2. P .eldtior, With. ( Oxlip Primrose) ; leaves toothed wrinkled 
contracted below the middle, scape umbellate, limb of the corolla 

flat. E. Bot. A 513. E. FI. v. i.p. 270 P. veris , [3. elatior, Linn. 

— Henslow. 

Woods and thickets, not common : still rarer in Scotland. About 
Dublin, Mr. J. T. Macfcay. FI. Apr. May. If.. — Mr. Wilson finds spe- 
cimens of this with some scapes bearing solitary flowers and others um- 
bellate : so that whatever may be thought of the following species, this 
cannot be considered really distinct from P. acaulis. 

3. P. veris, Linn. ( common Cowslip or Paigle) ; leaves toothed 
wrinkled contracted below the middle, scape umbellate, calycine 
teeth obtuse, limb of the corolla concave. E. Bot. t. 5. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 271. — P. veris, a. officinalis, Henslow. 

Meadows and pastures, frequent in a clayey soil in England; very 
rare in Scotland. Near Edinburgh . Introduced about Glasgow, Hop- 
Icirlc. FI. Apr. May. If. — Various are the opinions respecting the above 
3 Primulas, as to the permanence of their specific characters. Professor 
Henslow has seen them all produced from the same root: and thus, in 
his useful little Catalogue of British Plants arranged according to the Nat. 
System, has reduced them to cars, of P. veris, as Linnaeus had done. 
Few plants are, however, more constant to the characters here laid down 
than these are, as generally seen growing in their wild stations. They 
rarely are found intermixed — and in Scotland the two last kinds-are scarcely 
known. Some are of opinion that the P. elatior is a hybrid between 


106 


PENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


[Menyanthes. 

the other two: but Mr. II. F. Talbot found, upon the summit of a higli 
mountain, near the Lake of Thun, in Switzerland, P. elatior in abun- 
dance, while P. veris was confined to the base of the hill, and P. vulgaris 
was not found within 50 miles of it. 

4. P .farinosci, Linn. (Bird's-eye Primrose) ; leaves obovato-lan- 
ceolate mealy crenulated, calyx oblongo-ovate, limb of the corolla 
plane its mouth obscurely glandular, the segments obcordate atte- 
nuated at the base distant “ nearly as long as the tube.” E. Bot. 
t. 6. E. FI. v. i. p. 272. 

Mountainous pastures in the north of England, especially York- 
shire, not unfrequent. Very rare in Scotland ; oidy seen, I believe, 
south of Edinburgh : the stations given in FI. Scotica all belonging to the 
following species. Not found in Ireland. FI. June, July. If . — One of 
thejnost elegant of plants, scarcely yielding in beauty to the next spe- 
cies. The powdery substance on the leaves, scape, and calyx has a 
musky smell. Floivers pale lilac-purple, with a yellow eye. 

5. P. scotica, Hook. ( Scottish Primrose) ; leaves obovato-lan- 
ceolate mealy denticulate, calyx ventvicose, limb of the corolla flat 
its mouth glandular, the segments broadly obcordate approximate 
“half the length of the tube.” Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 133. 
E. FI. p. 272, (excluding the syn. P. stricta.) Hook, in E. Bot. 
Svppl. t. 2608. 

North coast of Caithness, discovered by Mr. IV. Gibb of Inverness. 
Frequent also on the north coast of Sutherland, and in the Orkney Is- 
lands ; growing upon the sandy shores. FI. July. If. — A most distinct 
and rare species of Primrose, not half the size of the preceding, but with 
a stouter habit. Floivers deep bluish-purple, with a yellow eye. In 
P.farinosa, the germen is broadly obovate and the stigma capitate: here 
the germen is globose, and the stigma with 5 points. Dr. Graham first 
observed the difference in the relative length of the segments of the co- 
rolla, a character which he thinks may be advantageously employed in 
distinguishing other allied species of Primula. This has no affinity with 
P. stricta of Horneniann, to which Smith, though doubtfully, referred it ; 
nor have I seen specimens from any country save those just-mentioned. 

15. Hottonia. Linn. Water- Violet. 

1. H. palustris, Linn. ( common Water- Violet or Featherf oil); 
flowers whorled on a long solitary cylindrical stalk, corolla longer 
than the calyx, leaves pectinated. E. Bot. t. 364. E. FI. v. i.p. 276. 

Ditches and pools in England : not found in Scotland. Downpatrick, 
Ireland, Mr. J. V. Mackay. FI. June. If. — Root creeping. Leaves 
all submerged. Flowers large, handsome, pale purple, rising above 
the water, 

16. Menyanthes. Linn. Buckbean. 

1. M. trifoliata, Linn. ( common Buckbean or Marsh Tnfoil). 
E. Bot. t. 495. E. FI. v. i. p. 274. 

Marshy places, boggy ground, &c. frequent. FI. June, July. If. — 
Roots densely creeping and matted, so as often to render the boggy 


Erythrwa .] PENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 107 

ground firm where the plant grows. Leaves ternate, stalked : leaflets 
obovate, obscurely toothed. The base of the leaf is sheathing, whence 
arises a flowerstalk supporting a compound raceme or thyrsus , of many 
white flowers, tipped externally with red and beautifully fringed with 
white filaments within. — In the Highlands of Scotland, employed as tea, 
it is considered to strengthen weak stomachs. It cures the disease 
called darn in cattle ; and is sometimes used as a substitute for hops, 
(Mr. Gibb.) All these qualities indicate the bitter principle which 
abounds so much in the Gentian tribe. 

17. Villarsia. Vent. Villarsia. 

1. V. nym pheroides, Vent. (Nymphcea-like Villarsia); leaves 
orbiculari-cordate floating, peduncles aggregate single-flowered, 

corollas ciliated. Hook. in. FI. Loud. N. S. t. 168 Menyanthes 

nymphceoides, Linn. — E. Hot. t. 217. E. FI. v. i.p. 275. 

Rare; in rivers and still waters. In the Thames. Abundant in the 
canal near Downham Market and Wisbeach. In Yorkshire. — FI. July, 
Aug. If . — A beautiful plant, easy of cultivation, and difficult to be eradi- 
cated. Flower large, yellow', curiously plaited. The canals in Holland 
are sometimes covered with this plant, which has quite a different habit 
from the true Menyanthes. Stigma 5-cleft. The ripe fruit I have not 
seen. Mr. Brown says that in the aquatic species of this genus, the 
capsule is valveless ; 2-valved in the others. 

18. Erythrasa. Renealm, Centaury. 

1. E. Centaurium, Pers. ( common Centaury); stem nearly 
simple, leaves ovato-oblong, flowers sessile (or nearly so) fasciculato- 
paniculate, calyx half as long as the tube of the corolla. Hook. 
Scot. i. p. 79. E. FI. v. i.p. 320. — Chironia Centaurium , Curt. 
— E. Bot. t. 417 — Gentiana Centaurium , Linn. 

Dry pastures, frequent. FI. July, Aug. 0.-8— 10 inches to a foot 
high. Font-leaves spreading, three-nerved, broader than those of the 
stem, which are in distant pairs. Panicles of flowers fascicled near the 
top of the stem, and forming a sort of corymb. Corolla handsome, 
rose-coloured. 

2. E. pulchella, Hook. (Dwarf branched Centaury); stem much 
branched, leaves ovato-oblong, flowers pedicellate in lax panicles, 
calyx nearly as long as the tube of the corolla. Hook. Scot. i. p. 79^ 

E. FI. v. i. p. 322 — Chironia pidchella, Willd E. Bot. t. 458. 

( . pulchtlla, [3. Duby , Bot. Galt. p. 328. — Gentiana pulcltella, 
Swartz . — G. Centaurium, [3. Linn. 

Sandy sea-shores ; England and Scotland. Cape Clear Island, Ire- 
land, Mr. Drummond. FI. Aug. Sept. ©. — Stems 2 — 4 or G inches 
high, slender and much branched from near the base. Panicle spreading, 
leafy, dichotomous, with a single flowerstalk between the branches. — 
Probably only a var. of the preceding. 

3. E. littordlis, Hook. ( Dwarf tufted Centaury) ; stem simple 
or branched, leaves ovato-oblong, flowers sessile capitato-paniculate, 


108 


FENTANDRIA MON 0 GY N I A . 


[ Ilyoscyanms. 

calyx as long as tlie tube deeply cleft. Hook. Scot. i.p. 80. E. FL 
v. i. p. 320 . — Chironici littorcdis, Turn, and Dillw. Bot. Guide , 
p. 4 GO. F.Bot. t. 2305. — C. pulchella, Bon, FI. Brit. Fuse. i. v. 7. 

Sandy coasts of Northumberland, Lancashire, Wales, Scotland. Port- 
marnock sands, Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FL June, July. 0. — 
Varying in height from 2 — G inches. Leaves all narrow. Cal. segments 
very long, in my specimens scarcely united by a membrane as in the 2 
preceding species, as long as the tube of the corolla : but most of the 
characters given for this species, are said by Mr. Turner, its founder, 
to vary in individuals he has seen : and I fear it has little right 
to be kept distinct from E. Centaurium. Mr. Wilson finds many 
specimens which cannot be referred to either, owing to differential marks 
as slight as those attributed to this and the preceding one. 

4. E. latifolia, Sm. ( broad-lecired tufted Centaury ) ; stem 3- 
cleft at the top, flowers in dense forked tufts, calyx as long as the 
tube, segments of the corolla lanceolate, lower leaves broadly ellip- 
tical with 5 or 7 ribs. E. FI. v. i.p. 321 . — Chironia Centaurium, 
var. 2. Sm. FI. Brit. p. 1393. 

Sea-shore of Lancashire : sandy ground near the sea, to the north of 
Liverpool, Dr. Rostock and Mr. Shepherd, 1803 ; (Sm.). Near Holy- 
head, Mr. IV. Wilson. County of Down, Ireland, Mr. T. Drummond. 
Isle of Staffa, Rev. G. Gordon. FI. July. ©. — This has more the 
appearance of a species than either of the two last. Some of my Irish 
specimens have the leaves an inch and a half long, and J of an inch broad, 
not confined to the root, and rising one pair close above the other. Yet 
I can hardly persuade myself it is distinct from the first species, E. 
Centaurium. 

19. Datura. Linn. Thorn-apple. 

1. D. Stramonium , Linn. ( common Thorn-apple); herbaceous, 
leaves ovate angulato-sinuate glabrous, fruit ovate erect clothed 
with numerous nearly equal spines. E. Bot. t. 1288. E. FI. v. i. 
p. 314. 

Waste ground in England, in the neighbourhood of gardens or towns, 
not indigenous. El. July. ©. — The narcotic qualities of this plant are 
well known. The capsule lias 4 cells below, and is divided by four 
dissepiments of which two only reach the top; hence the summit is 
2-celled. 

20. Hyoscyamus. Linn. Henbane. 

1. H. niger, Linn, (common Henbane); leaves amplexicaul si- 
nuated, flowers nearly sessile. E. Bot. t. 591. E. FI. v. i.p. 315. 

Waste places, especially in a chalky soil ; often near towns and villages. 
FI. July. ©. — Stem much branched, rounded. Whole plant covered 
with unctuous fetid hairs. Leaves subovate. Calyx veined, as is the 
large dingy yellow corolla, with purplish-brown lines ; its tubular part 
swells and firmly encloses the capsule, of which the upper part falls of!' 
like a lid. Plant highly narcotic. 


Verba scum.] 


rENTAN DrtlA — monogynia. 


109 


21. Atropa. Linn, Dwale. 

1. A. Belladonna, Linn. ( common Dwale, or deadly Nightshade) ; 
stem herbaceous, leaves ovate undivided, flowers axillary on short 
peduncles. E. Bot. t. 592. E. FI. v. i. p. 31G. 

Hedges and waste places, especially among ruins and near towns. FI. 
June. y . . — 3 feet and more high. Leaves entire, some very large, but 
placed in pairs ol unequal sizes. Flowers drooping, lurid purple. Ber- 
ries shining, black, highly injurious when taken internally. Their effects 
are said to be best counteracted by drinking plentifully of vinegar. 

22. Solanum. Linn. Nightshade. 

1. S. Dulcamara, Linn. ( woody Nightshade or Bittersweet) ; 
stem without thorns shrubby climbing, leaves cordate, upper ones 
hastate, corymbs drooping inserted opposite the leaves. E. Bot. 
t. 3G5. E. El. v. i. p. 317. 

Moist hedges and thickets : not common in Scotland. About Dublin, 
il/r. .7. 1. Mach ay. Ft. June, July. T? • — Flowers purple with 2 green 
tubercles at the base of each segment. Anthers large, yellow, united 
into a pyramidal or cone-shaped figure. — This has been much employed 
in medicine, especially in rustic practice. A hairy var. is mentioned by 
Ray, as growing on the southern coast of England. 

2. S. nigrum, Linn, {common or Garden Nightshade) ; stem 
without thorns herbaceous, leaves ovate bluntly toothed and waved, 
umbels lateral drooping. E. Bot. t. 566. E. El. v. i. p. 3 1 8. 

Maste places, fields, &c. frequent. Ft. June — Sept. 0. — Flowers 
white. Berries globose, black. 

23. Verbascum. Linn. Mullein. 

1. . Thapsus, Linn. ( great Mullein ); leaves decurrent woolly 

on both sides, stem simple, spike of flowers very dense, 2 stamens 
longer glabrous. E. Bot. t. 549. E. EL v. i. p. 308. 

Banks and waste ground, in a light, sandy, gravelly or chalky soil. 
Ft. July, Aug. $ . — Stem 4 — 5 feet high, angular, winged. Leaves thick, 
excessively woolly, ovate or oblong. Spike long, cylindrical. Flowers 
handsome, golden-yellow, when dried in the sun, giving out a fatty matter 
used in Alsace as a cataplasm in haeroorrhoidal complaints. 3 of the 
stamens hairy ; 2 longer ones glabrous. 

V. Lychnitis , Linn, (while Mullein) ; leaves oblong wedge- 
shaped nearly glabrous above, stem angular and panicled. E. Bot. 
t. 58. E. FI. v. i. p. 309. 

Road-sides, pastures, and fields, especially in a chalky soil. On clay- 
slate, near Truro, Rev. J. S. Tozer. Ft. July, Aug. $ .—Flowers 
numerous, rather small, cream-coloured. Leaves below very woolly. 
Stamens hairy. 

3. Y . “ thapsiforme, Schrad.” (Thapsus-lihe Mullein;) “stem 
simple, leaves lanceolato-ovate, raceme spiked dense, bracteaj longer 
than the woolly calyx, segments of the corolla obovate rounded, 


PENTANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


no 


[Convolvulus . 


2 anthers oblong. I). C." Lindl. Syn. p. 181. “V. thapsoides, 
Willd.” 

“ By road-sides in Kent. FI. July, Aug. $ .” Lindley. 

4. V. pulverulentum, Vill. (yellow lioary Mullein) ; leaves 
ovr.to-oblong subserrated pulverulentotomentose on both sides, 
stem rounded panicled. E. Eot. t. 487. E.Fl. v. i.p. 310. 

Roadsides on a gravelly or chalky soil : frequent in Norfolk and Suf- 
folk. Den near Cullen, Scotland, Mr. Maughan. FI. July. $ . — 
Remarkable for the mealy down on the leaves, which is easily removed 
from the surface. Flowers large, handsome. If the plant be struck 
suddenly and violently, the expanded corollas will in a short time fall 
ofli and the calyx will close over the germen. (Sin.) 

5. V. nigrum , Linn, (dark Mullein ); leaves oblongo-cordate 
petioled crenate, subpubescent. E. Eot. t. 59. E. Fl.v. i. p. 311. 

Banks and way-sides, particularly in a gravelly or chalky soil. Rare 
in Scotland. Between Seton and Gosford, Dr. Yule. Banks of the 
Esk, andBorthwick Castle, Mr. Maughan. FI. July, Aug. If. — Leaves 
nearly glabrous, dark green. Flowers in clusters on the almost simple 
long spike. Cor. rather large, yellow. Slam, with bright purple hairs. 

6. V. virgatum,\N\[h. ( large-flowered Primrose-leaved Mullein); 
“ leaves ovato-lanceolate toothed sessile, radical ones downy some- 
what lyrate, stem branched, flowers aggregate partly sessile.” 
E. Eot. t. 550. E. FI. v. i. 311. 

Fields, and by road-sides, rare. Field near Wrexham, Mrs. Nash ; 
from whose garden at Seven near Worcester, it is presumed to have 
established itself in the neighbourhood. (Sin.). Near Plymouth, Mr. 
Banks. Ft. Aug. $ . — Allied to the following. 

7. V. Elattdria, Linn. (Moth Mullein) ; leaves amplexicaul 
crenate oblong glabrous radical ones sinuate, upper ones acuminate, 
flowers stalked remote collected into an elongated branched raceme. 
E. Eot. t. 393. E. FI. v. i. p. 312. 

Banks in a gravelly soil, rare. In several places in Kent, (whence 
specimens have been sent to me, from Cobham, by the Rev. Prof. 
Henslow); and not unfrequent in Devonshire and Cornwall. Near Ply- 
mouth; Air. Banks. Ft. July. ©. 

(Thames’ side near Walton, is mentioned to me as a station for the 
V. ferrugineum and apparently wild, by J. S. Mill, Esq.) 

24. Convolvulus. Linn. Bindweed. 

1. C. arvensis, I, inn. (small Bindweed) ; stem climbing, leaves 
sagittate their lobes acute, peduncles mostly single-flowered, bracteas 
minute distant from the flowers. E. Eot. t. 3 1 2. E. El. v. i.p. 284. 

Corn-fields, hedges, &c. especially in a light soil. FI. June, July. If.. 
— Flowers rather small, vose-coloured. Root running very deep into the 
ground and difficult of extirpation. 

2. C. sepium, Litin. (great Bindweed) ; stem climbing, leaves 
sagittate their lobes truncate, peduncles 4-sided single-flowered, 


PENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


Azalea .] 


Ill 


bracteas large heart-shaped close to the flower. E. Bot. t. 313. 
E. FI. v. i. p. SSI. — Calystegia, Br. 

Moist woods and hedges. FI. July, Aug. If. — Much larger than the 
last in every part. Flowers very large, showy, pure white. 


3. C. Soldanella, Linn. ( Seaside Bindweed ) stem prostrate, 
leaves reniform fleshy, peduncles 4-sided single-flowered their angles 
winged, bracteas large ovate close to the calyx. E. Bot. t. 314. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 285. — Calystegia , Br. 

Sea-shore in sandy places, frequent. FI. June — Aug. If . — Foot long, 
creeping. Flowers few, large, rose-coloured. Capsules 1-celled. 


25. Polemonium. Linn. Jacob’s Ladder. 

1. P. cceruleum , Linn. ( blue Jacob's Ladder ) ; leaves pinnated 
glabrous, leaflets oblongo-lanceolate, flowers erect. E.Bot.t. 14. 
E. El. v. i. p. 286. 

Banks and bushy places, rare ; chiefly found in the north. In Derby- 
shire and Yorkshire. About Queensferry, Arniston and Delvine woods, 
Scotland. Knockmaron Hill, Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. June. 
If • — 1 — 2 feet high. Stem angular. Flowers large, blue, sometimes white. 

26. Azalea. Linn. Azalea. 

1. A. procumbens, Linn, (trailing Azalea). E. Bot. t. 865. 
E. FI. v. i. p. 282. — Cliameeledon , Link Loiseleuria, Desvaux. 

Dry rnoory ground, on most of the Scottish Highland mountains, among 
grass and moss : especially abundant in the north ; and nowhere per- 
haps more plentiful than on the Cairngorum range, where it forms large 
dark green patches. FI. May, June. Tj . — Alow shrub, with very woody 
tortuous steihs, and crowded leafy branches. Leaves small, almost like 
those of Thyme, but quite smooth and glossy above, rigid, channelled, 
their margins remarkably revolute ; midrib below broad and prominent. 
Flowers in short terminal racemes. Pedicels with short ovate bracteas at 
the base, swollen upwards. Cal. deeply 5-sometimes G-partite, purple, 
segments oblong, fleshy. Corolla flesh-coloured, subcampanulate, with 5 
oblong, moderately spreading, sometimes unequal, obtuse segments. 
Stamens inserted upon a fleshy disk or base to the germen, a little shorter 
than the corolla. Anthers of 2 oval cells, opening distinctly by a longi- 
tudinal fissure, lead-coloured. Germen upon a fleshy base or disk scarcely 
broader than itself, ovate, 2-or 3-celled. Style about equal to it in 
length ; stigma capitate, obscurely lobed. Capsule broadly ovate, with 
a somewhat spongy coat, purplish-brown, opening by 2 or 3 valves, 
according as the cells are 2 or 3; the margins of the valves entering into 
the capsule and thus forming the dissepiments: again each valve is 
deeply cleft; so that on looking at. the upper half of an open capsule we 
find 4 or 6 valves or segments, each having one of its sides introflexed, 
to form (with the introflexed side of the neighbouring segment) a dis- 
sepiment of a double plate. Seeds fixed to 2 or 3 lobes of a central, at 
length (when the valves open) free column or receptacle, oval, pale 
brown, dotted. 

I have been the more particular in my description of this plant, because 


112 


PENTANDRIA MONOGYNI A. 


[Jasioiic. 


the accounts of authors arc at variance. Smith says that he lias never 
seen the anthers burst longitudinally: but nothing can be more clear 
than the opening of their cells by a fissure, as long as the cell. The same 
author, too, and even Mr. Don, whose description in most other par- 
ticulars (see Ed. Phil. Journ. v. vi. p. 48.) is very accurate, say that the 
capsule is 5-celled, 5-valved, the valves cloven. I find both in the ger- 
men and in the capsule only 2 or 3 cells, as figured by Gaertner, and the 
same structure in the rest of the fruit as is so well described by that 
admirable carpologist. — It was upon this species that Linnaeus founded 
the Genus Az'ilea. The other Azaleas are now properly referred to 
Rhododendron by Mr. Don, as was suggested many years ago by Mr. Salis- 
bury. A. procumbens abounds in the Arctic Regions of, I believe, 
the whole northern hemisphere. It is found in America, as far 
south as the White Mountains of New Hampshire. My friend Dr. 
Boott gathered it on Mount Washington of that range : and it is extreme- 
ly plentiful on the higher parts of the Rocky Mountains. With us it is 
not seen either in England, or in Ireland. 

27. Vinca. Linn. Periwinkle. 

1. V. minor , Linn, (lesser Periwinkle); stem procumbent, 
leaves oblongo-lanceolate their margins as well as the small lanceo- 
late teeth of the calyx glabrous. E. Pot. t. 917. E. El. v. i.p. 338. 

Hedges and banks in woods ; decidedly wild in Devon, with blue and 
white fi. Rev. J. S. Toser. FI. May, June. 11 . — Wood of the shoots 
very tough ; not so in the following species. 

2. V. major, Linn, (greater Periwinkle) ; stem suberect, leaves 
ovato-cordate their margins as well as those of the elongated subulate 
segments of the calyx ciliated. E. Bot. t. 514. E. FI. v. i. p. 339. 

Woods and thickets: not wild. FI. May. If - — Twice the size of the 
former in all its parts. Corolla mostly purple in both, but varying in 
intensity. The anthers, stigma, and fruit (a follicle) are highly curious 
in this genus. 

28. Samolus. Linn. Brook-weed. 

1. S. Valerandi, Linn. (Brook- weed or Water Pimpernel ; 
leaves obtuse, racemes many-flowered, pedicels with a small lnac- 
tea. E. Bot. t. 703. E. El. v. i. p. 323. 

Marshy and watery places, especially in a gravelly soil. Ft- July, 
If . — This plant is very generally dispersed throughout the world. Stem 
8 — 10 inches high, rounded, glabrous, as well as the ovate, subpetiolate, 
entire, fleshy leaves. Flowers small, white. Cal. small, 5-cleft, per- 
sistent : the segments surmounting the rounded capsule. 

29. Jasione. Linn. Sheep’s-bit. 

1. J .mentdna, Linn, (annual Sheep' s-bit cr Sheep' s- Scabious) ; 
leaves linear waved hispid, peduncles solitary elongated, root annual. 
E. Bot. t. 882. E. El. v. i. p. 296. 

Dry heathy pastures, in a light gravelly or heathy soil. FI. June, 
July, ©. — Stem (j— 10 inches high, branched. Flowers bright blue, in 
terminal, dense, hemispherical heads, surrounded by a many-leaved 


PENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


Phyteuma .] 


] 13 


involucre. Cal. small, superior, 5-toothed. Cor. in 5 deep and narrow 
segments. Anthers united at the base. The whole inflorescence has, 
indeed, a very near affinity with that of the Class Syngenesia, where 
Linnaeus placed it. Here, however, the little flowers are pedicellate 
upon the receptacle, and there is a distinct and true calyx to each. 

30. Lobelia. Linn. Lobelia. 

1. L. urens, Linn, (acrid Lobelia) ; stem erect, leaves toothed 
nearly glabrous, radical ones obovate petioled, upper ones lanceo- 
late sessile, raceme terminal bracteated, calyx rough. E. Lot. 
t. 953. E. FI. v. i. p. 298. 

Heathy ground, very rare ; only found near Axminster, Mr. Newberry ; 
and Ottery St. Mary, Devonshire, Miss Burgess. FI. Aug. Sept. '4 . — 
Milky, and, as its name implies, very acrid. One foot or more high, w ith 
distant leaves and axillary branches. Flowers deep-purple, slightly 
downy without. 

2. L. Dortmdnna, Linn. (Water Lobelia) ; leaves radical sub- 
cylindrical and obtuse of two parallel tubes, stem scarcely leafy, 
flowers racemed. E. Bot. t. 140. E. FI. v. i. p. 297. 

Lakes in the north and north-west of England, Scotland and Ireland, 
especially in the mountainous parts, frequent ; often forming a green 
carpet at the bottom of the water with its densely-matted foliage. FI. 
July, Aug. If. — Root a small, thick, fleshy stock, from which descend many 
fibres and which send forth creeping filiform runners, (Mr. 1C. Wilson). 
Leaves 2 — 3 inches long, a little recurved, formed of 2 parallel tubes or 
cells. Scape, or almost leafless stem, flowering above water, a foot or 
more high, according to the depth of the water. Flowers pale blue, 
drooping ; fruit erect. 

31. Phyteuma. Linn. Rampion. 

1. P. orbieuldre , Linn, (round-headed Rampion); head of 
flotvers roundish, radical leaves ovato-oblong petiolate crenate those 
of the stem as well as the bracteas lanceolate. E. Bot. t. 142. Hook, 
in FI. Lend. N. S. t. 5G. E. FI. v. i. p. 295. 

Chalky soils, to the south of London, but rare. On the downs of 
Sussex and Hampshire; in Surry and Kent. FI. Aug. If— Stem 1 foot 
high. Root-leaves numerous, but often withering while the stem is yet 
in perfection, as is the case with those ol Campanula rolundifolia : cauline 
ones remote, gradually becoming smaller upwards. Heads of flowers of 
a most beautiful blue colour. The capsules too form a curious oval head, 
with their persistent calyces, each calyx spreading in a stellated manner. 

2. P. spicatum, Linn, (spiked Rampion) ; flowers in an oblongo- 
cylindrical spike, radical leaves cordato-oblong petiolate somewhat 
doubly serrated, upper ones and bracteas linear-lanceolate short 
sessile. Lindl. Syn. p. 135. Borrer, in E. Bot. Suj.pl. t. 2598. 

oods, thickets, hedges, and fields recently cleared of wood, in several 
stations^ about Mayfield and Waldron, Sussex, Mr. Borrer. First 
detected in the former place in 1825 by the Rev. Ralph Price. FI. June, 
uuly. If- Formerly cultivated, and the root eaten as a salad or boiled. 


PENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


114 


[Campanula. 


Much taller than the last. Spike of flowers 2 — 4 inches long, greenish- 
white. Upper part of the stem almost bare of leaves. 


32. Campanula. Linn. Bell-flower. 

* Cor. campnnulate. Capsule opening bg lateral pores. 

1. C. rotundifolia, Linn. ( round-leaved Bell- flower or Hare- 
bell ) ; glabrous, root-leaves subrotundo-cordate crenate (very soon 
withering) those of the stem linear entire. E. Bot. t. 866. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 287. 

Dry and hilly pastures, borders of fields, walls, &c. abundant, some- 
times varying with white flowers. FI. July, Sept. If. — Panicle few- 
flowered, lax. Flowers drooping. Whole plant slender and graceful: 

“ E’en the slight Hare-bell raised its head, 

Elastic from her airy tread.” 


2. C. pdtula, Linn, (spreading Bellflower) ; stem angular sca- 
brous, leaves roughish dentato-crenate those of the root obovato- 
lanceolate subpetiolate those of the stem linear-lanceolate, panicles 
spreading, calycine segments toothed, corolla spreading. E. Bot. 
t. 42. E. FI. v. i. p. 288. 

Pastures and hedges, chiefly confined to the middle and south-eastern 
counties of England, and even there by no means frequent. FI. July, 
Aug. ©.(<£. Sin.) — Somewhat allied to C. rotundifolia, but much taller, 
with more branched panicles ; larger, more spreading, more purple flowers, 
rough stems and leaves, and toothed or serrated calycine segments. 

3. C. Rapuncidus , Linn. ( Rampion Bell-flower) ; stem some- 
what angular hairy below, leaves roughish those of the root obo- 
vato-oblong stalked crenate upper ones narrow-lanceolate, panicle 
erect racemose, calycine segments entire, limb of the corolla patent. 
E. Bot. t. 283. Hooh. in El. Loncl. N. S. t. 80. E. El. v. i. p. 2S9. 

In Kent, Surry, Norfolk and Hampshire, in a gravelly soil : and in 
several of the midland counties, as far north as Yorkshire. Ft. July, 
Aug. If . — Taller (2-3 feet high) more erect and less panicled than the 
last. Flowers almost racemed, little spreading at the mouth, more truly 
campanulate. Calycine segments narrower and entire. The roots con- 
stitute Humps, and used to be much cultivated for the table. Now they 
are principally confined to the kitchen-gardens of the curious. 

4. C. persicifolia, Linn. ( Peach-leaved Bellflower); glabrous, 
stem rounded few-flowered, root-leaves obovate stalked crenate 
those of the stem linear-lanceolate subserrate sessile, calycine seg- 
ments entire, corollas spreading. Bon , Ft. Br. Fuse. n. 180. E, FI. 
v. i. p. 290. 

Woods near Cullen, Scotland, apparently indigenous, G. Don. FI. 
July. If . — Corolla large, spreading. In really wild specimens, the flowers 
are often solitary upon the stem. 

5. C. lot folia, Linn. (Giant Bellflower) ; stem quite simple 
routided, leaves ovato-lanceolate acute scabrous crenato-serrate, 


PENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


Campanula.] 


115 


peduncles erect single-flowered, calyx glabrous its segments entire, 
fruit drooping. E. Bot. t. 302. E. FI. v. i. p. 290. 

Moist shady woods. In Norfolk, Suffolk, Bedfordshire and Derby- 
shire, but rare ; less unfrequent in the north of England, and very com- 
mon in woody glens in Scotland. New-Ross, Ireland, Mr. Mackay. 
FI. July, Aug. If. -2-3 feet high. Corolla very large, blue, often white 
in the Scottish woods. This is the finest anil most stately of our species. 

6. C. rapunculoidcs, Linn, (creeping Bell-flower) ; stem slightly 
branched, leaves cordato-lanceolate scabrous crenate, flowers soli- 
tary unilateral drooping axillary forming a leafy raceme, segments 
of the calyx reflexed. E. Bot. t. 1369. E. FI. v. i. p. 291. 

\\ oods and fields, rare. Oxfordshire (Buddie's Herbarium'). On the 
magnesian limestone between Went-bridge and Darlington, Yorkshire, 
Mr. James Backhouse. Blair in Athol, Scotland; and found plentifully 
in cornfields 2 miles N. \V. of Kirkcaldy, (where it is considered a trou- 
blesome weed by the farmers,) by the late Alexander Chalmers, Esq. an 
accomplished botanist and one of the most excellent of men. FI. July, 
Aug. If . — 2 f. high. Leaves gradually narrower in the upper part of 
the stem. Flowers large. Calycine segments entire, rough. 

7. C. Trachelium, Linn. (Nettle-leaved Bell-flower); hispid, 
stem angular, leaves petiolate cordate acuminate inciso-serrate, 
peduncles axillary few-flowered, calycine segments erect. E. Bot. 
t. 12. E. FI. v. i.p. 292. 

Woods in England, frequent- Rare in Scotland : old walls of Mug- 
doch Castle, near Glasgow, Mr. Hoplcir/c. FI. July, Aug. If. — Leaves 
much like those of the Nettle, whence its English name. 

8. C. glomerdta, Linn, (clustered Bell-flower); stem angular 
simple nearly smooth, leaves scabrous crenate oblongo-lanceolate, 
root-leaves petiolate those of the stem semiamplexicaul, flowers 
sessile mostly in a terminal cluster. E. Bot. t. 90. E. FI. v. i. 
p. 292- 

In dry, principally chalky and clayey pastures, England. Hilly pas- 
tures in Scotland ; but confined, I believe, to the east side, between the 

Firth of Forth and Montrose. FI. July, Aug. If Varying much in 

height, from 3 or 4 inches to a foot. Flowers rather large, erect ; 
the petals sometimes turning to a bunch of leaves, (Prof. Hens low). 
Many slight varieties of this plant are considered as species by the con- 
tinental Botanists. 

** Corolla campanulate. Capsule opening at the free extremity , 
within the calycine segments. ( Wahlenbergia, Schrad.) 

9. C. hederacea , Linn. (Icy-leaved Bellflower) ; stem weak fili- 
form, leaves all stalked cordate angulato-dentate glabrous. E. Bot. 
t. 73. Hook, in FI. Loud. N. S. t. 93. E. FI. v. i. p. 293. 

In moist shady woods. Abundant in Devonshire, Cornwall, the 
Scilly Isles, and Wales. In Sussex (plentiful), Hampshire, Oxfordshire, 
Worcestershire, Essex. Epping-forest, near Theydon Bois, Mr. II. Cole. 
On the north bank of the Clyde, (Dr. Brown) whence it has been con- 


116 


PENTANDIU A MONOGYN'fA. 


f Loniccra. 


veyeil with the turf to grass-walks in the garden of Sir Michael Shaw 
Stewart of Ardgowan, where it was pointed out to me by my valued friend 
1). Fogo of Row, Esq. County of Cork and other places in Ireland, Mr. 
Mac/cay. FI. July, Aug. If. — A most graceful little plant, growing in 
lax tufts like Sibthorpia curapcea. Peduncles long, slender, mostly ter- 
minal. Flowers half an inch or more in length, at first drooping, then 
erect ; pale purplish-blue. Fruit, which I have on beautiful specimens 
communicated to me by Mr. W. Wilson, from North Wales, an almost 
globose capsule, fths adhering to the calyx, opening, not at the sides, 
but in the upper free part, between the persistent segments of the calyx. 
This is included in the genus Wahlenbergia of Schrad. But it has not 
tile habit of the other IVahlenbcrgice, which are, as M. Alphonse de Can- 
dolle observed to me, all natives of the southern hemisphere. An ex- 
cellent Monograph of the Campanulacece has just appeared from the pen 
of this gentleman, who visited the Herbaria of this country with a view 
to gaining a more complete knowledge of the tribe. 

*** Corolla nearly rotate. Capsule triangular, opening by 
valves at the extremity on the outside, and between the segments of 
the calyx. (Prismatocarpus, L' Her. Lindl.) 

10. C. hybrida, Linn. ( Corn Bell-flower ); stem simple or often 
branched from the base, leaves oblong crenate waved, corolla widely 
spreading shorter than the calycine segments, capsule elongated 
triangular. E. Bot. t. 375. E. El. v. i.p. 293. 

Corn-fields of a dry and chalky nature, chiefly confined to the middle 
and southern parts of England. FI. Aug. 0. — Sir J. E. Smith is of 
opinion that the beautiful C. Speculum, or Venus’ Looking-glass, is the 
same species as this, with larger flowers . Be that as it may, although 
extremely common on the continent immediately upon crossing the Bri- 
tish Channel, and a splendid ornament to the corn-fields there, it has 
never been found wild in England. 

33. Lonicera, Linn. Honey-suckle. 

* Climbing; flowers in whorled heads. (Caprifolium, Juss.) 

1. L. Caprifolium, Linn, (pale perfoliate Honey-suchle'); flowers 
ringent whorled terminal sessile, upper leaves connato-perfoliate. 
E. Bot. t. 799. E. FI. v. i. p. 326. 

Woods and thickets, rare. Oxfordshire and Cambridgeshire. In 
Collintou woods and on Corstorphine hill near Edinburgh, and in hedges 
at Dalmeny, Linlithgowshire. FI. June. T? . — Berries smooth, of an 
orange-colour. 

2. L. Periclymenum, Linn. ( common Honey-sucltle or Wood- 
bine); flowers ringent capitate terminal, leaves all distinct. E. Bot. 
t. 800. E. FI. v. i. p. 326. 

Frequent in woods and hedges ; 

“ Ami honey-suckle loves to crawl 
Up the low crag and ruiited wall.” 

FI. June — Oct. Tj . — Berries red. The stems of this and the last species 
invariably twine in one and the same direction. 


PE N TAN D It I A — M O N O G YN I A . 


117 


Euonynius.\ 

** Erect ; peduncles 2- flowered . (Xylosteum, Juss.) 

3. L. Xylosteum , Linn. ( upright Fly Honey-suclile); peduncles 
2-flowered, berries distinct, leaves ovate acuminate entire downy. 
E. Bot. t. 9 lti. E. FI. v. i. p. 32o. 

Thickets ; near Sewenshele, Northumberland, Wallis, Certainly wild 
cai Houghton Biid^c, 4 miles from Arundel, Sussex, Mr. Borrcr. FI. 
July. Tj .—An erect shrub ; with pale yellowish, small, scentless flowers, 
succeeded by bright scarlet berries. 


34. Rhamnus. Linn. Buckthorn. 


1. R . catharticus, Liuu. (common Buckthorn); spines terminal, 
flowers 4-cleft dioecious, leaves ovate sharply serrated. E. Bot. 
t. 1629. E. FI. v. i.p. 327. 

Woods, hedges and thickets; not unfrequent in England. About 
Dumfries, Scotland. Near Cork and Lough Earnein Ireland, Mr.J, I\ 
A Today. FI. May, June. Tj • — A spreading shrub. Leaves with 4 or G 
stiong lateral nerves parallel with the margin or rib ; serratures glandu- 
lar. _ Flowers in dense fascicles. “ In the barren flower the tube of the 
cal, is campanula te, the segments ovate, 2-ribbed. Pet. 4, oblongo-ovate, 
inserted below the mouth of the cal., alternate with its segments: St am. 
inserted just below the petals: there is an abortive germen visible. In 
th e fertile flower the petals are linear, incurved above. Stain, abortive. 
Styles 4, united halt-way up, spreading. Stigmas small, slightly decur- 
lent along the inner edge of the styles. Germen superior,” (Wilson.) 
Berries black, nauseous, powerfully cathartic. They afford a yellow dye 
J n an un,i pe state ; the bark a green dye. “ Seeds ovate, acute at the 
lower extremity, rounded at the back, with two flat sides, forming the 
internal angle. Embryo with kidney-shaped cotyledons, laterally'bent, 
surrounded by the albumen ,” ( Wilson). 


2. R. Frdngula, Linn. (Berry-bearing Alder or Alder Buck- 
thorn); unarmed, flowers perfect, leaves obovate entire. E. 13ot 
t. 250. E. FI. v. i. p. 328. 

Woods and thickets in England. Near Auchincruive, Ayrshire, Mr. 
Smith. PI May. T? A small shrub. Flowers pedunculate, axillary, 
somewhat fascicled, whitish-green. Petals very minute. Berries dark- 
purple, with two seeds, purgative. 


35. Euonymus. Linn. Spindle-tree. 

1. E. europdus, Linn. ( common Spindle-tree); flowers mostly 
tetrandrous, petals acute, branches glabrous, leaves ovato-lanceo- 
late minutely serrated. E. Bot. t. 362. E. FI. v. i. p. 329. 

7ir^°/ 0d / anJ hed - geS j Sequent in England, and the south of’lreland, 
Mi Mackey: rare in Scotland. King’s Park, near Edinburgh, Sibbald. 

hrin P -~ S ! ri i b 3-5 feet h *gh. Bark green, smooth. Leaves glu- 
/y du ’ lcle be f in S a few-flowered Umbel. Flowers small, white. 
, S ^' angular, very beautiful, rose-coloured. A rill us orange- 
thl c ,-~ rhe pemes and e\cn leaves are said to be dangerous, and 
" e P ant is fetid. Of its tough white wood, skewers and spindles 
are made, and Lmnams tells us it aflbrds the best charcoal for drawing. 

O 


118 


FENTANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


[Viola. 


36. Impatiens. Linn. Balsam. 

1. I. Noli-me-tdngcre, Linn. ( yellow Balsam or Touch-me-not ); 
joints of tlie stem swelling, leaves ovate serrated petiolate, pedun- 
cles solitary many-flowered. E. Bot. t. 937. E. FI. v. i. p. 299. 

Rare ; moist shady woods in Yorkshire and Westmoreland. Guild- 
ford, Surry, Rev. J. Jenyns. Abundant in a wet glen at Castlemilk, 
near Glasgow; but probably the outcast of a garden, Mr. Hopkirlc. FI. 
July, Aug. ©. — Stem 1 foot high, rounded, succulent, fragile. Flowers 
large, yellow, spotted with orange. Capsule bursting elastically and 
scattering its seeds with considerable force : the valves are then spirally 
twisted. 

37. Viola. IJnn. Violet. 

* S tern less, or nearly so. 

]. V. hirta, Linn, (hairy Violet); leaves cordate rough as well 
as the petioles and capsules with hairs, calyx-leaves obtuse, lateral 
petals with a hairy central line, creeping scions none. E. Bot. 
t. 894. E. EL v. i.p. 301. 

Woods and pastures in England, principally in a chalky or limestone 
soil. Rare in Scotland, and, I believe, found only in the neighbourhood 
of Edinburgh. FI. April, May. 1/ . — Stigma an oblique point, in this 
and the 5 following species. Flowers pale, rather dingy blue, scentless. 
Nearly allied to V. odorata; distinguished, as Mr. Curtis well observed, 
by the short not ' creeping scions, by the greater hairiness of the plant, 
and by the situation of the little bracteas of the scape; here below, in V. 
odorata above the middle. 1 — Mr. J. T. Mackay has observed this species, 
immediately after flowering, to elongate its flower-stalks, which, taking a 
downward direction, bury the ripening capsules to the depth of 2 — 3 
inches beneath the soil. The flowers of this and the following species are 
often destitute of petals, and yet bear fruit. 

2. V. odorata , Linn, (sweet Violet) ; leaves cordate and as well as 
the petioles nearly glabrous, calyx-leaves obtuse, lateral petals with 
a hairy line, scions creeping. E. Bot. t. 619. E. FI. v. i. p. 301. 

Woods, banks and pastures; frequent in England, very rare in Scot- 
land. Near Slateford and Collinton woods, Edinburgh, Dr. Grevil/e. 
Wood near the Castle Rock, Stirling, Dr. Graham. Hedges between Killi- 
ney hill and Bray, Ireland, Mr.J. T. Mackay. FI. March, April. If. — 
Flowers deep purple, fragrant, often white; in many parts of Devonshire, 
in the stiff red soil about Torquay especially, I have seen them very 
commonly of a lilac colour. Bracteas inserted above the middle of the 
scape. Mr. W. Wilson observes that the hairs of the scapes and leaf-stalks 
are deflexed, which is not the case with V. hirta. The Sorbet of the 
Turks, according to Hasselquist, is prepared from these flowers and sugar. 
I do not know where the Highland ladies of former times obtained their 
violets to make a cosmetic. Yet the plant was known to them, if the following 
lines given by Lightfoot are correctly translated from the Gaelic; “Anoint 
thy face with goat’s milk in which Violets have been infused, and there is 
not a young prince upon earth who will not be charmed with thy beauty.” 

1 Mr. W. Wilson finds a monstrosity in a leaf of this species, bearing on its 
stalk two smaller petiolated leaves. 


rENTANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


119 


Viola?\ 


3. V. palustris , Linn. ( Marsh Violet): leaves cordate or kidney- 
shaped quite glabrous veiny beneath, spur very short, lateral petals 
scarcely hairy, scions none. E. Bot. t. 444. E. FI. v. i. p. 303. 

Bogs and marshy grounds; less frequent in the south; abundant in the 
mountains of Scotland, and at a very considerable elevation. FI. April 
— June, and even July in the colder regions. If — Flowers very pale blue, 
with purple sheaths. The petals are slightly hairy on one side at the 
base, as Mr. VV. Wilson well observes; the lateral ones have not a 
distinct line of hairs. 

** Furnished with an evident stem. 

4. V. canina, Linn. ( Dog's Violet); stem at length ascending 
channelled, leaves cordate acute, leaflets of the calyx acuminate, 
stipules long ciliato-dentate, bracteas subulate entire. E.Bot. t. 620. 
E.Fl.v.i.p. 303. 

Woods, banks and dry pastures, frequent, and in clefts of rocks upon 
the mountains at a considerable elevation. FI. April — Aug. If . — Variable 
in regard to size ; but, as it appears to me, very constant to the above 
characters. In mountainous situations, the blossoms are often numerous 
and large in proportion to the size of the plant. Flowers scentless, 
blue, purple or sometimes almost white. On the sandy Denes at Yar- 
mouth, this plant is very small in all its parts. 

5. V. Idctea, Sm. ( Cream-coloured Violet); stem ascending, 
leaves ovato-lanceolate glabrous, stipules dentate, calyx-leaflets 
acuminate. E. Bot. t. 445. E. FI. v. i.p. 303. 

On mountains and boggy heaths. Near Tonbridge Wells, and in Corn- 
wall. Near Peebles. Brandon Mountain, Ireland, Dr. Taylor. FI. 
May. If . — A small plant, with its leaves almost lanceolate, and narrower 
than in the last species, and with pale blue or almost white flowers. But 
it appears very doubtful if it be really distinct. De Candolle makes it a 
var. of V. montana of Linn. : and it seems to agree also with V. lancifolia 
of Thore, which again De Candolle considers to belong to V. pumila 
of Villars. 

6. X. flavicornis, Sm. {dwarf yellow-spurred Violet ); “stem 
ascending woody somewhat angular much branched, leaves heart- 
shaped coriaceous smooth and even, stipules anil bracteas fringed, 
calyx-leaves lanceolate.” — Sm. in E. FI. v. i.p. 305. — V. canina, 

y. FI. Brit. p. 247 V. canina , var. minor , Bill, in Ray Syn. 

p. 364. t. 24./. 1. 

Pastures and banks, near Mitcham in Surry and about Norwich, 
(E. FI.) FI. May, June. If. — Smith says this little plant is not un- 
common, but that it is usually neglected as a var. of V. canina. It is 
probably the small state of V. canina, above alluded to, as growing on the 
Denes near Yarmouth. Mr. Borrer considers this and V. laclca the same, 
and that both names ought to merge into V. pumila of Vill. 

7. V. tricolor, Linn. {Pansy Violet or Heart s Ease) ; mostly 
annual, stem angled branched, leaves oblong deeply crenate, stipules 
lyrate pinnatifid. E. Bot. t. 1287. E. FI. v. i. p. 305. 

Banks and cultivated fields, frequent. FI. the whole summer. ©. £ . 


120 


PENTA N DR I A — MO NOGY N I A. 


[Riba. 

or y . . — Extremely variable, especially in the size and colour of its flowers. 
Stigma, in this and the following species, capitate, obliquely perforated. 

8. V. lutea, Hiuls. ( yellow Mountain Violet or yellow Pansy); 
perennial, stem much branched at the base, leaves ovato-oblong 
crenate, stipules lyrate subpalmato-pinnatifid. E. Pot. 1. 721. E. FI. 
v. i.p. 306 — V. grandiflora, Huds., not Linn — V. sudetica, Willd. 
— J)c Cand. — /3., flowers all purple. V. anuena, Sym. Syn. Dc 
Cand. Syn. v. i. p. 302. — y., leaves broadly ovate subcoriaceous, 
flowers deep yellow. 

Mountainous pastures; frequent in Wales, the north of England and 
Scotland ; «. and 3 . often growing together, y. Isle of Arran, Mr. S. 
Murray. A small yellow var. is found by Mr. Tozer at the Land’s End, 
Cornwall. Ft. May — Sept. If .. — The flowers are generally of a pale yel- 
low or sulphur colour, much larger than in V. tricolor ; often the upper 
petals are purple, and in /3. all arc purple. The var. y- is a very singular 
one, discovered by Mr. Murray in Arran, and cultivated for many years 
in the Glasgow Bot. Garden. It forms a large dense tuft, and with its 
very numerous, broad dark green leaves and bright yellow flowers, makes 
a handsome appearance. Sir J. E. Smith has well distinguished V. lutea 
from the V. grandiflora of Linn, by the shortness of its spur. But 
distinct as it probably is from V. tricolor, it is very difficult to define 
the characters in words. 

38. Ribes. Linn. Currant and Gooseberry. 

* Without Thorns. 

1. R. rubrum, Linn. ( common or red Currant) ; without thorns 
erect, racemes glabrous pendulous, flowers nearly plane, petals ob- 
cordate. E. Pot. t. 1289. E. FI. v. i. j>. 330. 

Alpine woods : by the Tees-side in England. In Isla, one of the 
Hebrides, and about Culross in Scotland ; not unfrequent in hedges, but 
scarcely wild in such situations. FI. May. Tj . — Leaves Sdobed, doubly 
serrated, on longish stalks. There is a small scale or bractea at the 
base of each pedicel. Flowers greenish. Fruit usually red, in gardens 
white and rose-coloured, crowned as in all this genus, with the withered 
flower. 

2. R. petrdum, Wulf. ( Pock Currant); without thorns erect, 
racemes erect in flower, in fruit pendulous slightly downy, flowers 
nearly plane, petals hluntish, bracteas shorter than the pedicel. 
E. Pot. t. 705. E. FI v. i. p. 331. 

Woods in the north of England and Scotland. Eggleston and near 
Conscliffe, Durham. Kcar Airly Castle; and by the Spey-side, at Avie- 
more, Scotland, Rev. G. Gordon. FI. May, June. . 

3. R. spicutum, Robson, {acid Mountain Currant) ; without 
thorns, spikes upright in flower and in liuit, flowers nearly sessile, 
petals oblong, bracteas shorter than the flowers. Robs, in Tr. oj 
Linn. Soc. v. Hi. p. 240. A 21. E. Pot. t. 1290. E. Fl.v. i. 
p. 331. 

Woods near lliclnnund, Yorkshire, Mr. G. Robson; and formerly 


PENTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


121 


Glau.v .] 


found near Gainsford, Durham. FI. May. Tj . — A very dubious species, 
which I only know from the figures above-quoted. 

4. R. alpinum , Linn. ( tasteless Mountain Currant) ; without 
thorns, racemes erect both in flower and fruit, flowers plane shorter 
than the bracteas, leaves shining beneath. E. Dot . t. 704. E. EL 
v. i.p. 332. 

Woods, in the north of England. About Bradford and Ripon, York- 
shire. Woods, and fissures of rocks, in Scotland, Dr. Parsons. Woods 
at Cadzow Castle, near Hamilton. FI. May. Tj .^Leaves small, frequently 
3-lobed; lobes acute, deeply serrated. Racemes few-flowered : flowers 
small. Berries red.— Well distinguished by the length of its bracteas. 

5. R. nigrum, Linn, (black Currant) ; without thorns, racemes 
lax downy pendulous with a separate simple flower-stalk at their 
base, flowers campanulate, leaves dotted with glands beneath. 
E. Dot. t. 1291. E. FI. v.i.p. 332. 

Woods and river-sides, in various situations. FI. May. T? . Berries 

the largest of our Currants, black, much esteemed medicinally and for 
making jelly. The glands of the leaves yield a peculiar smell when 
bruised, which has been compared to that of Savin, (Juniperus Sabini.) 

** Thorny. 

6. R. Grossuldria, Linn, (common Gooseberry ),- branches thorny, 
leaves rounded and lobed, peduncles hairy single-flowered with a 
pair of minute bracteas, fruit more or less hairy. E. Bot. t. 1292. 
E. FI. v. i.p. 333 — R. Uva-crispa, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 2057. 

. Hedges and thickets ; scarcely an aboriginal native ? Apparently in- 
digenous in Hamilton woods, Scotland. FI. April, May. Tj- — Thorns 
immediately beneath a fascicle of leaves, solitary, or 2—3 combined at 
the base, spreading. Fruit much esteemed in cool and temperate cli- 
mates, where alone it comes to perfection ; and varying exceedingly bv 
cultivation, in size, colour, and flavour. 


39. Hedera. Linn. Ivy. 

L H. Helix, Linn, (common Lvy); leaves ovate or cordate and 
5-lobed, lobes angular, umbel erect. E. Bot. t. 1267 E FI v l 
p. 334. ' 

Hedges, woods, old buildings, or rocks and trunks of trees, frequent 

. mi 5 -~ St £ m V61 7 l0 , n »> cree P in g> throwing out numerous 
roots, by which they adhere to hard substances. Leaves very shining dark 
green, often veined with whitish lines. Flowers small, palem-een^ Cal 
teeth very minute. Petals reflexed. Berries smooth and black — A 
variety called the Irish Ivy is much cultivated on account of the vastly 

oiT/ss ctei- ve,y rapkl srow,h - The ^ is 


40. Glaux. Linn. Sea-Milkwort. 

1. G.maritima, Linn, (common Sea- Milkwort, or black Salt- 
wort.) E. Bot. t. 13. E. FI. v. i.p. 33 6. 

G 


122 


PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


[ Gentiana • 


Sea-shore and muddy salt-marshes, abundant. FI. July. If . — Stems 
2 — 1 or 5 inches long, stout, branched, often procumbent. Leaves oppo- 
site, ovate, glabrous, fleshy, entire, sessile, small. Flowers sessile, soli- 
tary, axillary, rose-coloured, with 5, obtuse, spreading lobes. 

41. I llecebrum. Linn. Knot-grass. 

1. I. verticillatum, Linn, (whorled Knot-grass') ; stems procum- 
bent filiform glabrous, leaves broadly ovate, flowers axillary in 
crowded whorls. E. Bot. t. 895. E. El. v. i.p. 335. 

Marshy or boggy ground, in Devonshire and Cornwall. Base of a 
hill at the race-course, Truro, and road-side between Penzance and St. 
Ives, Rev. J. S. Tozer. FI. July. If . — A small plant, with spreading 
and procumbent filiform stems; white, scariose stipules jagged at the mar- 
gin, and numerous whitish flowers. 

42. Thesium. Linn. Bastard Toad-flax. 

1. T. linophyllum, Linn, (ftax-leared Bastard- Toadflax) ; 
leaves linear-lanceolate, racemes panicled leafy, peduncles and 
pedicels bracteated, fruit nearly globose. E. Bot. t. 247. E. FI. 
v. i. p. 337. 

Elevated chalky pastures, Cambridgeshire, Norfolk, Suffolk and 
Dorsetshire; Ranmar hills, near Dorking, Surry, .7. S. Mill, Esq. FI. July. 
If. — Roots woody, sending forth several herbaceous, spreading, leafy 
stems, terminated by the somewhat paniculated leafy racemes. Segments 
of the perianth white. Fruit strongly x-ibbed. 

PENTANDRIA— DIGYNIA. 

43. Swertia. Linn. Felwort. 

1. S. perennis, Linn. ( Marsh Felwort or Swertia ) ; radical 
leaves nerved ovate attenuated at each extremity, peduncles corym- 
bose, segments of the corolla lanceolate acute. E. Bot. t. 1441. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 2G. 

Wales, Dr. Richardson, according to Hudson. But there is reason 
to apprehend some mistake, and that it was never found wild in Britain. 
FI. Aug. If . 

44. Gentiana. Linn. Gentian. 

* Cor. subcam panidate, the mouth naked. 

1. G . acaulis, Linn . (dwarf Gentian) ; leaves oblongo-lanceo- 
.ate acute, flower solitary 5-cleft about as long as the quadrangular 
stem. E. Bot. (. 1 594. E. El. v. ii. p. 28. 

Near Ilaverford-Wcst, 717. dc St. Amans ; assuredly the outcast of a 
garden. FI. June, July. If . 

2. G. Pneumonanthe, Linn. ( Marsh Gentian ); leaves linear, 
flowers terminal and axillary sessile, corolla 5-cleft. E. Bot. t. 28. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 27. 


TENTANDR1A — DIGYNIA. 


123 


Ctiseuta.] 


Moist heathy places, in several parts of England. FI. Aug. ©. — Sept. 
~U- —Stcm Upright, 4 to 6 or 8 inches tall. Corolla large, deep blue 
within, having b broad greenish lines corresponding with the segments. 


** Cor . somewhat funnel or salver-shaped, with 5 large and 5 
smaller segments. 

3. G. verna, Linn. ( Spring Gentian ); stem 1 -flowered, leaves 
crowded ovate, corolla salver-shaped with 5 large and 5 small alter- 
nate bifid segments. E. Bot.p. 493. E. FI. v. ii.p. 29. 

Alpine pastures, rare; between Gort and Galway, Ireland, Mr. Heaton: 
on limestone locks in the Barony of Burren in the same country, 
Mr.J. T. Mackay. Middleton in Teesdale, Durham; Rev. J. Ilarr im an. 
FI. April. If.. 

4. G. nivalis, Linn, (small alpine Gentian ) ,• branches single- 
flowered, leaves elliptical, corolla salver-shaped 5-cleft with inter- 
mediate small bifid segments, angles of the calyx acute (brown. 1 
E. Bot. t. 896. E. El. v. ii. p. 29. 

Exceedingly rare, having only been found on Ben Lawers first by 71 Tr 
Hickson, and since by Mr. G. Don and Mr. IV. Wilson. FI, Atw. ©.— 
This rare and beautiful little alpine plant was supposed to be°lost to 
this country, till Mr. Wilson found it again on Ben Lawers, in August 
1827 ; but so rare is it that after the most diligent search, he could only 
gather two specimens. J 


*** Cor. 4 5-cleft, somewhat salver-shaped, fringed at the throat. 

5. G. Amarella, Linn. ( autumnal Gentian); stem very much 
branched many-flowered, leaves ovato-lanceolate, calycine segments 
nearly equal, corolla 5-cleft. E. Bot. t. 236. E. FI. v. ii.p. 30. 

Pastures, particularly in subalpine situations, England, Scotland, and 
Ireland : especially abundant in limestone countries. FI. Apr.— June and 
often through the whole summer and autumn. ©.—From 3 inches to a 
foot high, branched from the base and covered with flowers of a Dale 
rather dmgy purple. “ Fringe under the mouth of the corolla a beau- 
tiful object beneath the microscope ; the rays tapering, and covered with 
prominent dots.” Mr. W. Wilson. 


6. G. campestris, Linn. ( Field Gentian); stem very much 
branched many-flowered, leaves ovato-lanceolate, 2 outer segments 
of the calyx very large ovate, corolla 4-cleft. E. Bot. t. 237 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 31. 


Hilly pastures, frequent on a limestone or chalky soil in England and 

Ireland. Abundant in Scotland, especially near the sea FI Aug 

Oct. ©.-Very similar to the last in general habit; but wi'th larger 
flowers and these so numerous in specimens gathered on the Isle°of 
|-kye that I counted 8(1 on one plant. All the Gentians contain the 
bitter principle abundantly ; this particular species is said to be used by 
the poor in Sweden in lieu of hops. y 


45. Cu, scuta. Linn. Dodder. 

1. C. europcea, Linn, (greater Dodder); flowers sessile, corolla 


PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


121 


[Apium* 


4 — 5-cleft without any scale at the base of the stamens, stigma 
simple. E. Bot. t. 378, (not t. 55.) Hook, in FI. Lond. t. 67. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 24. 


Parasitical on nettles, flax, &c . ; scarce, yet found in several counties 
of England and Scotland, and in Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. 
Aug. Sept. 0 . — Stems very large, red, having small tubercles and papilla;, 
which act as roots. Flowers clustered, of a pale yellowish rose-colour. 


2. C. Epithymum, Linn. ( lesser Dodder) ; flowers sessile, co- 
rolla mostly 4-eleft with a small fringed scale at the base of each 
stamen, stigma simple. E. Bot. t. 55, (C. Epithymum) and at 
t. 378. E. FI. v. ii. p. 25. 

Frequent on furze, heath and thyme, in exposed situations in Eng- 
land and Scotland. FI. July, Aug. ©. (If.) 1 Sm .) — Smaller than the 
last, especially in the flowers, and well distinguished by the presence of 
the scales. 

46. Hydrocotyle. Linn. White-rot. 


1. H. vulgaris, Linn, (common White-rot, Marsh Penny-wort) ; 
leaves peltate orbicular somewhat lobed and crenate, heads of about 
5 flowers. E. Bot. t. 751. E. FI. v. ii. p. 96. 

Bogs, marshes, and banks of lakes, frequent. FI. May, June. If .. — 
Stems creeping; producing, from their joints, clusters of petiolated leaves 
and simple flower-stalks, which are much shorter than the petioles. 
Flowers often with a reddish tinge. 

47. Sanxcula. Linn. Sanicle. 

1. S. europda, Linn. (Wood Sanicle) ; lower leaves palmate 
with the lobes trifid inciso-serrate, flowers all sessile. E. Bot. 
t. 98. E. FI. v. ii. p. 36. 

Woods and thickets, frequent. FI. May, June. If. — Leaves mostly 
radical, finely serrated, almost ciliatec}. y Heads of flowers small, white. 

J ?. ! & c ' y/ - 4S. Cicuta. Linn. Cowbane. 

1 . C. virosa, Linn, (ivater Hemlock or Cowbane). E. Bot. 
t. 479. E. FI. v. ii. p. 62. 

In ditches, and about the margins of rivers and lakes in England and 
the lowlands of Scotland; but not very frequent. FI. July, Aug. If . — 
Stem 3 — 4 feet high, branched. Root and lower part of the stem, which 
is very large, hollow, and divided by transverse partitions into large cells. 
Leaves biternate, the radical ones pinnated : leaflets lanceolate, serrated. 
Umbels pedunculated. — A deadly poison. 

/ 

49. Apium. Linn. Celery. 

1. A. graveolens, Linn. (Smallage or wild Celery). E. Bot. 
t. 1210. E. FI. v. ii. p. 76. 

St%larshy places, especially near the sea ; not unfrequent in England. 
Musselburgh, Scotland. — FI. Aug. $ . — Stem furrowed, 2 feet high. 
Jjcaves tcrnate ; leaflets large, wedge-shaped, lobed and cut at the ex- 
tremity : the lower leaves are upon long stalks with their leaflets rounder 


PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


125 


Helosciadium.] 

and truncate at the base. Umbels often sessile; peduncled ones of few 
flowers. — This is the origin of our garden Celery: and both its seeds 
and branched stems are well known as culinary articles. 

50. Petroselinum. Hoffm. Paisley. 

1. P. sativum , Koch, (common Parsley) ; leaves decompound 
shining, lower leaflets ovato-cuneate trifid and toothed, upper ones 
lanceolate nearly entire, partial involucres filiform. — Apium Pe- 
troselinum, Linn. 

Frequent on old walls, especially in the south-west of 'England, 
naturalized. FI. June, July. $ . — I introduce this at the suggestion of 
my friend Mr. Edward Forster, who remarks that it has a stronger claim 
to a place in a British Flora than many plants that are universally ad- 
mitted. Blarney Castle, near Cork, Mr. IV. Wilson. 

2. P. segetum, Koch, (Corn Parsley) ; radical leaves pinnated, 
leaflets ovate lobed cut and serrated, upper leaves with linear very 
imperfect leaflets, rays of the umbels few and unequal. — Sison sege- 
tum, Linn. — E. Pot. t. 228. E. El. v. ii. p. 60. 

Moist fields, chiefly on calcareous soil, in several parts of the middle 
and south of England. Sea-shore, between Bognor and Little Hampton : 
and between Esher and West Moulsey, Surry, ,7. S. Mill, Esq. Said to 
have been found in one of the Hebrides, by the late Dr. Walker. FI. 
Aug. ©.or $ . — 1 foot to high, wiry, spreading, branched. Leaves 
few, mostly radical. Universal involucre of about 2 leaves. Fruit ovate, 
strongly ribbed. 

51. Trinia. Hoffm. Honewort. 

1. T. glaberrima, Hoffm. (glabrous Honeivort) ; glabrous, leaves 
tripinnate, leaflets linear uniform, involucre none. — Pimpinella 
dioica, E. Pot. t. 1209. E. El. v. ii. p. 90. — Seseli pumilum, 
Linn. (Sm.). 

Limestone, rare. Near Bristol, on St. Vincent’s Rocks ; at Uphill, 
Somersetshire; Whorle Ilill, Somerset, Mr. Christy; near Athboy, 
county of Meath, Ireland, Dr. Wade. FI. May, June. If. .—Whole herb 
glaucous-green, pale, remarkable for the narrow segments of its leaves, 
and its dioecious flowers. Root fusiform. 

52. Helosciadium. Koch. Marsh-wort. 

1. H. nodijlorum, Koch, (procumbent Marsh-wort); stem pro- 
cumbent, leaves pinnate, leaflets ovate suhequally serrated, umbels 

sessile opposite to the leaves. — Siam nodijlorum , Linn E. Pot. 

t. 639. E. FI. v. ii.p. 57. 

Sides of lakes and rivulets. FI. July, Aug. If. — — 2 feet high. 
Leaflets of the radical leaves sometimes with a lobe at the base, on the 
upper margin. Petals slightly incurved at the apex. 

2. H. repens, Koch, (creeping Marsh-ivort) ; stem creeping, 
leaflets broadly ovate inciso-dentate, umbels on peduncles opposite 
to the leaves — Slum repens, Linn . — E. Pot. t. 1431. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 58. 


126 


PE NTA N D IMA 1) I GY N I A. 


[Car uni. 


Boggy meadows and watery places in Oxfordshire, Cambridgeshire, 
and Bedfordshire. Side of the Fergus, above the bridge of Fmnis, Mr. 
J. T. Mackay; and at Guillon, Scotland. FI. July, Aug. If .. — Stems 
G — -10 inclics long. Leaflets 5 — £k — Scarcely distinct from H.nodifl. 

3. H. inundcitum, Koch, ( least Marsh-wort ); stems creeping, 
lower leaves capillaceo-multipartite upper ones pinnatifid, umbels 

generally of 2 rays — Stum inundation, Wiggers E. FI v. ii.p.bS. 

— Sison inundatum, E. Bot. t. 221. I look. Scot. i.p. 21 . — Hydro- 
cotyle inundata, Sin. FI. Brit. p. 290 Melon, Spreng. 

Lakes and pools that are dried up in summer. FI. May, July. $ ? 
0 ? — Stems 4 — 6 inches long ; most of them capillaceo-multifid, with 
the segments small and lanceolate. Partial umbels minute, scarcely longer 
than their involucres. Univ. involucre none. Fruit large in proportion 
to the size of the plant, striated. 

53. Sison. Linn. Bastard Stone-Parsley. 

1. S. Amomum, Linn. ( Hedge Bastard Stone -Parsley). 
E. Bot. t. 954. E. FI. v. ii. p. 60. 

Chalky, rather moist ground, under hedges in England. FI. Aug. 0. 
or $ . — 2 — 3 feet high. Lower leaves pinnated with lobed, inciso-ser- 
rate, ovate leaflets ; upper ones cut into narrow segments. Petals broad. 
Fruit roundish-ovate. — Smith says that the seeds are pungent and aro- 
matic: and that they and the whole plant, when bruised, emit a strong 
smell, resembling that of Bugs. 

54. ^Egopodium. Linn. Gout-weed. 

1. JE. Podagrdria, Linn. ( Gout-weed , or Herh-Gerarde). 
E. Bot. t. 940. E. FI. v. ii. p. 77. 

Gardens and wet places. FI. May, June. If. — A foot and a half 
high. Radical leaves twice ternate, upper ones ternate ; leaflets ovate, 
acuminate, unequally serrated. The creeping root is pungent and 
aromatic. 

55. CarujM. Linn. Caraway. 

1. C. Cdrui, Linn. ( common Caraway); stem branched, par- 
tial involucre none, universal scarcely any. E. Bot. t. 1503. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 86. 

Meadows and pastures, in several places both in England and Scot- 
land. TV. June. $  — Stem 1 — 2 feet high. Leaves doubly pinnated, 
cut into linear segments, of which the lowermost are decussate. Umbels 
dense. Carpels agreeably aromatic, and well known in the kitchen and 
Pharmacopeia under the name of Caraway seeds. 

2. C. verticilldtum, Koch, ( whorled Caraway); leaflets all 
capillary in short whorled segments — Slum verticillutum, E. FI. 
v. ii.. p. 59. — Sison verticillatum, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 395. Hook. 
Scot. i. p. 90. 

Unknown to England. In the flat parts of Wales, (Jluds.) Killarncy, 
and near Bantry Bay, Ireland, Air. ./. 7'. Mackay. Extremely abund- 


PENTANDRlA — DIGYNIA. 


127 


Siam.] 

ant in moist hilly pastures on the West of Scotland, especially near the 
sea. FI. July, Aug. If . — Leaves mostly radical ; a long common petiole 
bears a number of opposite multifid capillary leaflets, whose spreading 
makes them appear whorled. Stem a foot high, slender. Umbels few, 
terminal. Involucre very small. 

56. Bunium. Koch. Earth-nut. 

1. B .fie xubsum, With, (common Earth-Nut ). E. Lot. t. 988. 

E. EL v. ii. p. 54. — Conopodium denudatum, Koch. — Bunium 

denudatum. Be Ccincl. — B. Bulboccistanum , Huds Curt. Lond. 

t. 24. Hook. Scot. i. p. 88 — Myrrhis Bunium, Spreng. 

Woods and pastures, frequent. FI. May, June, If. — Foot a solitary 
tuber, much sought after by children and pigs. Stem solitary, erect, 
flexuose, with few leaves much divided into very slender, linear, or almost 
setaceous segments. Fruit oblong, moderately ribbed, a little narrower 
upwards, crowned with the strait styles, which have conical, very tumid 
bases. The true Bunium Bulbocastanum is a very different plant from this, 
and has never been found in Britain. 

57. Pimpinella. Linn. Burnet- Saxifrage. 

1. P. Saxifraga, Linn. ( common Burnet- Saxifrage) ; radical 
leaves pinnate their leaflets roundish sharply serrate or cut, those 
of the stem bipinnate linear. E. Bot. t. 407. E. Fl.v. ii. p. 89. 

Dry pastures, frequent. FI. July', Aug. If. — Stem-leaves few; lower 
and radical ones upon long stalks. Leaflets of the latter, (in specimens 
gathered by Mr. Jas. Wilson, in Ayrshire,) often deeply' and pinnatifidly 
cut, and sometimes even bipinnatifid. 

2. P. mdgna, Linn. ( greater Burnet- Saxifrage) ; leaves all pin- 
nate, leaflets ovato-serrate subincised the terminal one (rarely the 
lateral ones) 3-lobed. E. Bot. t. 408. E. FI. v. ii. p. 90. 

Shady places, on a chalky or limestone soil, in several parts of Eng- 
land. Scotland, (Herb. Bruce, in Sm.) Near Cork, Air. .7. T.Mackay. 
Mucruss and Killarney, Mr. W. Wilson. Ft. July, Aug. If . — Larger in 
all its parts than the foregoing, and the leaflets of the upper leaves much 
broader and less divided. 

58. Sium. Linn. Water-Parsnep. 

1. S. led folium, Linn, (broad-leaved Water-Parsnep ); stem 
erect, leaves pinnated, leaflets ohlongo-lanceolate equally serrated, 
umbels terminal. E. Bot. t. 204. E. El. v. ii. p. 56. 

River-sides, ditches and watery places; rather rare in Scotland. FI. 
July, Aug. If . — Stems 3 — 4 feet high, furrowed. Fruit small. Leaflets 
distant, .5 — 9 on a leaf. 

2. S. an gust folium, Linn, (narrow-leaved Water-Parsnep) ; stem 
erect, leaflets unequally lobed and serrated, umbels pedunculate 
opposite to the leaves. E. But. t. 139. E. FI. v. ii.p. 56. 

Ditches and rivulets, frequent ; not common in Scotland. FI. July, 
Aug. If. Smaller than the last. Stem striated; leaflets of the upper 
leaves most unequal and laciniated : radical ones ovate, their lowermost 
leaflets distant. 


128 


PENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[CEnanthe. 


59. Bupleurum. Linn. Hare’s Ear. 

1. B. Odontites, Linn. ( narrow-leaved Hare's Ear); universal 
and partial involucre each about 4 — 5-leaved, leaflets lanceolate cus- 
pidate longer than the umbels, leaves linear 3-nerved, stem panicled. 
E.Eot. t. 2468. E. FI. v. it. p. 93. — Odontites luteola, Spreng. 

Hocks in the neighbourhood of Torquay; on the Flag-Post Hill, Tor- 
quay, Rev. J. S. Tozer. FI. July. 0 — A small plant, 3 — 6 inches or 
more, high, with rigid, striated, pale yellow-green, pungent leaves. Flowers 
in terminal, much involucrated umbels. 

2. B. rotundifolium, Linn. ( common Hares Ear, or Thorow- 
wax); universal involucre wanting, partial involucres mucronate, 
leaves perfoliate roundish-oval. E. Hot. t. 99. E. FI. v. ii. p. 93. 

Corn-fields in England, on chalky soil. Abundant about Swaflfham, 
and in Cambridgeshire, Rev. Prof. Henslow. Streat’ley, in Berkshire, 
J. S. Mill, Esq. FI. July. ©. 

3. B. tenuissimum, Linn. ( slender Hare's Ear); stem very much 
branched, leaves linear, umbels lateral very minute few-flowered 
longer than the setaceous involucres. E.Dot.tAlQ. E.Fl. v.ii.p. 94. 

Salt-marshes on the south and east coasts of England. FI. Aug. 
Sept. 0 . — Stems very wiry, slender. Leaves remote, very sharp, mostly 
3-nerved. Umbels inconspicuous, often sessile, axillary. 

60. CEnanthe. Linn. Water-Dropwort. 

1. CE. fistulosa, Linn, (common Water-Dropwort); root stolo- 
niferous, stem-leaves pinnated their main stalk as well as the stem 
cylindrical tubular, umbels of very few rays. E. Dot. t. 363. E.Fl. 
v. ii. p. 68. 

Ditches and rivulets, common. FI. July, Aug. If. — Plant 2 — 3 feet 
high, remarkably tubular and fistulose. Stem-leaves distant ; the leaflets, 
which are few and small, are confined to the upper extremity of the 
leaves. U mbels small. Univ. involucre often wanting. 

2. CE. pimpinelloides, Linn. ( Parsley Water-Dropwort) ; leaf- 
lets of the radical leaves wedge-shaped cloven, those of the stem 
linear entire very long, universal involucre of several linear leaves. 
E. Dot. t. 347. E. El. v. ii. p. 69. 

Salt-marshes, not unfrequent ; less common in Scotland, and princi- 
pally confined to the West coast. Ft. July. If . — 2 feet or more high. Urn- 
bellules thickly crowded, forming almost sphaei ical heads when in fruit. 

3. CE. peucedanifolia, Poll. ( Sulphurweed Water-Dropwort); 
leaflets all linear, universal involucre none, knots of the root sessile 
elliptical, (Sm.) E. Dot. t. 348. E. FI. v.ii.p. 70. 

Fresh-water ditches and bogs in Oxfordshire, Bedfordshire, and Suf- 
folk. In Sussex, Mr. Borrer. Id. June. If. — Allied to the last; but 
found only, as it appears, near fresh water. The roots , Sir J. E. Smith 
tells us, taste like parsneps, but are probably dangerous. 

4. CE. crocdta, Linn. ( Hemlock Water-Dropwort) ; leaves tri- 
quadripinnate, leaflets cuneato-ovate cut and serrated those of the 


Fcvniculum.] 


PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


129 


upper leaves narrower, general involucre of few leaves (abounding in 
a yellow juice.) E.Bot.t. 2313. E.Fl.v.ii.p. 71. 

Watery places, by ditches and rivers ; frequent. FI. July. If . — Root 
consisting of large fusiform tubers. Plant 3 — 5 feet high : different from 
all the preceding in the great breadth of its leaflets, and large, much rami- 
fied stems, full, it is said, of a poisonous yellow juice. — Very nearly allied 
to this is the following species, which I introduce with some hesitation. 

5. CE. apiifolia, Brot. ( Celery-leaved Water- Dr opwort) ; radical 
and cauline leaves tripinnate upper ones pinnated, leaflets all wedge- 
shaped inciso-serrate striated, (no peculiar juices). Brot. FI. Lusit. 
v. i.p. 420. Spreng. Sgst. Veget. v. i. p. 889. Br. FI. cd. 1. 

About Plymouth, Mr. Banks; and elsewhere. FI. July. If. — Spe- 
cimens were sent to me some years ago by Mr. Banks and Mr. R. C. 
Sconce from the above station, of an CEnantlie, with the remark that it 
differed essentially from the common CE. crocata, in having no yellow fetid 
juice. On afterwards visiting Prof. Brotero at Lisbon, Mr. Sconce was 
struck with the figure and description of CE. apiifolia of that author, 
which he had there the opportunity of consulting, and he kindly wrote 
to assure me that he believed it to be identical with the Plymouth 
plant. This kind is now found to be universal, and it does not appear 
that any species gives out the copious yellow juice, attributed to CE. 
crocata. 

6. GE. Phellandrium, Spreng. (_ fine-leaved Water -Dropwort) ; 
leaves decompound nearly uniform with narrow oblong short diva- 
ricated segments, peduncles lateral, general involucre scarcely any. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 71 — Phellandrium aquaticum , Linn. — E. Bot. 
t. 684. Hook. Scot. i. p. 92. 

Ditches and pools. FI. July. If. — Stem 2 — 3 feet high, very thick 
below, much branched; branches spreading. Umbels rather small ; mostly 
perfect in every flower. 

61. .Fthusa. Linn. Fool’s Parsley. 

1. F. Cynapium , Linn, (common Fool' 's Parsley , or lesser Hem- 
lock); leaves uniform, leaflets wedge-shaped decurrent with lanceo- 
late segments. E. Bot. t. 1192. E. FI. v. ii. p. 64. 

Fields and gardens. FI. July, Aug. ©.— 1 ft. high. Stem striated, 
branched, very leafy. Leaves glabrous, doubly, or the lower ones trebly, 
pinnate ; segments ovato-lanceolate, variously cut. Umbels terminal, on 
long stalks. Umbellules small, distant. Universal involucre none ; par- 
tial involucres of 3, long, pendent leaves all on one side, by which this is 
readily known from all other umbelliferous plants. — The smell is nauseous, 
and it is esteemed very unwholesome. 

62. FcenIculum. Hoffm. Fennel. 

1. F. vulgare, Gtertn. (common Fennel); leaves biternate, leaflets 
linear-filiform pinnatifid, segments awl-shaped. — Anetknm Fceni- 
culum, Linn — E.Bot. t. 1208. — Meum Fceniculum, Spreng. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 85. 

1 lentilul on chalky cliffs in England, near the sea, (Sm.) and in the 

G 2 


130 


PE N T A N I) I? I A — D I GY N I A . 


[Meum. 


neighbourhood of towns and villages in Norfolk and Suffolk, at short 
distances from the coast. FI. July, Aug. If . — Stem 3 — 4 feet high, 
fistulose. Leaves much divided, with very slender segments. Floivers 
dark yellow : at the base of the styles very glutinous. — This is the true 
Fennel of the Gardens, and its seeds are esteemed as carminative. The 
boiled leaves are served up with Mackarel on the eastern coasts of England. 

63. Seselt. Linn. Meadow-Saxifrage. 

1. S. Lxbanotis, Koch, ( mountain Meadow-Saxifrage ) ; stem 
furrowed, leaves bininnatifid, leaflets incised the segments lanceo- 
late very acute, umbels hemispherical, universal involucre of many 
leaves. — Athamanta Libanotis , Linn. — E. Hot. t. 138. E. El. v. ii. 

p. 88. 

Chalky pastures, very rare. Gogmagog hills, Cambridgeshire (Ray); 
and I possess fine specimens from the same county, through the kind- 
ness of my friend Prof. Henslow. Between St. Albans and Stony-Strat- 
ford, Huds. FI. Aug, If. — Root fusiform, crowned with the fibrous 
bases of the old leaves. Stem to 2 feet high. — In some of the speci- 
mens from Mr. Henslow , one of the peduncles of the umbel is twice the 
length of the rest. 

64. Ligusticum. Linn. Lovage. 

1. L. scoticum, Linn. ( Scottish Lovage); leaves twice ternate, 
leaflets subrhomboid dentato-serrate not glossy, general involucre of 
about 6 narrow leaves, calyx 5-toothed. E. Bot. t. 1207. E. El. 
v. ii. p. 82. 

Rocky sea-coasts, in the north of England and Scotland, frequent. 
FI. July. If. — Root fusiform, acrid but aromatic. Stem nearly simple. 
Leaves mostly radical; leaflets large, deeply-serrated, rather fleshy. — In 
the island of Skye this plant is eaten raw and called Shams. — The true 
Lovage, common in gardens, Ligusticum Levisticum (now, the genus Levis- 
ticum), has truly winged ridges to the fruit, and fewer vittce; but in other 
respects is nearly allied to this. It may, however, at once be known by 
its larger size, branched stems, and more compound shining leaves. 

65. Silaus. Besser. Pepper-Saxifrage. 

1. S. pratensis, Besser, (meadow Pepper- Saxifrage) ; leaves tri- 
pinnate, leaflets linear-lanceolate opposite, general involucre of 1 or 

2 leaves. — Peucedannm Silaus, Linn E. Bot. t. 2142. Hook. 

Scot. i. p. 88. — Cnidium Silaus, Spreng. — E. El. v.ii.p. 91. 

Pastures and meadows, not unfrequent in England. Near Oxenford 
Castle and Kelso, Scotland. FI. July — Sept. If. — 1 — 2 feet high. Par- 
tial umbels small, distant. Flowers pale yellow. — Whole plant fetid when 
bruised, apparently rejected by cattle. 

66. Meum. Town. Spigr.el. 

1. M. athamdnticum, Jacq. ( Spignel , Men, or Buld-money); 
all the leaflets multipartite, segments bristle-shaped. E. Bot. 
t. 2249. E. FI. v. ii. p. 86. — Athamanta Meum, Linn. — Ligusti- 
etim Meum, Crantz . — Hook. Scot i. p. 89. 


rENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


131 


Pcncedaimm.] 

Dry alpine pastures, in the north of England and Scotland ; especially 
in the Highlands, frequent. FI. June, July. If. — Rout fusiform, eaten 
by the Highlanders as an aromatic and carminative: at its summit are 
the fibrous remains of former years’ leaves. Leaves long, dark-green, 
doubly-pinnate. Flowers yellowish. — Remarkable for its setaceo-mul- 
tifid leaf and powerfully aromatic smell. Bald, or Bald-money, is a cor- 
ruption of Balder, the Apollo of the northern nations; to whom this 
plant was dedicated. 

67. Crithmum. Linn. Samphire. 

1. C. maritimum, Linn. ( Sea Samphire ); leaflets lanceolate 
fleshy, leaves of the involucre ovate. E. Bot. t. 819. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 7L 

Rocks by the sea-side : rare in Scotland, found only, I believe, on the 
coast of Galloway and thence northward to Colzean Castle, Ayrshire, 
whence I have numerous specimens sent by Mr. Jas. Wilson; and at 
Aberlady, Haddingtonshire, Mr. J. Ferine. FI. Aug. If . — Whole plant 
very succulent, pale green. Leaves bi-triternate. — When the process of 
drying this plant for the Herbarium is aided by immersion in hot water, 
a number of white dots, as Mr. W. Wilson observes, make their appear- 
ance on the surface, which are quite opaque. Samphire makes a warm 
aromatic pickle, and is sold for this purpose in England ; being very 
superior to the Salicornia herhacea, which often passes under the name 
of Samphire, and is used in the same way. 

68. Angelica. Linn. Angelica. 

1. A. Archangelica, Linn, (garden Angelica) ; terminal leaflet 
lobed, seed free marked with numerous vittaj. E. Bot. t. 2561. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 80 — Archangelica officinalis, Hoffm. 

Watery places, rare; scarcely of British origin. Near Birmingham; 
upon the Thames’ side, near Dorking, Mr. J. S. Mill; also in° Dur- 
ham, Mr. Backhouse. FI. June — Sept. $ . — Stem 4 — 5 feet high, and 
from 1—2 inches in the thickest diameter, glabrous, fistulose. . Leaves 
bipinnate flowers greenish-white. — Candied Angelica, a well-known arti- 
cle in confectionary, consists of the prepared stalks of this plant, and in 
that state is agreeable ; otherwise, though aromatic, the flavour is too 
powerful and pungent to be pleasant. It is called Archangelica, 
implying its imagined superiority in virtue to the following species! 

2. A. sylveslris, Linn, (wild Angelica) ; leaflets equal ovate 
serrated at the base somewhat lobed, fruit with the interstices of 
the ridges having single vittae. E. Bot. t. 1128. E. El. v. ii. p. 81. 

Moist woods and marshy places, especially near rivers, frequent. FI. 
July. If.— Plant 2—3 feet high. Stem purplish, pubescent above, as 
well as the umbels. — Inferior in its qualities to the former species. 

69. Peucedanum. Linn. Hog’s Fennel. 

1.1. officinale , Linn. ( Sea Hog's Fennel , or Sr a Sulphur-weed'); 
leaves 5 times tripartite, leaflets linear-filiform flaccid, involucres 
few linear deciduous. E. Bot. t. 1767. E. FI. v. ii. p. 99. 

In salt-marshes, very rare. In Kent and Sussex; on the coast of 


132 


rENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[Heracleum. 


Essex, Mr. Jonathan Grubb. FI. July — Sept. If. — Remarkable for its 
large umbels of yellow flowers , and its long and extremely narrow leaflets. 
The whole plant, especially the root, has a strong sulphureous smell, 
and the latter yields a resinous substance, reckoned stimulant, but of 
dangerous internal use. 

2. P .palustre, Mcench, ( Marsh Hog's Fennel , or Milk Parsley); 
milky, leaves ternately decompound, leaflets opposite pinnatifid, 
segments linear-lanceloate with a hard point, rays of the umbel 
rough, involucres of many persistent lanceolate leaves . — Selinum 
palustre, E. Eot. t. 229. E. FI. v. ii. p. 97. 

Marshy and boggy places, but apparently very local. Yorkshire and 
Lancashire, about Norwich and the isle of Ely. Ardincaple on the Clyde, 
Mr. Hopkirk. FI. July. If or $ . — 4 — 5 feet high, with very compound 
leaves; abounding in a milky juice, which dries to a brown resin. The 
root is said to be used by the Russians instead of Ginger. 

3. P. Ostruthium, Koch, (broad-leavecl Hog’s Fennel, or Master- 
Wort); leaves biternate, leaflets broadly ovate lobed inciso-serrate 
unequal at the base, sheaths very large, fruit with a very broad 

margin, universal involucre none. Lindl. Syn. p. 116 Imperato- 

ria Ostruth. Linn. — De C. — E.Eot. t. 1380. E. FI. v. ii.p. 78. 

Moist pastures, and in various parts of Scotland ; but generally in 
suspicious places, the plant having been formerly much cultivated as a 
pot-herb. FI. June. If. — Flowers white. Partial involucres several, subu- 
late. De Candolle still keeps this distinct from Peucedanum, on account 
of the obsolete calyx. 

70. Pastinaca. Linn. Parsnep. 

1. P. saliva , Linn. ( common wild Parsnep); leaves pinnate 
downy beneath, leaflets ovate cut and serrated ultimate one 3-lobed. 
E. Pot. t. 556. E. FI. v. ii. p. 101. 

Borders of fields and pastures in a chalky soil. About Cambridge, 
Rev. Prof. Henslow. Crosby, by Liverpool, Mr. JF. Wilson. Chalk}', and 
sometimes gravelly soils in S.E. of England, .7. S. Mill, Esq. Abundant 
in Essex, E. Forster, Esq. FI. July. $ . — Root fusiform ; the origin of 
our garden Parsnep. Leaves generally shining. Petals very convex, in- 
volute, yellow. 

71. Heracleum. Linn. Cow- Parsnep. 

1. H. Sphondylium , t Linn. ( common Cow- Parsnip or Hog- 
weed); leaves pinnated rough hairy, leaflets pinnatifid cut sinuated 
ultimate one sometvhat pal mated, petals unequal, fruit glabrous. 
E. Pot. t. 939. E. FI. v. ii.p. 102. — (3. leaves more deeply cut, 
lobes narrower. E. FI. v. ii.p. 102. — H. angustifolium, Sm. FI. 
Prit.p. 307. Jacq. Austr. v. ii. t. 173. (not Linn.) 

Hedges, pastures and bushy places, frequent. FI. July. $ . — A coarse 
rank weed, 4 — 5 feet high. Leaves largely serrated, sheaths inflated. — 

1 From movhvno;, the vertebra of the back, to which the jointed stems were 
fancied to bear some resemblance. 


PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


Caucalis.) 


133 


Hogs are fond of this plant, and it is said to be wholesome and nourish- 
ing for cattle in general. 


72. Tordylium. Linn. Hart-wort. 

1. T. officinale, Linn. ( small Hart-wort ); 2 outer petals of the 
flowers of the ray each with one very large lobe, involucres seta- 
ceous as long as the umbels, fruit with the thickened border beau- 
tifully crenated and glabrous. E. Hot. t. 24*40. E. FI. v. ii.p. 1 14. 
— Condylocarpus, Koch. 

Near London ? Ray and Petiver. FI. June, July. ©. — Hairy, 1 foot 
high : leaflets few, ovate, lobed and notched, upper ones confluent. 
Flowers beautiful, with the outer large lobes of the petals white. Fruit 
rough on the surface, with a very thick, pale, deeply notched or almost 
beaded border. 

2. T. maximum, Linn, (great Hart-ivort); 2 outer petals of the 
flowers of the ray each with 2 equal lobes, involucre linear shorter 
than the umbel, fruit with the thickened border scarcely notched 
and as well as the disk rough with appressed hairs. E. Hot. t. 1173. 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 105. 

Rare in waste ground, about London, Oxford, and Eton. FI. June, 
July. ©. — Much taller than the last, and with a greater number of more 
lanceolate leaflets. Involucre very short. Petals, all, comparatively 
small, rose-coloured. 

73. Daucus. Linn. Carrot. 

1. D. Carota, Linn, (wild Carrot ); bristles of the seed slender, 
leaves tripinnate, leaflets pinnatifid, segments linear-lanceolate acute, 
umbels with a solitary coloured abortive flower in the centre, when 
in seed concave. E. Hot. t. 1174. E. FI. v. ii.p. 39. 

Pastures and borders of fields, very frequent. FI. July. $ . — This is 
the origin of our garden Carrot ; a name derived, as Theis tells us, from 
Car, red, in Celtic ; whence also comes Garance, the French name for 
the red Madder-roots, and our words carmine and carnation, also, as I 
presume. Professor Henslow finds a var. with viviparous fb, near 
Cambridge. 

2. D. mantimus, With. (Seaside Carrot); bristles of the seed 
flattened, leaves tripinnate, leaflets pinnatifid lanceolate fleshy, seg- 
ments rounded, umbels destitute of abortive flower, convex when in 
seed. E. But. t. 2560. E. FI. v. ii. p. 40. — D. Carota, y. FI. Brit, 
p. 300. Spreny. 

Sea coast of Kent and Cornwall. Anglesea, Mr. IV. Wilson. Island 
of Lismore, Scotland, Rev. C. Smyth. Ireland, Mr. J. T. Macfcay. — FI. 
July, Aug. $ . — Smaller than the preceding, with broader and more 
fleshy leaves; but I fear scarcely permanently distinct. 

74. Caucaris. Linn. Bur-Parsley. 

1. C. daucoules, Linn, (small Bur-Parsley); leaves bi-tripin- 


13 1 


PENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


\_Scandix. 


natifid, segments short, umbels of few rays, general involucre none, 
partial umbels of few flowers, their involucres of about 3 small 
leaves. E. 13ot. t. 197. E. FI. v. ii. p. 41. 

Cornfields, on a chalky soil, principally in the east and south-east of 
England. FI. June. ©. — Peduncles lateral and terminal. 

2. C. lat folia, Linn, {great Bur-Parsley); hispid, leaves pinnate, 
leaflets decurrent pinnatifid and serrate, involucres ovate membran- 
ous. E. Bot. t. 198. E. El. v. ii. p. 41. — Turgenia latifolia, 
Koch Tordylium, Linn. 

Fields in a chalky soil, rare; abundant in Cambridgeshire. FI. July. 
©. — A very striking plant, and entirely different from the preceding. 
Leaves broad for this tribe of Umbelliferce, and comparatively little 
divided. Flowers rose-coloured, large ; fruit large and abundantly 
aculeated. 


75. Tori'lis. Adans. Hedge-Parsley. 

1. T. Anthriscus , Gsertn. (upright Hedge- Parsley) ; stem erect 
branched, leaves bipinnate, leaflets lanceolate inciso-serrate attenu- 
ate, umbels terminal, involucres of many small subulate leaves. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 48 . — Caucalis Anthriscus , Huds. — E. Bot. t. 987. 

Hedges and waste places. FI. July. ©. — Stems 2 — 3 feet high. Fruit 
densely clothed with incurved bristles. 

2. T. infesta, Spr. (spreading Hedge-Parsley); leaves bipinnate, 

leaflets ovate inciso-pinnatifid serrated, general involucre of one, par- 
tial of few subulate leaves. E. Fl.v.ii.p. 43. — Caucalis infesta. 
Curt E. Bot. t. 1314. — C. helvelica, Gmel. — Spreng. 

Fields and way-sides, common. FI. July. ©. 

3. T. nodosa , Gsertn. (knotted Hedge- Parsley); stem prostrate, 
umbels lateral simple subsessile, fruit sometimes warted. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 44. — Caucalis nodosa, E. Bot. t. 199. — Tordylium 
nodosum, Linn. 

Waste places by road-sides, frequent ; especially in dry, gravelly or 
chalky soils. FI. May, June. © . — Leaves bipinnate ; leaflets ovate, pin- 
natifid, segments linear, acute, short. Umbels capitate, opposite the 
base of a leaf. Flowers reddish. External fruits of the umbel most 
bristly, inner ones partially tubercled. 

76. Scandix. Linn. Shepherd’s-Needle. 

1. S. Peclen , Linn. (Needle Chervil, Venus' Comb, or Shepherd s- 
Needle); fruit roughish, leaflets cut into many linear short segments. 
E. Bot. t. 1 396. E. FI. v. ii. p. 48. 

Corn-fields, abundant. Id. June, July. ©. — S/cm 1 — G inches to a 
foot high, roughish. Leaves triply pinnate. Umbels of very few rays, 

2 3. " Partial involucres pinnatifid, or bipinnatifid. Fruit of singular 

appearance, and very large in proportion to the size of the plant and of 
the flowers that produce it. 


C/ieerophy/lum.] 


PENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


135 


77. Anthri'scus. Pers. Beaked- Parsley. 

* Carpels smooth. 

1. A. sylvestris, Koch, ( wild beaked-Parsfey) ; umbels terminal 

stalked, stem a little swelling’ below each joint glabrous Charo- 

phyllum syloestre, Linn — E. Eat. t. 752. E. Fl.v.ii.p. 48. 

Under the hedges and borders of fields, frequent. FI. April, June. 
ll.—S feet or more high, branched. Leaves triply pinnate; leaflets 
ovato-lanceolate, deeply cut. Umbels at first slightly drooping. Partial 
involucres of several ovato-lanceolate leaves. Fruit linear-oblong, with 
a much less evident beak than in A. Cerefolium. This beak, alone, is 
marked with a few ribs. 

2. A. Cerefolium, Koch, (Garden beaked- Parsley) ; umbels 
lateral sessile, leaves tripartite decompound, leaflets ovate pimiati- 
fid the segments obtuse. — Scandix Cerefolium , Linn. — E. Bat. 
1 . 1268 — Chceropkiyllum sativum, Hook. Scot. i. p. 93. E. FI. V. ii. 
p. 48. 

Hedges and about gardens, whence it has perhaps generally escaped. 
FI. July. . © . Stem slender, 1|— 2 feet high. Leaves pale yellow- 
green, delicate. Umbels sessile, lateral, of few rays, pubescent. Partial 
involucres of few leaves, about 3, unilateral, linear. Umbellules small. 
Fruit large, perfectly glabrous, linear, tapering upwards. — Known as a 
salad and pot-herb under the name of Garden Chervil. 


** Carpels muricated. 

3. A. vulgaris, Pers. ( common beaked- Parsley) ; stem smooth, 
leaves ternately decompound the segments obtuse, umbels opposite 
the leaves, fruit ovately conical hispid about twice as 1 on <>  as the 
glabrous beak. Hook. Scot. i. p. 93. E. FI. v. ii. p. Ab. —Scan- 
dix Anthriscus, E. But. t. 818. 

Waste places, by road-sides, especially near towns and villages. FI. 
May, June. ©.—2 feet or more high, swelling under each joint. Leaves 
slightly hairy. Partial umbels small, with small involucres. Fruit rather 
large, with a distinct furrow on each side which extends to the beak 
covered with hooked bristles. 5 


78. Chasrophyllum. Linn. Chervil. 

1. C. temulentum, Linn. (Bough Chervil); fruit with obtuse 
ribs, stem rough (spotted) swelling below each joint, partial 
involucres reflexed. E. Bot. 1 . 15 2\.-Myrrhis temulenta, E. FI. 
v. a. p. 51. — M. temula, Spreng. 

Hedges and copses, common. FI. June,' July. 1/.-3 feet or more 

in • I VV “,! h . ai . r . s * Leaves doubl y pinnate; leaflets pinnatiful or 
inciso-lobate. Fruit linear-oblong, striated. Umbels at first drooping. 

2. C. aureum, Linn. ( tawny-seeded Chervil); pubescent, fruit 
with obtuse ribs coloured, stem slightly swelling below the joints, 
leallets very acuminate inciso-pinnatifid. E. Bot. 1 . 2103.— Mgrrhis 
a urea, Sprang.— E. FI. v. ii. p. 52 


136 


PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


[Conium. 


Fields, between Arbroath and Montrose. Near Corstorphine, Edin- 
burgh, Mr. G. Don. FI. June. If . — 3 feet or more high, branched, 
aromatic. Leaves tripinnate ; leaflets peculiarly attenuated, at least on 
the upper leaves (for the radical ones are more obtuse), a character 
which distinguishes this from every other British species. 

3. C. aromdticum, Linn. ( broad-leaved Chervil) ; fruit with 
obtuse ribs, leaves subternate bipinnate, leaflets ovato-oldong sub- 
acuminate serrate undivided. Don's Descr. of rare Scot. PL p. 7. 
Hook. Scot. i. p. 94. Don in E. Dot. Suppl. t. 2636 — Myrrhis 
aromatica, Spreng. — E. FI. v. ii. p. 52. 

Road-side near Guthrie, leading from Forfar to Arbroath. Mr. G. 
Don. FI. June. If . — 2 — 3 feet high, slightly pubescent below, glabrous 
above. Leaves biternate ; leaflets large, undivided or rarely with a small 
lobe near the base, pubescent beneath. In this, as well as in C. aureum, 
there is sometimes a small general involucre. Leaves, as Persoon 
observes, resembling those of /Ego-podium Podagraria ; their smell is 
aromatic, (Mr. G. Don.) 

79. Myrrhis. Tourn. Cicely. 

1. M. odorata, Scop, (sioeet Cicely); fruit large with very sharp 
ribs and deep furrows between them. E. FI. v. ii. p. 50. — Scan - 
dix odorata, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 697. Hook. Scot. i. p. 93. 

Pastures in mountainous countries, especially in the north of England 
and Lowlands of Scotland, generally near houses. FI. May, June. If . 
— Whole plant highly aromatic, 2 feet and more high. Leaves large, 
triply pinnate ; leaflets pinnatifid, ovato-lanceolate, inciso-serrate. Many 
of the partial umbels of this species, especially the inner ones, and some- 
times even entire umbels, prove abortive. The fruits are remarkable for 
their large size and powerful fragrance, and, as Sir J. E. Smith well ob- 
serves, make a part of the humble luxuries and simple medicines of the 
mountain cottager. 

80. Eciiinophora. Linn. Prickly Samphire. 

1. E. spinosci, Linn. (Sea-side Prickly Samphire or Sea-Pars - 
nep) ; leaves bipinnatifid the segments trifid subulate spinous, invo- 
lucres entire spinous. E. Bot. t. 2413. E.Fl. v. ii.p. 38. 

Sandy sea-shores. Found, many years ago, in Lancashire and Kent ; 
but now apparently extinct. FI. July. If. — A very prickly and singular 
plant ; but now I fear quite lost as a native of Britain. 

81. Conium. Linn. Hemlock. 

1. C. maculdtum, Linn, (common Hemlock) ; stem glabrous spot- 
ted, leaves tripinnate, leaflets lanceolate pinnatifid with acute and 
often cut segments. E. Bot. <.1191. E. FI. v. ii.p. 65. 

Waste places, banks, and under walls, not unfrequent. FI. June, 
July. $ . — Root fusiform. Stem 2 — 4 feet high, striated and spotted with 
purple, much branched upwards. Leaves large, much divided, when 
bruised extremely fetid, yielding an extract which has been extensively 
employed both in the cure of scrophulous and cancerous maladies, and 


PENTANDIUA — DIGYNIA. 


137 


Coriandrum.] 

for the purpose of lowering the pulse. So powerful a plant should be 
carefully discriminated from its allies ; and it is best distinguished by 
its spotted stem, fetid smell, and by the unilateral partial involucres, to- 
gether with the waved ridges of the fruit. 

82. Physospermum. Cuss. Bladder-seed. 

1. P . cornubiense, (Cornish Bladder-seed ) P. aquilegifolium, 

Koch. — P. commutation , Spreng. Umbell. Spec. p. 22. t. 4. 

f 8, and f. 7. — Danaa aquilegifolia, All. Ped. n. 1392. t. 63 

Ligusticuw aquilegifolium, Willd. Sp. PI. v. i. p. 1425. — L. cor- 
nubiense, Linn. Sp. PI. p. 35. t. 4. E. Bot. t. 683. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 82 — Smymium tenui folium nostras, Dill, in JRaii Sun. p. 209. 
t. 8. (Jig. bad.) 

Bushy fields in Cornwall ; about Bodmin, and only there, Rev. J. S. 
Tozer. FI. July. If   — Stem a foot and a half to 2 feet high, erect, stri- 
ated, glabrous, panicled above. Leaves mostly radical, on long stalks, 
triternate ; leaflets wedge-shaped, cut and laciniated or deeply tripartite, 
the segments acute, glabrous or minutely downy on the veins and mar- 
gins. Catiline leaves few, small, less divided, the segments longer and 
slenderer. Umbels on long terminal stalks, of 10 — 12 spreading, lax 
rays. Universal and partial involucres of from 1 — 4 or 5 lanceolate, 
somewhat membranaceous leaves. Partial umbels spreading, rather lax, 
erf many flowers ; of which several in the centre bear only stamens and 
are consequently abortive. Cal. evident. Petals rather long, almost 
unguiculate, white. Germen ovato-globose, laterally compressed, fur- 
rowed, ovules very loose within. Fruit almost globose, laterally com- 
pressed, and contracted between the carpels, so as to be didymous. 
Carpels reniformi-globose, with 5 ridges and 4 broad, brown vittce ; 
the coat crustaceous and so loose that the seed is loose within: a trans- 
verse section of this seed is crescent-shaped. In the first edition of this 
work, I have fully given my reasons for referring to this plant the P. 
aquilegifolium of Koch. 

83. Smyrnium. Linn. Alexanders. 

1. S. Olusatrum, Linn, (common Alexanders) ; cauline leaves 
ternate petiolate serrate. E. Bot. t. 230. E. FI. v. ii. p. 76. 

Waste ground and among ruins, especially near the sea; not unfre- 
quent. FI. May, June. $ . — Stem 3 — 4 feet high, very stout, furrowed. 
Leaves bright yellow-green; twice or (the lower ones) thrice ternate, 
with a very broad membranous base : leaflets very large, broadly ovate, 
lobed and serrated. Flowers yellow-green, in very dense, numerous, 
rounded umbels. Involucres none. Fruit almost black when ripe.— Aro- 
matic, but too strong and pungent to be agreeable. It was formerly used 
as a potherb, and takes its specific name from Olus, a potherb, and aler, 
blade; in allusion, apparently, to the black colour of the fruit. 

84. Coriandrum. Linn. Coriander. 

1. C. sativum, Linn, (common Coriander). E.Bot. t. 67. E.Fl. 
v. ii. p. 67. 

Fields and waste places, in the neighbourhood of which it had form- 


138 


PENTANDTUA DIGYNIA. 


[Chcnopodium. 

erly been cultivated, about Ipswich and in Essex. FI. June. ©. — This 
is the only true species of the genus, and is well known as a medicinal 
plant. The seeds are highly aromatic, and sold enveloped in sugar as 
Coriander comfits. Stem erect, leafy. Lower leaves bipinnate ; the pinnae 
pinnatifid with broad, wedge-shaped, toothed segments : the upper leaves 
gradually more compound, with the segments very narrow and linear, 
those of the uppermost leaves nearly setaceous. Fruit very curious : 
each carpel is hemispherical ; on its inner and hat side having a project- 
ing margin, which combines with the opposite one so as to leave no line 
or furrow between the two, and they form a complete little ball or globe; 
having, however, when quite ripe, 10 obscure elevated lines or ribs. 

85. Chenopodium. Linn. Goose-foot. 

* Leaves semicylindrical ; flowers with two bracteas each. 

1. C . fruticosum, Scbrad. (shrubby Seaside Goose-foot) ; leaves 
semicylindrical, styles often 3 combined at the base, stem shrubby. — 
Salsola fruticosa, Linn. — Id. Lot. t. 635. E. FI. v. ii.p. 18. 

On the Norfolk coasts, especially at Cley ; and those of Suffolk, Dor- 
setshire, Devonshire and Cornwall: but rare. Ft. July, Aug. If. — 3 
f. and more high, with many erect, leafy branches. Flowers in small 
axillary clusters, sometimes solitary. Calyx unchanged in fruit, as in the 
following species. 

2. C. maritimum, Linn, (annual Seaside Goosefoot) ; leaves 
semicylindrical a little tapering upwards, styles 2, stem herbaceous. 
E. Eot. t. 633. E. FI. v. ii. p. 1 6. 

Sea-shore, frequent. FI. July, Aug. ©. — This has quite the habit of 
the last species : but is greatly smaller and an annual. Flowers solitary 
or two in the axils of the leaves, and each subtended by two small, ovate, 
acute, narrow bracteas. 

** Leaves plane, undivided; bracteas unde?' each flower none. 

3. C. oliduni , Curt, (stinking Goosefoot ) ; leaves ovato-rhom- 
boid entire, flowers in dense clustered spikes, stem diffuse. E. Eot. 
t. 1031. E. FI. v. ii. p. 14. — C. Vulvaria, Linn. 

Waste places and under walls, especially near the sea. FI. Aug. ©. 
— Leaves small, pctiolate, greasy to the touch and covered with a pul- 
verulent substance, which, when bruised, yields a detestable odour, 
resembling that of putrid fish. 

4. C. polyspermum, Linn, (many-seeded Goose-foot ) ; leaves 
ovate entire, spikes elongated subeymose. Hook. Scot. i.p. 83. 
— a. stems all prostrate, leaves obtuse, spikes cymose leafless. C. 

polyspermum, E. Eot. t. 1480. E. FI. v. ii. p. 15 j3. stem erect, 

leaves acute, spikes leafy scarcely cymose. C. polyspermum, 
Curt. Load. t. 17. — C. acut folium, E. Eot. t. 1480. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 15. 

«. Cornwall. — p. not unfrequent in waste places and among rubbish. 
FI. Aug. Sept. ©. — The spikes of flowers are more or less cymose, 
leafy and leafless, upon the same individual : and I can by no means 
assent to the opinion that the C. acuti/olium is permanently distinct from 


Chcnapodium.] PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 139 

C. polyspermum , of which Wallroth, an excellent observer, says “ variat 
foliis ovatis, obtusis, emarginatis, rubro-marginatis, acntis, cymis aphyllis 
et foliosis expansis.” It is remarkable for the very numerous, dark 
brown, shining seed-vessels, in part only enveloped by the calyx. 

** I .eaves plane, toothed, angled or lolnd; Iracteas none. 

5. C. Bonus Henrtcus, Linn. (Mercury Goose-foot or good King 
Henry); leaves triangular arrow-shaped entire, spikes compound 
terminal and axillary erect leafless. E. Hot. t. 1033. E. EL v. it. 

p. 10. 

Waste places and way-sides ; frequent. Ft. Aug. If . — Stems 1 foot 
high, striated. Leaves large, dark green. — Used, when boiled, instead of 
spinach. 

G. C. urbicum, Linn, (upright Goose-foot) ; leaves triangular 
toothed, spikes long erect approaching the stem subsimple nearly 
leafless, flowers scattered on the spikes. E. Bot. t. 717. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 10. 

Waste places, under walls, and about towns and villages. FI. Aug. 0 . 
— Stem erect, angular. Leaves large, truncate or subcuneate at the base, 
of a light or subglaucous green, their margins deeply and irregularly 
toothed. Flowers on the spikes, in rather small, but remote, clusters ; 
spikes very long and erect. Seeds (or fruits) large in comparison with 
those of the following species, “almost as big as rape-seed,” (Curtis.) 

7. C. rubrum, Linn, (red Goose-foot) ; leaves triangular some- 
what rhomboid toothed and serrated, spikes erect compound leafy, 
flowers crowded on the spikes, fruit very minute. E. Bot. t. 1721. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 11. 

Dunghills and under walls. FI. Aug. Sept. © — 9f a darker green 
than the last. Stems frequently reddish. Leaves always more or less 
attenuated at the base, by no means truncate. Spikes very compound, 
thick. — 7 he salt (or alkali) contained in the juice of this plant crystal- 
lizes upon the surface of the stem ( Mr. W. Wilson.) 

8. C. botryodes, Sm. (many-spiked Goose-foot); “leaves trian- 
gular shortly attenuated at the base scarcely toothed, spikes erect 
compound leafy.” E. Bot. t. 2247. E. El. v. ii. p. 11. 

At \ armouth, Norfolk, Mr. Wigg ; and cliffs by the sea at Lowestoft, 
Sir J. E. Smith. Shore at South Shoebury-, Mr. E. Forster. FI. 
Aug. Sept. ©. — Much resembling the last, but smaller and less toothed 
in the margins of its leaves. This is quite different from the C. Botrys 
of Linn. 

9. C. murale, Linn, (nettle-leaved Goose-foot) ; leaves ovate 
approaching to rhomboid acute toothed shining, spikes much 
branched cymose leafless. E. Bot. t. 1722. E. FI. v. ii. p. 11. 

L ruler walls and in waste places near towns and villages. FI. Aug. 
© • Branches of the spikes spreading. Flowers rather distant. Smell 
unpleasant. 

10. C. hylnridum, Linn. (Maple-leaved Goos'-fool) ; leaves cor- 


140 


PENTANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


[ Salsola . 


date angulato-dentate acuminate, spikes very much branched subcy- 
rnose divaricated leafless. E. Bot. t. 1919. E. FI. v. ii. p. 12. 

Waste places and in cultivated fields, not common : about London, 
Colchester, Dedham, Ely, and Edinburgh. FI. Aug. ©. — Stems slender. 
Leaves large, with very prominent teetli or angles. Spikes similar to the 
last, but the branches are more remote and spreading. 

11. C. album , Linn, (white Goose-foot) ; leaves cvate inclining 
to rhomboid erose entire at the base, upper ones oblong perfectly 
entire, spikes branched somewhat leafy, fruit smooth. E. BoL 
t. 1723. E. FI. v. ii. p. 13. — f3. leaves green more entire, spikes 
elongated more branched. C. viride, Linn. 

Waste places, dunghills, &c. common. FI. July. Aug, ©. — Leaves 
covered with a whitish and mealy substance, varying in their width, and 
in the erosion, or blunt toothing, of the upper half of their margins. 
When these are nearly entire, it is the C. viride of Linn. 

12. C . ficifolium, Linn, (fig-leaved Goose-foot) ; leaves ovato- 
oblong toothed and sinuated at the margin somewhat hastate, upper 
ones oblong quite entire, fruit dotted. E. Bot. t. 1724. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 13. 

Dunghills and waste ground, about London and Yarmouth. FI. Aug. 
Sept. ©. 

13. C. glaucum , Linn. ( Oak-leaved Goose-foot) ; leaves all 
oblong toothed and sinuated at the margin glaucous and mealy 
beneath, spikes compound leafless, seed very minutely dotted. 
E. Bot. t. 1434. E. FI. v. ii. p. 14. 

Waste ground, especially on a sandy soil about London. FI. Aug. ©. 

86. Beta. Linn. Beet. 

1. B. maritima, Linn. (Sea- Beet) ; stems procumbent at the 
base, flowers solitary or in pairs, calycine segments entire. E. Bot. 
t. 285. E. FI. v. ii. p. 17. 

Sea shores, especially in a muddy soil, England; and the South, prin- 
cipally, of Scotland. FI. Aug. If. . — Root large, thick and fleshy. Stem 
tall, branched, angular. Rout-leaves subovate, succulent, entire, waved. 
Spikes of flowers numerous, leafy; leaves small, at the base of each flower 
or pair of flowers, which are greenish. — De Candolle says this is biennial, 
and distinguishes it from the cultivated Beet, B. vulgaris, in having one 
or two, instead of 3 — J flowers, in the axil of the upper leaves. Smith 
observes that, according to Linmeus, it differs from B. vulgaris in the 
keel of the calyx being entire. The present is esteemed a wholesome 
food when boiled. Mr. W. Wilson finds that there are always 3 styles, 
and that the germen is 3-seeded, that the flowers are often 3 together, 
and that when the seed is ripe the germen becomes purple and granulated. 

87. Salsola. Linn. Saltwort. 

1. S. Kali, Linn, (pricldg Saltwort) ; stems herbaceous pros- 
trate, leaves subulate spinous scabrous, segments of the perianth 
margined scariose. E. Bot. t. 634. E. FI. v. ii. p. 18. 


TENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


141 


Ulmus.\ 

Sandy sea-shores, frequent. FI. July. ©. — Stem angled, very much 
branched. Flowers solitary, pale-greenish, sessile, with three leaflike 
bracteas at the base of each. 

88. Herniaria. Linn. Rupture-wort. 

1. H .glabra, Linn, (glabrous Rupture-wort'); leaves and calyx 
glabrous or ciliated. E. Rot. t. 206. E. FI. v. ii. p. 8. 

Rare, about the Lizard, Cornwall, (Rag) whence 1 have specimens 
from the Rev. J. S. Tozer. Near Newmarket, Rev. Mr. Hemsted. FI. 
June — Aug. If .. — A small low, procumbent, shrubby plant. The “root 
penetrates deep into the soil for the size of the plant. Stems quite pro- 
strate, taking root, subsequently to which all foliage disappears, and the 
stem is gradually converted into what appears to be a woody horizontal 
root.” ( Tozer.) Stems, at first slender, somewhat angular and hairy. Leaves 
opposite, ovate, nearly sessile, fringed almost constantly, as Mr. Tozer 
observes, with transparent white bristles. Stipules large, white, ovate, 
acute, membranaceous, ciliated. Flowers in dense, axillary, sessile clus- 
ters. Cal. green, somewhat striated, its segments ovate, concave, persis- 
tent, within which at the base is a fleshy perigynous disk, bearing 10 fila- 
ments, apparently all on the same line, 5 only having rounded anthers. 
Capsule indehiscent, bearing one seed. 

2. H. hirsuta , Linn. ( hairy Rupture-wort); leaves and calyx 
hairy. E. Rot. t. 1379. E. FI. v. ii. p. 9. 

Sandy ground near Barnet (Hudson,) probably not wild. — Sprengel 
has surely done well in uniting these two under the name of H. vulgaris. 
FI July, Aug. . 

/ 

89. Ulmus. Linn. Elm. 

(With the English species of this genus, I confess myself not to 
be well acquainted : and Scotland, so far as I can ascertain, pos- 
sesses but one really native kind, the Broad-leaved Elm, Ulmus 
montana. Mr. Lindley appears to have made them a particular 
object of his study, and on him I have relied for the following 
characters.) 

1. U. campestris, Linn, (common small-leaved Elm); leaves 
rhomboid-ovate acuminate wedge-shaped and oblique at the base, 
always scabrous above doubly and irregularly serrated, downy 
beneath, serrature incurved, branches wiry slightly corky, when 
young bright brown pubescent, fruit oblong deeply cloven naked. 
Lindl. Syn.p. 226. E. Rot. t. 1886. E. FI. v. ii. p. 20. 

Hampshire, Sussex, and especially in Norfolk, frequent. FI. March, 
April. Tj . — A large tree with rugged baric. Flowers in dense heads’ 
each subtended by a small scale or bractea. This yields the best wood 
of all the Elms, and is consequently employed for a great variety of pur- 
poses, particularly for articles that require to be exposed to moisture.— 
The Hertfordshire Elm is supposed by Mr. Lindley to be a var. of this. 

2. U . suberosa, Ehrh. (common Cork-barked Elm) ; leaves nearly 
orbicular acute obliquely cordate at the base, sharply regularly and 
doubly serrated always scabrous above, pubescent below, chiefly 


142 


PENTANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[Ulmus. 


hairy in tlie axils, branches spreading bright brown, winged with 
corky excrescences, when young very hairy, fruit nearly round 
deeply cloven naked. Lindl. Syn. p.226. E. JBot. t. 2 1 (i 1 . E. FI. 
v.ii.p. 21. — U. campestris, Light/. Scot. p. 151. Hook. Scot. i. 
p. 85. 

Hedges in all parts of England (Sm.), and in Scotland ; but scarcely 
indigenous. FI. March. Tj . — Remarkable for the cork-like covering to 
the branches, which is full of deep fissures. 

3. U. major, Srn. ( Dutch cork-barked Elm ) ; leaves ovato-acu- 
niinate very oblique at the base, sharply doubly and regularly ser- 
rated, always scabrous above, pubescent below with dense tufts of 
white hairs in the axils, branches spreading bright brown winged 
with corky excrescences, when young nearly smooth, fruit obovate 
slightly cloven naked. Lindl. Syn.p. 226. E. Hot. t. 2542. E. FI. 
v. ii.p. 21. 

Hedges in the neighbourhood of London, a doubtful native. (Sm.) 
FI. March. Tj . — More corky in its bark even than the preceding, and 
probably not specifically distinct from it. 

4. U. carpinifolia , Lindl. ( Hornbeam-leaved Elm ) ; leaves 
ovate acute coriaceous strongly veined simply crenate serrate slightly 
oblique and cordate at the base shining, but rather scabrous above, 
smooth beneath, branches bright brown nearly smooth, fruit — ? 
Lincll. Syn. p. 226. 

Four miles from Stratford-upon-Avon, on the road to Alcester; Prof. 
Findley. Tj • 

5. U .glabra, Mill. ( smooth-leaved Elm); leaves ovato-lanceolate 
acuminate doubly and evenly crenato-serrate cuneate and oblique 
at the base becoming quite smooth above, smooth or glandular 
beneath with a few hairs in the axils, branches bright brown 
smooth wiry weeping, fruit obovate naked deeply cloven. Lindl. 
Syn. p. 226. E. Hot. t. 2248. E. Fl.v. ii.p. 23 — fi. gland nlosa ; 
leaves very glandular beneath. Lindl. — y. latifolia ; leaves oblong 
acute very broad. Lindl. 

Woods and hedges in Essex. In Scotland ? — ,3. near Ludlow, Prof. 
Lind ley. — y. Clay bury, Essex, Mr. E. Forster. FI. March. Tj — To 
this species Mr. Lindley thinks that the Downton Elm and Scampston 
Elm of the Nurseries may probably belong. 

6. U. stricta, Lindl. ( Cornish Elm) ; leaves obovate cuspidate 
cuneate at the base, evenly and nearly doubly crenato-serrate 
strongly veined coriaceous very smooth and shining above, smooth 
beneath with hairy axils, branches bright brown smooth rigid erect 
very compact, fruit — ? Lindl. Syn.p. 227. — /3 . parr folia ; leaves 
much smaller less oblique at the base finely and regularly crenated 
acuminate rather than cuspidate. Lindl. 

In Cornwall and North Devon;— p. less common. Tj . 

7. U. montdna , Bauli. ( broad-leaved or Wyck Elm); leaves oho- 


i Sambucus.] 


PENTANDIU A — TItIGYNIA. 


143 


vate cuspidate doubly and coarsely serrated cuneate and nearly 
equal at t lie base always exceedingly scabrous above, evenly downy 
beneath, branches not corky cinereous smooth, fruit rhomboid- 
oblong, scarcely cloven naked. Lindl. Syn.p. 227. E. Eot. t. 1887. 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 22. — U. campestris, Willd. 

Woods and hedges, frequent. Abundant in Scotland and certainly 
wild. FI. March, Apr. Tj • — Distinguished at first sight by its large 
spreading branches and broad leaves, appearing just as the “ hop-like 
fruit” comes to perfection. A variety is called the iveeping Elm. The 
wood is of inferior quality. Of this species Mr. Lindlcy says that the 
Giant Elm and Chichester Elm are varieties. He observes, too, that it is 
often confounded by foreign Botanists with U. pedunculata, a very dif- 
ferent species, not found in England, and closely related to U. rubra of 
N. America. 

PENTANDRIA— TR1GYNIA. 

90. Viburnum. Linn. Guelder-rose. 

1 • V. Lantdna, Linn, (mealy Guelder- rose or Wayfaring tree); 
leaves elliptico-cordate serrated veined downy beneath. E. Eot. 
t. 331. E. FI. v. ii.p. 107. 

Woods and hedges, especially in a chalky or limestone soil. Dunglass 
glen, Scotland. FI. June. T? . — A large shrub, much branched, with the 
yotmg shoots very downy. Flowers in large dense cymes, white. Cal. 
teeth very minute. Berry purplish-black. — The young shoots are much 
esteemed in the Crimea for the tubes of Tobacco pipes, (Pallas.). 

2. V. Opulns, Linn, (common Guelder-rose, or Water Elder); 
leaves glabrous three-lobed acuminate and serrate, petioles with 
glands. E. Eot. t. 332. E. FI. v. ii.p. 107. 

Woods and coppices, not unfrequent in England, and Scotland, as far 
north as Inverness, Mr. G. Anderson. FI. June, July. Tj .—A small tree, 
verj glabrous. Leaves large, subcordate, broad. Cymes large, with white 
powers ; the perfect ones small and resembling the last; abortive ones 
in the circumference, consisting of a very large, plane, 5-lobed petal, 
without either stamen or pistil. Flowers erect. Berries reddish-purple 
drooping. 1 1 ’ 

91. Sambucus. Linn. Elder. 

1. S. Ebulus, Linn, (dwarf Elder or Dane- wort) ; cymes 
wutli 3 principal branches, leaflets lanceolate, stipules foliaceous, 
stem iieibaceous. E. Eot. t. 475. E. FI. v, ii.p. 108. 

Way-sides and in waste places, not uncommon in England and Scot- 
land. Ireland, at Powerseourt, Lambay and Kenmare, Mr. .J T 
Maekay. FI. July. If.- Stem 2-3 feet high, angular and furrowed. 
Leaves pinnate; leaflets serrated. Cyme large, terminal, purplish. Anthers 
large, purple. Berries spherical, black.— The plant has a fetid smell 
and is violently purgative. 

... S. nigra, Linn, (common Elder) ; cymes with 5 principal 
branches, leaflets ovate, stem arboreous. E. Eot. t. 470. E. FI. 
v. n. p. 109. — (3. leaves laciniated. 


144 


rENTANDRIA TETRAGYNIA. 


[Parnassia. 


Woods, coppices, See. frequent. — £. Near Ayr, Mr. Jas. IVi/son. FI. 
June. T? . — A small tree, having the stems and branches full of pith. 
Leaves pinnate; leaflets serrated. Cymes terminal, large, cream-coloured, 
smelling unpleasantly. Anthers small, yellow. Berries purple-black, 
sometimes white. — The bark and flowers are used by country practitioners 
medicinally, and the fruit is employed for wines and preserves. 

92. Staphylea. Linn. Bladder-Nut. 

1. S. pinndta, Linn. ( common Bladder -nut) ; leaves pinnated, 
petioles without glands, styles 2, capsules bladdered. E. Dot. t. 831. 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 111. 

Thickets and hedges in Yorkshire; truly indigenous ( Mr. Hailstone ) 
about Pontefract, but not certainly wild according to Ray. About 
Ashford, Kent, Parkinson. It is frequent in gardens. FI. June. Tj . — 
A shrub, having the leaves pinnated with from 5 — 7, ovate, suddenly 
acuminated, finely serrated leaflets, anil graceful, white, drooping racemes 
of flowers, which are succeeded by large and curious, obovate, bladdered 
fruits. 

93. Tamarix. Linn. Tamarisk. 

1. T. gdllica, Linn. ( French Tamarisk) ; leaves minute am- 
plexicaul appressed acute, spikes lateral somewhat panicled slender 
much longer than broad. E.Dot. t. 1318. E. FI. v. ii.p. 112. 

Rocks, cliffs and sandy shores by the sea about the Lizard and St. 
Michael’s, Cornwall; where Mr. Tozer tells me it is scarcely wild, though 
naturalized in many parts of the county and plentiful. It is called 
“ Cypress ” by the common people; Rev. J. S. Tozer. About Hurst 
Castle and Hastings. Near Languard Fort : but evidently planted. 
FI. July. Tj . — A slender upright-growing shrub, with red branches , 
glaucous leaves, pink spikes of flowers and comose seeds. — Frequent in 
shrubberies. 

94. Corrigiola. Linn. Strapwort. 

1. C. littoralis, Linn. ( Sand Strapwort) ; stem leafy among the 
flowers. E. Dot. t. 668. E. FI. v. ii. p. 1 1 3. 

Rare on the south-western coast of England. On Slapham sands 
and near the Star-point, Devon ; and at Helston, Cornwall. FI. July, 
Aug. 0. — Stems numerous from the top of the root, spreading, slender. 
Leaves linear, obtuse, somewhat fleshy and very glaucous. Stipules 
small, membranaceous, white. Flowers small, in branching axillary 
small clusters, from the axils of the upper leaves. 

PENTANDRIA — TETRAGYNIA. 

95. Parnassia. Linn. Grass of Parnassus. 

1. P. palustris, Linn, (common Grass of Parnassus); bristles 
of the nectary 9 — 13, leaves cordate, eauline one amplexicaul. 
E. Dot. t. 82. E. FI. v. ii.p. 1 14. 

Bogs and wet places ; frequent in the north. FI. Aug. — Oct. 1/. — 
Leaves mostly radical, on long footstalks, cordate, entire, nerved; one 


Statice.] 


I’ENTANDRIA — PENTAGYNIA. 


J 15 


on (he stem below the middle, sessile. Stem angular, from 1 inch (as I 
have seen it in N. Ronaldsha, Orkney, with perfect flowers) to 8—10 
inches high. Flowers solitary, terminal, large, yellowish-white, hand- 
some. Petals broadly ohovate. Nectaries , each an obcordate scale, 
opposite the petals, fringed with white hairs along the margin which 
are terminated by a yellow pellucid globular gland. 

PENTANDRI A — PENTAGYNIA. 

96. Statice. Linn. Thrift. 

* Flowers collected into a rounded head. (Armeria, De Cand.) 

1. S. Armeria, Linn, (common Thrift , or Sea- Gill flower ) ; 
leaves linear, scape simple bearing a rounded head, awns of the 
calyx short. E. Bot. t. 226. E. El. v. ii. p. 115. 

Muddy sea-shores, among rocks by the sea-side and upon the tops of 
our highest mountains. FI. July, Aug. If. — Leaves all radical, nume- 
rous. Heads of flowers rose-coloured, white in Cornwall (G. E. Smith) 
intermixed with scales, and having, besides, a brown, membranous, 3- 
leaved involucre, terminating below in a sheathing, jagged covering to the 
upper part of the scape. fo 

** Flowers unilateral on a paniculated scape. (Taxanthema, 


Neck. B r.) 


2. S. Limoni am, Linn, (sprea/ling-spiked Thrift or Sea Laven- 
der); leaves elliptic-lanceolate stalked mucronate single-ribbed, 
scape angular with a much branched spreading corymb at the top’ 
caJyx will, deep acute plaited segments and intermediate teeth’. 
E. Ijot. t. 102. E. El. v. u. p. 116, (excl. syn. /3.) 

Frequent on the muddv shores and s»lt-mnr«hpc r__ 



blue blossoms of this plant to those of the LaS" S 


“ the sea-la veuder 4 which lacks perfume.* ** 





Ji 


146 


PENTANDRIA — FENTAGYNIA. 


[Slalice. 


Sims in Rot. Mag. t. 1617. — S. corclata, G. E. Smith , in Cat. of 
Pl. of Kent , p. 18, t. 2. f. 2, (vix Linn.) S. binervosa, G. E. 
Smith in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2663. — S. reticulata , Hook. Scot. i. 
p. 97, {ex cl. syn.) S. Limonium , /3. E. FI. v. ii. p. 1 16. — Lirno- 
nium minus , Ray, Syn.p. 202. 

Coast of Kent in several places, Gerard; and Rev. G. E. Smith. I 
gathered it on the Shakspeare Cliff, Dover, in 1806. Harwich, Ray. 
Mull of Galloway, Scotland, Mr. Goldie. Rocks near Holyhead, and St. 
Bees’ Head, near Whitehaven, Mr. IV. Wilson. Devon, Mr. Banks. 
Dublin, Mr. Mac/cay. N. of Ireland, Mr. Drummond. Somerset, Mr. 
Christy. FI. Aug. If .. — Much credit is due to the Rev. G. E. Smith who 
published in 1829, and clearly distinguished this plant from S. Limonium ; 
and no less to Mr. W. Wilson and Mr. Goldie, both of whom had pre- 
viously sent it to me as distinct from S. Limonium: though they at first 
fell into the very natural error of considering it to be the S. reticulata. 
Mr. Wilson has so well recorded its discriminating characters in a let- 
ter to me in August 1828, that I should do him injustice were I not 
to introduce them here. “ The leaves (which are coriaceous and short 
in proportion to the height of the scape), have the midrib somewhat pel- 
lucid when held between the eye and the light ; and there are besides, two 
parallel ribs or nerves extending beyond the middle : footstalks bor- 
dered, so as to constitute of the whole a spathulate leaf. Macro very 
small, always dorsal, not formed of a continuation of the (cartilaginous) 
margin, for that is continued round the apex of the leaf, and above the 
mucro which is not channelled. Scape round, with an even surface, a 
little zigzag or wavy above, taking a fresh direction at every branch of 
the panicle. Anthers white. Pollen with 4 — 5 pellucid dots, compressed. 
Germen smooth. Stigmas covered with a reticulation of vesicles, not 
prominent, much larger than the papillae of S. Limonium.” The lower 
branches of the panicle are now and then abortive or destitute of flowers, 
in both species. 

This appears to me to agree with Desfontaines’ S. spathulata, figured 
in the Botanical Magazine, and mentioned as a native of Barbary. 
Nor can I satisfy myself that the S. oleifo/ia, Pourr. and globu/aricefolia , 
Desf. and Willdenoviana, Poir. ( spathulata , Willd. in Hort. Bcrol. 
t. 63.) are really distinct from the present species : — to these 1 might 
almost add S. auriculifolia. The differences seem chiefly to reside in the 
more or less acute or mucronated leaves. 

4. S. reticulata, Linn. ( matted Thrift ); leaves spathulate, scapes 
paniculated almost from the base with numerous slender zigzag 
distinctly bracteated branches, of which the upper ones only bear 
flowers, flowers crowded. E. Bot. t. 328. E. FI. v. ii. p. 116. 
(excl. syn. of Hook. Scot.) 

Muddy salt-marshes, but rare. Norfolk, principally at Cley, and 
Wisbeaeh.) FI. July, Aug. If. — Much smaller than either of the 
two last ; with very short leaves. Scapes several from the same root, 
remarkable for their numerous, slender, entangled, barren branches, and 
small, crowded flowers, in secund, terminal spikes. The finest specimens I 
have seen of this species are sent to me by Professor Henslow from Cley, 
gathered July 1829 . They are 6 inches long and with such numerous 


Sibbaldia . ] 


PENTANDRIA — PENTAGYNIA. 


147 


barren branches as to satisfy me that the S. caspia, of Willdenow, is the 
same; as Marshal Bieberstein had rightly determined. Sprengel quotes, 
under S. reticulata, S. virgata, Willd. and S. viminea, Schrad. Staticc 
is a genus that would amply repay the labour required in its illustration 
by the beauty and singularity of its species. Above 70 species (includ- 
ing “ Armeria”) are enumerated by Sprengel. 

97. Linum. Linn. Flax. 

* Leaves alternate. 

1. L. usilatissimum , Linn. ( common Flax); leaves lanceolate, ca- 
lycine leaves ovate acute 3-nerved, petals crenate, stem subsolitary. 
E. Bat. t. 1357. E. FI. v. ii.p. 1 18. 

Corn fields, not unfrequent. FI. July. ©. — One or one foot and a 
half high, slender, branched above. Leaves distant. Flowers large, pur- 
plish-blue. — This, as may be inferred from its name, yields in the strong 
fibres of its bark the valuable flax of commerce; while from the seed 
a precious oil is expressed, known by the name of Lint-seed oil. These 
seeds, too, are highly mucilaginous, and much employed in poultices, 
fomentations, &c. 

2. L. perenne, Linn. ( perennial blue Flax) ; leaves linear acute, 
calycine leaves obovate obtuse obscurely 5-ribbed glabrous, stems 
numerous from the same root. E. Bot.t. 40. E. Fl.v.ii. p. 118. 

Chalky hills : Cambridgeshire, Hinton, Rev. Prof. Henslow, Nor- 
thamptonshire, Westmoreland, Norfolk and Suffolk, Rev. G. R. Leathes. 
Near Monkstown, Ireland, Mr. James Drummond. FI. June, July. If.. 

3. L. an gust folium, Huds. (narrow-leaved pole Flax) ; leaves 
linear-lanceolate acuminate 3-nerved, calycine leaves elliptical three- 
ribbed mucronate as well as the capsule. E. Bot. t. 381. E. FI. 
v.ii.j). 119. 

t Sandy and chalky pastures, principally near the sea. Kent, Sussex, 
Norfolk, Suffolk ; near Liverpool, Mr. J. Shepherd. Cornwall ; and 
near Plymouth, Mr. Banks. About Dublin, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. 
July. ~lf . — All the three species of this division have a great similarity 
in their habit. The best characters, as observed by Sir J. E. Smith, 
are taken from the calyx. In the present the petals are of a paler blue 
than in the preceding species, and smaller in proportion to the size of 
the calyx. 

** Leaves opposite. 

4. L. catharticum, Linn, (purging Flax); leaves opposite 
oblong, stem dichotomous above, petals acute. E. Bot. t. 382. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 119. 

Pastures, everywhere, abundant. FI. June, July. ©. — Stem slender, 
upright, 2 — 6 inches high. Flowers gracefully drooping before expan- 
sion, white, small. 

98. SiBBALDlA. Linn. Sibbaldia. 

1. S. procumbens, Linn, (procumbent Sibbaldia) ; leaves ternato, 


148 


PENTANDRIA MEXAGYNIA. 


[ Droscra. 

leaflets wedge-shaped tridentate. E. Boi. t. 175. E. FI. v. ii. 

p. 120. 

Near, and upon the summits of the Highland mountains of Scotland, 
abundant. FI. July. If .. — A small, glaucous, slightly hairy plant, woody 
at the base and roots. Petals small, yellow, sometimes wanting. Slam. 
5 — 7. Pistils 5   — 8 or 10. — Nearly allied to Potcntilla, as Mr.W. Wilson 
well observes. 

PENTANDRIA — HEXAGYNIA. 

99. Drosera. Linn. Sun-dew. 

1. D. ro undifolia, Linn. ( round-leaved Sun-dew) ; leaves radi- 
cal orbicular spreading, petioles hairy, seeds chaffy. E. Bot. t. 867. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 122. 

Bogs and moist heathy ground, frequent. FI. July. If . — Leaves, 
in all our species, covered with red pedunculated viscid glands, which 
retain insects. Scajje 2 — 5 inches high, glabrous. Flowers raeemed, 
secund, small. Styles variable in number. 

2. D. longifolia, Linn. ( spathulate-leaved Sun-dew) ; leaves 
radical spathulate very obtuse erect on long glabrous petioles, seeds 
with a compact rough coat not chaffy. E. Bot. t. 868. E. FI. v. ii- 
p. 123. 

Bogs and moist heathy ground, not uncommon, but more frequent in 
the south than in the north. South of Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. 
FI. July. If . — Well distinguished from the following, by its rough, and 
not loose, coat to the seeds, a character long ago observed and figured 
by Schkuhr and confirmed by Mr. W. Wilson. Styles often 8 ; stigmas 
deeply cloven. Mr. W. Wilson detected a curious monstrosity in the 
flower of this, having “ one germen enclosed within another, and a third 
within the second ; the external one open at the top and fringed with 
styles and abortive anthers. Rudiments of seeds lined the inner sur- 
face as usual. The inner germen had styles and anthers intermixed, 
and was closed at the top, the innermost was more imperfectly formed, 
but with rudiments of styles. There were 8 petals and about G perfect 
stamens in the flower.” The same acute Botanist, too, observed that 
“specimens 1 gathered in Cheshire abounded in colouring matter and 
stained the paper in which they were placed, after having been dried, 
of a deep, rusty red colour, which also penetrated several contiguous 
sheets: — and that D. rotundifolia, on the same sheet, was found to pos- 
sess the same property, but in a much slighter degree.” 

3. D. anglica, Huds. (great Sun-dew ); leaves radical linear- 
spatliulate erect on very long glabrous petioles, seeds with a loose 
chaffy coat. E. Bot. t. 369. E. FI. v.ii.p. 123. 

I With mo, in the Herbarium, both D. anglica and T). longifolia retain the 
property of staining the paper of the sheets that lie next to them for a great 
number of years; so that the form of the leaves, scapes, and (lowers are dis- 
tinctly represented through to the backs of the sheets on which they are fastened, 
and upon, the backs of several sheets which have, at different times, lain above 
them : and this though the specimens are perfectly dry. 


Teplis. 1 HEXANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 149 

On bogs in several parts of Scotland, as far north as Ardnamurclian, 
JK. C. Trevelyan , Esq.: near Warrington, Lancashire, Mr. W. I Vi/son : 
Bedfordshire; Norfolk, and probably in other counties. FI. July, Aug. 
If. — This has much longer and narrower leaves than the last, and would 
better deserve the name of longifo/ia. But that character has never been 
considered (though I believe very constant) sufficient to separate this 
species from the last ; and a general opinion has prevailed, with myself 
as well as others, that the present was but a variety of longifolia. Now, 
however, that Mr. W. Wilson has observed the true nature of its seed, 
an important and invariable character is established. Here the seed, as 
in Pyrola and Orchis and in D.rotundifolia , has a very loose, reticulated, 
even coat. In D. longifo/ia the coat firmly adheres to the rest of the 
seed, and is rough or papillose. “ Embryo at the lower end of the seed, 
•dicotyledonous.” — Wilson. 

PENTANDRIA— POLYGYNIA. 

100. Myosurus. Linn. Mouse-tail. 

1. M. minimus, Linn. ( common Mouse-tail.') E. Bot. t. 435. 
E. FI. v. ii. j). 124. 

Corn-fields and waste places in England, in a gravelly or chalky soil. 
Scotland, Sibbald; but I have never seen Scottish specimens, nor does it 
appear to be a native of Ireland. FI. May. ©. — A small plant; from 
2 — G inches in height. Leaves erect, narrow, linear-spathulate, fleshy. 
Scapes slender, bearing a single flower, small, greenish. Receptacle with 
the numerous germens, at first short, oblong; then lengthening out to from 
i — 3 inches, and resembling a mouse’s tail. 


CLASS VI. IIEXANDRIA. 6 Stamens ( equal in height ). 

OIID. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

* Flowers complete, having a double perianth. (Cal. and Cor.) 

1. Berberis. Cal. of 6 concave, coloured, inferior, deciduous 

leaves. Pet. 6, each with two glands at the base. Berry 2 3- 

seeded — Nat.Ord. Berberidete, Vent — Name ; Berberys, accord- 
ing to du T/teis, is the Arabic name of this fruit. 

2. Frankenia. Cal. of 1 piece, inferior. Cor. of 6 petals. 
Stigmas 3. Caps, of 1 cell, 3 — 4-valved ; valves bearing many 
seeds at their margins. — Nat. Ord. Frankeni ace.e, St. HU.— 
Named fiom John Franken, a Swedish botanist and Professor of 
Medicine at Upsal, who died in 1661. 

3. 1 epli.s. Cal. campanulate, with 6 large and 6 alternating 
smaller teeth. Pet. 6, inserted upon the calyx, often wanting. 

Cajjs. superior, 2-celled, many-seeded Nat. Ord. Lytiirahi*, 

Juss. Named from mirXiov, anciently applied to the genus Portu- 
lacu, now to one somewhat similar in habit. 

(See Lythrum in Cl. XII.) 


150 


HEXANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. [Ornithogalum. 

** Perianth single, superior. 

4. Leucojum. Perianth campanulate, superior, petaloid, of 6 
equal pieces, a little thickened at the point. Flowers from a spatha. 
— Nat. Orel. Amaryllide/e, Br. — Named from Xswos, white , and 
tov, a violet. But the name Mvkoiov was by the Greeks applied to 
the Wall-flower. 

5. Galanthus. Perianth petaloid, of 6 pieces, 3 outer ones 
spreading, 3 inner smaller, erect, emarginate. Flowers from a 
spatha. — Nat. Orel. Amaryllide.*, Br. — Named from ya/.a, 
milk, and uvdog, a jlower. The French name, perce-ncige, is very 
expressive. 

6. Narcissus. Perianth superior, coloured, funnel-shaped, with 
a spreading 6-partite limb, and a campanulate or cup-shaped crown 
or nectary, within which are the stamens. Flowers from a spatha. 
— Nat. Ord. Amaryllideje, Br. — Named from vagxt], stupor , in 
allusion to the powerful and injurious smell of the flowers. More 
immediately derivable from the youth Narcissus , who was fabled 
to be changed into this flower, an inhabitant sometimes of watery 
places, by the banks of streams. 

*** Perianth single, inferior, petaloid, rarely herbaceous. 

7. Convallaria. Perianth inferior, petaloid, deciduous, 6-cleft, 
globose or cylindrical. Berry 3-celled. Seeds 1 — 2 in each cell. 
— Nat.Ord. Smilaceje, Br. — Name, convallis, a valley; from the 
locality of the species. 

8. Allium. Perianth inferior, petaloid, of 6 ovate spreading 
pieces. Caps, triquetrous. ( Flowers umbellate, arising from a 2- 

leaved spatha) Nat. Ord. Liliaceje ; Trib. II. Asphodele^e, 

De Cand.~— Named from the Celtic all, which signifies acrid, burn- 
ing. ( Theis .) 

9. Gagea. Perianth coloured, of G persistent pieces, connivent 
below, spreading above. Filaments not dilated at the base. Cap- 
side triangular. ( Flowers corymbose or umbellate, yellow, with 
foliaceous bracteas .) — Nat. Orel. Liliaceje; Trib. II. Aspho- 
DELEiE, De Cand. — Named in honour of the late Sir Titos. Gage, 
Baronet, an excellent British botanist. 

10. Ornithogalum. Perianth inferior, petaloid, of G persistent 
pieces. Stam. alternately larger or dilated at the base. Capsules 
with 3 angles and 3 furrows. ( Flowers racemose. Bracteas mem- 
branaceous.) — Nat. Ord. Liliace;e; Trib. II. Asphodele.e, 
De Cand. — Named from ogvig, a bird, and yctXn, milk. Linnaeus 
says that the roots of O. umbellatum are the 11 Dove's Dung," which 
was sold so dear at the siege of Samaria, as mentioned in 2d book 
of Kings. They are still much used as food in the Levant. (See 
E. Bot. t. 130.) 


HEXANDRIA — MONOGYNlA. 


151 


Ttdipa .] 

11. Scilla. Perianth inferior, of 6 leaves, petaloid, spreading 
and deciduous. Filaments filiform, glabrous, inserted at the base 
of the perianth. ( Flowers racemed .) — Nat. Ord. Liliacf./e ; 
Trib. II. Asehodele.e, De Cand. — Named from <rxaXXw, to in- 
jure: in Arabic also, dsgyl. The root of S. maritima is said to be 
highly poisonous and a valuable medicine. 

12. Hyacinthus. Perianth inferior, of 1 piece, petaloid, 6-cleft 
or 6-partite, tubular, reflexed at the extremity. Stamens inserted 

upon the segments, included Nat. Ord . Liliace.e ; Trib. II. 

Asphodele/E, De Cand. — Named from the youth Hyacinthus , 
who, being killed by Apollo, was by him changed into a plant, 
whose foliage bore in dark streaks the initials of his name. Our 
only British species, having no mark or figure, was hence called 
non-scriplus. 

13. Muscari. Perianth inferior, of 1 piece, petaloid, ovate, in- 
flated, 6-toothed. Capside trigonous, with prominent angles ; cells 

2-seeded. Duly Nat. Ord. Liliace/e; Trib. II. Asphodeleje, 

De Cand. — Named from goeyog, musk, a smell yielded by one species. 

14. Anthericum. Perianth inferior, petaloid, of 6 equal, spread- 

ing elliptical pieces. Siam, filiform, mostly bearded. Capsule round- 
ish, 3-celled; seeds angular Nat. Ord. LiLiACEiE; Trib. II. 

AsphodelejE, De Cand. — Named from aAsg/xos, applied by the 
Greeks to the stem of the Asphodel. 

15. Asparagus. Perianth inferior, 6-partite, deciduous. 
Stigmas 3. Berry globose, 3-celled. Seeds few. Embryo ex- 
centric — Nat. Ord. LiLiACEiE ; Trib. II. Asphodele^e, De 
Cand. — Name, xTTrx^xyoi in Greek, from c-vx^xo-t-o, to tear: and 
that, according to Theis, from spen, a spine, in Celtic, which is 
the root of many words in Latin, French, German, and English. 
Many species of this genus are armed with spines. 

16. Narthecium. Perianth inferior, petaloid, of 6 linear- 
lanceolate, spreading pieces. Siam, woolly. Germen pyramidal. 
Caps. 3-celled, 3-valved. Seeds with an appendage at each extre- 
mity — Nat. Ord. JuncEjE, De Cand. — Named from vxtfn , a rod, 
probably from the elongated straight raceme of flowers. It is 
remarkable that this word is an anagram of Anthericum, a genus 
with which Linnaeus united it. 

17. Fritillaria. Perianth campanulate, inferior, of 6 pieces, 
with a nectariferous cavity at the base of each. Stigmas 3. Cap- 
sule S-ceWed, 3-valved, oblong. Seeds flat. — Nat. Ord. Liliace.e; 
I rib. I. '1 ulipacete, De Cand. — Name derived from fritillus, a 
Dice-board. 

18. Tulipa. Perianth campanulate, inferior, of 6 pieces. 


HEXANDRIA — TBIGYN1A. [ Tofieldia . 

Nectaries 0. Stigma sessile, 3-lobed. Capsule trigonous. Seeds 

Hat — Nat. Ord. Liliacete; Trib. I. Tuli pacers, De Cand. 

Named from toliban , the Persian name for a Turban, whose gay 
colours are similar to those of the Tulip. (Theis.) 

19. Acorus. Flowers arranged upon a spadix. Spatha 0, 
Perianth of G pieces or scales, inferior. Stigma sessile. Capsule 
indehiscent, many-seeded — Nat. Ord. Aroide;e, Juss. — Named 
from a., without, and xoyov, or zopsi, the pupil of the eye , the diseases 
of which it was supposed to remove. 

Perianth single, inferior, glumaceous. 

20. Juncus. Perianth inferior,, of 6 leaves, glumaceous. 
Caps. 3-celled, 3-valved; valves with the seed-bearing dissepiments 
in their middle. ( Leaves rigid, mostly rounded, rarely plane, gla- 
brous. ) — Nat. Ord. Junce.e, De Cand. — Named from j ungo , to 
join ; the leaves and stems of this genus having been employed as 
cordage. 

21. Luzula. Perianth inferior, of 6 leaves, glumaceous. Caps. 
1-celled, 3-valved : valves without dissepiments. Seeds 3, at the 
bottom of the cell. ( Leaves soft, plane, generally hairy). — Nat. 
Ord. Junceae, De Cand. — Name : — the Gramen Luzulce of 
Bauhin. Luzula, Smith tells us, is altered from lucciola , or luzziola, 
a glowworm : because the heads of flowers, wet with dew, and 
sparkling by moonlight, gave the elegant Italians an idea of those 
brilliant insects. Hence the learned author of English Flora con- 
tends for Luciola as the proper orthography. 

{See Peplis in Ord. I. Polygonum in Cl. VIII.) 

ORD. II. DIGYNIA. 2 Styles. 

22. Oxyria. Cal. of 2 leaves. Cor. of 2 petals, a little larger 
than the cal. Nut triquetrous, with a broad membranous margin. 

Embryo erect, inverted Nat. Ord. Polyc.one.e, Juss Named 

from o%ug, sharp or acid; from the acid flavour of this, as of many 
other plants belonging to the same natural family. 

ORD. III. TRIGYNIA. 3 Styles. 

23. Rumex. Cal. of 3 leaves combined at the base. Cor. of 
3 petals. Stigmas multifid. Nut triquetrous, covered by the 
enlarged petals, which often bear tubercles. — Nat. Ord. Poly- 
go NEiE, Juss. — Name of unknown origin. 

24*. Tofieldia. Perianth single, 6-partite, having a small 3- 
partite involucre. Stamens glabrous. Caps. 3 — 6-celled ; cells 
united at the base, many-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Melanthace/E 4 
Br Named in honour of Mr. Tojield, an English Botanist. 


itEXANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


Frankenia.] 


153 


25. ScheuchzIria. Perianth single, petaloid, of 6 leaves. 
Anthers elongated. Capsules 3, inflated, 2-valved, l-seeded. — 

Nat. Orel. Jltncagine.e, Rich Named in honour of the 3 

Scheuchzers , Swiss Botanists. 

26. Triglochin. Perianth of 6, concave, deciduous leaves, 3 
outer and 3 inner. Anthers sessile, lodged in the leaves of the 
perianth, with their backs towards the pistil. Capsules 3 — 6, 1- 
seeded, united by a longitudinal receptacle, from which they usually 
separate at the base — Nat. Ord. Juncagine.®, Rich. — Named 
from rgeig, three, and y'/Myjc, a point ; from the three points of the 
capsules. 

2?. Colchicum. Perianth single, tubular, very loug, rising 
from a spatha; limb campanulate, 6-partite, petaloid. Caps. 3- 
celled ; cells united at the base. — Nat. Ord. Melanthaceas, Br. 
— Named from Colchis, where it was said to grow abundantly. 

(See Elatine in Cl. VIII.) 

ORD. IV. HEXAGYNIA. 6 Styles. 

28. Actinocarpus. Cal. of 3 leaves. Petals 3. Gerrhens 
6 — 8. Capsules combined at the base, spreading in a radiated 
manner, 2-seeded. Embryo much curved. — Nat. Ord. Alismace^E, 
Be Cand. — Named from x>cuv,a ray, and ku.^ to;, a fruit ; in con- 
sequence of its curiously radiated fruit resembling a star-fish. 


ORD. V. POLYGYNIA. Many Styles. 

29. Alisma. Cal. of 3 leaves. Petals 3. Capsules many, 
clustered, distinct, indehiscent, one-seeded. Embryo much curved. 
— Nat. Ord. Aeism ace/e, Be Cand. — Named from alls, water, in 
Celtic. The genus is altogether aquatic. 

HEXANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 

1. Berberis. Linn. Barberry. 

1. B. vulgaris, Linn. ( common Barberry ); racemes pendulous, 
spines 3- forked, leaves obovate ciliato-serrate. E. Bot. t. 49. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 184. 

Copses, woods and hedges, in England and Scotland. Near Fermoy, 
Ireland, Mr. J. Drummond. Ft. June. Tj . — Shrub with upright, twiggy 
stems. Flowers yellow, smelling disagreeably. Stamens highly curious 
in their formation and in their elastic property when touched. Berries 
oblong, a little curved, red, tipped with the black style: they are agree- 
ably acid and much used for preserves. 

2. Frankenia. Linn. Sea-Heath. 

1. I', lee vis, Linn, (smooth SearJIeath) ; leaves linear revolute 

ii 2 


HEXANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


154 


[Narcissus. 


at the margin glabrous ciliated at the base. E. Bot. t. 205. E. FI. 
v.ii.p. 186. 

Muddy salt-marshes, about Yarmouth and the other eastern coasts 
of England. Isle of Sheppey, Kent, Rev. Prof. Henslow. FI. July. If. 
— A humble procumbent plant, with wiry stems and numerous fascicled 
leaves. Flowers pale rose-coloured, terminal or from the axils of the 
branches. 

2. F. pulverulenta, Linn, (powdery Sea- Heath) ; leaves obovate 
retuse glabrous above, downy and pulverulent beneath, petiole cili- 
ated. E. Bot. t. 2222. E. FI. v. ii. p. 186. 

Found in the time of Dillenius and Hudson on the sea-coast of Sus- 
sex. FI. July. ©. — Stems prostrate, repeatedly dichotomous. Flowers 
smaller than in the preceding. 

3. Peflis. Linn. Purslane. 

1. P. Portula, Linn. (Water Purslane) ; flowers axillary soli- 
tary, leaves obovate. E. Bot. t. 1211. E. FI. v.ii.p. 187. 

Watery places, not unfrequent. FI. July, Aug. 0. — Plant prostrate, 
5 — 6 inches long, creeping, little branched. Leaves opposite, glabrous, 
tapering at the base. 

4. LeucoJum. Linn. Snowflake. 

1. L. cestivum, Linn. (Summer Snowflake); spatha many- 
flowered, style club-shaped. E.Bot.t. 621. E. FI. v. ii. p. 130. 

Moist meadows ; Thames’ side, below Greenwich, especially the Kent- 
ish shore, Mr. E. Forster; in Suffolk, Berkshire, Westmoreland, North- 
umberland, &c. It is difficult to say where this plant is really wild. FI. 
May. 1 1 . — Root bulbous. Leaves long linear, keeled ; scape 2-edged. 
Flowers white, drooping. 

5. Galanthus. Linn. Snowdrop. 

1. G. nivalis, Linn. (Snowdrop). E. Bot. t. 19. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 129. 

Woods, orchards, meadows, pastures, &c. in very many places in 
England, Scotland and Ireland, but scarcely indigenous. FI. Feb. If. 
— Bulb ovate. Leaves 2, broadly linear, glaucous-green. Flowers soli- 
tary, drooping, elegant, rendering this plant a general favourite. 

“ Like pendent llakes of vegetating snow 
The early Herald of the infant year, 

Ere yet the adventurous Crocus dares to blow 
Beneath the orchard boughs thy buds appear.” 

6. Narcissus. Linn. Daffodil. 

1. N. Pseudo-narcissus, Linn, (common Daffodil); spatha 
single-flowered, nectary campanulate erect crisped at the margin 
obsoletely 6-cleft, as long as the ovate segments of the perianth, 
E. Bot. t. 17. E. FI. v. ii. p. 132. 

Moist woods and thickets. Rare in Scotland : about Culross and 
Dunoon; but scarcely indigenous. Near Templeogue, Ireland; Mr. J. 
T. Mac/cay. FI. March, Apr. If .—Flowers large, yellow. 


HEXANDUIA — MONOGYNIA. 


155 


Convallaria .} 

2. N. pocticus, Linn. ( Narcissus of the Pods ) ; spatha mostly 
single-flowered, nectary very short concave membranous and cre- 
nate at the margin, leaves with an obtuse keel. E. Bot. t. 275. 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 131. 

Heathy open fields on a sandy soil, said to be wild in Norfolk and 
Kent. Ft. May. If. .—Larger than the last, with a flower of a very dif- 
ferent structure, and with a deeply coloured border to the nectary. Its 
beauty and delicious odour have recommended it to general culture. 
Smith says this is the true Narcissus of the Greek writers, as clearly 
described by Dioscorides. 

3. N. bijlbrus, Curt, (pale Narcissus ) ; spatha 2-flowered, nec- 
tary very short concave membranous and crenate at the margin, 
leaves acutely keeled. E. Bot. t. 276. E. FI. v. ii.p. 132. 

Sandy fields, in Kent and Herts ; near Totness, Devon, Rev. J. S. 
Tozer ; and about Dublin, frequent, Mr. J. T. Mac/cay. Ft. April, May. 

• Similar to the last in the general form of the flowers, but these are 
smaller, not of so pure a white, without the coloured border to the 
nectary, and with a less agreeable scent. 

7. Convallaria. Linn. Lily of the Valley, or Solomon’s Seal. 

1. C. mcyalis, Linn. ( Lily of the Valley); scape semi-cylin- 
drical, leaves 2 ovato-lanceolate radical, flowers racemed globoso- 
campanulate drooping. E. Bot.t. 1035. E. FI. v. ii.p. 154. 

Woods and coppices, particularly in a light soil : frequent in England 
and in several places in Scotland. FI. May, If . — Flowers very pure 
white, fragrant, segments recurved. Berries red, globose. 

2. C. verticillata, Linn. ( narrow-leaved Solomon's seal) ; leaves 
lanceolate whorled, flowers cylindrical. E. Bot. 1. 128. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 154. 

Woods and glens, very rare, and only found in Scotland. Den of Re- 
chip, 4- miles N.E. of Dunkeld, Mr. A . Bruce. It has been pointed out 
to Mr. James Macnab as indigenous in the woods at Blair in Athol. FI. 
June. If .—2 f. high. Leaves numerous, bright green, 3—4 in a whorl." 
Flowers solitary or with branched footstalks, drooping. 

3. C. multiflora, Linn, (common Solomons seal) ; leaves ovato- 
elliptical alternate half-embracing the rounded stem, peduncles axil- 
lary one-or many flowered, flowers cylindrical, filaments hairy, style 
flexuose. E. Bot. t. 279. E. FI. v. ii.p. 156. 

Woods and coppices, in various parts of England and the south of 
Scotland : also at Kingcusie, 7 miles from Aberdeen, Mrs. Boswell, FI. 
May, June. If. 2 f. high, bare of leaves below. Leaves large, marked 
with longitudinal nerves, secund ; the flowers drooping in an opposite 
direction, white, greenish at the tips. Berries bluish-black. 

Polygonatum, Linn, (angular Solomons seal); leaves 
ovato-elliptical alternate half-embracing the angular stem, peduncles 
mostly single-flowered, flowers cylindrical, filaments glabrous, stylo 
stiait, E. Bot.t. 280. E. FI. v. ii.p. 155. 


156 


HEXANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


[Allium. 


Woods in England, very rare ; in Yorkshire, Somersetshire, and Kent. 
FI. May, June. If . . — Smaller than the last. Flowers greener, fragrant. 

/ 

8. Allium. IAnn. Onion. 

* Stem-leaves plane. 

1. A. Ampeloprasum, Linn, (great round-headed Garlic ); um- 
bels globose without bulbs, leaves linear keeled acuminate, 3 alter- 
nate stamens deeply 3-cleft. E. Bot. t. 1657. E. FI. v. ii. p. 133. 

Rare; on Holmes Island in the Severn, Hay. FI. Aug. If. — 2 — 3 f. 
high, with broad acuminated leaves, and large heads of purplish-white 
flowers : allied to A. Porrum, the Leek, in habit, but differing in its peren- 
nial and clustered young bulbs. The specific name, a vine, and 

a leek, means onion of the vineyard. Porrum, says Theis, is from 
pori, to cat, in Celtic; whence comes our word Porridge. 

2. A. arendrium, Linn. (Sand- Garlic); umbels bearing bulbs 
compact spherical, leaves linear with cylindrical sheaths, 3 alternate 
stamens 3-cleft, leaves of the spatha short obtuse. E. Bot. t. 1358. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 134. 

Mountainous woods and fields, in sandy soil, principally in the north 
of England. Perthshire and Angus-shire. Portmarnock sands, Ireland, 
Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. July. If. — Stem 2 — 3 f. high, leafy below, 
rounded, glabrous. Heads dense with purple flowers , rather small. Spatha 
often of 3, very short, ovate, obtuse segments. 

3. A. carindtum , Linn. ( Mountain Garlic) ; umbels bearing 
bulbs lax, leaves linear keeled, stamens all simple, leaves of the 
spatha very long unec[ual. E. Bot. t. 1658. E. FI. v. ii. p. 135. 

Sandy ground on the south-east coast of England, and mountainous 
situations in the north. Banks of the Isla, Scotland. Near Dublin, 
Dr. Scott. FI. July. If. — 3 f. high. Steins rounded, glabrous, leafy 
below. Flowers upon long wavy peduncles, pale brownish-white. Smith 
considers it to differ from the following only in its more compressed 
leaves. 

** Stem-leaves rounded. 

4. A. oleraceum, Linn. ( streaked Field Garlic) ; umbel bearing 
bulbs lax, leaves grooved above, stamens all simple, leaves of the 
spatha with long points. E. Bot. t. 488. E. FI. v. ii. p. 136. 

Borders of fields in Essex, about Bristol, in Norfolk, Westmoreland 
and Yorkshire Su David’s, Scotland. FI. July. If. 

5. A. vinedle, Linn. ( Crow Garlic) ; umbel bearing numerous 
bulbs, leaves fistulose, stamens deeply 3-cleft. E. Bot. t. 1974. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 137. 

Corn-fields, waste places, &c. not unfrequent throughout England 
and the south of Scotland: and near Dublin, Ireland. FI. June. If. — 
Stem H to 2 f. high. Bulbs numerous. Spatha of 2 rather small, deci- 
duous leaves. Flowers on longish peduncles, which are thickened up- 
wards, few, crept, reddish, green on the keels, shorter than the stamens , 
whose filaments as well as the anthers are protruded. . 


Ornithogalum.] 


IIEXANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


1.77 


*** Leaves all radical. 

6. A. ursinum, Linn. ( broad-leaved Garlic or Bam sons) ; 
umbel nearly plane, leaves ovato-lanceolate on footstalks, scape 
triangular. E. Bot. t. 122. E. FI. v. ii. p. 137. 

Moist woods and hedge-banks, frequent. FI. June. If.. — Flowers 
white. Umbels without bulbs, level-topped. Spatha of 2, ovato-lanceo- 
late leaves. 

7. A. Schcenoprasum , Linn. ( Chive Garlic ) ; leaves rounded 
subulato-filiform fistulose, scape rounded as long as the leaves. 
E. Bot. t. 2441. E. El. v. ii. p. 138. 

Meadows and pastures, rare. Westmoreland, Berwickshire and 
Argyleshire, Lightfoot. Above K} nance Cove, Cornwall. Rev. J. S. Tozer. 
FI June. If. — 1 f. high. Heads of flowers compact, purplish. St am. 
simple. Spatha of 2 short ovate leaves. Umbel without bulbs. — Specific 
name from a-^ooios, a rush, and argamv, a leek : i. e. rush-leaved onion, 

9. Gagea. Scdisb. Gagea. 

1. G. hitea, Ker, (yelloiv Gagea); radical leaves 1 — 2 linear- 
lanceolate longer than the angular scape, umbel simple, bracteas 
linear-lanceolate longer than the umbel, leaves of the perianth 
obtuse. Lindl. Syn.t. 268. — Ornithogalum luteum , Linn. — E. Bot. 
t. 21. E. Fl.v. ii. p. 142. 

Woods and pastures, in several parts of England and Lowlands of 
Scotland. FI. March. Apr. If. 

10. Ornithogalum. Linn. Star of Bethlehem. 

1. 0. pyrcnaicum, Linn, (spiked Star of Bethlehem) ; raceme 
elongated, filaments all dilated, peduncles equal spreading erect in 
fruit. E. Bot. t. 499. E. FI. v. ii. p. 143. 

Hare. Pastures in Somersetshire, Sussex and Bedfordshire. FI. 
June, July. If. — Bulb ovate. Leaves long, linear, acuminate, chan- 
nelled. Scape 1 1 to 2 f. long. Raceme elongated. Flowers much 
smaller than in the two following species, greenish-white. 

2. O. umbelldlum, Linn, (common Star of Bethlehem) ; racemes 
corymbose, peduncles longer than the bracteas, filaments subulate. 
E. Bot. t. 130. E. FI. v. ii. p. 143. 

Meadows and pastures in various parts of England : scarcely wild. 
Near Glasgow. FI. Apr. May. If S— 10 inches high. Leaves linear, 
acuminate, grooved. Flowers large, few, 6—9, lower pedicels very long, 
so that their flowers reach to the same height with the upper ones, thus 
forming a corymb, each having a membranous lanceolate bractea. Seg- 
ments of the perianth green, with a white margin and white within. 

3. O. nutans, Linn, (drooping Star of Bethlehem) ; flowers pen- 
dulous unilateral, filaments broad cloven alternately longer and 
with deeper lobes. E. Bot. t. 1997. E. FI. v. ii. p. 144. 

• Fields and orchards, apparently naturalized in Bedfordshire, Suffolk, 
Derby and Nottingham. FI, Apr. May. If . — Flowers in a true, but 


HEXANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


158 


\Muscari. 


lax, raceme, larger than the last, and having the filaments of their stamens 
of a very peculiar structure. 

11. Scilla. Linn. Squill. 

1. S. vtrna, Huds. (vernal Squill) ; bulb coated, raceme in an 
hemispherical corymb few-flowered, bracteas lanceolate obtuse, 
leaves linear channelled. E.Bot.t. 23. E. Fl.v. ii. p. 145. 

Common on the coasts of the west and northern parts of Great Bri- 
tain, frequent in Orkney and Shetland. In Ireland. FI. April. If . — 
Plant 4—5 inches high. Leaves few, nearly as long as the scape. 
Flowers fragrant, deep blue. Filaments dilated downwards; bracteas 
membranaceous. — Mr. W. H. F. Talbot finds this species in the Pyre- 
nees along with S. Liliu- Hyacinthus, which latter he distinguishes by its 
scaly root, racemed flowers, bracteas much longer than the pedicels and 
broader leaves. 

2. S. bifolia, Linn, (two-leaved Squill ); bulb coated, raceme 
lax subcorymbose, bracteas obsolete, leaves lanceolate mostly 2. 
E. Bot. t. 24. E. FI. v. ii. p. 146. 

A very dubious native. It exists in Buddie's Herbarium, and was 
received from the West of England by Mr. Sims of Norwich. FI. March, 
April. If . — Flowers pale blue. 

3. S. autumndlis, Linn. ( autumnal Squill); bulb coated, raceme 
scarcely corymbose, bracteas none, pedicels and stamens about as 
long as the perianth, leaves linear several. E. Bot. t. 78. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 1 46. 

Dry pastures and rocks in Cornwall, and near Bristol. Moulsey 
Hurst (Ray’s habitat), Mr. J. S. Mill. Blackheath and Richmond, 
abundant ; Rev. G. E. Smith. Flagpost-hill, Torquay, Rev. J. S. Tozer. 
FI. Sept. If . — Flowers pinkish-purple. 

12. Hyacinthus. Linn. Hyacinth. 

1. H. non-scriptus, Linn, (wild Hyacinth or Hare-bell); flowers 
in a raceme drooping, perianth 6-partite the extremities reflexed, 
bracteas in pairs. Hook. Scot. i. p. 102. — Scilla nutans, E. Bot. 
t. 377. E. FI. v. ii.p. 147. 

Woods, copses, and hedge-row's ; varying with white and more rarely 
rose-coloured flowers. FI. May. if. — Leaves long, linear, channelled, 
acuminate. Scape 1 f. high, with 2 bracteas at the base of each short 
pedicel. — The habit of this plant is surely more that of II. orientalis than 
of any true Scilla. 

13. Muscaui. Tourn. Grape-Hyacinth. 

1. M. racemosmn, Mill. (Starch Grape- Hyacinth) ; flowers 
crowded ovate upper ones sessile, leaves linear flaccid keeled longer 
than the scape. — Hyacinthus racemosus, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 1931. 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 149. 

Grassy fields, and among ruins, scarcely indigenous. FI. May. If . — 
Flowers deep blue, smelling like wet starch. 


Fritillaria.] 


HEXANDIIIA — MONOGYNIA. 


159 


14. Anthericum. Linn. Spider-wort. 

1. A. serotinum, Linn. (. Mountain Spider -wort ); leaves semi- 
cylindrical, cauline ones dilated at their base, flowers mostly soli- 
tary. E. Bot. t. 793. E. El. v. it. p. 150. 

Rare, on the Welsh mountains. On Snowdon, Crib y Ddescil, near 
Llanberis; and Cwm Idwel, Caernarvonshire, (E. FI.) “On Snowdon, 
as well as on rocks by Twll du, and near the summit of Glyder Fawr; 
all neighbouring, but distinct, situations.” Mr. W. Wilson. FI. June. 
If. . — 4 — 6 inches high. “ Flower-stalk invested with its own sheath and 
separated by an elongation of the root from the leaves, of which the most 
distant one encloses within its fleshy base the rudiment of the plant of 
the following season. The plant is increased by offsets or creeping 
shoots with a bulb at the extremity, the point of the bulb directed to- 
wards the parent root. Perianth permanent, withering : its segments 
nectariferous. Stamens not attached to the perianth, beardless. The 
lateral ribs at the back of the leaf are one on each side of the keel, not 
‘ of the leaf.’ Two-flowered specimens are very unfrequent.” — W. Wilson. 

15. Asparagus. Linn. Asparagus. 

1. A. officinalis, Linn, (common Asparagus) ; unarmed, stem 
herbaceous mostly erect rounded very much branched, leaves seta- 
ceous fasciculate flexible, peduncles jointed in the middle. E. Bot. 
t. 339. E. FI. v. ii. p. 152. 

In several parts of the South, and South-west coasts of England. On 
an island, thence called “ Asparagus Island ,” Kynance Cove, Cornwall; 
Rev. J. S. Tozer. Links near Gosford, Scotland. FI. Aug. If . — Root 
creeping, throwing up numerous scaly erect stems, which, when cultivated, 
form the Asparagus of our tables : rarely, in a wild state, exceeding a 
foot in height. Flowers drooping, greenish-white. Berries bright red. 

16. Narthecium. Huds. Bog-Asphodel. 

1. N. ossifragum, Huds. ( Lancashire Bog- Asphodel) ; leaves 
linear uniform, pedicels with bracteas above the middle, stamens 
much shorter than the perianth. E. Bot. t. 535. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 151. 

Wet places in moors, and mountains, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If . 
— 6—8 inches high, decumbent at the base. Roots creeping. Leaves 
all radical, uniform, equitant, striated, about 4 as long as the scape, which 
has many scales or bracteas. Stamens considerably shorter than the 
perianth. Seeds with a very long arillus forming an appendage to each 
extremity, attached to a longitudinal receptacle on each valve : the 
receptacles form the dissepiments. 

17. Fritillaria. Linn. Fritillary. 

1. F. Meleagris, Linn, (common Fritillary); stem single -flow- 
ered, leaves alternate linear-lanceolate, points of the perianth 
inflexed, nectary linear. E. Bot. t. 622. E. FI. v. ii. p. 139. 

Meadows and pastures, principally in the East and South of 
England. FI, April. If .—Varies with white Jlowcrs. Specific name 


160 .HEXANDRIA- — MONOGYNI A. [Junciis. 

derived from the Numklia Melcagris, or Pintado, whose plumage is 
chequered in a somewhat similar manner. 

18. Tulipa. Linn. Tulip. 

1. T. sylvestris , Linn, (wild Tulip); stem 1 -flowered somewhat 
drooping, leaves of the perianth ovato-acuminate bearded at the 
extremity, stamens hairy at the base, stigma obtuse. E. Bot. 
t. 63. E. Fl.v. ii. p. 140. 

Chalk-pits in Norfolk, Suffolk, Hertfordshire and Middlesex. In 
Scotland, near Hamilton and Brechin, and in an old quarry at Bennie 
Craig, Firth of Forth. Mr. J. T. Mac/cay. 1(1. April. If. — Flowers 
yellow, fragrant. Anthers and pollen yellow. Leaves linear-lanceolate. 
The wild Tulip increases by throwing out a long stout fibre from its root, 
at the extremity of which a bulb appears. Thus is a new individual 
planted at a considerable distance from the parent. 

/ 

19. Acorus. Linn. Sweet Flag. 

1. A. Calamus, Linn, (common Sweet Flag); scape ancipitate 
rising much above the spadix. E. Bot. t. 356. E. FI. v. ii. p. 1.57. 

Watery places on the banks of rivers, in the middle and south-eastern 
counties of England; abundant in Norfolk and Suffolk. Hare in Scot- 
land. Ayrshire, Mr. J. Smith. Loch Winnoch, Renfrewshire, Mr. 
Paterson. Castle Semple Loch, Dr. Logan. FI. June. If. — Root aro- 
matic. Scape similar to the leaves, ensiformi-ancipitate. The agreeable 
scent of this plant has recommended it for garlands, and for strewing on 
the floor of the cathedral at Norwich on festival-days. 

20. Juncus. Linn. Rush. 

* Leaves none. Barren scapes resembling leaves. Panicle lateral. 

Flowers scattered. 

1. J. glaucus, Sibth. (hard Rush) ; scape deeply striated rigid, 
panicle much branched, leaves of the perianth lanceolate subulate 
nearly equal, longer than the elliptical capsule. E. Bot. t. 665. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 160. 

Wet pastures and by road-sides. FI. July. If . — Root creeping. Scapes 
1 — 2 f. high, glaucous, rigid, at the base covered with deep purple-brown, 
membranaceous, shining sheaths. Panicle lax, erect. Flowers slender, 
pale brown, with a broad green line down the middle of each leaflet of 
the perianth. Bructeas also small and acuminate. Slam. C, in my 
specimens. 

2. J. effusus, Linn, (soft Bush); scape very faintly striated soft, 
panicle loose very much branched, spreading leaflets of the peri- 
anth lanceolate nearly acuminate rather longer than the obovate 
obtuse capsule. E. Bot. t. S36. E. Fl.v. ii.p. 162. 

Marshy ground, common. FI. July. If. — Distinguishable from the 
last, by its soft, pliable, almost smooth (scarcely striated) scapes, and 
spreading denser and shorter panicles, in which particulars it approaches 
the following species. Slam. 3 or (j.— Excellent, as is the following, for 


June us.] 


IIEXANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


161 


plaiting into mats, chair-bottoms, &c. Wicks of candles arc made of 
the pith. 

3. J. conglomeratic, Linn. ( common Rush); scapes very faintly 
striated (soft), panicle much branched very dense globose, leaflets 
of the perianth lanceolate acute nearly equal about as long as the 
broadly ovate very obtuse capsule, stamens 3. E. Bot. t. 1835. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 160. 

Marshy ground, frequent. FI. .Tidy. If. — Panicle very dense. Scape 
resembling the last, and employed for the same purposes. 

4. J. Bdlticus, Willd. ( Baltic Rush); scapes very obscurely 
striated, panicle erect branched, leaflets of the perianth nearly 
equal very acute as long as the elliptical capsule, stamens 6. Hook, 
in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2621. — J. arcticus, Hook, in FI. Lond. t. 151. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 163, {ex cl. syn. Willd. and Wahl.) 

Sandy sea-shores in Scotland ; near Dundee, Air. T. Drummond. 
Farr and Cape Wrath, Sutherland; Dr. Graham. Aberdeenshire, Dr. 
J. Murray. Stotfield, G m. from Elgin, and between Findhorn and 
Spey ; on the banks of the Losie, 7 m. from the sea ; and at St. Andrews, 
Llanbride, where the sea formerly reached, Rev. G. Gordon. FI. July. 
V   — 1 his comes so near the true J. arcticus, that I had myself con- 
sidered it as the same, or only a large var. of it. It is, however, assur- 
edly, the J. ballicus ol Willdenow, and differs from .7. arcticus in its much 
taller and more rigid scapes, larger, and decidedly branched panicle, and 
rounded, not trigonous, capsules. Both have exceedingly creeping roots, 
more so than any other species I am acquainted with. Flowers dark 
brown, with a pale line down the centre of each segment. 

5. J. Jiliformis, Linn, {thread Rush) ; scapes filiform, panicle 
simple of few flowers from near the middle of the scape, leaflets of 
the perianth lanceolate acuminate nearly equal larger than the 
obovate capsule, stamens 6. E. Bot. t. 1175. E. FI. v. ii. p. 162. 

Stony margins of lakes in Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Lanca- 
shire. Ben-Lawers, Mr. Dickson; and several parts of Scotland, Mr. G. 
Don; but 1 have never seen Scottish specimens. FI. July, Aug. If —Root 
creeping. Riant remarkable for its slender scapes, greatly extended 
beyond the panicle; for its pale greenish Jlowers and short capsules. 

** Leaves none. Barren scapes resembling leaves. Panicle 
terminal. Flowers aggregated. 

6. J. maritimus, Sm. {lesser sharp Sea Rush) ; barren scapes 
and outer bracteas pungent, panicle very compound, clusters 4 — 8- 
fl owe led, leaflets of the perianth equal lanceolate acute as long as 
the elliptical mucronated capsule. E. Bot. t. 1725. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 159 — ./. acutus, [3 . Linn. 

Sflt marshes in various parts of England, but not frequent. St. 
Andrews, Scotland, Mr. J. Macleay. Coast of Ayrshire, Air. J. Smith. 
Kingstown and other places in Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. Aug. 
14- • In this and the following species, the outer bractca, or portion that 


162 HEXANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. [Juncus. 

rises above the panicle, is broad and membranous at the base, and less 
like a continuation of the scape than in the preceding division. 

7. J. acutus, Linn, (great sharp Sea Rush) ; barren scapes and 
outer bracteas pungent, panicle very compound mostly compact, 
clusters 2 — 4-flowered, leaflets of the perianth equal, interior ones 
with a broad membranous margin at the apex shorter than the 
broadly ovate suddenly acuminated capsule. E. Eot. t. 1614. 
E. El. v. ii. p. 158. 

Sandy sea-shores, principally on the West of England and Wales. 
Norfolk. Wicklow and Arklow, Ireland, Mr. Hodgins. FI. July. V- . 
— Larger and stouter than the last, especially in the capsules, which are 
of considerable size, much protruded, rich brown and glossy. 

*** Stems leafg. Leaves rounded or subcompressed and distinctly 
jointed internally. Panicle terminal. Flowers aggregated or 
fascicled. 

8. J. acutflonis, Ehrh. (sharp-flowered jointed Rush) ; leaves 
subcompressed, panicle very compound pyramidal, clusters 5 — 6- 
flowered, leaflets of the perianth unequal lanceolate very acute 
nearly as long as the narrow-ovate subacuminate capsule. E. Eot. 
p. 2143. E. FI. v. ii. p. 174. — J. articulatus , E. Eot. t. 238. 

Bogs, very common. FI. June — Aug. 2£. — 1 — 2 f. high, erect. Leaves 
3 — 4 on a stem, distinctly nodoso-articulate when dry. Panicle diffuse, 
in fruit spreading. Flowers several together, greenish-brown. General 
bracteas short, membranaceous, scarcely leafy. Capsules pale-coloured. 

9. J. lampocdrpus, Ehrh. (shining -fruited jointed Rush) ; stem 
ascending and as well as the leaves compressed, panicle compound 
spreading, clusters 4 — 6-or 8-flowered, leaflets of the perianth 
equal rather obtuse shorter than the acute triquetrous oblongo- 
lanceolate capsule. E. Eot. t. 2143. E.Fl. v. ii.p. 175. — /3. pani- 
cles less branched, clusters of more numerous flowers. J. poly- 
cephalus, Eon , MSS. — Hook. Scot. i. p. 110, scarcely of Pursh ? 
— J. nigritellus, E. Eot. Suppl. t. 2643. 

Boggy grounds and watery places, frequent. FI. July, Aug. 11 . — 
Very similar to the last; but with larger flowers, and deep brown shin- 
ing capsules. The var. ft. has more numerous flowers in each cluster or 
head, sharper leaflets to the perianth, pale capsules, and it seems almost 
to unite J. acutiflorus with J. lampocarpus. 

10. J. obtusiflorus, Ehrh. (blunt-flowered jointed Rush); stem 
and leaves erect rounded, panicle very compound spreading and 
divaricated, clusters 3 — 6-flowered, leaflets of the perianth equal 
rather obtuse about equal in length with the oval trigonous capsule. 
E. Eot. t. 2144. E. FI. v. ii. p. 176. 

Wet pastures and marshes, not unfrequent. FI. Aug. If . . — Distinct 
as this species assuredly is, it has very frequently been confounded with 
the preceding ones of this division. 

11. J. idiginosus, Sibth. (lesser Eog jointed Rush) ; stem erect 


Juiicus.] HEXANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 163 

and often swollen at the base or decumbent and rooting, leaves 
bristle-shaped, panicle nearly simple irregular, clusters few or many- 
flowered, leaflets of the perianth equal oblong subacute nearly as 
long as the elliptical capsule. E. Eot. t. 801. E. FI. v. ii. p. 169. 
— J. bulbosus, Linn — J. subverticillatus, Wulf — Host, Gram. 
Austr. v. Hi. t. 88. E. FI. v. ii. p. 170. 

Boggy and swampy places, and often partly floating in shallow water. 
FI. Aug. 2f . — This is indeed an extremely variable plant, depending 
much for its appearance on soil and situation. In rather dry places it 
often rises erect, 3 — 4 inches high, having a bulbous or swollen base, 
and is then the original J. bulbosus of Linn. At other times the stems are 
spreading or procumbent, when it becomes the J. subverticillaius of 
Wulfen. Again these procumbent stems often take root at intervals, 
and are proliferous ; or, when growing in water, they float upon the sur- 
face and spread their long flaccid branches in all directions. The rami- 
fications and panicles are exceedingly irregular ; the latter few-flowered. 
It is often extremely difficult to distinguish this from small varieties of 
J. lampocarpus, 

**** Stems leafy. Leaves plane or grooved above ; not distinctly 
jointed. 

12. J. castdneus , Sm. (clustered alpine Rush); stem rounded, 
leaves hollow grooved above rounded at the back, heads of flowers 
generally single sessile or peduncled shorter than the bractea, cap- 
sules ovate bluntly trigonal nearly twice as long as the perianth. 
E. Eot. t. 90. E. El. v. ii. p. 173. 

Bare, on the elevated mountains of Breadalbane. In the county of 
Durham, Rev. il Ir. Harriman, (F. FI.) FI. July. If. — “ Root slightly 
creeping, with short runners or lateral shoots. Stem hollow. Leaves 
with the channelled side very thin and membranaceous ; and within are 
found distant transverse partitions. Upper part of the leaf rounded and 
compressed. Leaflets of the perianth elliptic-lanceolate, acute and 
3-ribbed. Style breaking oft' at a joint. Capsule shining, and as well as 
the perianth and inner bractea of a deep chocolate colour.” W. Wilson. 

13. J. trijidus, Linn, (three-leaved Rush'); sheaths fringed 
those at the base of the stem leafless, bracteas resembling the seta- 
ceous solitary stem-leaf, heads of about three terminal flowers. 
E. Bot. t. 1482. E. FI. v. ii. p. 1G3. 

Bocky places, on the Highland mountains of Scotland. FI. July, Aug. 
If.— Very unlike any other British Juncus. Root creeping. Lower 
sheaths with at most a short awn, scarcely to be termed a leaf. A soli- 
tary leaf is on the stem, generally near the summit, 2—3 inches long, 
linear-setaceous. Bracteas 2 under each head of 1 — 3 flowers. “ Capsule 
not at all angular, but rounded-elliptical with a furrowed beak.” IV. Wilson. 

14. J. compressus, Jacq. (round-fruited Rush); stem erect 
compressed, leaves linear-setaceous grooved, panicle terminal com- 
pound 8ubcymose generally shorter than the bracteas, capsules 
roundish-ovate longer than the obtuse incurved leaflets of the 


164 


1IF.XANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


[Juncus. 


perianth. Bich. in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xii. p. 307. E. FI. v. ii. 

p. 165 [3. panicle nearly simple few-flowered longer than the 

hracteas. Hook. Scot.i.p. 107 J. bothnicus,Wahl. — J. ccenosus, 

Bich. in Linn. Trans, v. xii. p. 309. E. Fl.v.ii. p. 166. Bich. 
in E. But. Suppl. t. 2680. 

Wet marshy places, common. — /3. In salt marshes. FI. Aug. If. — 
Having now seen various specimens both of the .7. ccenosus of Mr. 
Bicheno and J. bothnicus of Wahlenberg, I feel confirmed in the opinion 
expressed in FI. Scoiica, that they are but varieties of 7. comjiressus. 

15. J. tenuis , Willd. ( slender spreading Rush); stem above 
shortly dichotomous panicled, leaves linear-setaceous grooved, 
flowers solitary approximate mostly sessile, capsules nearly sphserical 
shorter than the very acuminated leaflets of the perianth. Pursh, 
FI. Am. v. i.p. 228. Hook. Scot. i. p. 108. — J. gracilis, E. Bot. 
t. 2174. — J. Gesneri, E. FI. v. ii. p. 167. 

Moist mountains of Clova, D. Don. Ft. July. If . — This rare British 
plant seems abundant in America, and I possess specimens likewise from 
various parts of Europe. It is allied to J. bufonius, yet really distinct. 
Radical leaves several ; stems bare of leaves up to the division near the top, 
where is one leaf immediately beneath the foliaceous bracteas. In the 
axils of the forks are 2 or 3 large, nearly sessile flowers, and 2 or 3 uni- 
lateral ones on the branches. The capsule is very different from that 
of the following species. My Scottish specimens entirely agree with 
the true American J. tenuis, which 1 have from Dr. Boott and various 
American Botanists. 1 therefore retain the name. 

16. J. bufonius, Linn. (Toad Rush) ; stem dichotomous above 
panicled, leaves filiform setaceous grooved, flowers solitary uni- 
lateral mostly sessile, capsules elliptical ovate much shorter than 
the very acuminated leaflets of the perianth. E. Bot. t. 802. E. FI. 
v.ii.p. 168. 

Frequent in moist, or watery places, especially such as have been 
overflowed in winter. FI. Aug. 0. — 4 — 6 inches high. Leaves few, 
slender, only one on the stem, generally near the middle. The divisions, 
or ramifications of the stem, as they are called, more properly, I think, 
belong to the panicle, at the base of which are foliaceous bracteas. Whole 
plant very pale-coloured. Flowers green, with white membranous mar- 
gins to the leaflets of the perianth. 

***** Leaves all radioed. Flowers terminal. 

17. J. squarrosus, Linn. ( Heath Rush); leaves setaceous 
(rigid) grooved, panicle terminal elongated compound, capsules 
elliptical ovate. E. Bot. t. 933. E. FI. v. ii. p. 164. 

Moory and heathy ground, abundant. FI. June, July. If .. — Whole 
plant exceedingly rigid, 6 inches to a foot high. Leaves subsecund, 
about half as long as the scape. Bracteas lanceolate, membranaceous. 
Leaflets of the perianth ovato-lanceolate, glossy brown with a pale line 
down the middle, scariose at the edges. Capsules, as in almost all this 
Genus, tipped with a short mucro, the remains. of the style, palish-brown. 


IIEXANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


165 


Luzula.] 

18. J. capitdttis, Willd. ( capitate Rush); leaves filiform (soft) 
plane or grooved above, heads of flowers sessile terminal shorter 
than the bracteas, leaflets of the perianth acuminato-aristate. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 171. E. Bot. SuppL t. 2641. — J. supinus, Bich . — J. 
ericetorum, DC. 

Found by Mr. Hudson in the island of Jersey. ( E . FI.) FI. May, 
July. ©. — Plant 2 — -1 inches high, flaccid. Leaves entirely radical, about 
half the length of the scape , erect. Heads rather large, in proportion to 
the size of the plant, of 3 — 6 sessile flowers, occasionally proliferous. 
This species is well distinguished by the setaceous inclined bractea, (with 
its sheathing membranaceous base) which is longer than the heads of 
flowers, and by the acuminato-aristate perianth. 

19. J. biglumis, Linn. ( two-flowered Rush) ; leaves linear-sub- 
ulate compressed (not channelled) gradually dilated into the 
sheathing base, flowers 2, one of them pedicelled mostly shorter 
than the foliaceous involucre, capsule turbinate retuse rather longer 
than the obtuse leaflets of the perianth. E. Bot. t. 898. E. El. 
V. ii. p. 172. 

Boggy places on the Highland mountains : not unfrequent on the 
Breadalbane range, but rare in other parts of Scotland. FI. July, Aug. 
If. — 2 to 4 inches high; growing not in tufts, but scattered; and a 
much rarer species than the following, small specimens of which have 
often been mistaken for it. “ Leaves with distant transverse partitions 
within, but not longitudinally divided.” Mr. W. Wilson. 

20. J. triglumis, Linn. ( tliree-jlowered Rush); leaves linear- 
subulate channelled bitubular their sheaths auricled above, flowers 
mostly 3, generally as long as the membranaceous bractea, capsule 
elliptical acute longer than the rather obtuse leaflets of the perianth. 
E. Bot.t. 899. E. FI. v. ii. p. 106. 

Boggy places among the mountains in the north of England, Wales, 
and especially the Highlands of Scotland. FI. July, Aug. If . — Mr. W. 
Wilson has well studied, in living plants, the character of this and the 
preceding species of Rush. “ Stems,” he says, of this plant, “ several 
from the same root, perfectly rounded, not channelled on one side, as 
in J. biglumis, naked above, and generally with 2, and sometimes 3 leaves 
near the base. Leaves with dilated sheaths, which are auricled at the 
top, setaceous, channelled, bitubular, with transverse partitions; radical 
leaves also setaceous, more slender and longer than in J. biglumis. 
Sometimes 4 flowers are found together, the additional ones placed 
lower down and separated from the rest. Outer bractea sometimes as 
large as in J. biglumis; each flower has one bractea at its base. Cal. leaves 
more membranous than in the last, narrower and more acute. Capsule 
longer than the calyx, with a tapering, rather acute extremity, and with 
indistinctly furrowed sides ; colour almost black.” W. Wilson. 

21. Luzula. Be Cand. Wood-rush. 

1. L. sylvatica, Bich. ( great hairy Wood-rush) ; leaves hairy, 
panicle subeymose, peduncles elongated of about 3 flowers, leaflets 
o/ the perianth aristate as long as the capsule. E. FI. v. ii. p. 181, 


166 IIEXANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. [Luvula. 

— L. maxima, DC. — Hook. Scot. i. p. 110. — J uncus sylvaticus, 
Huds. — E. Hot. t. 737. — J. pilosus 'S, Linn. 

Woods, hilly places, and upon the mountains, frequent. FI. May, 
June. If. — 1 — 1^ ft. high. Leaves broad, shining, striated. Floral 
bracteas ciliated. Caps, with a very sharp point, deep brown. Seeds 
elliptic-ovate, with scarcely any crested appendage on the top. 

2. L. pilosa, Willd. (broad-leaved hairy Wood-rush) ; leaves 
hairy, panicle subeymose, peduncles 1 -flowered bent back, leaflets 
of the perianth acuminate rather shorter than the obtuse capsule. 

Hooh. Scot. i. p. 110. E. FI. v. ii. p. 178 J uncus pdosus, Linn. 

—E. Hot. t. 736. 

Woods, frequent. FI. April, May. If . — Much smaller than the last, 
with the flowers standing singly on the panicle, dark brown. Seeds with 
a curved appendage at the top. 

3. L. Forsteri, De Cand. (narrow-leaved hairy Wood-rush ) ,* 
leaves hairy, panicle subeymose but little branched, peduncles 
1 -flowered erect, leaflets of the perianth narrow acuminated a little 
longer than the acute capsule. Hook. Scot. i. p. 110. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 179. — J uncus Forsteri, E. Bot.t. 1293. 

Groves and thickets, especially on a calcareous or gravelly soil. ( E . 
FI.) More common in Surry than L. pilosa, J. S. Mill, Esq. About 
Forfar, and banks of the Doune, Ayrshire, Mr. Jas. Wilson. FI. May, 
June. If . — Much slenderer than the last in every part and taller. Seed 
with a large oblong crested appendage on the top. 

4. L. campestris, Br. ( Field Wood-rush ) ; leaves hairy, spikes 

sessile and pedunculated, leaflets of the perianth acuminate longer 
than the obtuse capsule. E. FI. v. ii.p. 181. — Juncus campestris, 
Linn. — E.Bot. t. 672. — (3. taller, with the spikes of flowers col- 
lected into an almost orbicular head. Hooh. Scot. i. p. 110. 
L. congestci, L(j E. FI. v. ii. p. 181. 

Woods and dry pastures, frequent, «. and /3. growing together. FI. 
April, May. If . — 4 — 6 or 8 inches, or even a foot or more high. Flowers 
collected into ovate or oblong, nearly erect spikes, of a reddish-brown 
colour, sometimes very pale. In /3,, the spikes are nearly all sessile. De 
Candolle, whom Smith quotes as the authority for considering this a dis- 
tinct species, himself now in the Bot. Gallicon, makes it a var. of cam- 
pestris. Indeed we find various intermediate states. — Even the L. 
sudctica of DC. will probably prove not permanently distinct from cam- 
pestris. 

5. L. arcuata, Hook, ( curved Mountain Woodrush ); leaves 
canaliculate hairy, panicle subumbellate of few heads of 3—5 
flowers with long drooping peduncles, bracteas membranous 
fringed, capsule ovato-globose shorter than the broadly lanceolate 
leaflets of the perianth. Hooh. in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 153. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 1 83. 

On the barren stony summits of the great Cairngorum range of 
mountains. — Upon Fonniven, a high mountain in Sutherland, Fro/. 


IIEXANDUIA — TRIGYNIA. 


167 


Rumex.) 

Graham. FI. July. If . — The smallest of our Luzulcc and one of the 
rarest and most distinct. It comes nearer Mr. Brown’s L. hyperborea 
than any other, but that wants the curved peduncles. 

6. L . spicdta, De Cand . (spiked Mountain Wood-rusli ); leaves 
someudiat canaliculated, spike solitary drooping compound, spikelets 
shorter than their subdiaphanous mucronated bracteas, leaflets of 
the perianth mueronato-aristate about as long as the rounded cap- 
sule. Hook. Scot. i. p. 111. E. FI. v. ii. p. 182. 

High mountains in the north of England, and more abundantly in 
Scotland. FI. July. If. — 6 — 8 inches high, slender. Leaves small, 
narrow, hairy only at the margins of the sheaths. Spike dark-coloured, 
interrupted near the base. Capsule very dark, shining-brown, acute. — 
Well distinguished by its drooping compound spike and narrow leaves. 

HEXANDRIA— DIGYNIA. 

22. Oxvria. Hill. Mountain-Sorrel. 

1. O.reniformis, Hookfkidtiey-shaped Mountain- Sorrel). Hook. 
Scot. i. p. 111. E. FI. v. ii. p. 188. — Rumex dioynus, Linn. — 
E. Bot. t. 910. 

North of England, Wales and Scotland, abundant in alpine situations, 
especially amongst moist rocks and within reach of the spray of cascades. 
-FY. July, Aug. If. — Stems 8 — 10 inches high, with rarely more than one 
leaf, often naked. Radical leaves numerous, all reniform, with a more or 
less evident obtuse sinus at the apex, on long footstalks, having mem- 
branaceous stipules at their base. Racemes and peduncles branched, with 
minute, ovate, membranous bracteas at the base of each ramification. 
Pedicels thickened upwards. Flowers erect, small. Stain. 6, shorter 
than the petals. Pistil nearly orbicular-compressed, notched, with 2, 
spreading feathery styles. Fruit a nut, enclosed in an utricle, with a 
i emarkably broad winged border, tipped with the styles situated in 
rather a deep notch ; and having at the base the pointed petals, not at 
all enlarged. 

The leaves yield a most agreeably acid flavour, much resembling that 
of the Wood-Sorrel ( Oxalis acetosella ). 

HEXANDRIA — TRIGYNIA. 

23. Rumex. Linn. Dock and Sorrel. 

Plants not acid. Flowers perfect. (Lapatlium. Pock'). 

1. R. Hydrolapathum, Huds. ( great Water Pock); enlarged 
petals ovato-deltoid reticulated each with a tubercle entire, leaves 
lanceolate the lower ones cordate at the base, whorls mostly leaf- 
less. E. FI. v. ii. p. 195. Reich. Ic. Pot. t. 370. — R. aquaticus 
Sm. FI. Br.p. 394. E. Bot. t. 2104. Hook. Scot. i.p. 112. 

Ditches and river-sides, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If .— The largest 
o oui Duels, 3 5 feet high ; some of the lower leaves 1 ^ ft. Root large, 
tuber'le. ln ^ ent ' ^ n ^ ar ° e ^ pdah with prominent veins, and large oblong 

2. R. crispus , Linn. ( curled Pock); enlarged petals broadly 


1G8 HEXANDIUA — TH1GYNIA. [Rumex. 

cordate entire reticulated, tubercle large coloured on one, obsolete 
on the other two leaves lanceolate waved acute, upper whorls leafless. 
E. Bot. t. 1998. E.Fl. v. ii. p. 191. 

Way-sides and near houses, pastures, &c. frequent. FI. June, July. 
V- • — 2 or 3 feet high. Lower leaves the broadest, all waved and crisped 
at the margins. Whorls of flowers very numerous and crowded. Here 
the enlarged petals are truly cordate. Most authors say that each petal 
bears a tubercle ; but in my specimens, in those gathered by Mr. Wilson 
in Lancashire, and in some that I have from Switzerland, one only bears 
a large oblong orange-coloured tubercle, the others have only the midrib 
a little swollen at the base. 

3. R. aqudticus, Linn, ((/rainless Water Dock}; enlarged petals 
broadly cordate reticulated without tubercles, leaves lanceolate, the 
lower ones cordato-oblong crisped and waved, whorls crowded 
mostly leafless. Reich. Ic. Bot. t. 369. Svensk, Bot. t. 209. 

Moist places, near Ayr. Mr. Goldie. FI. July. If . — This was sent to 
me as a new species of Rumex by Mr. Goldie. It comes indeed very near 
R. crispus, but the enlarged petals are quite destitute of grains or tuber- 
cles, and in this respect it agrees exactly with the true aquatic as of Linn. 

4. R. alpinus, Linn. ( alpine Dock, or Monk's Rhubarb}; 
enlarged petals cordate reticulated obscurely toothed at the margin, 
one bearing a small grain, leaves broadly cordate ample obtuse, 
whorls leafless crowded, flowers monoecious. Compel. Rum.p. 105. 
— R. cordifolius, Horn. — Reich. Ic. Bot. t. 487. 

Way-side on the road from Helensburgh to the head of the Gare- 
Loch. — Glen Luss, near Loch Lomond, Rev. Mr. Berkeley. FI. July. If . 
— This most distinct species of Rumex has been found both by the Rev. 
Mr. Berkeley and myself in the Scottish Highlands, and far removed 
from any place where it is at all likely to have been cultivated, — for I 
am aware that its root was formerly employed in lieu of Rhubarb. 
Leaves a span broad, cordate, very obtuse, wrinkled and reticulated ; 
upper ones ovato-lanceolate : whorls of flowers very dense. 

5. R. sanguineus, Linn. ( bloody-veined , and (13.} green-veined 
Dock} ; enlarged valves (small) oblong entire, one at least bearing 
a tubercle, leaves lanceolate somewhat cordate, whorls distant on 

long generally leafless branches a. Leaves with bright red veins. 

R. sanguineus, Linn E. Bot. t. 1533. Hook. Scot. i. p. 112. 

E. El. v. ii. p. 190. — 1 3 . Leaves with green veins. R. viridis, Sibth. 

— Sm. FI. Brit. p. 390. — R. Nemolapathum, Ehrh. 

Shady pastures, woods and road-sides. — £. far more frequent than «. 
FI. July. If. 

6. R. acutus, Linn. ( sharp Dock}; “enlarged petals oblong 
obscurely toothed all tuberculated, leaves oblong-heart-shaped 
pointed, clusters leafy.” Sm. — E. Bot. t. 724. E. FI. v. ii.]). 192. 

Moist deep soils, and in watery places, not uncommon. FI. July. If. 

— Much resembling var. /3. of the last species, and appearing to me to 
differ chiefly in its leafy whorls and more coloured flowers. But Smith 


Iiumcx.] HEXANDRIA TRIGYNI A. 169 

says it is a totally distinct plant, and that it always grows in watery 
places. 

7. R.pulcher, Linn. (Fiddle Dock') ; enlarged petals ovate deeply 
toothed, one of them principally bearing a tubercle, root-leaves 
panduriform, stem spreading. E. Bot. t. 1576. E. FI. v.ii.p. 193. 

Pastures, way-sides, &c. FI. Aug. If .—Stems very straggling ; whorls 
distant, on slender leafy branches. 

8. R. obtusifolius, Linn, (broad-leaved Dock); enlarged petals 
ovate toothed at the base, one principally bearing a tubercle, root- 
leaves ovato-cordate, stem roughish. E. Bot. t. 1999. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 192. 

Way-sides and waste places, too frequent. FI. July. If..— 2— 3 ft. 
high. Whorls rather close, somewhat leafy. Distinguishable by its broad 
and obtuse radical leaves , which are generally crisped at the margin. 
Stem scabrous between the elevated lines or ridges. 

9. 11. maritimus, Linn, (golden Dock); enlarged petals deltoid 
fringed with setaceous teeth and bearing grains, whorls much 
crowded, leaves linear-lanceolate. E.Bot.t. 723. E.Fl.v.ii.p. 193. 
— R. aureus, With. 

Marshes, principally near the sea. FI. July, Aug. If .— Well dis- 
tinguished from every preceding species by its narrow leaves, excessively 
crowded flowers, bright, almost orange-coloured, enlarged petals, and 
their setaceous, or, I might almost say, spinous teeth. 

10. R. palustris, Sm. (yellow Marsh Dock) ; enlarged petals 
lanceolate with short setaceous teeth near the base and bearing 
tubercles, whorls remote, leaves linear-lanceolate. E.Bot.t. 1932. 
E FI. v. ii. p. 1 94. 

Marshy places, remote from the sea. FI. July. If —Nearly allied to 
the last, and I had an idea that it was not truly distinct: but Sir J. E. 
Smith considers it to be permanently different in the form of the petals, 
when in seed, and in the number, shape, length and situation of the 
teeth which border them. 


** Flowers dioecious. Plants acid. (Acetosa or Sorrels.) 

11. R. acetosa, Linn, (common Sorrel) ; enlarged petals orbi- 
culari-cordate reticulated scarcely tuberculated, leaves oblongo- 
sagittate. E. Bot. t. 127. E. FI. v. ii. p. 196. 

Meadows and pastures, frequent. FI. June, July. If .— 1—2 feet high. 
1 eta/s becoming large, purplish, orbiculari-cordate, obtuse, membranous, 
reticulated with veins ; tubercles very small, almost obsolete. I do not 
find the enlarged petals to be ovate, as Sir J. E. Smith describes them; 
nor does Mr. Wilson ; but orbicular and cordate. 


12. R. acetosella, Linn. (Sheep's Sorrel) ; enlarged petals ovate 
not tuberculated, lower leaves lanceolato-bastate, lobes entire. 
E. Bot. t. 1674. E. FI. v. ii. p. 197. 

r. ° r o P w! l ! re t’ fre( l uent - F. May— July. If .—Variable in its size, 
10 m 2 10 inches, and in the form of its leaves ; for, frequently, on Ip 


I 


170 


HEXANDRIA — TRIGYNIA. 


[ Triglochin. 

the radical ones are of the shape above described, at other times many 
of the cauline ones are so too ; the rest are lanceolate, more or less 
petiolate, entire. Every part is much smaller than the last. In very 
dry situations and at the end of summer the whole plant becomes of a 
rich red colour. 

24. Tofieldia. Huds. Scottish Asphodel. 

1. T .palustris, Huds. (Scottish Asphodel) ; spike ovate, stem 
glabrous filiform nearly leafless, petals obovate obtuse, germen 3- 
lobed, involucre at the base of the pedicel. E. Bot. t. 536. 

Hook, in FI. Lornl. N. S. t. 105. E. FI. V. it. p. 198 T. borealis, 

Wahl. — Anthericum calyculatum, Linn. 

Mountains of England, Scotland and Ireland, in boggy places ; not 
rare. FI. July, Aug. If.. — 4 — 6 inches high. Leaves almost wholly 
radical, in fascicles, linear, sword-shaped, equitant. Flowers small, pale 
yellowish-white, 

25. Scheuchzeria. Linn. Scheuchzeria. 

1. S. palustris, Linn. ( Marsh Scheuchzeria ). E. Bot. t. 1801. 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 199. 

In a marsh at Lakeby Car, near Borough-bridge, discovered by the 
Rev. James Dalton ; and at Thorne Moor, near Doncaster, Mr. R. Har- 
rison. FI. June. If . — A singular and very rare plant, having few, semi- 
cylindrical, slender, rush-like leaves; a scape with large bracteas, 
terminated by a raceme of greenish flowers. Perianth and stamens 
reflexed. Germens 3, ovate, obtuse, with lateral, linear, downy stigmas. 
Capsides singularly inflated. 

26. Triglochin. Linn. Arrow-grass. 

1. T .palustre, Linn. (Marsh Arrow-grass); fruit 3-celled nearly 
linear. E. Bot. t. 366. E. FI. v. ii.p. 200. 

Wet meadows, and by the sides of rivers and ditches in marshy situa- 
tions, plentiful. FI. Aug. If. — Leaves all radical, linear, fleshy, 
slightly grooved on the upper side, sheathing and membranous at the 
base. Scape & — 10 inches high, terminating in a lax, simple spike or 
raceme. Flowers small, greenish. Capsules 3, linear, united by a common 
receptacle, so as to form one 3-ce\\eA fruit, each cell separating at its base 
and suspended by the extremity, containing one seed and not dehiscent. 
— Mr. W. Wilson finds that the leaves, when bruised, yield a very fetid 
smell, and that the root, under certain circumstances at least, is a creeping 
one: sending out jointed, scaly runners, with comparatively large, ovate, 
shortly acuminated bulbs at the extremity. These bulbs at the end of 
the jointed runners have very much the appearance of a scorpion’s tail. 

2. T. mantimum, Linn. (Sea-side Arrow-grass) ; fruit 6-celled 
ovate. E. Bot. t. 255. E. FI. v. ii.p. 201. 

Salt-marshes, not unfrequent. FI. May, Aug. If . — Larger than the 
last and stouter, differing essentially in its fruit, which is formed of 6 
combined cajjsules, constituting a broadly ovate fruit ; not separating from 
the base and suspended by their summits as in T. palustre. Even when 
in flower, the same form is observable in the germen as in the fruit. 


J/iVwtf.] 


HEXANDRIA POLYGYNIA. 


m 


27. Colchicum. Linn. Meadow-Saffron. 

1. C. autumnale , Linn. ( common Meadow-Saffron); leaves 
plane broadly lanceolate erect. E. Bot. t. 133. E. FI. v. ii. p. 202. 
— Var. with late, green, abortive flowers. E. Bot. t. 1432. 

Meadows and pastures, chiefly in the north-west of England, Ray. In 
Suffolk, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Cheshire, (Mr. Jonathan Gaslcarth), 
and other places. Alloa, Scotland ; Light 'f. FI. Sept. Oct. — Fruit and 
leaves in the spring. If-. — Bulb solid. The flowers appear in succession, 
rising from the bulb, with a very long, narrow tube, surrounded at the 
base with a membranous sheath. The stamens are inserted on the 
oblong-ovate segments of the pale purple perianth. Germen at the base 
of the bulb, its long thread-like styles running up the whole length of the 
tube. The leaves and fruit appear in spring and are withered before 
summer. Its properties are said to be similar to those of the officinal 
Squill, and it has been employed as a substitute for the famous Eau 
tnedicinale. 

HEXANDRIA— HEXAGYNIA. 

28. Actinocarpus. Br. Star-fruit. 

1. A. Damasonium, Br. ( common Star-fruit); capsules 6 subu- 
late compressed opening longitudinally, leaves 5-nerved. Hook, in 
FI. Loud. A. S. cum ic. — Alisnm Damasonium , Linn. — E. Bot. 
t. 1615. E. FI. v. ii. p. 204. 

Ditches and pools, mostly in a gravelly soil, and chiefly in the middle 
and south-eastern counties of England. FI. June, July, If —Leaves 
radical, on long petioles, floating, elliptical. Scapes with a terminal um- 
l>el, generally proliferous. Petals white, very delicate, obcordate, each 
having a yellow spot at the base. Capsules with two seeds upon evident 
stalks, one from the upper angle, horizontal, the other from the lovver 
angle of the axis, erect, oblong, tubercled and transversely striated, com- 
pressed, with a deep furrow on each side, occasioned by the form of the 
embryo within, which is cylindrical, bent double, somewhat like a horse- 
shoe. 


HEXANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 

29. Alisma. Linn. Water- Plantain. 

1. A. Plantago, Linn, (greater Water-Plantain); leaves ovate 
acute, fruit depressed, capsules obtusely trigonal. E. Bot. t. 837. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 203. 

Near the margins of lakes, rivers and ditches, frequent. FI. July, If. . 

- •’ R’ high. Leaves all radical, on long stalks. Scape branched 

upward ; branches all whorled, bracteated, compound : flowers of a pale 
rose-colour. Embryo curved, as in Actinocarpus. 

2. A. nutans, Linn. ( floating Water-Plantain); leaves ellip- 
tical obtuse, stem floating and rooting, peduncles simple. E. Bot . 
t. 775. E. FI. v. ii. p. 204, 


172 


IIEPTANDRI A — MONOGYNIA. 


[Trientalis. 


Lakes in North Wales and Cumberland : very rare in Scotland. Black 
Loch, 6 miles from Stranraer, Mr. J. Smith. On Howth and in Cunna- 
mara, Ireland ; Mr. J. T. Maclcay. FI. July, Aug. 2f . — At the base of 
the plant are long, linear-lanceolate, membranous scales, or abortive 
root-leaves. Stem-leaves floating, on long stalks, scarcely nerved. 

3. A. ranunculoides, Linn. ( lesser Water -Plantain); leaves all 
radical linear-lanceolate, scape umbellate, fruit globose squarrose, 
capsules acute. E. Bot. t. 326. E. FI. v. ii. p. 205. — (3. with 
creeping runners. A. repens, “ Davies Welsh Bot. 36.” E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 205. 

Ditches and turfy bogs, not unfrequent in England, Scotland, and 
Ireland. — /3. In lakes, North Wales. FI. Aug. Sept. If. — In general 
appearance most allied to A. Plantago, especially the narrow-leaved 
Scottish variety of that plant. But it is much smaller, having larger 
flowers, pale-coloured, arranged in umbels, which are often proliferous, 
f he most essential character is to be found in the germen and fruit. 


CLASS VII. HEPTANDRIA. 7 Stamens. 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

1. Trientalis. Cal. of 7 leaves. Cor. monopetalous, in 7 deep 
segments, regular and flat. Caps. 1-celled, with 7 valves, and many 
seeds on a fleshy, central, free receptacle. Seeds with a reticulated 
tunic. — Nat. Ord. Primulace/E, Juss. — Named from triens, a 
third part; and said to allude to this plant being one-third of a 
foot in height. But such a meaning is very equivocal. 

(See Uhnus in Cl. V. Ord. II.) 

HEPTANDRIA— MONOGYNIA. 

1. Trientalis. Rupp. Chickweed Winter-green. 

1. T. europda, Linn. ( European Chickweed Winter- green); 
leaves oblongo-obovate obtuse. E. Bot. t. 15. Hook, in FI. Lond. 
N. S. t. 161. E. FI. v. ii. p. 208. 

Woods in the north of England, but rare. Abundant in many parts 
of the Highlands of Scotland. Not found in Ireland. FI. June. 
If . — Root filiform, creeping. Stems 4 — 6 inches high, with 2 or 3 
small, distant leaves, and 4 — 7 terminal, whorled larger ones ; from the 
centre of which arise 1 — 4, slender, single-flowered peduncles. Cal.-leaf- 
lets almost subulate, varying in number from G— 9, as do all the other 
parts of the flower, and the valves of the capsule. The fruit had always 
been misunderstood, till Sir J. E. Smith described it in Rees’ Cyclo- 
paedia. The beautiful covering, like the finest white lace, of its seeds, 
liad been taken for a pericarp ; because few Botanists had seen the 
very fugacious, horny valves of its capsule. (See FI. Lond. N. S. t. 161). 
This is assuredly one of the most interesting of our Highland vegetable 
productions ; and like Butomus, is the only British example of a plant of 
its class. 


raccinium .] 


OCTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


173 


CLASS VIII. OCTANDRIA. 8 Styles. 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

* Flowers complete, (Juicing Cal. and Cor.) 

I 

1. Acer. Cal. 5-cleft, inferior. Pet. 5. Germen 2-lobed. 
Capsules 2, united at the base, each with a long winged membrane, 
(hence called a Samara), 1-celled, 1 — 2-seeded. — Nat. Ord. 
Aceiun’e.e, Juss. — Named from acer, sharp or hard (ac, Celtic), 
on account of the hardness of the wood, which was employed in 
fabricating spears, pikes, & c. — The Maple is the badge of the Clan 
Oliphant. 

2. Chlora. Cal. inferior, of 8 deep segments. Cor. of 1 petal, 
nearly rotate. Stigmas 2, bifid. Caps. 1-celled, 2-valved, 
many-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Gentianeas, Juss. — Name derived 
from yjugog, pale, or yellowish green, in allusion to the colour of 
its flowers. 

3. Menziesia. Cal. cleft to the base into 4 — 5 deep segments, 
inferior. Cor. of 1 petal, ventricose. Stam. 8 — 10. Capsule 
4 — 5-celled, the dissepiments formed by the indexed margins of 
the valves, and opening between these dissepiments. — Nat. Ord. 
Erice.e, Juss. — Name , — “ Nomen dedi,” says the learned founder 
of this Genus, “ in honorem Archibaldi Menzies Scotici, peregri- 
natoris et botanici indefessi, priscre fidei ac urbauitatis viri.” 

4. Erica. Cal. of 4 leaves, inferior. Cor. of 1 petal, cam- 

panulate, often ventricose. Capsule 4-celled, 4-valved, dissepi- 
ments from the middle of the valves Nat. Ord. Erice^e, Juss. 

— Named from ss/xw, to break; because it was formerly supposed 
to have the power of destroying calculi in the bladder. 

5. C'alluna. Cal. of 4, coloured leaves, inferior, concealing 
the cor., accompanied by 4 bracteas , resembling an outer calyx. 
Cor. campanulate. Caps. 4-celled, 4-valved; dissepiments adher- 
ing to the axis of the fruit ; valves opening at the dissepiments and 

separating from them — Nat. Ord. Erice.e, Juss Named from 

y.aXXom, to cleanse or adorn, and hence peculiarly applicable, as 
Sir J. E. Smith observes, to this plant, whether we consider the 
beauty of its flowers, or the circumstance of Brooms being made of 
its twigs. — The Ling is the badge of the Clan Macdoncll. 

6. Vaccinium. Cal. 4 — 5-toothed, superior. Cor. of 1 petal, 
ovate, campanulate or rotate, 4 — 5-fid. Anthers with two pores. 
Perry globose, 4-celled, many-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Vaccinieac, 
De Cand. — Name ; — some say the uxy.ivQo;, of the Greeks, and 


174 OCTANDRIA — TETRAGYNIA. [Elatine. 

hence synonymous with Hyacinthus ; but the true etymology of 
the word is unknown. 

7. CEnotheua. Cal. superior, tubular, with a deeply 4-cleft 
limb; the segments reflexed, more or less combined. Pet. 4. Caps. 4- 
valved, with many naked seeds. — Nat. Ord. Onagkari.e, Juss . — 
Named from o mg, wine, and Orjgit, searching or catching, from the 
root having caught the perfume of wine. 

8. Epilobium. Cal. superior, 4- partite, segments free, decid- 
uous. Pet. 4. Capsule elongated, 4-sided, 4-celled, 4-valved, 
many-seeded. Seeds with a tuft of hairs at one extremity. — Nat. 
Ord. Onagr ari®, Juss. — Named from sot, upon, and Xofioj, a 

pod : the flower being placed upon the top of the elongated seed- 
vessel. 

** Flowers incomplete. 

9. Daphne. Perianth single, inferior, resembling a cor., 4-fid. 
Ferry with one seed. — Nat. Ord. Thymele®, Juss. — Named in 
allusion to the Nymph Daphne, who was changed into a Laurel ; 
some of the plants of this Genus having the habit of Laurels. 

( See Monotropa in Cl. X.) 

(Digynia. 2 Styles . 

See Polygonum in Ord. Trig. Chrysosplenium and Scleranthus in 

Cl. X.) 

ORD. II. TRIGYNIA. 3 Styles. 

10. Polygonum. Perianth single, in 5 deep, coloured, per- 
sistent segments, inferior. Stam. 5 — 8. Styles 2, 3. Fruit a 
one-seeded, compressed or trigonous nut. — Nat. Ord. Poly- 

gone®, Juss Named from noXv;, many , and ywu, a knee or joint ; 

from the numerous joints of the stem. 

ORD. III. TETRAGYNIA. 4 Styles. 

11. Paris. Cal. of 4 leaves. Pet. 4. Cells of the anthers 
fixed one on each side the middle of a subulate filament. Berry 
4-celled ; each cell with several seeds in two rows. — Nat. Ord. 
Smilace®, Ur. — Named, it is said, from par, paris, (equal), on 
account of the regularity of its leaves and flowers, 

12. Adoxa. Cal. half-inferior, 3-cleft. Cor. superior, 4 — 5- 
cleft. Anther terminal, 1-celled. Berry 4 — 5-celled. The side 

flowers have the corolla 3-cleft, the terminal one 4-cleft Nat. Ord. 

Saxifrage.®, Juss. — Named *, without, and So!'*, glory; from the 
humble and insignificant aspect of this little flower. 

13. Elatine. Cal. 3 — 4-partite, persistent, inferior. Pet. 3 
— 4. Stam. 3 — 4 ? or G — 8. Styles 4 or 3, very short. Caps. 
3 — 4-valved, 3 — 4-celled, many-seeded. Seeds cylindrical, fur- 


OCTANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


175 


J/ensiesia.] 

rowed and transversely striated, attached to a central free recepta- 
cle Nat. Ord. Elatine;e, Camb. — Name said to be derived 

from eA xrtj, a pine, to which nothing can be less similar than our 
present plant. 

( See Sagina in Ci . IV.) 

OCTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 

/ 

1. Acer. Linn. Maple. 

1. A. Pseudo-platanns, Linn. ( greater Maple or Sycamore ); 
leaves 5-lobed unequally serrated, racemes pendulous subtomentose. 
E. Bot. t. 303. E. FI. v. ii. p. 230. 

In hedges, plantations, and about houses, not indigenous. FI. May, 
June. Tj . — A large tree, with spreading branches and ample leaves. 
Flowers greenish. Fruit with two long membranaceous wings, which 
greatly aid in its dispersion. The wood is used for bowls and trenchers 
and other turnery ; and the Highlanders are said to make a wine of its 
sap. From an allied species, A. saccharinum, the Canadians extract 
a valuable sugar.— “ The cotyledons vary from 1 — I.’’ (Rev. Prof. 
Henslow .) 

2. A. campestre, Linn, (common Maple); lobes of the leaves 
mostly 5 inciso-crenate, racemes upright subtomentose. E. Bot. 
t. 304. E. FI. v. ii.p. 230. 

Woods and thickets ; not common in Scotland, and perhaps neither 
indigenous there, nor in Ireland. (Mr. J. T. Mackay.) FI. May, 
June. Tj . — A small tree with rough bark, full of deep fissures. Leaves 
small. Wood often beautifully veined, and then much valued. 

2. Chlora. Linn. Yellow-wort. 

1. C. perfolidta, Linn, (perfoliate Yellow-wort); leaves con- 
nato-perfoliate ovate glaucous. E. Bot. t. 60. E. FI. v. ii. p. 218. 

Chalky and hilly pastures, chiefly in the middle and southern parts of 
England. In Ireland, on gravelly soil about Dublin, frequent ; Mr. J. 
T. Mackay. FI. July — Sept. ©. — Allied to the Gentians. Plant very 
glaucous, with remote leaves; panicled above, and bearing many bright 
yellow flowers ; — very bitter. 

3. Menziesia. Sm. Menziesia. 

1. M. ccerulea, Sm. (Scottish Menziesia); leaves scattered 
numerous linear toothed, flower-stalks terminal aggregate simple, 
flowers 5-cleft decandrous. E. Bot. t. 2469. E. FI. v. ii. p, 222. 

Heathy moor near Aviemore in Strathspey, Mr. Brown of Perth ; 
and in the western isles of Shiant, Mr. G. Lon and lJr. de Ramm’, 
(E. FI.) FI. June, July. T? . — A small shrub ; stems branched, woody 
and naked below. Peduncles 2 inches long, glandular, reddish. Flowers 
large, beautiful, purple-blue. Cor. urceolate. This plant is far more 
common in North America than in Scotland. It scarcely yields in 
beauty to the following species. 

2. M. polifolia, Juss. (Irish Menziesia); leaves ovate, the mar- 
gins revolute white and downy beneath, flowers 4-cleft octandrous 


OCTANDR.IA MONOGYNIA. 


176 


[Erica. 


in terminal leafy racemes. E. FI. v.ii.p. 223. — Erica Dabcoci, 
Linn E. Eot t. 35. 

Mountainous heaths in Ireland, Rat/. Croagh Patrick, Co. Mayo. 
Abundant in Cunnamara, Dr. Wade and Mr. J. T. Mackay, who finds 
it also with pure white fl. FI. June, July. Tj. 

This beautiful species, frequently cultivated in gardens, is not, as some 
have supposed, peculiar to Ireland, as an indigenous plant. It is found 
in the Western Pyrenees and in Anjou. 

4. Erica. Linn. Heath. 

1. E. Tetralix, Linn. ( Cross-leaved Heath) ; anthers with two 
acute awns at the base, corolla ovate as long as the style, leaves 4 
in a whorl ciliated, flowers capitate. E. Eot. t. 1014. E. Fl. v. ii. 

p. 226. 

Heaths and moory ground, abundant. Fl. July, Aug. T? . — Flowers 
next in size to those of the rare E. ciliaris, delicate, rose-coloured, some- 
times white, drooping. They have been found, deft into several divi- 
sions and with the stamens turned into petaloicl segments, by Mr. W. C. 
Trevelyan. — The Cross-leaved Heath is the badge of the Macdonalds. 

2. E. cinerea, Linn, (fine-leaved Heath) ; anthers with 2 ser- 
rated appendages at the base, style a little exserted, corolla ovate, 
stigma capitate, leaves ternate. E. Eot. t. 1015. E. Fl. v. ii. 

p. 226. 

Heaths, abundant. Fl. July, Aug. Tj. — Flowers in rather large 
whorled racemes , drooping, reddish-purple. Leaves nearly linear, gla- 
brous. This plant is used for various (economical purposes, and its 
flowers are sometimes white. — It is the badge of the Clan Macalister. 

3. E. mediterrdnea, Linn. ( Mediterranean Heath) ; anthers 
without awns and as well as the style exserted, corolla narrow 
urceolate, bracteas above the middle of the peduncle, calyx coloured, 
flowers axillary, leaves 4 in a whorl. Eot. Mag. t. 471. 

Boggy ground, Cunnamara, Ireland, covering a space of at least 2 
acres ; ./. T. Mackay, Esq. — In September, 1830, Mr. Mackay was so 
kind as to communicate to me this important discovery. The plants were 
not then in flower. 

4. E. vagans , Linn. ( Cornish Heath); anthers without awns 
bifid and as well as the style exserted, corolla cavnpanulate, leaves 
3 — 4 in a whorl, flowers axillary crowded. E. Eot. t. 3. E. Fl. 
v. ii. p. 227 — E. multifiora, Huds. (not Linn.) 

On heaths in Cornwall, abundant. (E. FL) The Rev. J. S. Tuzer 
assures me that it is only found at Goonnely and Liskeard, near the 
Lizard, and is thence called “ Goonnely ” not Cornish, Heath. Fl. July, 
Aug. Tj . — Well distinguished from all our British Ericas by its campa- 
nulate, not ovate, corollas. 

5. E. ciliaris, Linn. ( ciliated Heath); anthers without awn9 
bifid included, corolla ovate inflated, leaves 4 in a whorl ciliato- 
glandulose, flowers in terminal unilateral racemes. Lindl. Syn. 
p. 174. Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2616. 


OCTANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


177 


Vaccinium.] 


Boggy (never on dry) ground, Cornwall. Near Truro ; and most 
abundantly at East Croft, Ilev. J. S. Tozer. Heath at Carclew near 
Penryn, frequent, and on a heath in the parish of St. Agnes, on the 
north coast of Cornwall ; Sir Charles Lemon, Hurt. FI. June, July. Tj . 
— Communicated to me in Sept. 1828, by my valued correspondent, the 
Rev. J. S. Tozer, of Truro, it is unquestionably the most interesting 
and beautiful addition that has been made to our British Flora for many 
years. The J/owcrs are as large as those of Menziesia ccerulea, and more 
highly coloured; while the leaves are elegantly fringed with hairs, and 
each hair is tipped with a gland. 

5. Calluna. Salisb. Ling. 

1. C. vulgaris, Salisb. ( common Ling). Hook. Scot. i. p. 119. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 225. — Erica vulgaris, Linn — E. Hot. t. 1013. 

Heaths and moors, common ; sometimes with white fl. FI. June, Aug. 
Tj . — A low, much branching, tufted shrub. Leaves small, opposite, with 
two small decurrent spurs at the base, more or less pubescent, and even 
hairy in /3. of Sin. (the E. ciliaris, Huds., not Linn.), closely imbricated 
in 4 rows. Flowers small, reddish, drooping, nearly sessile, ovate. It 
varies much in the colour of its flowers and degree of pubescence of the 
leaves ; and besides the more common varieties, Mr. Stewart Murray 
finds in this “ land of brown heath,” two states which he cultivates in 
the Glasgow Botanic Garden, where they have retained their differences 
for years. 

Var. 1. Leaves compact crowded and as well as the branchlets pubes- 
cent, branches short, flowers deep red. — Aberdeenshire, Mr. S. Murray. 

Var. 2. Leaves compact and as well as the branchlets pubescent, 
branches elongated, flowers white. — Arran, Mr. S • Murray. It bears 
flowers later than the other varieties. 

This plant is much employed for brooms as well as fuel ; and it makes 
an excellent edging to garden-plots, and bears clipping as W'ell as Box. 
The Icelanders say that when t he Ling shows a profusion of blossoms, a 
severe winter may be expected. 

6. Vaccinium. Linn. Whortleberry. 

* Leaves deciduous. Anthers with 2 dorsal awns. 

1. V. Myrtillus, Linn. (Eilberry or Whortleberry); peduncles 
1 -flowered, leaves ovate serrate deciduous, stem angular, stamens 
8 — 10. E. Hot. t. 456. E. Fl. v. ii. p. 219. 

Woods and heathy places, chiefly in mountainous or alpine districts, 
abundant. Fl. May. T? • — A small shrub, about 1 foot high. Flowers 
drooping, urceolate, almost waxy, greenish with a red tinge. Anthers 
tubular, each cell opening by a pore at the extremity, and having a horn 
at the back. Berries black, glaucous, very agreeable to the taste, anti 
much eaten in the Highlands of Scotland. 

2. V. uliginosum, Linn. ( great Eilberry, or Bog Whortle- 
berry); peduncles 1 -flowered, leaves obovate entire veined deci- 
duous, stems rounded. E. Hot. t. 381 . E. Fl. v. ii. p. 220. 

In mountain-bogs, Cumberland and Westmoreland ; more frequent in 
the Highlands of Scotland, ascending even nearly to the summits of the 

i 2 


173 


OCTANDRIA MONOGYNIA. 


[CEnothera. 


mountains. FL May. Tj . — Leaves glaucous, especially beneath. Cur. 
ovate, flesh-coloured, smaller than in the last; anthers similar. Berries 
agreeable, but inferior in flavour to those of V. Myrtillus. — The leaves 
are added to Lycopodium alpinum by the Icelanders, in order to produce 
a yellow dye, for colouring woollens. 

* * Leaves persistent, evergreen. Anthers hornless at the hack. 

3. V. Vitis Idcea, Linn, (red Whortleberry, Cow-berry ); racemes 
terminal drooping, flowers campanulate, leaves evergreen obo- 
vate dotted beneath, their margins slightly revolute nearly entire. 
E. Lot. t. 398. E. FI. v. ii. p. 220. 

Dr)' places on heaths, mountains and in woods, in the north of Eng- 
land, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. FI. May, June. T? . — A low, some- 
what straggling shrub, with leaves resembling those of the Box. Flowers 
pale flesh-coloured, open at the mouth, and with deeper and more spread- 
ing segments than the two preceding Vaccinia : hence, as well as in the 
absence of horns at the back of the anthers and in its evergreen foliage, 
it seems to connect the following species with the rest of the Genus. — 
The red Whortleberry is the badge of the Clan Macleod. — A dwarf 
variety, very bushy, with leaves much crowded, and only half the size of 
the common plant, but having its flowers full as large, is found by Mr. 
Murray on the Campsie and Arran hills. 

4. V. Oxycoccos, Linn. (Marsh Whortleberry, Cranberry'); 
peduncles terminal single-flowered, leaves ovate evergreen glaucous 
beneath, their margins revolute and entire, cor. 4-partite revolute, 

stem filiform. E. Eot. t. 319. E. El. v. ii. p. 221 Oxycoccos 

palustris, Rich. — Lindl. Syn. p. 134. 

Peat-bogs, especially among Sphagnum, in various parts of England, 
Scotland, and Ireland. FI. June. Tj .• — Stems straggling, wiry, 8 — 10 
inches long. Leaves small. Flowers of a bright rose-colour. Cor. deeply 
divided, the segments singularly revolute ; on which account this sp. has 
been by some Botanists removed from Vaccinium. The fruit is highly agree- 
able, making the best of tarts, far superior to the foreign V. macrocarpum 
which is largely imported to this country. At Longtown, on the borders 
of Cumberland, the fruit of the Cranberry forms no inconsiderable article 
of trade. It is the badge of the Clan Grant. 

7. CEnothera. Linn. Evening-primrose. 

1. O. biennis, Linn. ( common Evening-primrose) ; leaves ovato- 
lanceolate toothed, stem somewhat hairy, flowers sessile subspicate, 
stamens about as long as the corolla, capsules nearly cylindrical 
4-toothed. E. Eot. t. 1534. E. FI. v. ii. p. 211. 

Sandy soils near Liverpool, also in Suffolk and Warwickshire. FI. 
July. — Sept. $ . — This Genus is altogether American. The present 
species was introduced to our gardens, is most extensively cultivated 
and has escaped into waste ground, where, meeting with a favourable 
soil, it has become apparently indigenous. Plant 2 — 3 feet high. Stem 
roughish. Flowers yellow, fragrant, expanding in the evening. 


Epilohium.] 


OCTANDRIA MONOGYNI A. 


179 


8. Epilobium. Linn. Willow-herb. 

* Flowers irregular. Stamens bent down. 

1. E. angustifolium, Liun. ( Rose-bay Willow-herb) ; leaves scat- 
tered linear- lanceolate veined glabrous, flowers irregular subspicate, 
stamens declined. E. Eot. t. 1947. E. FI. v. ii. p. 212. 

Moist banks and margins of woods ; rare in England, frequent in very 
many parts of Scotland. Near Enniskerry, Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mac/cay. 
Ft. July. . — Stems 4* — 6 feet high. Whole plant very handsome. 

** Flowers regular. Stamens erect. Stigmas deleft. 

2. E. hirsutum, Linn, (great hairy Willow-herb); leaves semi- 
amplexicaul ovato-lanceolate deeply serrated hairy, stem very much 
branched hairy, root creeping, stigma 4-cleft. E. Eot. t. 838. 
E. FI. v. ii.j). 213. 

Sides of ditches, rivers and lakes, frequent. FI. July. If .. — Almost equal 
in size to the last. Root perennial, creeping. Flowers corymbose, large. 

3. E. parviflorum , Schreb. (small-flowered hairy Willow-herb) ; 
leaves sessile lanceolate slightly toothed downy on both sides, stem 
nearly simple very downy, root fibrous, stigma 4-cleft. E. Eot. 
t. 795. E. FI. v. ii. p. 214. 

Marshes and banks of lakes and rivers, frequent. FI. July. If . . — The 
much smaller size of this species in all its parts, being scarcely more than 
1 — 1 i ft. high, besides the above characters, serves to distinguish it from 
the preceding, with which it has been confounded. Seedlings bulbous, 
growing in Sphagnum. Rev. G. E. Smith. 

4. E. montdnum , Linn, (broad smooth-leaved Willoiv-herb) ; 
leaves ovate acute shortly petiolate glabrous all toothed, stem 
rounded pubescent as well as the fruit, stigma 4-cleft. E. Eot. 
t. 111. E. Fl.v.ii.p. 214. 

Dry shady banks, walls, roofs of cottages, &c. frequent. FI. July. If . 
— 6 inches to 1 foot high. Much resembling the following; but essen- 
tially distinguished by its 4-fid stigma. It has, too, more shortly petio- 
late, deeply toothed leaves ; and larger flowers. 

*** Flowers regular. Stamens erect. Stigma undivided. 

5. E. roseum, Schreb. (pale smooth-leavedWillow-herb); leaves 
ovato-lanceolate stalked finely toothed, stem erect somewhat 2- 
edged, stigma clavate. E. Eot. t. 693. E. Fl.v, ii.p. 215. 

About London, in Essex and Sussex. Forfarshire, Mr. Drummond. 
FI. July. If. — Distinguishable from E. montanum by its clavate entire 
stigma, and from E. telragonum by its broader petiolate leaves and stem 
not distinctly 4- sided. 

6. E. tetragonum, Linn, (square-stalked Willow-herb) ; leaves 
lanceolate sessile denticulate, stem with 4 angles nearly glabrous, 
stigma undivided. E. Eot. t. 1948. E. FI. v. ii. p. 515. 

Sides ol ditches and watery places, common. FI. July. If. 

1. E. palustre, Linn, {narrow-leaved Marsh Willow-herb); leaves 


130 


OCTANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


[Daphne. 

narrow-lanceolate sessile nearly entire and as well as the rounded 
erect stem subglabrous, stigma undivided. E. Bot. t. 346. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 216. 

Boggy places and the sides of lakes and ditches. FI. July. If. — 
About a foot high. Flowers small. 

8. E. alsinifolium, V ill. [duckweed green leaved Willow-herb); 
leaves lucid ovato-acuminate nearly sessile glabrous lowermost ones 
entire, the rest toothed, stem rounded, its upper part and germen 
slightly pubescent, stigma entire. E. Bot. t. 2000. E.Fl. v. ii.p. 216. 

Sides of alpine rivulets. On the Cheviots, Mr. Winch. — Aber water- 
fall, N. Wales, Mr. IV. Wilson. Frequent on the Scottish, especially 
the Highland mountains. FI. July. If. — This has many of the char- 
acters, in its leaves and stem, of F. montanum; but the stigma is entire, 
clubbed, and the leaves have a flaccid, subpellucid appearance, so that 
the eye readily distinguishes the species. The germen is pubescent ; 
but in my specimens the down disappears before the fruit is ripe. 
Wahlenberg considers it a variety of the following ; anti I must confess 
that 1 have gathered, on the mountains of Clova, specimens that seem 
intermediate. The more usual forms of the plant do indeed appear to 
be very different. Let it be observed, that in Wales, where E. alsinifo- 
lium is found, E. alpinum is never seen. 

9. E. alpinum, Linn. ( alpine Willow-herb ) ; leaves elliptical 
glabrous on short footstalks nearly entire, stem nearly glabrous and 
fruit entirely so, stigma undivided. E. Bot. t. 2001. E.Fl. v. ii. 
p. 217. 

Wet places near springs, and by the sides of rivulets on all the High- 
land mountains. FI. July. If. — 2-4 inches high. Root creeping. Stem 
with two lines of very obscure pubescence, procumbent at the base. 
Flowers seldom more than 1 or 2 from the summit of the stalk, at first 
gracefully drooping, bright purple-red. Fruit erect, often as long as 
the plant itself. 

9. Daphne. Linn. Mezereon and Spurge-Laurel. 

1. D. Mezereum, Linn, (common Mezereon or Spurge-Laurel); 
flowers subternate lateral sessile appearing before the deciduous lan- 
ceolate leaves, tube of the perianth hairy. E. Bot. A 1381. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 228. 

Rare, in woods in England; Hampshire, Sussex, Suffolk, Staffordshire, 
Worcestershire, Berkshire, and Oxfordshire. FI. March. T? . — The well- 
known Mezereon of the gardens, whose early blossoms and delightful fra- 
grance have attracted general notice. It forms a bushy shrub, bearing 
its numerous purple flowers before the leaves, and the red berries nestled 
among the foliage. Flowers sometimes white. 

o o 

2. D. Lauriola, Linn. (Spurge-laurel) ; racemes axillary of 
about 5 flowers, leaves lanceolate glabrous evergreen. E. Bot. 
t. 119. E. FI. v. ii. p. 229. 

Woods, thickets and hedges throughout England, especially in a clay 
soil. Rare in Scotland ; about Rosslyn and Bothwell. FI. March. Tj - 


OCTANDRIA — TRIGYNIA. 


181 


Polygonum .] 

— Stem rather stout, erect, 1 — 3 feet high, but little branched, naked 
below, leafy above, and hence bearing some resemblance to a Palm. 
Floivers drooping, each accompanied by an ovate, concave bractca. Peri- 
anth funnel-shaped, pale yellowish-green; limb 4-cleft. Slam, included, 
standing in two rows of 4 each ; filaments very short. Berry ovate, 
bluish-black. 

OCTANDRIA— TRIGYNIA. 

10. Polygonum. Linn. Persicaria, Bistort, Knot-grass and Buck- 
wheat. 

* Styles 3. Nut triquetrous. 

1. P. Bistorta, Linn. ( Bistort or Snakeicced) ; stem simple 
bearing one spike, leaves ovate waved, the radical ones tapering 
into a footstalk. B. Bol. t. 509. E. FI. v. ii. p. 230. 

Moist meadows in various parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland. 
FI. June, If . — I — 1^ foot high. Upper leaves with long sheaths. Spiles 
cylindrical, dense. Flowers flesh-coloured, on short foot-stalks, with 
small bractcas at their base. Stain. 8. Styles 3. Boot large, tortuose, 
very astringent. 

2. P. viviparum, Linn, (viviparous alpine Bistort ) ; stem 
simple bearing one spike, leaves linear-lanceolate, the lower ones 
elliptical petiolate, their margins revolute. E. Bot. t. 669. E. El. 
v. ii. p. 237. 

Mountain pastures in the north of England, and abundant on the 
Highland mountains of Scotland. FI. June. If.— 4— 8 inches high, 
slender. Spike linear ; lower part of it generally bearing little viviparous 
bulbs of a fine red colour. Stain. 8. Styles 3. Perianth pale flesh-coloured, 
almost white. — This species increases much by the bulbs, and little, if at 
all, by seed, its triquetrous germen proving abortive. 

3. P. aviculare, Linn. (Knot-grass') ; flowers nearly solitary 
axillary, leaves elliptico-lanceolate, stipules much shorter than the 
leaves, nerves of the stipules distant, stem procumbent herbaceous. 
— a. fruit included within the perianth striated with raised points. 

P. aviculare, Linn. E. Bot. t. 1252. E. FI. v. ii. p. 238 (3. fruit 

longer than the perianth quite smooth on the surface. P.maritimum, 
Buy, Syn. p. 147 ? — P. aviculare, s. E. FI. v. ii. p. 238 ? 

Waste places and way-sides, common. — /3. Sea-coast near Dublin, Dr. 
Taylor. Cornish coast ? Bay; F. Boroni. Isle of Arran, upon the sea- 
shore; and other places at the mouth of the Clyde. FI. May— Sept. 
O . — Ii. 7f . — Varying much in size ; sometimes quite dwarfish, erect, one- 
flowered, (Dr. Patou.) I feel almost persuaded that the maritime Poly- 
gonum, here mentioned, will prove a distinct species. It covers a space of 
some feet with its long, straggling, procumbent branches. The leaves are 
an inch long, and the bracteas large and scariose. Flowers twice the size 
ol a; and the fruit greatly larger, protruded and quite even on the surface: 
in these respects agreeing with the true P. marilimum; but that has woody 
stems, larger stipules, as long as the leaves, and the joints of the stem 
always much shorter than the leaves. 


182 


OCTANDRIA — TRIGYNIA. 


\Polygonum. 

4. P. Fagapyrum, Linn. {Buck- wheat) ,* leaves cordato-sagit- 
tate, stem nearly upright without prickles, angles of the fruit even. 
E. Bot. t. 1044. E. FI. v. ii. p. 239. 

Dunghills and about cultivated land, but introduced by cultivation, it 
being an excellent food for poultry. FL July, Aug. 0. — Stem nearly 
erect, waved, 1 foot high, branched. Flowers in spreading panicles, ter- 
minal and lateral, pale reddish. 

5. P. Convolvulus, Linn, {climbing Buck-wheat) ; leaves cor- 
dato-sagittate, stem twining angular, segments of the perianth 
bluntly keeled. E. Bot. t. 941. E. FI. v. ii. p. 239. 

Corn-fields, frequent. FL July, Aug. ©. — Very long, climbing. 
Spikes lateral and leafy, of 4, whorled, greenish flowers. 

** Styles mostly 2 . Nuts co/npressecl. 

6. P. amphibium, Linn, {amphibious Persicaria ); flowers pen- 
tandrous, styles forked, spike oblongo-ovate, leaves petiolate cor- 
dato-lanceolate rough at the margins. E. Bot. t. 436. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 232. — x. ciquaticum, leaves floating broadly lanceolate glabrous, 
spikes oblong. — (3. terrestre, nearly erect, leaves narrow-lanceolate 
rough with short rigid appressed hairs on both sides, spikes ovate. 

Margins of ponds, lakes, and ditches, frequent. FI. July, Aug. I/. — 
Stem 2 — 3 feet long, scarcely branched when growing in the water. 
Leaves arising from long, tubular sheaths or stipules; glabrous in £., but 
hispid in a. Spikes mostly solitary, terminal, of a bright rose-colour. This 
is the only perennial species of the Persicaria groupe. 

7. P. Persicaria, Linn, {spotted Persicaria ); flowers hexan- 
drous, styles forked, leaves lanceolate (often spotted), spikes 
oblong erect their peduncles smooth, stipules fringed. E. Bot. t. 756. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 233. 

Moist ground and waste places, frequent. FI. Aug. 0. — Stems erect, 
branched, 1 — 2 feet high. Spikes terminal and lateral, dense, greenish, 
the tips of the flowers rose-coloured. Leaves nearly sessile, glabrous : 
but there are said to be varieties with hoary leaves. 

8. P. lapathifolium, Linn, {pale-flowered Persicaria ); flowers 
hexandrous with 2 distinct styles, leaves ovato-lanceolate shortly 
petiolate, spikes oblong erect their peduncles rough, stipules not 
fringed. E. Bot. t. 1382. E. FI. v. ii. p. 234. 

Fields and dunghills, frequent. FI. Aug. ©. — 1 — If ft. high. Avery 
variable species ; but the above characters, so ably pointed out by Mr. 
Curtis, are constant. Sometimes the stem is spotted, and sometimes the 
leaf is hoary. The flowers are either* pale green, almost white, or of a 
reddish tint. Spikes dense, terminal and lateral. 

9. P. Hydropiper, Linn, {biting Persicaria ); flowers hexandrous, 
styles forked, leaves lanceolate waved and spotless, spikes lax fili- 
form drooping, stem erect. E. Bot. t. 989. E. FI. v. ii. p. 235. 

Frequent by the sides of lakes and ditches. FL Aug. Sept. ©. — 1 — 3 


E/atinc.] 


OCTANDRIA — TETRAGYNIA. 


188 


feet high, erect. Remarkable for its slender, long, more or less drooping 
spiles of distant, reddish flowers; they are lateral and terminal. 

10. P. minus, Huds . (small creeping Persicaria) ; flowers hex - 
androus, style undivided, leaves linear-lanceolate plane very shortly 
petiolate, spikes slender erect, stem rooting at the base. E. Bot. 
t. 1043. E. FI. v. ii. ji. 235. 

On gravelly, watery commons ; about London, Worcestershire, Che- 
shire and Lancashire. Moist fields round Forfar, G. Bun. Near Cork, 
Ireland, Mr. Drummond. FI. Sept. ©.—Nearly allied to P. Hydropiper , 
but much smaller, procumbent below, with upright spikes, narrower leaves, 
and undivided stigmas. 


OCTANDRIA — TETRAGYNIA. 

11. Paris. Linn. Herb Paris. 

1. P. quadrifolia, Linn. ( common Herb Paris'); leaves ovate 4 
in a whorl. E. Bot. t. 7. E. FI. v. ii. p. 241. 

T ..^°' st and we ^ shad y woods, in many parts of England and Scotland. 
Killarney Ireland, (“ Smith's Kerry.") FI. May, June. If. .—Stem 1 foot 
mgh, with 4, rarely 5, whorled, large, ovate, acute leaves at its summit, 
the rest leafless. Flower single, terminal, on a footstalk about 2 inches 
long. Cal. ol 4, linear-lanceolate, green leaflets; petals similar to these, 
but nariowei and more yellow. Routs purgative. Berry esteemed poison- 
ous; but it has been employed in curing inflammation in the eyes. 

12. Adoxa. Linn. Moschatell. 

1. A. moschatellina, Linn, (tuberous Moschatell). E. Bot. t. 463. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 242. 

M pods, hedgebanks and shady places ; not unfrequent at a great 
elevation and even upon the tops of Highland mountains. FI. April, May. 
// com P os ed of tooth-like scales, creeping. Stem about a span 

’g . Leaves 2 3, radical, on very long footstalks, triternate, lobed 

and cut, 2 cauline ones small and simply ternate. Peduncle single, ter- 
minal, with a head of 4, vertieillate flowers, and a fifth terminal one. 
Stamens united in pairs, or they may be considered as 4—5 forked sta- 
mens, each ramification terminated by the single cell of an anther, and 
all springing from a fleshy ring that surrounds the upper part of the 
germen. 1 he flowers have an evident musky smell in the evening or 
early in the morning, while the dew is on them. 

13. Elatine. Linn. Water-wort. 

L E. hexandra, De Cand. ( small hexandrous Water-wort); 
leaves opposite spathulate, flowers alternate pedicellate erect hex- 
androus tripetalous, capsule turbinate concave at the summit 
3-celled seeds about 12 in each cell straight ascending. Dc Cand. 
PL Gall Bar. p. 14. t. 43./. 1. Reich. Ic. Bot. t. 413 .—E. tripe- 
Lin’n) 1 ' V ‘ U ’ P ‘ 2 ^'~ E - H ydropiper , E. Bot. t. 955. (not 

Margins °f p° n j s and ditches, rare ; Bomcre pool, near Condover, 
Shropshire, Rev. E. Williams; near Binfield, Berks, Mr. T. F. Forster. 


184 


DECANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


[Monotropa. 

Near Crawley, Sussex, Mr. Borrar. FI. July, Aug. 0. — A minute, pro- 
cumbent, much branching plant, with axillary solitary flowers. Petals 
rose-coloured. Seeds most beautifully ribbed and transversely striated. 

2. E. Hydropiper , Linn. ( small octandrous Water-wort) ; leaves 
opposite spathulate, flowers alternate sessile erect octandrous 
tetrapetalous, calyx shorter than the petals, segments ligulate, cap- 
sule roundish depressed 4-celled, seeds 16 in each cell pendulous 
much curved. Linn. Sp. PI. p. 527. Hooli. in E. Bot. Suppl. 
ined. (not Smith.) 

Discovered in 1830, by Mr. J. E. Bowman of Wrexham, at the E. end 
of Llyn Coron, Anglesea, growing with E. hex. Ft. Aug. © . 


CLASS IX. ENNEANDlilA. 9 Stamens. 

I. HEXAGYNIA. 6 Styles. 

Butomus. Perianth single, coloured, 6-partite, inferior. Cap- 
sules 6, many-seeded. Seeds fixed to the inner lining of the 
capsule. — Nat. Ord. ButomeyE, Rich. — Named from (3ou;, an ox, 
and r iy.m, to cut ; because the sharp leaves injure the mouths of 
cattle that browze upon them. 

ENNEANDRiA — HEXAGYNIA. 

1. Bujomus. Linn. Flowering-rush. 

1. B. umbellatus , Linn. ( common Flowering -rush); leaves 
linear-subulate trigonous, spatha of 3 leaves. E. Bot. t. 651. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 245. 

Ditches and ponds, frequent in England and Ireland. Duddingston 
Loch, and Loch of Cluuie, Scotland, where I believe it has been 
planted. FI. June, July. If. — Root white, tuberous. Leaves all radical, 
2 — 3 feet long, linear, acuminate, acutely trigonous, more or less spirally 
twisted at the extremity. Scape longer than the leaves, rounded. Umbel 
of many rose-coloured flowers, on pedicels about 4 inches long, with 
scariose sheathing braetcas at the base; and these having a triphyllous 
membranous spatha or involucre beneath them. Germans ovate, com- 
pressed. Style about as long as the germen, with a recurved, cleft stigma. 
Seeds parietal, or fixed to the inner surface of the pericarp, extremely 
small. — A highly ornamental plant. 


CLASS X. DECANDRIA. 10 Stamens. 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

1. Monotkopa. Perianth single, of 4 — 5 leaves, cucullate at 
the base. Anthers 1 -celled, 2-lipped. Caps, superior, 4 — 5- 


Saxi/raga.] DECANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 185 

celled. Seeds numerous, invested with a long arillus. — Nat. Ord. 
Monotrope®, Nutt . — Named from [lovog, one, and w, to turn; 
the flowers all pointing one way. 

2. Pyrola. Cal. 5-cleft. Petals 5, often connected at the 

base. Anthers opening with 2 pores. Caps, superior, 5-celled. 
Seeds numerous, invested with a long arillus. — Nat. Ord. Mono- 
trope®, Nutt Named from Pyrus, a pear ; from a fancied 

resemblance in its leaves to those of a Pear-tree. 

3. Ledum. Cal. 5-toothed. Petals 5. Anthers with 2 pores. 
Stigma 5-lobed. Caps. 5-celled, 5-valved, dissepiments formed 
by the indexed margins of the valves, opening from the base and 
between the dissepiments. Seeds arillate, fixed to a longitudinal 
parietal receptacle. — Nat. Ord. Erice®, Juss . — Named from the 
similarity of its foliage to that of the Cistus Ledum. 

4. Andromeda. Cal. deeply 5- cleft. Cor. of one petal, ovate 
or campanulate. Anthers with awns. Caps, superior, 4 — 5-celled, 

the dissepiments from the middle of the valves Nat. Ord. Erice®, 

Juss — Named in allusion to the fable of Andromeda, who was 
chained to a rock and exposed to the attack of a sea-monster: so 
does this beautiful tribe of plants grow in dreary and northern 
wastes, feigned to be the abode of pimternatural beings. 

5. Arbutus. Cal. deeply 5-cleft. Cor. of one petal, ovate. 
Perry superior, 5-celled, many-seeded — Nat. Ord. Erice®, Juss. 
— Named, according to Theis, from ar, rough or austere, and hoise, 
a bush, in Celtic. — The Arbutus is the badge of the Highland Clan 
Ross. 

(See Menziesia and Vaceinium in Cl. VIII.) 

ORD. II. DIGYNIA. 2 Styles. 

6. Scleranthus. Cal. of 1 piece, 5-cleft. Cor. 0. Stam. 
inserted upon the cal., 5 frequently abortive or wanting. Capsule 
1-seeded, covered by the calyx. — Nat. Ord. Sclerantiie®, Link. 

(Allied to Ciienopode®, Br -Paronychi®, Be Cand.) — 

Named from exXr^og, hard, and avOog, a jlower ; from the indurated 
nature of the floral covering. 

7. Chrysosplenium. Cal. 4 — 5-cleft, somewhat coloured, 

superior. Cor. 0. Capsule with 2 beaks, many-seeded Nat. Ord. 

Saxifrage®:, Juss . — Named from yjvcog, gold, and e-rr/^v, the 
splee?i; a disease for which this plant was supposed to be a cure. 

8. Saxifraga. Cal. superior, or inferior, or A inferior, in 5 
segments. Cor. of 5 petals. Caps, with 2 beaks, 2-celled, many- 
seeded, opening between the beaks. Seeds upon a receptacle 

attached to the dissepiment. — Nat. Ord. Saxifrage®, Juss 

Named from saxum, a stone, and frango, to break; in allusion to 


186 


DECANDRI A — PENT AGY N I A. 


[ Cotyledon . 

the supposed medicinal virtues of this plant : or, perhaps, to its 
roots penetrating the crevices of rocks and stones, among which the 
different species generally grow. 

9. Saponaria. Cal. monophyllous, tubular, 5-toothed, with- 
out bracteas at the base. Pet. 6, clawed. Capsule oblong, 1 -celled. 
— Nat. Orel. Caryophylle;e, Juss. — Named from setpo, soap. 
The plant yields a mucilaginous juice, which has been employed 
in lieu of that useful article. 

10. Dianthus. Cal. monophyllous, tubular, 5-toothed, with 
about 4, imbricated, opposite scales or bracteas at the base. Pet. 5, 
clawed. Caps, cylindrical, 1-celled. — Nat. Orel. Ca ryophyllka:, 

Juss Name derived from Zsu;, A/o;, Jupiter , and <zv0o?, a flower : 

dedicated as it were to Deity itself ; to express the high value that 
was set upon this charming genus of plants. 

ORD. III. TRIGYNIA. 3 Styles. 

11. Silene. Cal. monophyllous, tubular, often ventricose, 
5-toothed. Pet. 5, clawed, mostly crowned at the mouth, and the 
limb generally notched or bifid. Caps. 3-celled, 6-toothed, many- 

seeded. — Nat. Ord. Caryophylleas, Juss Name supposed to 

arise from o-taXov, saliva, in allusion to the viscid moisture on the 
stalks of many species; hence too, the English name Catchjly. 

12. Stellaria. Ccd. of 5 leaves. Pet. 5, deeply cloven. 

Caps, opening with 6 teeth, many-seeded Nat. Orel. Caryo- 

PHYLLEiE, Juss. — Named from stella, a star ; because the corolla 
is spread in a star-shaped manner. 

13. Arenaria. Cal. of 5 leaves. Pet. 5, undivided. Cap- 
sule 1-celled, many-seeded. — Nat. Orel. Caryofuylle.'e, Juss. — 
Named from arena, sand ; the greater number of species growing 
in sandy soils. 

14. Cherleria. Cal. of 5 leaves, united at the base. Pet. 5, 
extremely minute, notched. Stam. with glands at the base. Caps. 
1-celled, opening with 3 valves, many-seeded. — Ned. Ord. Caryo- 

PHYLLEiE, Juss Named in honour of John Henry Cherler, a 

friend and coadjutor of John Bauhin in the Prodromus of his Hist. 
General. PL in 1619. 

(See Polygonum in Cl. VIII.) 

ORD. IV. l’ENTAGYNI A. 5 Styles. 

15. Cotyledon. Cal. 5-partite. Cor. monopetalous, tubu- 
lar, 5-cleft. Capsules 5, each with a gland or nectariferous scale 

at its base. — Nat. Orel. Crassulaceas, l)e Cand. Named from 

xoruXt), a cup, to which the leaves of some of the species may bear 
a distant resemblance. 


Monotropa.] 


DECANDRI A — MONOGYNIA. 


187 


16. Sedum. Cal. in 5 (sometimes 4 — 8) deep segments, often 
resembling tlie leaves. Petals 5, patent. Germens 5, eacli with 
a nectariferous scale at its base. — Nat. Ord. Ckassulace.e, De 
Cand . — Named from seclo, to sit; from the humble growth ot these 
plants on their native rocks. 

17. Oxalis. Cal. 5-partite. Pet. 5, often united by the base 
of their claws. Filaments often combined below, 5 outer ones 
shorter. Caps, angular, 5-celled: cells 2-or many-seeded. Seeds 
with an elastic arillus. — Nat. Ord. Oxalide JE.De Cand . — Named 
from o^v;, sharp or acid. The leaves of O. acetosella produce 
oxalic acid in the state of binoxalate of Potash. ( Professor 
Thomson.') 

18. Agrostemma. Cal. monophyllous, tubular, coriaceous, 
with 5 teeth. Pet. 5, clawed, their border undivided. Caps. 
opening with 5 teeth, 1-celled. — Nat. Ord. Caryoph vlle.e, Juss. 
— Name ; ay^s mufut, Crown of the field , peculiarly applicable to 
our species which is a great ornament to corn-fields. 

19. Lychnis. Cal. monophyllous, tubular, 5-toothed. Pet. 
5, clawed, crowned at the mouth, mostly divided at the border. — 
Nat. Ord. Cakyopiiylleac, Juss . — Named from Xup/yog, a lamp; 
the thick cottony substance of the leaves of some species, or some 
similar plant, having been employed as wicks to lamps. 

20. Cerastium. Cal. of 5 leaves. Pet. 5, cloven. Caps. 
bursting at the top with 10 teeth (5 in C. aquaticum). — Nat. Ord. 

CaryophylleyE, Juss Name, — xsga?, a horn, from the rather 

long and curved capsules of some species. 

21. Spergula. Cal. 5-leaved. Pet. 5, undivided. Caps. 

ovate, 5-celled, 5-valved Nat. Ord. Caryopiiylleas, Juss — 

Named from spargo , to scatter; from the seeds being so widely 
dispersed. 

(See Silene and Stellaria, in Ord. Trig. — A doxa in Cl. VIII.) 

DECANDRIA— MONOGYNIA. 

1. Monotropa. Linn. Bird’s Nest. 

1. M. Hypopitys , Linn, (yellow Bird’s Nest); lateral flowers 
with 8, terminal one with 10 stamens. E. Pot. t. 713. Hook, in 
FI. Lond. N. S. t. 105. E. FI. v. ii. p. 249. 

Beech and Fir-woods, where the soil is dry ; but not common either 
in England or Scotland. Counties of Dublin and Louth, Ireland; Mr. 
J. T. Mackay. FI. June, July. If.. — Root fibrous, parasitic? Stem stout, 
erect, 6 — 9 inches high, simple or slightly branched jinstead of leaves 
having numerous ovate scattered scales, of the same dingy yellow colour 
as the stem. Raceme terminal, a continuation of the stem, at first 
drooping, then erect. Flowers on short scaly or bracteated pedicels, 
large, oi the same colour as the rest of the plant. Stamens alternately 


188 DECANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. [Pyrola. 

smaller. Germen 4 — 5-lobed, ovate. Stigma large, peltate. Seeds very 
minute, rarely perfect, enveloped in a reticulated arillus. 

2. Pyrola. Linn. Winter-green. 

1. P. unifiora , Linn, (single- flowered Winter -green); stem 
bearing a solitary flower, leaves orbicular. E. Bot. t. 146. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. ”258. 

Woods in Scotland, rare. Fir-wood near Brodie House, Forres. 
Woods at Scoune. Mr. Bishop. Coul, Ross-shire ; Sir G. S. Mackenzie , 
Bart. In the Oak-wood, Knock of Alves, near Elgin ; Mr. Law- 
son. FI. July. If. — Stem scarcely any, bearing a few petiolated and ob- 
scurely serrated leaves; and a single peduncle, with one large, nearly 
white, very fragrant flower. Style short, strait. Stigma large, with 8 
erect rays. 

2. P. sccunda, Linn. ( serrated Winter-green ); flowers all lean- 
ing one way racemed, leaves ovate serrated. E. Bot. t. 307. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 257. 

Rare in England; Yorkshire, Ray. Not unfrequent in Fir-woods 
in Scotland, especially in the Highlands. FI. July. If . — Stems rather 
straggling, branched. Peduncles 4 — 5 inches high, with several oval 
scales or bracteas. Flowers small, greenish white. Petals erect. 
Style much protruded. Stigma 5-lobed. 

3. P. rotundifolia, Linn, {round -leaved Winter-green ); flowers 
drooping racemed, leaves obovato-rotundate slightly crenate, style 
bent down curved upwards at the extremity, much longer than the 
ascending stamens. E. Bot. t. 213. E. FI. v. ii.p. 255. 

Moist woods and bushy places, rare. Bradwell and Middleton in 
Suffolk. Larlingford, Norfolk ; Rev. G. R. Leathes. Kent ; Rev. G. F. 
Smith. Yorkshire, and many places in Scotland are assigned as sta- 
tions for this plant ; but it is so often confounded with the two follow- 
ing species, that I cannot ([note them with equal certainty. FI. July — 
Sept. If. — The largest of the Pyrolcc, with white, spreading flowers; 
well distinguished by the direction and relative length of its stamens and 
style. The latter is more than twice as long as the fully-formed caj)sule 
and is singularly curved. Stigma with 5 erect points. 

4. P. media , Swartz, ( intermediate Winter-green); leaves ovato- 
rotundate crenate, stamens erect much shorter than the strait or 
slightly decurved style, stigma with 5 erect points. E. Bot. t. 1945. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 256. 

Woods, principally in the north ; very general in Scotland, often 
taken for l\ rotund. Oxfordshire. ( Sm .) J. S. Mill, Esq. County of Antrim, 
&c. Ireland, Mr. Templeton. FI. July, Aug. If. — Style protruded be- 
yond the flower , strait. 

5. P. minor, Linn. ( lesser Winter -green); leaves ovato-rotun- 
date crenate, stamens erect as long as the very short strait style 
which is included within the flower, stigma large with 5 divergent 
rays. E. Bot. t. 158, (not good). Hook, in El. Loud. t. 154. 
E. El. v. ii. p. 257.— P. rosea , E. Bot. t. 2543. 


DECANDRTA — MONOGYNI A. 


189 


Arbutus.] 

Woods in the north of England and Scotland ; most frequent in the 
W estern Highlands and Hebrides. FI. July. If . . — This is smaller than 
the last, essentially distinguished from it, and at once characterized by 
the shortness of its style and large radiated stigma, quite included within 
the concave corolla. 

3. Ledum. Linn. Ledum. 

1. L.j mlustre, Linn. (Marsh Ledum); leaves linear their margins 
revolute downy beneath, flowers decandrous. Hook, in FI. Lond. 
t. 210. Lindl. Syn.p. 173. Ur. FI. ed. 1. 

At Achil-head on the north-west coast of Ireland, Sir Chas. Giescche. 
FI. July, Aug. Tj . — A small shrub; with rigid evergreen leaves, clothed 
while young entirely, and afterwards, on the underside only, with rusty 
down. Flowers corymbose, white, spreading. Stamens prominent. Cap- 
sules pendent, opening from the base upwards into valves which remain 
attached to the upper extremity, as in Triglochin. — In Canada this plant 
is extensively used by the hunters in lieu of Tea. 

4. Andromeda. Linn. Andromeda. 

1. A . pol folia, Linn. ( Marsh Andromeda ); leaves alternate lan- 
ceolate their margins revolute glaucous beneath, flowers in short 
terminal racemes. E. Hot. t. 713. E. FI. v. ii.p. 251. 

Peat-bogs, Larlingford, Norfolk, Rev. G. R. Lealhes. The north of 
England, Lowlands of Scotland, and in Queen’s county and Kerry, 
Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. June. Tj . — A small evergreen shrub, 
with beautiful oval or urceolate, rose-coloured drooping flowers , a good 
deal concealed among the terminal leaves. Mr. Mackay mentions a 
broad-leaved var. growing in a bay between Newport and Castle-Connel. 

/ 

5. Arbutus. Linn. Strawberry-tree. Bear-berry. 

1. A. Unedo, Linn. ( Strawberry -tree ); stem arboreous, leaves 
elliptic-lanceolate serrated, panicles terminal, berries tubercled. 
E. Bot. t. 2377. E. FI. v. ii. p. 252. 

About the Lakes of Killarnev, in woods at Mucruss and at Glengariff 
near Bantry, Ireland. FI. Sept. Oct. — The fruit ripens the following 
summer. T^. — This beautiful evergreen is said to be truly wild in the 
south of Ireland ; though some are of opinion that it has been intro- 
duced by the Monks of Mucruss Abbey. The young leaves are clothed 
with glandular hair. The flowers are large, pale greenish-white. The 
fruit red, ungrateful, ( Smith, “palatable,” Wilson ); and hence, it is reported, 
arises the specific name Unedo, because those who had eaten one would 
not care to eat more. It is a tree which, from its frequency and the 
beauty of its foliage, adds greatly to the charms of the Lake scenery of 
Killarney, and contributes to give it a preference over the Scottish 
Lakes. 

2. A. alpina, Linn, (black Bear-berry); stem procumbent, 
leaves wrinkled serrated, racemes terminal. E. Bot. t. 2030. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 253. 

Dry barren grounds on many of the Highland mountains; Ben Nevis, 
near the little Lake, and more frequent in the northern mountains and 
in Sutherland. Hoy hill, Orkney. FI. May. Tj . — A trailing shrub, with 


It)!) DECANDRIA — DIGYNIA. [ Chrysosplenium . 

obovate, marcescent leaves which taper down into a footstalk, and be- 
come, in autumn, of a fine red colour. There are a few hairs on the 
leaf-stalks, and ciliated bracleas at the base of the flower-stalks. Corollas 
urceolate, very pale rose-coloured, almost white. Berry black. 

3. A. Uva Ursi, Linn, (red Bear-berry); stems procumbent, 
leaves obovate entire evergreen, racemes terminal. E. Bot. t. 714. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 253. 

North of England and Ireland ; especially abundant in the Highlands 
and Western Isles of Scotland, growing in dry heathy and rocky places. 
FI. May. Tj . — Stems very long and trailing ; leaves obovate, stiff, rigid, 
glabrous, their margins revolute. Flowers in small crowded racemes, 
terminal, of a beautiful rose-colour. Berry small, red, austere, mealy ; 
but yielding excellent food for the Moor-fowl. 

DECANDIIIA — DIGYNIA. 

6. Scleranthus. Linn. Knawel. 

1. S. dnnuus , Linn, (annual Knawel); calyx of the fruit with 
erecto-patent rather acute segments, stems spreading, root annual. 
E. Bot. t. 351. E. FI. v.ii. p. 282. 

Corn-fields, frequent. FI. July. If .. — Stems many, much branched in 
a dichotomous manner, slender, subpubescent, straggling. Leaves linear- 
subulate, keeled, opposite and combined at the base by a membranous 
fringed margin. Flowers green, inconspicuous, in axillary, leafy clusters. 
Cal. urceolate, ribbed, with 5 ovato-lanceolate teeth, in my specimens 
white and membranous at the edge as in the following, spreading when 
in flower, almost erect when in fruit, as represented in E. Bot. t. 351, 
left-hand figure. The accurate Mr. Wilson finds Smith’s character taken 
from the calyx in S. perennis, applicable to the S. annuus. 

2. S. perennis, Linn, (perennial Knawel); calyx of the fruit 

with obtuse closed segments edged with a broad white membrane, 
stems procumbent, root perennial. E. Bot. t. 352. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 283 S. polycarpos, Light/. Sc. p. 1143? 

Open dry sandy fields, in Norfolk and Suffolk. Eskdale ? (Light/.); 
and near Forfar, G. Don. FI. Aug. — Oct. If. 

7. Chrysosplenium. Linn. Golden-Saxifrage. 

1. C. alter ni folium, Linn, (alternate-leaved Golden- Saxifrage); 
leaves alternate, lower ones subreniform upon very long footstalks. 
E. Bot. t. 54. E. FI. v. ii. p. 260. 

Boggy places among rocks and springs ; Cheshire, rare, Mr. IV. Wilson. 
Norfolk: more frequent in Scotland. Rosslyn Woods, Bilston burn, and 
St. Bernard’s well, Edinburgh : Castlemilk glen, and Beetle’s burn, vale 
of Clyde. Near Belfast, Ireland, Mr. Templeton. FI. March, Apr. If . 
— 4 — 5 inches high, branched near the summit. Leaves petiolate, ere- 
mite. Flowers in small umbels, deep yellow, mostly with 8 stamens. 

2. C. opposit folium, (common Golden- Saxifrage); leaves oppo- 
site cordato-rotundate. E. Bot. t. 490. E. FI. v. ii. p. 260. 

Sides of rivulets in shady places, common. Abundant near the 
sources of rivulets in very alpine situations, in the Highlands. FI. May— 


DECANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


191 


Saxifraga.] 


July. If — Generally more branched at the base than the last, of a paler 
colour in all its parts. Stamens usually 8. 

8. Saxifraga. Linn. Saxifrage. 

From a few, comparatively speaking, well defined individuals, 1+ in 
number, given in Flora Britannica, the number of British species of Saxi- 
frage is now increased to 24; and many of them, as in the Willows and 
Roses and Brambles, are marked by characters so obscure, or so liable to 
vary, that in the hypnoides family especially, we will venture to say no two 
Botanists are agreed as to what is and what is not a species. After a careful 
revision of the British ones, I am still of opinion that the view I have taken 
of that groupe, as stated in Flora Scotica, is not far from the truth. In 
describing, however, those of England and Ireland, as well as Scotland, 
it behoves me to speak with great caution ; since there are many of them 
that I have not seen in a living state ; and it is a painful and an invidious 
task, to reduce the number of species established by Botanists of un- 
questionable authority, and who have had equal advantages with, or 
greater than myself, in studying the genus. At my request, Mr. Wm. 
Wilson has paid particular attention to the Welsh species, both upon their 
native mountains, and as cultivated in his garden ; and it is gratifying to 
me to find, in general, how entirely his opinion coincides with mine. His 
observations I shall here introduce, at least such as I consider essential 
to the subject, and I am much mistaken if they will not contribute 
greatly to a more correct knowledge of this difficult genus. Mr. D. 
Don has well arranged all the species, both Foreign and British, that 
were known to him, in a valuable Memoir in the Linn. Trans, v. xiii. 
p. 341, and his arrangement is here adopted, with Sir J. E. Smith’s 
slight alterations. 

* Cal. reflexed, inferior. Leaves undivided. Peduncles panicled, 

erect, much tcdler than the stems. 1 

1. S. Geum, Linn. ( kidney-shaped Saxifrage); leaves rotun- 
dato-reniform acutely crenate more or less hairy, footstalks linear 
channelled, scape panicled, capsules superior. E. FI. JJ. 261. D. 

Don, Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 249 a. leaves hairy on both 

sides, their under surface beautifully reticulated with purple, Mcickay. 
— (3. leaves glabrous on both sides, more sharply toothed, Mcickay. 
S. Geum, E. Dot. t. 1561, {leaves smaller than usual). — Rohertsonia 
dentata, Haworth in App. Syn. PI. Succ. — y. leaves light green 
glabrous and shining sharply toothed, Mackay. Rohertsonia polita, 
Haworth, l. c. — d. leaves orbicular dark green glabrous on both 
sides, footstalks short, Mackay. S', elegans, Mackay MSS . — 
Flowers spotted with red. — e. leaves hairy on both sides smaller 
than in any of the preceding, flowers cream-coloured spotless, scape 
slender, Mackay. S. gracilis, Mackay MSS. 

1 For our knowledge of the individuals and varieties of this little and very 
distinct groupe, which is almost exclusively of Irish origin, we are indebted to 
J. 1. .Mackay, Esq., who has given their characters and very particular stations 
in his useful Catalogue of Plants found in Ireland, (Dublin, 1825,) from which 
1 have profited. 


192 


DECAN DUI A — DIGYNIA. 


[Saxifraga. 

Mountains in the south of Ireland. — «. Sheltered spot below Turk 
waterfall, Killarney, and only there. — /3. The most common var. near 
Dingle, Mangerton, near Killarney and mountains of Cork. — y. Conner 
cliff, near Dingle. — $. Summits of Turk mountain, Killarney. — e. Conner 
hill, near Dingle. — All found by Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. June. If. — 
This species has the margin of the teeth cartilaginous, but less so than 
the two following. 

2. S. hirsuta, Linn. ( hairy oval-leaved Saxifrage); leaves more 
or less cordate at the base slightly hairy, footstalks linear, scape 
panicled, capsule superior. E.Dot. t. 2322. D. Don, in Tr. of Linn. 
Soc. v. xiii. p. 251. E. FI. v. ii.p. 262. 

Gap of Dunloe, near Killarney, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. June. If. — 
Readily distinguished, Mr. Mackay observes, from S. Geum, by its oval 
leaves, which are of a deep green colour. But my friend, the Rev. W. 
T. Brce, who has cultivated and studied the Saxifrages very assiduously, 
says that it is certainly a hybrid between the preceding and the following. 
Mr. Don notices a roundish-cordate-leaved variety, which I should 
think can hardly be any thing but the S. Geum. 

3. S. umbrosa, Linn. (^London- pride Saxifrage or None-so- 
pretty) ; leaves obovate with sharp cartilaginous teeth tapering 
gradually into a broad footstalk, panicle small, capsule superior. 
E. Dot. t. 663. J). Don , in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 252. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 263. — (3. leaves roundish with sharp tooth-like serratures, 
fruitstalks elongated, Mackay. S. punctata, Haworth, (not Sm.) — 
y. leaves oblongo-ovate glabrous light green wdth deep acute serra- 
tures, Mackay. Robertsonia serrata, Haworth. 

Plentiful on mountains on the south of Ireland, as at Glengariff and 
Conner cliffs, near Dingle, Mr. J. T. Mackay. — /•. Summit of Magilly- 
cuddy’s reeks. Mountains of Cunnamara; of Sligo, {Ray.) On Croagh 
Patrick in Mayo, (A. B. Lambert, Esq.) and Muckish, in Donegal, Mr. 
Templeton, on both which lofty mountains I have gathered the plant 
abundantly. — y. Gap of Dunloe, near Killarney, Mr. J. T. Mackay — 
This species is found too in woods at Wetherby and in Craven, York- 
shire, and about Edinburgh and Glasgow, but in situations so different 
from its Irish habitat, that I can hardly consider the stations wild. 
Ft. June. If   — This is well known in our gardens, even amid the smoke 
of London ; hence, and in consequence of its beautifully spotted flower, 
it is called London-pride; in Ireland, St. Patrick’s Cabbage. 

4. S. stellaris, Linn. ( starry Saxifrage); leaves oblongo-cunei- 

form angulato-serrate scarcely petiolate, panicle subcorymbose of 
few flowers, capsule superior. E. Dot. t. 167. D. Don, in Tr. of 
Linn. Soc.v. xiii.p. 356. E.Fl. v.ii.j).2Q>b f3. leaves quite entire. 

Sides of rivulets and wet rocks, in the mountainous parts of the north 
of England, Scotland and Ireland. — fi. Rocks on Ben Nevis, Mr. S. 
Murray. FI. June — Aug. If . — Stems short, growing frequently in tufts. 
Leaves with coarse teeth ; in /3. quite entire, and thence having so differ- 
ent an aspect, that, at first sight, Mr. Murray as well as myself considered 
it to be quite a distinct species. It has now, too, been cultivated for 


Saxifraga.] 


DECANDItIA — DIGYNIA. 


193 


several years, and offsets have been taken from it, all of which preserve 
their original character. It was found only in one spot; and, there, a 
single tult was growing by itself. As in a, the whole plant is slightly 
hairy. Scape 2 — 5 or 6 inches high, with a minute bractea at each rami- 
fication of its small panicle. Flowers white; with 2 yellow spots at the 
base of each somewhat clawed petal. 

** Calyx spreading , half-superior. Leaves all radical, undivided. 

Scape upright ; with a panicle or head of floicers. 

5. S. nivalis, Linn, (clustered alpine Saxifrage) ; leaves obovate 
subpetiolate acutely crenate subcoriaceous, 6cape terminated by a 
dense cluster of flowers, capsule half-inferior. E. Bot. t. 440. D. 
Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 387. E. FI. v. ii. p. 263. 

Mountains ot Wales, and, not unfrequent in the rocky clefts of the 
Highland mountains of Scotland ; particularly abundant on the Bread- 
albane range. FI. Aug. 21 . — Allied as this species appears at first sight 
to S. stellaris, there are many and important distinctions. It is a thicker 
and stouter-looking plant, though nearly of the same height. Leaves 
subcoriaceous, glabrous above. iSca^jcglanduloso-pubescent, sometimes 
a little branched. Among specimens from Snowdon, where, however, the 
species is rare, Mr. W. \\ ilson finds an individual with a long branch 
from above the middle, and another with the branch from near the base. 
blowers clustered. Cal. teeth almost erect, never reflexed. 

*** Calyx partly or entirely inferior. Stem leafy. Leaves 


undivided. 


6. S. opposit folia, Linn. ( purple Mountain Saxifrage) ; leaves 
ovate opposite imbricated ciliated, flowers solitary terminal. E. Bot. 
t. 9. D. Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 400. E. FI. v. ii. 


p. 266. 


Moist alpine rocks. Ingleborough, Dr. Richardson. Snowdon, Mr. 
Llwyd. ' W elsh mountains, Mr. IV. Wilson. Frequent on the Highland 
mountains of Scotland. Ft. Apr. May. 1/ .—Grows in straggling tufts 
with a habit quite different from that of any other British Saxifrage 
Flowers large m proportion to the size of the plant, purple, very beau- 
tifuL The leaves are retuse, ciliated, and have a pore at the extremity. 
Capsule half-inferior. J 

1 ' S- Hirculus, Linn. ( yelloiv Marsh Saxifrage) ; stem erect 
leaves alternate lanceolate, those from the root attenuated into a 
petiole, calyx inferior at length reflexed obtuse downv at the mar. 


t"j|un:ai. ii is singular that tins plant, which I have seen abun- 
an y in Iceland, and which was found so plentifully by our arctic Amer- 



K 


DECANDUI A DIGYNIA. 


194 


[Saxifraga. 


ican voyagers and travellers, is found no further north in Britain than 
Yorkshire. 

8. S. aizoides, Linn. ( yellow Mountain Saxifrage); lower 
leaves of the stem numerous crowded, the rest scattered linear-lan- 
ceolate fleshy more or less ciliated, stem branched ascending, calyx 
spreading, capsule half-superior. E. Bot. t. 39. D. Don in Tr.of 
Linn. Soc. v. xiii.p. 375. E. FI. v. ii. p. 268. 

Abundant near alpine rills and in springy places, in mountainous coun- 
tries ; north of England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. FI. July — Sept. 
"If. — 5 — 7 inches high, branching below. Flowers panicled, subcoryrn- 
bose, bright yellow ; each jielal beautifully spotted with orange. 

**** Calyx spreading. Leaves more or less lobed. Flowering- 
stems erect, more or less leafy. 

9. S. granulata, Linn, (white Meadow Saxifrage) ; radical leaves 
reniform on long footstalks obtusely lobed, those of the upper part 
of the stem nearly sessile acutely lobed, stem panicled, root granu- 
lated. E. Bot. t. 500. D. Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii.p. 362. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 269. 

Hedge-banks, meadows and pastures, especially on a gravelly soil ; 
yet very local ; common in Surry, Mr. ./. S. Mill. In many parts 
of the south of Scotland ; but scarcely known in the Highlands. Be- 
tween Beldoyle and Portmarnock, Ireland ; Mr. J. T. Mac/cay. FI. May, 
June. If. — Root consisting of numerous, small, clustered tubers. Stem 
8 — 12 inches high, glanduloso-pilose. Leaves mostly radical, glabrous; 
petioles glandular. Flowers large, white. Germen and capsule half- 
inferior. 

10 . s. cernua, Linn, (drooping bidbous Saxifrage) ; radical 
leaves reniform on long footstalks palmato-lobate, superior ones 
nearly sessile subtrifid, stem simple bulbiferous with one terminal 
flower. E. Bot. t. 664. D. Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii.p. 364. 
E . FI. v. ii. p. 27 6. 

Dry rocks (not about rills) on the highest of the Breadalbane moun- 
tains ; summit of Ben Lawers, discovered by Mr. Townson; and on 
Craigalleach. FI. June — Aug. If. — 3 — 4 or 5 inches high, slender. 
Leaves glabrous, and the stem, which droops at the extremity, nearly so. 
In the axils of the small upper leaves, instead of flowers, are clusters of 
minute reddish bulbs. Frequently there is no flower, and I have never 
seen more than one upon a stem, which is terminal, large in proportion 
to the size of the plant, and white ; petals refuse. In the E. Bot. figure, 
the root-leaves are much less deeply-lobed than in my specimens. 

1 1. S. rivuldris, Linn, (alpine Brook Saxifrage) ; leaves 3 — fi- 
lched palmated glabrous on long stalks, stem slender branched 
pubescent, branches few-flowered, bracteas oblong sessile 3-lobed 
and entire, capsule half-inferior. E. Bot. t. 2275. D. Don in Tr. 
of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 367. E. FI. v. ii. p. 27 1. 

Moist alpine rocks in Scotland; rare. Near the summit of Ben 
Nevis, (Mr. Townson,) but very sparingly, as it is likewise on Ben 


DECANDItIA — DIGYNIA. 


195 


 Saxifr aga.] 

Lawers. Plentiful on Loch-na-gar, in Forfarshire, Mr. Drummond ; 
Loch Kannoch, Mr. Sommerville. FI. Aug. Sept. If. 

12. S. tridactylites, Linn. ( rue-leaved Saxifrage) ; glandular 
and viscid, leaves cuneate 3 — 5-fid, the uppermost or bracteaS 
undivided, stem panicled, pedicels single-flowered, capsule inferior. 
E. Bot. t. 501. D. Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 441. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 271. 

Common on walls and dry barren ground, in England and the Low- 
lands of Scotland; rare however in the west of Scotland, and especially 
in the Highlands. Island of Lismore, Rev. C. Smith. FI. May, June. ©. 
— 2 — 4 inches high. Whole plant covered with viscid hairs. Petals 
small, pure white, scarcely longer than the segments of the calyx. Capsule 
almost wholly inferior. 

13. S. muscoides, Wulf. ( mossy alpine Saxifrage ); radical 
leaves crowded linear obtuse entire and trifid, stem nearly naked 
few-flowered, petals oblong obtuse (buff-coloured), a little longer 
than the superior calyx. — a., leaves entire and trifid. S. muscoides, 
D. Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 437 — a. Sternb. Saxifr. 
p. 39. t. 1 \.f. 2. E. FI. v. ii.p. 272. — y. Sternb. Saxifr. p. 40. 

t. 11. b.f. i. — S. ccespitosa, Huds. not Linn S. moschata, With. 

— [3. leaves mostly entire or retuse. S. muscoides , Hook. Scot. i. 

p. 130. — S. moschata, E. Bot. t. 2314 y. Sternb. Saxifr. p. 41. 

t. 1 1. b.f. 2 — S. pygmcea, Haw. Misc. Nat. 168. D. Don in Tr. 
of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 439. F. El. v. ii. p. 273. 

a. Mountains above Ambleside, Westmoreland. Huds. (D. Dan.) — 
£. Highlands of Scotland (?) Mr. J. Dunn. FI. May. If . — The English 
Bot. S. moschata, I referred to the entire-leaved state of S. muscoides of 
IVulff. in my FI. Scot. Now, the state, with frequently 3 lobes to the 
leaves, is introduced as English upon the authority of Mr. Pludson. 
British specimens of it I have never seen, but Mr. Don refers to Stern- 
berg's Ell. f. 2, and t. 1 1. b.f. i. and /. 2, for the two plants. These 
figures appear to me evidently to belong to the same species ; and I 
possess all the states in specimens which I have gathered abundantly in 
Switzerland and Savoy. 

14. S. ccespitosa, Linn, (tufted alpine Saxifrage); “ radical 
leaves crowded 3 — 5-cleft obtuse veiny fringed, lowermost undi- 
vided, flowers 5 or more, germen half-inferior hairy, calyx smoother 
obtuse, petals rounded triple-ribbed.” ( S/n .) — u. smaller. E. EL 
v. ii. p. 273 — S. ccespitosa, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 794. D. Don in 
Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 428. — S. grcenlandica, Gunn. Norv. 
v. ii. p. 80. t. 7. f. 1 — /3. larger. E. El. v. ii. p. 274. — S. deci- 
piens, Ehrh — Sternb. Saxifr. p. 55. t. 23. — S. palmata, E. Bot. 
t. 455. 

Mountains of Wales and Ireland. Aberdeenshire, Dr. Graham. — 
a. Rocks of Twll du, and Cwm Idwel, N. Wales; Mr. Griffith. 
Brandon mountain, Kerry, Ireland; Mr. J. T. Mackay. — /3. Cwm 
Jdwel, Mr. Griffith. On the Galty mountains, Tipperary ; Mr, J. T 


196 


DECANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 


[Saxifraga. 

MacJcay. FI. May, June. If. — I had considered the two plants above 
alluded to as the same with the following species of our Scottish Alps, 
only having shorter and less stoloniferous stems. Sir J. E. Smith, how- 
ever, describes them as peculiar to the Welsh and Irish Mountains, and 
Mr. W. Wilson too is of opinion that this species is distinct. The 
var. a. is, he says, very scarce upon Twll du, and he has not been able 
to find more than 2 roots of it. “ But,” he says, “ a root of a Saxifrage, 
from Snowdon, which had hitherto been considered as S. palmata, I find, 
on examination, to answer very exactly to S. ccespitosa, /3. of E. FI., and 
agreeing also with what is there said of the cultivated plant from Bran- 
don mountain. The Snowdon plant has acquired, by culture, rather 
long, procumbent shoots, the leaves of which are ail 3-lobed, unless just 
below the flowering-stems; the lobes obtuse, short and often very broad, 
not spathulate, copiously fringed with jointed hairs of various lengths, 
the short ones often glandular. It is true that, in this case, the lobes of 
the leaves are not rounded at the extremity, as in wild specimens 
from Twll du ; and though they are always much more obtuse than in 
the cultivated varieties of S. hypnoides, hereafter enumerated, they are 
sometimes terminated by a point; but it will be seen that the point is 
not cartilaginous, as in S< hypnoides , but only a terminal, jointed, glan- 
dular hair, in every respect similar to those found in the margins of the 
lobes. The ribs of the leaf also appear rather different ; the broad com- 
mon base of the lobes having 5 ribs, instead of 3, uniting much lower 
down the footstalk than is common to S. hypnoides ; thus the middle 
lobe is 3-ribbed at the base, and the lateral lobes 2-ribbed, and some- 
times 3-ribbed ; all of them furnished with lateral veins above. The 
radical leaves are usually 5-lobed. The petals, notwithstanding their size, 
are obovate and 3-ribbed ; never furnished with lateral veins, as in many 
of the wild and most of the cultivated states of S. hypnoides. The germcn 
in this, as well as in the wild plant from Twll du, is remarkable for its 
broad, rounded base, which, with the very broad and obtuse segments of 
the calyx and leaves, fully establishes, as I think, the relationship be- 
tween the cultivated Snowdon plant and the wild one from Twll du, and 
will keep both essentially distinct from all the varieties, wild or culti- 
vated, of S. hypnoides, though assuredly very nearly connected .” 

In regard to S. hirta, (Sm.) Mr. Wilson remarks that he has never 
found in Wales a Saxifrage sufficiently hairy to justify the name; or, in 
that respect, at all approaching to S. ccespitosa. When it acquires 
rounded petals and the ribs are furnished with lateral veins, it becomes 
S. p/atypeta/a. When the segments of the leaves are narrow and widely 
spreading, it then passes for S. leptophylla. Indeed, after a careful exa- 
mination of a great number of specimens from Wales, and of plants in a 
cultivated state, Mr. Wilson has come to the conclusion, that S. hirta, 
plalypetala, leptophylla, and hypnoides, are varieties of one species; and 
moreover,” lie adds, so intimately connected by intermediate states, that it 
is hardly practicable to define their limits, even as varieties." In this, as 
may be supposed, from what I have stated in Flora Scotica, I do most 
cordially concur; and I here follow Mr. Wilson’s arrangement and cha- 
racters drawn up from the living plants. 

15. S. hypnoides, Linn, (mossy Saxifrage) ; radical leaves 3-or 
5-cleft, those of the procumbent shoot undivided or 3-cleft all bris- 


DECANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


197 


Sa.vifraga.] 


tie-pointed and more or less fringed, segments of the calyx ovate 
pointed, petals roundish obovate or oblong 3-ribbed with or with- 
out lateral veins.” IVils. 3ISS. 

«. leaves of the trailing shoots undivided, sometimes with axillary 
buds. S. hypnoides , Linn. — E. Bot. t. 454*. Hook. Scot. i. p. 131. D. Don 
in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 147. E. FI. v. ii. p. 277. — S. condensata, 
D. Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 448. 

Frequent in mountainous situations, among rocks; especially in lime- 
stone countries. FI. May — July. If. — Leaves sometimes with axillary 
buds. Stem bearing from 3 — 7, usually erect, sometimes drooping flowers. 
Petals elliptical, entire, 3-ribbed; sometimes as broad as those of S. 
platypetala, and like them furnished with lateral veins; occasionally very 
narrow, notched or pointed. The procumbent shoots in this variety are 
sometimes very short and sometimes destitute of axillary buds, which 
appear to be neither a constant character nor confined to this variety. 
A root exactly answering to S. hypnoides, E. FI., from Dove Dale in 
Derbyshire, is not altered by culture ; except that the axillary buds on 
its shoots are not so numerous as in wild specimens. Wi/s. 

jS. leaves of the procumbent shoots either undivided or 3-cleft, petals 
usually broad with or without lateral veins. IVils. MSS. — Hook. Scot. i. 
p. 131. — S. platypetala , E. Bot. t. 2276. D. Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. 
v. xiii. p. 422. — S. hirta, Don. — E. But. p. 2291. D. Don in Tr. of Linn. 
Soc. v. xiii. p. 421. E. FI. v. ii. p. 275. 

Mountains of Wales Scotland and Ireland; frequently with the former. 
FI. May — July. If. — This is closely connected with the preceding and 
following vars., and perhaps should not be kept separate from y. — 
Flowers, in some instances, drooping, generally erect. Calyx-segments 
sometimes narrow. Petals variable, as in the last. 

y. leaves of the procumbent shoots nearly 3-cleft, the lobes usually 
broad, the middle one 3-ribbed at the base. IVils. MSS. — Again to this, 
Mr. Wilson refers certain states of S. platypetala and S. hirta, E. I'L; 
and further remarks, “ the common base of the lobes is usually very broad 
and tapering downwards into the more or less elongated footstalk. 
Flowering-stem .3 — 12 inches high, the flowers, in some instances, few 
and crowded, upon short branches near the top; sometimes there are 
7 or 9 flowers ; the branches axillary and often placed at distant inter- 
vals along the stem. Cal. segments variable in length and breadth. 
Petals variable, as in the foregoing ; occasionally very long and narrow, 
with a notched extremity. The procumbent shoots are frequently fur- 
nished with axillary buds. By cultivation, the leaves, in autumn, become 
very large and 5-lobed, the lobes spreading and in some degree spathu- 
late. A root, exactly similar to S. platypetala, E. El., brought from 
Wales, was found not materially changed by culture while in a flowering 
state; but in the following autumn the leaves of the shoots were almost 
universally five-parted, and their lobes broadly spathulate.” 

S. leaves of the procumbent shoot deeply 3-cleft, lobes linear-lanceo- 
late and widely spreading. I Vi/s. MSS. — S. leptophylla, Pers. — D. Don in 
Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 450. E. FI. v. 2. p. 279. 

Welsh mountains, Mr. MacNab. — In this the calyx-segments vary 
much in breadth and length. Petals obovate or elliptical, 3-ribbed, sel- 


198 


DECANDRIA DIGYNIA. 


[Saxifrage. 

dom furnished with lateral veins. Intermediate states occur, in which 
the stem-leaves have narrow, wide-spreading lobes, while those of the 
procumbent shoots are undivided, as in var. a.. 

t. flowering- stem terminating the procumbent shoots. Wils. MSS. 

Welsh mountains, Mr. IV. Wilson. — “ This can scarcely be termed a 
var. ; yet it is not readily altered by culture, though perhaps its habit 
may not be strictly permanent. Except in having its flowering-stem at the 
end of the shoots produced in spring, there is nothing to distinguish it. 
A root from Snowdon was not altered in the garden at the time of blos- 
soming in the succeeding year; and in the following autumn the leaves 
were found very large, having from five to nine spreading segments, or 
doubly 3-parted. In the flowering state they corresponded with the 
var. S. — On the other hand, wild specimens from Twll du, with terminal 
flower-stalks, rather belong to the var. y. 

16. S. affinis , Don, ( involute alpine Saxifrage); “radical 
leaves 5-cleft, those of the trailing shoots mostly 3-eleft, lobes 
linear pointed, segments of the calyx awl-shaped channelled pointed 
recurved, petals oblong indexed at the edges. D. Don in Tr. of 
Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 418. E. FI. v. ii. p. 275. 

On the top of Brandon mountain, county of Kerry; Mr. J. T. 
Mackag. FI. May, June. — If. 

17. S. incurvifolia , Don, (curve-leaved Saxifrage) ; “somewhat 

glabrous, radical leaves 5-cleft, those of the trailing shoots 3-cleft, 
segments lanceolate obtuse incurved, calycine segments ovate acute, 
petals roundish emarginate.” D. Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. 
p. 423. E. FI. v. ii. p. 276 S. incurva, Mackag MSS. 

Alpine rocks, Ireland; Mr. J. T. Mackap . — If. 

18. 8 .clenuddta, Don, (smooth Grampian Saxifrage) ; “some- 
what glabrous, radical leaves 5-cleft, those of the trailing shoots tri- 
partite, segments linear-subulate acute, calycine segments lanceolate 
inucronulate, petals obovate emarginate.” D. Don in Tr. of Linn • 
Soc. v. xiii. p. 424. — S. ccespitosa , a. Hooh. Scot. i. p. 131. 

Mountains of Angus-shire, G. Don. — 2f. — Sir J. E. Smith seems to 
consider this a var. of the preceding; and Mr. W. Wilson observes that 
the reflexed points of the calyx mentioned in the description are very 
general in varieties of S. hppnoides, and that the lanceolate shape of its 
segments is probably accidental. 

19. S. elongella , Sm. (long-stalked Saxifrage) ; “ radical leaves 
3-or 5-cleft, those of the upright short shoots undivided or 3-cleft 
all bristle-pointed slightly fringed, primary flower-stalks very long 
simple and naked, calyx pointed, petals obovate.” E. Dot. t. 2277. 
1). Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 449. E. FI. v. ii. p. 279. 
— S. ccespitosa, y. Hook. Scot. i. p. 131 . 

Moist rocks, near Lintrathen, Angus-shire, Mr. G. Don. FI. June. If. 
— Mr. Wilson has seen this plant, and thinks that it can hardly be any 
thing but a var. of hppnoides. 

20. S. Icetevirens, Don, (bright-green alpine Saxifrage) ; trailing 


Saponaria.] DECANDRIA — DIGYNIA. 

shoots procumbent elongated, leaves 5-or 3-parted, segments linear 
acute, calycine segments lanceolate mucronate, petals spathulate 
emarginate. J). Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 451. L. FI. 
v. ii. p. 280. — S. ccespitosa, (3. Hook. Scot. i. p. 131. 

Mountains of Angus-shire, Aberdeenshire and north of Loch Lomond, 
G. <iy 1) Don. If. — “ The recurved points of the segments of the leaves 
may possibly distinguish this as a species ; but at present I think its 
claims very doubtful.” IV. Wilson. 

21. S. pedatifida , Elirh. ( pedatifid-leaved Saxifrage); lower 
leaves and those of the rather short sterile shoots upon very long 
footstalks divided into 3 deep linear-lanceolate acute spreading 
segments, the lateral ones bifid, panicle cymose, calyx superior as 
long as the germen. F. Dot. t. 2278. Hook. Scot. i. p. 132, ( excl . 
syn. var. |3.) D. Don in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xiii. p. 414. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 280. 

Rocks near the head of Clova, Angus-shire, G. Don. FI. May. If. — 
A species very distinct from any British one ; nor does it appear to be 
noticed in Sternberg’s valuable work, though coming near his S. lada- 
nifera and S. penladactylis. — Whole plant rigid. Stems reddish, glabrous. 
Leaves slightly pubescent and viscid. Panicle much branched, cymose 
and subfastigiate. Flowers rather small. Petals linear-obovate, thrice 
as long as the calyx-teeth. Germen inferior, oblongo- ovate. Teeth of the 
calyx longer than in any of this division. — S. geranioides, Linn, differs 
from the present species in its broadly wedge-shaped divisions of the 
leaves, which are of a much thinner texture. The panicle, however, the 
flowers, calyx and germen are precisely of the same structure. I should 
have thought it identical with S. ladanifera of La Peyrouse, (which indeed 
Mr. D. Don makes a var. of it), but that that species is described as 
being covered with little points, whence an odoriferous gum exudes. 
S. penladactylis has its leaves extremely narrow, indeed, and obtuse. 
Another species, very closely allied to our plant, is the S. ceratopliylla of 
Hort. Kew., and Sims in Bot. Mag. t. 1651, of which I possess speci- 
mens through the liberality of Mr. Aiton. It is distinguished by its still 
more rigid habit; by the divisions of the lobes being bent back like a 
sickle; and by having the calyx covered with a resinous, not a clammy 
varnish ; it is a native of Spain, — as geranoides, ladanifera and pen- 
tadactylis are of the Pyrenees. 

9. Saponaria. Linn. Soapwort. 

1. S. officinalis, Linn. ( common Soapwort); leaves ovato-lan- 
ceolate, calyces cylindrical glabrous. E. Bot. t. 1060. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 284. 

Road-sides, margins of woods, and hedge-banks, especially near cot- 
tages. TV. July, Aug. If . — I — 1| foot high, with a rather stout, cylindri- 
cal stem. Leaves ribbed, opposite and connate. Panicle ot numerous 
large, rose-coloured flowers. Limb of the corolla obcordate. — This plant 
makes a lather with water. Sir J. E. Smith mentions a curious var., found 
near Liverpool and in Northamptonshire, having a monopetalous corolla. 


200 


DECAN Dill A DIGYNIA. 


[Dianthus. 


10. Dianthus. Linn. Pink. 

* Flowers clustered. 

1. D. At •meria, Linn. ( Deptford Pink') ; flowers clustered 
fascicled, scales of the calyx lanceolate downy as long as the tube. 
E. Lot. t. 317. E. FI. v. ii. p. 286. 

Pastures and hedges; not uncommon in England and Scotland. In 
fields at Carse, Angus-shire, G. Don. Leetown in the Carse of Gowrie, 
Mr. J. Mac Nab. FI. July, Aug.0. — 1 — 1 i foot high, branched upwards. 
Leaves linear, opposite and connate, slightly pubescent; upper ones acute. 
Limb of the petals rose-coloured, with white (not red, as mentioned in 
E. Bot.) dots, crenate at the margin. Flowers scentless. 

2. D. prolifer , Linn. ( proliferous Pink) ; flowers clustered capi- 
tate, scales of the calyx ovate blunt membranous longer than the tube, 
leaves rough at the edge. E. Bot. t. 956. E. FI. v. ii. p. 286. 

Gravelly pastures, in England, rare: Selsey island, Sussex; near 
Ilampton-court ; near Norwich; and at Hanby Castle, Worcestershire. 
FI. July. ©. — Readily distinguished by its small, deep-coloured J lowers , 
of which only one in a head expands at a time, and by the large, dry, 
brown and membranaceous scales which envelop the calyces of several 
flowers. Limb of the petals obcordate, notched. 

% * Flower solitary ; one or more on the same stem. 

3. D. Caryophyllus, Linn. ( Clove Pink, Carnation , or Clove 
Gillyflower); stem branched, flowers mostly solitary, scales of the 
calyx 4 very short ovate submucronate, petals broad crenated, leaves 
linear-subulate grooved glaucous. E. Bot. t. 214. E. FI. p. 287. 

On ruined walls, as at Norwich; old arch of Westonhanger, Mr. IV. Hut- 
chison; and on the castles of Deal, Sandown, Rochester, &c. From the 
latter station, the Rev. Prof. Henslow sent me ( 1829) excellent speci- 
mens. FI. July. If. — Few persons, on seeing this plant as it grows on 
old walls, would suppose it was the origin of one of the “ fairest flowers 
o’ the season,” 

“ The curious choice Clove July -flower,” 
or Carnation of our gardens, with its endless diversity of colour and form; 
yet such it is always considered to be. It varies, with the limb often 
bearded, and rarely, with a beautiful deep purple bar at the base of 
the limb ; the pet. doubly cut and jagged ; stain, often exserted. A hairy 
var. is also found in Kent. Rev. G. E. Smith. 

4. D. deltoides, Linn. (. Maiden Pink) ; flowers solitary, scales 
of the calyx about 2 ovato-acuminate short, leaves bluntish some- 
what downy, petals crenate glabrous. E. Bot. t. 61. E. Fl.v. ii. 
p. 288. — /3. scales of the calyx mostly 4, petals nearly white. B. 
glaucns, Linn. 

Borders of fields, banks and hedges, on a gravelly or sandy soil, in 
England and Scotland, extending as far north as lloss-shire ; Mr. G. 
Anderson. About Edinburgh, &c. where, in the King’s Park, grows the 
var. 1 3. FI. July, Aug. If. — A small plant, much branched even from 
its very base. Petals very beautiful, rose-coloured, spotted with white, 
with a white eye enclosed in a deep purple ring. 


Si/enc,] 


DECANDRIA — TRIGYNIA. 


201 


5. D. ccesius, Sm. ( Mountain Pink); stems mostly single- 
flowered, scales of the calyx short roundish, leaves scabrous at the 
margin, petals unequally crenate hairy. E. Pot. t. 62. E. El. v. ii. 

p. 288. 

On limestone rocks at Cheddar, Somersetshire. FI. June, July. If . 
— This exceedingly rare plant has very glaucous foliage ; and, compara- 
tively, large, fragrant flowers, of a delicate rose-colour. 

DECANDRIA — TRIGYNIA. 

11. Silene. Linn, Catchfly. 

* Stems tufted , short. Peduncles single-flowered. 

1. S . acaulis, Linn. ( Moss Campion) ; ctespitose, leaves linear 
ciliated at the base, peduncles solitary single-flowered, petals 
crowned slightly notched. E. Bot. t. 1081. E. FI. v. ii. p. 299. 

Rocky places on Snowdon. Devonshire, {Dill.) Abundant on all the 
Scottish mountains. FI. June, July. If..— Stems short, 2—3 inches high, 
much branched and tufted. Leaves patent. Flowers beautiful purple ; 
and apparently dioecious. — One of the greatest ornaments of our Alps ; 
not unfrequently found with white flowers. 

** Stems elongated. Flowers solitary or panicled. Calyx inflated, 

bladdery. 

2. S. inflata , Sm. {Bladder Campion) ; flowers numerous pani- 
cled, petals deeply cloven with narrow segments scarcely crowned, 
calyx inflated reticulated, stem erect, leaves ovato-lanceolate. 
Hook. Scot. i. p. 134. E. FI. v. ii. p. 292. — Cucubalus Behen, 
E.Bot.t. 164. — j3. calyx, stem and leaves downy. 

Pastures and road-sides, common. — /3. near Cromer, Norfolk ; Mr. D. 
Turner. Banks of the Clyde, Mr. Hopkirk. FI. June — Aug. If . — 
Whole plant glaucous, variable in the size and shape of its leaves, and in 
the more or less numerous flower's. Petals pure white. The downy 
variety maintains its characters after many years’ cultivation in the Glas- 
gow Botanic Garden. 

3. S. maritima , With. {Sea Campion or Catchfly) ; panicles 
few-flowered, petals with a shallow cleft and broad segments 
crowned, calyx inflated reticulated, stems spreading, leaves ovato- 
lanceolate or spathulate. E. Bot. t. 057. E. FI. v. ii. p. 293.— 
S. inflata , [3. Hook. Scot. i. p. 135. 

Frequent upon the sea-shore in sandy and stony places, as well as by 
alpine rills; IWendip hills, Mr. Christy. FI, June— Aug. If .—This, al- 
though it has smaller stems and leaves than the last, has larger flowers ; 
yet I will not say I have done right in again raising it to the rank of a 
speaes. Mr. W. Wilson finds a var. in Caernarvonshire, with a panicle 
ot 1 flowers. In this and the preceding, the styles are variable in number. 

*** Stems elongated. Flowers in racemes and whorled. 

4. S. Otites, Sm. {Spanish Catchfly) ; stems erect nearly simple 

K 2 


202 


DECANDRIA — TRIGYNIA. 


[Silenc. 


with few leaves, flowers in whorls dioecious, petals linear entire, 

leaves spathulate. E. FI. v. ii. p. 298 Cucubalus Otites, E. Bot. 

t. 85. 

Sandy fields, chiefly in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire. FI. 
July, Aug. If. — Remarkable for its small, unassuming, dioecious flowers , 
with their linear, yellowish, entire petals. 

**** Stems elongated , branched. Flowers in leafy racemes , 

alternate. 

5. S. anglica, Linn. ( English Catchjly) ; hairy and viscid, petals 
(small) crowned slightly bifid, calyces with setaceous teeth ovate in 
fruit anti sometimes reflexed. E. Bot. t. 1178. E. FI. v. ii. p. 291. 

Sandy and gravelly fields ; in Surry, Cambridgeshire, Hertfordshire, 
and Norfolk; South Port, Lancashire, and North Wales; Mr. IV. Wil- 
son. Cornwall, Rev. J. S. Tozer. Between Dundee and St. Andrews; 
near Perth, Mr. Mac/cay. (Sin.) FI. June, July. ©. — More or less 
viscid. Leaves lanceolate, the lower ones spathulate. Flowers solitary 
from the axils of the upper leaves. Calyx at first cylindrical, scarcely 
shorter than the petals, erect ; at length the lower ones, when in fruit, 
have their pedicels often singularly reflected. Petals mostly white, some- 
times with a faint tinge of red in the middle, in which case the whole 
plant much resembles the following species. 

6. S. quinquevulnera, Linn. ( variegated Catch fly) ; pubescent, 
limb of the petals roundish entire, flowers secund, calyces with 
setaceous teeth and always erect very hairy. E. Bot. t. 86. E. FL 
r. ii. p. 292. 

Sandy corn-fields, near Wrotham, Kent; Hudson. Duppa’s Hill, by- 
Croydon ; Mr. Borrer. FI. June, July. ©. — A common annual in our 
gardens, which derives its Latin specific name from the 5 deep red spots 
on its petals resembling marks of blood, but which become more or less 
faint in cultivation. 

***** Stem panicled, leafy. Calyx not bladdery. 

7. S. nutans, Linn. ( Nottingham Catchjly ) ; flowers panicled 
secuild cernuous, branches opposite, petals deeply cloven their seg- 
ments linear crowned, leaves (of the stem) lanceolate pubescent. 

E. Bot. t. 465. E. El. v. ii. p. 296 /3. leaves broader. S. para- 

doxa , Sm. (not Finn.) 

Limestone rocks, and chalky cliffs in England. About Nottingham. 
Ormeshead, Caernarvonshire, Air. IV. Wilson. Knaresborough, York- 
shire; Dovcdale, Derbyshire. North Queensferry and near Arbroath, 
Scotland. — fS. on Dover cliffs, Ray. — ] — 14 ft. high. Root-leaves spath- 
ulate, acute. Calyx tubular, clavate. Petals rather large, white. 

8. S. conica, Linn. ( striated Corn Catch fly'); panicle forked, 
petals bifid crowned, leaves linear downy, calyx in fruit conical 
with numerous furrows. E. Bot. t. 922. E. FI. v. ii. p. 294. 

At New Romney and Sandown Castle, Kent ; near Bury, Mrs. .If, A. 
Blake. FI. July. ©. — Petals purple, small. Calyx of the flower almost 


DECANDRIA TRIGYNIA. 


203 


Stellaria.\ 


tubular, of the fruit so broad and swollen at its base as to be nearly 
conical. It is moreover finely striated, 

9. S. nocHJJura, Linn. (wght-Jloioering Catchfhj); panicle forked, 
petals bifid, calyx with long teeth oblong in fruit with 10 connected 
ribs, leaves lanceolate lower ones spathulate. E. Bot. t. 291. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 295. 

Corn-fields in a sandy or gravelly soil, in several counties of England. 
Coast of Angus-shire, 'Scotland; G. Don. Near Inveresk, Mr. Cold- 
stream. FI. July. ©. — 1 foot or more high. Leaves much like the last, 
pubescent. Upper part of the stem many times dichotomous, each 
branchlet terminated with a single flower, and a solitary flower in the 
axil of the fork. Flowers rather large, sweet-scented, pale reddish, 
almost white. Peduncles viscid. 

****** Stems elongated. Flowers corymbose. Calyx clavate. 

10. S. Armeria , Linn. ( common or Lobel's Catchjhj); panicles 
forked corymbose with crowded flowers, petals notched and 
crowned with awl-shaped scales, calyx clavate and as well as the 
leaves glabrous, leaves ovato-lanceolate, stem viscid. E. Bot. 
t. 1398. E. FI. v. ii. p. 296. 

Banks of the Dee, half a mile from Chester. FI. July, Aug. ©. — 
“ A doubtful native.” Extremely common in gardens. Flowers purple. 
Calyx singularly clavate. The germen and capsule are elevated upon a 
stalk ; hence the lower part of the calyx is contracted, while the upper 
part is swollen by the enlargement of the capsule. 

12. Stellaria. Linn. Stitchwort. 

1. S. nemorum, Linn. (Wood Stitchwort ); leaves petiolate cor- 
date, upper ones ovate sessile, panicle dichotomous. E. Bot. t. 92. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 300. 

In moist woods, principally in the north of England and Lowlands of 
Scotland. FI. May, June. If.— 1— U foot high. Stems weak, pubescent 
above. Leaves very large, glabrous, but rough with extremely minute, 
elevated dots, sometimes ciliated at the margin. Calyx-leaves white at 
the edges. Petals narrow, deeply bifid, pure white. 

2. S. media, With, (common Chickweed or Stitchwort ); leaves 

ovate, stems procumbent with an alternate line of hairs on one 
side, petals 2-partite, stamens 5 — 10. E. Bot. t. 537. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 301 Alsine media, Linn. 

Road-sides and waste places, abundant. FI almost the whole year. 
©. — Stem weak, with alternate lines of hairs between each pair of leaves, 
by which the species is admirably distinguished. Leaves, except the 
uppermost, glabrous ; on footstalks, which are fringed with hairs. Flowers 
small, white, on solitary, axillary and terminal stalks. — It is a good pot- 
herb, and small birds are very fond of the seeds. 

3. S. holostea, Linn, (greater Stitchwort ); stem nearly erect, 
leaves lanceolate much acuminated finely serrulated, petals inversely 


204. DECANDRIA — TRIGYNIA. [ Stellaria . 

heart-shaped bifid twice as long as the nerveless calyx. E. Bot. 
t. 211. E. FI. v. ii.p. 301. 

Woods and hedges, frequent. FI. May. If. — Plant 1 — Ij foot high, 
rather rigid and brittle, somewhat glaucous. Flowers large and with 
much broader petals than the two following, pure white. Panicle of 
few flowers, leafy. 

4. S. graminea , Linn. ( lesser Stitchwort); stem nearly erect, 
leaves lanceolate acute entire, panicle much branched, petals very 
deeply cleft, segments linear scarcely longer than the 3-nerved 
leaves of the calyx. E. Bot. t. 803. E. FI. v. ii. p. 302. 

Dry pastures, fields and heaths, common. FI. May. If. — 1 foot high, 
more slender than the last, and readily distinguishable by its much 
smaller flowers, large and branching panicle, 3-nerved calyx, and entire 
leaves, which are, moreover, by no means so much acuminated. 

5. S. glauca, With. ( glaucous Marsh Stitchwort) ; stem nearly 
erect, leaves linear-lanceolate entire glaucous, flowers upon long 
solitary axillary footstalks, petals very deeply cleft their segments 
much longer than the 3-nerved calyx. E. Bot. t. 825. E. FI. 
v. ii.p. 303. 

AVet, marshy places, margins of lakes, &c. FI. June, July. If . — 
Equally slender with the last, 1 foot high. Flowers next in size to those 
of S. holoslea. Readily known from that and S. graminea by its narrower, 
glaucous leaves, solitary, axillary flowers, and the narrow calyx-leaves, 
which, like the last, are 3-nerved. 

6. S. uliginosa, Murr. (Bog Stitchwort') ; leaves ovato-lanceo- 
late entire with a callous tip, flowers in dichotomous panicles, 
petals bipartite shorter than the leaflets of the calyx which are com- 
bined at the base. E. Bot. t. 1074. E. FI. v. ii. p. 303. — Lar- 
hrcca, St. Hil. Da Cand. Lindl. — S. graminea, ( 3 . Linn. 

In ditches and rivulets, frequent. FI. June. Q. — This species, besides 
having the calyx-leaves combined at the base, has truly perigynous sta- 
mens and petals. St. Hilaire, who makes of it his Genus Larbrcea (in 
honour of the Able de Larbre ,) seems to think it more allied to his Order 
Paronychice than to the Caryophylleee. Its general habit, however, is 
surely that of a Stellaria, from all the other species of which it is dis- 
tinguished by the comparatively minute petals. 

7. S. cerastoides, Linn. ( alpine Stitchwort'); stems decumbent 
with an alternate hairy line, leaves oblongo-spathulate, peduncles 
2 or 3 mostly terminal downy as is the calyx which is about half 

the length of the bifid corolla. Ilooh. Scot. i. p. 136 x. leaves 

hairy. S. cerastoides, Linn Cerastium nivale, Don MSS . — 

Cerastium trigynum,Vill. Delph. Hi. p. 6 1 5. t. 46 (3. leaves gla- 

brous. S. cerastoides, Waif, in Jacq. Coll. v. i. p. 254. t. 19. 
E. Bot. t. 911. E. FI. v. ii.)}. 305. 

Breadalbane mountains of Scotland, and mountains to the north of 
that great range. FI. July, Aug. If. — I— 6 inches long. Lower part 
of the stem bare of leaves and much branched. Leaves subsecund and 


DECANDRIA — TRIGYNIA. 


905 


Arcnaria.] 


subfalcate, as observed by Wahlenberg: their points callous. Flowers 
large, pure white. Sir J. E. Smith observes that the stales are some- 
times 4 and 5; and the capsules, on my specimens, have some G and some 
10 teeth ; so that this plant lias as great a claim to rank with the Ceras- 
tia as with the Stellarice. 

8. S. scnptgera, Willd. {many -stalked Stitchwort); stem shorter 
than the flovverstalks, leaves linear-lanceolate crowded pubescenti- 
scabrous at the margin, calyx 3-nerved as long as the petals. 
E. Bot. t. 1269 (leaves too broad). E. FI. v. ii. p. 304. 

Hills to the north of Dunkeld and about Loch Nevis, G. Don. FI. 
June. 1/.— I possess only cultivated specimens of this remarkable plant, 
which was first described by Willdenow. He attributes to it single- 
flowered peduncles; but in my plants these peduncles, of which many 
arise from the extremity of the very short stems, are mostly branched in 
the middle, where they have 2, small, ovate, acute, membranaceous 
bractcas. 

13. Arenaria. Linn. Sandwort. 


* Stipules none. 

1. A. peploides, Linn. ( Sea-side Sandwort); glabrous, leaves 
ovate acute fleshy, calyx obtuse ribless. E. Bot. t. 189. E. FI. 
v. ii.p. 306 — Adenarium, Rajin.—De Cand. Prod. v. Hi. p. 363 
(in note.) 

. On sandy sea-shores, frequent. FI. July. If. .—Root long and creep- 
mg, slender. Stems decumbent at the base; branches erect, leafy up- 
wards. Leaves large, decussate, connate, fleshy, shining, a little recurved. 
Flowers solitary' or 2 3 together, in the axils of the upper leaves, nearly 

sessile, closing in the shade. Petals white, small, scarcely longer than 
the caiyx, distant, broadly' ovate, shortly' clawed : surrounding the eer- 
men are 10 glands, alternating with the stamens. Capsule large, round- 
I s ,’. 3 - 5 : v : al y ed > " lth . comparatively, few, large, and black seeds.— The 
habn of this is very different from the rest of the Genus, and it is said 
that the flowers are dioecious. It is certain that very extensive patches 
ot the plant have abortive flowers. 1 

2. A. trinervis, Linn, (three-nerved Sandwort); leaves ovate 
acute petiolate 3-(rarely 5-) nerved ciliated, flowers solitary calyces 
rough on the keel with 3 obscure ribs. E. Bot. t. 1483 E FI 
v. ii.p. 307. 

Sluidy woods and moist places. FI. May. Q. —Stems 1 foot hi<di 
much branched, pubescent. Upper leaves sessile. Flowerstalks an inch 
or more long, from the forkings of the extremities of the stem ; in fruit 
spreading, the upper part deflated. Petals oblongo-obovate, white, 
scarcely longer than the acute segments of the calyx . 

3. A. serpylli folia, Linn, (thyme-leaved Sandwort); leaves ovate 
acute subscabrous sessile, calyx hairy its outer leaves 5-ribbed. 
E. Bot. 1 . 923. E. FI. v. ii.p. 307. 

Walls and dry waste places, frequent. FI. June. ©.-2-G inches in 
en^tli, el ect or procumbent, much branched, pubescent. Leaves small 
latncr rigid. Flowers white, on short stalks, from the forkings of the 


20G DECANDRIA— TRIGYNIA. [ Arenaria . 

upper part of the stem or the axils of the leaves. Petals as long as the 
calyx. — Mr. W. Wilson finds a var. at Bangor, with 5 stamens, and the 
petals only \ as long as the calyx, which has prominent ribs. 

4. A. ciliata, Linn. ( fringed Sandwort); leaves spathulate 
roughish ciliated at the base, stems much branched procumbent, 
flowers terminal solitary, calyx-leaves half as long as the corolla 
lanceolate acute with many ribs. E. Bot. t. 1745. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 310. 

Mountains in Ireland, rare. Limestone cliffs, near Ben Bulben, a 
high mountain in Sligo ; Mr. J. T. Mac/cay. FI. Aug. Sept. If. 

5. A. verna, Linn. ( vernal Sandwort); stems numerous panicled 
above, leaves subulate acute when dry 3-nerved, petals obovate and 
as well as the capsule about as long as the lanceolate acuminated 
3-nerved calyx. E. Bot. t. 512. E. El. v. ii. p. 309. 

Rock)' and mountainous pastures, in the north of England and Wales; 
abundant on Arthur’s Seat and in other places about Edinburgh; Mael 
Dun Crosk, Breadalbane; not found at all in the West of Scotland. FI. 
May, June. If . — Stems 3 — 4 inches high, slightly hairy, as are the calyces 
and peduncles. Lower leaves crowded, often curved ; upper ones distant. 

6. A. rubella, Hook. ( alpine Sandwort) ; stems numerous, 
peduncles terminal downy single-flowered, leaves linear-subulate 
obtuse 3-nerved, petals elliptico-lanceolate and as well as the 4- 
valved capsule shorter than the lanceolate very acute 3-nerved 

calyx. Hook, in Parry's 2d Voy. App in El. Lond. N. S. t. 200. 

E. El. v. iv. App. p. 267. Don in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2638 — Al- 
sine rubella, Wahl. — Arenaria quadrivalvis , Br. 

Near the summits of the Breadalbane mountains, among soil and 
broken rocks; very rare. On Craigalleach, Dr. Earl. On Ben Lawers; 
first found, it now appears, by Mr. Don; since by Mr. Murray, Dr. 
Grevillc and in one spot most abundantly by Mr. IV. Wilson and Dr. 
Graham. FI. July. If. — This is quite an alpine or arctic plant. It loves 
to grow with its root buried under a loose piece of rock, and late in the 
summer often acquires a reddish tinge. Stamens from a glandular disk. 
Styles .3,4 or 5: the valves of the capsule, consequently, equally variable. 

7. A. tenuifolia, Linn, (fine-leaved Sandwort); stems much 
branched dichotomous panicled above, leaves narrow linear-subu- 
late, petals lanceolate much shorter than the narrow-lanceolate 
3-nerved calyx, capsule 3-valved as long as the calyx. E.Bot.t.2\9. 
E. El. v. ii.p. 308. 

Sandy fields; Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, Oxfordshire, &c. Cramond 
Island, Firth of Forth ; and near Pettycur Harbour, Scotland ; Mr. 
Yalden and G. Don. FI. June. ©. — Stems 4 — 6 inches high, glabrous; 
throughout remarkably slender, especially the peduncles. 

8. A . fasliyidta, Sm. ( level-topped Sandwort); stems erect 
strait, leaves fascicled subulato- setaceous erect, flowers fascicled, 
calyx much acuminated (white) with two central (green) ribs twice 
as long as the ovate petals. E. Bot. t. 1744. E. El. v. ii. p. 309. 


DECAN Dill A — DENTAGYNI A. 


20 ? 


Cotyledon .] 

In Fifeshire and mountains of Angus-shire, Mr. Don. FI. June. © . — 
Sir J. E. Smith rightly distinguishes this, the A. fasciculata of Jacq , 
from the species so named by Gouan ; of which very rare plant I possess 
Gouan’s original specimen. Scottish individuals I have never met with; 
but, judging from the figure in E. Bot., 1 do not see how this is to be sepa- 
rated from the A. mucronata of DC. ( Alsine , Gouan). It is very peculiar 
in habit and quite unlike any other British species. The seeds “ are 
beautifully toothed at the margin, each on a long stalk.” 

** Stipules at the base of each pair of leaves. 

9. A. rubra, Linn. ( purple Sandwort) ; stems prostrate, leaves 
narrow linear acute plane somewhat fleshy tipped with a very 
minute bristle, stipules ovate cloven, capsule as long as the calyx, 
seeds compressed angular roughish. E. Bot. t. 852. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 311. 

Gravelly or sandy soils, frequent. FI. June. © . — Very much branched 
and spreading. Stipules, a pair of ovate, acute, white, membranaceous 
scales, united at their base. Flowers numerous, in the axils of the upper 
leaves, solitary. Calyx nerveless, and as well as the rather short pedun- 
cles, glandular and viscid. Petals ovate, red, about as long as the calyx. 
Peduncles, after flowering, slightly bent back. — The seeds constitute the 
essential character by which this is known from the following species. 

10. A. marina, Oed. ( Sea Spurrey Sandwort ); stems prostrate, 

leaves semicylindrical fleshy awnless, sti pules ovate cloven, capsule 
longer than the calyx, seed compressed smooth with a broad mem- 
branous pellucid border. E. Bot. t. 958. E. FI. v. ii. p. 311. 

A. rubra, (3. Linn. 

Frequent upon the sea-coast. FI. June, July. ©, or $. — Much 
larger and stouter in all its parts than the last, independent of the differ- 
ence existing in the seed: still I am not sure that these marks may not 
depend upon situation. Indeed 1 have now before me a pubescent 
variety, gathered in the Isle of Man by Mr. Wilson, in which the seeds 
are rough without a border ; and another with the seeds smooth and 
without a border. 

14. Cherleria. Linn. Cypliel. 

1. C. suicides, Linn .(mossy Cyphel, dwarf Cherleria). E. Bot. 
t. 1212. E. FI. v. ii. p. 3 1 2. 

Summits of the Highland mountains, especially those of the Breadal- 
bane range. FI. June — Aug. It . — Pools exceedingly long, running deep 
i nt0 the earth ; bearing, above, innumerable short, forked stems, and 
forming a dense mass which scarcely rises above the surface of the soil. 
Leaves crowded, linear-subulate, channelled above, slightly ciliated and 
glandular at the edge. Flowers solitary, imbedded among the dense 
mass of leaves, yellow-green. Cal. membranous at the edge. 

DEC ANDRI A— P EN TAG YNI A. 

15. Cotyledon. Linn. Pennywort. 

1. C. Umbilicus, Uuds. ( Wall Pennywort); leaves peltate cre- 
nate depressed in the centre, stem with a (usually) simple raceme 


DECANDRIA PENTAGYNIA. 


208 


[Scdum. 


of pendulous flowers, upper bracteas minute entire. E. Bot. t. 325. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 314 Umbilicus pendulinus, DC. 

Rocks, walls and old buildings, especially in subalpine countries. 
FI. June — Aug. y. — Whole plant succulent. Stems from 6 inches 
to a foot high, rounded. Leaves mostly radical. Flowers cylindrical, 
yellowish-green. 

2. C. lutea, Huds. (yellow Pennywort) ; lower leaves only some- 
what peltate crenate, raceme with erect flowers, bracteas subden- 
tate. E.Bot.t. 1522. E. Fl.v.ii.p. 314. — Umbilicus erectus, DC. 

Walls and rocks, very rare. West Riding of Yorkshire, Mr. Tofield. 
Mr. Hudson understood it to grow in Somersetshire. FI. July. y. 

16. Sedum. Linn. Orpine and Stonecrop. 

* Leaves plane. 

1. S. Telepluum , Linn. ( Orpine, or Live-long') ; leaves oval- 
oblong plane serrated, corymbs leafy, stems erect. E.Bot.t. 1319. 
E. El. v. ii. p. 3 1 5. 

Borders of fields, hedge-banks, and waste places among bushes. FI. 
July. y. — 1 — 2 feet high. Stem spotted. Leaves broad. Floivers 
purple. Very unlike any of the following species, and in habit resem- 
bling Rhodiola rosea. 

** Leaves terete. Flowers white or reddish. 

2. S. dasyphyllum , Linn, (thick-leaved Stonecrop ) ; leaves oppo- 
site (except on the flowering-stems) ovato-globose fleshy, panicles 
glutinous. E. Bot. t. 656. E. FI. v. ii. p. 316. 

Walls and rocks, in several parts of England. Conway, Wales ; Mr. 
W. Wilson. Collinton woods, Edinburgh, Mr. Arnott. Cork, Ireland, 
Mr. Drummond. FI. June. y. — Stems slender, procumbent below, 
slightly viscid. Flowering-stems 2 — 3 inches high. Leaves short, singu- 
larly thick and fleshy, glaucous with a reddish tinge and dotted. Flowers 
tinged with rose-colour. Petals and pistils 5 — 8. 

3. S. ctnglicum, Huds. (white English Stonecrop) ; leaves ovate 
gibbous fleshy produced at the base alternate, cymes few-flowered, 
petals very sharp at the point. E.Bot.t. 171. E. FI. v. ii, p. 317. 

On sandy and rocky places, especially near the sea ; common in N. 
Wales; most abundant in Scotland and Ireland, on rocks inland as well 
as by the sea-shores. FI. June, July. ©. — 2 — 3 inches high, much 
branched, procumbent below. Leaves glaucous-green, often tinged with 
red. Flowers few in each cyme, but very conspicuous from their white, 
starlike appearance, and their purple anthers. It is a great ornament to 
some of the most barren rocks in the Highlands and Hebrides. 

4. S. album, Linn. ( white Stonecrop) ; leaves scattered oblongo- 
cylindrical obtuse spreading, cyme much branched. E. Bot. t. 157S. 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 319. 

Rocks, walls, and roofs of houses, in Middlesex, Worcestershire, 
Suffolk, and about Peterborough. Wich Cliffs, Somerset, truly wild, 
Mr. Christy. Forfar and Glamis, Scotland, G. Don. FI. July. y. — 
Stems prostrate below only, the J/owcring-stcm erect, 3—5 inches high. 


Sedum .] 


DECANDRIA — PENTAGYNIA. 


209 


Leaves pale glaucous-green, sometimes tinged with red. Flowers 
crowded, white or only tinged with rose-colour. 

5. S. villosum, Linn. ( hairy Stonecrop) ; leaves scattered oblong 
flattened above and as well as the peduncles and stems hairy and 
viscid. E. Bot. t. 394. E. El. v. ii. p. 319. 

Stony moist places and by the sides of rills, frequent in the north of 
England and Scotland; especially in the subalpine parts. FI. June, 
July. If.. (Sin.) — 3—4 inches high, reddish-purple. Leaves on the low, 
barren shoots, almost exactly cylindrical. Flowers few, of a pale rose- 
colour. 

*** Leaves terete. Flowers yellow. 

6. S. acre , Linn, (bithig Stonecrop or Wall Pepper) ; leaves 
erect alternate ovate gibbous fleshy produced at the base, cymes 
trifid glabrous leafy. E. Bot.t. 839. E. FI. v. ii. p. 317. 

^alls, rocks, and sandy ground, frequent. FI. June. If. — Distin- 
guished among our yellow-flowered species, by its upright, short and 
very succulent leaves, closely imbricated on the barren shoots. Very 
biting when chewed ; and hence its name of Wall-pepper. 

7. S. sexangiddre, Linn, (tasteless yelloiv Stonecrop) ; leaves 
generally in 6 rows whorled on the barren shoots cylindrical fleshy 
spreading produced at the base, cyme trifid. E.Bot. t. 1946. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 3 1 8. 

Old walls in the east of England, generally rare. Isle of Sheppey ; 
Greenwich Park wall; in Cambridgeshire, and Old Sarum, Wiltshire; 
Mr. I). Turner. FI. July. If. — Well distinguished from the last by its 
spreading, larger and slenderer leaves, and by their insertion. 

8. S. rejlexum, Linn, (crooked yellow Stonecrop) ; leaves awl- 
shaped scattered spurred at the base, the lowermost recurved, 
flowers cymose, segments of the calyx ovate. Sm.—E. Bot. t. 695. 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 320. 

W alls, roofs of houses and thatched buildings, frequent. FI. July. If. 
— Sterile branches with thickly placed leaves, often reflexed. Flower- 
ing-stems G 8 inches high. Cyme large, yellow. Flowers numerous, 
often with G petals and 12 stamens. Very similar to this are the three 
following species. 

9. S. glaucum, Donn, (glaucous yellow Stonecrop ); “leaves 
glaucous awl-shaped scattered produced at the base, those of the 
branches thread-shaped, flowers cymose, segments of the calyx lan- 
ceolate.” Sin — E. Bot. t. 2477. E. FI. v. ii.p. 321. 

Rough hills near Mildenhall, Suffolk, Mr. F. Fagle. Sunday’s-well 
and Glaskeen, Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. July.Aug. 2f “ Differs 
from the last in being of a more glaucous hue, with much slenderer 
leaves, especially on the radical shoots. The branches of the cyme are 
more uniformly spreading and the segments of the calyx are narrower 
and more pointed.” Sm. 

10. S. rupestre, Linn. (St. Vincent' s Rock Stonecrop) ; “leaves 
glaucous produced at the base, those of the branches awl-shaped 


210 


DECANDRIA PENTAGYNIA. 


[ Agrostemma . 

erect in five close rows, flowers imperfectly c.ymose, segments of 
the calyx elliptical obtuse.” ( Sm .) — E.Bot.t. 170. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 321. 

St. Vincent and Cheddar rocks, Somersetshire. Walls about Dar- 
lington, Yorkshire, Mr. E. Robson. FI. July. If. 

11. S . Forster ianum, Sm. (Welsh Rock Stonecrop) ; ‘‘leaves 
produced at the base, those of the branches semicylindrical bluntish 
pointed spreading in many rows, flowers cymose, segments of the 
calyx elliptical obtuse.” (Sm.) — E. Bot. t. 1802. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 322. 

Rocks in Wales; at the Fall of Rhydoll, Cardiganshire, Mr. E. For- 
ster. At Hisvae, valley of Nant-phrancon, Dr. Richardson and Mr. 
Llwyd. Little Ormeshead, Mr. IV. Wilson. FI. June, July. — “ Perhaps 
the compact, hemisphaerical or round-topped cyme is the best mark by 
which to distinguish this from S. reflexum .” Mr. IV. Wilson. 

17. Oxalis. Linn. Wood-sorrel. 

1. O. Acetosella, Linn. ( common Wood-sorrel) ; leaves all radi- 
cal ternate, leaflets inversely heart-shaped hairy, scape single- 
flowered, root scaly. E. Bot. /. 762. E. Fl.v.ii.p. 323. 

Woods and shady places, frequent ; also at a great elevation on the 
mountains, among shady rocks. FI. May, and on the Alps, till August. 
If . — Leafstalks long and slender, reddish. Leaflets drooping at night. 
Scape with 2 scaly bracteas. Flowers handsome, drooping, white, with 
purplish veins. The leaves have a most agreeably acid flavour. 

2. O. corniculata, Linn. ( yellow procumbent Wood-sorrel); 
stem branched, branches procumbent, peduncles mostly 2-fiowered 
shorter than the leaves, stipules united to the base of the footstalks. 
E. Bot. t. 1726. E. FI. v. ii. p. 324. 

Shady waste ground, chiefly in the extreme south of F.ngland ; Sussex 
and Devonshire. Found also near Stirling by the late Dr. ( Buchanan ) 
Hamilton, and near Glasgow by Mr. Hopkirk : but whether really wild 
or not, I cannot say. FI. through the summer. ©. — This is indeed 
very nearly allied to O. stricta, but that species has a more upright, less 
branched stem ; more numerous and often whorled leaves ; with longer 
Jlowerstalks and several flowers in an umbel ; and no evident stipules at 
the base of the petioles. 

18. Agrostemma. Linn. Cockle. 

1. A. Githago, Linn. ( Corn Cockle) ; calyx much longer than 
the corolla, petals entire destitute of a crown. E.Bot. t. 741. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 325 . — Lychnis Githago, Lam De Cand. 

Corn-fields, too frequent. FI. June, July. If . — A Genus scarcely 
different from Lychnis. 1 — *2 ft. high, branched, erect. Leaves linear- 
lanceolate. Cat. ribbed, its segments very long and slender. Flowers 
large, purple. Seeds from their number and size injuring the quality of 
the grain, with which they are thrashed. Git or Gith, Theis says, is 
the Celtic name for a peculiarly large and black seed; whence comes 
Githago. 


Ceraslium.] 


DECANDRIA PENTAGYNIA. 


211 


19. Lychnis. Linn. Catchfly. 

1. L. Flos-Cuculi , Linn. ( Meadow Lychnis or ragged Robin) ; 
flowers loosely panicled, petals 4-cleft, capsule roundish 1-celled. 
E. Bot. t. 573. E. FI. v. ii. p. 326. 

Moist meadows and pastures, frequent. FI. June. If.. — 1 — 2 ft. high, 
hairy below, reddish-green, clammy above. Leaves lanceolate. Calyx 
and Jlowerstatks reddish-purple. Petals rose-coloured. 

2. L. Viscdria, Linn, (red German Catchfly); petals slightly 
notched at the extremity, capsule 5-celled stalked, stem clammy 
at the joints. E. Bot. t. 788. E. FI. v. ii. p. 327. 

Dry alpine rocks; on Craig Wreidhin, or Breiddin, Montgomery- 
shire ; and about Edinburgh, Newburgh, Fifeshire, near Airly Castle, 
Bridge of Earne, and Den of Balthayock, Perthshire. Ft. June. If . . — One 
foot high, glabrous. Leaves lanceolate, acuminate. Flowers in a com- 
pact panicle, large, rose-coloured. 

3. L. alpina, Linn, (red alpine Campion) ; glabrous, petals bifid, 
flowers eorymboso-capitate, capsule 1-celled. E.Bot. t. 2254. E.Fl. 
v. ii. p. 328. 

Bocks on the summit of the Clova mountains, G. Don. FI. June, 
July. If. — 5-6 inches high, by no means viscid. Leaves lanceolate. 
Flowers rather small, rose-coloured. 

4. L. dioica, Linn, (red or white Campion ) ; flowers dioecious, 
capsule of 1 cell. Hooh. Scot. i. p. 142. E. FI. v. ii. p. 328. — 
a. flowers red. L. dioica, E. Bot. t. 1579. — L. diurna, Sibth. Ox. 

— L. sylvestris, Hop Be Cand. — /3. flowers white. E. Bot. 

t. 1580 — L. vespertina, Sibth. Ox. — y. flowers flesh-coloured 
with stamen and pistils together. Sm. 

Under hedges and in grass-fields, common. FI. u. May, June. Com- 
mon in Devon and Cornwall ; rare in Cambridge. — /3. common in Cam- 
bridge; rather rare in Devon and Cornwall. Rev. J. S. Tozer. — y. June 
—Sept. (Sm.) If . — 1 — 2 ft. high, panicled above, pubescent, viscid in a 
slight degree about the joints of the stem. Leaves ovate, or ovato- 
lanceolate. Calyx in the anther-bearing flowers subcylindrical, in the 
fruit-bearing ones ovate. In /3. the petals are pure white and the flowers 
fragrant in the evening. 

20. Cerastium. Linn. Mouse-ear Chickweed. 

* Petals not longer than the calyx. 

1. C. vulgatum, Linn, (broad-leaved Mouse-ear Chickweed); 
hairy nearly erect viscid above, leaves ovate, bracteas herbaceous, 
petals as long as the calyx, flowers subcapitate, calyces oblong 
longer than their pedicels. E. Bot. t. 789. E. FI. v. ii. p. 330. — 
C. viscosum, Huds . — With. — FI. Land. ed. 1. with a fly. 

Fields, pastures, and road-sides, common. FI. April, June. ©. — 6 — 
10 inches high, branched below, dichotomous above. Petals narrow. 


212 


DECANDRIA — PENTAGYNIA. 


[ Ceraslium . 


bifid at the extremity. Caps, cylindrical, as long again as the calyx , 
curved upward. 

2. C. viscosum , Linn. ( narrow-leaved Mouse-ear duckweed) ; 
hairy viscid spreading, leaves oblongo-lanceolate, bracteas mem- 
branaceous at the margin, flowers somewhat panicled, calyces 
oblong shorter than the pedicels. E. Eot. t. 790. E. FI. v. ii.p. 230. 

— C. vulgatum , Huds . — With. — FI. Lond. ed. 1. with a jig. 

Pastures and waste places, wall tops, &c. FI. the whole summer. 1£. 

— Much resembling the last, but a larger, coarser, and spreading plant; 
with longer and narrower leaves ; calyces shorter than their footstalks 
in general, especially when in fruit. 

3. C. semidecandrum , Linn, (little Mouse-ear duckweed) ; 
hairy viscid suberect, leaves oblongo-ovate, bracteas membranaceous 
at the margin, flowers somewhat panicled, calyces ovate shorter 
than the pedicel, segments with broad membranaceous margins, 
petals slightly cloven, stam. 5. E. Eot. t. 1630. E. El. v. ii.p. 331. 

— C. punrilum, Curt. 

Dry waste places in sandy soil, on wall-tops, &c. frequent. FI. March, 
April. ©. — This displays itself, as Sir J. E. Smith well observes, in early 
Spring, on every wall ; and withers away before the C. viscosum begins 
to put forth its far less conspicuous blossoms. Calyx-segments acute, 
not “ obtuse” longer than the petals. Reichenbach’s figure (leonogr. 
t. 181.) represents the petals deeply bifid, as in Smith’s var. /3., and the 
capsule scarcely longer than the calyx; whereas in E. Bot.it is figured 
twice as long and quite strait : which differences I find to exist in my 
own specimens. — Mr, W. Wilson thinks that this may be but an early 
flowering state of S. viscosum. 

L C. tetrandrum, Curt. ( four-cleft Mouse-ear duckweed); “hairy 
and somewhat viscid, flowers four-cleft with four stamens, petals 
inversely heart-shaped shorter than the taper-pointed calyx which 
is nearly as long as the capsule.” ( Sm .) Hook. Scot. i. p. 143. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 332. — Sagina cerastoides, E. Eot. t. 166. 

Waste ground, walls, and sandy places, especially near the sea. On 
the East of England, (Yarmouth,) the South, (Sussex, Mr. Borrcr,) 
and in Wales, Mr. IV. Wilson. About Edinburgh, Banks of Tweed, 
Mr. B. 1). Thomson. Howth, Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. May, 
June. ©. — Sir J. E. Smith seems to consider this plant peculiar to the 
neighbourhood of Edinburgh ; but I have received specimens corre- 
sponding with the Edinburgh plant from the three most opposite points 
of England. At the request of my excellent friend Mr. Borrer, I have 
again considered the opinion I offered in FL Scot, that this should not be 
kept distinct from C. semidecandrum. The number of parts assuredly 
varies from 4 — 5, and in regard to all the other marks of distinction, it 
does appear to me that they rest on very slender grounds. The figure 
in E. Bot ., drawn from a cultivated specimen, only tends to mislead ; and 
in E. FL it is observed that the “ taper-pointed calyx” is alone sufficient 
to keep it distinct from C. semidecandrum ; whereas I find no difference 
in the calyx whatever; except perhaps that in C. semidecandrum there is 


Cerastium.] 


DECANDRIA — PENTAGYNIA. 


213 


a more distinctly membranaceous margin, as there is also to the floral 
leaves or bracteas. In other respects I must confess that Mr. Borrer’s 
own specimens of the 2 plants, do seem to me to be truly the same. See, 
too, Dr. Greville’s remarks in FI. Edincnsis, p. 103. Mr. Wilson, how- 
ever, observes that this plant, though a difficult sp., is, in his opinion, 
distinct. 

** Petals longer than the calyx. 

5. C. cirvense , Linn. ( Field duckweed) ; leaves linear-lanceo- 
late more or less pubescent especially at the base, petals twice as 
long as the calyx. E. Pot. t. 93. E. FI. v. ii.p. 333. 

Dry, sandy, and gravelly places. Less frequent in Scotland. FI. June, 
July. If . — Slews branched and decumbent at the base, a span long, slen- 
der. Flowers large, pure white, 2 or 3 on terminal stalks. Capsule 
scarcely longer than the calyx. 

6. C. alpinum, Linn, (hairy alpine Chichweed) ; subglabrous or 
clothed with long white soft silky hairs, leaves elliptical ovate, 
panicle dichotomous. E.Eot.tA12. E. FI. v. ii. p.3'3i. — C.lati- 
folium, Lighf Scot. v. i.p. 242. t. 9. 

Frequent on the Highland mountains of Scotland. Very rare in 
Wales: and not now to be found on Snowdon. FI. July, August. If. 
— Much branched below and creeping, then erect, 3 — 5 inches high. 
Flowers large, handsome, white. Petals bifid at the point. Whole plant 
hoary. 

7. C. lat folium, Linn. ( broad-leaved alpine Chichweed); sub- 
glabrous or clothed with short rigid yellowish pubescence, leaves 
elliptical-ovate, branches mostly single-flowered. E. Eot. t. 473. 
E. FI. v. ii.p. 334. 

Mountains of Wales and Scotland. Clogwyn y Garnedd near Llan- 
beris, Dr. Richardson ; Snowdon, Mr. W. Wilson, but rare. Very rare 
on Ben Lomond ; more frequent on Ben Nevis. FI. July, Aug. If. — 
Never clothed with long white hairs; of a deeper green than C. alpinum, 
sometimes almost glabrous. The stems are dichotomous and bare of 
leaves below, and much buried under rocks and stones. Flowers soli- 
tary, rarely 2, terminal on the branches. — I agree with Mr. W. Wilson in 
thinking that there exists scarcely any difference in the flower and fruit 
between this and the preceding. In both, the capsules are broadly oblong, 
shining, nearly twice as long as the calyx, strait, opening with 10 teeth. 

8. C. aquuticum, Linn. ( Water Chichweed); upper leaves cor- 
dato-ovate sessile, flowers solitary, fruit pendulous. E. Eot. t. 538. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 335. 

- Sides of rivers and ditches. FI. July. If..— Stems 1—2 feet long, 
branched and straggling. Leaves large, lower ones only on footstalks, 
with short scattered hairs on their surface and margins; whilst in Stc/Iaria 
nemorum, (to which it is closely allied,) besides that the latter species has 
but 3 styles , the leaves are only ciliated on the margin, and appear when 
seen under the microscope to be very minutely dotted with raised points. 
Stems viscid upwards. The capsule opens with 3 teeth or valves. 


214 


DECAN Dill A PENTAGYNIA. 


[Spergula. 


21. Spergula. Linn. Spurrey. 

1. S. arvensis, Linn. ( Corn Spurrey ); leaves whorled with 
minute membranaceous stipules at their base, stalk of the fruit 
reflexeil, seeds more or less margined. E. Eot. t. 1535. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 336 — S. pentandra, E. Eot. t. 1536. 

Corn-fields, too frequent, especially in light stony soils. FI. June, 
Aug. 0. — Stems G — 12 inches high, swollen at the joints. Leaves 1 — 2 
inches long, narrow, linear, terete, glabrous or a little pubescent, in two 
fascicles from each joint, spreading in a whorled manner. Panicle of 
many flowers. Pet. white, ovate, rather longer than the calyx. Siam. 
often 5. Seed varying exceedingly in the width of its margin. — Cattle 
are fond of this plant, and it is an object of culture in Holland. 

2. S. nodosa, Linn. ( knotted Spurrey ); leaves subulate oppo- 
site glabrous connate, the lower ones sheathing, upper ones bear- 
ing clusters of young leaves, petals much longer than the calyx. 
E. Eot. t. 694. E. FI. v. ii. p. 338. 

Wet, sandy, and marshy places, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If. — 
3 — 4 inches high, branched and decumbent at the base, where the leaves 
are f of an inch long, but they gradually become smaller upwards. 
Flowers large, white, 2 — 3 on the terminal branches, peduncled. Whole 
plant glabrous. Cal. nerveless. 

3. S. sayinoides, Linn. (Pearl-wort Spurrey ); glabrous, leaves 
subulate acute awnless, peduncles solitary very long, petals shorter 
than the calyx, capsule twice as long. E. Eot. t. 2105. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 338. 

Highland mountains, frequent. FI. June, July. If. — Stems many from 
the root, procumbent below, 2 or 3 inches in length. Leaves numerous 
and rather long at the base, shorter in remote pairs upon the stem. 
Flower drooping before and alter expansion ; capsule erect. 

4. S. subulata, Swartz, ( awl-shaped Spurrey ); leaves subulate 

subciliated tipped with a bristly point, peduncles solitary very long, 
petals and capsule as long as the calyx. E. Eot. t. 1082. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 339. — S. sayinoides , Curt. — S. laricina, Liyhtf. — FI. 
Dan. t. 858 Sayina procunibens, (3. Linn. 

Dry, gravelly, and stony pastures. FI. July, Aug. If . — This comes 
very near the last species, nor is it easy at all times to discriminate be- 
tween them. Mr. W. Wilson cannot distinguish the Anglesea S. subu- 
lata, from the Ben Lawers S. saginoides ; which latter perhaps is but an 
alpine var. of the former, though the original species of Linn. Both have 
very much the habit of Sagina procunibens. 


Asarum.] 


DODECANDRIA MONOGYNI A. 


215 


CLASS XI. DODECANDRIA. 12 ( — -20) Stamens. 

OltD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

1. Asarum. Perianth single, 3-cleft, superior. Caps. G-celletl. 
— Nat. Orel. Aristolochiae, .7 ass. — Named from a, not, and 
ou?a, a band; because it was rejected from the garlands of flowers 
employed by the ancients. 

2. Lythrum. Cal. inferior, tubular, with 12 teeth, alternately 
smaller. Petals 6, inserted upon the calyx. Capsule oblong, 2- 
celled. — Nat. Orel. Lytiirari.e, Juss. — Name, — XuOgov, blood , — it 
is said from the red colour of the flowers. 

ORD. II. DIGYNIA. 2 Styles. 

3. Agrimonia. Ccd. turbinate, covered with hooked bristles, 
5-cleft, inferior. Pet. 5, inserted upon the calyx. Siam. 7 — 20. 
Fruit of 2, small, indehiscent capsules, invested by the hardened 
calyx. — Nat. Ord. Rosace;e, Juss. — Name corrupted from Ar- 
gemone, given by the Greeks to a plant supposed to cure the cat- 
aract in the eye, called 

ORD. III. TRIGYNIA. 3 Styles. 

4. Reseda. Cal. of 1 piece, many-parted. Petals more or 
less divided and unequal. Caps, of 1 cell, opening at the top. — 
Nat. Ord. Resedaceae, Dc Cand . — Named from resedo, to calm; 
from its supposed sedative qualities. 

(See Euphorbia in Cl. XXI.) 

(Tetragynia, 4 Styles. 

Sec Tormentilla in Cl. XII.) 

ORD. IV. DODECAGYNIA. 12 Styles. 

5. Sempervivum. Cal. 12-cleft. Pet. 12. Capsules 12. — 
Nat. Ord. ('rassulace/E, De Cand . — Name derived from semper, 
always, and vivo, to live ; because it is always green. 

DODECANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 

t 

1. Asarum. Linn. Asarabacca. 

1. A. europceum, Linn. ( Asarabacca ); leaves binate reniform 
obtuse. E. Pot. t. 1083. E. FI. v. ii.p. 342. 

V ootls in the north ; Lancashire and Westmoreland. Near Halifax, 
Mr . Leylaml. Near Linlithgow. 7*7. May. If . — Stem very short. Leaves 
2, petioled, shining ; from the axil of these 2 leaves springs a solitary, 


216 DODECANDRI A — TRIGYN1A. [ Reseda . 

rather large, drooping flower, upon a short footstalk, of a greenish-brown 
colour and coriaceous substance. Segments of the perianth incurved. 
Filaments produced beyond the cells of the anthers, as in Paris. Routs 
aromatic, and said to be purgative and emetic. 

2. Lythrum. Linn . Purple-Loosestrife. 

1. L. Salicaria, Linn. ( spilled purple  Loosestrife'); leaves oppo- 
site lanceolate cordate at the base, flowers in vvhorled leafy spikes 
with 12 stamens. E. Bot. t. 1061. E. FI. v. ii. p. 343. 

Watery and marshy places, frequent. Ft. July. If . . — 2 — 3 feet high, 
erect. Stems 4-sided. Spikes very long, of beautiful, purple flowers. 
Cal. striated. Petals oblong, cuneiform. Stam. within the tube of the 
calyx, 6 long and 6 short ones. 

2. L. hyssopifolium, Linn, (hyssop-leaved purple- Loosestrife') ; 
leaves mostly alternate linear-lanceolate obtuse, flowers axillary 
solitary, stamens about 6. E. Bot. t. 292. E. FI. v. ii. p. 344. 

Moist and occasionally inundated places, chiefly in the east of Eng- 
land. FI. Aug. ©. — A humble annual, 4 — 6 inches high, with small 
axillary flowers. 

DODECANDRI A— DIGYNIA. 

3. Agrimonia. Linn. Agrimony. 

1. A. Eupatoria, Linn, (common Agrimony ); cauline leaves 
interruptedly pinnate, terminal leaflet on a footstalk. E. Bot. 
t. 1335. E. FI. v. ii. p. 346. 

Borders of fields, waste places and road-sides. FI. June, July r . If . — 

2 ft. high. Leaflets deeply serrated ; intermediate smaller ones 3 — 5- 
cleft. Flowers yellow, in a long simple or branched spike, with a 3-cleft 
bractea at their base. — Seeing how variable is the number of stamens in 
this plant, it might perhaps be better to place the Genus with its 
affinities in Icosandria. 

DODECANDRIA— TRIGYNIA. 

4. Reseda. Linn. Rocket. 

1. R. Luteola, Linn. (Dyers Boc/tct, Yellow-need, or Weld); 
leaves lanceolate undivided, calyx 4-partite. E. Bot. t. 320. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 317. 

Waste places ; frequent on a chalky soil. FI. July. ©. — 2 — 3 ft. high, 
branched. Racemes long, of numerous yellowish flowers, with prominent 
stamens. Nectary large, green, crenate on the upper side of the flower; 

3 of the petals 3-cleft, segments linear : two lower petals entire. Capsules 
broad, depressed.- — Used in dyeing woollen stuffs yellow. 

2. R. luteci, Linn, (base Rocket, Wilrl Mignonette); leaves 3- 
cleft or pinnatifid lower ones pinnated, calyx 6-partite, petals 6 
very unequal. E. Bot. t. 321. E. FI. v. ii. p. 348. 

Waste places and chalky hills. Ft. July, August. © or If . — Leaves 
very variable, some bipinnatifid. Flowers deeper yellow than in the last. 


Sempervh'um.] DODECANDRIA — DODECAGYNIA. 


217 


Two upper petals with 2 wing-like lobes, lateral ones unequally bifid, 
lower ones entire Capsule oblong, wrinkled. 

3. R. fruticulosa, Linn. ( shrubby base Rocket); leaves all pin- 
nated waved glaucous, calyx 5-partite, petals 5 nearly equal trifid. 
Jacq. Ic. Rar. t. 4 71. Sni. in Rees' Cycl. Hook, in E. Rot. Suppl. 
t. 2628. 

On an old hedge, between Marazion and Penzance, certainly wild; 
Rev. J. S. Tozer, 1829. Unenclosed sand-hills, Bootle, 4 — 5 miles from 
Liverpool, //. C. IVatson , Esq. Other stations, either for this or R. alba, 
have been communicated to me. About Dublin, Mr- Drummond. Be- 
tween Cork and Glenmire, Dr. Stokes, Mr. J. T. Mackay. Weston 
super mare, Somersetshire, (It. alba); Mr. J. Woods. Near Gosport ; 
Rev. W. S. Bayton. El. June. ^ or If . — The following description was 
made by Mr. Tozer from recent specimens. “ Root woody, tapering. 
Stems growing in a shrub-like manner from the root, more or less 
branched, wand-like, hollow, striated, leafy, 2 — 3 feet high. Leaves 
furnished with a minute tooth at the base on each side, pinnate with a 
terminal leaflet, leaflets narrow, linear-lanceolate, decurrent, their mar- 
gins frequently undulate, particularly the terminal one. Racemes termi- 
nal, erect, tapering, many -flowered. Flowers somewhat scattered below, 
but becoming extremely dense towards the top. Bractea linear, soli- 
tary, at the base of each simple flower-stalk, than which it is a little 
longer. Cal. inferior, of one leaf, deeply divided into 5, linear-lanceolate, 
spreading segments. Petals 5, nearly equal and similar, 3-cleft at the 
summit, the middle cleft being the narrowest, longer than the calyx, 
pale yellowish-white, with a slight tinge of green. Filaments about 1 1. 
Anthers at first of a brownish-yellow colour, but gradually turning to a 
very pale buff yellow as they advance to maturity. Germen with about 
4 angles, tumid. Styles 4, at first erect, afterwards spreading, perma- 
nent.” Except that the R. alba of Linnaeus is annual, I can perceive no 
real distinguishing character. Mr. Borrer informs me that there is a spe- 
cimen of each in the Liunaean Herbarium, and the difference appears 
very slight. R. alba has shorter flower-stalks and thence more cylindrical 
racemes, and the terminal lobe of its leaves is more similar to the others, 
(less dilated than that of R. fruticulosa). I ought to observe that Mr. 
Mackay in his Cat. of PL of Ireland, gives Portmarnock-sands, as the 
station for li. alba ; and considers it to be naturalized. 

DODECANDRIA— DODECAGYNIA. 

5. Sempervivua/. Linn. Houseleek. 

1. S. tectorum, Linn. ( common Houseleek); leaves ciliated, 
offsets spreading, petals entire and hairy at the margins. E. Rot. 
t. 1320. E. FI. v. ii. p. 350. 

House-tops and on walls. FI. July. If . . — The Jlowcrs of this well- 
known and rustic medicinal plant, are no less beautiful than they are 
curious in their structure. The number of stamens is in reality 24; of 
which 12, inserted 1 at the base of each petal, are perfect ; the rest alter- 
nating with the petals, small and abortive; some, bearing anthers, open 
longitudinally and laterally, producing, instead of pollen, abortive ovules! 

L 


218 ICOSANDUIA — MONOGYNIA. [Sjrirced. 

others resemble a cuncate pointed scale, in the inside of which, upon a 
longitudinal receptacle, are likewise ranged abortive ovules, in the same 
manner as in the real germen thus exhibiting the most complete tran- 
sition from stamens to germens, in the same individual flower. See the 
fig. in FI. Loud. cd. 2. 


CLASS XII. ICOSANDUIA. 20 or more stamens, 
placed on the calyx. 1 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

1. Prunus. Cal. inferior, 5-cleft. Pet. 5. Nut of the drupe 
with slightly prominent seams. — Nat. Ord. Rosaceas, Juss. — 
Named srgoyMj in Greek ; according to Theophrastus. 

( See Crataegus in Ord. Pentagynia.) 

II. PENTAGYNIA. 5 Styles, ( variable in most of the Genera.) 

2. Mespilus. Cal.- segments superior, foliaceous. Pet. round- 
ish. Disk large, secreting much honey. Styles 2 — 5, glabrous. 
Fruit turbinate, with the upper ends of the cells, which are bony, 
exposed. Lindl. — Nat. Ord. Rosacea:, Juss. — Named from 
/usttiXti, the Greek word for Medlar. 

3. Crataegus. Cal.-segments superior, acute. Pet. roundish. 
Styles 1 — 5. Fruit oval or round, concealing the upper end of the 

cells which are bony. Lindl. — Nat. Ord. Rosacea:, Juss 

Named from x^ctros, strength, in allusion to the extreme hardness of 
the wood. 

4. Cotoneaster. Floivers polygamous. Cal. turbinate, with 5 
short teeth. Pet. 5, small, erect. Stam. erect, the length of the 
teeth of the cal. Fruit turbinate, with its nuts adhering to the in- 
side of the cal., but not cohering in the centre. — Nat. Ord. Rosa- 
cea;, Juss. — Named from Cotoneum, (kuHuhov, Gr .) the Quince. 

5. Pyrus. Cal. superior, of 5 segments. Pet. 5. Styles 2 — 5. 

Fruit fleshy (a Pome, or apple) with 5, cartilaginous, 2-seeded 
cells. — Nat. Ord. Rosacea;, Juss — Name derived from the Celtic 
peren, a pear. In Greek from a pi, Celtic ; whence apple in 

Engl.; apfel, Germ.; abhal pradhavgh in Gaelic. 

6. Spirasa. Cal. inferior, 5-cleft, persistent. Pet. 5. Capsules 
3-12, 1 -celled, 2-valved, with few seeds. — Nat. Ord. Rosacea:, 
Juss. — Name supposed to be the <wrs igtict of Theophrastus. 

1 This Class comprises a most natural groupe, belonging to the Jussieuan 
Order Rosaceas. 


Primus .] 


ICOSANDRIA — MONOCIYNIA. 


219 


ORD. III. POLYGYNIA. Many Styles. 

7. Rosa. CaL urn-shaped, fleshy, contracted at the orifice, ter- 
minating in 5 segments. Pet. 5. Pericarps (or Carpels ) numerous, 
bristly, fixed to the inside of the calyx. — Nat. Ord. Rosacea;, Juss. 
— Named from the Celtic Rhos, (from r/iodd, red) ; whence also the 
Greek name for a rose, Podov, was probably derived. 

S. Rubus. Cal. 5-cleft. Pe^5. Fruit superior, of several single- 
seeded juicy drupes, placed upon a protuberant spongy receptacle. 
— Nat. Ord. Rosacea:, Linn . — Name of uncertain origin ; per- 
haps from the Latin ruber, or the Celtic, rub, red. — The Bramble 
is the badge of the Macnabs. 

9. Fragaria. Cal. 10-c!eft, segments alternately smaller. Pet. 
5. Fruit consisting of many minute nuts, placed upon a large fleshy 
deciduous receptacle. — Nat. Ord. Rosacea;, Juss. — Named from 
fragrans , odorous; on account of its fragrant smell. 

10. Com arum. Cal. 10-(or more) cleft, segments alternately 
smaller. Pet. 5, (or more), shorter than the calyx. Pericarps 

inserted on a large spongy, hairy, permanent receptacle Nat. Ord. 

Rosacea:, Juss . — Named from Kogx^o f, a term applied by Theo- 
phrastus to some plants of the Arbutus tribe. 

11. Potentilla. Cal. 10-cleft, segments alternately smaller. 
Pet. 5. Fruit consisting of numerous minute nuts, placed upon a 
small dry receptacle — Nat. Ord. Rosacea;, Juss. — Named from 
potens, powerful, from the medicinal properties attributed to some 
of the species. 

12. Tormentilla. Cal. 8-cleft, segments alternately smaller. 
Pet. 4. Fruit consisting of numerous minute nuts, placed upon a 

small dry receptacle. — Nat. Ord. Rosacea:, Juss Named from 

tormina, the dysentery, in the cure of which it was employed on 
account of its astringent qualities. 

13. Geum. Cal. 10-cleft, alternate segments minute. Pet. 5. 

Pericarps with long geniculated awns. Receptacle elongated Nat. 

Ord. Rosacea;, Juss . — Named from yiuto, to yield an agreeable 
flavour. 1 he roots of G. itrbanum are aromatic. 

14. Dryas. Cal. 8 — 10-cleft, its segments equal. Pet. 5 — 8. 
Pericarps with long feathery aims — Nat. Ord. Rosacea:, Juss. 
— Named Spv;, the oak, from adistant similarity between their leaves. 

ICOSANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 

1. Prunus. Linn. Plum and Cherry. 

Fruit covered with bloom. Young haves convolute. 

1. P. domestica, Linn. ( wild Plum-tree); peduncles solitary or 


220 1COSANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. [CralcegUS. 

two together, leaves ovato-lanceolate somewhat downy beneath, 
branches without spines. E. Bot. t. 1783. E. FI. v. ii. p. 355. 

Woods and hedges occasionally, scarcely wild. FI. May. T? . — The 
original stock of our garden plum, but probably a var. of the following; 
indeed Mr. Wilson is disposed to unite them and P. sjhn. as forming 
only one species. 

2. P. insititia, Linn. ( wild Bullace-tree); peduncles in pairs, 
leaves ovato-lanceolate downy beneath, branches ending in a spine. 
E. Bot. t. 841 . E. FI. v. ii. p. 336. 

Woods and hedges. FI. May. Tj. — ‘A small tree, bearing black, glo- 
bular fruit, with a fine bloom, sometimes of a waxy yellow. 

3. P. spinosa, Linn. ( Black-thorn or Sloe); peduncles (mostly) 
solitary, leaves elliptico-lanceolate somewhat downy beneath, 
branches very spinous. E. Bot. t. 842. E. FI. v. ii. p. 357. 

Hedges and coppices, frequent. FI. Apr. May. T? . — It is difficult 
in few words to distinguish this species from the last. It is much smaller 
in all its parts, and the branches are more crooked and spinous. In the 
P. insititia, the leaves are rather considerably advanced at the time of 
the blossoms’ appearing ; in this, the flowers are generally past before 
the leaves appear. Fruit small, very austere ; used to adulterate Port 
wine, as the leaves are to mix with tea. 

** Fruit without bloom. Young leaves conduplicate. 

4. P. Pddus, Linn. ( Bird Cherry); flowers in racemes, leaves 
deciduous obovate or oval glabrous with two glands at the summit 
of the footstalk. E. Bot. t. 1383. E. FI. v. ii. p. 354. — Cerasus 
Padus, Be Cintd. Lindl. 

Woods and coppices, frequent ; especially in the north. FI. May. b . 
—A small tree, with acute, doubly serrated leaves. Flowers white. 
Drupes small, black ; nut rugose. 

5. P. Cerasus, Linn. ( ivild Cherry); flowers in nearly sessile 
umbels, leaves ovato-lanceolate somewhat downy beneath. E. Bot. 
t. 706. E.Fl.v. ii. p. 354. — Cerasus Avium, Mcench, Lindl. 

Woods and hedges. FI. May. b . — The origin of the garden Cherry. 

ICOSANDRIA— PENTAGYNIA. 

2. Mespilus. Linn. Medlar. 

1. M. germanica, Linn. ( common Medlar); leaves lanceolate 
a little downy, flowers solitary nearly sessile terminal, styles 5. 
Sm.—E. Bot. t. 1523. E. FI. v. ii. p. 360. 

Hedges, in Cheshire and Sussex. Red-hill, Surry ; and in its wild, 
thorny state, in a hedge between Reigate and Nutfield, J. S. Mill, Esq. 
Ft. May. b • 

3. Crat/Egus. Linn. Hawthorn. 

1. C. Oxyacantha, Linn. ( Hawthorn , White-thorn or May); 
spiny, leaves glabrous cut into 3 or 5 deeply serrated segments 
cuneate at the base, flowers corymbose, style 1 or 2. Hook. Scot. i. 


ICOSANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


Pyrus.] 


221 


p. 151. — Mespilus Oxyacantha , Gcert. — E. But. t. 2501. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 359. — C. monogyna, Jacq. 

Woods and hedges. Ft. May, June. T? . — Variable in the form of 
its leaves, in the downiness of the cat. and in the colour of the flower 
and fruit. The latter, usually red, Mr. J. Wilson finds of a greenish- 
orange on some bushes in Ayrshire. The fruit or haws afford abundant 
food for small birds during hard winters. — The tree is the badge of the 
Highland Clan Ogilvie. Few of our native plants present a more beau- 
tiful appearance than a well-grown tree of “ Hawthorn hoar,” with its 
massy foliage and innumerable w'hite and fragrant blossoms. 

“ From the White-thorn the May-flower shed 
Its dewy fragrance round our head.” 


4. Cotoneaster. Lindl. Cotoneaster. 

1. C. vulgaris, Lindl. ( common Cotoneaster ); leaves oval, calyx 
glabrous, peduncles slightly downy. Hook, in FI. Loncl. N. S. 
t. 211. Lindl. Syn. p. 104. E. FI. v. iv.p. 268 . — • Mespilus Co- 
toneaster, Linn. 

Limestone cliffs at Ormeshead, Caernarvonshire; Mr. Griffith (1783) 
and .Mr. IF. Wilson. FI. July. Tj • 

5. Pyrus. Linn. Pear, Apple, and Service. 

1. P. communis, Linn. ( wild Pear-tree) ; leaves simple ovate 
serrated, peduncles corymbose, fruit turbinate. E. Bot. t. 1784. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 361. 

Woods and hedges, England. FI. April, May. T? . — Origin of our pear. 

2. P. Mains, Linn. ( Crab-apple ); leaves ovate acute serrated, 
flowers in a sessile umbel, styles combined below, fruit globose. 
E. Bot. t. 179. E. FI. v. ii. p. 362. 

Woods and hedges. FI. May. Tj . — Origin of our apple. Fruit 
austere, of which verjuice is made. — This tree is the badge of the Clan 
Laniont. 

3. P. torminalis, Sm. ( Wild Service-tree); leaves ovate or 
cordate lobed and serrated, lower lobes spreading, peduncles corym- 
bose. E. FI. v. ii. p. 362 — Crataegus torminalis, Linn. — E. Bot. 
t. 298. 

Woods and hedges, chiefly in the middle and south of England. FI. 
April, May. Tj . — Flowers rather large, white. Fruit small, greenish- 
brown, spotted. 

4. P . domestica, Sm .(true Service-tree); leaves pinnated downy 
beneath, leaflets serrated upwards, flowers panicled, fruit obovate. 
E. Bot. t. 350. E. FI. v. ii. p. 363 . — Sorbus domestica, Linn. 

Mountainous parts of Cornwall and in Staffordshire, rare. FI. May. T? • 
— Habit of the following ; but differing in its inflorescence and the large 
size of its fruit, which resembles a small pear, an inch long. 

5. P. aucuparia, Gaertn. ( Quicken-tree , Mountain-ask, orRowan- 
tree); leaves pinnated glabrous, leaflets serrated, flowers corym- 


222 


ICOSANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


[Spircea. 


hose, fruit (small) globose. Hoolt. Scot. i. p. 151. E.Fl.v.ii. 
p. 364. — Sorbus aucuparia, E. Bot. t. 387. 

Mountainous woods and hedges, frequent, especially in the Highlands 
of bcotland, “ Where clings t lie -Rowan to the rock, 

And through the foliage shows his head 
With narrow leaves and berries red.” 

FI. May, June, Tj . — The wood is valued for its compactness, and the 
tree is often planted near houses and villages in the Highlands, to pro- 
tect them from evil spirits. The berries are not unfrequently eaten, 
though very austere. — This tree is the badge of the Clan AP Lachlan. 

G. P. pinnalijida, Ehrlt. (bastard Mountain Ash); leaves entire 
pinnatifid and pinnated white and downy beneath, flowers corym- 
bose, fruit globose. E. Bot. t. 2331. E. FI. v. ii.p. 365. — Sorbus 
hybrida, Linn. 

Isle of Arran, the northern part ; first found by Mr. J. T. Mackay. 
In Derenth wood, near Hartford; Rev. Prof. Henslow. FI. May. Tj . — 
Some of the leaves of this plant so nearly resemble the following, that 
1 fear (and Prof. Henslow is of the same opinion), it can only be con- 
sidered a variety. 

/ 

7. P. Aria, Sm. (white Beam tree); leaves ovate cut and ser- 
rated white and downy beneath, flowers corymbose, fruit globose. 
E. Bot. t. 1858. E. FI. v. ii. p. 367. — Crataegus Aria , Linn. 

Mountainous woods, especially in a chalk or limestone country; 
England and Scotland. Cunnainara and Killarney, Ireland; Mr.J. T. 
Mackay. FI. June. T? . — Leaves often more or less cut at the margin. 
Fruit red. 


6. SpiRjEA. Linn. Spirtea, Drop wort or Meadow-sweet. 

1. S. salic folia, Linn. (Willow-leaved Spircca); shrubby, leaves 
elliptico-lanceolate serrated glabrous, racemes terminal compound. 
E. Bot. t. 1468. E. FI. v. ii. p. 367. 

Moist woods in several parts of the north of England, and Scotland. 
FI. July. T? . — A small branching shrub. Flowers rose-coloured, in 
crowded racemes. 

2. S. Filipendula, Linn, (common Dropwort); herbaceous, 
leaves interruptedly pinnated, all the leaflets uniform deeply cut 
and serrated, flowers paniculato-cymose. E. Bot. t. 284. E. FI. 

v. ii. p. 368. 

Dry pastures, especially in a chalky or gravelly soil; rare in Scotland. 
Hills to the S.W. of Arthur’s Seat, Light/. FI. July. If . — Root with 
rather long tubers. Stem a foot high, panicled above. Leaflets small, 
lanceolate, alternate ones not half their size. Stipules united, serrated. 
Flowers yellowish-white, tipped with rose-colour. 

3. S. U/mdria , Linn. (Meadow-sweet, Queen of the Meadows); 
herbaceous, leaves interruptedly pinnated serrated downy beneath, 
terminal leaflet largest and lobed, flowers in compound (and as it 
were proliferous) cymes. E. Bot.t. 960. E. FI. v. ii. p. 368. 


Rosa.] 


ICOSANDRIA POLYGYNIA. 


223 


Meadows, and banks of ponds and ditches, frequent. Ft. July. If . — 
Stems 3 — 4 feet high, branched upward. Leaflets ovate, acuminate, very 
large, especially the terminal (generally) 3-lobed one; alternate ones 
minute. F/oteers yellowish-white, numerous, sweet-scented. 

ICOSANDRIA— POLYGYNIA. 

7. Rosa. 1 Linn . Rose. 

* Shoots setigerous, prickles scarcely curved. 

1. Bracteas large. 

1. R. Dichsoni, Lindl. ( Dicksons Rose); “ shoots setigerous,” 
prickles scattered slender subulate, leaflets oval coarsely and irregu- 
larly serrated hoary, sparingly glandulose beneath, calyx-segments 
long simple, fruit ovato-urceolate. Lindl. in Trans, of Hort. Soc. 
v. vii. p. 224. — R. Dicksoniana, ejusd. Syn. 

Ireland; discovered by Mr. J. Drummond. (Findley). FI. June. Tj. 
— Upright, with divaricated flexuose branches; bark blood-red, with a 
slight ceesious bloom, young shoots pale green. Prickles, some binate 
below the leaves, the rest scattered thinly, except on the lower part of 
the root-shoots, and there not very numerous ; larger ones with a small 
flat dilation at the base, and sometimes slightly curved. Leaflets 5 or 7, 
large, oval, grey with fine pubescence on both sides ; glands beneath few 
and inconspicuous; serratures occasionally simple, but mostly with a few 
irregular gashes; petioles downy, with, or without very minute prickles, 
with a few glands, and large gland-fringed pale stipules ; the leaves next 
the flowers usually change into broad concave bracteas , some pointed, and 
some with a terminal leaflet. Peduncles setose, thickened and fleshy at 
the summit. Calyx-segments copiously setose at the back, slender and 
downy upwards, with a leafy point ; a small linear-lanceolate pinna is 
found on one or two of them. Petals rather small, shorter than the 
calyx, deep pink. Styles hairy, included. Stigmas depressed. Fruit 
rather large, orange-red, not always, if usually, without a few strong 
setae ; its shape ovate, with a more or less lengthened neck; 2 crowned 
with the persistent, variously spreading, or connivent calyx-segments. — 
I doubt not the propriety of arranging this species with the R. cinna 
momea, with which it agrees in the habit of the shrub and of the prickles; 

1 All the British species are prickly shrubs, with pinnated leaves. Inflores- 
cence ternate: primordial peduncle continuous; lateral ones with a joint near 
the base, accompanied by two bracteas, and capable of producing there another 
pair of flowers, and so on ; but rarely, in British Itoscc, beyond a third series; 
the larger bunches being composed of independent fascicles, which terminate 
alternate, often leafless, ramifications. Such compound bunches are produced 
on strong shoots only ; on the feebler ramuli the flowers grow three together ; 
on the weakest, solitary. The primordial fruit has the shortest stalk, is the 
largest, and is very generally more produced at the base, and less at the apex, 
than the subordinate ones. — It. spinosissima is the only British species in which 
I have never observed a secondary flower. It. rubella and It. involuta rarely 
produce a complete set of three. 

Obs. 1 he <j lands of Rosa are rarely quite sessile. When the stalk obviously 
exceeds in length the diameter of the gland it supports, 1 call it, after Woods, 
a seta. Jt is only by bearing a gland that a strong seta is distinguished from a 
prickle, and a feeble one from a hair. 

3 In the descriptions of the species, I apply the term urceulute to a fruit 
broad at the base and having a lengthened neck. 


224 


ICOSANDRIA POLYGYNIA. 


[Rosa. 


although the specimens and the one living plant which I have the 
opportunity to examine, exhibit no setae on the stem or branches. It 
approaches R. pomifera , ( R. villosa, Lindl.) in the general appearance of 
its foliage, and in the incrassated summit of the peduncle, which ripens 
with the fruit: but the large growth of that species, its pale bark and 
large prickles, its compound calyx-segments, and almost prickly crimson 
fruit, are only some of the points in which it differs. 

2. R. cinnamomea, Linn. ( Cinnamon Rose); shoots setigerous, 
prickles scattered slender subulate, leaflets lanceolato-ohlong simply 
serrated, downy and glandulose beneath, calyx-segments long sim- 
ple, fruit small ovate. E.Bot.t. 2388, (excl. the fruit.) Woods in 
Trans, of Linn. Soc. v. xii. p. 175. Lindl. Ros. p. 28. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 372. Linn. Sp. PI. ed. 2. p. 703 R. acuminata, Swartz. 

In the wood at Aketon Pasture, near Pontefract, Yorkshire; Mr. 
Salisbury in E. Bot. Probably not a native: Mr. Sabine has sought 
for it there in vain. At Birkhill, Galston, Ayrshire, apparently wild ; 
Miss Brown. FI. May, and irregularly through the summer. Tj . — Root 
creeping widely and throwing up numerous suckers. Shrub about 5 feet 
high; branches ascending; bark blood-red with an evanescent c fusions 
bloom. Prickles on the stem very numerous towards the lower part, 
horizontal or rather deflex ed, very unequal in size, the largest somewhat 
compressed ; on the branches found only in infrastipular pairs, and often 
slightly curved. Leaves grey-green, downy beneath and slightly so 
above, without glands, except on the edges of the pale, broadish, pointed 
stipules, and a very few occasionally on the upper side of the downy peti- 
ole ; serratures coarse, simple and mostly regular, but now and then with 
a single gash or a small intermediate tooth. Bracteas broad concave, 
pointed. Peduncle not thickened upwards. Segments of the calyx longer 
than the petals, simple, or with an almost filiform pinna on one or two ; 
naked on the back, except a very few glands along the middle, very 
downy at the edges and towards the dilated point, persistent, connivent on 
the fruit, which is small, ovate, sometimes almost globular, when ripe pulpy, 
of a coral red, with a slight caesious bloom. I never saw setae, either on the 
fruit or on the peduncle. The flower is delicately fragrant. — Mr. Lindley 
has learned from the Linnaean herbarium that this is the R. cinvamomea, 
Sp. PL Linnaeus probably joined with it, as the same species, R. majahs, 
Betz (and Lindl.), which was called R. cinnamomea by the late Dr. 
Swartz, whose R. cinerea, and R. turbinella, appear to be slight vars. of 
the same. Fries also regards R. majalis as the type of R. cinnamomea, 
Linn.; and adds to it as a var., our plant, which is not a native of Sw e- 
den. The Swedish fruit, figured in E. Bot., must, therefore, belong to 
R. majalis. It would not be easy to assign to each its proper synonymy. 
R. cinnamomea seems to be the southern, R. majalis the northern plant. 
Whether the latter is truly distinct, I cannot decide. Its humble stature, 
(about two feet,) seems its principal characteristic for the stipules vary 
in width, and that of the leaves can scarcely be depended on; and 
although we find its branches usually more prickly, Wahlenberg found 
both them and the petioles mostly unarmed in Swedish Lapland. No 
other Hose exists in that region. It retains in our gardens the lively red 
which attracted on the banks of the Tenglio, the notice of Maupertuis, 


7?<wrt.] 


ICOSANDRIA POLYGYNIA. 


225 


from whom Thomson borrows an allusion to it in a beautiful passage of 
his Winter, 1 The flowers of It. cinnamomea are of a less vivid purplish- 
pink and darker than the colour given in E. Hot. 

2. Bradens small or wanting . 

3. R. rubella, Sm. ( red-fruited dwarf Bose ) ; stem and branches 
densely setigerous throughout, prickles few slender nearly strait, 
leaflets simply serrated naked, their disk eglandulose, fruit oblong 
or urceolate. E. Bot. t. 252 1 , and fruit t. 2G0 1 . Woods l. c.p. 177. 

Lindl. Bos. p. 40. E. FI. v. ii. p. 374 B. alpina, 6. Ser. in 

Be Cand. 

Rare. Sandy sea-coast of Northumberland, sparingly ; Mr. Winch. 
Banks of Dee about Abergeldy, Anderson. FI. May. Tj . — Root creeping, 
stoloniferous. Shrub 2 — 4 feet high, slightly arched, with spreading 
much divided branches, copiously covered with seta:, among which are 
scattered a few slender prickles, strait or very nearly so, and slightly 
deflexed. Leaves without hairs on any part ; with glands, setce, and 
sometimes prickles on the petioles and midribs, and a glandular fringe 
to the stipules, which are somewhat widened and divaricated at the 
points; leaflets 7, 9, 11, full-green above, paler beneath, elliptical or 
roundish, not acuminate, the serratures quite simple or slightly gashed, 
gland-tipped whilst young. Flowers solitary, sometimes two together, 
with a small narrow bractea ; peduncle, and usually the base of the calyx- 
tube, setose; the segments simple, setose, and glandulose, sometimes 
slender, sometimes dilated at the point, shorter than the petals. These 
are cream-coloured, not rarely tinged with pink, often tipped externally 
with crimson, in some cultivated cars, entirely red. Head of stigmas 
prominent, very hairy. Fruit pendulous, bright-red, firm, not pulpy 
when ripe, usually of a short oval shape tapering equally to each end, 
sometimes, especially when two flowers occur together, flattened at the 
base and truly urceolate; the peduncle in both cases gradually thickened 
upwards, fleshy and coloured. Persistent calyx-segments mostly spread- 
ing, affixed to a prominent ring, like which their base is often fleshy and 
coloured. The fragrance of the flowers has a peculiar acidity mingled 
with the common scent of the rose.— In Mr. Forster’s doubtful plant 
from Irish seed, mentioned by Woods, the peduncle is bare of seta, the 
calyx without glands, and with a few narrow pinnae. — Exclusive of the 
plant just mentioned, one form only of It. rubella has been found wild 
with us : but several cars, exist in our gardens. One of these (/3. mda- 
nocarpa, Lindl.?) has the leaflets small and distant, and small urceolate 
fruit of a deep dull blood-purple, almost black, on a less incrassated 
stalk. All the other vars. with which I am acquainted, differ from every 
form of It. spinosissima by their bright red fruit; from most of them, the 
abundant seta: and the few and uniform larger prickles offer a sufficient 
distinction. The species is more nearly allied to It. alpina and It. slrictu. 
The former, indeed, has neither setae nor prickles, except a few near the 
ground on radical shoots, and its fruit is more elongated. The latter is 
but unsatisfactorily marked by the denudated points of the ramuli and 
the larger somewhat glaucous leaves. Its larger prickles are more rare 

1 *• And, fringed with Roses, Tenglio foils his stream.” 


226 


1COSANDRIA POLYGYNIA. 


[Rosa. 


than in R. rubella, but a few are found on vigorous parts of the shrub; 
and the difference in general habit is but trifling. Still I agree with Mr. 
Lindley in believing the two distinct. 

4. R. spinosissima, Linn. ( Burnet-leaved Rose); prickles 
crowded unequal mostly strait, intermixed with seta}, leaflets small 
simply serrated their disk eglandulose, calyx simple, fruit nearly 
globular. E. Rot. t 187. Woods, l. c. p. 178. Lind/. Ros. p. 50. 

E. E/.v. ii. p. 375 — R. pimpinellifolia, Linn.— Sabine Ser. in 

Re Cand. Prod. — j3. pilosa ; “ very dwarf, leaves acute hairy on 
the under surface.” Lindl.Syn.p. 100. 

Heaths, &c. chiefly on sand and chalk; most common towards the 
sea. — /3. Ireland. FI. May. Tj . — Increasing fast by suckers. Shrub 
upright, 1 — 3 feet high ; occasionally still more dwarfish on sandy sea- 
coasts, and taller when drawn up in hedges ; branches spreading, tor- 
tuous, much divided ; lowermost often lengthened and trailing. Prickles 
tawny, horizontal or deflexed, very numerous on every part, although 
old bushes are sometimes denudated ; extremely unequal in size; the 
larger not rarely compressed, and somewhat falcate, 1 the smaller, and 
often all, straight, gradually dwindling down to setae. Leaflets rigid, most 
frequently 7, but varying in number from 5 to 11, sometimes even to 
15, and in figure from orbicular and subretuse to ovate and acute, the 
more numerous usually the longer, and the more finely serrated; they 
are mostly flat, their hue full green or somewhat glaucous, paler beneath ; 
serratures simple, generally broad, very rarely irregular; petioles usually 
glandulose, and with a few strait prickles, sometimes naked, sometimes 
with a few chaffy scales, rarely downy or hairy; stipules fringed with 
glands, narrow at the base, dilated, leafy and divaricated at the points. 
Flowers numerous, solitary. Peduncle gradually thickened upward, 
becoming fleshy and coloured with the fruit, naked or glandulose, some- 
times setose, more rarely prickly. Cal. segments shorter than the petals, 
acuminate, entire, or with a few gland-tipped teeth, and occasionally a 
minute pinna or two. Petals cream-coloured, with or without crimson 
blotches on the outside, sometimes suffused with pink, rarely full pink 
or deeper red. Stigmas somewhat depressed, pale or red, mixed with 
hairs. Fruit varying from the size of a large cherry to that of a large 
pea, globose, or more often spheroidal, in some ears, obovate, in others 
ovate and urceolate ; dark purple or blood-red, or full black ; firm, not 
pulpy when ripe, of a sweet taste, and with a purple juice : the spreading 
or erect persistent segments of the calyx are affixed to a prominent ring, 
and often somewhat fleshy at the base. The flowers are more or less 
cupped in different ears, and for the most part larger than in the E. Rot. 
figure. Their fragrance is similar to that of R. rubella, but in some ears. 
the scent becomes disagreeable, as in R. arvensis, when they are fully 
expanded. — f>. is a very remarkable var. Its serratures are rather irre- 
gular; its peduncles densely setose and prickly ; its cal.-tube turbinate, 
naked except at the base; the segments setose, fully pinnate. The shape 
of the tube induces a suspicion of monstrosity. I have seen but one 
specimen, and I leave the plant where Lindley has placed it. Under all 

> “ Falcate, bent as a scythe; uncinate, hocked, like a claw or sickle.” Woods. 


Rosa.] 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


227 


its other variations this most beautiful species is readily recognised by 
its peculiar arms and foliage. The tall Scotch Rose of the gardens, R. 
spinosissiwa, y. Woods, (s. Host. Kew.) may possibly be distinct. Its 
prickles are less unequal and rather thinly scattered, the larger much 
compressed but strait. The habit, too, both of the bush and foliage is 
different, approaching in a slight degree to that of R. hibernica. Sussex 
specimens have been mistaken for it, but I have no reason to believe it 
really British. Mr. Sabine, in Trans, of Hart. Soo., regards it as the true 
R. spinosissiwa, Linn. Fries observes, that the plant intended by Lin- 
naeus when he gave to R. spin, a place in his FI. Suec. was the Swedish 
R. cinnamomea, (R. majalis, Lindt. ) but that part, of the synonymy and 
the whole of the description belong to our 7?. spin, which is not a native 
of Sweden. See also E. FI. v. ii. p. 377. R. myriacantha, Dc Cand. is 
made by Seringe, a var. of our R. spin. ; but its glandulose leaves seem 
an essential difference, and their serratures, in all that I have seen, are 
compound. 

5. R. hibernica, Sm. (Irish Rose); shoots and ramuli sparingly 
setigerous, prickles scattered unequal, larger somewhat falcate, leaf- 
lets simply serrated hairy beneath, their disk eglandulose, calyx 
pinnate, fruit nearly globular. E. Bot. t. 2196 . Woods, l. c.p. 222. 
Lind/. Ros. p. 82 . E. FI. v. ii. p. 393 . 

Counties of Derry and Down, particularly near Belfast harbour; Mr. 
Templeton. FI. “June— Nov.” Smith. Tj . — Root creeping, stolonife- 
rous. Shrub 3 — 6 feet high, dense, with ascending, much divided, reddish- 
brown branches. Larger prickles slightly curved, smaller subulate and 
straight ; numerous on root-shoots, few on the ramuli ; a few setae occur 
on both. Leaflets closely set, 5 or 7, rarely 9, ovate, or of a rounder 
outline, acute; naked and somewhat glaucous above, hairy beneath, 
chiefly on the ribs and veins; serratures sharp, simple, occasionally 
rather unequal; petioles hairy, with falcate prickles, sometimes wanting, 
rarely any set® or glands ; stipules broad, smooth, slightly serrated, with 
tapering, slightly spreading points ; those next the flowers enlarged. 
Flowers rather small, mostly solitary or two together, sometimes in con- 
siderable fascicles and then accompanied by ovato-lanceolate bracteas. 
Peduncle cylindrical, naked as well as the calyx, the segments of which 
are downy within and at the edges only ; shorter than the pale pink 
petals, with slightly leafy points and a few pairs of shortish, linear-lan- 
ceolate, entire, gland-tipped pinnae. Styles included, hairy; stigmas 
somewhat prominent. Fruit nearly globular or urceolate, but short, 
blood-red, crowned with the erect or spreading, persistent segments of 
the calyx — A satisfactorily distinct species, intermediate in habit and 
in the size of its leaves between R. spinosissiwa and R. collina, g. Woods; 
but in its fruit, and in the presence of seta;, nearer to the former. 

6. R. Wilsoni, (Wilsons Rose ); prickles crowded unequal strait 
intermixed witli seta;, leaflets simply serrated hairy, their disk 
eglandulose, calyx simple, fruit ovato-urceolate. 

On a declivity by the Menai, near Bangor, Mr. W. Wilson. FI. June, 
July, . About 3 feet high, of slender habit, well furnished with very 
uneq tal strait prickles and glandular sette. Leaflets 7 or 9, 5 towards the 


228 


ICOSANDRIA POLYGYNIA. 


[Rosa. 

flowers, ovate, somewhat cordate, blunt, (not acuminate,) simply ser- 
rated, slightly hairy on both sides, the ribs beneath rather more so, and 
the midrib beset with glands, like the petiole, which bears also a few 
small prickles, which are often falcate or almost uncinate ; stipules copi- 
ously fringed with glands, widened upwards, pointed and somewhat 
divaricate. Flowers usually 3 together, bracteate ; the primordial bractea 
a pair of enlarged stipules with a terminal leaflet, the others simple 
ovate or lanceolate, acute. Peduncle setose. Calyx-lube broadly ovate 
(almost globular), with a short neck, sparingly setose, sometimes naked ; 
segments persistent, copiously setose and glandulose, shorter than the 
petals, with a slightly dilated point and occasionally a capillary pinna. 
Petals rather large, pink. Styles included, hairy ; stigmas forming a 
round protuberant mass. Fruit scarlet. — In describing this remarkable 
Rose, which I have never seen growing, I have availed myself of the 
remarks of its accurate discoverer. He observes further that it is as 
plentifully supplied with prickles as R. spinosissim /, and that the foliage 
soon acquires a reddish tinge, which gives to the bush a remarkable and 
somewhat elegant aspect. On the flowering twigs I find the prickles 
scattered, small, slightly curved, and richly tinged, like the twigs them- 
selves and the flower-stalks and calyx, with purple. Whatever might 
be supposed from the spec, char., this plant has no resemblance, in its 
appearance, to R. spinosissima ; but decidedly approaches the Roses of 
the Centifulice groupe. Its leaves are somewhat longer than those of R. 
Sabini, (i. the plant which it most resembles in calyx. Can it be a hybrid 
production ? Mr. Wilson finds several bushes of it, which discourages 
such an idea. 

7. K. involuta , Sm. ( prickly unexpanded Rose); prickles 
crowded unequal strait, intermixed with sette, leaflets doubly ser- 
rated hairy, glandulose beneath, stem dwarfish. E. Rot. t. 2068, and 
fruit t. 2601. Woods, 1. c. p. 183. Lind/. Ros. p. 56. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 377. 

Hebrides, and Western Highlands of Scotland. — Near Meggarnie in 
Glen Lyon; Rev. Dr. Stuart. Isla, Morvern, and elsewhere in the 
Highlands; Rev. Dr. Walker. 1 Isle of Arran; Mr. G. Don. FI. 
June. Tj. — Spreading widely by suckers. Shrub scarcely exceeding 
3 feet high, upright, with spreading branches. Prickles horizontal or 
slightly deflexed. Leaflets o — 9, elliptical, naked above, or very nearly 
so, hairy and glandulose on the ribs and veins beneath ; petioles with 
strait prickles, glands, anti a few hairs. Flowers mostly solitary. Pe- 
duncle somewhat thickened and fleshy upwards. Calyx setose, segments 
rather shorter than the pale pink petals, usually a little dilated at the 
point, and rarely bearing a slender pinna or two, persistent, and more 
or less spreading on the fruit. Fruit dark-red, setose, globular or some- 
what urceolate. — Intermediate, in the size and habit of its leaves, between 
R. spinosissima, to which it is attached by Seringe, and R. Sabini, of 
which Mr. Winch still thinks it a var. The doubly serrated and glan- 
dulose leaves distinguish it from the former; the dwarfish growth from 
its nearer affinity, the latter; from all the known vars. but one, of which, 

' I have specimens from a plant communicated by Dr. Walker to the late 
Mr. llrodie, of Brodie, which 1 suspect to belong to 11. Sabini ,3. 


ICOSANDRI A POLYGYNTA. 229 

it further differs by its crowded arms. Its serratures too are less regu- 
larly compound, being often toothed on the outer margin only, and not 
constantly even there. The petals do not expand widely, but are only 
occasionally involute. 

8. R. Sabini , Woods , (Sabines Rose); shoots and ramuli seti- 
gerous, prickles scattered unequal strait or nearly so, leaflets 
doubly serrated hairy, glandulose beneath, calyx somewhat pinnate. 
Woods, l. c. p. 188. Lindl. Ros. p. 59. E. Fl.v. ii. p. 380. 
E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2594. 

/3. prickles more numerous, leaves very hairy, calyx almost simple. 
Lindl. Ros. ]j. 59. — R. Doniana, Woods, l. c.p. 185. E. FI. v. ii. p. 378. 
E. Rut. Suppl. t. 2601. 

y- larger prickles falcate, calyx almost simple. R. gracilis, Woods, 
I. c. p. 186. E. FI. v. ii. p. 379. — R. vi/losa, E. Bot. t. 583, (Jig- on/p ). 1 

Scotland and N. of England. — (3. Sussex, and near Edinburgh. War- 
wickshire, Rev. W. T. Bree. — y. Near Darlington, Mr. Robson. Pooley 
Bridge, Cumberland, and near Keswick, Woods. Between Pooley and 
Lowther, Mr. Robertson. FI. June. T? . — 5 — 8 feet high, (in y. 10 feet, 
Woods ;) upright ; branches reddish-brown, spreading, somewhat droop- 
ing, much divided. Prickles numerous on the stem, rather thinly scat- 
tered on the ramuli, very unequal in size ; nearly strait in a and /3. ; the 
larger ones considerably curved in y. Leaflets 7 or 9, elliptical or ovate, 
acute but rarely acuminate, sharply and doubly serrated, edged with 
glands ; hairy in various degrees, and thence more orless green or hoary 
above, beneath paler and more hairy, and sprinkled on the ribs and 
veins with glands; petioles also hairy and glandulose, with small strait 
prickles, and often setose ; stipules rather broad, somewhat dilated up- 
wards, pointed and divaricate. Flowers solitary or in threes ; in larger 
bunches more frequently in «. than in /3. Peduncle cylindrical, setose, 
as is mostly the calyx-lube ; segments hairy, setose, and glandulose, vari- 
ously but not copiously pinnate, with a long usually leafy point, nearly 
as long as the petals. Petals pink, often beautifully mottled, or white. 
Styles included, hairy ; stigmas varying in prominence. Fruit dark red, 
globular or somewhat urceolate ; persistent cal.-segments erect, more or 
less spreading, or recurved. — Th e leaves of«. are somewhat greener than 
those of the other vars., its calyx is usually more compound, its fruit 
more generally urceolate, and it increases less by the roots. Mr. Don’s 
C'lova plant, to which the name Doniana was intended to be given, has 
an almost simple cal)x like /3., but agrees more nearly with a. in foliage 
and fruit.— In y. the calyx is simple, or has merely an almost capillary 
wing or two in Mr. Woods’ specimens ; but in some of Mr. Robertson’s 
it is nearly as compound as in «. Its larger prickles, as well as those 
on the petioles, are somewhat falcate; but those of a. are not invariably 
quite straight, and this increase of curvature can scarcely be held a.suf- 
fieient spec. char. I am, however, but very imperfectly acquainted with 
the plant.— I have a specimen from the garden of the Horticultural 
Society, labelled R. Doniana, horrid a, with leaves like those of/3, and 
most like to it in calyx, but with the prickles on the ramuli almost as 


1 The Rose contemplated In the description was R.pomifera. See E. pi. 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


230 


[Rosa. 


much crowded as tlio.se of R.ferox. I have neglected to ascertain 
whence it was procured, nor am 1 informed as to its stature. 

** Shoots mostly without setce. 

1. Leaves glandulose. 

a. Prickles uniform or nearly so ; setce none or very few. 

9. R. villosa, Linn, (villous Rose); prickles uniform nearly strait, 
leaflets doubly serrated downy glandulose, calyx slightly pinnate, 
root-shoots straight. Woods, l. c. p. 189. E. FI. v. ii. p. 381. 
Linn. Herb. — R. mollis, E. Rot. t. 2459. Lindl. Syn.p. 100. — 
R. mollissima, Wi/ld. — R. heterophylla , Woods, l. c. p. 195. — R. 
pulchella, Woods, l. c.p. 196 ? 

N. of England, Scotland, Wales ; Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. June, 
July. T? . — Root stoloniferous. Shoots upright or ascending, not arched ; 
busk sometimes 6 — S feet high, but usually of more humble growth ; 
branches irregular, ascending, variously tinged with purple, and caesious 
in various degrees whilst young. Prickles not numerous, subulate from 
a dilated base, sometimes very slightly curved, often in pairs at the base 
of the petioles. Leaflets 5 or 7, ovate or elliptical, not acuminate, some- 
times subretuse, hoary with down and glandulose, most plentifully so 
beneath ; primary serratures often rather distant, especially towards the 
base of the leaflet, with their points frequently somewhat divaricate, and 
the secondary ones sometimes scarcely more than a fringe of glands ; 
petioles and stipules' downy and glandulose; the former mostly with 
feeble strait prickles; the latter linear, scarcely dilated towards the points; 
those nearest the flowers coalescing into broadly ovate, elliptical, or 
sometimes lanceolate pointed bracteas. Flowers 1 — 3 together on the 
ramuli, often in large bunches on strong shoots. Peduncle and calyx- 
tube caesious, setose, more rarely naked. Calyx-segments downy, setose 
and glandulose, simple, or more generally sparingly pinnate, very often 
leafy at the point, about as long as the petals, persistent, connivent, erect 
or somewhat spreading on the fruit. Petals generally of a vivid full pink 
or deeper red, often fringed with distant glands, sometimes white with 
crimson blotches on the outside. Styles included; stigmas prominent. 
Fruit mostly pendulous ; broadly elliptical or nearly globose, lateral ones 
often urceolate ; when ripe, purplish-red approaching to crimson, with a 
caesious bloom. The turpentine scent perceptible in most of the glan- 
dulose-leaved roses is powerful in this species. — The E. Rot. figure re- 
presents a stunted specimen. — If the trivial name villosa be assigned to 
the Apple Rose of our gardens, R. pamifera, “ Herm.” (R. villosa, Lindl. 1 2 ), 
that of mollissima, first given, it seems, by Borkhausen, and belonging to 
this species rather than to R. lomentosa, claims priority to that of mollis. 
— The specimens from which Mr. Woods described his R. heterophylla, 
are remarkable for the disproportionately large size of the upper leaves, 
and their petioles are almost entirely without prickles ; but plants 

1 Mr. Wilson finds the bracteas, in Welsh plants, almost naked ; aud the 
stipules much less downy than the leaves. 

“ And apparently II. villosa, Linn. Sp. PI. Linnteus, however, undoubt- 
edly included Ii. villosa, 11 nods, and probably It. tomentosa, in his idea of Ii. 
villosa. 


Rosa.) 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


231 


brought from the station at Collington, and probably from the same 
roots, although still retaining the latter peculiarity, have in one year 
assumed the usual appearance of R. villosa. — Possibly R. pulchella. 
Woods, ought to be referred to R. tomentosa. In both species, the petals 
of dark-flowered vars. have not unusually a slight glandular fringe. In- 
deed Fries regards such a fringe as essential to his R. mollissima, which 
includes the two. With us it certainly is not constant. When Fries 
says that R. mollis, Sm., removed to a garden, became in the third year 
R. tomentosa, Sm., I suspect some error ; although I would by no means 
positively assert that the two species are ab origine distinct. — R. tomen- 
tosa y. resinosa, Lind/. Ros., transferred to R. mollis in Syn. Brit. FI., has, 
in our specimens, foliage most like that of R. tomentosa, but a nearly 
simple calyx. 

10. R. tomentosa, Sm. (downy-leaved Rose); prickles mostly uni- 
form strait or curved, leaflets doubly serrated downy glandulose, 
calyx copiously pinnate. E. Rot. t. 990. Woods l. c. p. 197. E. FI. 
v. ii. p. 383. Lindl. Syn.p. 100. Hook, in FI. Load. N. Ser. t. 1 2d. 
Pers. — JJe Cand. — Ser. 

cc. R. scabriuscula. Winch, Geog. Distr. ed. 2. p. 45. E. Rot. t. 1896. 
(fig. only ?) Woods, l. c. p. 193. 

Hedges and thickets, not unfrequent. — /5. About Newcastle. Winch. 
FI. June, July. Tj . — A most variable species, best distinguished from 
R. villosa by the copiously pinnate calyx-segments, which generally, but 
not invariably, spread widely on the fruit. The fruit too is mostly of a 
more slender figure ; and the leaflets are usually more narrowly elliptical 
and more pointed. These vary much in the quantity of glands and 
denseness of pubescence ; their upper surface being often very hoary, and 
sometimes, although rarely, quite naked. The peduncle and calyx-tube 
are seldom without numerous setcc. Some of the vars. throw up suckers 
freely; others sparingly; others not at all.— The living plants which I 
have had an opportunity of studying present the following variations: 

1- Shoots arched , fruit oblong, prickles strait. 

2. Shoots and fruit the same, prickles falcate. 

3. Shoots arched, fruit urceolate, prickles strait. 

4. Shoots and fruit the same, prickles falcate. 

5. Shoots and fruit the same, prickles uncinate. 

G. Shoots strait, fruit oblong, prickles all nearly strait. 

7. Shoots and fruit the same, prickles of ramuli falcate, the rest strait. 

. The third of these forms, (p. Woods,) is a very remarkable one, and 
bids fair to assume the rank of a species when better understood. It is 
of humble growth, with long straggling tortuous branches, the ramuli of 
a pale hue, lanceolate hoary leaflets , deciduous calyx-segments, small 
urceolate fruit, upright, and usually in considerable bunches. It is a 
Sussex plant. Of all Woods’ vars. his o. incana is the only one which 
I venture to separate from this species. It will be found under R. cccsia. 

Sherardi, Davies, and Sm. E. FI. v. iv. p, 209, (R. subglobosa,v. ii. 
p. 5s4,) be distinct, we must look to its falcate prickles for a character, 
lor the shape both of the leaflets and fruit is too evidently inconstant. — 
R. sylvestris, Lindt. Syn. p. ]0U, has also falcate prickles. In a specimen 
from the garden of the Horticultural Society, its leaflets are almost naked 


232 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


[Rosa. 


above, with serratures less compound and more acuminate than usual in 
R. tomentosa. Its ramuli, as in several vars , are flexuose and coloured; 
anil its shoots are described as growing erect. — A', scabriuscula. Winch, 
has, in plants from Newcastle, long and straggling, much arched or 
drooping branches, remarkably oblong leaflets, its calyx-segments rather 
less copiously pinnate, and scarcely remaining on the ripe fruit, which is 
of a darker red than the usual scarlet hue of R. tomentosa, to which, how- 
ever, the plant seems to have more affinity than to R. villnsa. — R. tomen- 
tosa y. Woods has a peculiar aspect. I almost think it a species, but 
know too little about it to pronounce it such. It more resembles, I think, 
R. canina /3. (sarmentacea) than R. tomentosa; but the bush is, if I mis- 
take not, upright, with few and slightly falcate prickles, and its unripe 
fruit is globular and remarkably large. It has no pubescence but on the 
upper side of the petioles, and no glands but a few on the petioles and 
the edges of the stipules and the imperfectly-compound serratures. I 
have a specimen gathered by Mr. Woods at Weston- super-mare, and re- 
ferred to this var., which has similar leaves, but richly setose peduncles 
and calyx, like the common R. tomentosa. The forms of R. tomentosa, 
with arched shoots and falcate prickles, have so much the habit of various 
forms of R. canina, that doubts have naturally arisen whether even these two 
species are truly distinct. The fruit in this species is pulpy as in that, 
and has a similar flavour. The prickles are less dilated at the base. 

11. II. inodora, Fries, (slightly-scented Briar); prickles uniform 
uncinate, leaves doubly serrated hairy mostly glandulose beneath, 
calyx-segments closely pinnate mostly deciduous, ramuli without 
setae, fruit elliptical or nearly globular. Fries “ FI. Ha/land .” — 
E. Bot. Svppl. t. 2610 , ad calcem. Ser. in Be Cand. — JR. Bor- 
reri, Woods , l. c. p. 210 . E. FI. v. ii. p. 388 — R. dumetorum, 
E. Bot. t. 2579 . — R. rubiginosa, var. inodora , Lindl. Ros. p. 88 . 
FI. Bond. N. S. t. 117 . — Wahl. — Fries, Nov. cel. 2 . — (3. Woods. 
leaves hairy on both sides. — y. leaves more copiously glandulose, 
calvx-segments elongated persistent. 

Thickets and hedges, chiefly in the S. of England. — /3. near Edinburgh 
and elsewhere. — y. Glen Goy, Inverness-shire. Near Newcastle, Mr. 
Robertson. FI. June, July, Tj . — Sparingly stoloniferous. G — 8 feet high, 
stout, arched, with vaguely divided, ascending, drooping branches. 
Prickles not very numerous, all strongly hooked, their base dilated : 
flowering ramuli not rarely unarmed. Leaflets flat, rarely carinate, broadly 
ovate, or sometimes narrower, scarcely acuminate; upper surface dark- 
ish green, mostly shining and inconspicuously hairy, under-side paler 
and more hairy, sprinkled, perhaps always, although often sparingly and 
inconspicuously, with minute glands which give out a slight turpentine 
fragrance, such as also fringe the stipules and the truly double serratures; 
petioles downy and glandulose, with small hooked prickles. Flowers, 
as in all the neighbouring species, solitary, 3 together, or in larger bunches, 
according to the vigour of the bush and the part on which they grow. 
Peduncle mostly shorter than the ovate pointed bracteas, beset with fee- 
ble setce or with soft pale hairs, more rarely naked. Calyx-tube mostly 
naked, sometimes sparingly setose ; segments about as long as the petals 
usually naked at the back, with a leafy point and closely set, shortish, 


7?(myz. 1 ICOSANDRIA — l’OLYGYNIA. 233 

lanceolate, often compound pinna, fringed with gland-tipped teeth. Pe- 
tals pale pink, moderate in size and in expansion. Styles included, hairy; 
stigmas depressed. Fruit varying in length, scarlet, soft and pulpy, and 
with the same taste as that of/?, canina when ripe. — The figure in FI. 
Land, represents a small but not uncommon state of the species. — Mr. 
Woods has favoured me with a specimen from Weston-super-mare with 
leaves much like those of R. septum, but with the characteristic calyx of 
/?. inodora . — y. approaches rubiginosa, and has even a few setaceous 
prickles and setae on the stem and ramuli. Its fruit is somewhat longer 
than is usual in the common plant, but not pear-shaped. Its leaves ra- 
ther more fragrant, but the scent is not that of the Sweet-Friar. In 
character it comes near to R. tomentosa. The sctcc on the peduncle are 
like those of R. inodora a. 

12. R . mierdntha, Smith, (small- floioered Sweet-Briar); prickles 
uniform uncinate, leaflets doubly serrated hairy, glandulose beneath, 
calyx-segments and pinnae elongated deciduous, fruit small ellipti- 
cal and ovate, ramuli sparingly setigerous. E. Bot. t. 2490. 
1 Foods, l. c. p. 209. E. FI. v. ii.p. 387. ( not De Cand.) — II. ru- 
biginosa, {3. Lindl. Ros. p. 87. 

Open bushy commons, thickets and hedges, in the S. of England. 
Abundant on chalk and gravel in some parts of Sussex and Surry. Essex, 
Mr. Forster. South of Ireland, Mr. Drummond. FI. June, July. f . — 
Scarcely stoloniferous, 3 — 8 feet high, of loose straggling growth, with 
arched shoots and spreading branches. Prickles strongly hooked, not 
numerous, nor intermixed with strait subulate ones; but a few strictly 
setaceous, and a few real setce, often occur immediately under the inflor- 
escence ; occasionally the flowering ramuli, and sometimes the points of 
leafy shoots, are altogether unarmed. Leaflets broadly elliptical or ovate, 
of a rather pale green and somewhat shining and slightly hairy above ; be- 
neath more hairy and sprinkled copiously, as are the petioles and usually 
the stipules, with rusty glands diffusing a fragrance similar to that of the 
Sweet-Briar, but less powerful, and sometimes according to Woods inter- 
mixed with a turpentine odour. Peduncle setose. Calyx-tube naked, 
or with a few setce, those at its base not in general larger than the others; 1 
its segments with a long leafy point and narrow lanceolate pinnae fring- 
ed with gland-pointed teeth. Petals small, shorter than the calyx, pale 
pink. Styles included, not hairy; 2 stigmas slightly protuberant. Fruit 
coral-red, or scarlet, pulpy when ripe, and flavoured like that of R. canina : 
the primordial bluntly elliptical, never pear-shaped : the secondary ovate 
with a slight neck, often somewhat oblique. The flowers are for the most 
part neatly cupped, as in Ii. systyla, and delicately fragrant. — It is diffi- 
cult to distinguish this plant satisfactorily by characters from R. inodora; 
yet it differs considerably in habit, its ramification being more tufted, 
although it sends out long arched shoots, and also in its lengthened calyx- 
segments and its small fruit. It is in fact more likely to be united to R. 

1 I have gathered at Box-Hill, Surry, stunted specimens with very much 
the habit ot It. septum, with the set® on that part stronger, and leaflets smaller 
and narrowed at the base. 

1 cannot justly estimate the value of this character, to which I have not 
attended in the living plant. Lindley remarks that they are “ often without 
pubescence and 1 find them so in all my dried specimens. 


234- 


ICOSANDRIA POLYGYNIA. 


[Rosa. 

rubiginosa by botanists who separate those two, yet deny to this the 
rank of a species. The justice of its claim to such rank I am far from 
asserting positively : yet its uniform and much less numerous prickles, 
its small pulpy fruits, all rounded at the base, and its deciduous calyx- 
segments, seem constant characters ; and its smaller and paler flowers 
and arched straggling shoots, distinguish it from II. rubiginosa at first 
sight. 

b. Prickles various, intermixed with setce. 

13. R. rubiginosa, Linn. ( true Sweet-Briar); prickles numer- 
ous, larger uncinate, smaller, subulate, leaflets doubly serrated 
hairy, glandulose beneath, mostly rounded at the base, calyx-seg- 
ments and pinnae elongated persistent, primordial fruit pear-shaped. 
E. Bot. t. 991. E. FI. v. ii.p. 385. — R. rubiginosa a. Lindl. Ros. 

p. 8G. Hook. Scot. i. p. 157 Be Cand . — Wahl. — Fries. — R. 

Eglanteria, Woods, l. c.p. 206. — Huds. — R. suavifolia, Light/. 

Open bushy places, chiefly in the S. of England. Abundant in some 
places on chalk ; more rare in moist hedges. About Edinburgh ; and 
near Passage in Ireland. Ft. June, July. T? . — Stoloniferous ; 4 — 6 feet 
high, compact and densely branched in general, and the shoots seldom 
arched. Prickles numerous ; the large uncinate ones on the stem and 
branches mixed irregularly with abundance of smaller, some slightly 
curved, and some strait, subulate and setaceous, and some real seta:, 
which last, however, are not always present ; the flowering-twigs are 
occasionally unarmed, but have more usually binate uncinate prickles 
near the base of the leaves, and others scattered, varying in size and 
curvature. Leaflets flat, or often concave, pale bright green, more or less 
hairy, ovate, or broadly elliptical, or often almost round, occasionally 
narrower and more pointed, but scarcely tapering to the base ; sprinkled 
copiously beneath, on the edges and on the petioles with fragrant viscid 
glands, which are found also on the backs and edges of the stipules. 
Peduncles and often the calyx- tube beset with setce, of which those at the 
base of the latter are usually larger ; segments setose and glandulose, 
with a lengthened leafy point and narrowly lanceolate pinna;, spreading 
almost at right angles with gland-pointed teeth. Petals deep pink, equal 
to the calyx or rather shorter. Styles included, slightly hairy ; stigma 
scarcely protuberant. Fruit changing first to yellow then to orange-red 
or scarlet, its substance thin, scarcely pulpy and almost insipid when ripe, 
when in bunches the primordial is pear-shaped, the secondary obovate, 
but less tapering at the base; the others elliptical. The fragrance of the 
leaves is compared to that of ripe apples. — / 3 . of IVoods, which I have 
from himself, has leaves smaller, but of the usual form, and differs chiefly 
in wanting the larger bristles at the base of the calyx-tube. — At’zelius, in 
his lie Rush Suecanis Pentanien,' argues, as does Woods, for the adop- 
tion of the name Eglanteria for this species. Fries also thinks that if 
that name be restored, it should be assigned rather to this species than to 
R. (idea, “ licet e Mant. p. 399, palam est quam intellexit Linnaeus.” He 
remarks too that Linnaeus long referred R. rubiginosa to R. canina, men- 


’ Translated in Sims and Kdnig’s Annals of Botany, v. ii. 


Rosa .] 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


235 


tioning it in It. Scan. p. 277, as belonging, on account of its red flowers, 
to R. canina, not to It. Eglanteria, notwithstanding its fragrant leaves. 
See Sir J. E. Smith’s opinion in E. EL 

14. R .sepium, “ Thuil.” ( small-leaved Siccct- Briar); prickles 
numerous, larger curved, smaller subulate, leaflets small doubly 
serrated hairy acute at each end, glandulose beneath, calyx-segments 
and pinnae elongated, (fruit ovate?). Lindl. Syn.p. 101. De 
Cand, FI. Fr. cd. 3. v. vi. 538 ; Borr. in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2653. 

Near Bridport, Warwickshire; Rev. IV. T. Brec. FI. June. Tj . — A 
densely branched bush, about 3 feet high, distinguished, in the common 
French plant, by long slender flexuose twigs with large nearly strait, 
or falcate, or even uncinate, prickles, and small distant lanceolate leaflets, 
mostly 7, acute (mostly, cut not invariably,) at the base as well as at 
the point. The petioles are glandulose, sometimes hairy, and bear a few 
straightish or curved prickles. The peduncles and calyx-tube are usually 
naked; but occasionally both, or the former only, bear setae, which are 
larger on the base of the tube, although less remarkably than in R. rub- 
iginosa. The calyx-segments are variously glandulose, and the narrowly 
lanceolate pinna; issue more or less exactly at right angles, and have 
little sharp divaricated gland-tipped teeth. The styles are included and 
very slightly hairy. — In Mr. Bree’s plant, which I have seen only under 
cultivation, 1 find but little difference, except that the ramuli are less 
flexuose, and the leaflets not remarkably distant, rather larger, and more 
hairy', almost shaggy beneath. Th e pinnae of the calyx are less divaricated 
and have glands on the edges only', (as they have in a specimen gathered 
by Mr. Woods at Troyes, which, also, has larger leaflets). The flowers 
are white, clustered or solitary, according, as usual, to their situation on 
the bush. The fruit is scarlet, ovate, (rounded at the base,) when soli- 
tary ; I have no note of its shape in the bunches. 1 The prickles , which 
have a few seta; among them, are numerous, the larger ones strongly/ 
hooked. Whether setae exist in the foreign plants I know not ; I find 
none in my limited number of specimens. Desvaux, Journ. de Bot. for 
1813, v. ii. p. 1 1G, assigns to this species 9 cars., and describes 5 of them 
as wanting glands, or bearing them only' on the petioles. He expresses 
a strong persuasion that both It. sepium and R. rubiginosa pass into R. 
canina. 

2. Leaves eglandulose. 
a. Styles distinct, included or nearly so. 

15. R. canina, Linn. ( common Boy-Rose); prickles uniform 
hooked, leaves naked or slightly hairy, their disk eglandulose, 
calyx-segments fully pinnate deciduous, styles not united, shoots 
assurgent. a. e). t. Lindl. Ros. p. 98, (excl. some syns.) Hooh. 
Scot. i.p. 157. — Fries* 

1 De Candolle describes the fruit of the French plant as longer than that of 
It. rubiginosa. 

2 It. canina of Fries must surely be this species, although he opposes its late 
and coriaceous fruit to the early subcarnose fruit of his h. coriifoliu ; explaining 
the term “ coriaceus" by “ durissimus subexsuccus,” and carnosus" by “ durus 
guidon, sed motlior et svccosior." Now all our vars . of Ii. canina have the ripe 
fruit soft and pulpy, such, I presume, as he terms “ fructus pulposus." 


23 G 


ICOSANDRIA POLYGYNIA. 


[Rosa. 


Thickets, hedges, &c. very common. FI. June, July. If. — The Bri- 
tish Roses answering to the character given above may be subdivided as 
follows -. 

u. Leaflets naked, carinate; serratures simple. R. canina, Woods, l. c. 

p. 223. E. FI. v. ii. p. 39L 

a. green, a. Woods. R. canina, E. Bot. t. 992. 

b. grey. /3. Woods. 

P>. sarmentacea. Leaflets naked, carinate; serratures compound. R. gar- 
ment acea, J Foods, l. c. p. 213. E. But. Suppl. t. 2595. — R. canina, FI. 

Loud. 

a. green. /3. Woods. R. sarmentacea, Swartz ? 

b. grey. «. Woods, R. glaucophylla , Winch. 

y. surculosa. Leaflets naked, flat ; serratures simple. R. surculosa, 

W oods, I. c. p. 228. R. venosa, Swartz ? R. canina, /3. E. FI. 

a. green. /3. Woods. 

b. grey. «. Woods. 

$. dumetorum. Leaflets more or less hairy, flat. 

a. hairy on both sides. R. dumetorum , “ Thuil.” Woods, l. c. p. 21?. 

E. FI. v. ii. p. 392, Burr, in E. But. Suppl. t. 2G10. 

[i b . hairy beneath only. R. collina, Jacq. from the younger Jaequin. 

I have not seen it British.] 

s. Forsteri. Leaflets more or less hairy, not flat. R. collina, JVoods, 
l c.p. 2 1 9. — R. Forsteri, E. Ft. v. ii.]). 392. Burr, in E. But. Suppl. t. 2611. 

a. concave, green, y. Woods. R. campestris, Swartz. 

b. carinate, grey. 

1. hairy beneath only. /3. Woods. R. Forsteri, E. Bot. Suppl. 

£.2611. 

2. hairy on both sides. 

The forms above mentioned are not so defined, but that connecting 
variations may be found. In all of them, the ramification varies in 
denseness, and the shoots are more or less arched or erect according 
to the vigour of the plant ; the prickles are not very numerous, hooked 
in various degrees and compressed, and their base considerably dilated ; 
the leaflets vary in width ; their serratures, although scarcely compound, 
except in /3., are mostly irregular in size; the bracleas vary in size; the 
peduncle and calyx-tube are most commonly naked, their setae, when 
present, feeble and not numerous; the calycine segments are Iree from 
glands, or more or less copiously fringed with them ; the styles are hairy ; 
the fruit is coral-red, or more scarlet, soft and pulpy when ripe, with a 
pleasant somewhat acid taste. The principal cars., as I now assume 
them to be, are excellently described by Woods, who, the better to bring 
them into notice, • distinguished them as species. I shall add a lew 
remarks on each. — «. grows 6 — 10 feet high. It has usually lanceolate 
leaflets, not rounded at the base, with a small, often twisted point, and 
rather small acuminate serratures ; petioles with almost strait prickles, 

1 See his remarks in TV. of Linn. Soc. v. xii. p. 170. — Lindley well 
observes, “ Surely it is not surprising that this most common species ot the 
genus, whose fruit is scarcely ripe before it is devoured by small birds, and 
deposited by them in every possible variety of soil and situation, should fre- 
quently assume features considerably different from its more general appear- 
ance.” He has however separated as species , in his Si/n. Brit. l'l. several forms 
which he had made vars., in his Monograph. 


Rosa.] 


ICOSANDUIA — POLYGYNIA. 


237 


and mostly, notalways, a few glands, but mostly, not always, bare of 
hairs, except a few on the channelled upper-side; peduncle and calyx- 
tube generally naked, the latter more rarely setose than the former ; cal- 
segments loosely pinnate, the pinner entire or toothed; the disk of the 
receptacle sometimes very prominent ; styles included ; stigmas depressed ; 
fruit oblong, generally tapering to each end, especially in the modifica- 
tion a ; which is distinguished by its shining bright green leaves. R. 
Swartzii. Ser. in l)e Cand. Prod., from Fries, now reduced by Fries him- 
self to R. canina, seems to be this form, although the styles are described 
as exsorted. R. senticosa, Ach. received from Ur. Swartz, appears to be 
a form of this var. with large subglobose fruit. Woods describes bis 
var. s. with a subglobose calyx-tube. — /3. sarmentacea resembles «. in 
growth and habit, in styles and stigmas, in the disk of the receptacle, and 
in the variations of the cal-segments • In its extreme state it appears 
well distinguished by its double serratures, the points of which are often 
divaricate; but although often really double, they are sometimes only 
apparently so from a fringe of glands ; and every gradation in this respect 
is to be met with between it and a. The leaves vary much in width in 
different specimens, and the fruit in size. It is mostly oblong, but Mr. 
Woods found it nearly globular in his var. 2., a N. of England plant, of 
large growth. In the green-leaved modification, b., 1 once observed a 
few glands on the under-side of the leaflets. In /3. y. and 2. the pedun- 
cle is sometimes naked, has sometimes soft hairs, and sometimes feeble 
setce . — y. surculosa approaches 2. in aspect, from the flatness of its leaves, 
and, usually, their rounded figure. It has the serratures rather coarse; 
prickles on the petioles considerably hooked; pinner of the calyx rather 
closely set and usually entire; styles somewhat protruded, with a round 
head of stigmas; fruit short, elliptical, or ovate and somewhat urceolate. 
The green-leaved modification a., is of humbler growth than the other, 
which rivals the larger forms of «. in size. This var. and «., seem less 
inclined to spread by suckers than the other vars. of the species. — The 
British form of 2. dumetorum is often of humble and feeble growth ; 
but vigorous plants also occur, 6 — 8 feet high. It has much general 
resemblance to R. inodora. It bears somewhat small, but uncinate prickles, 
rather numerous for this species ; leaflets for the most part broadly 
oval, the terminal one sometimes almost cordate, their serratures coarse, 
their hue dull green but shining, the hairs on the upper surface being 
oppressed and very inconspicuous; calyx-pinner varying in closeness; 
styles nearly or quite included ; stigmas in a round head ; fruit elliptical, 
varying in length. Plants agreeing with this var. in pubescence, but in 
other respects more like «., sometimes occur. The first form, a., of s. 
Forsteri, is connected by intermediate variations with the other form, b., 
on the one side, and with 2. on the other. In its proper state, it has 
leaflets pale green and concave, as those of R. rubiginosa often are ; ser- 
ratures shallow, sometimes indistinctly compound ; petioles hairy or 
downy, more or less glandulose; peduncle mostly naked, sometimes 
hairy, very rarely feebly setose. Its prickles are as in 2 — The next form, 
b. ]., but for the existence of intermediate plants, might well be held a 
species. Its growth is mostly stout and dense; prickles less dilated at 
the base and less hooked than in the other vars.; fu/iage with a strong 
glaucous tinge ; serratures coarse, often unequal ; petioles downy, usually 


238 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


[Rosd. 


not always, without glands ; peduncle and calyx-lube naked ; cal. -segments 
rather closely pinnate ; styles included ; stigmas varying in prominence, 
considerably hairy ; fruit elliptical, often so short as to be almost globu- 
lar. — The remaining form, b. 2., has highly csesious twigs and more pubes- 
cent grey leaves. Its flowers are more deeply coloured than is usual in 
the species. In other respects it approaches nearest to $. and to t. «, 
although its leaflets are carinate. From the tints of the foliage and 
flowers it has a general resemblance to R. ccesia. This form appears 
rare. I find it at Henfield. — Of the other forms, var. y. has been least 
noticed, but it is not unfrequent in Sussex and Surry, and Mr. Forster 
finds it in F.ssex. — I have Yorkshire and Northumberland specimens, 
from Mr. Robertson, as R. sepium, Swartz,' which have altogether the 
appearance of t. b. 1 . but the leaves with some hairs on both sides, and the 
head of stigmas prominent and very woolly, as in R. bractescens. Some 
of them have a few setts on the peduncles. Should S. and s. be finally 
regarded as a species distinct from R. canina, collina seems to be the 
trivial name it should bear, since R. collina, Jacq. can scarcely be speci- 
fically distinguished. The figure in FI. Austr. t. 197, is much likes- b. 1., 
but the plant sent by the younger Jacquin most resembles a luxuri- 
ant state of$. — Mr. Wilson finds a Rose, about Warrington, with glau- 
cescent leaves, somewhat hairy on both sides, more or less doubly ser- 
rated, and fringed, as well as the calyx, with glands. This resembles 
both (3. sarmentacea and s. Forsteri. b. If the species be divided, it must 
go with the former to R. canina, not to R. collina. Lindlev is probably 
correct in regarding as a feeble state of R. canina the R. mala, 
Woods, /. c p. 205, described from a single specimen gathered between 
Ambleside and Clappersgate- The peculiarity which induced the author 
to propose it as a species is the “union of strait prickles, unmixed 
with setae, with smooth leaves furnished only with simple serratures.” 
The fruit is described as globose ; the petioles, as devoid of prickles and 
( down, sometimes with, sometimes without, glands. — R. systyla, y. Mon- 
santo-, Lindl. Rus.- p. Ill, found by Miss Munro, at Watford, Herts, is 
probably a hybrid production from intermixture of a wild with a garden 
Rose. It has more resemblance to R. dumetorum, (R. canina, S.) than to 
R. systyla, J Yoods, but is very different from both in habit, being of hum- 
ble growth with stiff upright branches like R.gal/ica, which it resembles 
also in the size and shape of its roundish orange-red fruit, and in the 
thick stiff peduncle plentifully sprinkled with glands or short seta;, and 
in some degree in the calyx, and in the narrowly oblong outline and 
thickish substance of the leaflets. Sometimes, not always, it has small 
setaceous prickles on the ramuli. The stigmas are sessile at the orifice 
of the tube, and have but few hairs among them. It flowers abund- 
antly, with petals of a beautiful glowing red, and larger than in any other 
British Rose, except another supposed hybrid, of which some account 
will be found under R. arvensis. 

16. R. bractescens, Woods, (bracleated Z)off-Rose); “calyx- 
tube globose, prickles hooked, leaflets simply serrated downy 
beneath, bracteas overtopping the fruit.” Woods, l. c. p. 216. 

1 Afterwards named by Swartz himself sepincola. Fries refers it to his 
own II. coriifulia. 


ICOSANDIUA — POLYGYNIA. 


iiosn.] 


239 


E. FI. v. ii. p. 391. — It. dumetorum, Lindl. Syn. p. 102. — R. 
cor ii folio, Fries, Nov. ed. ii.p. 147 ? 

About Ulverston, Lancashire ; and a var. with nearly smooth stipules 
and glandulose calyx-segments, at Ambleside, Westmoreland. Woods. 

FI. Tj . — Mr. Woods describes this shrub as G or 7 feet high, with 

diffuse branches ; prickles more numerous, more slender and less curved 
than usual in the groupe to which it belongs ; petioles downy, without 
glands, rarely without prickles ; leaflets elliptical, hairy above as well as 
downy beneath ; peduncle bare, or more rarely with few and feeble setae; 
styles included ; head of stigmas conical ; fruit globose. He chiefly de- 
pends on the shape of the fruit, the mass of very woolly styles , and the 
immense bracteas, to distinguish it as a species. I leave it for future 
consideration, having seen only specimens kindly communicated by Mr. 
Woods, which agree entirely, as far as they go, with his description ; but 
seem very closely allied to his R. col/ina, (i?. canina t. b.) If the refer- 
ence to Fries be correct, the separating of the plant from R. canina 
is sanctioned by the opinion of another eminently original observer, and 
one by no means liable to be accused of an undue propensity to multiply 
species. 

17. R. ccesia, Sm. ( glaucous Dog-Rose'); prickles uniform un- 
cinate, leaflets doubly serrated downy, their disk eglandulose, calyx 
sparingly pinnate, styles not united, shoots assurgent. E. Dot. 
t. 2367. Woods, l. c.p. 212. E. FI. v. ii. p. 389. Lindl. Syn. 
p. 102. — R. canina , d. Ilcok. Scot. i. p. 157. 

£. incana. prickles strongly uncinate from a much lengthened base, 
fruit large oblong. R. tomentosa o. incana, Woods, l. c. p. 203. 

Highland valleys of Perthshire and Argyleshire. Northumberland 
and Durham. Mr. Robertson. — £. sent from Scotland to Mr. Sabine, by 
the late Mr. G. Don. FI. June, July. T? . — Stoloniferous. About 5 feet 
high, upright, densely branched. Leaves elliptical, pointed, downy be- 
neath, very slightly so or quite smooth above; serratures sometimes 
regularly double, sometimes imperfectly so ; petioles glandulose, and 
usually downy or hairy ; stipules fringed with glands, downy or almost 
naked; those next to the flowers changed into broad, elliptical, pointed 
bracteas. Flowers usually solitary. Peduncle naked, or sparingly setose. 
Calyx-tube elliptical, naked, in all that 1 have seen, and, like the leaves 
and young twigs, very glaucous ; segments about as long as the petals, 
broad at the base, sometimes glandulose at the back, sometimes bare c f 
glands in every part and only downy at the edges, somewhat leafy at 
the point, and bearing a few narrowly lanceolate jnnnce, which are either 
entire or toothed with glands. Petals uniform pink, or white. Styles 
nearly or quite included, hairy; stigmas a round prominent mass. Fruit 
ov ato-urceolate, scarlet, soft and pulpy when ripe, before which it loses 
the segments of the calyx. I have seen the fruit only in a plant from 
the neighbourhood of Newcastle, which is, under cultivation, much less 
beautiful than this species, as it occurs in the Highlands. Its growth is less 
dense, its flowers fewer and of a paler pink. — I retain this species until 
oppoi tunities offer themselves of further investigation. Mr. Robertson 
observes that R. collina, Woods, readily passes into it, and Mr. Woods 


210 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


[It os ft. 


himself has remarked how difficult it is to characterise the two. — g. in - 
cnna is about 8 feet high, the leaves very glaucous and slightly downy 
above, densely so beneath, as are also the petioles and the haiks of the 
stipules, on which, and on the edges of the serratures and of the calyx, 
are sprinkled small glands ; and a few such are sometimes found on the 
veins on the under side of the leaf, near the point. The peduncle is beset 
with soft hairs, not setae. The calyx-segments bare at the back, very woolly 
at the edges, spread widely, or even become recurved after flowering, 
and remain until the fruit is almost ripe ; their pinna; are broad and 
short. The fruit is bluntly oblong, almost equally large at each end, not 
unlike in size and shape to an Olive. The dilation at the base of the 
strongly hooked prickles is very remarkably elongated. — The taller 
growth, and the differences in the prickles, the calyx-pinnce, and the fruit, 
scarcely prove this plant a species; but it is a remarkable var., with more 
affinity, I think, to It. cccsia, than to R. tomentosa. 

b. Styles united in a column ; mostly exsertcd. 

18 . R . systylci, Woods, (close-styled Dog-Rose') ; prickles uni- 
form uncinate, leaves simply serrated, their disk eglandulose, calyx- 
segments sparingly pinnate deciduous, styles united hairless, shoots 
assurgent. Woods, l. c. p. 230 . E. FI. v. ii.p. 395 , ( excl. from both 
the foreign sytis.) Lindl. Fos. p. 111 . (excl. the foreign syns. except 
It. dibracteota, DC. FI. Fr. ed. 3 . v. vi. p. 537 .) — It. collina, 
E. Dot. t. 1895 . (excl. syn .) 

jS. Woods, leaves shining, naked on both sides, except the mid-rib. 

y. leaves glaucescent, naked on both sides, except the mid-rib. 

Thickets, hedges, &c. Sussex. — Essex, Middlesex, Mr. Forster. 
Berkshire, Mr. Bicheno. Kent, Mr. Woods . — Nidrie, and hills to the N. of 
Milngaire, Hopkirk. Near Cork, Mr. Drummond. — fi. Henfield, Sussex. 
I have similar specimens from Fort- Augustus. — y. Newtimber, Sussex. 
FI. June, July. Tj . — Scarcely stoloniferous. Often lOor 12 feet high, 
vaguely branched, and with strong arched shoots. Prickles on the stem 
not much dilated in general at the base, compressed, and often much 
enlarged in the lower part so as to be almost triangular with a straight 
point, or a short, hooked beak; those on the ramuli usually in substi- 
pulur pairs. Leaf ets more generally 5 than 7, carinate, lanceolate or 
elliptical, bright green and shining, or rarely opaque above, paler and 
slightly hairy beneath ; serratures tolerably regular; petioles downy, with 
curved prickles, with or without glands. Peduncle rather long, with 
numerous glands or short setae, a few of which are rarely found on the 
tube of the calyx. Calyx-segments broad and short with a tapering 
point and linear-lanceolate pinna;, entire, or with a few gland-tipped 
teeth. Petals longer than the calyx, pink, sometimes white. Column 
of styles usually protruded, but variable in length ; occasionally quite 
included; stigmas forming a conical head. Fruit oblong, or sometimes 
globular, pulpy and orange-red when ripe, flavoured like that of R. arven- 
sis. — fi. is of feebler growth, with shoots and leaves beautifully tinged 
with purple, and flowers more deeply coloured than those of a. — y. is 
about 3 feet high, of a stiff habit, with large and very numerous prickles; 
peduncles with somewhat longer setae; fruit small, globular, setose. — The 
habit of «., the most elegant, when vigorous, of all our wild Roses, most 




ICOSANDUIA POLYGYNIA. 


241 


resembles that of 7?. canina a. The prickles on young strong shoots are 
generally crimson or rich dark purple, and the young foliage tinged with 
reddish brown. The flowers often form large bunches, and are generally 
of a peculiarly pleasant pink, with the stamens and the base of the 
petals ot a glowing orange tint. The upright growth distinguishes this 
Rose from R. arvensis: to which however the var. p. approaches in 
habit. The species appears but little known. The R. systyla , stylosa, 
brevistyla, and leucochroa of the French botanists, belong rather, as my 
friend Woods informs me, to R. arvensis and its ears. 

19. R. arvensis, Huds. (trailing Dog-Rose); prickles uncinate, 
those of the ratnuli feehle, leaves simply serrated deciduous (glau- 
cescent beneath), their disk eglandulose, calyx-segments sparingly 
pinnate deciduous, styles united hairless, shoots trailing. E. Bot. 
t. 188. Woods, l.c.p. 232. Lindl.Ros.p. 112. E. Fl.v.ii. p. 397. 
Hook. EL Lond. N. S. t. 123. Linn. — [3. ( Woods), glands on the 
fruit. — y. shoots flexuose, leaves ovato-lanceolate shining. 

Woods, hedges, thickets, &c. common in the S. of England. — Rare in 
the mountainous districts, Mr. Woods. Lowlands of Scotland, Dr. Bur- 
gess. Near Bray, Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mack ay . — y. Henfield, and else- 
where in Sussex. FI. June, July. Tj . — Bush scarcely a yard high when 
unsupported, with trailing shoots, often many feet in length, and much 
divided, entangled, feeble ramuli, which occasionally produce rugged 
excrescences and take root. Prickles numerous, not much dilated at the 
base, uncinate, those on strong shoots often compressedly conical with 
a straight or curved point ; those on the ramuli few and scattered, small, 
more or less curved. Leaflets thin, nearly flat, coarsely serrated, dull 
green, paler, and somewhat glaucous beneath, naked on both sides, or 
slightly hairy beneath, chiefly on the midrib ; on some plants they are 
elliptical, ovate or almost round, on others, much elongated; petioles 
hairy or glandulose, or both, with falcate prickles. Flowers copiously 
produced, often in large bunches, with lanceolate bractcas, white, large 
and handsome, opening flat, with a slight fragrance at first, but soon be- 
coming unpleasant. Peduncle long, sprinkled with almost sessile glands. 
Segments of the calyx reflexed by the time the petals fall, broad and 
short, with an acute point shorter than the petals, and a few small, entire, 
lanceolate pinna:. Column of styles often overtopping the stamens ; per- 
sistent stigmas in a round head. Fruit small, spherical, ovate, or ellipti- 
cal, sometimes long and slender, its length varying almost in accordance 
with that of the leaflets; blood-red when ripe, with an orange-red pulp 
of a pleasant peculiar flavour. — p. differs only by minute deciduous glands 
on the fruit. — y. is a handsome var., approaching to R. sempervirens ; 
but the leaves are deciduous and the styles hairless. The shoots and 
foliage are often much tinged with purple. The leaves shine a little even 
on the under-side, although usually glaucescent there. Its ripe fruit is 
oval, orange-red. The peduncles, when several flowers grow together, 
spread less than in R. sempervirens, but rather more than in the other 
states of the species, in which their position is remarkably parallel. — 
R. arvensis is distinguished from all the other British species by its trail- 
ing habit. Some of the vars. so closely resemble the true Ayrshire Rose, 
(R. capreolata, Neill and Don,) that I know not where to draw the line 

M 


242 


ICOSANDRIA — POI.YGYNIA. 


[Rubus . 

of separation. Mr. Sabine, however, regards that plant as a deciduous 
var. of R. sempervirens, and points out the shining leaves, paler, but with- 
out glaucescence,on the underside, and the hairy stigmas, with some other 
minute differences, as distinguishing it from II. ar vends. — Several Roses 
have been met with in a wild state, which approach more nearly to R . 
arvensis than to any other British species, and which are conjectured to 
be hybrids between it and some garden Rose. They all resemble Ii. 
gallica in having dark setae, scattered more or less plentifully, among the 
prickles, in the stout stiff peduncles, and in the rigid leaves hoary un- 
derneath. In the habit of the bush they are almost intermediate between 
that species and R. arvensis, but they have not the long trailing shoots 
of the latter. The best known of them is the Double Hip-Rose of gar- 
deners, very similar to R. hybrida, Schleicher, if not the same. In this 
the flowers are larger than in R. arvensis, semidouble, of a very delicate 
uniform pink; the styles slightly protruded, separate, hairy. I have not 
seen the fruit perfect ; when half-grown it is nearly spherical, very like 
that of II. gallica. This plant is said to have been found in Devonshire. 
— A very similar plant, with rather smaller and less multiplied petals 
and somewhat longer styles, grows in a hedge near Cowfold, Sussex. I 
have not found it perfect its fruit. — In a third, said to have been found 
in Yorkshire, the styles are still more lengthened, the flowers almost as in 
the first, and the fruit as large as that of R. gallica, but when ripe more 
like that of R. arvensis in colour. — The late Mr. G. Anderson found yet 
another in Somersetshire, with flowers of the same hue as in the others, 
very nearly single, approaching to those of R. gallica itself in size; in 
which the styles are hut slightly hairy, and not at all protruded beyond 
the orifice of the receptacle, its fruit comes to apparent perfection, is 
orange-red, and closely resembles that of Ii. gallica. This is known, I 
understand, among cultivators by the name of R. arvensis, Andersonii. 

8. Rubus. Linn. Bramble. 1 

* Leaves pinnate. 

1. R. ideens, Linn. ( Raspberry ); leaves pinnate with 5 or 3 
leaflets white and very downy beneath, footstalks channelled, stems 

' Shrub-lihe plants, or herbs with perennial roots. The latter offer nothing 
very peculiar. In some species of the former, the stem is upright or merely 
curved at the top; but in the greater number it is either prostrate, or, as is 
more generally the case, assurgent, arched, and decurved, anil the ends of the 
shoot avid of the side-branches, if it produce any, unless prevented by circum- 
stances from reaching the ground, take root in the latter part of the year. In 
the winter the shoot is partially destroyed, the part next to the origi nal root 
surviving to produce flowering-branches during the ensuing summer, and 
usually dying after the fruit has been perfected; young shoots meanwhile spring- 
ing up by its side. The rooted ends also become distinct plants at various dis- 
tances from the parent-root, often many yards. This mode of growth adds 
much to the difficulties in the discrimination of the species ; since an acquaint- 
ance with both the leafy shoot and the floriferous stein, formed in the second 
year from its remains, is necessary. The best characters are found in the figure, 
the arms, and the leaves of the former. The leaves in all the British species of 
this division are, occasionally at least, quinate, and, with one exception, digitate, 
or somewhat pedate from a partial junction of the stalks of the two lateral pairs 
of leaflets ; the margins serrated, for the most part unequally and irregularly ; 


Rubus.] 


1 COS ANURIA — POI.YGYNIA. 


243 


nearly erect downy prickly, flowers drooping, petals as short as 
the calyx. E. Bot. t. 2443. E. FI. v. ii. p. 407. 

Woods, especially in the north. FI. May, June. Is . — Stems woody. 
Leaflets somewhat cut and serrated. Fruit scarlet in a wild state. 

** Leaves digitate or pedate. 

1. Stem ( mostly ) biennial , woody. 
a. nearly erect , not rooting. 

2. 11. suberectm, Anderson, ( upright Bramble); stem nearly 
erect not rooting obsoletely angular, prickles uniform few small, 
leaves digitate quinate, leaflets flexible, lower pair sessile or nearly 
so, panicle nearly simple. And. in Tr. of Linn. Soc. v. xi.p. 218. 
t. 16. E. Bot. t. 2572. E. FI. v. ii. p. 406. — /3. prickles more 

numerous and rather larger. B. plicatus , W. and N. t. 1 It. 

nit id us, E. FI. p. 404. 

Somewhat boggy heaths, sides of streams, &c. chiefly in mountainous 
districts in the north. Near Tunbridge Wells. By the large bog near 
Stokes Bay, Hampshire. — /3. In similar situations in the Sussex forests. 
Near Newberry, Berkshire ; Mr. Bicheno. TV. June, Aug. . — 3 — 4 ft. 
high, often less in exposed places, with much the habit of the Raspberry, 
merely curved at the summit; in the shade sometimee longer and more 
inclined, but never, I believe, rooting; tinged more or less with red 
according to the degree of exposure, hairless or slightly hairy, sprinkled 
with extremely minute and inconspicuous glands. The angles vary 
somewhat in distinctness ; in the flowering state they are sometimes quite 
lost. Leaves occasionally pinnate, by the interjection of two smaller 
leaflets, (as occurs in other species also,) but usually digitate, with 
5 thin and flexible leaflets, bright green and nearly naked above, 1 paler 
and more hairy beneath, ovate, with more or less of a point, sometimes 
rounder. The flowering-branches are mostly short and spreading; then- 
lower leaves ternate, upper ones simple. Inflorescence a simple raceme, 

the prickles on the leaf-stalks more curved than those on the stem.” In some 
species the inflorescence is remarkable; but in general the panicle varies so 
much as to afford no good distinction. Nor can the arms of the calyx, nor the 
form of its segments be depended on. The petals in all are delicate and 
crumpled, and in several species very considerable in size and width. There are 
some differences in th e fruit, but they are rarely discriminative. In examining 
the hgure of the leaves, the central leaflet is to be regarded : the lateral ones 
are always smaller and of a narrower proportion. In several species the 
leaves occasionally survive a mild winter, and are found the next season sub- 
tending flowering branches. The leaves of these branches are of less deter- 
minate flgure ; the number ol their leaflets is reduced as they approach the 
inflorescence, and their place is supplied in the upper part of ‘the panicle by 
hrst trihd, and then, simple bracteas, formed by the coalescence of the stipules. 
Iliese last are usually long and narrow, entire or sometimes toothed or jagged, 
and issue from the petiole, for the most part, a little above its base. They 
afford no distinguishing characters.— No less than 48 supposed species of the 
genus are described and figured in the elaborate Ruin Germanici of Wei he and 
jyees von hsenbeck.—Dorrer ; to whom 1 am indebted for all the following 
e scrip turns ol species, except It. Chamccmorus and 11. saxatilis and It. arcticus. 

Judging from American specimens, It. villosus, Pursh, is this species with 
moii' pubescence than usual, i have specimens, exactly, as far as I can discover, 
tne same, which grew in a shady place near Tunbridge Wells. 


244 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


[ Rubus . 


or a very slightly divided 'panicle ; pedicels often divaricate, sometimes 
ascending, the upper lateral ones usually overtopping the terminal flower. 
When in fruit, the lower pedicels are sometimes so lengthened as to form 
a remarkably fastigiate bunch. Pubescence of the panicle not copious, 
consisting of spreading loose hairs. Calyx-segments broad, their points 
usually acute and short, sometimes elongated and dilated. Petals long, 
obovate, white ; in /S. sometimes pink. The fruit of a. has been described 
as deep red; but I believe it is black and shining, when properly ripened, 
as that of /3. certainly is. In both cars, the bright red of the partly ripe 
fruit is very striking. — The chief differences of /3. are the niOre plicate 
leaflets, and the usual presence of very short stalks to the lower pair, 
with the larger and more abundant prickles, especially on the petioles 
and panicle, although they are still small and far from numerous. In a. 
scarcely any prickles are found about the inflorescence ; in /3. there are 
a few sometimes even on the calyx. — R.fastigiatus, W. and N. agrees so 
nearly in its flowering branches, (judging both by the figure, and by an 
authentic specimen,) as not to be distinguishable from II. suberectus; 
but the barren stem is described as 5 — 15 feet long, arched, and rooting, 
and its leaves are figured with considerable stalks to all the leaflets. 
Both P. nitidus also, under which those authors quote Anderson’s plant, 
and P. affinis, are described as differing in the same points. They all 
appear likewise to have larger prickles. I have seen from Dunkeld, and 
have gathered in Surry and Sussex, a Bramble which is probably either 
R. affinis or P. nitidus, W. and N. Whether these two are specifically 
distinct, I have not been able to ascertain ; nor am 1 sufficiently acquaint- 
ed with the British plant in question to describe it. P.plicatus, E. FI. 
from Shropshire, I suspect to be R. rhamnifolius. 

b. Stem arched or prostrate, rooting. 

a.. Prickes nearly uniform, confined to the angles of the stem. 

3. R. ccnpin folius , W. and N. ( Hornbeam-leaved Bramble); 
stem arched obsoletely angular not furrowed hairy, prickles uniform 
deflexed curved, leaves digitate of 5 stalked ovate acuminate flexible 
leaflets paler beneath, panicle compound hairy, branches corymbose. 
W. and N. t. 13 . Borrer in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2664 . 

Hedges, &c. Cheshire, Lancashire; N. Wales, Mr. W. Wilson. Sussex. 
FI. July, Aug. Tj   — Although this plant appears to be of common 
occurrence, I am far from being well acquainted with it ; nor should I 
have ventured to give it as the P. carpinifolius, JV. and N., but for the 
exact accordance of an authentic specimen. It may possibly be but a 
var. of P. rhamnifolius. The stem is more generally hairy ; the prickles 
more curved and smaller, those especially on the panicle, more nume- 
rous ; and the plant is of feebler growth. The stem is commonly much 
stained with purple, and the prickles purple with a yellow point. The 
leaves seem to be green beneath, more rarely so towards the inflorescence. 

4. R. rhamnifolius, W. and N. (Buckthorn-leaved Bramble); 
stem arched obsoletely angular and furrowed nearly naked, prickles 
uniform straightish (horizontal or deflexed), leaves digitate of 
5 stalked roundish acuminate coriaceous leaflets paler beneath, 
panicle repeatedly divided diffuse somewhat downy. W. and N. 


Rubus.] 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


245 


t. 6. E. FI. v. ii.p. 401. E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2004. Lindt. Syn. 
p. 92. — It. cordifolius, W. and N. t. 5. Lindt. Syn. p. 92. 

Common in hedges, thickets, and woods, at least in the S. of England. 
FI. July, Aug. T? . — Stem naked, or with scattered hairs as well as 
minute glands and occasionally a few setce, many feet long, varying in 
thickness and in the prominence of its angles, but less remarkably chan- 
nelled than in It. fruticosus, the old wood not of so dark a purple, and 
the young shoots not glaucous. Prickles not so strong, and the pubes- 
cence less clustered and more generally deciduous. Leaflets thinner, yet 
rigid, scarcely decurved at the edges, ovate or almost round, acuminate ; 
even and naked or with scattered hairs above ; more hairy and paler, 
sometimes grey or white beneath, especially towards the inflorescence. 
Panicle spreading, not contracted or elongated, its branches variously 
pubescent, greenish or whitish, varying in abundance of prickles. Cal. 
segments sometimes, but not usually, prickly, short in general and not 
acuminate, reflexed but loosely under the fruit. Fruit sometimes larger 
than in any other British Bramble, black, somewhat acid, the drupes of 
moderate size, not depressed nor much crowded. Authentic specimens 
prove this to be R. cordifolius as well as R. rhamnfolius , IV. and N. 
Indeed the central leaflet is generally more or less cordate. 

5. R . fruticosus, Linn. ( common Bramble or Blackberry) ; stem 
arched angular furrowed mostly minutely hairy, prickles uniform 
straightish (horizontal or deflexed), leaves digitate of 5 stalked obo- 
vate coriaceous leaflets decurved at the edges, their under-side and 
the elongated panicle white with close down. E. Bot. t. 715. E. El. 
v. ii. p. 309. — R. discolor, W. and N. t. 20. Lindl. Syn. p. 93. — 
R. abrvptus , Lindl. Syn. p. 92. 

Extremely common in thickets and hedges in the more open districts. 
FI. July, Aug. k . — Stem sometimes an inch or more in thickness and 
many feet long, in general deeply sulcate ; while young, pale green, often 
glaucous, mostly hairy, with a large proportion of the hairs aggregate ; 
when older, deep purple with a grey or bluish tinge from the oppressed 
persistent remains of the pubescence. Prickles strong, not often 
hooked except on the petioles and occasionally on the panicle. Leaflets 
varying in width, often small, sometimes almost round with an abrupt 
point, but mostly obovate or somewhat cuneiform, and with the edges 
and point remarkably curved downwards; all of them on considerable 
stalks, the lateral pairs of which are often but imperfectly divided ; upper- 
side even dark green, mostly but not always naked ; under-side, except- 
ing in the lower leaves of flowering branches usually quite white. Pa- 
nicle in general somewhat narrow, although almost always more or less 
divided, with divaricate branches bearing several flowers. Segments of 
the calyx reflexed, short, rarely acuminate, very woolly, seldom prickly. 
Flowers handsome, the obovate or rounder petals and the stamens often 
redder than is usual in other British species, except R. leucostachys : 
sometimes white. Fruit black, (sometimes, it is said, white,) nearly 
globular; drupes rather small, closely packed, their summits depressed, 
their flavour sweet. — This species attains a greater size than our other 
Brambles, except in its near affinities, R. rhamn folius and R. leucostachys. 
Observations are wanting to prove the stem more than biennial, yet I 


246 


ICOSAN DRI A — POLYGYNIA. 


[. Rubus . 


doubt much whetlier it is constantly and strictly so. Certainly shoots 
apparently qualified to take root at the end occasionally occur among 
the dense mass of flowering branches. The Linnaean Herbarium proves 
it the R. fruticosus, Linn. An authentic specimen of R. fruticosus , 
IV. and A 7 ., in Dr. Hooker’s collection, differs somewhat from the general 
appearance ; but it exhibits merely the end of a flowering shoot, and I 
cannot form from it an opinion as to the identity of their species. 

6, R. leucostachys, Sm. (long -clustered Bramble) ; stern arched 

obsoletely angular and furrowed hairy, prickles uniform straightish 
(horizontal or deflexed), leaves digitate of 5 stalked roundish flat 
coriaceous leaflets paler or white beneath, panicle elongated shaggy 
or downy. E. FI. v. ii. p. 403. Lindl. Syn. p. 03. Borrer in 
E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2631 (3. stem less shaggy, prickles very large. 

Woods, thickets, hedges. Hampshire and Berkshire, Mr. Bicheno. 
— /S. Essex, Mr. Forster. Sussex. FI. July, Aug. Tj . — Stem becoming 
dark purple as in R. fruticosus, sometimes so slightly angular as to be 
almost round, except near the end ; with long spreading hairs when 
young, some of which often remain the second summer, but the stem 
is then more generally naked. Prickles varying in abundance, not so 
strong as in R. fruticosus. Leaflets sometimes somewhat waved but 
not decurved, mostly cordate, roundish with an abrupt point, sometimes 
ovate, unequally serrated, lower ones frequently jagged ; upper surface 
dark green and even, sometimes hairy; under-side often very shaggy 
with shining and frequently tawny hairs ; sometimes, especially in the 
upper leaves, very white. Panicle often remarkably long, narrow, and 
raceme-like, yet rarely simple ; sometimes with many compound axillary 
branches at the lower part ; its stalks shaggy or closely downy, with 
glands and setae varying much in number and not always easily found, 
and generally few and slender prickles. Cal.-segmcnls more or less 
reflexed, broad, short, rarely elongated or prickly, extremely downy, and, 
like the panicle, often tawny. Petals and stamens rose-coloured or 
white. Fruit black, the drupes less depressed and rather looser than in 
R. fruticosus. — / 3 ., which is more a forest plant, differs chiefly in its 
strong horizontal prickles, even exceeding in size those usual on R. fru- 
ticosus. It approaches that species in general appearence, and in the 
less shaggy, closer and more aggregate hairs of its stem. The very 
round leaves are white beneath, but not at all decurved at the edges. 
The panicle too has very large straight prickles, and the setas are per- 
haps generally more conspicuous on it. I believe R. diversfolius , Lindl. 
may be referred hither. 

7. 11. macrophyllus, W. and N. ( large-leaved Bramble) ; stem 
somewhat angular and furrowed, prickles uniform few small, leaves 
digitate of 3 or 5 stalked elliptical or ovate flexible leaflets, panicle 
repeatedly divided somewhat corymbose. W. and N. t. 12. Borrer 
in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2625. 

Hedges, thickets, woods; rare? — Sussex. Ft. July, Aug. T? . — Stem 
rather soft and spongy, about £ an inch thick near the base, upright at 
first, then decurved, and growing often 15 feet or more in length, dull 
green, purplish when much exposed, covered with short soft hairs which 


Rubus.] 


ICOSANDUIA — POLYGYNIA. 


247 


are usually lost in the flowering state of the plant. Prickles thinly 
scattered on the angles of the stem, short and small, horizontal or de- 
flexed, with a thick base. Leaflets often 6 inches long, soft and pliant, 
hairy and mostly green on both sides, occasionally greyish beneath, 
rather coarsely serrated ; the central one generally cordate ; lower leaves 
of the flowering branches, and many of those of the barren stem, ternate. 
Panicle hairy, with few prickles and no seta;, but small inconspicuous 
glands may be found both here and on some parts of the stem. Cul.- 
segments acute, at length reflexed, woolly and glandulose, with occasion- 
ally a very few prickles. Petals white or faint pink. Fruit black and 
shining, of a moderate size, rather loosely set. — In habit this plant 
approaches R. Koehleri y., but wants the setae and the unequal prickles ; 
in technical characters it is nearer to R. rhamnifolius, and R. carpinifolius, 
from both of which it differs much in general appearance. 

(3. Prickles various, not confined to the angles of the stem. 

8. R. Koehleri, W. and N. (Koehler s Bramble) ; stem decurved 
somewhat angular and furrowed hairy glandular setose, prickles 
numerous unequal curved and straight, leaves digitate of 5 stalked 
ovate or elliptical leaflets, panicle much divided somewhat corym- 
bose. TV. and N. t. 25. Lindl. Syn. p. 94. E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2605. 
— R. glandulosus, E. FI. v. ii. p. 403, (excl. syn. of Bellardi, and 
perhaps the others.) — /3. R.fusco-ater, TV. and N. t. 26. Lindl . — 
y. R. pallidas, TV. and N. t. 29. Lindl. — R. affinis, E. FI. v. ii. 
p, 405, (excl. syn.) 

Woods, thickets, hedges. FI. July, Aug. Tj . — Stem green in the 
shade, red when exposed, decurved, or even prostrate, (scarcely arched 
unless supported,) very variable in size and length and in the promi- 
nence of its angles. Prickles copiously scattered on every part of the 
stem, as well as on the stalks and midribs of the leaves and on the 
panicle; extremely various in curvature and size; intermixed with and 
passing into setae which likewise are very numerous. Leaves thin and 
flexible until old, varying in size and shape and in the length of the 
point, which is often long and taper; serratures coarse, unequal; upper 
surface pale opaque green, with scattered hairs, rugose, often somewhat 
plicate at the nerves, under-side paler ; old leaves darker above, occa- 
sionally hoary beneath. Panicle often very large. Cal.-segments hairy, 
very prickly, setose, and glandulose, often elongated; more or less 
reflexed whilst in flower, often more spreading afterwards. Petals white 
or pale pink, rather small, varying from strap-shaped to almost round, 
often jagged. Fruit black, shining, acid ; drupes rather small and nume- 
rous, not depressed. — /3. scarcely differs but in having fewer prickles and 
more setae on the panicle, and in the dark purple hue of its stem, between 
which, however, and the usual paler red of «., every gradation occurs. — 
y. is frequently a large plant, of a pale green, (from the shady situations 
in which it grows,) with leaves 6 inches long, and a stem with fewer and 
less unequal prickles and extremely numerous short seta*. — R. echinatus, 
Lindl. Syn. p. 94, differs somewhat in aspect, and I cannot confidently 
unite it to this species, although I do not find satisfactory characters to 
distinguish it. Its chief peculiarity is in the prickles, which, although 
numerous and irregular, differ less in shape and size, and approach some- 


248 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


[ Rubus . 


what to those of R. rhamnifolius or R. carpinij alius. The setae are irre- 
gularly distributed, occurring in groupes among the rigid hairs which 
copiously clothe the stem. The leaves are rather rigid. It grows in 
the Sussex forests, and Mr. Forster finds it in Essex. 

9. R. corylifolius, Sm. ( Hazel-leaved Bramble) ; stem decurved 
roundish, prickles straight scattered somewhat unequal but not 
passing insensibly into seta^, leaves digitate of 5 ovate leaflets, the 
outermost sessile and lapping over the others, calyx of the fruit 
spreading or reflexed. E. Bot. t. 827. E. FI. v. ii. p. 408. 

Hedges and thickets. FI. July, Aug. Tj. — Stem considerably stouter 
and longer than in R. ccesius, frequently somewhat angular, generally 
hairy. Prickles usually straight and deflexed. Sc tee few or none, except 
about the inflorescence, and there distinct from the prickles. Leaflets 
broadly ovate, with a cordate base, soft, hairy, paler or sometimes hoary 
at the back; intermediate pair on short stalks, on which the external 
pair is usually quite sessile. Panicle very various, sometimes broad and 
corymbose like that of R. ccesius, at others longer and contracted. 
Fruit large, acid; drupes more numerous than in R. ccesius, but less so 
than in most other species. — The nearest affinity of this Bramble is with 
R. ccesius, but in artificial character it seems rather to belong to the di- 
vision with uniform prickles, according to the distribution of VVeihe and 
Nees, than to those which have aciculi and setae ; and accordingly Find- 
ley in his Synopsis has referred it to the Jl. vulgaris of those authors, 
to which indeed it has considerable resemblance ; but the sessile exter- 
nal leaflets seem sufficient to distinguish it from that and all other spe- 
cies enumerated by them in the same division of the genus. What is 
perhaps a vcir. of R. corylifolius, but furnished with a much greater abund- 
ance of setae, particularly about the panicle, occurs in many parts of 
England, and renders it impossible to form so distinct a character for 
this species as might otherwise be done. This var. frequently approxi- 
mates to R. ccesius, notwithstanding its being in general so much larger 
and stronger. 

10. R. ccesius, Linn. ( Dewberry ); stem prostrate glaucous round 
or nearly so, prickles straight unequal passing insensibly into setae, 
the length of the largest rarely equalling the diameter of the stem, 
leaves digitate of 3 or more rarely 5 ovate leaflets the outermost 
sessile, calyx embracing the fruit. E. Bot. t. 826. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 409. W. £)• N. t. 46. A. B. Sy C. — (3. stem stronger ohsoletely 
angular, leaflets generally 5. R. dumetorum, IV. SyJY. t. 45. A. 

Thickets, hedge-banks, and borders of fields. FI. June, July. T? . — 
Stem weak, with many slender branches rooting at the extremities. 
Prickles usually straight, scarcely deflexed, the largest generally small 
and slender, but now and then larger and stronger ones may be observed ; 
always varying in size, and diminishing gradually so as not to admit of a 
distinct line of separation between them and the setee with which the 
plant is also furnished : both vary in quantity, being sometimes so 
crowded as almost to cover the stem, sometimes few and widely scat- 
tered. Leaflets broadly ovate, often lobed, pubescent above, more so 


ICOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 


249 


Fragnria.] 

and softer beneath and of a paler colour, sometimes covered with long 
shining hairs ; the outermost sessile, or with only hardly distinguishable 
stalks. Panicle corymbose ; the divisions frequently cymose. Flowers 
few in a., more numerous in /3. Drupes of the fruit few, large, juicy, 
black with a fine glaucous bloom and agreeably acid flavour. — In the 
specific character of R. dumetorum the smaller prickles and setae are said 
to be few in number; but in the more detailed account, Weihe and 
Nees acknowledge that they are sometimes densely crowded, and this 
agrees better with the figures given by these authors. In this country 
perhaps the largest and stoutest var. is, in general, the most abundantly 
furnished with arms. R. ccesius may occasionally be found with a pin- 
nate leaf ; and small specimens occur in chalky thickets, which, from the 
tenderness of the plant and fewness of the prickles, might almost be mis- 
taken for R. saxalilis. 

2. Stem herbaceous or nearly so. 

11. R. saxatilis, Linn. ( Stone Bramble); leaflets 3 slightly 
downy, runners creeping herbaceous, panicle of few flowers. 
E.Bot.t. 2233. E. El. v.ii.p. 410. 

Stony mountainous places, especially in the north. FI. June. If . — 
Erect, slender, 8 — 10 inches high, with a few weak straight prickles on 
the stem. Leaves 2 — 3; leaf ets ovate. Petals minute, narrow, greenish- 
yellow. Fruit of very few, red, (comparatively) large, clustered drupes. 

12. R. arcticus, Linn. ( arctic Bramble); leaflets 3 glabrous 
obtusely serrated, runners none, "stem without prickles bearing 
(mostly) 1 flower, petals roundish notched. E. Bot. t. 1585. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 411. 

Rocky mountainous parts of the Isle of Mull, according to the 
late Dr. Walker, and on Ben-y-glo, Richard Cotton, Esq.: but we 
have searched these spots in vain for the plant. FI. June. If .. — Stems 
4 — 6 inches high, slender, having 3 — 4 leaves. Flowers of a deep rose- 
colour, large. Fruit purplish-red, highly prized by the Swedes. 

*** Leaves simple. 

13. R. Chamcemorus, Linn. ( Cloudberry ); dioecious, leaves 
simple lobed, stem without prickles herbaceous single-flowered. 
E. Bot. t. 716. E. FI. v. ii. p. 112. 

Alpine moors, north of England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. FI. 
June. If. — Erect, 8 — 10 inches high. Flowers large, white. Fruit large, 
of an agreeable flavour, and much eaten by the Norwegians and Lap- 
landers. — Badge of the Clan Macfarlane. 

9. Fragaria. Linn. Strawberry. 

1. F. visca, Linn. ( Wood Strawberry); calyx of the fruit 
reflexed, hairs of the peduncles widely spreading, those of the pedi- 
cels close-pressed silky. E.Bot.t. 1524. E. FI. v. ii. p. 414. 

Woods and thickets, frequent. — FI. May, July. If. 

2. F. elatior, Erhr. ( Hautboy Strawberry); calyx of the fruit 
refiexed, hairs of the peduncles and pedicels widely spreading, 

M 2 


250 1COSANDRIA POI.YGYNIA. [ Potcntillu . 

somewhat deflexed. Srn. — E. Bot. t, 2197. B. FI. v. ii. p. 415 

F. moschata , Duchesne. — Lindl. 

Groves and hedges, in several places ; but scarcely indigenous. FI. 
June — Sept. If. 

3. F. calycma, Loisel. ( calycine Strawberry); “ leaflets sessile 
hairy roundish wedge-shaped coarsely toothed, peduncles longer 
than the scapes, calyx as large as the corolla.” Lindl. Syn. p. 96. 

In Northumberland. Lindl . — Ft. June — Sept. If. 

10. Comarum. Linn. Marsh Cinque-foil. 

1. C. palustre, Linn, (purple Marsh Cinque-foil). E. Bot. 
t. 172. E. FI. v. ii.p. 433. 

Marshes and peat-bogs, frequent. Ft. July. If . — Stems ascending. 
Leaves petioled, with 7 lanceolate, deeply serrated leaflets , upper ones 
quinate or ternate, sessile, with a pair of ovate stipules. Flower-stalk 
branched. Flowers of a deep dingy purple. — The Genus is very nearly 
allied to Poteniilla. 

11. Potentilla. Linn. Cinque-foil. 

* Leaves pinnate. 

1. P . fruticosa, Linn, (shrubby Cinque-foil); leaves pinnate, 
leaflets (generally 5) oblongo-lanceolate entire, stem shrubby. 
E. Bot. t. 88. E. FI. v. ii.p. 416. 

Rare; rocky and bushy places, in Middleton-Teesdale, Yorkshire. 
Rock-forest, Clare, Ireland ; Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. June. Tj . 

2. P. anserina, Linn. ( Silver-weed ); leaves interruptedly pin- 
nate serrated silky especially beneath, peduncles axillary single- 
flowered, stem creeping. E. Bot. t. 861. E. FI. v. ii. p. 417. 

Moist meadows and road-sides, frequent. Ft. June, July. If. — 
Varying much in the degree of silkiness ; sometimes silky and white on 
both sides. Flowers large, yellow. Leaflets lanceolate. 

3. P. rupestris , Linn. (Strawberry -flowered Cinquefoil); stem 
erect dichotomous, leaves pinnate, leaflets cuneato-ovate serrated 
hairy, of the root-leaves about 5, of the cauline 3. E. Bot. t. 2058. 
E. FI. v. ii. p. 4 1 7. 

Very rare, on Craig Breidhin, Montgomeryshire, Ray ; where it was 
supposed to have been lost; but was found again in 1817, by J. E. Bow- 
man, Esq. to whom I am indebted for specimens. Flowers large, white. 

** Leaves digitate. 

4. P. argentea, Linn, (hoary Cinquefoil); leaves quinate, leaf- 
lets cuneiform cut white and downy beneath, their margins revo- 
lute, stem decumbent. E. Bot. t. 89. E. FI. v. ii.p. 418. 

Pastures and road-sides, especially in a gravelly soil. FI. June. If . — 
Flowers terminal, small, yellow, sub-corymbose. 

5. P. verna, Linn. (Spring Cinquefoil); root-leaves quinate, 
leaflets obovatc (green on both sides) sharply serrated upwards, 


Polcnti/la.] 


ICOSANDHIA — POLYGYNIA. 


251 


hairy beneath and at the edge, petals obcordate longer than the 
calyx, stem decumbent. E. Bot. t. 37. E. FI. v. ii. p. 420. 

Dry pastures, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, near Bristol, and in the north 
of England ; Wales, Mr. W. Wilson, and Scotland, especially about 
Edinburgh, Breadalbane mountains, Lightfoot and Mr. Trevelyan. FI. 
May, June. If . . — A small woody procumbent plant, 3 — 5 inches in length, 
more or less hairy. Flowers at the end of weak leafy branches. 

6. P. alpestris, Hall. fil. ( orange alpine Cinque-foil); “ radical 
leaves of five wedge-shaped somewhat hairy leaflets deeply cut in 
the upper half, upper stipules ovate, petals heart-shaped, stem 
ascending.” E. FI. v. ii.p. 418. — P. aurea, E. Bot. <.561. ( not 
Linn.) — P. salisburgensis , Jacq. Ic. Rar. t. 490. — P. verna, var. 
Wald. Nad. 

Mountains of the north of England, Smith; Wales, Mr. W. Wilson; 
Breadalbane and Clova mountains of Scotland. FI. June, July. If. — 
With this I am very familiar, having gathered it for a succession of 
years on the Scottish mountains, and I have endeavoured to find some 
solid character by which it might be distinguished from P. verna , but in 
vain. The extreme ears, it is true, do appear distinct, but they insensi- 
bly pass into each other; an opinion in which I am happy to be sup- 
ported by such authority as Mr. W. Wilson, who finds at Llandudno, a 
little above high-water mark, specimens of verna, which cannot be dis- 
tinguished from alpestris. If retained as a species, surely the name sal- 
isburgensis should be preferred to the much more recent one of the younger 
Haller. 

7. P. opaca, Linn. ( Saw-leaved hairy Cinquefoil); radical 
leaves of seven hairy linear wedge-shaped leaflets deeply serrated 
throughout, stem-leaves ternate mostly opposite, stems recumbent. 
E. Bot. t. 2449. E. FI. v. ii. p. 421. — P. intermedia , Nesll. Pot. 
t. 8. 

Hills of Clova and braes of Balquhidder, Scotland, G. Don. FI. June. 
If . — I am indebted for the only specimen I have ever seen of this to the 
kindness of Mr. D. Don. The leaflets are coarsely serrated to the base, 
and in this respect, as well as in its stouter habit, it differs from the two 
preceding species. Mr. Borrer has pointed out to me the synonvm of 
Dr. Nestler. 


8. P. alba , Linn, (white Cinquefoil); stems filiform procum- 
bent-root-leaves quinate, upper ones ternate, leaflets oblong with 
converging serratures silky beneath. E. Bot. t. 1384. E. FI. v. ii. 
p. 422. 

Wales (?) Mr. Havilund; (in Hulls.) FI. June, July. If. — Flowers 
white. 


9. P. reptans, Linn, (common creeping Cinquefoil); stem fili- 
form creeping, leaves quinate, leaflets obovato-cuneiform serrated, 
peduncles axillary single-flowered longer than the leaf. E. Bot. 
t. 862. E. FI. v. ii. p. 423. 


252 TCOSANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. [Geum . 

Meadows, pastures, and way-sides. FI. June — Aug. If. — Stems tak 
ing root at the joints. Flowers yellow. 

##* L eaves ternate. 

10. P. tridentata, Soland. ( tliree-tootlied Cinque- foil); leaves 
ternate, leaflets oblongo-cuneiform three-toothed at the extremity, 
glabrous above hairy beneath, petals oval longer than the calyx, 
stem ascending. E. Dot. t. 2389. E. FI. v. ii. p. '124*. 

Scotland, very rare. On Werron hill and the east rocks of Clova. 
G. Don. FI. May, June. If. — Flowers white. 

11. P. Fragariastrum, Ehrh. {Strawberry -leaved Cinque-foil); 
leaves ternate, leaflets obovate deeply serrated silky on both sides 
(especially beneath), petals obcordate as long as the calyx, stems 

procumbent. E. FI. v. ii. p. 425 P. Fragaria , Poir. — Hook. 

Scot. i.p. 164 . — Fragaria sterilis, Linn. — E. Dot. t. 1785. 

Woods, banks, and dry pastures, frequent. FI. March, April. If. — 
Flowers white. 


12. Tormentilla. Linn. Tormentil. 

1. T. officinalis, Sm. ( common Tormentil); leaves ternate all 
sessile, leaflets lanceolate inciso-serrate,stem ascending dichotomous, 

E. Dot. t. 863. E. FI. v. ii. p. 427 Potentilla Tormentilla, 

Sibth. Nestl. 

Moors and heathy places, frequent. FI. June, July. If. — Root large 
and woody, used medicinally, and by the Laplanders for staining leather 
of a red colour. Peduncles axillary and terminal. 

2. T. reptans, Linn. ( trailing Tormentil); leaves ternate and 

quinate on foot-stalks obovato-cuneiform inciso-dentate, stem pros- 
trate. E. Dot. 864. E.Fl.v. ii. p. 428 Potentilla nemoralis, 

Nestl — Lehm. Pot. t. 13, ( excellent .) 

Hedge-banks, borders of fields and waste places. FI. June, July. If- 
— This, as well as the last, varies with 5 petals, when it becomes difficult 
to be distinguished from Potentilla reptans, and many Botanists are 
of opinion that the two plants are the same, of which the two extremes 
are represented in E. Pot. Rarely is Potentilla reptans found so much 
creeping as in E. Pot. t. 882 ; nor Form, reptans so upright, or so de- 
cidedly panicled as in E. Pot. t. 864. — I am often at a loss to discrimi- 
nate between the two plants; and while Mr. Wilson finds them undistin- 
guishable, Mr. Forster and Nestler think them quite distinct. 

13. Geum. Linn. Avens. 

1. G. urbdnum, Linn, (common Avens, Herb Eennet); flowers 
erect, cauline leaves ternate, radical ones lyrato-pinnate. E. Dot. 
t. 1400. E. FI. v. ii. p. 429. 

Woods and hedges, frequent. FI. June. If . — 1 — 2 feet high. Root- 
leaves on long foot-stalks. Flowers small, yellow. Petals patent. 

2. G. rivdle, Linn. ( Water Avens); flowers drooping, awns 


rOLY ANDKI A MON O G Y N I A . 


Acteca.] 


253 


feathery, caiiline leaves ternate, radical ones interruptedly pinnate 
and lyrate. E. Bot. t. 10G. E. FI. v. ii.p. 430. 

Marshes and wet moory grounds, frequent: sometimes very alpine. 
FI. June, July. If . — A shorter, but stouter plant than the last. Flowers 
much larger, with erect purplish calyces and erect dull purplish-orange 
coloured pet ah, broadly obcordate, clawed. Head of fruit pedicellate. 
A var. is not uncommon which seems hybrid. Mr. J. Wilson finds it 
with semi-double flowers in Ayrshire. 

14. Dryas. Linn. Dryas. 

1. D. octopetala , Linn. ( white Dryas or Mountain Avens ),- 
petals 8, leaves simple serrated. E. Bot. t. 451. E.Fl.v.ii. 
p. 432. 

Frequent in alpine parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland, especially 
on limestone: north coast of Sutherland, abundant. FI. June. If. — 
Stem short, procumbent. Leaves ovato-elliptical, white and downy be- 
neath, petioled. Flowers large, white. 


CLASS XIII. PGLYANDRIA. 

Many Styles , inserted upon the receptacle. 

ORD. I. MONOGYNIA. 1 Style. 

* Petals 4. 

1. Papaver. Cal. of 2 caducous leaves. Pet. 4. Stigma ses- 
sile, radiated. Caps, superior ; the seeds on receptacles , forming 
incomplete dissepiments, escaping by pores beneath the permanent 
stigma. — Sat. Ord. Papaveraceje, .fuss — Named because it was 
administered with pap , papa in Celtic, to induce sleep. 

2. Meconopsis. Cal. of 2, caducous leaves. Pet. 4. Style evi- 
dent. Stigma of fetv rays. Capsule opening at the top by 4 G 

valves, Beceptacles ot the seeds filiform. — Nut. Ord. Papaver- 
ACE.E, Juss . — Named front ( uri/iuv, a Poppy, and o\]/is, resemblance. 

3. Glaucium. Cal. of 2 leaves, caducous. Pet. 4. Stigma 
2-lobed. Pod superior, linear, 2-(3 or-4) celled, with as many 
valves. Seeds numerous, dotted. ( Glaucium and Roemeria, De 
Cand.) — Nat. Ord. Papaverace;e, Juss. — Named from the 
glaucous or sea-green hue of the stems and leaves. 

4. Chelidonium. Cal. of 2 leaves, caducous. Pet. 4. Stigma 
2-lobed. Pod superior, linear, 1 -celled, 2-valved. Seeds numerous, 
crested. — Nat Ord. Papa veraceag, Juss. — Named from ygXibuv, 
a swalloic ; probably from the plant flowering at the time of the 
arrival of those birds. 

o. Act/EA. Cal. of 4 leaves, caducous. Pet, 4. Berry 1- 


254 POLYANDRIA PENTAGYNIA. [Ar/ui/cgia- 

celled. Seeds numerous. — Nat. Ord. Spurious Ranunculace.®, 
Juss — Named a.xrr\, the Elder: the leaves somewhat resembling 
those of Elder. 

** Petals Jive. 

6. Heltanthemum. Cal. of 3 equal leaves, or 5, of which 2 

outer ones are smaller. Pet. 5. Stigma capitate. Caps. 3-valved. 
— Nat. Ord. Cistinea:, Juss. — Named from the sun, and 

undo;, a Jloioer. The same as Helianthus. 

7. Txlia. Cal. 5-partite, deciduous. Pet. 5, with or without 

a nectary at the base. Fruit coriaceous, 5-celled, without valves ; 
cells 1 — 5, 2-seeded Nat. Ord. Tiliacea:, Juss. — Name of ob- 

scure origin. 

*** Petals numerous. 

8. NvMPHiEA. Cal. of 4 — 5 leaves. Pet. numerous, inserted 
upon a fleshy disk or covering to the germen, (so as apparently to 
arise from it,) as well as the stamens. Berry mauy-celled, many- 

seeded, deliquescent Nat. Ord. Nymphasacea:, Be Cand. — 

Name, — the N vypcuu of the Greeks, so called from its inhabiting 
the waters, as the Nymphs or Naiads were wont to do. 

9. Nuphar. Cal. of 5 — 6 leaves. Pet. numerous, inserted, 
as well as the stamens, upon the receptacle. Berry superior, many- 

celled, many-seeded Nat. Ord. Nymph .lace a:, Be Cand. — 

Name, the N oupxg, of Dioscorides, applied to this plant. The 
Arabic name is Naufar, according to Forskal. 

ORD. II. PENTAGYNIA. Styles variable, 2— G. 

10. Pasonia. Cal. of 5 leaves. Pet. 5 — 10. Follicles 2 — 5, 
with many seeds, crowned with the bilamellated stigmas. — Nat. Ord. 
RanunculacejE, Juss. — Named in honour of the Physician Pceon, 
who is said to have cured Pluto of a wound received from Hercules. 

11. Delphinium. Cal. coloured, deciduous, irregular, upper 
leaflet produced at the base into a spur. Pet. 4 ; 2 upper ones 
with appendages included within the spur. — Nat. Ord. Ranuncu- 
laceas, Juss. — Named from Belphinus or dexaiv, a Bolphin ; on 
account of the shape of the upper calycine leaf. 

12. Aconitum. Cal. petaloid, irregular, upper leaflet helmet- 
shaped ; 2 upper petals or nectaries on long stalks, and concealed 
within the helmet-shaped leaflet. — Nat. Ord. RanunculacEjE, Juss. 
— Name derived, it is said, from Acone in Bithynia : or from xxom, 
a rock or stone ; “ Quae quia nascuntur dura vivaria caute 

Agrestes Aconita vocant.” — Ovidii Met am. 

13. Aquilegia. Cat. of 5 leaves, deciduous, coloured. Pet' 
5, terminating below in a horn-shaped spur, or nectary. — Nat. Ord • 


Helleborus.] l’OLYANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 255 

Ranunculace/K, Jims . — Named from Aquila, an Eagle , whose 
claws the nectaries resemble. 

14. Stratiotes. Spatha of 2 leaves. Cal. 3-cleft. Cor. of 
3 petals. Hurry inferior, angular, with 6 cells, many-seeded. — 
Nat. Ord. Hydrociiarideje, Rich . — Named from ar^arog, an 
army, on account of the numerous sword-like leaves. 

(See Reseda in Cl. XI. and Helleborus in Okd. Polygynia.) 

ORD. III. POLYGYNIA. Many Styles. 

* Pericarps l -seeded, indehiscent. 

15. Thalictrum. Cal. of 4 — 5 leaves. Cor. 0. Pericarps 
without awns. — Nat. Ord. Ranunculacea;, Juss . — Named from 
dxXAu, to be green ox flourishing. 

16. Clematis. Cal. of 4 — 6 leaves. Pet. 0. Pericarps 

terminated by a long, mostly feathery, awn Nat. Ord. Ranun- 

culace-'E, Juss . — Named from Kk 7 ]/jM, the shoot of a vine, which 
its long branches somewhat resemble. 

17. Anemone. Involucre of 3 divided leaves, more or less 
remote from the flower. Cal. petaloid, of 5 — 9 leaves. Cor. 0. 

Pericarps with or without awns -Nat. Ord. RanunculacejB, 

Juss . — Named from avs/Mog, the wind; because many of the species 
grow in very exposed situations. 

18. Adonis. Cal. of 5 leaves. Pet. 5 — 10, without a nectary. 

Pericarps without awns. — Nat. Ord. 1 1 a n u n c u l a c e je , Juss 

Name : — its deep red colour gave the idea of its being stained by 
the blood of Adonis, who was killed by a boar while hunting. 

19. Ranunculus. Cal. of 5 (rarely 3) leaves. Pet. 5 
(rarely many), with a nectary at the base. Pericarps without 
awns. [In the pore or nectary of the petals of this, and Myosurus, 
we observe an affinity with the tubular petals ( nectaries , Sm.) of 
Helleborus, and even of Trollius; only, in the two latter, the petals 

are more altered in shape.] — Nat. Ord. R anunculacejE, Juss 

Named from liana, a Frog-, from the plants’ delighting to grow 
where frogs abound. 

20. Trollius. Cal. of 5, or many, coloured leaves. Pet. 5, 
or many, small, linear, with an obscure depression above the con- 
tracted base. Capsules or follicles many-seeded — Nat. Ord. Ran- 
uncul aceaj, J uss — Name said to be “derived from troll or trolen, 
a ball or globe in old German, and bearing the same meaning as our 
English word Globeflower. 

21. Helleborus. Cal. of 5, persistent leaves. Pet. 8 — 10, 
small, tubular, 2-lipped, nectariferous. Pericarps or follicles 


POLYANDRIA — MONOGYNIA. 


256 


[Pa paver. 


nearly erect, many-seeded — Nat. Ord. Ranunculacete, Jttss . — 
Name, — iXsiv, to injure, and {3o?a, food, from the poisonous nature 
of the plant. 

22. Caltha. Cal. of 5 or more petaloid leaves. Pet. none. 

Pericarps several, compressed, spreading, with many seeds. 

Nat. CJ/d. R a nuncul ac E/E, fuss.— Named from KztXccdo;, a cup , 
which its flowers resemble. 


POLYANDRIA— MONOGYNIA. 

1. Papaver. Linn. Poppy. 

1. P. Argemone, Linn, {long -prickly-headed Poppy); capsule 
clavate hispid ribbed, stem leafy many-flowered, leaves bipinnati- 
fid. E. Pot. t. 643. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 10. 

Corn-fields, not unfrequent. FI. June. ©. — Flowers small. Petals 
narrow, scarlet. 

2. P. hybridum, Linn, {round-rough-headed Poppy) ; capsule 
subglobose hispid furrowed, stem leafy many-flowered, leaves 
doubly pinnatifid. E. Pot. t. 43. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 9. 

Sandy and chalky fields in England, rather rare. Norfolk, Durham, 
Cornwall, Kent; Essex, Mr. Jonathan Grubb; Ormeshead, Mr. Wilson. 
Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mac/cay. FI. July. ©. 

3. P. nudicdide, Linn, {naked- stalked yellow Poppy); capsule 
hispid obovate 4 — 6-ribbed, scapes single-flowered, leaves pinna- 
tifid, lobes toothed or cut acute. Hook, in FI. Loud. N. S. t. 213. 
E. Pot. Suppl. t. 2681. 

Rocky places at Achil-head on the west coast of Ireland, Professor 
GiesecU. /’’/.July. If. . — Flowers yellow, resembling those of Meconopsis 
cambric a. 

4. P. dubium , Linn, {long-smooth-headed Poppy); capsules 
glabrous oblong, stem many-flowered hairy, bristles of the flower- 
stalks appressed, leaves pinnatifid. E.Pot. t. 644. E.Fl. v. iii.p. 10. 

Corn-fields, not unfrequent. FI. July. ©. — Stems 1 — 2 feet high, 
hispid with spreading hairs. Flowers large. Petals broad, palish scarlet. 

5. P. Rhceas, Linn, {common red Poppy) ; capsules glabrous 
nearly globose, stem many-flowered bristly, its bristles and those 
of the flowerstalks spreading, leaves pinnatifid. E. Pot. t. 645. 
E. FI. v. iii. p. 11. 

Abundant in corn-fields ; but rare on the west of Scotland. FI. June, 
July. ©. — Distinguished from the last by its short capsule and the 
spreading hairs of the flowerstalks. Pet. broad, deep scarlet. 

6. P . somnftrum, Linn, {white Poppy); capsule globose gla- 
brous as well as the stem and glaucous amplexicaul leaves. E. Pot. 
t. 2145. E. FI. v. iii.p. 11. 

In Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, and other places where the plant has been 
cultivated ; but as the Rev. Prof. Henslow observes to me, never truly 


Acton.] 


POLY AND III A — MONOGYNIA. 


257 


wild : “ apparently truly so, and very abundant, near Sidmouth,” Rev. J. 
S. Tozer. Ft. July. © . — Flowers generally white, with a purple eye ; but 
varying much as to colour. From the unripe capsules, opium, (from the 
Greek o*os, juice,) is prepared. 

2. Meconopsis. Viguier. Welsh Poppy. 

1. M. cambrica, Vig. ( common Welsh Poppy) ; capsules gla- 
brous, leaves mostly petiolate. De Cand. — Papaver cambricum, 
Linn. — E. Pot. t. 66. E. FI. v. iii.p. 66. 

Rare: rocky and shady places. Foot of Lidford cascade, Devon; 
Rev. J. S. Tozer. N. Wales and Westmoreland. About Edinb. Ros- 
trevor hill, Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. June. 1 (. — Plant glabrous. 
Leaves on long stalks, pinnated, the pinnae pinnatifid. Flowers large, yel- 
low. — A genus, as De Cand. observes, between Papaver and Argemone. 

3. Glaucium. Tourn. Horned-Poppy. 

1 . G. luteum, Linn. ( yellow Horned- Poppy); pod minutely 
tuberculated, cauline leaves amplexicaul sinuate, stem glabrous. 
E. Pot. t. 8. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 6 — Chelidonium Glaucium , Linn. 

Sandy sea-shores, frequent. FI. July, Aug. © . — 1—2 feet high, very 
glaucous, much branched. Leaves scabrous. Flowers very large, hand- 
some, succeeded by pods 6- — 10 inches long. Dissepiment spongy, as in 
the following species. 

2. G. p/ueniceum , Gtert. ( scarlet Horned-poppy) ; pod hispid, 
cauline leaves deeply pinnatifid and cut, stem hairy. E. Pot. 1. 1433. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 7. — Chelidonium corniculatum , Linn. 

Said to have been found in Portland island, and in Norfolk. FI. June, 
July. ©. — Petals scarlet, with a black spot at their base. 

3. G. violaceum , Juss. ( violet Horned-poppy); pod 3-valved 
with membranous dissepiments, leaves tripinuatitid, the segments 
linear scabrous, stem glabrous. E. FI. v. iii.p. 7 . — Chelidonium 
hybridum, Linn. — E. Pot. t. 201 . — Roemeria hybrida, PC. 

Corn-fields, rare. Norfolk and Cambridgeshire; only in cultivated 
ground and probably introduced; Rev. Prof . Henslow. FI. May, June. ©. 

4. Chelidonium. Linn. Celandine. 

1. C. majus, Linn. ( common Celandine). E. Pot. t. 1581. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 4. — [3. leaflets and petals jagged. C. laciniaturn , 
DC. Lindl. 

Waste places, especially near towns and villages. FI. May, June. L£. 
—About 2 feet high, slightly hairy, brittle, full of a yellow fetid juice. 
Leaves pinnated, with about 5 decurrent leaflets, which are broadly ovate, 
lobed and crenated. Flowers in long-stalked umbels, yellow, rather 
small. Pod long, somewhat turgid. 

5. Acttea. Linn. Bane-berry. 

1. A. spicata , Linn. ( Herb Christopher); raceme simple elong- 
ated, petals as long as the stamens, pedicels of the fruit slender. 
E. Pot.t. 918. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 3. 


258 


PO LY A N D n I A — M O N o G V N I A. [ Helianthemum. 

Bushy places, especially in limestone tracts in Yorkshire ; near Hali- 
fax, Mr. Ley land. Cleish woods, Scotland, Mr. Arnott. FI. May. If.. 
— 1—2 feet high. Leaves petiolate, 3-ternate; leaflets ovate, deeply cut 
and serrated. 

6. Helianthemum. 1 Tourn. Rock-rose. 

1. H. ednum, Dun. (hoary dwarf Rock-rose'); shrubby, without 
stipules, leaves opposite ovate or oblong petiolate fiat hoary beneath, 
racemes terminal bracteated, cal. -leaves 5, the inner with 4 ribs, 
style twisted at the base refiex'ed, at the apex indexed, seeds black- 
ish. Benth — Lindl. Syn. p. 36 — Cislus canus, Jacq. — C. an- 
ylicus, Linn . — C. marifolius, B. Bot. t. 396. (not Linn.?') Ilook. 
in FI. Bond. N. S.t. 171. E. FI. v. iii. p. 23. 

Rare : alpine rocks in the north of England, Lancashire, Westmore- 
land; on Cronkley Fell, Yorkshire; and in Wales. FI. May, June. If . — 
A small shrubby plant, with hoary leaves , and rather small yellow flowers. 

2. H. guttatum , Miller, (spotted annual Rock-rose ); annual, 
erect, without stipules, leaves oblongo-lanceolate or linear, the 
lower opposite, the upper alternate, racemes without bracteas, cal.- 
leaves 5, style straight very short, stigma capitate. Benth. — Lindl. 
Syn. p. 37 — Cistus guttatus, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 544. E. FI. v. iii. 
p. 24. 

Very rare. In Jersey. Holyhead mountain, Rev. II. Davies and Mr. 
Wilson . FI. June, July. 0. 

3. H. ledifolium , Willd. (Ledum-leaved Rock-rose); herbaceous, 
slightly downy, with stipules, leaves lanceolate, flower-stalks soli- 
tary erect opposite to the leaves shorter than the calyx, styles straight, 
capsule polished. Lindl. Syn. p. 37. — Cistus ledifolius, (and 
niloticus) Linn. — E. Bot. t. 24 1 4. E. FI. v. iii. p. 24. 

Very rare. On Brent downs, Somersetshire, Huds. FI. June, July. 
If . — I have never seen British specimens of this plant. It is certainly 
the Cistus niloticus of Linn. ; his C. ledifolius being glabrous, and proba- 
bly the cultivated state of the plant. 

4. H. vufgdre, Gsert. (common Rock-rose); shrubby procum- 
bent stipuled, leaves opposite ovate or oblong nearly flat green 
above, racemes terminal bracteated, cal. -leaves 5 the inner furrowed 
and scariose at the edge, style bent at the base, somewhat clavate 
at the apex, seeds black. Benth. — Lindt. Syn. p. 37. — Cistus 

Helianthemum, Linn E. Bot. t. 1321. E. Fl.v. iii.p. 26. — C. 

tomentosus , E. Bot. t. 2208. E. FI. v. iii. p. 27. — (3. petals lanceo- 
late, often cut. Cistus surrejanus, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 2207. 

Frequent in dry pastures, especially in a gravelly or chalky soil. — /3. 
Croydon, Surry. FI. July, Aug. If . — I am indebted for specimens of 
C. surrejanus of Authors to my friend Mr. Christy, who proves it by cul- 

1 I am happy to be able to avail myself of the specific characters of most of 
the llritish species of this difficult genus, given by Mr. Bentham in Lindley’s 
Synopsis. 


Nymphcea .] 


POLY A N D R.I A MO N O G Y N 1 A . 


259 


ture to be a var. or rather a monstrosity of II. vulgarc, with imperfect 
petals. Mr. Borrcr sometimes finds it on the Sussex downs. 

5. H. polifolium, (white Mountain Rock-rose); shrubby pro- 
cumbent stipuled hoary, leaves opposite ovato-oblong or oblongo- 
linear more or less revolute at the edge, racemes terminal bracte- 
ated, cal. -leaves 5, the inner furrowed anti scariose at the edge, 
style bent at the base, somewhat clavate at the apex, seeds black. 

JBenth. — //. apenninum, DC. — Lindl. Syn, p. 37 Cistus poli- 

folius, Linn. — E. Dot. t. 1322. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 27. 

Rare, in the south of England. Brent downs, Somersetshire, and 
Babbieombe-rocks, by the sea ; Rev. A. Neck. Rocks near the sea at 
Torquay, Dean of Bristol . — Flowers white. The II. polifolium of DC. 
is not the plant of Linn, but the splendens of Lamarck. 

7. Tilia. Linn. Lime. 

1. T. europrea, Linn. ( common Lime or Linden-tree); nectaries 
none, leaves twice the length of the footstalks quite glabrous except 
a woolly tuft at the origin of each vein beneath, cymes many- 
flow'ered, fruit coriaceous downy. Sm. — E. Dot. t. 610. E. FI. 
v. ii.p. 17. — T. intermedia , DC. Lindl. 

Woods and hedge-rows, probably not indigenous. FI. July. Tj .--A 
large and handsome tree ; its flowers, “ at dewy eve distilling odours,” 
yellowish-green, on a stalked cyme, springing from a large lanceolate foli- 
aceous bractea, which falls off with the fructified cymes. Fruit generally 
1-celled and 1 -seeded. — Linnaeus is said to have derived his own name 
from the Swedish Lin, our Linden or Lime-tree. 

2. T. cjrandifolia, Ehrli. ( broad-leaved downy Lime-tree); nec- 
taries none, leaves downy especially beneath, origin of the veins 
woolly, branches hairy, umbels 3-flowered, fruit woody downy tur- 
binate with prominent angles. Sm. E. FI. v. in. p. 18. 

Woods and hedges, in several places ; scarcely wild. Blair in Athol, 
Scotland ; Mrs. Beecrofl. Near Edinb.; Dr. Grevillc. FI. June, July. Tj . 

3. T. parvifolia, Ehrh. (small- leaved Lime-tree); nectaries 
none, leaves smooth above, glaucous beneath with scattered as well 
as axillary hairy blotches, umbels compound many-flowered, fruit 
roundish brittle nearly glabrous. Sm. E. Dot. t. 1705. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 20 — T. microphylla, Vent. 

Woods in Essex, Lincolnshire, &c. “ Perhaps the only truly native 
Lime-tree in Britain.” ilfr. E. Forster. FI. Aug. Tj . 

8. Nymph^a. Linn. White Water-Lily. 

1. N. alba, Linn, (great White Water-Lily) ; leaves cordate 
entire, stigma of 16 ascending rays. E. Dot. t. 160. Hook, in FI. 
Loud. N . S. t. 1 40. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 1 4. 

Lakes and still waters, frequent. In the quiet recesses of the High- 
land lakes, especially, — “ The water lily to the light, 

Her chalice rears of silver bright.” 


260 POLYANIJRIA PENTAGYNIA. [Aconitum. 

Ft. July. If . — In the northern parts of Scotland and the Hebrides, I have 
seen the flowers as small as those of the A r . odorata of North America, 
and Mr. Tozer finds them so at Marazion Marsh, Cornwall. 

9. Nuphar. Sm. Yellow Water-Lily. 

1. N. lutea, Sm. ( common Yellow Water-Lily) ; leaves cordate 
their lobes approximate, cal. of 5 leaves, stigma expanded entire 
with from 14 — 20 rays, llooh. in FI. Lond. N. S. p. 141. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 15 — Nymphcea lutea, Linn. E. Bot. t. 159. 

Lakes and ditches, frequent. FI. July. If. — Flowers large, smelling 
somewhat like brandy; which circumstance, in conjunction as I presume, 
with its flagon-shaped seed-vessels, has led to the name Brandy-bottle, 
by which this plant is known in many parts of England. 

2. N. pumila, De Cand. (least Yellow Water-Lily); leaves cor- 
date the lobes approximate, stigma (green) with 8 or 9 teeth and 
as many (yellow) rays, fruit furrowed upwards. Hook, in FI. Lond. 
N. S. t. 170. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 16. — N. Kalmiana , Hook. Scot. i. 
p. 169. (an Alton 1 ?) — N. minima, E. Bot. t. 2292. — Nymphcea 
pumila, Hoffm. 

In several of the Highland lakes. Foot of Ben Cruachan, Mr. Borrer ; 
and at Loch Baladren, near Aviemore Inn. Loch of Monteith ; Mr. 
I). Don. Near Callander; Dr. Gillies. Pond at Ross-wood, near Loch- 
lomond ; Rev. Dr. Stuart. Aberdeenshire; Dr. A. Murray. Near Wel- 
lington house, Northumberland, Mr. W. C. Trevelyan, the only place in 
England where it has yet been discovered. FI. July, Aug. If . — I am 
even now far from certain that this ought not to be united with the 
American N. Kalmiana. All the differences I can find between the two, 
I have fully detailed in the FI. Lond. 

POLYANDRIA— PENTAGYNIA. 

10. PiEoNiA. Linn. Preony. 

1. P. corallina, lletz, (entire-leaved Pceony) ; herbaceous, folli- 
cles downy recurved, leaves biternate glabrous, segments ovate 
entire. E. Bot. t. 1513. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 29. 

On the island called Steep-Holmes, in the Severn, Mr. Wright. Said 
to have been found near Gravesend; Gerard. FI. May, June. If. 

11. Delphinium. Linn. Larkspur. 

1. D. Consolida, Linn. ( Field Larkspur); stem erect branched, 
flowers in lax racemes, petals combined, inner spur of one piece, 
pedicels shorter than the bracteas, capsule glabrous. E. Bot. 1. 1839. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 30. 

Sandy or chalky corn-fields ; Suffolk, Kent. “ About Cambridge, at 
Quay, the hills are quite blue with it ; it also occurs red, pink, and white, 
and yet Ray does not mention it ;” Rev. Prof. Henslow. FI. June, July. © . 

12. Aconitum. Linn. Wolf’s-bane. 

1. A. Napellus, Linn. ( common Wolf s-bane or Monk’s-hood) ; 


T/ialictrum .] POLYA N DRIA — POLYGYNIA. 261 

upper leaflet of the calyx arched at the hack, spur of the nectary 
nearly conical bent down, wings of the stamens cuspidate or none, 
lobes of the leaves cuneate pinnatifid, germens 3 — 5 glabrous or 
hairy. DC. — E. FI. v. Hi. p. 31. 

Teme, Herefordshire. Below Staverton Bridge, Devon, Rev. J. S. 
Tozer. A doubtful native. FI. June, July. If. . 

13. Aquilegia. Linn. Columbine. 

1. A. vulgaris , Linn. ( common Columbine) ; spur of the petals 
incurved, capsules hairy, stem leafy many-flowered, leaves nearly 
glabrous, styles as long as the stam. E.Bot. L97. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 33. 

Woods and coppices, in several places ; often the outcast of gardens. 
Abundant and wild, for miles around Totness, Rev. J. S. Tozer. FI. 
June. 1/ . — Inner stamens frequently imperfect; but not forming a plaited 
lacerated membrane, as described and figured in E. But. 

14. Stratiotes. Linn. Water- Soldier. 

1. S. aloides, Linn. ( Water- Soldier) ; leaves sword-shaped tri- 
angular aculeato-serrate. E. Bot. t. 379. E. FI. v. in. p. 34. 

Lakes and ditches, particularly in the fenny parts of Norfolk and Lin- 
colnshire. Rare in the north : probably planted in the Lochs of Dud- 
dingston, Forfar, and Cluny, Scotland. FI. July. If . — A singular plant, 
resembling an Aloe , with numerous radical leaves thrown up from creep- 
ing runners, which penetrate far into the mud. Scape 4 — 6 inches long, 
compressed, 2- edged. Flowers white, from the compressed 2-leaved 
spatha. Sometimes the flowers are dioecious, and sometimes the stamens 
are on the same flower with the 5 or 0 cleft styles. 

POLY ANDRI A— POLYGYNIA. 

15. Tiialictrum. Linn. Meadow-Rue. 

1. T. alpinum , Linn. ( alpine Meadoio-Ilue); stem simple 
nearly leafless, raceme simple terminal, flowers drooping. E. Bot. 
t. 262. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 40. 

Mountains in the north of England, Wales, and in Scotland, frequent. 
FI. July. If .—Root-leaves upon long stalks, biternate, leaflets roundish, 
crenate or lobed, dark green. Stam. 10—12. Germens 2—4. Flowers few’. 

2. T. minus, Linn. ( lesser Meadow-Bue ),- leaves 3 — 4 pinnate, 
leaflets roundish glabrous trifid and toothed glaucous beneath, pani- 
cle diffuse, its branches alternate, flowers mostly drooping. Jaeq. 

Austr. t. 419. E. Bot. f. 11, ( excellent ). E. FI. v. Hi. p. 41 3. 

segments of the leaves much acuminated. 

Stony pastures, not unfrequent, especially in limestone or chalky coun- 
tries ; but the following species is probably often mistaken for it. FI. 
June, July. If .—Stem zigzag, about a foot high, mostly glaucous. Leaflets 
small. Fruit narrow, ovate, sulcate. 

3. 1. majus, Jacq. {greater Meadow-Rue); leaves 3 — 4 pinnate, 
leaflets roundish glabrous trifid and toothed glaucous beneath, pani- 
cle diffuse its branches whorled, ultimate pedicels often umbellate, 


262 


POI.YANDRIA POLYGYNI A. 


[Anemone. 


flowers mostly drooping. Jacq. Austr. t. 420. Hook. Scot. i. 
]). 172. (3. leaflets much larger. T. majus, E. Eot. t. 611. E. El. 
v. Hi. p. 42. 

Stony pastures, principally in the north. Queen’s Ferry near Edinb. 
Mr. Mavglian. Near Fenwickland, Ayrshire, Mr. J. Wilson. Belfast, 
Mr. Templeton. — /3. Durham, Mr. Robson. FI. June. If. — Twice the 
size of, and with a more luxuriant habit than the preceding, from which 
Jacquin, who first described it, takes great pains to distinguish it ; but 
except in the characters above stated, there is the greatest similarity. 
In Austria, as with us, the two grow in the same situations. Their fruit 
is the same. The leaves vary in hue; nor can the whorled or subum- 
bellate flowers be always depended on. I possess Mr. Robson's plant 
figured in E. Rot. ; its leaflets are twice the size of Jacquin's original 
plant. Mr. Christy has seen numerous specimens, showing all the in- 
termediate stages between T. majus and T. minus. 

4. T .JJdvvm, Linn. ( common Meadow-Rue); stem erect branched 
furrowed, leaves bipinnate, leaflets broadly obovate or wedge- 
shaped trifid, panicle compact subcorymbose, flowers erect. E. Eot. 
t. 367. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 42. — (3. leaflets broadly ovate almost rotun- 
date. 

Banks of rivers and ditches, and in moist meadows. Less frequent 
in Scotland, and principally found in the vale of Clyde, — 0. Isle of Bute, 
Dr. Greville. FI. June, July. If. — 2 — 3 ft. high. Flowers very numer- 
ous, yellow. Lobes of the leaves varying in breadth. In /3. th e. leaflets 
are much broader than usual. 

16. Clematis. Linn. Traveller’s Joy. 

1. C. Vitalba, Linn. ( common Traveller's Joy); stem climb- 
ing, leaves pinnate, leaflets cordato-ovate inciso-lobate, petioles 
twining, peduncles rather shorter than the leaves. E. Eot. t. 612. 
E. EL v. Hi. p. 39. 

Hedges ; abundant in a calcareous soil. Rare in the north. FI. May, 
June. Tj . — Petioles acting as tendrils. Flowers greenish-white, fl agrant. 
Fruit very beautiful, with long white feathery awns. 

17. A nemone. Linn. Anemone. 

1. A. Pulsatilla, Linn. ( Pasque-flower Anonione) ; leaves as 
well as the involucre with doubly pinnatifid linear segments, 
flower inclined, calyx-leaves 6, pericarps with long feathery awns. 
E. Eot. <.51. E. El. v. Hi. ]>. 35. 

Dry chalky pastures, in several parts of England. FI. Apr. May. If. 
— Flowers purple, externally silky, very handsome. 

2. A. nemorosa, Linn. ( Wood Anemone) ; leaves ternate, leaf- 
lets lanceolate lobed and cut, involucre similar to them petiolatc, 
stem single-flowered, calyx-leaves 6 elliptical, pericarps awn less. 
E. Eot. t. 355. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 36. 

Moist woods and pastures, and on the high mountains. FI. April, 
May. 7f . — Flowers white, tinged with purple on the outside. 


POL Y A N D R I A — PO L Y G Y N 1 A . 


203 


Ranunculus .] 

3. A. apenntna, Linn, (blue Mountain Anemone ) ; leaves tri- 
ternate, segments lanceolate cut and toothed, involucres petiolate 
teruate and cut, calycine leaflets 12 — 14, pericarp without awns. 
E. Eot. t. 355. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 36. 

Rare, probably not indigenous. Wimbledon woods, with Eranthis 
hyemalis; near Harrow; Luton Hoe, Bedfordshire, and near Berkham- 
stead, Essex. FI. April. 1 ). — Flowers light and bright blue. 

4. A. ranunculoidcs , Linn, (yellow Wood Anemone ) ; leaves 
ter-or quinate, leaflets subtrifid cut and toothed, involucres shortly 
stalked ternate cut and toothed, calycine segments 5 — 6 elliptical, 
pericarps without awns. E. Eot. t. 1484. E. El. v. Hi. p. 38. 

Woods, rare; King’s Langley, Herts, and Wrotham, Kent. Scarcely 
a native. FI. April. If. . — Flower brightish yellow. 

18. Adonis. Linn. Pheasant’s Eye. 

1. A. autumnalis, Linn. ( Corn Adonis or Pheasant's Eye); 
petals concave connivent scarcely longer than the glabrous calyx, 
pericarps reticulated collected into an ovate head, stem branched. 
E. Eot. t. 308. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 43. 

Amongst corn, in several parts of England. About London, Norfolk, 
Gloucestershire, Glasgow and Dublin. FI. Sept. Oct. 0 . — Leaves thrice 
compound, with linear segments. Petals bright scarlet, such as might 
well be supposed to have sprung from the blood of Adonis. The French 
name of this flower is “ goutte de sang.'” 

19. Ranunculus. Linn. Crowfoot. 

* Pericarps transversely wrinkled. Petals white. 

1. R. aqudtilis , Linn. (Water Crowfoot); stem submersed, 
leaves capillaceo-multifid, floating ones tripartite their lobes cut, 
petals obovate larger than the calyx, pericarps glabrous or hispid. 
E. Eot. t. 101. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 54. — /3. all the leaves capillaceo- 
multifid. R. pantothrix, DC. — y. all the leaves orbicular in their 
circumscription, deeply cut into fine capillary segments. E. circi- 
natus, Sibth. — R. ceespitosus, DC. 

Lakes, ditches and rivers, abundant. FI. May, June. . — Varies 
much in the length of the stems and form of the leaves, according to the 
depth and stillness of the water. 

2. R. hederaceus, Linn. (Ivy Crowfoot); stem creeping, leaves 
roundish kidney-shaped with 3—5 rounded entire lobes, petals 
small scarcely longer than the calyx, stamens 5 — 10, pericarps 
glabrous. E. Eot. t. 2003. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 54. 

W et places, shallow pools of water, and where water has stood. FI. 
through the summer. If . . 

** Pericarps not transversely wrinkled. Nectary with a small 
scale. FI. yellow (except II. alpestris.) 
f Leaves undivided. 

  R. Lingua, Linn, (great Spear-wort); leaves lanceolate sub- 


264 POLYANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. [ Ranunculus . 

serrated sessile semiamplexicaul, stem erect glabrous. E.Bot.t. 100. 
E. El. v. Hi. p. 40. 

Marshes, sides of lakes and ditches ; not very common. Frequent in 
the East of England, as Norfolk ; Duddingston Loch, Edinh. ; Kinross- 
shire ; near Glasgow, and in the Isle of Arran. Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. 
FI. July. If .. — Stem 2 — 3 feet high. Flowers large, handsome. 

4. II. Flammula, Linn. ( lesser Spear-wort) ; leaves linear-lan- 
ceolate nearly entire petiolate, the lower ones ovato-lanceolate, stem 
declined at the base and rooting. E.Bot. t. 387. E. Fl.v. iii.p. 45. 
— ,3. much smaller, stem creeping filiform. B.reptans, Light. Scot, 
p. 289. t. 1. 

Sides of lakes and ditches, abundant. — /3. Margins of the Highland lakes 
in barren stony places. FI. July, Aug. If.. 

5. II. gramineus, Linn, (grassy Crowfoot); leaves linear-lan- 
ceolate striated entire, stem erect glabrous, scale of the nectary 
tubular, root fascicled. E. Bot. t. 2306. E. FI. v. iii.p. 46. 

“ Brought from N. Wales by Mr. Pritchard.” Withering. FI. May, 
June. If . 

6. R. Ficdria, Linn. ( Pileivort Crowfoot, lesser Celandine) ; 
leaves cordate petiolate angular or crenate, calyx of 3 leaves, petals 

9. E. Bot. t. 584. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 46 Ficaria ranunculoides, 

Be Cand. 

Pastures, woods, bushy places, &c. FI. April, May. If .. — Root con- 
sisting of many long fasciculated tubers. Leaves petiolate, 2 — 3 on the 
1-flowered stem. Flowers glossy, yellow. 

Leaves divided. Pericarps smooth. Perennial. 

7. R. alpestris, Linn, (alpine white Croufoot ); leaves glabrous 
orbicular deeply 3-lobed, lobes at the extremity crenate, stem mostly 
1-flowered, petals obcordate (white). E. Bot. t. 2390. E.Fl. v. Hi. 
p. 49. 

Sides of rills on the Clova mountains, Mr. G. Don. FI. May. If. — 
4 — 5 inches high. Leaves mostly radical, petiolate. Flowers entirely 
white, large. 

8. R. auncomus, Linn. (Wood Croufoot); leaves glabrous, 
radical ones reniform 3-partite and cut, stem-leaves divided to the 
base into linear subdentate segments, calyx pubescent shorter than 
the petals, head of fruit globose. E. Bot. t. 624. E. FI. v. Hi. pAl. 

Woods and coppices, not unfrequent. FI. April, May. If. — Not 
acrid, as are most of the other Croufoots. 

9. R. scelerdtus, Linn. (Celery-leaved Croufoot); leaves gla- 
brous, radical ones petiolate tripartite, lobes cut very obtuse, upper 
ones in 3 linear cut segments, calyx glabrous, pericarps collected 
into an oblong head. E. Bot. t. 681. E. FI. v. iii.p. 48. 

Sides of pools and ditches. FI. June. If. — Stem stoiit, succulent, 

] — 2 feet high. Lower leaves very broad and glossy. Flowers extremely 
small, pale yellow. 


Troilius.] POLYANDRIA — POLYGYNIA. 265 


10. R. acris, Linn. ( upright Meadow Crowfoot); calyx spread- 
ing) peduncles rounded (not furrowed), leaves tripartite their seg- 
ments acute trifid and cut, upper ones linear. E. Bot. t. 652. 
E. FI. v. iii.p. 51. 

Meadows, pastures, and mountainous situations. FI, June, July. 2f . 

11. R. repens, Linn. ( creeping Crowfoot); calyx spreading, 
flower-stalks furrowed, scyons creeping, leaves with 3 petiolated 
leaflets which are 3-lobed or 3-partite and cut. E. Bot. t. 516. 
E. FL v. iii.p. 51. 

Pastures, too frequent. FI. June— Aug. If . . — Well distinguished by 
its creeping scyons. ° 


12. R. bulbosus, Linn. ( bulbous Crowfoot); calyx reflexed, 
peduncles furrowed, stem upright many-flowered, leaves cut into 
3 petiolated leaflets which are 3-lobed or 3-partite and cut, root 
bulbous. E. Bot. t. 515. E. FI. v. iii.p. 49. 

Meadows and pastures, frequent. Ft. May. If.— 1 ft. high, hairy. 
Lobes of the lower leaves subovate ; upper leaves cut into linear segments. 

ttt leaves divided. Pericarps tuberculated or muricated. Annual. 


13. K. hirsutus, Curt, (pafe hairy Croufoot); calyx reflexed, 
stem erect many-flowered hairy, leaves 3-lobed or 3-partite, lobes 
obtuse cut, root fibrous, pericarps margined and tuberculated. 
E. Bot t. 1501. E. FL v. Hi. p. 50. — II. Philonotis, E/irh. 

Meadows and waste ground. FL June— Oct. © —Varying extremely 
in size. When very small it is R. parvulus, Linn. Mant. and Sin. FI. Brit. 

14. R. arvensis, Linn. ( Corn Croufoot); calyx spreading, stem 
erect many-flowered, leaves 3-cleft their lobes generally again 3- 
cleft into linear entire or bi-tridentate segments, pericarps muri- 
cated. E. Bot. t. 135. E. Fl. v. iii.p. 52. 

Corn-fields. Fl. June. ©.— Pericarps very large and prickly. Flowers 
small, pale yellow. — Said to be extremely injurious to cattle. 

15. R. parvijlorus , Linn, {small-flowered Crowfoot); stem 
spreading, leaves hairy 3-lobed and cut, peduncles opposite the 
leaves, calyx as long as the petals, pericarps muricated. E Bot 
t. 1 20. E. FL v. Hi. p. 53. 

Corn-fields about London, Norwich, and in the S. and S W of Fne 
land. Chelmsford, Mr. Jonathan Grubb. Hackfall, Rev T Pnltnr, 
Ormeshead, Mr. IV. Wilson. Cork , Mr. Drummond. Sand-hills between 
Beldoyle and Howth, Dublin, Mr. J. T. Machrnj. Fl May June © — 
Well distinguished by its spreading stems, lateral flower-stalls, and small 
narrow petals, one or two often wanting. 


20. Trollius. Linn. Globe-flower. 

1. T. europccus, Linn. ( Mountain Globe-flower); calyx of about 
L, concave erect leaves, petals the same length as the stamens. 
E. Bot. t. 28. E. FL v. iii.p. 56. 

N 


206 DIDYNAMIA — GYMNOSPERMI A. [i Caltha . 

Moist mountain-pastures, in the north of England and north of Ire- 
land. Wales and Scotland. FI. June, July. If. — Lenvcs in 5, deep seg- 
ments, which are again cut and serrated. Flowers large, handsome. 
Petals often partly concealed by the spreading of the stamens. 

21. IIelleborus. Linn. Hellebore. 

1. II. viridis, Linn, (green Hellebore'); stem fevv-flotvered leafy, 
leaves digitate, cal. spreading. E. Bot. t. 200. F. FI. v. in. p. 57. 

Woods, thickets and hedges, especially in a chalky soil : but often the 
outcast of gardens, as at Dunglass Lien and Laswade, Scotland. FI. 
April, May. If.— 1 ft. high. Leaves annual, large, on a broad stalk; 
upper ones sessile : segments linear-lanceolate, serrated at the extre- 
mity. Cal. large, greenish-yellow. This and the following have been 
often employed medicinally, instead of the true, ancient or Greek Hel- 
lebore, (II. officinalis, Sibth. and Smith.) 

2. H .feetidus, Linn, (stinking Hellebore); stem many-flowered 
leafy, leaves pedate, calyx converging. E. Bot. t. 013. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 58. 

Pastures and thickets, especially in chalky counties, in England. Rlan- 
t\ re and Barncluish; and by the Doune, Ayr, (Mr. Ja >. I Vilson) on the 
west, and near Anstruther on the east of Scotland : scarcely indigenous. 
FI. Apr. If . A bushy plant, 2 feet high. Leaves evergreen, uppermost 
ones gradually becoming Lracteas. Flowers globose; calyx tipped with 
a purple tinge. Fetid and powerfully cathartic. 

22. Caltha. Linn. Marsh-marigold. 

I. C . palustris, Linn, (common Marsh-marigold); leaves orbi- 
culari-cordate or reniform crenate, calyx-leaves 5 — 6 oval. E. Bot. 
t. 506. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 59. (3. stem creeping, leaves cordato-trian- 
gular sharply crenate. Hook. Scot. i.p. 176. — C. radicans, Forst. 
— E. Bot. t. 2175. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 60. 

Marshy places, common. — /3. not unfrequent in Scotland, especially 
in mountainous regions ; but I have rarely seen it wild with leaves so 
decidedly triangular as a plant long cultivated as such in the Edin. Bot. 
Gard. (which Mr. Winch thinks totally distinct.) FI. March —June. If . 

CLASS XIV. DIDYNAMIA. 

4 Slam. ; 2 longer than the other 2. 

ORD. I. GYMNOSPERMI A. Seeds 4, apparently naked , 
i. e. closely covered by the pericarp; yjgvog, naked, and c-ts^/xw, the 
seed. (All belonging to the Nat. Orel. Labiat.e, Juss.) 

Tribe I. T uhs of the Cor. scarcely longer than the cal., its 

limb 4 — 5-cleft, nearly regular. Slam, distant. Mentiioide.l, 

Benth.' 

' I have availed myself of the new and excellent arrangement of the Laliatce 
recently published in the Bot. Register, t. 128.2, et seq. 


DIDYNAMIA — GYMNOSPERMIA. 


267 


Halluta.] 

1. Mentha. Cal. equal, 5-tootlied, its mouth naked or rarely 
villous. Cor. nearly regular, 4-cleft, its tube very short. Stum. 
distant, exserted or included. Filaments naked. Anthers with 
2 parallel cells, Benth — Name,— or pn h, an ancient Greek 
term. 

Tribe II. Corolla two-lipped ; the tube about as long as the calyx ; 
lips nearly equal in length ; upper one erect , somewhat flat. Slam, 
distant; anthers 2 -celled, cells parallel (in the British Genera.) 
Satureineae, Benth. ' 

2. Thymus. Flowers wliorled or capitate. Cal. with 1 0 ribs, 
tubular, 2-lipped: upper lip 3-toothed; lower one bifid, the throat 
hairy. Cor. with the upper lip erect, nearly plane, notched, lower 
patent and trifid. Benth. — Named huyoc, strength ; from its balsamic 
odour, strengthening the animal spirits. 

3. Origanum. Spikes (or heads) of flowers 4-sided, resembling 
a catkin, imbricated with bracteas. Cal various. Cor. with the upper 

lip erect, nearly plane; lower one patent, trifid. Benth Name, 

oeos, a hill, and joy; from the dry hilly places of which the 
species are the ornament. Marjoram is corrupted from marjorana, 
( Origanum Marjorana), and that again from the marjamie , (or 
Maryamych), of the Arabs. v 

Tribe III. Tjpper lip of the Corolla abbreviated or apjjarenth/ 
wanting ; lower one longer, patent. Stamens ascending, much 
exserted. Ajugoideae, Benth. 

4. Teucrium. Cal. tubular, 5-toothed, nearly equal or 2-lipped. 
Cor. with the tube shorter than the cal. : upper lip bipartite; lower 
one patent, 3-fid. Stem, much exserted. Cells of the anthers 
confluent, spreading — Named from Teucer , Prince of Troy, who 
first employed this plant medicinally. 

5. Ajuga. Cal. ovate, nearly equal, 5-cleft. Cor. with the 

tube exserted: upper lip short, erect, entire or emarginate; lower- 
one larger, patent, trifid. Stam. 4, ascending, protruded above the 
upper lip. Name altered from Abigu, (abigo, to drive away) of 
the Latins, a medicinal plant allied to this. 3 J 

Tribe IV. Cor. 2-lipped. Stamens ascending, shorter than the 
upper lip. Anthers free. Fruit dry. Nepetete. Benth. 

* Cal. equed or oblique, 5— 1 0-toothed, not 2 -lipped. 
t Stamens longer than the tube of the corolla. Anthers perfect. 

6. Ballota. Cal. salver-shaped, equal, with 10 ribs and 5 
broad mucronated teeth, naked within. Cor. with the upper lip 
erect, concave ; lower one trifid, middle lobe the largest, emarginate. 
Cells of the anthers spreading.— Named fixMurri , from /3 «XAw, to 
reject ; on account of its disagreeable smell. 


263 


DIDYNAMIA GYMNOSPERMIA. 


[Glechoma. 


7. Leonurus. Cal. witli 5 or 10 libs, equal, with 5 subulate 
teeth, the throat naked. Cor. with the upper lip very hairy above, 
entire ; lower one patent, trifid. Anthers sprinkled with shining 
dots. — Named from \iuv, a Lion, and ougx, a tail; from a fancied 
resemblance in the plant to a Lion’s tail. 

8. Galeogdolon. Cal. campanulate, 5-ribbed, nearly equal, 
5-toothed. Upper lip of the Cor. incurved, arched, entire ; lower 
one smaller, in 3 nearly equal, acute lobes. — Named from yccXir,, a 
weasel , and \3boXo;, a fetid scent: formerly considered synonymous 
with Caleopsis, from which genus it is now removed. 

9. Galeopsis. Cal. campanulate, equal, 5-toothed, teeth mu- 

cronate. Cor. with the tube exserted, the throat inflated : upper 
lip arched ; lower one with 3 unequal lobes, having two teeth on 
its upper side Named yx'xiri, a iveasel, and aspect or appear- 

ance ; from the resemblance in the lips of the flower to the snout 
of an animal. 

10. Lamium. Cal campanulate, 10-ribbed, 5-toothed, nearly 
equal. Cor. with the throat inflated : upper lip erect, entire, arched; 
lower one patent, 2-lobed, with one or two teeth on each side at 
the base. — Named from A ui/us, the throat ; on account of the shape 
of the flower. 

11. Betonica. Cal. ovate, 10-ribbed, teeth equal, awned. 
Cor. with the tube exserted, cylindrical : upper lip ascending ; lower 
one patent trifid, its middle lobe entire, or nearly so. — Name al- 
tered from Bentonic, in Celtic : Ben, meaning head, and ton, good. 
Its properties are cephalic. 

12. Stachys. Cal. subcampanulate, 10-ribbed, teeth 5, nearly 
equal, acuminate. Cor. with the tube as long as the calyx ; upper 
lip mostly arched, entire; lower one 3-lobed, with the 2 lateral lobes 

reflexed. This genus scarcely (lifters from Betonicahnt in the shorter 

tube of its corolla. — Name, — a spike, from the nature of the 
inflorescence. 

13. Nepeta. Cal. tubular, many-(15-) ribbed, its mouth a little 
oblique, 5-toothed. Cor. with the tube exserted : upper lip emar- 
ginate ; lower 3-fid, the lateral lobes reflexed, the middle one broad, 
concave, notched. — Named, some say from Nepi, a town in Italy ; 
others from Ncpa, a scorpion, for whose bite this plant was con- 
sidered a cure. 

1C. Glechoma. Cal. tubular, many-(15-) nerved, equal, 5- 
toothed. Cor. with the tube exserted : upper lip bifid; lower 3-lobed, 
middle lobe emarginate, plane. Anthers, before bursting, approach- 
ing in pairs and forming a cross. — Name, yXrixuv ,-. — applied by the 
Greeks to a kind of Thyme. 


Scutellaria.] 


DIDYNAMIA — GYMNOSPEUMIA. 


269 


tt Stamens included within the tube of the corolla. 

15. Marrubium. Cal. with 10 ribs and 5 or 10 spreading 
teeth, the throat hairy. Cor. with the tube exserted: upper lip 
strait, linear, cloven ; lower one 3-lohed, middle lobe the largest, 
emarginate. — Name of doubtful origin ; some say from a town so 
called in Italy. 

** Calyx two-lipped. 

16. Acinos. Whorls few-flowered. Cal. 13-nerved, tubular, 
gibbous at the base below: upper lip 3-, lower 2-fid, throat hairy. 
Cor. with the upper lip nearly plane ; lower one trifid, middle lobe 
nearly entire. — Name applied by the Greeks to some aromatic 
plant. 

17. Calamintha. Flowers axillary, somewhat solitary, or 
often in loose bracteated cymes. Ccd. tubular, 13-nerved, nearly 
equal at the base : upper lip 3-toothed ; lower one bifid, the throat 
mostly hairy. Cor. with the upper lip nearly plane, emarginate ; 
lower one trifid, middle lobe emarginate. — Name, — xxXog, good , and 
ptvQsc, mint : a plant whose scent drove away serpents. 

18. Clinopodium. Whorls many-flowered, with numerous, 
linear bracteas forming a sort of involucre. Cal. tubular, 13-nerved, 
nearly equal at the base, often curved : upper lip 3-toothed ; lower 
one bifid. Cor. with the upper lip nearly plane, emarginate ; lower 

one 3-lobed, middle lobe emarginate Mr. Bentham thinks that 

this and the two preceding genera and Gardoquia of Iiuiz and Pa- 
von, should perhaps form but one genus, distinguished by the tubu- 
lar, 13-nerved calyx and the peculiar conformation of the style, or 
stigma, which has its lower lobe recurved, flattened at the base, and 
surrounding the upper and shorter one. — Name,— kAoh, a bed, and 
7rs?, a foot, from the compact stalked head of flowers. 

19. Melittis. Cal. with branching veins, campanulate, ample : 
upper lip 2 — 3-toothed ; lower 2-lobed, lobes broadly ovate. Cor. 
with the tube much exserted ; upper lip nearly flat, entire ; lower 

one 3-lobed, lobes rounded, nearly equal Name the same as 

ftsAcrs-ss, a Fee ; from yi>.i, honey ; because yielding honey to Bees. 

20. Prunella. Cal. ovate: upper lip plane, more or less dis- 
tinctly 3-toothed; lower one bifid. Cor. with the upper lip nearly 
entire, arched ; lower one 3-lobed. Filaments with two teeth at 
the extremity, one bearing the anther — Named from the German, 
braiine, the quinsy, whence Prunella of Ray, softened into Pru- 
nella. 

21. Scutellaria. Cal. broadly ovate, having a conspicuous, 
concave tooth or scale on the upper-side ; its 2 nearly equal, en- 
tire lips closed after flowering. Cor. with the tube much exserted, 


270 DIDYNAMIA — ANGIOSPERMI A. [Pcdicularis. 

upper lip strait, arclied ; lower one trifid. — Named from scutella, a 
little dish or cup, which the calyx with its appendage or ear some- 
what resembles. 

OllD. II. ANGIOSPERMI A. 1 ( Seeds enclosed in a distinct 

capsule .) 

* Cal. \-jid. 

22. Bartsia. Cal. tubular, mostly coloured. Cor. ringent 
with a contracted orifice : upper lip arched, entire ; lower one in 3 
equal, reflexed lobes. Anthers mostly hairy. Caps, ovate, com- 
pressed, with 2 cells and many angular seeds. — Nat. Old. Scro- 
PHULARiNEiE, Juss. — Named in honour of John JBartsch, a Prus- 
sian Botanist, and friend of Linnjeus, who died at Surinam. 

23. Euphrasia. Cal. tubular. Upper lip of the Cor. di- 
vided ; lower one of 3 nearly equal lobes. Cells of the Anthers 
spurred at the base. Caps, ovato-oblong, 2-celled. Seeds striated. — 
Nat. Orel. Scrophularineje, Juss — Name from Euplirosyne, 
expressive ofjoy and pleasure, in allusion to its properties. 

24. Riiinanthus. Cal. inflated. Upper lip of the Cor. com- 
pressed laterally; lower one plane, 3-lobed. Caps, of 2 cells, obtuse, 

compressed, with many imbricated, flat and margined seeds Not. 

Ord. ScROPHULARiNEiE, Juss. — Name, — ziv, a nose, and x>6o;, a 

flower : in allusion to the beaked upper lip of the corolla, which is 
very remarkable in the R. Eleplias. 

25. Melampyrum. Cal. tubular. Upper lip of the Cor. 

laterally compressed, turned back at the margin ; lower lip trifid. 
Caps, oblong, 2-celled, oblique, opening on one side. Cells 1 -seeded. 
Seeds gibbous at the base — Nat. Ord. Melampyraceas, Richard. 
Named from hlach, and Togo?, wheat. Its seeds resemble 

grains of wheat, and they are said, when mixed with flour, to make 
the bread black. 

26. Lathrjea. Cal. campanulate. Cor. tubular, 2-lipped; the 
upper lip concave. A depressed gland is at the base of the germen. 
Capsule 2-valved, one-celled, having two spongy receptacles in the 
middle of each valve — Plants leafless, coloured.- — Nat. Ord. Oro- 
banchEjE, Rich — Name, — /.xSxiog, hid or concealed ; the plant 
being much concealed by the earth or dead leaves. 

** Calyx 5-cleft, (in Pedicularis irregular). 

27. Pedicularis. Cal. inflated, 5-cleft, or unequally 2 — 3- 
lobed, jagged, somewhat leafy. Upper lip of the Cor. laterally 
compressed, arched, lower one plane, 3-lobed. Caps, oblique, 


1 Ay yum, a vessel or capsule, that which surrounds or encloses <rmiu.ee, the seed. 


D I D YN A M I A — A N GIOSPE R M I A. 


271 


Verbena.] 

compressed, 2-celled. Seeds angular Nat. Ord. Scropiiula- 

rinea, Jttss. — Name derived from its supposed property of pro- 
ducing the lousy disease in sheep that feed upon it, but which 
rather arises from the wet pastures where such plants grow. 

28. Antirrhinum. Cal. 5 -partite. Cor. personate, gibbous 
at the base, (no distinct spur,) its mouth closed by a projecting 
palate. Caps. 2-celled, oblique, opening by three pores at the 
extremity — Nat. Ord. ScRopiiur.ARiNEiE, Juss. — Name, — «.vu, 
resembling, giv, a nose , muffler or mask, from the appearance of the 
flowers. 

29. Linaria. Cal. 5-partite. Cor. personate, spurred at the 
base ; its mouth closed by a projecting palate. Capsule ventricose, 
2-celled, opening by valves or teeth. — Nat. Ord. Scropiiularinea, 
Juss — Named from Linum, flax, which the leaves of some species 
resemble. 

30. Scrophulari a. Cal. 5-lobed, (or in S. vernalis deeply 5- 

cleft). Cor. subglobose ; its limb contracted with 2 short lips, the 
upper with 2 lobes and frequently a small scale or abortive stamen 
within it, the lower 3-lobed. Caps. 2-celled, 2-valved, the mar- 
gins of the valves turned inwards Nat. Ord. Scrophularinea, 

Juss. — Named from the Scrophula , a disease which this plant 
was supposed to cure. 

31. Digitalis. Cal. in 5, deep, unequal segments. Cor. cam - 
panulate, inflated beneath ; limb obliquely 4 — 5-lobed, unequal. 
Caps, ovate, of 2 cells and many seeds. — Nat. Ord. Scrofhula- 
rinea;, Juss. — Name, — digitate, the finger of a glove, which its 
flowers resemble. Hence Fox-glove in English, and cloigts de la 
Vierge, gants de notre Dame, &c. in French. 

32. Limosella. Cal. 5-cleft, equal. Cor. shortly 5-cleft, cam- 
panulate, equal. Stam. nearly equal. Stigma capitate. Caps. 
globose, 2-valved. — Nat. Ord. Scrophularinea, Dr. — Named 
from limus, mud: the plant growing in muddy places. 

33. Sibthorpia. Cal. in 5, deep, spreading segments. Cor. 
5-cleft, rotate, the two lowermost segments the narrowest. Stigma 
dilated. Capsule nearly orbicular, compressed, 2-celled, 2-valved. 
— Nut. Ord. Scrophularinea, Juss. — Name given in honour 
of Dr. Humphrey Sibthorpe, the successor of Dillenius in the bo- 
tanical chair at Oxford. 

34. Verbena. Cal. tubular, with 5 teeth, one of them gener- 
ally shorter than the rest. Cor. tubular, with the limb rather 
unequal, 5-cleft. Stamens included, (sometimes only 2). Seeds 
2 or 4, enclosed in a thin evanescent pericarp. — Nat.Ord. Verbe- 
nacea, Juss — Name, — -ferfaen in Celtic, derived from fer, to drive 


272 DIDYNAMIA — GYMNOSPERMI A. [Mentha. 

away, and faen, a stone, from having been supposed to cure the 
complaint so called. Th&is. 

35. Limn/ea. Cal. 5-cleft, superior. Cor. campanulate, 5-cleft, 
equal. Fruit a dry, 3-celled berry, with one cell only bearing a 
perfect seed. Involucre of about 4 leaves at the base of the germen. 
— Nat. Ord. CaprifoliacezE, Juss — Name: — It was this “ little 
northern plant, long overlooked, depressed, abject, flowering early,” 
which Linnreus himself selected as therefore most appropriate to 
transmit his name to posterity. Sm. 

*** Calyx lateral , in 2, generally combined, often bifid segments. 

36. Orobanche. Cal. of 2 lateral, often combined and bifid 

segments, bracteated. Cor. ringent, 4 — 5-cleft. A gland at the 
base of the germen beneath. Stigma capitate. Capsule 2-valved, 
bearing numerous minute seeds, on parietal longitudinal receptacles. 
— Leafless , brown or purplish, herbaceous, scaly plants, often at- 
tached to the roots of other plants Nat. Ord. Orobancheje, 

Vent. — Named from ogojSos, a leguminose ov pea-like plant , and ccyyjn, 
to strangle , the roots being often attached to plants of that de- 
scription, are supposed to injure them. 

DIDYNAMIA — GYMNOSPERMI A. 

1. Mentha. Linn. Mint. 

1. M. sylvistris, Linn. (Horse Mint); leaves ovato-oblong very 
acute unequally serrated downy hoary beneath, spikes almost cylin- 
drical scarcely interrupted, bracteas subulate, calyx very hairy. 
E. Eot. t. 686. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 73. 

Moist waste ground ; not uncommon in England. Siedlaw hills, For- 
farshire ; Mr. Drummond, (perhaps naturalized). Ireland, Mr. J. T. 
Mac/cay . Ft. Aug. Sept. If. — Mr. Drummond’s specimens, and others 
gathered by Mr. Banks near Plymouth, have the partial bracteas much 
longer than the flower, and far more conspicuous than in my other 
specimens and the figure in E. Bot. 

2. M. rotund folia, Linn. ( round-leaved Mint ); leaves ellipti- 
cal obtuse sharply serrated wrinkled downy shaggy beneath, spikes 
interrupted, bracteas lanceolate, calyx somewhat hairy. E. Bot. 
t. 446. E. FI. v. iii.p. 74. 

Moist places, in waste ground ; not unfrequent in many parts ot Eng- 
land. Anglesea, but scarcely wild ; Mr. 117 Wilson. Near Auchindenny, 
Scotland; Mr. Lloyd. Near Cove, Ireland; Mr.J. T. Mack ay. FI. 
Aug. Sept. If . 

3. M. viridis , Linn. ( Spear-Mint ); leaves lanceolate acute gla- 
brous serrated sessile, spikes interrupted, bracteas setaceous some- 
what hairy as well as the calyx, pedicels glabrous. E. Bot. t. 2424. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 75. 


DlDYNAMIA — GYMNOSPERMIA. 


273 


Mentha.] 

Marshy places, in many parts of England, according to Sm. Near St. 
Ives, Rev. J. S. Tozcr. Cairnhill, near Edinh. Mr. Lloyd. FI. Aug. If . 
— Cultivated for culinary purposes, being aromatic and pungent. 

4. M. piperita , Sm. ( Pepper-Mint ); leaves ovato-lanceolate 
strongly serrated acute slightly hairy stalked, spikes interrupted, 
hracteas lanceolate, calyx glandular quite glabrous at the base. 
E. Eot. t. 687. E. El. v. Hi. p. 76. 

Watery places in many parts of England ; but often the outcast of 
gardens. Alford, Aberdeenshire ; Dr. A. Murray. FI. Aug. Sept. If . — 
Much cultivated for the sake of its essential oil, which resides in minute 
glands, conspicuous on the leaves and especially on the cal. Mr. 
W. Wilson finds a var. near Warrington in which these glands are not 
visible even with a microscope : “ its odour is sweet and mild, without 
the pungency of the common sort cultivated in gardens.” 

5. M. citrdta, Ehrli. ( Bergamot- Mint); leaves broadly ovate 

or cordate strongly serrated acute glabrous on both sides, spikes 
capitate very obtuse, calyx and pedicels quite glabrous. E. El. 
v. Hi. p. 78. — 31. oclorata, Sole E. Eot. t. 1025. 

Watery places, rare. Cheshire ; near Bedford and in N. Wales. FI. 
Aug. Sept. If . — I have only seen garden specimens of this. It has much 
the habit of M. hirsuta ; but is quite glabrous, and “ has the smell of 
the Bergamot Orange or of the herbage of Monarda didyma.” Sm. 

6. M. hirsuta, Linn, (hairy Mint); leaves ovate serrated pubes- 
cent stalked, flowers capitate or whorled, calyx hairy, pedicels with 
reflexed hairs. E. Eot. t. 447. E. El. v. iii.p. 78.— 31. sativa, 
Linn — E. Eot. t. 448. 

Banks of rivers and marshes, frequent. FI. Aug. Sept. If . — Very 
variable. Sometimes the flowers are capitate, sometimes whorled, and 
sometimes the whorls are placed so close on the extremity of the 
branches as to form a sjiike. Anthers varying in length. 

7. M. acutifolia, Sm. (fragrant sharp-leavecl Mint); leaves 
ovato-lanceolate tapering at each end, flowers whorled, calyx hairy 
all over, hairs of the flower-stalks spreading. E. Eot. t. 2415. 
E. FI. v. iii.p. 81. 

Banks of the Medway. FI. Sept.? — Very closely related to the last 
species (Sm.), and probably a mere variety. 

8. M. rubra, Sm. (tall red Mint); “ stem upright zigzag” (Sin.), 
leaves ovate serrated subglabrous stalked, flowers whorled, pedicels 
and lower part of the calyx quite glabrous, teeth hairy. E. Eot. 
t. 1413. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 82. 

Wet places in hedges and thickets and banks of rivers. FI. Sept. If . 

4—5 feet high. Flowers purplish-red, with linear, somewhat hispid 
hracteas at the base. 

9. M. gentilis, Linn, (bushy red Mint); “ flowers whorled, 
leaves ovate, stem much branched spreading, flower-stalks and base 

n 2 


JDIDYNAMIA GYMNOSPERMI A. 


274 


[Thymus. 


of the bell-shaped calyx nearly glabrous.” Sm E. Bot. t. 2118 

(not 449.) E. El. v. Hi. p. 83. 

Watery places, rare. North Wales. River-side above Warrington, 
Mr. IV. Wilson. Holt in Norfolk ; andin Somersetshire. (Sm.) FI. °Au<r’. 
V-   — I have seen no Scottish specimens of this plant. .Mine are from the 
Holt station, such as are figured in E. But. On comparing them with 
my Yorkshire specimen of M. rubra from Mr. Turner, 1 find them to 
be the same ; and was hence led in FI. Scot, to doubt of their real dif- 
ference. In this I am corrected by Sir J. E. Smith. The present has 
much smaller flowers than the last, not so much confined to the upper 
axils as in M. rubra. — Cultivated for its agreeable scent, which is iin 
proved and rendered more powerful by a dry soil. 

10. M. gracilis, Sm. ( narrow-leaved Mini); “ flowers whorled, 
leaves lanceolate nearly sessile, stent upright much branched, dower- 

stalks and base of the calyx quite smooth.” E. FI. v. Hi. p. 84 

31. genti/is , E. Bot. t. 449. 

Watery places in moist meadows. (Sm.) FI. Aug. Sept. If. — Appar- 
ently very nearly allied to the preceding, and first published by Sir 
J. E, Smith as M. gentilis. 

11. M. ar re nsis, Linn. (Eorn-3/int) ; flowers whorled, leaves 
ovate hairy serrated, calyx campanulate and clothed with spreading- 
hairs. E. Bot. t. 2119. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 85. 

Corn-fields. Ft. Aug. Sept. If. — The short and campanulate calyx 
well distinguishes this species. Peduncles glabrous or hairy. The smell 
has been compared to that of decayed cheese. 

12. M. agrestis, Sole, (rugged Field-Mint); “flowers whorled, 
leaves somewhat heart-shaped strongly serrated rugose, stem erect, 
calyx bell-shaped covered all over with horizontal hairs. E. Bot. 
t. 2120. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 87. 

Corn-fields and neglected gardens, Somersetshire; plentiful in Sussex, 
M>\ Borrer. FI. Aug. Sept. If “ Whether this be a distinct species’ 
or not” (from the preceding), “ I will not dare to assert, nor do I know 
any person competent to decide the question.” Sm. 

13. M. Pulegium , Linn. (Penny -royal) ; flowers whorled, 
leaves ovate downy obtuse suberenate, stern prostrate, flower-stalks 
slightly and calyx very pubescent, teeth of the latter fringed. 
E. Bot. t. 1026. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 87. 

Wet commons and margins of brooks, England and south of Ireland. 

Rare in Scotland and probably not indigenous. FI. Aug. Sept. If. 

The smallest of the genus, readily known by its prostrate stems and 
small frequently recurved leaves, both of which are thickly covered with 
short hairs. Smell powerful. Much employed medicinally. 

2. Thymus. Linn. Thyme. 

1. I. Serpyllum, Linn, (wiki Thyme); flowers capitate, stems 
branched decumbent, leaves plane ovate obtuse entire petiolate 
more or less ciliated at the base. E.Bot.t. 1514. E.Fl.v. iii.p. 107. 


DIDYNAMIA — GYM NOSPERM I A. 


275 


Ajuga.] 

Hills and dry pastures, abundant. FI. July, Aug. If . — Variable in 
size; and in tbe hairiness, and scent of its foliage, which is sometimes 
all over hoary, and smells like lemon. Flowers purple. — The other Bri- 
tish sp. of Thymus, (of Linn, and Sm.) are referred to Acinos and 
Calamintha. 

3. Origanum. Linn. Marjoram. 

1. O. vulgdre , Linn. ( common Marjoram); heads of flowers 
roundish panicled crowded glabrous, braeteas ovate longer than the 
calyx, leaves ovate entire. E. Bot. t. 1 143. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 106. 

Dry hilly and bushy places, not unfrequent. FI. July, Aug. If. . — 
Stems 1 foot high. Flowers purple ; braeteas tinged with the same colour. 
Fragrant and aromatic. 

“The Thyme strong-scented ’neath one’s feet, 

And Marjoram so doubly sweet.” — Clare. 

4. Teucrium. Linn. Germander. 

1. T. Scorodonia, Linn. ( Wood Germander or Sage); leaves 
cordate petiolate downy crenate, flowers in lateral and terminal 
one-sided racemes, stem erect. E. Bot. t. 1543. E. FI. v. iii.p. 68. 

Woods and dry stony places, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If. — Stems 
1 — 2 feet high. Leaves very much wrinkled. Flowers yellowish-white. 
Stain, purplish-red. — The plant is extremely bitter and has been some- 
times substituted for Hops. 

2. T. Scordium, Linn. (Water Germander); leaves oblong 
sessile downy serrated, flowers few in the axils stalked, stem pro- 
cumbent. E. Bot. t. 828. E. FI. v. iii.p. 68. 

Low wet meadows, rare. Cambridgeshire; near Highbridge, Oxford- 
shire. Near Castle Lyons, and Portumna bridge, Tipperary ; Mr. J. T. 
MacJcay. FI. July, Aug. If .. — Flowers rather small, pale purple. — 
Formerly much employed in medicine. 

3. T. Chamddrys, Linn. ( Wall Germander); leaves ovate 
inciso-serrate tapering into a footstalk, flowers axillary in threes, 
stem ascending. E. Bot. t. 680. E. FI. v. iii.p. 69. 

Borders of fields and mostly ruined walls; Winchelsea castle, Sussex; 
Gateshead, Durham ; city-walls of Norwich, plentiful. Near Forfar anil 
Kelly- Angus ; in Methven wood, Perthshire, Mr. Jas. Macnab. Near 
Cork, Mr. Drummond. — FI. July. If. — Flowers reddish-purple, large, 
handsome, mostly in the terminal axils. 

5. Ajuga. Linn. Bugle. 

1. A. replans, Linn, (common Bugle); glabrous or downy, 
stem solitary with creeping scyons. E. Bot. t. 489. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 65. 

Moist pastures and woods, abundant. FI. May, June. If. — Leaves 
broadly ovate, more or less crenate, lower ones and those on the runners 
tapering into a footstalk. Flowering-stem erect, with sessile leaves. 
Flowers blue (sometimes white or flesh-coloured), in whorls, from the 
axils of the upper leaves or braeteas, which are often purplish. 


276 DIDYNAMIA — GYMNOSPERMIA. [Leonurus. 

2. A. pyramiddlis, Linn. ( pyramidal Bugle'); hairy, whorls 
crowded into a pyramidal and tetragonal form, scyons none, radical 
leaves obovate very large more or less crenate. E. Bot. t. 1270. 
E. El. v. Hi. ]). 66. 

Highland pastures, rare. Ben Nevis; plentiful at the Burn of Killi- 
gower and on the Ord of Caithness; Dr. Hope. Tor Aichaltie, near 
Brahan Castle, Ross-shire ; Mr. Gibb. Appin, Capt. Carmichael. Strath 
Erric, Inverness-shire; Dr. Maclachlan. FL June. If.— 4— 6 inches 
high. Leaves tapering gradually from the base upwards. 

3. A. cilpina , Linn. ( alpine Bugle); leaves nearly glabrous 
unequally toothed all nearly of the same size, whorls of flowers 
rather distant. E. Bot. t. 477. E. FL v. Hi. p. 65. 

Mountains ; rare. Wales, Derbyshire, Durham. Aberdeenshire, not 
uncommon; D. Don. FL July. if. — Of this 1 have seen no British 
specimens. It seems to be variable in the toothing of the leaves and in 
the middle segments of the lower lip being entire or notched. 

4. A. Chamcepitys, Sm. ( ground-Pine or yellow Bugle); hairy, 
stems spreading, leaves tripartite their segments linear- filiform, 
flowers axillary solitary shorter than the leaves. E. Bot. t. 77. 
E. FL v. iii. p. 67. — Teucrium Chamcepitys , Linn. 

Sandy or gravelly fields ; not unfrequent in Kent and Surry. Trip- 
low Heath, Cambridgeshire, and Purfleet, Essex. Fl. Apr. May. ©. — 
Very different in habit from the preceding species. Flowers yeliow, 
spotted with red and nestled among the narrow segments of the leaves, 
which almost resemble those of a Pine ; the lowermost ones however 
are much broader. Stem reddish-purple, glutinous. 

6. Ballota. Linn. Horehound. 

1. B. nigra , Linn, (black Horebound); leaves ovate crenato- 
serrate, teeth ol the calyx shortly acuminate patent longer than the 
tube of the corolla. E. Bot. t. 46. E. Fl. v. iii. p. 101. 

Waste places near towns and villages, less frequent in the north. Fl. 
July, Aug. If. — 2 — 3 ft. high. Flowers in whorls, purple, rarely white. 
A\ hole plant fetid. — Wallroth and other German writers have a 2d spe- 
cies, 1). alba, Linn. Sp. PL ed. ii. p. 814, (B. vulgaris. Link,) distin- 
guished from this by its longer and more erect teeth to the cal. and 
longer tube to the corolla : but its character seems to be scarcely suffi- 
cient to constitute it a good species. 

7. Leonurus. Linn . Motherwort. 

1. L. Cardiaca, Linn. (Mother wort); leaves petiolate, lower 
ones cuneato-lanceolate 3-lobed, upper ones entire. E. Bot. t. 286. 
E. El. v. iii. in 104. 

Hedges and waste places, in several parts of England. About Edinb. 
South of Ireland. Fl. Aug. If. — Stem 3 feet high, branched. Flowers 
in crowded whorls, white with a reddish tinge; upper lip of cor. shaggy. 
Cal. with pungent, spreading teeth. 


Lamium.] 


DIDYNAMTA — GYMNOSPERMIA. 


277 


8. Galeobdolon. Huds, Weasel-snout. 

1. G. luteuni, Huds. (yellow Weasel-snout or Archangel). 
E. Bot. t. 787. E. El. v. Hi. p. 9G. 

Woods and shady places, in England, the south of Scotland, and 
Ireland. FI. May, June. If. — One foot or more high. Leaves ovato- 
acuminate, petiolate, deeply serrated. Flowers whorled, yellow ; lower 
lip orange and spotted. 

9. Galeopsis. Linn. Hemp-nettle. 

1. G. Lddanum , Linn. ( red Hemp-nettle ); stem not swollen 
below the joints, leaves lanceolate subserrate hairy, upper lip of the 
corolla slightly crenate. E. Bot. t. 881. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 93. 

Gravelly or chalky fields, or limestone rubbish. Rare in Scotland. 
FI. Sept. Oct. 0. — Stem 10 — !2 inches high, with opposite branches. 
Leaves rather small, petiolate, hairy. Flowers purplish rose-coloured. 

2. G. villosa , Huds. (downy Hemp-nettle); stem not swollen 
below the joints, leaves ovato-lanceolate serrated soft and downy, 
upper lip of the corolla deeply notched. E. Bot. t. 2353. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 91. 

Sandy corn-fields, rare. Yorkshire, Lancashire, Nottinghamshire, and 
Bangor in Wales. FI. July, Aug. ©. — Flowers large, pale yellow. 

3. G. Tetrdhit, Linn, (common Hemp-nettle); stem hispid 
swollen below the joints, leaves ovate hispid serrated, corolla with 
the upper lip erect ovate entire. E. Bot. t. 207. E. FI. v. iii.p. 94. 

Corn-fields and cultivated grounds, frequent. FI. Aug. ©. — 1 — 2 ft. 
high. Flowers purplish, or often white. 

4. G. versicolor , Curt, (large-fioiceredl Hemp-nettle); stem his- 
pid swollen below the joints, leaves ovate hispid serrated, corolla 
with the. upper lip horizontal inflated. E. Bot. t. 667. Hook. Scot, 
i. p. 182. E. FI. v. iii. p. 95. 

Corn-fields, Norfolk; common about Warrington, Mr. IV. Wilson; 
near Llanrwst, Mr. J. Roberts. Ireland, Mr. J. T. Maekay. Abundant 
in Scotland, especially in the Highlands. FI July, Aug. ©. — Very 
different from the last, (though the distinguishing marks are difficult to 
be described,) and very beautiful. Often 2 — 3 feet high, with large 
rank foliage. Flowers showy, yellow, with a broad purple spot on the 
lower lip. 

10. Lamium. Linn. Dead-nettle. 

1. L. album, Linn, (ivliite Dead-nettle); leaves cordato-acumi- 
nate deeply serrated stalked, whorls of about 20 (white) flowers. 
E. Bot. t. 768. E. FI. v. iii.p. 90. 

Borders of fields and waste places, abundant. FI. June, July. If. — 
Flowers large, white, rarely tinged with blush. 

2. L. macula turn, Linn, (spotted Dead-nettle); leaves cordato- 
acuminate inciso-serrate stalked, whorls of about 10 (purple) flowers. 
E. Bot. t. 2550. E. FI. v. iii. p. 90. 


278 


DIDYNAMIA — GYM N OSPE RM I A. 


\_S tacky s. 

Banks, naturalized ; near Bristol, and at Baysvvater, by London. 
Woods in Scotland, rare, G. Don. FI. Apr. If . — Fl avors large, con- 
stantly purple, fewer in a whorl, otherwise very nearly allied to the 
preceding. The leaves are usually characterized as having a large central 
white spot, which Smith says appears principally in the winter and early 
spring ; but they are not represented so in the figure in E. Bot. and the 
plant is widely different from what is cultivated as L. maculatum in our 
gardens, which has the leaves much smaller, each with a large white spot 
and is well figured as the true maculatum in Reichenbach’s Icunogr. But. 
t.215. The E. But. L. maculatum is, in the same work, at t. 217, referred 
to L. rugosum, Ait. and it certainly well represents our plant. 

3. L. purpureum , Linn. ( reel Dead-nettle); leaves cordate ob- 
tuse crenato-serrate stalked the uppermost crowded together, 
“ corolla with the tube bearded within.” E. Dot. t. 1933. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 91. 

Borders of fields and in hedges, plentiful. FI. May — Sept. ©. — 
Leaves, especially the upper ones, with a silky hairiness, and a purplish 
tinge on the floral ones. 

4. L. incisum , Willd. ( cut-leaved Dead-nettle); leaves broadly 
cordate or deltoideo-cuneate deeply inciso-crenate stalked, the 
uppermost crowded, “ corolla with the tube naked within.” E. Bot. 
t. 1933. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 91. 

Cultivated and waste ground, growing very large in the Hebrides. 
FI. May, June. ©. — Nearly allied to the last. 

5. L. amplexicaule, Linn. ( Henbit-Nettle ) ; leaves broadly cor- 
date very obtuse deeply inciso-crenate stalked, the floral ones ses- 
sile embracing the stem. E. Bot. t. 770. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 92. 

Waste places, sandy fields and gardens. FI. March — June. ©. — 
Corolla of a fine deep rose colour, with a very slender tube. 

11. Betonica. Linn. Betony. 

1. B. officinalis, Linn. ( Wood Betony); spike interrupted short, 
leaves cordato-oblong erenate, middle lobe of the lower lip ot the 
corolla somewhat notched. E. Bot.t. 1142. E. El. v. Hi. p. 97. 

Woods and thickets, frequent; not common in Scotland. Ft. July, 
Aug. If. — Stem 1 — 2 feet high, hairy; with few leaves, the lowermost 
ones on long footstal/cs , upper ones oblong, sessile. Spiles oblongo-ovate. 

12. Stachys. Linn. Woundwort. 

1. S. sylvatica, Linn. (Hedge Woundwort); whorls of 6 flowers, 
leaves cordato-ovate acute stalked. E. Bot. t. 416. E. Fl.v. Hi. 
p. 98. 

Woods and shady places. FI. July, Aug. If. — Two to 3 feet high, 
hairy. Leaves truly cordate and tapering from below the middle to a 
[joint, in which respect it differs from the following. Flowers purple ; 
whorls ol about 0 flowers. 

2. S. ambigua, Sm. ( ambiguous Woundwort) ; whorls of 6 


Glcchoma.] 


D I D Y N A IM I A — G YM NOS PE R M I A. 


279 


flowers, leaves oblongo-cordate acute stalked. E. Eot. t. 2089. 
E. El. v. Hi. p. 99. 

Fields and waste places. Abundant in Scotland, especially in the 
west Highlands. Poynings, Sussex, Air. Borrer. Leicestershire, Ire- 
land. (Sm.) FI. Aug. Sept. If . — Hairy with soft, silky hairs, especially 
about the stem. Almost intermediate between the preceding and the 
following. It is found in Germany and Sweden. 

3. S. palustris, Linn. ( Marsh Woundwort); whorls of 6 or 
more flowers, leaves linear-lanceolate mostly sessile and semi- 
amplexicaul. E. Eot. t. 1075. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 99. 

River-banks and watery or moist places, frequent. FI. Aug. If - — 
Mr. Borrer finds this plant at Siddlesham, with broader, shortly-stalked 
leaves, and hence approaching to S. ambigua. 

4. S. germanica, Linn, (downy Woundwort) ; whorls many- 
flowered, leaves oblongo-ovate crenate densely silky, stem erect 
woolly. E. Eot. t. 829. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 100. 

Fields and hedges in England, on a limestone soil, and chiefly in Ox- 
fordshire and Bedfordshire, (Sin.) I have specimens from Ducklington, 
Berks ; gathered by Mr. Bicheno. FI. Sept. If . — Remarkable for its 
deuse covering of silky hairs or wool : frequently cultivated in gardens. 

5. S. arvensis, Linn. (Corn Woundwort); whorls of 6 flowers, 
stem weak, leaves cordate obtuse crenate slightly hairy, corolla 
scarcely longer than the calyx. E. Eot. t. 115L E. FI. v. Hi. 

p. 100. 

Dry corn-fields, frequent. FI. July, Aug. ©. — Distinguished by its 
small size, weak stems, small and obtuse mostly stalked leaves, and its 
pale purplish corollas, which scarcely exceed the calyx in length. 

6. S. annua , Linn, (pale annual Woundwort ); annual erect 
downy, leaves oblongo-lanceolate rather acute crenato-serrate 3- 
nerved, the lower ones stalked, whorls of about 6 flowers spicate, 
cal. hairy its segments subulate, seeds roundish glossy. Hook, in 
E. Eot. Suppl. t. 2669. 

Field between Gadshill and Rochester. Jos. Woods, Esq. FI. Aug. © . 

13. Nepeta. Linn. Cat-mint. 

1. N. Cataria, Linn. (Cat-mint); flowers in spiked subpedun- 
culated whorls, leaves stalked cordate dentato-serrate. E. Eot. 
t. 137. E. FI. v. ii. p. 70. 

Hedges and waste places, especially in a chalky or gravelly soil in 
England: rare in Scotland ; hedges near Craig Nethan Castle, Glasgow, 
and between Culross and Kincardine. At Rathfarnan; and by the 
Shannon, opposite Limerick, Ireland; Air. .1. T. Alackay. FI. July, 
Aug.lj: . — Stems 2 — 3 feet high, downy, as well as the leaves, and whitish. 
Flowers white, tinged and spotted with rose colour. Anthers reddish. 

11. Gleciioma. Linn. Ground-Ivy. 

1. G. hederacea, Linn. (Ground-Ivy); leaves reniform crenate. 
E. Eot. t. 853. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 88. 


280 


DIDYNAMIA GYMNOSPERMI A. [Clinopodium. 

Hedges and waste places, frequent. FI. Apr. May. If .—Plant much 
creeping. Leaves stalked, downy. Flowers large, in threes, axillary, blue; 
they arc found pure white near Derby by Mrs. Hardcastle. 

15. Marrubium. Linn. White Horehound. 

1. M. vulgar e, Linn. ( White I/ore hound); stem erect, leaves 
roundish-ovate toothed wrinkled, calyx with 10 setaceous hooked 
teeth. E. Eot. t. 410. E. FI. v. Hi. p. ] 03. 

Waste places and way-sides : frequent in England; less common in 
Scotland, where it is found near Edinburgh, and in Ireland. FI. Aug. 

• One to a foot and a half high, bushy; every where hoary with a 
white, thick pubescence or woolliness. Flowers small, almost white, in 
crowded whorls. Smell aromatic ; flavour bitter. The plant has been 
much in use for coughs and asthmas. 

10. Acinos. Moench. Basil Thyme. 

1. A. vulgaris , Pers. ( common Basil Thyme); flowerstalks 
simple about 6 in a whorl, stem ascending branched, leaves oblomt 
on short stalks acute serrated more or less ciliated at the base— 
Thymus Acinos, Linn — E.Bot.t. 411. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 109. 

Kent. Joseph Woods, Esq. FI. Aug. ©. — Stem 6 — 8 inches long. 
Leaves sometimes almost entire. Flowers bluish- purple. Lower lip of 
the corolla with the middle segment emarginate. Smell fragrant, 
aromatic. 

17. Calamintha. Moench. Calamint. 

1. C. officinalis, Moench, ( common Calamint); whorls on forked 
many-flowered stalks, leaves with shallow serratures, hairs in the 
mouth of the calyx not prominent. Sm. — Melissa Calamintha, 

Linn . — Thymus Calamintha, Scop E. Bot. t. 1676. E. FI. 

v. Hi. p. 109. 

Way-sides and borders of fields, chiefly in gravelly soils ; not unfre- 
quent in England. South of Ireland. FI. July, Aug. If!.— Plant aro- 
matic and employed to make Herb-Tea. 

2. C. Nepeta, Pursh, ( lesser Calamint); whorls on forked many- 
flowered stalks longer than the adjoining leaf, leaves serrated, hairs 

in the mouth of the calyx prominent. Sm Melissa Nepeta, 

Linn. — Thymus Nepeta, E. Bot. t. 1414. E. FI. v. iii.p. 1 10. 

Dry banks and way-sides, on a chalky soil, in England, plentiful. 
(Sm.) FI. Aug. If. . — “ Rather smaller in all its parts than the last ; 
especially the leaves, which are more strongly serrated. Odour strong, 
resembling Mentha Pulegium. The prominent white hairs in the mouth 
of the calyx distinguish this from the preceding.” Sm. — I fear this can 
hardly be considered really distinct from C. officin. My specimens 
of the two from the Rev. Prof. Ilenslotv, gathered in Cambridgeshire, show 
that the serratures of the leaves and the hairs in the calyx are often the 
same in both. 

18. Clinopodium. Linn. Wild Basil. 

1. C. vulgdre , Linn. ( Wild Basil); leaves ovate obscurely ser- 


Scutellaria .] DIDYNAMIA — GYMNOSPERMIA. 281 

rated, whorls hairy, bracteas setaceous, pedicels branched. E. Bot. 
t. 1041. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 105. 

Hills and dry bushy places, not uncommon. FI. Aug. If. — One to a 
foot and a half high, with soft hairs. Flowers in crowded whorls, large, 
purple. Smell aromatic. 

19. Melittis. Linn. Bastard-Balm. 

1. M. Melissophyllum, Linn. ( Bastard Balm); leaves oblongo- 
ovate or somewhat cordate, upper lip of the calyx with 2 or 3 
teeth. — a. leaves oblongo-ovate, middle lobe of the lower lip pur- 
ple with a white margin. — M. Melissophyllum , Linn. Sp. PL 
p. 832. Curt. FI. Lond. ed. i. t. 39. — M. grandijlora, Sm. FI. 
Br.p. 644. E. Bot. t. 636, ( excl . syn. of Curtis ). E. FI. v. iii. 
p. 112. Curt. FI. Lond. ed. ii. — ft. leaves broader subcordate, 
flowers reddish, the lower lip mostly spotted with purple. M. 
Melissophyllum, Sm. FI. Brit. p. 643. E. Bot. t. 577. 

Woods, coppices and hedges in the south (Hampshire) and particu- 
larly the south-west of England; exclusively. FI. May, June. If. — 
A highly beautiful plant, a foot to a foot and a half high, with ample 
serrated leaves, and large, conspicuous, often highly coloured flowers; 
but in the colour of the inflorescence, in the relative breadth of the leaves, 
and in the toothing of the calyx, very variable. Mr. Borrer informs me that 
“ Linnaeus’ only specimen of Melittis in his Herbarium is a garden one, 
precisely the plant of Curtis in FI. Lond.” Hence, that is the true Me- 
lissophyllum. The plant, when growing, is said to have a disagreeable 
smell; but when dried it is fragrant, like the Anthoxanthum odoratum, and 
the scent is retained for many years in the herbarium. 

20. Prunella. Linn. Self-heal. 

1. P. vulgaris, Linn. ( Self-heal ); leaves stalked oblongo-ovate, 
upper lip of the calyx truncated, its teeth almost obsolete. E. Bot. 
t. 961. E. FI. v. iii. p. 114. 

Moist and barren pastures, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If . — Flowers 
very densely whorled, so as to form an imbricated oblong spike, with a 
pair of leaves at its base, and a pair of broad, obcordate bracteas beneath 
each whorl. Cor. violet-blue, its lower lip finely toothed at the margin. 

21. Scutellaria. Linn. Skull-cap. 

1. S. galericulata, Linn. ( common Skull-cap ); leaves lanceolate 
cordate at the base crenate, flowers axillary in pairs. E. Bot. 
t, 523. E. FI. v. iii. p. 113. 

Banks of rivers and lakes, especially in stony places. FI. July, Aug. 
If • — Eight or ten inches to a foot high. Flowers rather large, blue, 
downy. 

2. S. minor , Linn, (lesser Skull-cap ); leaves oblongo-ovate on 
very short stalks entire cordate at the base, flowers axillary in pairs. 
E. Bot. t. 524. E. FI. v. iii. 1 1 3. 

Moist heathy places and by the sides of lakes; less frequent than the 


4 ° 4 DJDYNAMIA— ANGIOSPEIIMIA. [Rhinanthus. 

preceding.- Ft. July, Aug. If. — Four to six inches high. Lower leaves 
sometimes with one or two teeth at the base, and hence subhastate ; 
upper ones much narrower and quite entire. Flowers pale reddish, almost 
white. Lower lip spotted. 

DIDYNAMIA— ANGIOSPERMIA. 

22. Bartsia. Linn. Bartsia. 

1 . B. alpina , Linn. ( alpine Bartsia'); leaves opposite cordato- 
ovate obtusely serrated, (lowers in a terminal short leafy spike, 
anthers hairy. E. Bot. t. 361. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 1 17. 

Rocky alpine pastures ; rare. Near Orton, Westmoreland. Middle- 
ton leesdale, on the Yorkshire and Durham sides of the river. On 
Malghyrdhy and Ben Lawers in Breadalbane, Scotland. FI. June, July. 

• Stem about a span high, simple. Upper leaves or bracteas often 
tinged with purple. Flowers large, deep purplish-blue, downy ; lips of 
equal length. 

2. B. viscosa, Linn. ( yellow viscid Bartsia'); leaves lanceolate 
inciso-serrate, upper ones alternate, (lowers solitary axillary distant, 
lower lip large with two tubercles, anthers hairy. E. Bot. t. 1045. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 118. 

Pastures, in many places in the west of England and Wales and south- 
west ot Scotland and south of Ireland; Mr. J. r l\ Macfcap. FI. Aug. 
©• Habit of the last. Flowers yellow, handsome, yielding according 
to Mr. Hopkirk, an agreeable musky smell. 

3. B. Odontites , Huds. (red Bartsia) ; leaves lanceolate serrated 
upper ones (or bracteas) alternate, flowers in unilateral racemes, 
anthers nearly glabrous, stem branched. E. Bot. t. 1415. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 119. 

Corn-fields and waste places, frequent. FI. July, Aug. ©. — Racemes 
many, long, erect. Flowers reddish-purple. 

23. Euphrasia. Linn. Eye-bright. 

L E .officinalis, Linn, (common Eye-bright); leaves ovate deeply 
toothed, lobes of the lower lip emarginate. E. Bot.t. 1416. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 1 22. 

Pastures in the plains and on the mountains, abundant. FI. July. 
©• Varying from one inch, with often only a single flower, to 6 and 8 
inches, in the Highland pastures, where it becomes very much branched. 
Flowers axillary, but crowded at the extremities of the branches, white 
or reddish, streaked with purple. The plant is still much used in 
rustic practice as a remedy tor diseases of the eye. Milton represents 
the Archangel Michael as employing it, to remove the film from the eyes 
ot our first parent occasioned by eating the forbidden fruit •. 

“then purged with Euphrasy .aid Hue 
The visual nerve, for lie had much to see.” 

24. Rhinanthus. Linn. Yellow Rattle. 

1. R. Crista- Galli , Linn, (common Yellow Rattle); leaves lan- 
ceolate serrated, flowers in lax spikes, calyx glabrous, style included, 


283 


Mclampyrum .] DIDYNAMI A — ANGIOSPERMIA. 

seeds with a broad membranous border. E. Eot. t. 657. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 120. — R. Crista- Gal/i, minor , Svensk, Eot. t. 348 .f. 2. 

Meadows and pastures, abundant. Ft. June. ©. — One to 2 feet high, 
glabrous, often much branched and more or less spotted with purple. 
Leaves veiny. Flowers axillary in the upper leaves or bracteas, and hence 
loosely spiked. When the fruit is ripe, the seeds rattle in the husky cap- 
sule and indicate to the Swedish peasantry the season for gathering in 
their hay. In England, Mr. Curtis well observes the hay-making begins 
when this plant is in full flower. How far the following may be consid- 
ered as really distinct, I cannot say, as I have not had the opportunity 
of studying the living plant. 

2. II. major , Ehrh. (large bushy Yellow Rattle) ; leaves linear- 
lanceolate, upper ones especially acuminated, flowers in crowded 
spikes, calyx glabrous, style a little exserted, seeds with a narrow 
membranous border. E. El. v. Hi. p. 121. — R. grandijlorus, Bluff 
et Fing. Comp. FI. Germ. v. ii.p. 61 . — R. Crista- Gal/i, j3. Linn. 
— var. major, Svensk, Eot. t. 348. f. 1. 

Corn-fields in the north of England, Dr. Richardson, and Mr. James 
Backhouse, who observes that where the soil approaches to peat, it almost 
obliterates the crops. FI. July, 2 or 3 weeks later than the preceding 
species, (Mr. Backhouse) ©. — I have gathered R. Crista-Galli, quite 
equal to this, in size and ramification, in Scotland: but Mr. Backhouse 
adds justly that the present plant has denser and more bushy spikes, and 
yellowish bracteas, each terminated by an elongated green point. The seg- 
ments of the upper lip of the corolla are wedge-shaped, purple; the 
germen is narrower and more tumid : the style prominent : the nectary 
heart-shaped, more spreading and greenish. The seeds are thick at the 
edge and not quite destitute of a membranous margin. It is frequent 
upon the continent. 

25. Melampyrum. Linn. Cow-wheat. 

1. M. cristdtum, Linn, (crested Cow-wheat) ; spikes densely 
imbricated 4-sided, bracteas cordate acuminated finely ciliato-den- 
tate. E.Bot.t. 41. E. Fl.v.iii. p. 123. 

Woods, thickets and sometimes in corn-fields, chiefly in Norfolk, Cam- 
bridgeshire, Bedfordshire, and Huntingdonshire. FI. July. ©. — A beau- 
tiful plant, as is the following. Leaves lanceolate, acuminate, entire. 
Bracteas rose-coloured at the base. Flowers yellow, purple within the 
upper lip. 

2. M. arvense, Linn, (purple Cow-ioheat) ; spikes oblong lax, 
bracteas lanceolate pinnatifid with setaceous segments, teeth of 
the calyx much longer than the tube, lips of the corolla closed. 
E. Eot. t. 53. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 124. 

Corn-fields and dry gravelly banks, principally in Norfolk, and near Nor- 
wich. FI. July. ©. — Spikes of flowers much larger than in the preceding, 
and exceedingly handsome from the bright varied colour, yellow, purple, 
rose-colour and green of the blossoms and bracteas. 

3. M. pratense, Linn, (common yellow Cow-wheal) ; flowers 


28-1' DIDYNAMIA — ANGIOSPERMIA. [Pedicular is. 

axillary secund, leaves in distant pairs, corolla 4 times as long as 
the calyx closed, the lower lip protruded, upper bracteas mostly 
pinnatifid or toothed at the base. E. Bot. t. 113. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 125 — 1 3 . smaller, somewhat succulent, bracteas quite entire. 
M. montanum , Jolinst. FI. of Berw. upon Tweed. 

Groves and thickets (not in meadows as the name would imply), fre- 
quent. — /3. Mountains in the south of Ireland ; Sir T. Gage, Bart. Muck- 
ish and Croagh Patrick, Ireland. Near Berwick upon Tweed, Dr. John- 
atone. Richmond Moor, Ambrose Clement, Esq. FI. July, Aug. 0. — 
One foot or more high, slender, with straggling opposite branches. 
Flowers large, pale yellow. 

4. M. sylvdticum, Linn. ( lesser-flowered yclloio Cow-wheat); 
flowers axillary secund, leaves in distant pairs, corolla less than twice 
as long as the calyx, the lips equal in length a little open. E. Bot. 
t. 804. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 1 26. 

Alpine woods, rare, in the north of England; more general, but 
very local, in Scotland. In several parts of Perthshire. Auchindraine 
woods on the Doune, Craigs of Ness, &c. Ayrshire; Air. James Wilson. 
FI. July. ©. — 1 ft. high. Bracteas always entire. Cor. deep yellow, 
very small, quite different from the preceding. 

26. Lathr/EA. Linn. Tooth-wort. 

1. L. squamaria, Linn, (greater Tooth-iuort) ; stem simple, 
flowers pendulous in one-sided racemes, lower lip of the corolla 3- 
cleft. E. Bot. t. 50. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 127. — (3. bracteas lanceolate, 
style strait exserted above the upper nearly entire lip of the co- 
rolla. G. E. Smith in Cat. of PI. of S. Kent. p. 34. 

Woods and coppices, apparently parasitic on the roots of Hazels, Elms 
and other trees, in various parts of England, Scotland and Ireland. — 0. 
Lyminge, Kent, Rev. G. E. Smith. FI. Apr. May. If . — Branching from 
the very base. Whole plant succulent, with many, fleshy, tooth-like 
scales. Bracteas broadly ovate; in /3. lanceolate. Flowers purplish. 
Style included, or, as in all my specimens, and in var. /3., exserted. — See 
a valuable paper on the structure and growth of this plant, by J. E. 
Bowman, Esq. in Linn. Trans, v. 1G. P. ii. accompanied by a beautiful 
plate. 

27. Pedicularis. Linn. Louse-wort. 

1. P. paluslris, Linn. ( Marsh Louse-wort or tall Red Rattle); 
stem solitary branched upwards, calyx broadly ovate hairy ribbed 
with crenated nearly equal lobes. E. Bot. t. 399. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 129. 

Wet and marshy pastures. FI. June, July. If.? — Stem 1 foot high, 
often very purple, bearing many lateral branches. Leaves pinnate; 
pinna; ovate, almost pinnatifid. Flowers large, handsome, deep rose- 
coloured. 

2. P. sylvdtica, Linn. ( Pasture Louse-wort or Dwarf Red 
Rattle); stem branched from the base and spreading, calyx oblong 


Linar ia.] DIDYNAMIA — ANGIOSPERMIA. 285 

angular glabrous in 5 unequal crenate and almost leafy segments. 
E. Bot. t. 399. E. FI. v. iii. p. 129. 

Moist pastures and heaths, common. FI. July. If- — Stems 3 5 

inches long. Lower leaves pinnatifid, the rest pinnated with deeply ser- 
rated pinnce. Flowers large, handsome, pale rose-coloured ; they arc 
rarely found (near Dunrobin Castle, Scotland, by the Marquis of Staf- 
ford,' and in the same place the succeeding year by Mr. Borrer and 
myself,) with a salver-shaped, 6-cleft, regular corolla, and 6 stamens, 4 
long and 2 short. 

28. Antirrhinum. Linn. Snapdragon. 

1. A. majus, Linn. ( great Snapdragon ); leaves lanceolate alter- 
nate those of the branches opposite, flowers spiked, segments of 
the calyx ovate obtuse. E. Bot. t. 129. E. EL v. iii. p. 135. 

Old walls and chalk hills, frequently originating from neighbouring 
gardens. FI. July, Aug. If . — One to two feet high. Flowers very 
large, mostly purplish-red, but often varying to white. 

2. A. Orontiurn, Linn. ( lesser Snapdragon ); leaves mostly 
alternate linear-lanceolate, spikes very few-flowered lax, segments 
of the calyx longer than the corolla. E. Bot. t. 1 1 55. E. FI. v. iii. 
p. 136. 

Corn-fields in a dry soil, in many parts, especially of the east and 
south of England. FI. July, Aug. 0. — Flowers purple, remarkable for 
the great length of the calyx-segments, particularly after flowering. 

29. Linaria. Juss. Toadflax. 

1. L. Cymbaldria, Mill. (Ivy -leaved Toadflax); leaves cordate 
5-lobed alternate glabrous, stems trailing. — Antirrhinum Cyntba- 
laria, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 502. E. FI. v. iii.p. 131. 

On old walls, and in many places ; the outcast of gardens, FI. all the 
summer. If. — Stem very long, filiform. Leaves petioled, often purple 
beneath. Flowers small, pale blue or purplish. 

2. L. spuria , Mill, (round-leaved Fluellen or Toadflax); leaves 
ovate downy mostly alternate, stems procumbent. — Antirrhinum 
spurium, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 691. E. Fl. v. iii. p. 131. 

Sandy corn-fields, mostly confined to the east and south-east of Eng- 
land. Surry, Mr. J. S. Mill. Abundant in many parts of Norfolk and 
Suffolk. Fl. July — Sept. ©. — Flowers small, yellowish, upper lip pur- 
ple. Cal. large. — Sir James E. Smith mentions some flowers as being 
regular, with 5 spurs. 

3. L. E/citine, Desf. (sharp-pointed Fluellen or Toadflax'); leaves 
broadly hastate acute, lowermost ovate opposite, stems procumbent 

hairy Antirrhinum Elatine, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 692. E. Fl. 

v. iii.p. 132. 

Corn-fields in a dry, gravelly or chalky soil, in England. Fl. July— 
Sept. 0. — Similar to the last, yet distinct from it; smaller in all its 
parts. Iam indebted to the Rev. Prof. Henslow for excellent specimens 
of both. 


286 


DIDYNAMIA ANGIOSPERMIA. [Scrophularia. 

4. L. repens , Ait. (creeping pale line Toadflax); leaves linear 
whorled or scattered, stem erect pauicled, calyx glabrous tbe 
length ot the spur, (corolla striated.) — Antirrhinum repens Linn. 
E.Bot. t. 1253. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 133. 

Chalky banks and rocky places near the sea, rare; principally in the 
south ot England and Ireland. NearColzean, Ayrshire, and near Mus- 
selburgh, Scotland. 77. July— Sept. 7/.— Stems erect, 1 to foot 
high, slender, branched. Leaves somewhat whorled below, but there 
soon dying away. Flowers in panicled racemes, bluish ; palate yellow. 
Mr. Hopkirk has observed the flowers of this to assume the Pcluria 
appearance. 

5. L. vulgaris , Moench, (yellow Toadflax); erect, leaves linear- 
lanceolate scattered crowded, spikes terminal, flowers imbricated, 
calyx glabrous shorter than the spur — Antirrhinum Linaria, Linn. 
E. Eot. t. 658. E. FI. v. iii.p. 134. 

Borders of corn-fields, and in hedges, abundant. FI. Aug. If .. — One 
to two feet high, glaucous. Flowers large, yellow. A remarkable but 
not very uncommon monstrosity of this is the “ Peloria var.” (figured 
tn E. But. t. 260), with 5 spurs and 5, usually imperfect, stamens. 

6. L. minor , Desf. (least Toadflax) ; leaves linear-lanceolate 
obtuse mostly alternate downy, stem erect much branched, calyx 
longer than the spur. E.Bot. t. 2014. E. FI. v. iii.p. 135. 

Sandy fields; principally, I believe, in the eastern and south-eastern 
parts of England. Rare in Scotland and only in the vicinity of Glasgow, 
Dr. Brown and Mr. Hopkirk. At Sunday’s well, in Ireland, Dr. Woods. 
FI. June, July. ©. — 6 — 8 inches high, with small purplish-yellow 
flowers, which are stalked, solitary and axillary. Seeds, according to 
Smith, beautifully furrowed. 

30. Scrophularia. Linn. Figwort. 

* Cal. with 5 rounded lobes, flowers purple. 

1 . S. nodosa, Linn, (knotted Figwort); leaves cordato-triangu- 
lar acute doubly serrated glabrous, stem with 4 rather obtuse 
angles, root tuberous. E. Eot. t. 1544. E. El. v. iii.p. 137. 

Woods and moist ground, frequent. FI. July. If. — Root large, thick 
and knotty. Stem 2 — 3 feet high. Flowers in dichotomous, axillary and 
terminal, bracteated panicles. Cor. greenish-purple, with a scale in the 
upper lip. 

2. S. aqudtica, Linn. ( Water Figwort, Water Belong); gla- 
brous, leaves crenato-dentate elliptical-ovate mostly cordate at 
the base, stem winged at the angles. E.Bot. t. 854. E. FI. v. iii. 
p. 138. 

Sides of rivers and in wet places. FI. July. If. — Three to four feet 
high. Panicles terminal, bracteated, with remote branches. Flowers 
dark purple at the mouth, (wholly of a pale yellowish-green in a var. 
found by the Rev. Mr. Tozer in Cornwall), with a scale in the upper 
lip. Cal. margined with purple. 

3. S. Scoroilonia, Linn. (Balm-leaved Figwort); downy, leaves 


LimoseUa .] 


DIDYNAMIA — ANGIOSPERMIA. 


287 


cordato-tnangular with large double serratures, panicles leafy. 
E. Bot. t. 2209. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 138. 

Moist places, only in the extreme south and south-west of England, 
and at Tralee in Ireland. FI. July. If.. — Distinguished from all the 
preceding by being downy, by its leaves having large teeth or serratures 
which are again serrated, and by the leaves which accompany the pani- 
cle. Flowers dull purple, with a scale inside. The Rev. Mr. Bree has 
sent me a plant which he considers a hybrid between S. Scorodonia and 
S. aquatica, brought from St. Ives, and cultivated in his garden. 

** Calyx with 5 deep, acute segments ; Jlowers yellow. 

4. S. vernalis , Linn. ( yellow Fig wort); hairy, leaves broadly 
cordate doubly inciso-serrate acute, peduncles axillary solitary 
forked leafy, scale of the upper lip wanting. E. Bot. t. 567. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 139. 

Road-sides and waste places, in many parts of England and Scotland ; 
but nowhere general. In Norfolk, Suffolk, Berkshire, Essex, Wales, 
Gloddarth and Conway, (Mr. W. Wilson.)— Hoddam Castle; Bothwell 
Castle; near the hill ot MoncriefF; walls near Hatton, Edinburgh; in 
Perthshire, as at Cluny; Balmano Castle; Meithlie, Aberdeenshire; 
near Forfar; between Holmston and the river Ayr, (Mr. James Wilson.) 
FI. April, May. If. — Considerably different in many points from all the 
preceding, and as Sir James E. Smith has well observed, exhibiting a great 
affinity with the pretty Peruvian Genus Calceolaria. Styles and stamens , 
which latter arise from the base of the yellow corolla, protruded from 
its very contracted mouth. 

31. Digitalis. Linn. Foxglove. 

1. D. purpurea , Linn, (purple Foxglove); segments of the 
calyx ovate acute, corolla obtuse its upper lip or lobe scarcely 
divided, leaves ovato-lanceolate crenate downy. E. Bot. t. 1297. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 1 10. 

Dry banks, pastures, walls, &c. in hilly and especially subalpine and 
rocky countries; hence almost unknown in the more eastern parts of 
England, such as Norfolk and Suffolk. FI. June, July. $ .—The most 
stately and beautiful of our herbaceous plants; and one that has claimed 
great reputation as a medicine. Three to 4 feet high. Leaves large, 
veiny. Spikes very long, of numerous, drooping, purple (or rarely white) 
flowers , spotted within. 

32. Limosella. Linn. Mudwort. 

1. L. aquatica , Linn. ( common Mudwort); leaves lanceolate 
spathulate on long stalks, scapes shorter than the petioles. E . Bot. 
t. 357. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 145. 

Muddy places, and where water has stood, in several parts of Eng- 
land, Scotland^ and Ireland ; but often overlooked on account of its 
small size. 1<1. July, Aug. ©. — Root creeping, filiform, throwing up 
c usteis of glabrous leaves one or two inches long, including the petiole. 

Joweis minute, peduncled, arising from the base of the leafstalks. Cor. 
pale tose-coloured. Anthers purplish-blue, one-eelled. Seeds with a fur- 
tow on the back and numerous transverse stria;. 


288 


DIDYNAMIA — ANGIOSPEKMI A. 


[. Linncea . 


33. Sibthorpia. Linn. Sibthorpia. 

1. S. europcca, Linn, [creeping Sibthorpia, or Cornish Money- 
wort). E. Bot. t. 649. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 143. 

Moist shady places, in Devonshire, Cornwall, and the Scilly Isles ; at 
Conner hill, near Dingle, and near Brandon, Ireland, (Mr. IV. Wilson.) 
FI. July, Aug. If.. — A graceful little plant, hairy, with creeping, filiform 
stems and alternate, orbiculari-reniform, broadly crenate leaves. Flowers 
axillary, solitary, on short stalks, pinkish-white, very small. 

34. Verbena. Linn. Vervain. 

1. V. officinalis, Linn. ( common Vervain); stamens 4, stem 
erect somewhat hispid, leaves rough, lanceolate inciso-sen ate or trifid 
witli the segments cut, spikes filiform somewhat panicled, flowers 
rather remote. E. Bot. t. 767. Hook. Scot. i. p. 190. E. Fl.v.iii. 
p. 71. 

Road-sides and waste grounds, frequent in England. Rare in Ireland, 
(Mr. A lack ay) and only at Inverkeithing, Scotland, according to Dr. 
Parsons. FI. July. If . — The Genus Verbena is placed by Sir J. E. 
Smith in the first Order of this Class : but it does not naturally rank 
there, being considerably different in the structure of its germen and 
fruit. 

35. Linnasa. Gronov. Linnsea. 

1. L. borealis, Gronov. (two- flowered Linncea). Linn. Sp. PI. 
p. 880. E. Bot. t. 1297. Hook. El. Loud. N. S. t. 199. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 142. 

Woods in Scotland, especially of Fir, as well as, more rarely, in open, 
rocky and mossy situations, (probably where trees have been), in many 
parts of Perthshire, Inverness-shire and Aberdeenshire. In addition to 
the several stations already given in Flora Scotica for this most inter- 
esting plant, I may mention, near Brahan Castle, Boss-shire, Mr. 
Urquhart : Kingcusie, 7 m. from Aberdeen, Mrs. Boswell : Knock of 
Alves (along with the still rarer Pyrola uniflora) near Elgin, Mr. 
Wilson, schoolmaster, of Alves ; covering from 12 to 20 square yards 
and flowering abundantly, 1828. The Rev. G. Gordon has communi- 
cated most beautiful specimens from that spot. Fionlarig Park, by 
Loch Tay. — Mr. Drummond pointed it out to me growing abundantly 
on the sloping and mossy sides of hills at a considerable elevation upon 
the Clova mountains, but flowering only among Abler and Birch at the 
foot of them, above the White Water river. Banks of the Esk, at Dal- 
housie, Mr. Archibald. — In England, only one station for it is known; 
viz. in a plantation of Scotch Firs at Cathcerside, in the parish of Hart- 
burn, Northumberland, where Miss Emma Trevelyan of Wallington 
House in that county, was its fortunate discoverer. FI. May, June. 
If . — Stems trailing, filiform, branched. Leaves opposite, broadly ovate, 
stalked, obscurely crenate. Peduncles axillary, long, erect, 2-flowered. 
Flowers fragrant, graceful, drooping ; pedicels, bracteas, involucre, globose 
germen and calyx clothed with glandular hairs. Cor. rose-coloured, 
yellowish within. 


Orobaitckc.] 


DIDYNAMIA — ANGI0SPERM1 A. 


289 


36. Orobanche. Linn. Broom-rape. 

* Bracteas solitary under each flower. 

1. O. major , Linn. ( greater Broom-rape ); stem simple, corolla 
tubular its upper lip undivided, lower one in 3 nearly equal seg- 
ments, the lateral ones acute the terminal one larger obtuse, sta- 
mens glabrous, style downy. E. Bot. <.421. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 146. 

On the roots of Broom and Furze anil other leguininose plants, not 
unfrequent. Ft. June, July. If . — One to one foot and a half high, leaf- 
less. Whole plant dingy purplish-brown, pubescent. Stem swelling at 
the base and very scaly ; scales more distant upwards and becoming 
bracteas among the flowers; one at the base of each. Flowers in a long 
spike. Calyx of 2, lateral, lanceolate leaves. Cor. large. 

2. O. caryophylldcea, Sm. ( Clove-scented Broom-rape'); stem 
simple, tube of the corolla inflated especially above, limb spreading 
2-lipped, upper lip broad emarginate, lower with 3 lobes, all the 
segments obtuse wavy, stamens hairy especially at the base within, 
style pubescent, stigma dark purple. — Sm. in Linn. Tr. v. iv. 
p. 169. G. E. Smith, PL of Kent, p. 34. t. 3./. 4. Hook, in E. Bot. 
Suppl. t. 2639. — O. Galii, Bot. Gall. p. 349. 

On the roots of Galium Mollugo, Rubus fruticosus, &c. in South Kent ; 
Rev. G. E. Smith. FI. — If. 

3. O. eldtior, Sutton, ( tall Broom-rape); stem simple, corolla 
funnel-shaped, lower lip with acute nearly equal segments, stamens 

downy, style glabrous. Sm Sutton in Linn. Tr. v. iv. p. 178. 

t. 17. E. Bot. t. 568. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 147. 

Clover-fields and bushy places in a light gravelly soil, in several parts 
of England. FI. July, Aug. If. — Taller and yellower than the 2 pre- 
ceding. Flowers with their upper lip lobed. Stamens inserted higher 
up in the tube. 

4. O. minor, Sm. (lesser Broom-rape); stem simple, corolla 
nearly cylindrical, lower lip with curled segments, the middle one 
largest and lobed, stamens fringed, style glabrous. Sm. FI. Brit, 
p. 670. E.Bot.t. 422. E. FI. v.iii. p. 148. 

Clover-fields, abundant in Norfolk, Kent, Surry, and Brecknockshire. 
Upon Ivy, in many parts of Ireland, Mr. J. T. Maclcay. FI. July, Aug. 
© ? — Much smaller than any of the preceding and more slender. Cor. 
not at all tumid, upper lip unequally notched. 

5. O. rubra, Sm. (red Broom-rape); stem simple, corolla 
tubular its upper lip 2-lobed, lower one in 3 equal obtuse lobes, 

sftamens partially glanduloso-pilose, style glabrous Sm. E. Bot. 

t. 1786, (bad.) Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 105. E.Fl. v. iii.p. 148. 

Frequent upon basalt and trap rocks, in the Hebrides and adjacent 
shores of the mainland. Near Kirkaldy. Cave-hill near Belfast, Ire- 
land. FI. July. If . 

** Bracteas 3 under each flower. 

6. O. ccerulea, Vill. ( purple Broom-rape); stem simple, brac- 

o 


290 


TETR ADYNAMIA SILICULOSA. 


[I satis. 


teas 3, upper lip of the corolla cloven and notched, lower in 3 
equal entire segments, style downy. E. Bot. t. 423. E. FI. v. iii. 
p. 149. 

Grassy pastures near the sea; rare : principally found in Norfolk. 
FI. July. If . — More inclining to purplish-blue than any of the pre- 
ceding. 

7. O. ramosa, Linn. ( branched Broom-rape); stem branched, 
hracteas 3, upper lip of the corolla deeply cloven, lower equally 

3-lobed, segments all rounded and entire. Sm E. Bot. t. 184. 

E. FI. v. iii. p. 150. 

On Hemp-roots, chiefly in Norfolk and Suffolk. Ft. Aug. Sept. ©. 


CLASS XV. TETR ADYNAMIA. 1 6 Stamens , 4 long 
and 2 short. — ( Nat. Ord. Crucifer.*, Juss.) 

ORD. I. SILICULOSA. Fruit a short pod or pouch. 

1. Cakile. Pouch angular, of 2, 1 -seeded, indehiscent joints; 
the upper joint deciduous, bearing an upright, sessile seed, the 
lower one (sometimes abortive) pendulous. Cotyledons accumbent 
(o = ). — Name, — an old Arabic word, applied probably to this 
or some allied genus. 

2. Crambe. Pouch with the upper joint globose, indehiscent, 
deciduous, bearing one inverted seed , upon a stalk arising from the 
bottom of the cell ; lower joint abortive, resembling a pedicel. 

Cotyledons conduplicate (o^>>). Wilson Name, — xgagjSog of the 

Greeks. 

3. Coronopus. Pouch 2-lobed, without valves or wings. 
Seeds solitary in each cell. Cotyledons linear, incumbent (o |] ). — 
Named from v.oomr\, a Crow, and tt*;, a foot ; the cut leaves some- 
what resembling a bird’s foot. 

4. Isatis. Pouch 1-celled, 1-seeded, laterally compressed ; 

1 From T£i-§a, 4, and Zuvuyis a power, or superiority in length of 4 over the 
other 2 stamens. 't his Class is a most natural one, entirely corresponding 
with the Crucifer.® of Juss. The Calyx is of 4 pieces ; the Corolla of 4 Petals, 
placed in a cross-shaped manner. Pistil single. Fruit either a short pod or 
pouch, Silicula; ova long pod, Siliqua; from which, rather arbitrary distinction, 
tlie characters of the two Orders are taken. In every extensive natural groupe 
the difficulty is great in defining the generic characters. So it is here, and they 
are mainly depending upon th e fruit. Even the Embryo is taken into account. 
It is curved ; the radicle is turned upwards, and is either dorsal, originating 
from the back of, and applied to, one of the cotyledons (O || ), hence Cotyledons 
incumbent-, or lateral and applied to the two edges of the cotyledons (0=), whence 
Cotyledons accumbent. 1 he seed being without albumen and readily removed 
from the skin or integument, facilitates the examination of the embryo. — I 
have adopted, with very few alterations, Mr. Brown’s arrangement and cha- 
racter of the Genera in the Hurt. Kcw. ed. 2. 


TETRADYNAMIA — SILICULOSA. 


291 


Draba.\ 

valves keeled, eventually separating. Cotyledons incumbent (o ||). 
— Named from to make even ; because it was supposed to 

have the property of reducing the inequalities of the skin. 

5. Vella. Pouch swollen, with a dilated, flat, winged style, 
twice as long as the valves. Cotyledons conduplicate (o^>>). Cal. 
erect. — Named from veler, in Celtic, the Cress. 

6. Thlaspi. Pouch laterally compressed, emarginate ; valves 
winged at the back, many-seeded. Cotyledons accumbent ( 0 =). 
— Named from Oxxu, to flatten ; on account, probably, of its com- 
pressed seeds or seed-vessels. 

7. Capsella. Pouch laterally compressed, obcordato-cuneate ; 
the valves sharply keeled, without wings, many-seeded. Cotyledons 
incumbent (o||). — Name, — the diminutive of Capsula ; a little 
capsule or box. 

8. Hutchinsia. Pouch elliptical, entire; the valves keeled, 
without wings ; cells 2-seeded. Filaments simple. Cotyledons 
accumbent (o—). Pr — Named in honour of the late Miss Hut- 
chins, of Bantry, Ireland, who explored most successfully the 
Botany of her native country, and added many new species to the 
Cryptogamia. 

9. Teesdalia. Pouch emarginate ; the valves keeled ; the cells 
2-seeded. Filaments having a little scale within at the base. Coty- 
ledons accumbent (o=). Br — Named in honour of Mr. Robert 
Teesdale, a Yorkshire Botanist. 

10. Iberis. Pouch emarginate; valves keeled and winged ; cells 
1-seeded. Petals unequal. Cotyledons accumbent (o=). Br . — 
Named from Iberia, or Spain; where many of the species grow. 

11. Lepidium. Pouch with the cells one-seeded; the valves 
keeled. Petals equal. ( Cotyledons incumbent (o||); rarely accum- 
bent (o =). Br. — Name, — terns, a scale, from the form of the 
little pouches. 

12. Cochlearia. Pouch oval or globose, many-seeded; the 
valves turgid. Filaments simple. Seeds not margined. Cal. patent. 
Cotyledons accumbent (o =). Br — Name, — cochlear, a spoon, 
from the shape of the leaves. 

13. Subularia. Pouch oval, pointless, many-seeded ; valves 

turgid. Cotyledons incumbent (o ||), linear, curved Named 

from subida, an cnvl ; the leaves being subulate or awl-shaped. 

14. Draba. Pouch entire, oval (or oblong) ; valves plane or 

slightly convex; cells many-seeded. Seeds not margined. Cotyle- 
dons accumbent (o =). Filaments simple. (Braba and Erophila. 
JdC.) — Named from acrid, as are the leaves of many of 

this tribe. 


292 TETR ADYNAMIA SILIOUOSA. [ Erysimum . 

15. Camelina. Pouch subovate, many-seeded ; valves inflated. 
Cotyledons incumbent (o||). Filaments simple. Pr. — Named 
from yxpxi, dwarf or humble , and Linum, flax. 

1G. Koniga. Pouch subovate; valves nearly plane; cells 
1 -seeded ; seed-stalks with their base adnate to the dissepiment. 
Seeds (mostly) margined. Cotyledons accumbent (o =). Cal. 
patent. Pet. entire. Hypogynous glands 8 ! Filaments simple — 
Name, — Konig of Adanson ; Koniga of Mr. Brown, by whom it 
is intended “ to commemorate the important services rendered to 
Botany by Mr. Konig of the British Museum.” 

ORD. II. SILIQUOSA. Fruit a long narrow pod. 

17. Dent aria. Pod narrow-lanceolate, tapering; the valves 
flat, generally separating elastically, nerveless. Seed-stalks broad. 

Cotyledons accumbent (o =) Name, — dens, a tooth, from the 

tooth-like scales of the root. 

18. Cardamine. Pod linear: the valves flat, generally sepa- 
rating elastically, nerveless. Seed-stcdks slender. Cotyledons ac- 
cumbent (o =). — Name, — xotgdix, the heart, and 2ctf/.xu>, to fortify : 
from its supposed strengthening qualities. 

19. Arabis. Pod linear, crowned with the nearly sessile stig- 
ma ; valves veiny or nerved. Seeds in one row. Cotyledons accum- 
bent (o =). Cal. erect. Pr. — So named, because originally an 
Arabian genus. 

20. Turritis. Pod elongated, 2-edged ; valves nerved or 
keeled. Seeds in a double row. Cotyledons accumbent (o -=). 
Pr. — Named from turris, a tower ; the leaves become gradually 
smaller upwards, and hence the plant assumes a pyramidal form. 

21. Barbarea. Pod 4-angled and somewhat 2-edged. Co- 
tyledons accumbent (o =). Seeds in a single row. Calyx erect. 
Glands between the shorter filaments. Pr. — Name, — this plant 
was formerly dedicated to St. Barbara. 

22. Nasturtium. Pod nearly cylindrical (sometimes short) ; 
valves concave, neither nerved nor keeled. Cotyledons accumbent 
(o —). Cal. patent. Pr — Named from Nasus tortus, a convulsed 
nose, an effect supposed to be produced by the acrid and pungent 
quality of this plant. 

23. Sisymbrium. Pod rounded or angular. Cotyledons incum- 
bent (o ||) (sometimes oblique), plane. Ccdyx patent, sometimes 
erect. Pr. — Name, <ri?vgf3giov ; given by the ancients to some plant, 
perhaps allied to this. 

24. Erysimum. Pod 4-sided. Seeds not margined. Cotyledons 
incumbent (o ||). Stigma capitate, sometimes emarginate, with the 


Crambe .] 


TETH ADYNAMIA — SIL1CULOSA. 


293 


lobes patent. Cal. erect. Br. — Named from tgvoj, to cure, on 
account of the supposed virtues of the plant. 

25. Chf.iranthus. Pod compressed or 2-edged. Cotyledons 
accumbent (o =). Cal. erect, opposite leaflets saccate at the base. 
Stigma placed on a style, 2-lobed, the lobes patent or capitate. 
Br. — Named from the Arabic Kheyry, not however originally 
applied to this Genus. 

26. Matthiola. Pod (rounded or compressed) crowned with 
the connivent 2-lobed stigma, the lobes either thickened at the 
back, when the cotyledons are incumbent (o ||), or with a point at 
the base. Cal. erect. Longer filaments dilated Br. — Named in ho- 
nour of an Italian physician, Peter Andrew Matthioli. 

27. Hesperis. Pod 4-sided or 2-edged. Stigma nearly 
sessile, the lobes connivent. Cotyledons incumbent (o |]), plane. 
Cal. erect. Br. — Named from series, the evening ; at which time 
the flowers yield a powerful fragrance. 

28. Brassica. Pod 2-valved (with a sterile, one- or many- 
seeded beak). Cotyledons conduplicate (o )>)>). Calyx erect. 
Br — Name derived from the Celtic Bresic , a Cabbage, according 
to Theis. 

29. Sinapis. Pod 2-valved (sometimes of 2 joints, of which 
the upper one is without valves). Cotyledons conduplicate 
(o »). Cal. patent. Br. ( Sinapis and Diplotaxis, 1)C .) — 
Named from the Greek givxn, which again Theis derives from the 
Celtic Nap, a turnep or cabbage. 

30. Rapii anus. Pod. without valves. Cotyledons conduplicate, 
(o »). Cal. erect. Br. — Name, — quickly, and <p»ivopxi, to 
appear ; from its rapid vegetation. 

TETR ADYNAMIA — SILICULOSA. 

1. Cakile. Goert. Sea Rocket. 

1. C. marilima, Willd. ( purple Sea Pocket); joints of the 
pouch two-edged, the upper one with two teeth at the base, leaves 
fleshy pinnatifid somewhat toothed. Hook. Scot. i.p. 193. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 183 — Baidas Cakile, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 231. 

Sandy sea-shores, frequent. Ft. June, July. ©. — Bushy. Branches 
crooked, and, as well as the whole plant, succulent. Flowers purplish. 
Pouch thick, fleshy, at length somewhat woody. Mr. J. Wilson finds it 
on the coast of Ayr, with white flowers. 

2. Crambe. Linn. Kale. 

1. C. marilima, Linn. (Sea Kale); longer filaments forked, 
pouch pointless, leaves roundish sinuated waved toothed glaucous 


294- TETR ADYNAMIA SIUCULOSA. [ Thlaspi . 

and as well as the stem glabrous. E. Bot. t. 1660. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 184. 

Sea-coast in sandy or stony soils, in various places; but not very gen- 
eral. FI. June. If. . — Root thick, fleshy. Flowers white. Well known 
as an excellent culinary vegetable when cultivated and blanched. 

3. Coronopus. Gcert. Wart-cress. 

1. C. Ruellii, Sm. ( common Wart-cress, Swines cress); 
pouch undivided crested with little sharp points, style prominent. 

E. Bot. t. 1660 Senebiera Coronopus, DC. — E. FI. v. iii.p. 179. 

— CocJdearia Coronopus, Linn. 

Waste ground, not unfrequent in England. Rare in Scotland and 
mostly found about Edinburgh. FI. June — Sept.©. — A much branched, 
spreading weed. Leaves bipinnate, their segments linear. Flowers very 
small, white, in lateral, axillary corymbs . Pouch large in proportion to 
the flower, curiously crested. 

2. C. didyma , Sm. ( lesser Wart-cress); pouch emarginate of 
two wrinkled lobes, style very short. Sm. FI. Brit. p. 691 — 
Senebiera didyma, E. FI. v. Hi. p. 180. — S. pinnatifida, DC. 
Lepidium didymum, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 248. 

Waste ground near the sea, in the south and south-west ot England 
only. About Exeter, Truro, Penryn, Milfordhaven. Shore near Caei- 
narvon, Mr. W. Wilson. South of Ireland, Mr. Hichs. FI. July. ©. 

4. Isatis. Linn. Woad. 

1. I. tinct'oria , Linn. ( Dyer's Woad); pouch obovato-oblong 
glabrous, radical leaves oblong crenate, those of the stem sagittate. 
E. Bot. t. 97. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 182. 

Cultivated fields, scarcely indigenous. About Ely, Durham, &c. 
Beach at Dunoon, Scotland, G. Lyon, Esq. FI. July. $ 1' lowei s 

yellow. Cultivated for the sake of the blue dye which it yields, and 
used by the ancient Britons to paint their bodies. 

5. Vella. Linn. Cress-rocket. 

1. V. annua, Linn. ( annual Cress -rochet); leaves bipinnatifid, 
fruit pendulous. E. Bot. t. 1442. E. FI. v. iii.p. 156, 

Sandy fields, scarcely wild. Salisbury Plains, Ray. LI. June. ©. 

6. Thlaspi. Linn. Penny-cress. 

1. T. arvense, Linn. ( Mithridate Mustard or Penny-cress); 
pouch orbicular with abroad longitudinal wing, seeds concentrically 
striated, leaves oblong arrow-shaped toothed glabrous. Br. — 
E. Bot. t. 1659. E. FI. v. iii.p. 171. 

Fields and by road-sides, in various places ; but not common. H. 
June, July. © — One foot high, branched above. Flowers extremely 
small, white. Pouch very large, with unusually broad wings. 

2. T. perfoliatum, Linn. ( perfoliate Penny-cress); pouch obcor- 
date, style included within the notch, cauline leaves cordate some- 


Iberis.] TETR ADYNAMIA — SILICULOSA. 295 

what toothed glabrous. Br . — E. Bot. t. 2354. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 172. 

Limestone pastures, very rare ; only found in the stone-pits about 
Burford, Oxfordshire; Bobart and Siblk. FI. Apr. May. ©. 

3. T. alpestre, Linn. ( alpine Penny-cress); pouch obovate re- 
fuse, cells 4 — 6-seeded, style exserted, stamens as long as the 
petals, cauline leaves cordato -sagittate, stem simple. Br. — E. Bot. 
/.SI. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 172. 

Limestone pastures in the north of England : Derbyshire and York- 
shire. Caernarvonshire, Mr. IV. Wilson. FI. June, July. If. . 

7. Capsella. DC. Shepherd's Purse. 

1. C. Bursa- Pastdris, DC. ( common Shepherd's Purse). Be 
Cand. Syst. Veg. v. ii. p. 283. — Tldaspi Bursa-Pastoris, Linn. 
E. Bot. t. 1435. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 173. 

Corn-fields and waste places, everywhere, most abundant. FI. the 
whole summer. 0. — Very variable, from 3 inches to 1 — 2 feet high. 
Radical leaves more or less pinnatifid, cauline ones lanceolato-sagittate, 
all generally toothed and rough with hairs. Flowers small. — It differs 
in the embryo as well as in the pouch from Thlaspi. This, however, 
according to Sir J. E. Smith, is the true Thlaspi of Dioscorides. 

8. Hutchinsia. Br. (not of Agardh.) Hutchinsia. 

1. H. petraea , Br. ( Rock Hutchinsia); leaves pinnate entire, 
petals scarcely longer than the calyx, pouch obtuse at both extremi- 
ties, stigma sessile. Br. in Hort. Kew. Lepidium , E. Bot. t. 111. 
Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 31. E. FI. v. iii.p. 168. 

Limestone rocks, in several places in the west of England : as far as 
Yorkshire. Wall of Eltham church-yard, Kent, Mr. H. Cole , and Mr. 
J. S. Mill. FI. March, Apr. 0. — A small plant, 2 — 4 inches high. 

9. Teesdalia. Br. Teesdalia. 

1. T. nudicaulis, Br. ( naked-stalked Teesdalia). Br. in Hort. 
Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 83. Hook. Scot. i. p. 194. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 170 . — Iberis nudicaulis, E. Bot. t. 327. 

Sandy and gravelly banks, in many places. FI. May, June. 0. — 
Leaves almost entirely radical, lyrato-pinnatifid. Stems 2 — 4 inches high, 
with sometimes 1 — 2, small, entire or cut leaves. Flowers white, two of 
the petals longer than the other two. 

10. Iberis. Linn. Candy-tuft. 

1. I. amara, Linn. ( bitter Candy-tuft); herbaceous, leaves lan- 
ceolate acute somewhat toothed glabrous, flowers racemose. Br . — 
E. Bot. t. 52. E. FI. v. iii.p. 181. 

Chalky fields, rare ; not unfrequent in Oxfordshire and Berkshire. 
FI. July. © . — Stems spreading, often a foot high. Leaves very variable 
in their toothing. Whole plant, as its name implies, very bitter. 


296 


TETIl ADYNAMIA SILICULOSA. 


[Lepidium. 


11. Lepidium. Linn. Pepper-wort. 

1. L. lati folium, Linn, (broad-leaved Pepper-won'); leaves ovato- 

lanceolate undivided serrated or entire, pouch oval entire. Br. 

E. Bot. t. 182. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 165. 

Wet shady places, near the sea and salt-marshes, in Norfolk, Essex, 
Yorkshire; and Weems in Fifeshire, Scotland. FI. July. 2f .—2—3 feet 
high, branched, erect, with large leaves. Flowers numerous, small, in 
many terminal and axillary, clustered racemes. 

2. L. Draba, Br. ( Whitlow Pepper-wort); leaves amplexicaul 
broadly oblong- or lanceolate entire or toothed, pouch cordate 
entire at the apex crowned with a style about its own length. Br. 
in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 86. Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2683. 
— Cochlearia Draba , Linn. 

Fields and hedges, rare : Swansea, Jus. Turner, Esq. At St. Peters 
and Ramsgate, Isle of Thanet, licv. M. J. Berkeley. Ft. June. If. — 
8 — 10 inches to a foot high, branched, with large, distant leaves and 
almost umbellate corymbs of numerous small flowers. Pedicels very 
long. — I cannot hesitate about admitting this as a native. 1 received 
specimens many years ago, gathered as wild, by the late Mr. James 
Turner at Swansea; and in 1829 the Rev. M. J. Berkeley found it at 
the two places above-mentioned; “ in the one, spread over the greater 
part of a clover field ; in the other, growing on a road-side, and abun- 
dantly in waste ground on the other side the hedge.” 

3. L. rudercde, Linn, (narrow-leaved Pepper-wort); flowers 
diandrous without petals, radical leaves pinnatifid, those of the 

branches linear entire, pouch emarginate patent. Br E. Bot. 

t. 1595. E. Fl.v. Hi. p. 165. 

Waste places near the sea, and among rubbish. FI. June. 0. — Stem 
sometimes a foot high, much branched. Seed-vessels numerous. Cotyle- 
dons incumbent, as in most of this genus ; whereas those of its very near 
affinity, L. virginicum, are accumbent. 

4. L. campestre, Br. (common Mithridate Pepperivort); pouch 
ovate emarginate winged rough with minute scales, style scarcely 
longer than the notch, cauline leaves sagittate toothed. — Br. Hi 
Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 88. Hook. Scot. i. p. 195. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 166 — Thlaspi campestre, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 1385. 

Corn-fields and dry gravelly soils, not uncommon ; in England and 
Scotland. FI. July. ©. — 10 — 12 inches high. Stems solitary, branched 
above. Lower leaves almost spathulate, all slightly pubescent, as well 
as the racemes and pedicels. Pouch curiously scaly. 

5. L. Smithii , (smooth Field Pepperivort); pouch ovate emar- 
ginate winged glabrous quite smooth or occasionally very minutely 
scaly on the back, style much exserted beyond the notch, cauline 
leaves sagittate toothed. — Z. hirtum, Hook. Scot. i. p. 195. E. FI. 
v.iii.p. 167. (not DC.) — Thlaspi hirtum, FI. Brit.p. 684. (not 
Linn.) E. Bot. t. 1803. 

Borders of fields and hedges in Norfolk and Suffolk ; very common in 


TETRADYNAMIA — SILICULOSA. 


297 


Cochlearia.] 

Caernarvonshire and Anglesea, Mr. TV. Wilson. Frequent in Scotland. 
Warren Point, near Belfast, and about Dublin, plentiful, Mr. J. T. 
Mackay. FI. June, July. If ? — 6 — 8 inches high. Stems many, from 
the same perennial, or perhaps biennial, root. Much resembling the last, 
but truly distinct, with a whiter and more abundant pubescence. Stem 
and racemes hairy. Pod with a much longer style, quite glabrous, and 
smooth or even ; except that rarely, in the middle of the back, there are 
a few very minute scales. The true L   hirtum, 1 of the south of France, 
is also very different from this, being smaller, more hairy and even shaggy 
all over, especially its seed-vessels, which are less truly ovate and consi- 
derably larger. Our plant seems not to be known on the continent, and 
with us is probably often confounded with the preceding. 

12. Cochlearia. Linn. Scurvy-grass. 

1. C. officinalis, Linn. ( common Scurvy-grass'); pouch globose, 
radical leaves petiolate cordato-reniform entire or sinuated, cauline 
ones sessile oblong sinuated. E. Bot. t. 351. E. FI. v. in. p. 174, 

Rocks and muddy places by the sea-coast ; as well as on the elevated 
mountains. FI. May, June. 0. — Leaves succulent, more or less entire, 
cauline ones semi-amplexicaul by their, generally, toothed bases. 

2. C. grcenldndica, Linn. ( Greenland Scurvy-grass ); pouch glo- 
bose, leaves kidney-shaped (or cordate) fleshy entire, uppermost 
oblong. E. Bot. t. 2403. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 175. — C. officinalis, var. 
Hook. Scot. i. p. 1 95. 

Sea-shores and Highland mountains. FI. June, July. 0. — This has 
the leaves of the following, and the pouch of the preceding species ; 
from which latter I fear it is not distinct. It is frequent on the High- 
land mountains, and is there more dwarfish. 

3. C. dnglica, Linn. ( English Scurvy-grass); pouch elliptical 
veiny, radical leaves petiolate cordate entire, cauline ones mostly 
sessile oblong more or less toothed near the base. E. Bot. t. 552. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 176. 

Muddy and rocky sea-shores and margins of salt rivers ; frequent. 
Snowdon, Mr. TV. Wilson. FI. May, June. 0. — Generally smaller than 
C. officinalis, with more entire leaves and elliptical pouches. 

4. C. danica, Linn. ( Danish Scurvy-grass); pouch ovato- 
elliptical veiny, leaves all petiolate nearly deltoid. E. Bot. t. 697. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 177. 

Sea-coast in a stony and muddy soil, frequent. FI. May. ©. — The 
smallest of the species, with very angular and stalked leaves. 

5. C. Armordcia, Linn. ( Horse-radish) ; pouch oblong, stig- 
ma dilated nearly sessile, radical leaves oblong on long footstalks 
crenate, cauline ones elongato-lanceolate serrate or entire. E. Bot. 
t. 2323. E. FI. v. iii.p. 177. 

Said to be truly wild in the mountainous parts of the north of Eng- 
land ; and mentioned as a native of Scotland, by Sibbald ; but oftener 

1 Rudely but faithfully figured in Dauhin Pin. v. ii. p. 932. 


298 


TETR ADYNAMIA — S1LICULOSA. 


[Dmba. 


the outcast of gardens. FI. May. If. — Roots long, running deep into the 
ground : well known at our tables, and esteemed for their pungent fla- 
vour. Leaves much veined. Fruit compressed, seldom perfect. 

13. Subularia. Linn. Awl-wort. 

1. S. aqudtica, Linn. ( Awl-wort ). E. Bot. t. 732. Ilook. in 
FI. Lond. N. S. t. 135. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 157. 

Shallow margins of alpine lakes, frequent. In a mill-pool, Llyn 
Maelog, with Elatine hexandra and Callitriche autumnalis, Mr. IV. Wil- 
son. FI. July. If . — Roots of numerous, long, white fibres. Leaves few, 
radical, awl-shaped, 1 — 3 inches long. Scape 2 — 4 inches high. Flowers 
small, which I have seen in perfection when entirely submerged. Pouch 
nearly approaching that of Draba, but with more turgid or convex valves. 
Embryo with its cotyledons linear, long, and the curvature takes place 
above the base of the cotyledons, not at the very base as in most other 
Cruciferce. Most authors have followed Brown in calling the Cotyledons 
bicrures : but if by that is meant (as De Candolle’s figure o || || would 
imply) that they are twice folded, 1 have never found them so in any of 
the numerous seeds 1 have examined : but constantly as represented in 
FI. Lond. If indeed, as my friend Mr. Arnott observes, a transverse 
section be made above the radicle, the cotyledons will be cut through 
twice (|| ||), and such an appearance may have given rise to the idea of 
their being twice folded. The real structure can be easily seen through 
the skin of the seed and without dissection. 

14. Draba. Linn. Whitlow-grass. 

1. D. verna, Linn. ( common Whitlow-grass ); scapes naked, 
petals deeply cloven, leaves lanceolate somewhat toothed hairy. — 
a., pouch flat. D. verna , Linn. — E. Bot. t. 586. Hook. Scot. i. 
p. 196. E.Fl.v. Hi. p. 158 — Erophila vulgaris, DC. — (3. pouch 
swollen. 

Frequent on walls, rocks and dry banks. — fi. abundant on shelving 
rocks on Ben Lawers, above the Lake. FI. March — May. ©. — The var. 
/3. is a very singular one, which I have watched for many successive 
years in the above station, and never found it to vary, but always to 
have the pouch as much inflated as that of Subularia. Nor is it altered 
by cultivation from seed in a garden. 

2. D. aizoides, Linn. ( yellow alpine Whitlow-grass) ; scapes 
leafless glabrous, petals slightly notched twice the length of the 
calyx, pouch with a long style, leaves lanceolate rigid glossy keeled 
and ciliated. E. Bot. t. 1271. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 158. 

Walls and rocks near Swansea, S. Wales. FI. March, April. If. — 
Remarkable for its bright yellow flowers , and glossy leaves margined with 
hairs. 

3. D. rupeslris, Br. (Bock Whitlow- grass) ; scape leafless or 
rarely with one leaf, petals undivided, pouch oblongo-oval tipped 
with a very short style, leaves plane lanceolate hairy. Br. in Hort 
Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 91. Hook. Scot. i. p. 196. — D. hirta, E. Bot. 
t. 1338. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 159. (not Linn, according to Br.) 


Koniga.] 


TETRADYNAMIA — SILICULOSA. 


299 


Mountain summits: rare. Upon Ben Lavvers and Cairngorum, Scot- 
land. FI. July. If . — The slender, perennial root penetrates deep among 
mosses and the crevices of rocks, bearing above many short branches, 
each crowned with a tuft of lanceolate, soft, plane, entire, or rarely ob- 
scurely toothed, hairy leaves ; their margins ciliated; the hairs mostly 
simple, sometimes branched, on the surface not unfrequently stellated : 
scapes several from the same root, 1 — 1 ^ inch high, slender, simple, 
stellato-pubescent. Pedicels short, pubescent, or rarely glabrous. Cal. 
mostly downy. Pouch oval-oblong, pubescent or glabrous. 

4. D. incana, Linn. ( twisted-podded Whitloiv-grciss); cauline 
leaves several lanceolate toothed hoary with starry pubescence, 
pouch oblong somewhat twisted. E. Bot. t. 388, ( from a cult, spe- 
cimen.) E. FI. v. Hi. p. 160. 

Mountain rocks, in much less elevated situations and far more 
frequent than the last; in Wales, the N. of England, and Scotland. Ft. 
June, July. $ . — 4 — 6 inches to a foot and more high, sometimes throw- 
ing out lateral branches. Lower leaves frequently entire, upper ones 
deeply toothed, almost cut, acute. Pouch erect, glabrous in British spe- 
cimens. Small starved vars. with only 1 or 2 leaves on the stem, come 
very near near JJ. rupestris : yet the two are truly distinct. 

5. D. muralis , Linn. ( Speedwell-leaved Whitlow-grass') ; stem 
branched, leaves ovate obtuse amplexicaul toothed, pouch patent 
glabrous. Br. — E. Bot. t. 912. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 161. 

Limestone mountainous countries, on rocks and walls. Craven, York- 
shire. Wardon hills, Bedfordshire. Emborough, Somersetshire. About 
Forfar, Edinb. and Chelsea, where it has probably escaped from gardens. 
Blarney Castle, Ireland, Mr. Drummond. FI. May. 0. — Six inches to 
one foot high. Leaves scabrous. Pouch elliptical. 

15. Camelina. Crantz. Gold of Pleasure. 

1. C. sativa, Crantz, ( common Gold of Pleasure ); pouch obo- 
vate margined, stigma simple, leaves lanceolate sagittate. Br . — 
Hook. Scot.i.p. 198. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 164. — Myagrum , Linn. 

Fields, occasionally among flax, with which it has been imported. FI. 
June, July. ©.— 2— 3 feet high, panicled above. Flowers small, yellow. 
Pouches very large, on long stalks. 

16. Koniga. Adans. Br. Koniga. 

1. K. maritima, Br. ( sea-side Koniga). Br. in PI. of Be/ilt. 

and Clapp. Journ. p. 9. — Alyssum marit. Willd E. Bot. t. 

1729. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 162. — A. halamifolium, Bot. Mag A. 

minimum, and Clypeola maritima, Linn — Glyce maritima, Lindl. 

Cliffs by the sea ; near Aberdeen. Budleigh Salterton, Devon : said 
to be not wild. FI. Aug. Sept. If . — Stem somewhat woody at the base. 
Leaves linear-lanceolate, hoary with bipartite appressed hairs. Flowers 
white and fragrant, honey-scented : hence the plant is much cultivated 
as an annual in our gardens. 


300 


TE'l'R ADYNAMIA — SILIOUOSA. 

<v 


[Cardaminc 


OllD. II. TETRADYNAMIA SILIQUOSA. 

17. Dentaria. Linn. Coral-root. 

1. D. bulbifera, Linn, (bulbifcrous Coral-root ); stem quite sim- 
ple, lower leaves pinnated, upper ones simple with axillary bulbs. 
E. Eot. t. 309. E. LI. v. Hi. p. 186. — Cardamine bulbifera, Er. 
in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 101. Hook. Scot. i. p. 1 98. 

Woods and shady places; rare. Sussex, Middlesex. Near Dupplin 
and Banks of the Esk, below Dalkeith; Mr. Coldstream. FI. April, 
May. 14 . — Root creeping, bearing thick, fleshy scales or tooth-like pro- 
cesses. Stem 1 — H foot high. Leaflets lanceolate, as are the upper 
leaves themselves, serrated, somewhat fleshy, often bearing a small bulb 
in their axils. Flowers rather large, purple. 

18. Cardamine. Linn. Lady’s Smock. 

1. C. amdra , Linn. ( bitter Lady's Smock); leaves pinnated, 
radical leaflets roundish, cauline ones dentato-angulate, style 

oblique, stigma rather acute, stem rooting at the base. Br 

E. Bot. t. 1000. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 190. 

Wet meadows, near rivulets : not unfrequent. FI. Apr. Jung. 74 . 

One foot high. Well distinguished from the following by the broad 
angulato-dentate leaflets of its upper leaves, and the large white flowers, 
which have purple anthers. The leaflets of the radical leaves are rounded 
and entire. 

2. C. pratensis, Linn. ( common Meadoio Lady's Smock); leaves 
pinnate, radical leaflets roundish dentate, cauline ones lanceolate 
nearly entire, style strait, stigma capitate. Br. — E. Bot. t. 776. 
E. FI. v. iii. p. 189. 

Moist meadows, abundant. FI. May. If. — 1—2 ft. high. Flowers 
large, blush-coloured : sometimes found double, in which state the leaf- 
lets are known to produce new plants, when they come in contact with 
the ground, while still attached to the parent plant. 

3. C. impatiens, Linn, (narrow-leaved Lady's Smock); leaves 
pinnate, leaflets lanceolate somewhat cut or entire, stipules ciliated, 
petals linear or none. Br. — E. Bot. t. 80. E. FI. v. iii. p. 187. 

Moist rocks, rare; Derbyshire, Westmoreland and Cumberland. Near 
the Falls of the Clyde, and banks of the Doune, ( Mr. James Wilson). 
FI. May, June. ©. — 1 — 1| foot high; well distinguished by the fringed 
stipules at the base of each leaf. Flowers minute, white. It owes its 
specific name to the elastic force of the valves, when separating and dis- 
charging the seeds. 

4. C. hirsuta, Linn, (hairy Lady's Smock); leaves all pinnated 
and without stipules, leaflets petiolate, radical ones roundish, sta- 
mens 4 — 6 equal in length to the petals, stigma nearly sessile. Br. 
— E. Bot. t. 492. E. FI. v. iii. p. 188. — C. Jlexuosa, With . — C. 
parviflora , Linn.? — Light/, and With. 

Moist shady places, abundant. Ft. March — June. ©. — Varying much 
in size and luxuriance, according to soil and situation; from 4 inches to 
1 foot and more in height, as in the C. sylvatica of authors. Leaflets 


Arabisl) 


TET R A D Y N A M I A — S I LI 0 UOS A. 

<v 


301 


more or less angled or toothed, upper ones ovate or even linear; hairy 
or glabrous. Flowers small, white. 

5. C. bellidfolia, Linn. ( Daisy-leaved Lady's Smock); leaves 
simple ovate entire upon rather long footstalks. E. Bot. t. 2335. 
E. El. v. Hi. p. 187. 

Scotland, ( Mr. Milne, in With.) County of Clare, Ireland? a very 
dubious native. Id. Aug. If. — ; — 3 inches high. Flowers small, white. 
/ 

19. Arabis. Linn. Rock-cress. 

1. A. stricta, Huds. ( Bristol Rock-cress); leaves toothed obtuse 
hispid, radical leaves somewhat lyrate, sterns hairy, petals and pods 
erect. E. Bot. t. (314*. E. El. v. Hi. p. 210. 

Rare ; St. Vincent’s rocks, near Bristol ; among limestone. FI. March. 
V - ; — Habit of Sisymbrium thedianum, but perennial; root-leaves strongly 
ciliated, with frequently forked or trifid setae, and rather hispid than 
hairy: flowers twice the size ; stem-leaves few, small. 

2. A. petrcea, DC. (alpine Rock-cress); radical leaves lyrato- 
pinnatifid stalked, cauline ones undivided sessile, pods spreading 

twice as long as the pedicels — A. hispida, Linn. Suppl, E. FI. 

v. Hi. p. 211. Cardamine petrcea , Huds. — Linn. Sp. PL? — C. 
hastulata, E. Bot. t. 409. 

Alpine rocks in North Wales. Frequent on the high mountains of 
the west and north of Scotland; on the Cairngorum range. Hebrides; 
especially 8kye, Ross-shire and Sutherland, Prof Graham. FI. June] 
July. If. 3— 6 inches high, slender, glabrous or more or less hairy. 
Flowers moderately large, with a purplish tinge. 

3. A. ciliata, Br. ( fringed Rock-cress); leaves somewhat toothed 
oval glabrous ciliated, radical ones nearly sessile obtuse, those of 
the stem semiamplexicaul, stem simple. Br. in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. 

v. iv. p. 107. Hook. Scot. i.p. 200. E. FI. v. iii.p. 212 Turritis 

alpina, Linn.— E. Bot. t. 1746. 

By the sea-side at Rinville, Cunnamara, Ireland ; Mr. J. T. Mackav. 
Rocks near Loch Lea in Glen Esk, Scotland, Mr. G. Don. FI. July, 
f .— 4— G inches high. Root-leaves several, oval, or obovato-oblone, 
obtuse; cauline ones small. Pods nearly erect. 

4. A. hirsuta, Br. ( hairy Rock-cress); leaves all hispid dentate, 

cauhne ones semiamplexicaul, pods straight. Br. in Hort. Kew 
ed. ii. v. iv. p. 107. Hook. Scot. i.p. 200. E. El. v. iii.p. 213.— ] 
Turritis hirsuta, Linn E. Bot. t. 387. 1 

Wads, rocks and banks : frequent in many parts of England and Scot- 
land. Id. June. £ . One foot or more high, erect, stiff. Stem roimh 
with spreading hairs, bearing many leaves. Flowers small, white. Pods 
numerous, erect. 

5. A. Turrita, Linn. ( Tower Wall-cress); leaves amplexicaul, 
pods recurved flat and linear with the margins incrassated, bracteas 
iohaceous. E. Bot. t. 178. E. El. v. iii.p. 214. 


302 


TETRADYNAMIA — SILIgUOSA. 


[ Nasturtium. 


Old walls of Trinity and St. John’s Colleges, Cambridge, and of Mag- 
dalen College, Oxford. Castle of Cleish, Kinross-shire. Mr. Arnott. FI. 
May. $ . 

20. Turritis. Linn. Tower-Mustard. 

1. T. glabra , Linn, (long-podded Tower -Mustard ); radical 
leaves toothed hairy, cauline ones amplexicaul entire glabrous. Br. 
— E. Bot. t. 777. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 213. 

Banks and road-sides in many parts of England, but not general ; 
apparently most frequent in Norfolk and Suffolk. Bowling Bay, Scot- 
land. Ft. May, June. ©. — One to two feet high. Leaves oblongo-lan- 
ceolate, glaucous; radical ones toothed or sinuated at the base ; cauline 
ones sagittate. Flowers yellowish-white. Pods long, erect. Whole 
plant very erect and strait. 

21. Barbarea. Br. Winter-cress. 

1. B. vulgaris, Br. ( bitter Winter -cress, yellow Rocket); lower 

leaves lyrate, the terminal lobe rounded, the superior ones obovate 
toothed often pinnatifid at the base, pods linear tereti-4-angled 
acuminate. — Br. in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv.p. 109. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 198 Erysimum Barbarea, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 443. 

Pastures and hedges, frequent. FI. May — Aug. If . — 1 — 2 feet high, 
stout, furrowed, branched, glabrous. Flowers yellow. The Rev. C. Smith 
finds by Loch Awe, a var. with all the leaves lyrato-pinnatifid. 

2. B. prcecox , Br. ( early Winter-cress) ; lower leaves lyrate, 
upper ones pinnatifid, segments linear-oblong entire, pods linear 

obtuse compressed Br. in Hort. Kew.ed. 2.v. iv.p. 109. E. FI. 

v. iii.p. 199 Erysimum prcecox, Sm — E. Bot. t. 1129. 

Waste places, in Devonshire and elsewhere, often the outcast of a 
garden. FI. Apr. — Oct. $ . — 1 — 2 ft. high; slenderer than the last in 
every part. Flowers smaller; j)ods longer. 

22. Nasturtium. Br. Cress. 

1. N. officinale, Br. ( Water-Cress); leaves pinnate, leaflets 
ovate subcordate siuuato-dentate. Br. in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. 
p. 110. E. FI. v.iii. p. 192 . — Sisymbrium Nasturtium, Linn . — 
E. Bot. t. 853. 

Brooks and rivulets, frequent. FI. July. If . — A well known aquatic 
and an excellent and wholesome salad. Lower leaves large; of o — 7 
distant leaflets, the terminal one the largest and roundest; cauline leaflets 
subovate, all rather succulent, glabrous, more or less waved or toothed. 
Flowers white. Pods about an inch long, patent. 

2. N. sylvestre, Br. ( creeping Nasturtium); leaves pinnate, 
leaflets lanceolate cut, those on the uppermost leaves entire. Br. 
in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 110. E. FI. v. iii. p. 193. — Sisym- 
brium sylvestre, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 2324. 

Water-sides and waste places, but not common. FI. July, Aug. If . 
— Roots much creeping. Stem 1 foot high, angular, branched. Flowers 


Sisymbrium.] TETR ADYNAMIA — SILIOUOSA. 303 

yellow. Petals much longer than the calyx. Pods short, patent or 
curved a little upwards. 

3. N. terrestre, Br. (Marsh Nasturtium) ; leaves lyrato-pinnatifid 
unequally toothed glabrous, root simply fibrous, petals not longer 
than the calyx. Br. in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 110. E. FI. 
v.iii.p. 193. — N. palustre, DC. — Sisymbrium palustre, Willd. — 
S. amphibium, var. Linn . — S. terrestre , E.Bot. t. 1747. 

Watery places in many parts of England and Scotland. FI. June — 
Sept. 0. — One foot high, branched. Distinguished readily from the 
last by its pinnatifid not pinnated leaves, the minute (yellow) petals and 
more turgid pods. 

4. N. amphibium, Br. (amphibious Nasturtium) ; leaves oblong 
pinnatifid or serrated, root simply fibrous, petals longer than the 
calyx. Br. in Hort. Knv. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 110. E. El. v. Hi. p. 195. 
— Sisymbrium amphib. Linn. — E. Bot. t. 1840. 

Watery places, frequent. FI. June — Aug. If. . — 2 — 3 ft. high, branch- 
ed. If any leaves grow under water, they are deeply pinnatifid, other- 
wise deeply serrated. Pods short, small, but turgid, erecto-patent. 

23. Sisymbrium. Linn. Hedge-Mustard. 

1. S. officinale, Linn, (common Hedge-Mustard ); pods subu- 

late pubescent close pressed to the main-stalk, leaves runcinate 
hairy, stem hispid. Br. — E. FI. v. Hi. p. 19G Erysimum offi- 

cinale, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 735. 

Waste places and by way-sides, plentiful. FI. June, July. 0. — One 
to two feet high, branched. The deep and cut, serrated lobes are not 
always sufficiently decurved to constitute a runcinate leaf : the terminal 
lobe is very large, roundish in the lower leaves , and oblong in the upper 
ones. Flowers very small, pale yellow. 

» 

2. S. Irio , Linn. (Broad Hedge- Mustard, London Rochet); 
leaves runcinate toothed and as well as the stem glabrous, pods 
nearly erect. Br. — E. Bot. t. 1631. E. Fl.v.iii. p. 197. 

Waste ground, chiefly about London; in which city it covered the 
ground immediately after the great fire. Faulkbourn, Essex and Ber- 
wick-upon-Tweed, Ray. Dublin, Mr. IV. Wilson. FI. July, Aug. © 

Flowers yellow. Pods 2 inches long, erect. 

3. S. Sophia , Linn, (fine-leaved Hedge-mustard or Flax-weed); 
leaves doubly pinnatifid slightly hairy, lobes linear or oval, petals 
shorter than the calyx. E. Bot. t. 963. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 197. 

Waste places, among rubbish; frequent. FI. Aug. ©. — Two feet 
high, branched. Flowers small, yellow. Pods linear, slender, erect, but 
not appressed, the footstalk being a little patent. 

4. S. thalianum, (common T hale-cress); leaves somewhat toothed 
hairy, radical ones oblong subpetiolate, stem branched, pods ascend- 
ing* — Arabis thaliana, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 901. E. FI. v. iii.p. 209. 

Walls, dry banks and gravelly soils, common. FI. Apr. May. ©. — 


304 


TETRADYNAMIA SILIQUOSA. 


[ Matthiola   


Six to ten inches high, slender, with few leaves, and those mostly radi- 
cal. Flowers small, white. The cotyledons are incumbent here, not ac- 
cumbent as in the true Arabis, with which, however, it agrees better in 
habit. 

24. Erysimum. Linn. Treacle-mustard. 

1. E. cheiranthoides, Linn. ( Worm-seed Treacle-mustard); 
leaves lanceolate entire or slightly toothed with stellato-tripartite 
hairs, pods nearly erect their pedicels spreading, stigma undivided 
nearly sessile. Br. — E. Eot. t. 942. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 200. 

Fields, gardens and waste places. FI. July, Aug. ©. — 1 — 2 ft. high, 
branched. Flowers small, yellow. 

2. E. Alliaria, Linn. ( Garlic Treacle-mustard, Jach-by-the 
Hedge or Sauce-alone) ; leaves heart-shaped stalked sinuato-den- 
tate. E. Bot. t. 796. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 201. 

Hedge-banks and waste places. FI. May, June. $ .—Two to 3 feet 
high, branched. Leaves large, veined, well known by their garlic-like 
smell. Flowers white. Pods between erect and patent. 

3. E. orientale, Br. ( Hares-ear Treacle-mustard) ; leaves 
cordato-amplexicaul, radical ones obovate, all glabrous glaucous 

and entire Br. in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 117. E. FI. v. Hi. 

p. 202. — Brassica orientalis, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 1804. 

Fields and cliffs near the sea: Essex, Suffolk, Sussex. “ It came up 
spontaneously in a field, that had been ploughed to form a garden, in the 
centre of the new square at Plymouth;” Rev. J. S. Tozer. FI. June. ©• 

25. Cheiranthus. Linn. Wall-flower. 

1. C. Cheiri, Linn. ( common Wall-flower); leaves lanceolate 
acute entire with bipartite appressed hairs, pods linear, lobes of the 
stigma patent, stem shrubby. Hook, in Ft. Lond. N. S. t. 147. — 
C.fruticulosus, Linn. Mant. — E. Bot. t. 1934. E. FI. v. iii.p. 203. 

Old walls. FI. Apr. May. Tj . — A variety, with larger, more highly- 
coloured and more flaccid petals, is commonly cultivated in gardens. 

26. Matthiola. Br. Stock. 

1. M. inedna, Br. (hoary shrubby Stock); stem shrubby upright 
branched, leaves lanceolate entire, pods cylindrical without glands. 
Br. in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 119. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 205. — 
Cheiranthus incanus, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 1 935. 

Clifts to the eastward of Hastings ; but not wild. FI. May, June. Tj . 
—The origin of the Stock Gilly-flower of our gardens ; where it is gener- 
ally treated as an annual or biennial. 

2. M. sinuata , Br. (great Sea Stock); stem herbaceous spread- 
ing, leaves downy, lower ones sinuated, pods compressed muricated. 
—Br. in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 120. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 206. 
Cheiranthus sinuatus, Linn. — L. Bot. t. 462. 

Sandy shores of Wales and Cornwall. FI. May, Aug. £ . — Flowers 
purple, large, fragrant at night. 


Brassica.\ 


305 


TETR ADYNAMIA — SILIOUOSA. 

27. Hesperis. Linn. Dame’s Violet. 

1. H. matrondlis, Linn. ( common Dames Violet); stem erect, 
leaves ovato-lanceolate toothed, limb of the petals obovate, pods 
erect toruloseMieir margins not thickened. Hook. Scot. i. p. 202. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 207. — H. inodora , Linn E. Hot. t. 731. 

Hilly pastures, in several parts of Great Britain ; but often the outcast 
of gardens. Ft. May, June. If.. 

28. Buassica. Linn. Cabbage, Turnep. 

1. B. Ndpus, Linn, (wild Navew, Rape , or Cole-seed ); root 
caulescent fusiform, leaves smooth, upper ones cordato-lanceolate 
amplexicaul, lower ones lyrate toothed. E. Bot. t. 2146. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 217. 

Corn-fields and waste ground, frequent. FI. May, June. $ . — 1 — 2 
feet high. Lobes ot the lower leaves crenate ; upper leaves entire, some- 
what glaucous. Petals yellow, rather small. Pods torulose. — Cultivated 
for the oil produced by its seeds, which after pressure are formed into 
calces, and used as manure and for feeding cattle. 

2. B. Rapa , Linn, (common Turnep); root caulescent orbicu- 
lar depressed fleshy, radical leaves lyrate scabrous, those of the stem 
nearly entire smooth. E. Bot. t. 2176. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 217. 

Borders of fields and waste places. FI. Apr. May. $ . — Varying ex- 
ceedingly in height, according to soil. Upper leaves amplexicaul, ovato- 
acuminate, subglaucous ; all more or less toothed. Flowers yellow, 
rather large. 

3. B. oleracea, Linn. (Sea Cabbage); root caulescent cylin- 
drical fleshy, all the leaves glabrous glaucous waved and lobed. 
E. Bot. t. 637. E. FI. v. iii.p. 219. 

Cliff's by the sea: Devonshire, Dover, Wales, Cornwall, Yorkshire 
and in the Firth of Forth. FI. May, June. $ . — Varying in height, 1 — 2 
feet. Leaves thick, subcarnose, the uppermost undivided, but toothed. 
Flowers large, yellow. — The origin of our garden Cabbage. 

4. B. monensis, Br. (Isle-of-Man Cabbage); leaves pinnatifid, 
stem nearly leafless glabrous, pods smooth, beak 1( — 3)-seeded. 

Br. in Hort. Kew. ed. 2. v. iv. p. 124. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 220 

Sisymbrium monetise, Linn E. Bot. t. 962. 

On the isles and shores of the Clyde, and on both sides of the Irish 
Channel. In Lorn, Scotland, Rev. Colin Smith. FI. June, July. If . — 
Stems prostrate, slightly hispid, greedily eaten by cattle and sheep, and 
probably deserving of being cultivated as fodder. 

5. B. campestris, Linn, (common wild Navew); root and stem 
slender, leaves cordate acuminate amplexicaul, lower ones lyrate 
dentate subhispid. Br. — E. Bot. t. 2234. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 218. 

Corn-fields, and sides of rivers and ditches, in many places. FI. June, 
July, ©. Root fusiform, but slender. Stem hispid below. Flowers 
yellow. Pud upright, cylindrical or obscurely 4-angular, veiny ; seeds 
forming slight prominences ; beak awl-shaped, striated, square at its base. 


30C> 


[Raphanus. 


TETR ADYNAMIA SILIQUOSA. 

29. Sinapis. Linn. Mustard. 

1. S. arvensis, Linn, (wild Mustard, Charlock); pods with many 
angles turgid and knotty longer than the two-edged beak. E. Bot. 
t. 1748. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 221. 

Corn-fields, too frequent. — 

“ O’er the young corn the Charlock throws a shade, 

And clasping Tares cling round the sickly blade.” 

FI. May, June. ©. — 1 — 2 ft. high, rough. Flowers rather large, yellow. 

2. S. alba, Linn. ( white Mustard); pods hispid turgid shorter 
than the ensiform beak, leaves pinnatifid. E. Bot. t. 1677. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 222. 

Waste places, frequent. FI. July. ©. — Stem 1 — 1 4 foot high, hairy. 
Lobes of the leaves variously cut and toothed, or erose. Flowers large, 
yellow. Well distinguished by its long beak. — This plant, while in a 
young state, is eaten under the name of Mustard, with Cresses ( Lepidium 
sativum.) 

3. S. nigra, Linn. ( common Mustard); pods appressed glabrous 
tetragonous, style short subulate, upper leaves linear-lanceolate 
entire glabrous. E. Bot. t. 969. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 222. 

Under hedges and in waste places. FI. June. ©• — 3 — 4 ft. high. 
Lower leaves large, lyrate, rough. Flowers yellow. Pod with a very 
short beak, or rather only the persistent style and stigma at its summit, 
quadrangular, its surface scarcely rugged. — The seeds yield the mustard 
of our tables. 

4. S. tenuifolia, Br. ( fine-leaved Mustard); pods linear gla- 
brous shortly beaked erect, peduncles spreading, leaves lanceolate 
very acute pinnatifid or bipinnatifid, stem glabrous. Br. — Hook. 

Scot. i.p. 204. E. FI. v. iii.p. 223 Sisymbrium tenuif. Linn . — 

E. Bot. t. 525. — Diplotaxis tenuif. DC. 

Old walls about great towns, in the south, south-west and east of Eng- 
land ; as London, Bristol, Yarmouth, Chester. Coast of Fife, Mr. Neill 
and Dr. Greville. FI. July, Aug. If. — Root thick, woody. Stem 1 — 14 
ft. high. P lowers large, yellow. The plant smells very disagreeably. 

5. S. muralis, Br. ( Sand Mustard); pods linear glabrous 

shortly beaked erect, peduncles spreading, leaves sinuate gla- 
brous, stem spreading hairy. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 224 . — Sisymbrium 
murale, Linn E. Bot. t. 1090 Diplotaxis muralis, De Cand. 

Sandy barren fields near the sea, in the south and south-west of Eng- 
land. Isle ofThanet, and below Bristol. FI. Aug. Sept. ©. — Very 
near the preceding, but annual; (considered by Sir J. E. Smith quite 
distinct.) 

30. Raphanus. Linn. Radish. 

1. R . Raphanistrum, Linn, (wild Radish or jointed Charlock); 
leaves simply lyrate, pods of one cell jointed striated. Br . — 
E.Bot. t. 856. E. FI. v. iii.p. 226. 


M0NADELPI1IA — POLYANDRIA. 


307 


Althcca.] 


Corn-fields, frequent. FI. June, July. ©. — 1 — fi. high. Leaves 
stalked, rough. Flowers yellow, veined. 

2. R. maritimus, Sm. (Sea- Radish) ; leaves interruptedly 
lyrate, pods of one cell jointed striated. Br. — E.Bot. t. 1 64?3. 
E. EL v. Hi. p. 226. 

Beachy-head, Sussex. Sea-shore in Bute and Galloway, Scotland. 
FI. June. $ . — 3 — -f feet high. All the leaves rough and the lobes 
toothed. Flowers rather large, yellow. 


CLASS XVI. MONADELPHIA. 

Filaments combined in one set.' 

ORD. I. PENTANDRIA. 5 perfect Stamens. 

1. Erodium. Style 1. Cal. of 5 leaves. Cor. of 5 petals. 
Glands 5. Five alternate stamens imperfect. Fruit beaked, se- 
parating into 5 one-seeded capsules, each with a long spiral awn, 
bearded on the inside. — Nat. Ord. Geraniaceae, Juss. — Name, — 

a Heron; the fruit resembling the beak of that bird. 

(See Linum in Cl. V. Ord. I. — Geran. pusillum in Ord. Decandria.) 

ORD. II. DECANDRIA. 10 Stamens. 

2. Geranium. Style 1. Cal. of 5 leaves. Cor. of 5 regular 
petals. Glands 5. Fruit beaked, separating into 5, 1 -seeded 

capsules , each with a long naked awn Nat. Ord. GERANiACEiE, 

Juss — Name, — ysgawov of the Greeks, from vog, a Crane ; the 
fruit resembling the beak of a Crane. 

ORD. III. POLYANDRIA. Many Stamens. 

3. Lavatera. Styles numerous. Cal. double ; ext. 3-lobed. 
Capsules numerous, circularly arranged, 1 -seeded. — Ned. Ord. 
Malvaceae, Juss . — Named in honour of the two Lavcders, friends 
of Tournefort. 

4. Malva. Styles numerous. Cal. double ; ext. of 3 leaves. 

Capsules numerous, circularly arranged, 1-seeded Nat. Orel. 

Malvaceae, Juss. — Name altered from /jm/m'/j, soft ; in allusion 
to the emollient nature of the species. 

(See Oxalis in Cl. X.) 

5. Althaea. Styles numerous. Cal. double ; ext. of 6 — 9 
leaves. Capsules numerous, circularly arranged, 1-seeded. — Nat. 
Ord. Malvace/e, Juss. — Name,— -cthdu, to cure   from its healing 
properties. 

1 In Erodium and Geranium the union of the filaments takes place only at the 
very base, and is with difficulty seen* 


308 


MONADELPHIA — DECANDRIA. 


[ Geranium . 


MONADELPHIA— PENTANDRIA. 

1. Erodium. L'Herit. Stork’s bill. 

1« E. cicutarium , Sm. ( Hemlock Stork's bill); peduncles many- 
flowered, leaves pinnate, leaflets sessile pinnatifid and cut, petals 
longer than the calyx, stems prostrate hairy. E. Bot. t. 1768. 
E. FI. v.iii. p. 229 — Geranium cicutarium, Linn. 

Waste ground, frequent. FI. Summer months. ©. — Whole plant 
hairy. Flowers in small umbels, purplish, or sometimes white. 

2. E. moschdtum, Sm. ( musk y Stork' s-bill); peduncles many- 
flowered, leaves pinnate, leaflets nearly sessile ovate unequally 
cut, perfect stamens toothed at the base, stems depressed hairy. 
E. Bot. t. 902. E. FI. v. iii.p. 230. — Geranium moschatum, Linn. 

Mountainous pastures, rare. In the Craven of Yorkshire, and in West- 
moreland, “ more certainly wild than any where else, it having been long 
cultivated in gardens for its scent.” Sm. Near Bristol ; Shotover hill, 
Oxford, and on Ampthill warren, Bedfordshire- Near Plymouth, Mr. 
Banks. Simmond’s Court, Carlingford Castle and Monkstown Church, 
Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mackay. FI. June, July. 0. — Larger than the last, 
and with much less deeply cut leaflets, which yield a powerful smell of 
musk. Mr. Banks observes that the petals are more linear than in 
E. cicutarium and not ciliated at the claws. 

3. E. maritimum , Sm. ( Sea Stork' s-bill) ; peduncles 1-or few- 
flowered, leaves simple ovato-cordate stalked lobed and crenate, 
stems depressed slightly hairy. E. Bot. t. 646. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 231. 
— Geranium maritimum , Linn. \ 

Sandy and gravelly sea-coasts, but rare ; as in Sussex, Wales, (Ormes- 
head, Mr. IV. IVilson,) and Cornwall. Steep- Holmes, and near Bristol, 
far from the sea, Mr. Christy. Hill of Hovvth, Ireland, Mr. J. T. 
Mackay. FI. May — Sept. If . — Flowers exceedingly small and incon- 
spicuous. Petals fugacious. 

MONADELPHIA— DECANDRIA. 

2. Geranium. Linn. Crane’s-bill. 

* Peduncles \-jloioered. 

1. G. sanguineum , Linn, (bloody Crane' s-bill) ; peduncles 1- 
flowered, leaves nearly orbicular in 5 — 7 deep lobes each of which 
is trifid. E. Bot. t. 272. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 242. 

Alpine or limestone pastures, in many places ; but not very general. 
Ft. July. If . — ] — I ^ ft. high, swelling at the joints. Peduncles axillary, 
long. Flmuers large, handsome, purple, varying to flesh-colour, with 
purple veins. 

* Peduncles 2-Jlowered. 

2. G. pheeum , Linn, (dusky Crane's-bill); peduncles 2-flowered 
opposite the leaves, calyx slightly avvned, petals waved, capsules 


Geranium.] MONADELPHIA — DECANDRIA. 309 

keeled hairy below wrinkled above, stem erect. E. Bot. t. 322. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 232. 

Woods and thickets in many places, but often the outcast of a garden. 
Sir J. E. Smith considers it to he perhaps most truly wild in the moun- 
tainous parts of Yorkshire and Lancashire. With white fl. at the sands 
of Barrie, near Dundee, Mr. Drummond. Fl. May, June. If. — Stem 2 
feet or more high, diehotomously branched. Leaves 3 — 7-lobed, lobes 
acute, cut and serrated. Flowers very dingy, purple-black. 

3. G. nodosum , Linn, (knotty Crane's-bill ); peduncles 2- 
flowered, leaves opposite 5-or 3-lobed pointed errated, capsules 
even downy all over. Sm. — E.Bot. t. 1091. E. Fl. v. Hi. p. 233. 

Said to have been found in the mountainous parts of Cumberland, 
and between Hatfield and Welwyn, Harts; but I have never seen Bri- 
tish specimens. Fl. May — Aug. If. 

4. G. sylvaticum, Linn. ( Wood Crane's-bill); peduncles 2- 
flowered, leaves subpeltate with 5 or 7 deep and acute lobes which 
are cut and serrated, stem erect corymbose, petals slightly notched, 
stamens fringed, capsules keeled hairy not wrinkled. E. Bot.t. 121. 
E. Fl. v. Hi. p. 234. 

Woods, thickets and sides of rivers, chiefly in subalpine countries. 
Fl. June, July. If. — 1 — 3 ft. high. Flowers purple, rather larger than 
those of G. pheeum , but much smaller than in the following species. 

5. G. pratense, Linn, (blue Meadow Crane's-bill); peduncles 
2-flowered, leaves 5-partite, lobes multipartite all the segments 
acute, stamens glabrous dilated at the base, capsules hairy not 
wrinkled. E. Bot. t. 404. E. Fl. v. Hi. p. 235. 

Pastures and moist thickets, particularly near cascades, in mountain- 
ous countries : and near London. Surry, J. S. AIM, Esq. Fl. June, 
July. If. — l — 2 feet high. Distinguished by its large purple flowers and 
multipartite leaves. 

6. G. pyrendicum, Linn. (Mountain Crane's-bill); peduncles 
2-flowered, leaves reniform 5 — 7-lobed, lobes oblong obtuse trifid 
and toothed at the extremity, stem erect branched, petals with a 
deep notch twice as long as the calyx. E. Bot.t. 405. E.Fl.v.iii. 
p. 239. 

Meadows and pastures in many places, but not frequent. Fl. June, 
July. If. — 2—3 ft. high, much branched. Distinguished by the very 
obtuse segments of its lower leaves (for the upper ones are acute and 
less divided), and its rather small, numerous, purple J/owers, with cleft 
petals. 

7. G. lucidum , Linn, (shining Crane's-bill) ; peduncles 2- 
flotvered, leaves roundish 5-lobed, lobes trifid and notched obtuse 
with a short mucro, calyx pyramidal angular dentato-tuberculate, 
capsules wrinkled. E. Bot. t. 75. E. Fl. v. Hi. p. 236. 

Bocks, walls and roofs of houses, especially in mountainous countries. 
Frequent in Surry, II. Cole, Esq. Bucks, J. S. MM, Esq. Fl. June, 
July. ©. — Stems spreading, shining (as are the leaves), brittle, swelling 


MONADELPHIA DECANDRIA. 


310 


[Geranium. 


at the joints. Leaves small, lower ones often of a fine red. Flowers 
small, rose-coloured. 

8. G. robertianum, Linn. ( stinking Crane's-bill or Herb- 
Robert) ; peduncles 2-flowered, leaves ternate or quinate, leaflets 
pinnatifid, segments mucronate, calyx angular hairy, capsules 
wrinkled. E. Rot. t. I486. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 235. 

Woods, thickets, stony and waste ground, frequent. A small var. is 
common hy the sea-side, the /3. of Smith, and which is the G. purpureum 
of Mill, and of Forster in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2648. FI. Summer months. 
q, — Stems spreading, red, brittle. Flowers purple, sometimes white. I 
know not if G. Rail, Lindl. Sijn. p. 57, should be referred here, or as 
Mr. Forster rather suspects, to G. lucidum. 

9. G. nwlle, Linn. ( Dove-foot's Crane's-bill); peduncles 2- 
flowered, leaves rounded or reniform lobed and cut downy, petals 
notched scarcely longer than the calyx, capsules transversely wrink- 
led, seeds without dots. E. Bot. t. 778. E. FI. v. iii. p. 237. 

Dry pastures and waste places, common. FI. Apr. — Aug. 0. — 
Stems spreading, procumbent, with long hairs. Leaves lobed; lobes broad, 
cut. Flowers small, purple. Seeds smooth. 

10. G. rotund folium, Linn. ( round-leaved Crane's-bill); pedun- 
cles 2-flowered, leaves roundish or reniform lobed and cut downy, 
petals entire the length of the calyx, capsules smooth hairy, seeds 
dotted. E. Bot. t. 157. E. FI. v. iii. p. 240. 

Pastures and waste ground in England, but not common. About 
Edinb. FI. June, July. ©.—Distinguished from the preceding by the 
entire petals, and according to Sir Jas. E. Smith, by the smooth or even 
capsides and dotted seeds. 

11. G. pusillum, Linn, (small-flowered Crane's-bill) ; pedun- 
cles 2-flowered, flowers pentandrous, petals notched, leaves rounded 
or reniform in 5 — 7 deep lobes, lobes trifid, capsules smooth cari- 
nated downy with erect appressed hairs, seeds smooth. E. Bot. 
t. 385. E. FI. v. iii. p. 238. 

Waste ground and in gravelly soils, frequent : less common in Scot- 
land. About Edinb. and Glasgow. FI. June— Sept. Q.—Stem weak, 
prostrate. Leaves deeply lobed. Flowers very small, bluish-purple. 

12. G. dissection, Linn, (jagged-leaved Crane's-bill); pedun- 
cles 2-flowered, petals notched rather shorter than the much awned 
calyx, leaves 5-partite, lobes linear trifid or cut, capsules smooth 
hairy, seeds dotted. E. Bot. t. 753. E. FI. v. iii. p. 241. 

Hedges and pastures, gravelly and waste places. FI. May, June. 0. 

Stems spreading. Distinguished by the much divided leaves and the 

short footstalks of the blossoms, which, as Curtis observes, thus appear 
as if sitting among the leaves. 

13. G. columbinum , Linn, (long-stalked Crane's-bill ); pedun- 
cles 2-flowered shorter than the leaves which are 5-partite, the lobes 
divided into many acute segments, petals entire as long as the much 


Althaea.] MONADELPHIA — rOLYANDRIA. 311 

awned calyx, capsules smooth glabrous, seeds dotted. E. Bol. 
t. 259. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 241. 

Dry pastures in several parts of Great Britain ; especially in a dry 
gravelly or limestone soil. FI. June, July. 0. — Stem very slender, pro- 
cumbent, its hairs, as in G. dissection , reflexed. Capsules quite glabrous. 

MONADELPHIA— POLYANDIIIA. 

3. Lavatera. Linn. Tree-mallow. 

1. L. arborea , Linn. ( Sea Tree-mallow ); stem arborescent, 
leaves with about 7 angles downy plaited, peduncles axillary clus- 
tered single-flowered. E. Bot. t. 1841. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 248. 

On maritime, always insulated rocks in the south and west of England. 
Islet oft’ the coast of Anglesea, Mr. W. Wilson. Isles in the Firth of 
Forth. Ireland, Mr. J. T. Mac/cap. FI. July, Aug. $ . — 3 — 5 feet high. 
Flowers large, purple rose-coloured, shining, darker at the base of the 
petals. 

4. Malva. Linn. Mallow. 

1 . M. sylvestris, Linn. ( common Mallow ) ; stem erect herba- 
ceous, leaves with 7 rather acute lobes, peduncles and petioles hairy. 
E. Bot. t. 671. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 244. 

Waste places and way-sides ; not common in Scotland. King’s Park, 
Edinb. Cross-basket, near Glasgow. Kirkbean, Galloway ; Dr. Richard- 
son. Frequent in Ireland. FI. June — Aug. If . — Stem 2 — 3 feet or more 
high, branched. Flowers large, 3 or 4 together, axillary. Petals large, 
obcordate, of a purplish rose-colour with deeper veins, combined by the 
base of their claws. Whole plant, especially the fruit, mucilaginous and 
emollient: and has hence a place in the Materia Medica. 

2. M. rotundifo/ia, Linn. ( dwarf Mallow ) ; stem prostrate, 
leaves roundish-cordate 5-lobed, fruitstalks bent down. E. Bot. 
t. 1092. E. FI. v.iii.p. 246 — (3. petals as short as the calyx. 
E.'FI. v. Hi. p. 247. — M. pusilla, E. Bot. t. 242. 

Waste places and way-sides, frequent. FI. June — Sept. If. — Stems 
10 — 12 inches long, branching only from the root. Flowers small, 
roundish. 

3. M. moschdta, Linn. ( Marsh Mallow); stem erect, radical 
leaves reniform in 5 or 7 broad cut lobes, cauline ones 5-partite 
pinnato-multifid their segments linear, calyx hairy, leaflets of the 
ext. calyx linear. E. Bot. t. 754. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 247. 

Meadows, pastures and road-sides, especially in a gravelly soil ; 
not unfrequent. FI. July, Aug. If .—2—3 feet high. Flowers large, 
beautiful, rose-coloured, 1 — 2 from the axils of the terminal leaves. The 
leaves yield a faint musky smell if drawn through the hand. 

5. Altii/ea. Linn. Marsh-mallow. 

L A. officinalis , Linn. ( common Marsh-mallow); leaves soft 
and downy on both sides cordate or ovate toothed entire or 3- 


312 


D1 A DELPHI A OCTANDRIA. \PolygQ,l(l* 

lobed, peduncles axillary many-flowered much shorter than the 
leaves. E. Bot. t. 147. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 244. 

Marshes, mostly near the sea : rare in Scotland ; Solway Firth, and 
near Campsie. FL Aug. Sept. If . . — 2 — 3 feet high, remarkable for the 
dense, exquisitely soft and starry pubescence of the leaves and steins. 
Flowers 3—4 together, on axillary stal/cs, large, pale rose-colour.— Af- 
fords an abundant mucilage, and a decoction of it is in very general use 
in England, while in France it is made into lozenges, called Pale de 
Guimauve. 

2. A. hirsuta, Linn. ( hispid Marsh-malloiv) ; leaves cordate 
rough with hairs, lower ones obtusely upper acutely lobed crenated, 
stem hispid, peduncles single-flowered longer than the leaves. Cav. 
Diss. v. ii. t. 29. f. 1. Turn, and Dillw. Bot. Guide , v. i. p. 352. 
Hensl. Cat. Brit. PI. p. 5. Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2674. 

Fields and waste places, rare. In a field near Cobham, Mr. J. Rayer 
(in But. Guide). At the same station, that is, between Cobham and 
Cuxton, the Rev. Prof. Henslow finds it abundantly. FL June, July. 
© . — Remarkable for its very hispid stems and calyces. 


CLASS XVII. DIADELPHIA. 

Filaments combined in two sets ; — ( except in the first division 

of the 3d Order.) 

ORD. I. HEXANDRIA. 6 Stamens. 

1. Cory dalis. Cal. of 2, small, deciduous leaves. Pel. 4, one 
of them gibbous or spurred at the base. Pod 2-valved, compressed, 
many-seeded. — Nat. Old. Fumari acea, DC. — Named from 

the Greek name for the Fumitory, with which the pre- 
sent genus was, till lately, united. 

2. Fumaria. Cal. of 2, deciduous leaves. Pet. 4, one of them 
gibbous or spurred at the base. Fruit indehiscent, 1 -seeded, the 

style deciduous Nat. Ord. Fumariacea, DC. — Named from 

fumus, smoke, it is said on account of the smell. 

ORD. II. OCTANDRIA. 8 Stamens. 

3. Polygala. Cal. of 5 leaves, 2 of them wing-shaped and 
coloured. Petals combined by their claws with the filaments, the 
lower one keeled. Capsules compressed. Seeds downy, crested 

at the hilum — Nat. Ord. Polygalea, Juss Name, — eroXu, 

muck, and yuha., milk, from some fancied property in the plant. 


Ervum.] 


DIADELPHIA — DECANDRIA. 


313 


ORD. III. DECANDRIA. 10 Stamens; (all belonging to the 

Sat. Orel. Leguminosae ; having the fruit a Legume , and the 

flowers papilionaceous , with the leaves mostly compound.) 

* Filaments all connected at the base or monadelphous. The tube 

mosthj split above. 

t 

4. Ulex. Cal. of 2 leaves, with a small scale or bractea on each 

side at the base. Legume turgid, scarcely longer than the calyx 

Name, — according to Theis its root is ec or ac, a sharp point, in 
Celtic: whence too arises the French name ajonc or aejone, a sharp 
or spiny rush. 

5. Genista. Cal. 2-lipped ; upper lip with 2 deep segments, 
lower one with 3 teeth. Standard oblong. Legume flat or turgid, 
many-seeded. — Named from Gen, a shrub, in Celtic. 

6. Cytisus. Cal. 2-lipped ; upper lip nearly entire or with 2 
small teeth, lower one 3-toothed. Standard large, broadly ovate. 
Keel very blunt, including the stamens. Legume flattened, many- 
seeded — Name ; — zvnaog, of the ancient Greeks ; said to be so 
called because it came from the island Cytlinos , one of the Cyclades. 

7. Ononis. Cal. 5-cleft, its segments linear. Standard large, 

striated. Legume turgid, sessile, few-seeded Named from ovog, 

an ass ; because the plant is eaten by that animal. 

8. Anthyllis. Cal. inflated, 5-toothed. Petals nearly equal, 
in length. Legume oval, 1 — 3-seeded, enclosed in the permanent 
calyx — Name, — «v0«y, a flower, and iovXog, a beard or down , from 
the downy calyces. 

** Stamens diadelphous, 9 united and 1 free. 
t Style downy beneath the stigma. ( VI CIJE, DC.) 

9. Orobus. Style linear, downy above. Cal. obtuse at the base, 

oblique at the mouth, its upper segments deeper and shorter 

Leaves without tendrils. — Name, — ogw, to strengthen or invigorate, 
and (3oug, an ox; because yielding food for cattle. 

10. Lathy rus. Style plane, downy above, broader upwards. 
Ced. with its mouth oblique, its upper segments shortest. — Leaves 
with tendrils — Name, — XrJv^og; aleguminose plant of Theophrastus. 

11. Vicia. Style witli a tuft of hair beneath the stigma . — Climb- 
ing plants. Leaves with tendrils — Name originally derived, ac- 
coiding to Theis, from Gwig, Celtic; Wicken in German; jS/x/on 
in Greek; Vesce in French ; in English, Vetch. 

12. Ervum. Stigma capitate, downy all over. — Name derived, 

P 


314, Rl ADELPIII A — DECANDR1A. [Meilicago. 

according to Theis, from the Celtic erw, a ploughed field, of which 
it is the pest. 

++ Style glabrous. 

+- Legume of 2 more or less complete longitudinal cells. 

13. Astragalus. Keel of the corolla ohtuse. Legume 2-celled 

(more or less perfectly) ; cells formed by the indexed margins of 
the lower suture. — Named from the vertebra, in allu- 

sion to the knotted root of that individual plant to which it was 
formerly applied. 

14. Oxytrofis. Keel of the cor. with a narrow point. Legume 
2-celled (more or less perfectly) ; cells formed by the indexed 
margins of the upper suture.— Named from ogus, sharp, and rgo ct;, 
a keel, one of the essential characters of this Genus, as distinguish- 
ing it from the preceding. 

f_ Legume more or less jointed. 

15. Ornithopus. Legume somewhat cylindiical, cuived, of 
many close, single-seeded joints ; heel very small.— Name,— ogwj, 
o^nioe, a bird, and *-•<«, a foot, from the similarity of the seed-ves- 
sels to a bird’s foot. 

16. Hippocrepis. Legume compressed, submembranaceous, 
of numerous joints, which are curved like a horse-shoe, so that each 
legume 1ms many deep notches on one side. — Name, — /Wo;, a horse, 
and y.^yisa;, a shoe, from the form of the fi nit. 

+_ Legume of one cell, one- or many-seeded, {not formed of 
many joints.) 

17 Onobrychys. Legume sessile, of one indehiscent joint, 
compressed, coriaceous, prickly, crested or winged.— Named from 
o». f , an ass, and fayu, to eat ; the plant affording a valuable fodder. 

18 Meli lotus. Legume 1- or few-seeded, indehiscent, longer 
than the calyx. Petals distinct, deciduous — Flowers racemose. 

Leaves ternate Name,— rncl, honey, and Lotus, the Genus so 

called. 

19. Trifolium. Legume 1- or more-seeded, indehiscent, 

shorter than the calyx by which it is enclosed, (except in T. orni- 
thopodioidcs). Petals mostly combined by their claws and persist- 
ent —Flowers capitate. Leaves ternate.— Named m allusion to its 
3 leaves or leaflets Badge of the Highland Clan Sinclair. 

20. Lotus. Legume cylindrical, somewhat spongy within, and 
imperfectly many-celled. Keel acuminated.— Name,— supposed to 
be one of the three kinds (the herbaceous) of the A uro; of the Greeks. 

21. Medicago. Legume falcate or spirally twisted — Name — 


Fumaria.] 


DIADELPHIA HEXAND1U A. 


315 


the /irfr/.ri of tlie Greeks, so called because it was introduced into 
Greece by the Medes. 

DIADELPHIA— HEXANDllIA. 

1. Corydalis. De Cand. Corydalis. 

1. C. solida, ( solid-rooted Corydalis) ; stem simple erect with 
a scale beneath the lower leaf, leaves 3 — 4 biternate their leaflets 
cuneate or oblong and as well as the bracteas cut, root solid. 
Fumaria solida, Linn. MSS. E. Eot. t. 1471. E. EL v. Hi. 
p. 253. — Corydalis bulbosa, De Cand. — Fumaria Halleri,Willd. 

Groves and thickets : at Kendal, (an old garden, Mr. Christy); 
Wickham, Hampshire; and near Birmingham. A very doubtful native. 
FI. April, May. 11 . — Flowers large, purplish ; leaves glaucous. 

2. C. lutea, Lindl. ( yellow Corydalis); stem angular erect, 

leaves bipinnate, leaflets broadly cuneate cut or trifid, bracteas mi- 
nute, puds nearly cylindrical shorter than the pedicels. Fumaria 
lutea, Linn. Mant E. Bot. t. 588. E. FI. v. iii.p. 253.- — Cory- 

dalis capnoides, (3. lutea, De Cand. 

On old walls, scarcely indigenous. Near Castleton, Derbyshire; 
Fountain’s Abbey, Yorkshire. FI. May. If.. — Flowers yellow. Stems 
and leafstalks very brittle. 

3. C. claviculata, De Cand. (while climbing Corydalis); stem 
much branched climbing, leaves pinnate, pinnte stalked ternate or 
pedate, leaflets elliptical entire, petioles ending in tendrils, pedicels 
very short scarcely so long as the minute bracteas. Fumaria cla- 
viculata, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 103. E. FI. v. in. p. 254. 

Bushy and shady places, in gravelly or stony soil. In Scotland, most 
abundant on walls and roofs of houses, especially in the Highlands. 
FI. June, July. ©. — Stems long, very slender. Whole plant very deli- 
cate. Flowers small, pale yellow, almost white. 

2. Fumaria. Linn. Fumitory. 

1. F. capreoldta , Linn, (ramping Fumitory); calycine leaves 
broadly oval scarcely acute toothed at the base entire above twice 
as long as the globose fruit, bracteas a little shorter (about j) than 
the fruit-bearing pedicel. Am. — E. Bot. t. 943. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 25G. DC. Prodr. v. i.p. 130. 

Corn-fields and gardens, frequent. FI. May — Aug. 0. — A very va- 
riable plant. Stems generally climbing, sometimes only diffuse. Leaves 
bipinnate. Leaflets usually very broad ; rarely, as about Edinburgh, nar- 
row. On the continent, the fructiferous pedicels are mostly recurved, 
and occasionally so in the south of England; but in Scotland and Wales 
they are seldom more than patent. Best distinguished by its large petals 
and calycine leaves. I am indebted to Mr. Arnott, who has paid particular 
attention to this genus both in Britain and upon the Continent, for the 
characters and remarks upon this and the 2 following species. 

2. I', officinalis , Linn, (common Fumitory); calycine leaflets 


316 


DIADELPHIA — DECANDRIA. 


[ Ulc. r. 


ovato-lanceolate acute sharply toothed scarcely so long as the glo- 
l»ose very abrupt or obcordate fruit, bracteas 2 or 3 times shorter 
than the fruit-bearing pedicel. Am — x. Am. MSS. ; erect, very 
glaucous, leaflets narrow. F. officinalis, E.Bot. t. 589. E.Fl. v. Hi. 

p. 255 (3. Ant. MSS. ; diffuse or climbing, green, leaflets broad. 

F. media , DC. Prodr. v. i. p. 130. 

«. In dry fields and road-sides, common. — fi. also frequent, in highly 
cultivated fields and gardens. FI. through the summer. ©. — The F. 
media of De Candolle, does indeed, at first sight, appear to be distinct 
from the more upright state of officinalis, and even to approach nearer to 
F. capreolata : but the flowers and calyx are scarcely more than half the 
size of the latter; and it is very constant to these characters. 

3. F. pared flora, Lam. ( small-flowered Fumitory'); calycine 
leaves very minute, fruit globose slightly pointed, bracteas at first 
as long as the flower, afterwards about as short as the fructiferous 
pedicel, leaflets linear channelled. Am. — «. Am. MSS. ; flowers 
rose-coloured, leaves of a lively or yellowish green. F. parvif. 
E. Pot. t. 590. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 256 — /3. Am. MSS. ; flowers 
white tipped with dark purple, leaves glaucous. F. parvif. DC. 
Prodr. v. i. p. 130 F. Icucantha Viviani Cors.p. 12. 

a. Fields ; rare. Woldham, near Rochester and near Epsom. In 
newly turned up ground for building, at Hill-side, north of the Calton 
Hill, Edinburgh; 1). Stewart, Esq.—f. Brookham, Surry; Rev. J. Dalton. 
Mr. Waddel’s grounds at Hermitage, near Leith ; 1). Stewart, Esq. FI. 
Aim. Sept. ©. — The more common of these two vars. is that w ith white 
fl s .° Viviani is not quite correct, when he says, there is no apiculus to 
the fruit of his F. Icucantha. It exists on all the specimens found about 
Montpellier, where the plant is very common. The purple or rose- 
coloured ear. comes very near F. Vaillantii. 

DIADELPHIA — OCTANDRIA. 

3. Polygala. Linn. Milkwort. 

1. P. vulgaris, Linn, (common Milkwort); keel crested, flowers 
in a terminal raceme, wings of the calyx ovate about as long as 
the corolla, stems simple herbaceous procumbent, leaves linear- 
lanceolate. E. Pot. t. 76. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 259. 

Dry hilly pastures, frequent. FI. June, July. If. — Stems 4 — 8 inches 
long. Cor. beautifully crested, blue, purple, pink or white. Cal. -leaves 
persistent, enclosing the fruit. 

DIADELPHIA — DECANDRIA. 

4. Ulex. Linn. Furze. 

1. U. europceus, Linn, (common Furze, Whin or Corse) ; caly- 
cine teeth obsolete connivent, bracteas ovate lax, branchlets erect. 
E. Pot. t. 742. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 265. 


Genista] Dl ADELPHIA — DECANDRIA. 317 

Heathy places, especially in sandy or gravelly soils ; rare in the Scot- 
tish Highlands. FI. in May and throughout the summer. Tj . — Shrub 
3 — 4 or more feet high, with innumerable green striated branches, clothed 
with acute branching spines, having a few leaves at their base which are 
lanceolate, a little hairy, very minute. Cal. pubescent. Cor. bright yel- 
low. Whether the U. strictus of Mr. Mackay’s Cat. of Irish Plants, 
p. 67, should be referred to this or to the following, or be considered a 
distinct species, I am not able to say. It was discovered in the Marquess 
of Londonderry’s Park, county of Down, by Mr. J. White ; it is readily- 
propagated by cuttings, and now well known in our gardens and nur- 
series under the name of Irish Furze. It very rarely flowers ; but may 
be at all times distinguished from U. europceus by its smaller size, by its 
dense and compact, rather formal, mode of growth and its very upright 
branches, which are so soft and succulent, that sheep and cattle are very 
fond of them ; and Mr. Murray of the Glasgow Bot. Garden, strongly, and 
very judiciously, recommends it to be planted for early spring-feed. 

2. U. nanus, Foist . (dwarf Furze) ; teeth of the calyx lance- 
olate spreading, bracteas minute close-pressed, branches reclining. 
Sm E. Bot. t. 743. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 266. 

Dry heaths, in many parts of England and Ireland. Dalguise and 
Pentland Hills, Scotland. FI. mostly in autumn. Tj . — Smaller than the 
last in all its parts. The essential character, according to Sir J. E. 
Smith, consists in the more distinct and spreading calyx-leaves, and the 
more minute, rounded, close-pressed, and often hardly discernible brac- 
teas. De Candolle says that the U. provincials, Loisel. is, in size and 
character, between the present and the preceding species. 

5. Genista. Linn. Green-weed. 

1. G. tinctoria, Linn. ( Dyers Green-weed, Wood- Waxen ); 
unarmed erect, leaves lanceolate nearly glabrous, branches rounded 
striated, flowers spicato-racemose, legumes glabrous. E. Bot. t. 44. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 263. 

Pastures, thickets and borders of fields, frequent, in England and the 
Lowlands of Scotland. Between Killiney-hill and Bray, Ireland ; Dr. 
Allman. FI. July, Aug. B . — 1 — 2 feet high. Leaves rather distant. 
Flowers pale yellow, almost sessile, with a small floral leaf or bractea at 
the base ; very double on rocks near Ilkley, Yorkshire, Mr. Alderson. —   
Employed to dye yarn of a yellow colour. 

2. G. pilosa, Linn, {hairy Green-weed); unarmed procumbent, 
leaves lanceolate complicate silky beneath, flowers axillary on short 
pedicels, legumes downy. E.Bot. t. 208. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 263. 

Dry sandy or gravelly heaths. About Bury. Near the Lizard, Corn- 
wall. Foot of Cader Idris, N. Wales. FI. May, and again in Sept. B . — 
A small, much branched, tortuose, woody-stemmed plant. Flowers small, 
bright yellow. 

3. G. dnglica, Linn. ( Needle Green-weed or Petty whin); spi- 
nous, leaves ovato-lanceolate glabrous, spines simple, none on the 
flowering branches, flowers axillary somewhat racemed, legumes 
glabrous. E. Bot. t. 132. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 264. 


318 


DIADELPHIA DECANDIIIA. 


[Or obus. 

Moist heaths and rnoory ground, not unfrequent. FI. June. T? . — 
Slews declined, very spinous. Leaves very small. Flowers yellow. 

6. Cytisus. Linn. Cytisus or Broom. 

1. C. scopdrius, Linn. ( common Broom); branches angled gla- 
brous, leaves ternate stalked, upper ones simple, leaflets oblong, 
flowers axillary shortly pedicellate, legumes hairy at the margin. 
Spctrtium scoparium, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 1339. E. FI. v. iii.p. 36 1 . 
— Genista scoparia, Lam. — Hook. Scot i. p. 211 . 

Dry hills and bushy places, frequent. FI. June. Tj . — 3 — 6 ft. or more 
high. Branches long, strait, green. Flowers large, bright yellow; Iceel 
broad ; standard and wings much spreading. Legumes large, compressed, 
dark brown. — The young green tops are said to be powerfully purgative 
and diuretic ; and are very bitter. — Badge of the Clan Forbes. 

7. Ononis. Linn. Rest-harrow. 

1. O. arvensis , Linn. ( common Rest-Harrow) ; stem hairy, 
branches at length spinous, flowers mostly solitary, leaves ternate 
below, the rest simple serrated entire at the base. E. Bot. t. 682. 
E.Fl. v. iii.p. 267. 

Barren pastures and borders of fields. FI. June — Aug. If . — A very 
variable plant, erect or procumbent and rooting, more or less spinous ; 
leaves ovate or cuneate; flowers rather large, rose-coloured, sometimes 
white. Smith enumerates 3 vars. and De Candolle makes of them two 
species, O. procurrcns and 0 sjnnosa. — Mr. Bentham, again, considers 
the a. and y. of Smith to be the O. arvensis of Linn., and as such has 
figured it at t. 2659 of E. Bot. Suppl. 

8. Antiiyllis. Linn. Kidney-vetch. 

1. A. vulneraria, Linn. ( common Kulney-vetcli or Lady's finger ); 
herbaceous, leaves pinnated unequal, heads of flowers in pairs. 
E. Bot. t. 104. E. FI. v. iii.p. 269. 

Dry pastures, frequent. With red and sometimes white or cream- 
coloured fl., in Devonshire, Wales, and south of Ireland, mostly by the sea. 
FI. June — Atig. If. — Stem ascending. Leaflets 5 — 9, lanceolate, entire, 
hairy, terminal one the largest. Flowers in crowded heads, mostly yel- 
low, with hairy calyces, anil digitate or palmate large bracteas. 

t 

9. Orobus. Linn. Bitter-vetch. 

1. O. tuberosus, Linn. ( tuberous Orobus); leaves pinnated with 
2 — 4 pairs of elliptical lanceolate leaflets glaucous beneath, stipules 
half arrow-shaped toothed at the base, stem simple erect. E. Bot. 

t. 1153. E.Fl. v. iii.p. 272 ft. leaflets linear. O. tcnuifolius, 

Roth. — B. Bon. 

Mountain thickets, frequent; very common in Surry, J. S. Mill, Esq. 
— /S. Kin nail'd; and Moy Woods, Inverness-shire, Dr. MacLach/an. Near 
Elgin, Rev. G. Gordon. Fl. May, June. If. — Roots tuberous, eaten by 
the Highlanders under the name of Cormeille, a very small quantity 
being said to prevent hunger. Stem 1 foot high, winged. Flowers in long- 


Lathyrus.] DIADELPIIIA — DECANDR1A. 310 

stalked, axillary racemes , purple, veined. Legume long, pendulous, 
cylindrical, black. 

2. O. rdger , Linn, (black Bitter-vetch}} leaves pinnate with 
3 — 6 ovate or elliptical leaflets, stipules linear-lanceolate acute, 
stem branched angular erect. Hook. Scot. ii. p. 267. Curt. Hot. 
Mag. t. 2261. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 270. 

Shaded rocks, Scotland. Den of Airly, Forfarshire ; Mr. T. Drum- 
mond. Craiganain, a rock within 2 miles of Moy House, Inverness-shire; 
Dr. MacLachlan. FI. June, July. 2f.— Remarkable for turning black 
when drying. 

3. O. sylvdticus , Linn. ( Wood Bitter-retch); leaves pinnate 
hairy with 7 — 10 pairs of ovato-oblong acute leaflets, stipules half 
arrow-shaped, stem branched decumbent hairy. E. Bot. t. 518. 
E. Fl.v.iii.p. 273. 

Rocky and mountainous woods and thickets, north of England, Wales, 
and Lowlands of Scotland. FI. May, June. If. — Flowers purplish- 
white, in unilateral racemes. 

10. Lathyrus. Linn. Vetchling and Everlasting Pea. 

1. L. Apkaca , Linn. ( yellow Vetchling); peduncles single- 
flowered, tendrils without leaves, stipules cordato-sagittate. E. Bot . 
t. 1167. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 274. 

Borders of sandy and gravelly fields, rare. Cambridgeshire, Oxford- 
shire, Norfolk anti near London. FI. June — Aug. © . — True leaves, each 
of a single pair of leajlets, are rare, and only exist on this singular plant 
in the early germination. They have been sent to me by Professor 
Hensluw. Flowers yellow. 

2. L. Nissolia, Linn. ( crimson Vetchling or Grass Vetch); pe- 
duncles mostly single-flowered, leaves simple linear-lanceolate ses- 
sile without tendrils, stipules subulate. E. Bot. t. 112. E. FI. 
v. iii.p. 275. 

Bushy places and grassy borders of fields, in many parts of England. 
FI. May. ©. 

3. L. hirsutus, Linn. ( rough-podded Vetchling); peduncles 2- 
flowered, each tendril with a pair of linear-lanceolate leaflets, legumes 
hairy, seeds rough, stem and petiole winged. E. Bot. t. 1255. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 275. 

Cultivated fields in England, rare; Essex; between Bath and Bristol. 
FI. July. ©. — Flowers pale, except the standard, which is bright crimson. 

4. L. pratensis, Linn. ( Meadow Vetchling); peduncles 2 — 8- 
flowered, tendrils with 2 lanceolate 3-nerved leaflets, stipules arrow- 
shaped as large as the leaflets. E. Bot. t. 670. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 276. 

Moist meadows and pastures, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If. — Stems 
2 — 3 feet long, climbing. Flowers yellow. — Cattle are said to be very 
fond of this common plant. 

5. L. sylvestris, Linn. ( narrow-leaved Everlasting Pea); pe- 


320 


DIADELFIII A — DECANDRIA. 


[ Vicia. 

duncles 4 — 5-flowered, tendrils with a pair of sword-shaped leaflets, 
stem winged. E. Eot. t. 805. E. El. v. Hi. p. 277. 

Thickets and hedges, in the middle and S. of England. N. Wales, 
Mr. J. Roberts. Shore near Whitehaven, Mr. IV. Wilson. Salisbury 
Craigs and Coast of Angus-shire. FI. July, Aug. If. — Stem 5 — 6 feet 
long, broadly winged. Flowers large, greenish, with purple veins. 

(i. L. latifolius, Linn. ( broad-leaved. Everlasting Pea); pe- 
duncles many-flowered, tendrils with 2 ovato-elliptical mucronated 
leaflets, stem winged. E. Eot. t. 1 108. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 277. 

Woods, rare, too often the outcast of gardens. Cambridgeshire, Cum- 
berland, Worcestershire, Bedfordshire. Apparently wild in an old 
quarry, near Stapylton, Gloucestershire. Mr. Christy. Near Kirkcudbright, 
Scotland. FI. July, Aug. If . — A well known climber and a great orna- 
ment of cottage gardens. Somewhat resembling the last, but with leaves 
vastly broader and flowers larger and more purple. 

7. L. palustris , Linn, (blue Marsh Vetchling ); peduncles 3 — 
6-flowered, tendrils with 2 — 4 pairs of linear-lanceolate acute 
leaflets, stipules half arrow-shaped lanceolate, stem winged. E. Eot. 
t. 169. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 278. 

Boggy meadows and thickets in several parts of England ; near Lon- 
don, Berkshire, Leicestershire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, and 1 believe not 
unfrequently, in Norfolk. Scarcely indigenous to Scotland, though 
mentioned by Ligklfout. FI. July, Aug. If. — Stem 2 — 3 feet high, 
climbing. Leaflets about 2 inches long. Flowers bluish-purple. 

8. L .pisiformis, Linn .(Sea-side Pea); peduncles many-flowered 
shorter than the leaves, tendrils with 3 — 4 pairs- of oval leaflets, 
stipules as large as the leaflets unequally cordato-hastate with the 
angles acute. Hook, in FI. Ear. Am. v. i.p. 158. — Pisum mari- 
timum. Linn. — E. Eot. t. 1046. E. FI. v. iii.p. 270. Hook, in 
Er. FI. eel. i. p. 324. 

Pebbly beach of Lincolnshire, Suffolk and the south coast of England. 
Kerry, Ireland, Mr. J. T. Maekay. FI. July, if . — Upon a careful ex- 
amination of the style of this plant, I feel assured that it ought to be 
removed to Lathyrus: and, then, L. pisiformis, Linn. (figd. in Gmel. Sibir. 
v. iv. t. 1.) will I think be found to be identical with the Pisum maritimum 
of the same author. 

11. Vicia. Linn. Vetch. 

* Peduncles elongated, many -flowered. 

1. V. sylvatica, Linn. ( Wood Vetch); peduncles many-flowered 
longer than the leaves, leaflets elliptico-oblong mucronate, stipules 
lunate deeply toothed at their base. E. Eot. t. 79. E.Fl.v.iii. 
p. 279. 

Bushy places in mountainous countries, in Scotland, the north and 
north-west of England, Wales, and Ireland. It has been found near 
Newmarket and in Oxfordshire; and between Lyminge and Eltham, 
Kent, Rev. R. Price. FI. July, Aug. If. — Stems 3 — 6 feet high, climb- 


View.] 


DIADELRHIA — DECANDRIA. 


321 


ing by means of its branching tendrils. Leaflets 6 — 8 or 10 pairs. 
Flowers very beautiful, numerous, white, streaked with bluish veins. 

2. V. Crdeca, Linn, (tufted Vetch); peduncles many-flowered 
longer than the leaves, flowers imbricated, leaflets lanceolate 
slightly hairy, stipules half arrow-shaped nearly entire. E. Bot. 
t. 1168. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 280. 

Bushy places, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If .—2—3 feet high. Climb- 
ing. Flowers numerous, crowded, drooping and imbricated, of a fine 
bluish-purple. 

** Floivers axillary , mostly subsessile. 

3. V. sativa, Linn. ( common Vetch); flowers mostly in pairs 
sessile, leaflets elliptic-oblong the lower ones retuse, stipules 
toothed impressed with a dark spot, seeds smooth. E. Bot. t. 23-L 
E. FI. v. iii. p. 281. 

Cultivated ground, frequent. FI. June. ©.—One foot or more high. 
Lea Mis variable in width and in number, from 2 to 6 pairs or more on 
a petiole. Floivers large, purple and blue, or red. Legumes more or 
less downy, erect. — Mr. Mill finds a var. with elongated flowerstalks and 
sometimes a third fl. at the base of the peduncle, near Wimbledon. 

4. V.anyustifolia , Sibth. ( narrow-leaved crimson Vetch); flowers 
mostly solitary nearly sessile, leaflets linear lowermost ones 
inversely heart-shaped, stipules toothed with a pale depression 
beneath, seeds smooth. E. El. v. iii. p. 282. Hook, in E. Bot. 
Suppl. t. 2614. Forst. in Linn. Trans, v. 16. p. 439 ? and V. 
Bobartii, Forst. 1. c. p. 442. — V. sativa, j3. and y. Fl. Brit. p. 770. 

Dry pastures in a sandy or gravelly soil, in many places. All along 
the coast of Ayr, Scotland, Mr. J. Wilson. Fl. June. 0. — Too nearly 
allied, I fear, to the last species. 

5. V. lathyfoides, Linn. ( Spring Vetch); flowers sessile solitary, 
legumes glabrous, leaves generally in 3 pairs lower ones retuse, 
stipules entire not impressed with a dark spot, seeds l< cubic’’ 
tubercled. E. Bot. A 30. E. Fl. v. Hi. p. 283. 

Road-sides and dry pastures, not unfrequent. Fl. April, May. ©. — 
Much resembling a starved state of V. saliva , or especially V. angustif.; 
from both of which it may be known by its small size, 3— 5 inches high; 
smaller, more purple flower, scarcely so large as the leaflets, with a less 
reflexed heel, and by the rough or dotted seeds. Here, too, the leaflets 
are fewer on a petiole, the tendril is simple, the stem procumbent. 

6. V. lulea, Linn, (rough-podded yellow Vetch); flowers sessile 
solitary, standard glabrous, legumes reflexed hairy, stems diffuse, 
stipules coloured. E. Bot. t. 481. E. El. v. iii. p. 284. 

Rocky or stony ground, especially near the sea. Suffolk, Sussex. 
Glastonbury Tor-hill. Mearnshire ; betweeen Montrose and Arbroath ; 
and hills at Queensferry, G. Don : at which latter place Dr. Graham 
finds it annually and in great plenty, but confined to one spot. Rocks, 

r 2 


322 


DIADELPIIIA DECANDRIA. 


[ Ervum . 


Dunure Castle, abundant, Mr. Jas. Smith. FI. June, July. If. — Sterns 6 
— 12 inches high, weak. Leaflets elliptical-lanceolate, hairy beneath 
and at the edges, 6 — 9 pairs on a petiole. Flowers large, yellow. 
Legumes compressed. 

7. V. hybrida , Linn, (hairy -flowered yellow Vetch); flowers 
nearly sessile solitary, standard hairy, legumes reflexed hairy, stems 
ascending, leaflets abrupt, stipules ovate unstained. E. Hot. t. 482. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 281. 

On Glastonbury Tor-hill, Ray. FI. June, July. 1/. — Similar to the 
last, but essentially distinguished by its hairy standard. 

8. V. laevigata, Sm. ( smooth-podded Vetch); flowers solitary 
nearly sessile, legumes reflexed glabrous, stems ascending, stipules 
cloven unstained, leaflets bluntish very glabrous. E. Bot. t. 483. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 285. 

On the pebbly shore of Weymouth, Dorsetshire. Ft. July, Aug. Id . 
— Allied to the two last in its herbage. Petals “ pale blue or whitish, 
seldom yellowish, all quite glabrous.” 

9. V. sepium, Linn. (Bush Vetch) ; flowers mostly in fours 
somewhat stalked, legumes upright glabrous, leaflets ovate obtuse 
gradually smaller upwards upon the petiole. E. Bot. A 79. E. El. 
v. iii. p. 286. 

Woods and shady places, frequent. FI. June, July. 1/. — I — 2 ft. 
high. Leaflets large. One or two of the four flowers which grow 
together are often sterile. 

10. V. bithynica , Linn, (rough-podded purple Vetch); flowers 
stalked mostly solitary, legumes upright rough, petioles with two 
pairs of lanceolate leaflets, stipules toothed. E. Bot. t. 1842. 
E. FI. v. iii. p. 287. 

Bushy places in gravelly soil, mostly near the sea, but rare. Near 
Doncaster, Yorkshire ; in Dorsetshire and Hampshire. Frindsbury, 
Kent, Rev. Prof. Henslow. FI. July, Aug. If . — Flowers purple, all but 
the wings which are whitish. — Lamarck and De Candolle refer this to 
Luthyrus; and Sir J. E. Smith acknowledges that its habit accords bet- 
ter with that genus, but that its stigma is truly that of Vicia : as I find 
it to be in Professor Henslow’s specimens from Kent. 

12. Ervum. Linn. Tare. 

1. E. hirsutum, Linn, (hairy Tare); peduncles many-flowered, 
legumes hairy 2-seeded, leaflets linear-oblong truncated. E. Bot. 
t. 97 1. F. FI. v. Hi. p. 289. 

Corn-fields and hedges; too frequent. FI. June. ©. — Stems 2 — 3 
feet long, weak, straggling and climbing. Leaflets numerous. Flowers 
very insignificant, purplish-blue. 

2. E. tetraspermum , Linn, (smooth Tare); peduncles 2-fiowered, 
legumes glabrous 4-seeded, leaflets linear-oblong obtuse. E. Bot. 
t. 1223. E. FI. v. iii. p. 288. 

Moist corn-fields, hedges, &c. Rare in Scotland; and Mr. Arnott 


DI ADELPI1I A — DECANDRIA. 


323 


Ornilhopus.] 

doubts if it has been ever found there. Not a native of Ireland. FI. 
June. ©. — Smaller and slenderer than the last. Leaflets fewer. 

13. Astragalus. Linn. Milk-vetch. 

1. A. glycyphyllus , Linn, (sweet Milk-vetch); stem prostrate, 
legumes somewhat triangular curved sessile glabrous, leaves longer 
than the peduncles, leaflets oval. E. Eot. t. 203. E. EL v. Hi. 
p. 294. 

Woods and thickets, chiefly in a gravelly or calcareous soil ; rare in 
Scotland and found principally about Edinburgh. Ft. July. If. — Well 
distinguished by its great size. Stem prostrate, 2 — .3 feet long. Leaves 
with large, ovate, acute stipules. Flowers dingy yellow. Legumes an 
inch or more long, curved. 

2. A. hypoglottis, Linn, (purple Mountain Milk-vetch); stem 
prostrate, leaflets slightly emarginate, legumes erect capitate hairy 
their cells 1-seeded. E. Bot.t. 27-L E. FI. v. Hi. p. 294. 

Dry gravelly or chalky pastures ; chiefly in the E. of England and 
Scotland, as far N. as Blair in Athol. FI. July. If. — Stem weak, a few 
inches in length. Leaflets elliptic-ovate, retuse, hairy. Peduncles longer 
than the leaves, curved upwards. Heads of flowers large, in proportion 
to the size of the plant, bluish-purple. Legumes ovate, acuminate, hairy. 
— Mr. Drummond finds it with white fi, at the sands of Barrie. 

14. Oxytropis. De Cand. Oxytropis. 

1. O. uralensis, De Cand. (hairy Mountain Oxytropis); silky, 
stemless, scape longer than the leaves, legumes erect ovato-cylin- 

drical inflated pubescent 2-celled, style persistent Astragalus 

uralensis, Linn. — E. Eot. t. 466. E. El. v. Hi. p. 295. 

Dry mountain pastures, in Scotland. Queensferry ; Montrose, Dr. 
A. Murray. Frequent on the coast of Sutherlandshire. Ft. July. If . 
— Avery beautiful plant, clothed with silky pubescence, especially on the 
young leaves. Leaflets 8—12 pairs with an odd one, narrow, ovate, acute. 
Scape, when in Jr., 4 — G inches high. Flowers capitate, bright purple. 

2. O. campest/ is, De Cand. (yellowish Mountain Oxytropis) • 
somewhat silky, stemless, scape about the same length as the leaves', 

legumes erect ovate inflated pubescent semibilocular Astragalus 

campestris, Linn. — E. Eot. t. 2522. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 296. 

Rocks facing the south, a little to the north of Bradoonev in the 
Clova mountains, G. Don. FI. July. If. —Leaflets elliptical-lanceolate. 
Flowers capitate, yellowish, tinged with purple. 

15. Ornithopus. Linn. Bird’s-foot. 

1. O . perpusillus, Linn, (common Bird' s-foot); leaves pinnated 
with 6 — 9 pairs ot leaflets and a terminal one, flowers capitate 
bracteated, legumes curved upwards. E.Eot. t. 369. E. FI. v. Hi 
p. 290. 

Sandy and dry gravelly soil ; not common in Scotland. Very fine in 
thin soil upon whin-stone at Touch, Stirling; Dr. Graham. Sandy fields 


321 


DIADELFHIA DECANDRIA. 


[ Tr folium . 


Kinross-shire; Mr. Arnolt. Near Dumbarton. Fl. June. 0. — Stems 
2 — G inches high, much branched at the base and spreading. Leaflets 
oval. Flowers white with red lines. 

16. Hippocrepis. Linn. Horse-shoe Vetch. 

1. H. comosa, Linn. ( tufted Horse-shoe Vetch); legumes 5 — 8 
clustered pedunculated curved scabrous sinuated at each margin. 
E. Hot. t. 3 1 . E. El. v. Hi. p. 29 1 , 

Chalky and limestone banks and pastures, plentiful in the chalk coun- 
ties of England. Dundonald near Ayr, Scotland. FI. July. 2f. — Stems 
4 — G inches high, much branched and woody at the base. Leaflets 
4 — 6 pairs, with an odd one, obovato-elliptical. Peduncles long. Flowers 
pale-yellow, much resembling those of Lotus corniculatus ; but the 
legume is quite different and very remarkable. 

17. Onobrychis. Tourn. Saint-foin. 

1. O. sativa, Lam. (common Saint-foin ); leaves pinnated nearly 
glabrous, legumes toothed at the margin and ribs, wings of the 
corolla not longer than the calyx, stem elongated. Sm. — Hedysa- 
rum Onobrychis, Linn. — E. Hot. t. 96. E. Fl. v. iii. p. 292. 

Dry chalky hills and open downs, in various parts of England. Fl. 
June, July, if • — A plant cultivated to great advantage in dry, and espe- 
cially chalky, soils. 

18. Melilotus. Tourn. Melilot. 

1. M. officinalis, Linn. ( common yellow Melilot) ; legumes 2- 
seeded ovate wrinkled, racemes lax, corolla more than twice as long 
as the calyx, petals nearly equal in length, stem erect. — Trijblium 
Melilotus, Linn. — E. Hot. t. 1340. E. Fl. v. iii. p. 297. 

Bushy places and way-sides, frequent. FI. June, July. ©. — 2 — 3 ft. 
high. Leaves obovate, serrated. Flowers yellow, in unilateral, pedun- 
culated, axillary racemes. — This plant, while drying, smells like Anthox- 
anthum odoratum. 

2. M. leucaniha, Koch, ( ivhitc flowered A Ielilot); legumes 2- 
aeeded ovate wrinkled, racemes lax, corolla twice as long as the 
calyx, keel and wings shorter than the standard, stem erect. I)c 
Cand. Prod. v. it. p. 1 87. Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. ined. — M. 

vulgaris, Willd Trifolium officinale, ft. Linn — T. germanicum, 

Sm. in llecs Cycl. 

Denes at Yarmouth. Near Warrington, Dr. Kendrick. Chipstead, 
Surry, J. S. A Fill, Esij. Near Putney, Rev. G. E. Smith. Corn-fields 
at Aberlady Bay, near Edinb. M r. Lloyd. Fl. July, Aug. If . — It is sin- 
gular that this plant should never have been noticed, even as a var. of 
M. officinalis , by any British Botanist. 

19. Trifolium. Linn. Trefoil. 

* Legumes ivith several seeds. 

1. T. ornithopodioides, Linn. (Bird's foot Trefoil); flowers about 
3 together, legumes naked u ith about 8 seeds twice as long as the 


Trifolium.] DIADELFHIA DECANDRIA. 325 

calyx, leaflets obcordate toothed at the extremity, stems decumhent. 
E. Bot , t. 1047. E. FI. v. iii.p. 298. — Trigonella ornithopodioides, 
Be Cand. Lindl Fcdcatula, Brot. 

Dry sandy pastures, but not very general ; mostly on the East coast. 
About Edinburgh. FI. June. 0. — Stems spreading, .3 — 5 inches in 
length. Flowers small. The long legumes, petals, and the habit of this 
plant do not accord with this genus, nor yet with Trigonella. 

2 . T. repens , Linn, (white Trefoil or Butch Clover'); heads 
umbellate globose, legumes with 4 seeds, calyx-teeth unequal, 
leaflets obcordate serrulate, stem creeping. E. Bot. t. 1769. E. FI. 
v. iii.p. 299. 

Meadows and pastures, frequent. FI. through the summer. 2[ . — 
Heads of flowers white. Each flower is on a footstalk which becomes 
recurved after flowering, and then all the legumes are drooping and co- 
vered with the withered brown corolla. This is the Dutch Clover of Agri- 
culturists, and in great repute for pastures. The leaflets have often a 
dark spot at their base, with a white line bordering it near the middle. 

** Legumes 1 - or 2 -seeded. Standard deciduous or unaltered. 

Calyx not inflated, mostly hairy. 

3. T. subterraneum, Linn, (subterraneous Trefoil); heads lateral 
stalked hairy of few flowers, at length deflexed and throw'ing out 
from their centre thick fibres palmated at the extremity (abortive 
calyces) which are closely bent down over the reflexed fruit. 
E. Bot. t. 54. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 300. 

Dry gravelly pastures in England. FI. May. 0. — 3 — 6 or 8 inches 
long, decumbent, hairy, with large, ovate, membranaceous stipules. 
Flowers long and very slender, almost white. Peduncles at length elon- 
gated, and the heads of flowers reach the ground. The young fruit then 
becomes deflexed, and from the top of the peduncle there arise many 
thick short fibres with 5 palmated teeth at their extremity, which soon 
become recurved over the fruit and serve to bury it in the soil. From 
the number of teeth terminating each of the above-mentioned fibres, 
as well as from their comparative length and thickness, it is natural to 
conclude, with De Candolle, that the latter are abortive calyces. Petals 
partially caducous. Legumes large, ovato-globose, 1-seeded. 

4. T. ochroleucum, Linn, (sulphur-coloured Trefoil); heads 
terminal solitary, teeth of the calyx subulate, lower one thrice as 
long as the rest, leaflets elliptic or obovate, those of the lower leaves 
heart-shafted, stem ascending downy. E. Bot. t. 1224. E. FI. 
v. iii.p. 301. 

Pastures and way-sides in England, on a gravelly or chalky soil. 
Frequent also in the clayey soil of Norfolk and Suffolk. FI. July, Aug. 
~d - — A foot or more high. Petioles long. Stipules subulate, ribbed. 
Heads of flowers large, at first hemisphserical, at length oval, cream- 
coloured. The corolla turns brown and is persistent. 

5. 1 . pratense , Linn, (common purple Trefoil); heads dense 
ovate, teeth of the calyx setaceousj lower one longer than the rest 


326 


DIADELPHIA DECANDRIA. 


[ Trifolium • 

X as long as the tube of the corolla, stipules ovate bristle-pointed, 
leaflets oval or obcordate, stems ascending. E.Bot.t. 1770. E. FI. 
v. iii. p. 302. 

Meadows and pastures, frequent. FI. summer months. If . — Flowers 
reddish-purple. This is the common Clover, so much cultivated for hay. 
The leaflets are oval, obovate, or obcordate, often marked with a white 
lunulate spot. — Mr. W. Wilson finds a monstrosity of this in Anglesea, 
in which the flowers have the stamens as usual, but the germen is changed 
into stipules, enclosing the rudiments of a second head of flowers, and 
the stigma becomes a leaflet. 

G. T. medium, Linn. ( zigzag Trefoil); heads of flowers lax 
subglobose solitary terminal, calyx-teeth setaceous, lower one longer 
than the rest about equal to the tube of the corolla, stipules lan- 
ceolate acuminate, leaflets elliptical, stems branched zigzag. E. Bot. 
1. 190. E. FI. v. iii. p. 302. 

Pastures, frequent. FI. July. If. — Stem remarkably zigzag. Heads 
of flowers larger than the last, deeper purple. Leaves spotless. Inferior 
in quality to T. pratense, but better fitted for pasture on light soils. 

7. T. mantimum, Huds. ( Teasel-headed Trefoil); heads ovato- 
globose sessile terminal, teeth of the calyx broad acuminate rigid, 
the lower one much longer and larger than the rest shorter than 
the claws of the petals, all of them at length enlarged and spreading, 
stipules subulato-lanceolate, leaflets oblongo-obovate, stem ascending. 
E. Bot. t. 220. E. FI. v. iii.p. 303. 

Salt-marshes on the East as far north as Norfolk, and South coast of 
England, as far as Somersetshire. Near Kilbarrick Church, Ireland, 
Mr. J. T. Madcap. FI. June, July. ©. 

8. T . stelldtum, Linn. ( Starry-headed Trefoil); heads termi- 
nal globose stalked hairy, calyx-teeth longer than the corolla seta- 
ceous at length dilated veined and spreading, its tube closed with 
hairs, stipules broadly ovate crenate ribbed, leaves obcordate. 
E. Bot. 1. 1545. Hook, in FI. Loud. N. S. t. 95. E. FI. v. iii. p. 304. 

Sea-coast, Sussex, between Shoreham harbour and the sea, in great 
plenty; Mr. Borrcr : but probably introduced in ballast. FI. July, Aug. 
0. — A singular and beautiful species, with long, narrow eat pees, and, at 
first, strait, setaceous teeth, which conceal the small cream-coloured 
corolla, and then become greatly enlarged, spreading in a stellated manner. 

9. T. arvense, Linn. ( Hare's-foot Trefoil ); heads very hairy 
soft nearly cylindrical terminal stalked, calyx-teeth longer than the 
corolla permanently setaceous, at length somewhat spreading, sti- 
pules ovato-aeumiuate, leaflets lanceolate obtuse, stems erect much 
branched. E. But. t. 944. E. FI. v. iii. p. 305. 

Corn-fields and dry pastures, abundant. FI. July, Aug. 0. — Stem G 

12 inches high. Flowers very minute, almost white. Remarkable for 

its numerous, subcylindrical, soft, hairy heads or spikes. 

10. T. sedbrum , Linn, (rough rigid Trefoil); heads terminal 


Trifolium.] DIADELPHIA — DECANDUIA. 327 

and axillary sessile ovate, calyx-teetli unequal subulate very rigid 
1 -nerved at length patent, leaflets obcordate serrulate, stems pro- 
cumbent. If Hot. t. 903. E. El. v. iii. p. 306. 

Chalky or dry sandy fields, in several parts of- England. Anglesea, 
Mr. W. Wilson. Sea-shores, near F.dinb. and Dunbar. FI. May. June. 
q. — A small spreading plant, with many terminal and axillary, sessile, 
ovate heads, very rigid in fruit. Leaflets strongly nerved. 

11. T. glomeratum, Linn. ( smooth round-headed Trefoil); Leads 
terminal and axillary sessile globose, calyx-teetli ovate very acute 
leafy veiny at length reflexed, leaflets obcordate toothed, stems 
procumbent. E.Eot.t. 1063. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 307. 

Gravelly heaths and pastures in the East and South of England. FI. 
June. 0. — Similar to the last ; but with rounder heads, and broader, 
greener, and more foliaceous and spreading teeth to the calyx. 

12. T. suffocation, Linn. ( suffocated Trefoil); heads lateral 
sessile roundish, petals shorter than the membranaceous faintly 
striated calyx whose teeth are broadly subulate spreading, legumes 
two-seeded. E. Hot. t. 1049. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 299. 

Sandy sea-shores, rare. On the coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk. 
Anglesea, Mr. IV. Wilson. S. Kent, Rev. G. E. Smith. FI. June, July. 
0. — Stems 3 — 4 inches long. Remarkable for its dense sessile heads of 
inconspicuous flowers, and for its thin, delicate, scarcely striated calyx. 

13. T. striatum, Linn, (soft knotted Trefoil); downy, heads 
terminal and axillary ovate subsolitary sessile, calyx striated very 
rigid hairy with unequal strait small setaceous teeth, leaflets ob- 
cordate nearly entire, stems ascending. E.Eot.t. 1843. E. FI. 
v. iii. p. 307. 

Dry pastures and fields, frequent. FI. June. 0. — 4 — 8 or 10 inches 
long, more or less procumbent or reclined, pubescent. Flowers small, 
purplish-red. Cal. deeply furrowed, oval, a little swollen, with 5, almost 
setaceous, strait, not recurved teeth. 

*** Cal. remarkably inflated after flowering and arched above. 

Standard of the Corolla deciduous. 

14. T . fragferum, Linn. ( Strawberry-headed Trefoil); heads 
globose upon long lateral stalks, calyx after flowering inflated 
membranaceous reticulated downy two of the teetli bent down, stem 
creeping, leaflets obcordate serrated. E.Bot. 1. 1050. E. FI. v. iii. 
p. 308. 

Meadows and pastures. FI. July — Aug. If. — Flowers very small, 
purplish-red. The heads of flowers, an inch in diameter, are, often, more 
or less coloured, so as not unaptly to represent a Strawberry. Mouth 
ol the calyx, as in the following species, singularly contracted when 
enclosing the fruit. 

15. T. resupinatum, Linn. ( reversed Trefoil); heads hemisphe- 
rical, at length globose, on stalks at first only about as long as the 
petiole, corollas resupinate, calyx after flowering membranaceous 


328 


DIADELPHIA DECANDRIA. 


[Lotus. 


reticulated inflated hairy acute, two of the teeth longer patent, leaf- 
lets obovate, stem prostrate. De Cand. Prodr. v. ii. p. 202. 
Sturm , Deutschl. PI, cum Ic. 

Meadows near Bristol; Mr. Drummond. FI. July. ©• — This is a 
plant little likely to be an outcast of gardens, and its situation, accord- 
ing to Mr. Drummond, is apparently natural. 

**** Standard of the corolla persistent, dejlexed , dry , enveloping 
the fruit. ( Flowers yellow.') 

16. T. procumbens, Linn. ( Hop Trefoil); heads broadly oval 
many-flowered dense, standard at length deflexed furrowed, leaves 
stalked, leaflets obcordate, central one stalked — stems procum- 
bent, peduncles longer than the leaves. T. procumbens, Linn . — 
E. Bot. t. 945. E. FI. V. Hi. p. 309. — (3. stems erect, peduncles 
shorter than the leaves. Ser. in DC. Pr. v. ii. p. 205 — T. ccim- 
pestre, Schreb. in Sturm's Deutschl. FI. cum Ic. 

Dry pastures and borders of fields, frequent. — /3. In sandy soil, Mr. 
IF. IFi/son. Near Edinb. Dr. Boott. FI. June, July. ©• — This is well 
distinguished from the following by the large, dense, hop-like heads of 
flowers, and the standard striated when old. It is more difficult to dis- 
tinguish the erect var. (3. from the true T. agrarium of Linn. That 
plant is however always larger and stronger in all its parts, and has 
oblong nearly sessile leaflets, which are much shorter than the peduncles. 

17. T.fllifo rme, Linn, (lesser yellow Trefoil); heads of few lax 
somewhat racemose flowers, standard with its sides at length de- 
flexed nearly even, leaves almost sessile, leaflets obcordate, central 
one mostly on a short stalk, stems procumbent. — a. major ; larger, 
heads many-flowered, peduncles much longer than the leaves. T. 
Jiliforme, Sturm. Deutschl. FI. cum Ic. and foreign authors. T. 
minus, Belli.— E. Bot. t. 1256. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 310.— micro - 
phyllum, (Ser. in DC. Pr. v. ii. p. 206.); smaller, heads of very 
few distant flowers, peduncles frequently not exceeding the leaves. 
T.lupulinum, minimum; Dill, in Baii Syn. p. 331. t. 14./. 4 — 
T. Jiliforme, E. Bot. t. 1257. I look. Scot. i.p. 220. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 310. 

Dry pastures, and road-sides, frequent. FI. June, July. ©. — A care- 
ful examination of numerous specimens of this Trefoil, from various 
parts of England and the Continent, have satisfied me that Dillenius’ 
plant in Ray, t. 1+./. 4, is only a starved state of the commoner appear- 
ance of T. Jiliforme, and the same as the var. viicrophyllum of Scringe in 
De Candolle. The E. But. T. Jiliforme is a little more luxuriant, and 
intermediate states may be seen between it and the acknowledged T.flli- 
forms of continental writers. Mr. W. Wilson however considers them 
distinct. — In all, the flowers are pedicellated, and in the few-flowered varie- 
ties the pedicels are more evident, and thus appear more truly racemose. 

20. Lotus. Linn. Bird’s-foot-trefoil. 

1. L. corniculdtus, Linn, (common Bird's foot-trefoil); heads 


Lotus.] DI ADELPHIA — DECANDRIA. 329 

depressed umbellate 8 — 10-flovvered, stems decumbent, leaflets 
obovate, peduncles very long, claw of the standard inflated above. 
— a. vulgaris ; every where glabrous, or nearly so. L. corniculatus , 
Linn. — E. Bat. t. 2090. E. FL v. Hi. p. 312. — S. villosus ; stem, 
leaves, and calyx clothed with very long spreading hairs. L. corni- 
culatus, y. DC. Pr. v. ii. p. 214 . 

Pastures every where, abundant. — /3. rare. Higham, Kent, Rev. Prof. 
Henslow. Sandgate, Rev. G. E. Smith. FI. July, Aug. If . — The var.fi. 
is a very remarkable one; (the villosus of Thuillicr’s Flora of Paris) 
anti at least as deserving of being considered a distinct species as the 
two follow ing. 

2. L. tenuis, Waldst. et Kit. ( slender Bird' s-foot-tref oil); heads 
depressed umbellate 6 — 10-flovvered, stems prostrate slender, leaf- 
lets lanceolate, peduncles very long, claw of the standard inflated 
above. Borr. et Hook, in E. Bot. t. 2615. — L. corniculatus, vcir. 
tenuifolius, Poll. — De Cand. — L. decumbens, Forst. Tonb. 86. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 2615. — L. depressus et humifusus, Willd. 

Dry and waste places in many parts of England and Scotland. FI. 
July. If . . — I am really unable to point out any marks by which this may 
be known from the preceding, except its more slender and straggling 
habit, and narrower foliage. It is by no means an uncommon plant. 

3. L. major, Scop. ( narrow-leaved Bird' s-foot-tref oil); heads 
depressed umbellate 8 — 10-flovvered, stems nearly erect tubular, 
leaflets obovate, peduncles very long, claw of the standard narrow. 
E. Bot. t. 2091. E. Fl.v. Hi. p. 313. — L. corniculatus, y. Sm. 
FI. Br.p. 791 . ((3.) Hook. Scot. i.p. 230. 

Sides of ditches and moist bushy places, by no means unfrequent. 
FI. July, Aug. If . — The place of growth of this plant, in moister situa- 
tions than L. corniculatus, consequently inducing a greater development 
of every part, is I think, in itself, almost sufficient to account for the 
trifling differences which are said to distinguish it from that well-known 
species. The difference of breadth in their filaments, mentioned by 
Smith, Mr. Wilson finds not to be constant. L. corniculatus, he adds, 
“ seems to differ chiefly in the vaulted or gibbous appearance of the 
upper part of the claw of the standard, which raises up the two teeth of 
the calyx above.” But is this mark constant ? Smith says the claw of 
the standard of our present plant, “ though linear, is vaulted.” 

4 . L. angustissimus, Linn. ( slender Bird' s foot-trefoil); villous, 
flowers solitary in pairs or 3 — 4 in a head, their peduncle about 
twice as long as the leaves, leaflets ovato-lanceolate, calyx-teeth 

very long, stems procumbent, legumes very slender x. minor; 

heads 1 — 2-flowered, peduncles short. L. angustissimus, E. FL 
v. iii. p. 315 — L. dijfusus, E. Bot. t. 925. — ft. major ; heads 3 — 4- 
flowered, peduncles elongated. L. hispidus, Desf. 

South of England, very rare. — «. On the rocky beach at Hastings, 
Sussex : at Kingsteignton and Bishopsteignton, Devon. Strand, near 
Passage, Ireland, Mr. Drummond. The St. Vincent’s-Hocks station, 


330 DI A DELPHI A — DECANDRIA. \ Medicaso. 

mentioned by Smith, is considered to belong to L. tenuis.— fi. Cornwall, 
near tlie Lizard and near Penzance,//. C. Watson, Esq.— FI. May, June. 
©• — Flowers much smaller and general aspect very different from any 
ot the preceding. The var. £., though at first sight apparently distinct, 
can, I fear, only be considered a luxuriant variety of L. anguslissimus. 

21. Medicago. Linn. Medick. 

1. M. filed ta, Linn. ( yellow Sickle Medick); decumbent, nearly 
glabrous, leaflets ovato-oblong toothed, peduncles racemed, le- 
gumes falcate and very slightly twisted glabrous. E. Eot. t. 1749. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 317. 

Pastures and borders of fields. Ft. June, July. If.. — Flowers yellow. 

2. M. sativa, Linn. ( purple Medick or Lucerne); erect, gla- 
brous, leaflets obovato-oblong toothed, peduncles racemed, legumes 
loosely spirally twisted. E. But. t. 1749. E.FI. v. iii.p. 317. 

Dry gravelly banks and pastures, not wild. FI. June, July. If-. — 
This has purple flowers and a spirally-twisted pod , and bears much re- 
semblance to the preceding, having been suspected to be only a culti- 
vated state of it. Inhabit, the two differ remarkably from the follow- 
ing species. 

3. M. lupulina, Linn. ( black Medick or Nonsuch); procum- 
bent, leaflets obovato-cuneate, stipules nearly entire, flowers capi- 
tato-spicate, legumes kidney-shaped 1 -seeded. E.Bot.t. 971. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 3 1 8. 

Abundant in waste ground and cultivated fields. FI. May — Aug. 0. 
— A valuable plant in Agriculture, very similar in habit to Trifolium 
fl/iforme. Flowers crowded, small, yellow. Legumes small, rugged, of 
a black colour when ripe. 

4. M. maculdta, Sibth. ( spotted Medick); procumbent, leaflets 
obcordate, stipules toothed, peduncles 3 — 5-flowered, legumes com- 
pactly spiral compressed, the spires furrowed at the edge and 
fringed with a double row of long spreading curved spines. E. El. 
v. iii.p. 319. — M. polymorpha, E. Bot. t. 1616. 

Gravelly pastures in the middle and south of England. Ormeshead, 
N. Wales, Mr. W. Wilson, FI. May, June. ©. — Leaflets marked with 
a purple spot in the centre. 

5. M. muriedta, All. ( flat-toothed Medick); procumbent, leaf- 
lets obcordate downy, stipules toothed, peduncles 1 — 3-flowered, 
legumes compactly spiral subglobose, the spires keeled at the mar- 
gin and fringed with a close double row of short subulate curved 
spines. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 320. — M. polymorpha, ?. muricata , Linn. 
_( 7 .) Sm. FI. Br. 

On the sea-bank, Orford, Suffolk, Ray. FI. June, July. If. — Leaves 
hoary with fine pubescence. — In common with Sir J. E. Smith, I have 
seen no native plants of this, and have drawn tip my character from a 
south of France specimen given me by Mr. Bentham, who has studied 
this genus with great attention. 


POLY A DELPHI A — POLYANDUIA. 


331 


Hypericum .] 


6. M. minima, Linn, (little Bur-Medick) ; procumbent, leaf- 
lets obcordate downy, stipules nearly entire, peduncles 1 — 5- 
flovvered, legumes compactly spiral subglobose, the spires narrow 
keeled at tbe margin with a compact double row of uncinate prickles. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 321 . Benth. in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2 (id 5 — f3. stems 
and leaves boary. 31. minima, (3. canescens, DC. Prodr. v. ii. 
p. 178. 

Sandy fields and waste places, rare. Narburgh, Norfolk, and near 
Newmarket. Between Sandwich and Pegwell, Kent; Rev. G. E. Smith. 
Landguard Fort, Suffolk, and /3. Pegwell Bay, Isle ot Thanet, Rev. Prof. 
Hen slow. Ft. June, July. ©. — It is possible that Ray’s plant, taken 
for M. muricata (see preceding sp.) may be the present, which Prof. 
Henslow finds on the same coast. The latter plant precisely accords 
with specimens from Mr. Bentham of the true M. minima. 

7. M. denticuldta , Willd. (reticulated Medick) ; nearly glabrous, 
leaflets obcordate, stipules laciniated, peduncles 2 — 5-flovvered, 
legumes broad loosely spiral and flat with 1 — 3 convolutions reti- 
culated, tbe margin thin keeled with a double compact row of sub- 
ulate curved prickles. G. E. Smith in Cat. of PI. of S. Kent. 

p. 43. t. 1. f 4. Benth. 1. cit. 2634 31. niaculata, (3. E. FI. 

v. Hi. p. 3 1 9. 

Upon exposed sandy banks on the coast of Kent, Ray ; Rev. G. E. 
Smith. Near Weymouth, Mr. Lightfoot. Cley, Norfolk, Rev. Mr. Bry- 
ant. FI. April — June. 0. — The Rev. G. E. Smith has well distinguished 
the present species in the little work just mentioned. Its legumes are 
very beautiful and quite unlike any of the preceding. Mr. Smith speaks 
of 2 vars., one with long and the other with shorter spines ; which, in all 
probability, correspond with the «. and /3. of Mr. Bentham in his Cat. of 
PL of the Pyr. and Lang. p. 103. — I am indebted for authentic British 
specimens to Mr. Winterbottom. 


CLASS XVIII. POLYADELPHIA. 

Filaments combined in more than two sets. 

OIID. I. POLYANDUIA. 3Iany Stamens. 

1. Hypericum. Cal. 5-partite, inferior. Pet. 5. Filaments 

united at the base into 3 or 5 sets. Capsule many-seeded Nat. 

Ord. Hypericine^e, Jiiss. — Name, — the iimyxov of Dioscorides. 

POLYADELPHIA— POLYANDUIA. 

1. Hypericum. Linn. St. John’s-wort. 

* Styles 5. 

1. H. calycinum , Linn, (laryef lowered St. John' s-icort); styles 
5, flowers solitary, segments of the calyx unequal obovate obtuse, 
leaves oblong, stem shrubby branched square. E. Bot. t. 2017. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 323. 


332 


POLYADELPHIA — POLYANDRIA. [ Hypericum . 

Bushy places. Largs; and Balmacarra, Scotland, (Dr. Maclachlan,) 
but I fear not truly wild. Commonly cultivated in shrubberies on ac- 
count of its beauty. Near Cork, Ireland. FI. July, Sept. Ty . — Flowers 
very large, yellow, as in all the Genus. Sets of stamens 5. 

** Styles 3. Cal.-segments entire at the margins. 

2. H. Androsoemum , Linn. [Tutsan'); styles 3, capsule pulpy, 

stem shrubby compressed, calyx-leaflets unequal, leaves ovate ses- 
sile. E. Bot. t. 1225. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 321 — Androscemum offici- 
nale, All Lindl. 

Hedges and shrubby places ; Norfolk and at Asheridge, Herts. Be- 
tween Dorking and Guildford, and at Gt. Marlow, Bucks; •/. S. il Fill, 
Esq. Not rare in Devon and Cornwall, Rev. J. S. Tozer. Frequent in 
Ireland, and on the W. of Scotland. FI. July. T? • — ~ h.. high. Leaves 
large. Cymes terminal, of rather large flowers. Berry black. 

3. FI. quadrangulum , Linn, [square-stalked St. John s-wort); 
styles 3, stem herbaceous 4-angled somewhat branched, leaves 
ovate with pellucid dots, calyx-leaves lanceolate. E. Bot. t. 370. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 324. 

Moist pastures, sides of ditches and rivulets. FI. July. If. 1 — 2 ft. 
high. Panicles terminal. 

4. H. perforatum, Linn, {common perforated St. John s-wort); 
styles 3, stem 2-edged, leaves elliptic-oblong obtuse with pellucid 
dots, segments of the calyx lanceolate. E. Bot. t. 295. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 325. 

Woods, thickets, hedges, &c. abundant. FI. July. 'If. — 1—2 feet or 
more high, branched. There are minute black dots on the tips of the 
cal., cor., and often on the leaves. This plant is variously commemorated 
by’ Physicians and Poets, as “ Balm of the Warrior’s wound, in allusion 
to its healing properties, while its profusion is noticed in 
“ Hypericum, all bloom, so thick a swarm 
“ Ot' (lowers, like Hies, clothing its slender rods 
“ That scarce a leaf appears.’’ 

5. H. dvbium, Linn. ( imperforate St. John’s-wort ); styles 3, 
stem obsoletely quadrangular, leaves elliptic-ovate obtuse destitute 
of pellucid dots, segments of the caly r x elliptical. E. Bot. t. 296. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 326. 

Rather mountainous woods in various places, but no where in great 
plenty. FI. July’, Aug. If. — Similar in many respects to the last : for 
which, perhaps, it is not unfrequently mistaken. Corolla olten marked 
with small black dots. 

6. H. humifusum, Linn. ( trailing Sc John s-wort) ; styles 3, 
flowers terminal subeymose, stem compressed prostrate, leaves 
oblong obtuse glabrous. E. Bot. t. 1226. E. Fl.v. iii.p. 326. 

Gravelly, heathy and boggy pastures, stone walls, &c. in many places. 
FI. July. If .—Stem slender, about a span long. Cor. with black dots, 
as well as the calyx, on which they arc frequently seen near the edge, 


Hypericum.] POLYADELl’HIA — POLYANDRIA. 


333 


but not, in my specimens, so distinctly as to justify the plant being placed 
in the next division. 

*** Styles 3. Margins of the calycine segments with glandular 

serratures. 

7. H. montdnum , Linn. ( Mountain St. John s-wort); styles 3, 
flowers paniculato-corymbose, calyx with glandular serratures, stem 
erect rounded and as well as the ovate leaves glabrous. E. Eot. 
t. 371 . E. FI. v. iii.p. 327. 

Bushy hills, especially in a chalky or gravelly soil. FI. July. If .. — 
H — 2 ft. high. Leaves rather large, more or less perforated, distant, 
especially above; their margins having black glandular serratures, with 
which the bracleas and calyx are beautifully fringed. Flowers rather 
compact. 

8. H. barbatum, Jacq. (bearded St. John s-wort); styles 3, 
corymbs terminal, calyx fringed with long stalked glands, stem 
erect rounded, leaves ovate with (black) scattered dots beneath. 
E. Bot. t. 1986. E. FI. v. iii.p. 327. 

Side of a hedge near Aberdalgy in Strathearn, Perthshire, Mr. G.Don. 
FI. Sept. Oct. If. — 1 ft. or more high. Very distinct in the long glan- 
dular hairs of its calyx. The petals, too, are often toothed at the 
extremity. 

9. H. hirsutum, Linn, (hairy St. John s-wort); styles 3, calyx 
with (black) glandular serratures, stem erect rounded pubescent, 
leaves ovate slightly downy beneath. E. Bot. t. 116. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 328. 

Woods and thickets, especially in a chalky soil. FI. July. If • — 2 ft. 
high. Leaves rather large, more or less downy, especially beneath. 

10. H. pulchrum, Linn, (small upright a St. John’ s-wort); styles 
3, calyx with (black) glandular serratures, stem erect, leaves cor- 
date amplexicaul glabrous. E. Bot. t. 1227. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 329. 

Dry woods and heaths, frequent. FI. July. If. — 1 — 2 ft. high, slen- 
der, erect, rigid, branched. Flowers beautiful, in loose panicles , yellow, 
tipped, before expansion, with red. Anthers red. 

11. H. eludes, Linn. ( Marsh St. John s-wort); styles 3, calyx 
with (reddish) glandular serratures glabrous, leaves roundish 
shaggy, stem rounded creeping, panicle of few flowers. E. Bot. 
t. 109. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 330. 

Spongy bogs, not unfrequent. FI- July, Aug. If . — A span long. 
Flowers few, panicled, terminal, pale yellow. 


334 


[Apargia. 


SYNGENESIA JEQUALIS. 


CLASS XIX. SYNGENESIA . 1 

Anthers united into a tube. Flowers compound. — {'Nat. Ord. 
Composite, Jitss.) 

OIID. I. /EQUALIS. All the florets perfect. 

* All the Corollas ligulcite or strap-shaped. (Cichor ace/e, Juss .) 

1. Tragopogon. Involucre simple, of many scales. Recep- 
tacle naked. Pappus feathery, stalked. Fruit longitudinally 
striated. — Name, — rguyog, a goat, and nuycmi, a heard; from the 
beautifully bearded fruit. 

2. Helmintiiia. Involucre double ; inner of 8 close scales, 
outer of 4 large, lax, leafy ones. Receptacle naked. Pappus feathery, 
stalked. Fruit transversely striated. — Name, — sXpivg, sXgtvtSos, a 
worm , and tbjxtj, a case; from the form of the fruit. 

3. Picris. Involucre double ; inner of many compact, upright, 
equal scales, outer of several lax, small, linear ones. Receptacle 
naked. Pappus sessile, slightly feathery. Fruit transversely 
striated. — Named crago;, bitter, as are many of this tribe. 

4. Sonchus. Involucre imbricated with scales, swelling at the 
base. Receptacle naked. Pappus simple, sessile — Named myog in 
Greek, from tSoppog, soft; in allusion to the soft nature of the stems. 

5. Lactuca. Involucre imbricated, cylindrical, its scales with 
a membranous margin. Receptacle naked. Pappus simple, stip- 

i tate . Named from Lac, milk, which flows from this and many 

plants of the tribe, when bruised. 

6. Prenantiies. Involucre cylindrical, its scales equal, with 
smaller ones at the base. Fiords few. Receptacle naked. Pappus 
simple, sessile. — Named from <irp jrjjg, drooping, and avtiog, * flower. 

7. Leontodon. Involucre imbricated with scales, of which the 
outermost are frequently lax and flaccid. Receptacle naked. Pap- 
pus simple, stipitate. — Named from Xsov, a Lion, and obovg, a tooth, 
from the tooth-like margins of the leaves. 

8. Apargia. Involucre imbricated, the innermost scales equal, 
outer ones smaller. Receptacle naked, pitted. Pappus feathery, 

1 Tills is an extensive and most natural Class, corresponding with the Com- 
losiTAi of the Nat. Arrangement. In al! the species, the flowerstalk is enlarged 
•it the summit into a receptacle, which bears a great number ot distinct, but 
closely placed, small flowers or florets, surrounded by a many-leaved involucre, 
so that- the whole looks like one flower. Each floret has an inferior germen, 
the upper part frequently expanding into a hairy or feathery calyx called a pap- 
pus, and becoming a 1-secded pericarp or achenium. The corolla is ot one petal, 
tubular, or ligulate. Stamens 5. Style single. Stiymu bilid. 


Saussurea.] SYNGENESIA — .ffiQUAEIS. 335 

sessile. — Name of uncertain origin. A nugyioi was applied to some 
plant of this tribe. 

9. Thrincia. Involucre nearly simple, multipartite, with a few 
small scales at the base. Receptacle naked, pitted. Pappus of 
the florets of the circumference scaly, of those of the centre feathery, 
sessile — Named from Sgmccs, a feather , iu allusion to the feathery 
pappus. 

10. H ieracium. Involucre imbricated, ovate. Receptacle 

nearly naked, dotted. Pappus simple, sessile Name, — /£»ag, 

a hatch ; because birds of prey were supposed to employ this plant 
to strengthen their powers of vision. 

11. Crepis. Involucre tumid at the base, surrounded with 
deciduous scales, ribbed and furrowed, (often very obscurely). 

Receptacle naked. Pappus simple, sessile Name, — v-gran;, a 

slipper or last in Greek ; but why applied to this plant is not 
known. 

12. Borkhausia. Involucre oval, with deciduous scales, ribbed 

and furrowed. Receptacle naked. Pappus simple, stalked 

Named in honour of Moritz Borkhausen, a German Botanist. 

13. Hypochoeris. Involucre oblong, imbricated. Receptacle 

chaffy. Pappus feathery, stipitate or sessile Named from wo, 

for, and yjugo;, a hog , the roots being eaten by that animal. 

14. Lapsana. Involucre with small scales at the base. Recep- 
tacle naked. Fruit quickly deciduous. Pappus none Named 

from Xucru^u, to purge ; from its laxative qualities. 

15. Cichorium. Involucre of 8 scales, surrounded by 5 smaller 
ones at the base. Receptacle naked or slightly hairy. Pappus 
sessile, scaly, shorter than the fruit. — Name, — chikouryeh, in 
Arabic. The Egyptians eat a vast quantity of this vegetable. ’ 

** Corollas all tubular ; and generally spreading so as to form 
a hemispherical head. (Cinarocepiial/E, Juss.; Artichoke or 
Thistle Tribe). 

/ 

16. Arctium. Involucre globose, each of its scales with an in- 
curved hook at the extremity. Receptacle chaffy. Pappus simple 

Name, — ugx.ro;, a bear; from the coarse texture of the involucres. 

17. Sf.rratula. Dioecious. Involucre oblong, imbricated with 

unarmed scales. Receptacle setose or chaffy. Fruit obovate. Pap- 
pus in 3 — 4 rows, nit. longest. Anthers not setose Named from 

sen nla, a little saw , which the margins of the leaves represent. 

18. Saussurea. Involucre oblong, imbricated with unarmed 
scales. Receptacle setose or chaffy. Pappus double, sessile ; ext. 


336 


SYNGENESIA — iEQUALlS. [Diotis. 

of short, rough bristles, persistent ; int. feathery, united at the base. 
Anthers below setose. — Named in honour of the two Saussures , 
Father and Son. 

19. Carduus. Involucre tumid, imbricated with spinous scales. 
Receptacle hairy. Pappus deciduous, rough — Name ; Theis derives 
this from arcl, in Celtic, a point ; whence also ag8o;, in Greek ; 
arduus, in Latin ; and Cardo, and even Cardinal .’ 

20. Cnicus. Involucre tumid, imbricated with spinous scales. 
Receptacle hairy. Pappus deciduous, feathery — Named from 
xw £«, to prick or wound. 

21. Onopordum. Involucre tumid, imbricated; the scales 
spreading and spinous. Receptacle honey-combed. Fruit four- 
cornered. Pappus rough, deciduous. — Name ; ovog, a sinus, and 
Kspdci), pedere, such being the effect, according to Pliny, upon the 
ass who eats of it. 

22. Carlina. Involucre imbricated, tumid ; the outer scales 
with numerous spines, the inner ones coloured, spreading, mem- 
branous. Receptacle chaffy. Pappus feathery — Name ; — the 
same as Carolina, from a tradition that the root was shown by an 
angel to Charlemagne, as a remedy for the plague which prevailed 
in his army. 

(See Centaurea, in Ord. Frustranea.) 

*** Corollas all tubular, erect and parallel, crowded , forming a 
level top, without a ray. (part of Corymbiferje, Juss.f 

23. Bidens. Involucre of many scales, outer ones or bracteas 
foliaceous at the base. Receptacle plane, chaffy. Corollas some- 
times radiant. Fruit crowned with 2 — 5 persistent awns, which 
are rough with minute, deflexed bristles. — Name ; — bis, double, 
and dens, a tooth; from the two awns or teeth which crown the 
fruit. 

2-1. Eupatorium. Involucre imbricated, oblong. Florets lew. 
Receptacle naked. Pappus rough or feathery — Named from 
Eupator, the surname of Mithridates, king of Pontus, who brought 
this plant into use. 

25. Ciirysocoma. Cal. imbricated, hemispherical. Recep- 
tacle naked. Pappus rough. Style scarcely longer than the 
florets. — Named from %ga<ro;, gold, and xo/x?j, a head oj hair ; from 
the colour of the flowers. 

2G. Dions. Involucre imbricated, hemispherical. Receptacle 
chaffy, its scales fringed. Pappus none. Corolla with two ears 

' “ A Cardinal is the point or pivot, upon which the door of the holy chinch 
hinges.”— Theis. 


Pda sites.] 


SYNGENESIA — SUPERFLUA. 


337 


at the base, which border the germen. — Named from < 5 / 5 , two, 
and o'j;,' u to;, an ear ; from the circumstance just mentioned. 

(See Tanacetum, Senecio, Aster and Anthemis in Ord. If.) 

ORD. II. SUPERFLUA. 

Florets of the centre complete, having anthers and pistils; those of 

the circumference with pistils only, ( thus as it were superfluous); 

all hearing seed. ’ 

* Corollas of the marginal florets obsolete or wanting. (Discoid 

CoRYMBIFERJE, JllSS.) 

27. Tanacetum. Involucre hemispherical, imbricated. Re- 

ceptacle naked. Florets of the ray trifid, obsolete, sometimes want- 
ing. Fruit crowned with a membranous margin or pappus. Name 

altered from Athanasia ; «, not, and 6xmto;, death; or that which 
does not quickly fade. 

28. Artemisia. Involucre ovate or rounded, imbricated. Re- 
ceptacle naked or hairy. Florets of the ray awl-shaped. Pappus 0. 
— Named from Artemis, the Diana of the Greeks. 

29. Gnaphalium. Involucre imbricated, with (often) coloured, 
membranous scales. Receptacle naked. Florets of the circumfer- 
ence subulate ; some of the centre occasionally abortive. Pappus 
rough or feathery. — Name, — yvxcpxXov, soft down, or ivool, with 
which the leaves are clothed. 

30. Conyza. Involucre roundish, imbricated. Receptacle naked. 

Florets of the circumference 3-toothed. Pappus rough Name,— 

a Gnat ; the plant having been supposed to possess the 
virtue of driving away these insects. 

(See Petasites, Aster, and some sp. of Senecio in the following section.) 

** Corollas of the circumference or ray ligulate. (Radiate.) 

31. Eri'geron. Involucre imbricated with numerous linear 
scales. Receptacle naked. Florets of the ray numerous, very nar- 
row, (mostly of a different colour from the disk.) Pappus simple. 
— Named from sp, early, and ysg«v, an old man : from the bald 
heads of the receptacles, after the flowers and fruit have fallen. 

32. Tussilago. Involucre formed of a simple row of equal, 
linear scales. Recepjtcwle naked. Flowers radiant. Corollas of 
the circumference long, linear, numerous ; of the disk few. Pappus 
simple. Scapes single-flowered.— Name altered from Tussis, a 
cough, in the cure of which the plant has been employed. 

S3. Petasites. Nearly dioecious. Involute imbricated with 
two rows of lanceolate scales. Flowers not radiant. Pappus sim- 

2 


338 SYNGE N ESI A — SUPERFLUA. [Chrysanthemum. 

pie. Scope many-flowered — Name, — titk go;, a covering to the 
head, or an umbrella; from tlie great size of its foiiage. 

34*. Senecio. Involucre cylindrical, its scales linear, equal, with 
several smaller ones at the base, their tips often brown. Receptacle 
naked. Flowers discoid or radiant. Pappus simple, sessile.^— 
Named from senex,an old man. (See Eriyeron .) 

35. Aster. Involucre imbricated, the lowermost scales spread- 
ing (except in A. Tripolium). Receptacle naked. Pappus sessile, 

simple. Florets of the disk yellow; ot the ray , purple or white. 

Name : — Aster, a star, which the flowers resemble. 

36. Solidago. Involucre closely imbricated. Receptacle naked. 
Florets of the ray few, (yellow). Pappus sessile, simple — Name,— 
solidari, to unite, from the vulnerary qualities of the plant. 

37. Inula. Involucre imbricated, its scales spreading ; outer 
ones, especially, foliaceous. Anthers with bristles at theii base. 
Receptacle naked. Pappus simple. Floivers yellow. — Name said 
to be the same as Helenium, having sprung from the tears of Helen. 

38. Limbarda. Involucre with imbricated, narrow scales. 

Anthers with bristles at the base. Receptacle naked. Pappus sim- 
ple, rough. Named from Limharde, as the plant is called in some 

parts of France. 

39. Pulicaria. Involucre hemisphserical, closely imbricated 
with narrow scales. Anthers with bristles at the base. Pappus 
double ; outer one short, cup-shaped, membranous, toothed : inner 
long, rough. Floivers yellow. — Name, — pulex, a Jiea, an insect 
which this plant is supposed to drive away by its powerful smell. 

40. Cineraria. Involucre cylindrical, of many equal, upright 
scales. Receptacle naked. Fruit quadrangular. Pappus sessile, 
simple. Flowers yellow — Name,— cineres, ashes; from the ashen 
colour of the underside ot the leaves in some species. 

41. Doronicum. Involucre with the scales in a double row, 
equal, longer than the disk. Receptacle naked. Pappus simple, 
wanting on the florets of the ray. — Named from Swgov, a gift, and 
vix.ri, victory, because it is said to have been formerly used to destroy 
wild beasts. 

42. Bellis. Involucre, hemisphserical, simple, its scales all equal 
in length. Receptacle naked, conical. Pappus none — Named from 
bellus, pretty. And who is there, whether in youth or in age, that 
has not felt the beauty of this “ modest crimson-tipped flower t ’ 
It is therefore, in France, called Marguerite, the name of a woman, 
expressive of beauty, from margarita, a pearl. 

43. Chrysanthemum. Involucre hemisphaerical, imbricated 


f   


Tragopogon.] SYNGENESIA — 7EQUALIS. 339 

with scales whose margins are membranaceous. Receptacle naked. 
Pappus none. — Name, — gold, and ccv@t>s, a flower, from the 
colour ot the blossoms in some of the species. 

44. Pyrethrum. Involucre hemispherical, imbricated with 
scales whose margins are membranaceous. Receptacle naked. Fruit 

crowned with a membranaceous border Flowers with a yellow 

disk and white ray . — This genus scarcely differs from the preced- 
ing — Named from its resemblance to the nv^dgov of Dioscorides, 
so called from rrvo.flre, on account of its acrid roots. 

45. Matricaria. Involucre hemispherical or nearly plane, 
imbricated with scales whose margins are membranaceous. Recep- 
tacle naked, almost cylindrical. Pappus none. — Named from its 
reputed medical virtues. 

i. 1 

46. Anthemis. Involucre hemispherical, imbricated with near- 
ly equal scales whose margins are membranaceous. Receptacle con- 
vex, chaffy. Fruit crowned with a membranaceous border or 
pappus . — Named from ctvfopov, a flower , from the profusion of its 
blossoms. 

47. AchillyEA. Involucre ovate, imbricated. Receptacle plane, 
chaffy. Florets of the ray 5 — fO, roundish, obcordate. Papjms 
none. — So named because its healing virtues were said to be first 
discovered by Achilles. 

ORD ill. FRUSTRANEA. 

Florets of the disk perfect and fertile ; those of the circumference 
neuter. {Part o/'Cinarocephal;£, Juss ). 

48. Centaurea. Involucre imbricated. Receptacle bristly. 
Pappus simple or none. Corollas of the ray funnel-shaped, irre- 
gular, longer than those of the disk . — So named, because with 
this plant it is said the Centaur Chiron cured himself of a wound 
received in the foot from Hercules. 

SYNGENESIA — 7EQUALIS. 

1. Tracopogon. Linn. Goat’s-beard. 

1. T. pralensis, Linn. ( yellow Goat’s-beard); involucre about as 
long as the corollas, leaves undivided glabrous acuminated channel- 
led, peduncles cylindrical. F. Pot. t. 434. E. FI. v. iii.p. 337. 

Meadows and pastures; rare in Scotland. Ball’s Bridge, Ireland; Mr. 
J.T. Mac/cay. FI. June. $. — I — 2 ft. high. Flowers yellow, closing 
every day before noon ; bead of fruit large. Pappus very feathery, ele- 
vated on a long stalk. 

2. '1'. major, Jaeq. {greater Goat’s-beard); involucre more than 
half as long again as the yellow coiollas, leaves undivided glabrous 


[ Sonchus . 


340 SYNGENESIA ^QUALIS. 


acuminated channelled, peduncles thickened upwards. Jaeq. 
Austr. t. 29. — T. pratensis, Johnston FI. of Berw.p. 172. 

Glebe of Eccles and fields near Eceles. Banks of the Tweed at Bing- 
ham by Coldstream; Dr. Johnston and It. D. Johnston, Ext/. FI. June, 

j u | y ± Dr. Johnston has correctly pointed out the difference in the 

relative iength of the calyx and corolla which distinguishes this, together 
with its swollen peduncles , from T. pratensis ; and Mr. Thomson in- 
forms me that these marks are constant. The observations and specimen 
with which the latter gentleman favoured me, have satisfied me that 
it is the T. major of Flora Austriaca ; a native of Germany, Austria 
and Switzerland. — It grows abundantly in the stations above given, while 
the T. pratensis is nowhere found in that country. 

3. T. porrifolius, Linn, (purple Goat's-beard ); involucre much 
longer than the corollas, leaves undivided strait, peduncles tine '- 
ened upwards. E. Bot.t. 638. E. El. v.iii.p. 338. 

Moist meadows in several parts of England ; but very local. About 
Glasgow. FI. May, June. U .—3—4 feet high. Flowers large purple, 
closing before noon, or in rainy weather. The root was formerly culti- 
vated "for culinary purposes. 


2. Helminthia. Juss. Ox-tongue. 

1. H. echioides, Gaertn. (bristly Ox-tongue).— Picris echioides, 

Linn.— E. Bot.t. 972. E. FI. v.iii.p. 339. 

Borders of fields, especially in a clayey soil, hiot found in Scotland. 
About Dublin, Mr. J. T. Mac/cay. FI. June, July. V- .—2-3 feet high, 
stout, hispid with numerous rigid hairs, springing from tubercles. Lower 
leaves lanceolate; upper ones cordate, amplexicaul. Flowers small, 
yellow. Outer involucre large, with heart-shaped scales. 

3. Picris. Linn. Picris. 

1. p. hieracioides, Linn. (. Hawk-weed Picris); stem rough with 
hooked bristles, leaves lanceolate rough toothed, flowers corym- 
bose, peduncles with many bracteas. E. Bot.t. 196. E. FI. v. in. 

p. 339. „ t , . 

Road-sides and borders of fields, frequent. FI. July, Aug. $ . 
S/ems 2—3 feet high. Flowers yellow. 

4. Sonchus. Linn. Sow-Thistle. N 
1. S. alpinus, Linn, (blue alpine Soiv-thistle) ; flower-stalks 
bracteas and involucre glanduloso-hispid racemose, stems glabrous 
below, leaves glabrous lyrate arrow-shaped at the base, teimma 
lobe very large deltoideo-hastate — S. ccerulcus, “ Gamer. Epist. 
281.” E. Bot. t. 2425. E. FI. v. iii.p. 341. 

Rocky places near rivulets, in the mountains of Clova. FI. July, 
* -v’.— I cannot but agree with Wahlenbcrgin considering this to be 
the same as the true alpinus of Linn. 1 have gathered the plant at t ic 
head of the White-water in the Clova mountains, and on a comparison 
those specimens with others of S. alpinus, for which I am in- 
debted to Sir J. E. Smith himself, I find them identical. What the 


Lacluca.] 


SYNGENESI A — iEOUAI.IS. 


341 


5. alpinus of “ Smith's leones" may be, I am unable to say. Though 
stated to be common in Lapland, and eaten by the natives, Wahlenberg 
never saw any thing resembling it. — Plant 3 — 4 feet high. Flowers blue. 

2. S. palustris, Linn, (to// Marsh Sow-thistle); flower-stalks 
corymbose and involucre gianduloso-hispid, leaves denticulate run- 
cinato-pinnatifld with few segments arrow-shaped at the base, upper 
ones simply sagittate. E. Eot. t. 933. E. El. v. Hup. 341. 

Marshy places, rare ; Isle of Ely, About Greenwich and Blackwall. 
Croydon, J. S. Mill, Esq. Wouldham, Kent, Rev. Prof. Iienslow. FI, 
July, Aug. If . — 6 — 8 feet high. Flowers numerous, large, yellow, 

3. S. arvensis, Linn, (corn Soio-thistle); flower-stalks corym- 
bose and involucre gianduloso-hispid, leaves denticulate cordate at 
the base oblongo-lanceolate, lower ones sinuato-runcinate. E. Eot. 
t. 674. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 342. 

Corn-fields, frequent. FI. Aug. 7/ . — Stems 3 — 4 feet high. Flowers 
very large, yellow. 

4. S. olerdeeus, Linn. ( common Sow-thistle); flower-stalks downy 
subumbellate, involucre glabrous, leaves lyrato-runcinate, upper 
ones lanceolate sagittato-amplexicaul at the base, all dentato-ciliate. 
E. Eot. t. 843. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 343. 

Waste places and cultivated ground, common. FI. June, Aug. 0. —   
2 — 3 ft. high. Flowers small, yellow. Involucre conical when in seed. 

5. Lactuca. Linn. Lettuce. 

1. L. virosa, Linn, (strong scented Lettuce); leaves patent ob- 
long toothed two-eared and amplexicaul at the base, their keel 
prickly, flowers panicled. E.Eot. 1. 1957. E. Fl.v. in. p. 345. 

Banks and way-sides, especially in a chalky soil. About Edinb. and 
Dunkeld. Near Coldstream, Mr. R. D. Thomson. Melrose, Rev. A. 
Baird. Stirling Castle, Mr. IV. Wilson. Ft. Aug. $ . — Stems 3 — 4 feet 
high, erect, prickly, with distant leaves. Root-leaves obovate, numerous. 
— The plant abounds with a milky and narcotic juice, which has been 
considered by some as a gentle and safe opiate. Flowers small, yellow. 

2. L. Scariola , Linn, (prickly Lettuce); leaves nearly upright 
lanceolate-sagittate sinuated and ciliato-dentate, the keel prickly, 
panicle leafy. E. Eot. t. 268. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 346. 

Waste ground in Cambridgeshire. Southend, Essex, and (formerly) 
near Islington, E. Forster , Esq. Ft. Aug. If.. — Of milder quality and 
paler colour than the last, with more upright branches and leaves. 

3. L. suligna, Linn, (least Lettuce); root-leaves lanceolate with 
few teeth, cauline ones linear-lanceolate entire sagittate, flowers 
lateral with small floral leaves. E. Bot. t. 707. E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 347. 

Chalky waste ground, near salt-marshes in the south-east of England. 
FI. Aug. $ . — Whole plant slender; branches twiggy: the small flowers 
may be said to be almost spicate. 


312 


SYNGENESIA — 7EQUALIS. 


[Apargia. 


G. Prenanthes. Linn. Wall-Lettuce. 

1. P. murdlis, Linn. ( Ivy-leaved Wall-lettuce); florets 5, leaves 
lyrato-pinnatifid and toothed the terminal lobe angled, panicle with 
divaricated branches. E. Bot. t. 457. E. El. v. iii. p. 348 — 
Chondrilla , Lo.m. 

On old walls and in woods. FI. July. If..— Stem 2 feet high, pani- 
cled above. Flowers small, yellow ; fruit with an elongated narrow 
neck, not really stipitate. 

2. P. hierdcii folia, Willd. (Hawkweed-leaved Wall-lettuce ); 
leaves downy toothed, radical ones oblongo-obovate, the rest sagit,- 
tato-amplexicaul, panicle corymbose spreading — C repis pul cl ir a, 
Linn. — E. Bot. t. 2325. E. FI. v. iii. p. 371. 

Crumbling rocks on the hill of Turin, near Forfar, Scotland. FI. 
J une — Sept. ©. — Root-leaves tapering into a foot-stalk; cauline ones 
very few, small, clasping the stem with their toothed bases. 

7. Leontodon. Linn. Dandelion. 

1. L. Taraxacum , Linn. ( common Dandelion); outer scales of 
the involucre reflexed, leaves runcinate glabrous toothed. E. Bot. 
t. 510. E. FI. v. iii.p. 349. 

Meadows and pastures, common. FI. all summer. If .—-Leaves all 
radical, segments m ire or less deep. Scape with a single, huge flower. 

2. L. palustre, Sm. (Marsh Dandelion); outer scales of the 
involucre erect appressed, leaves sinuato-dentate nearly glabrous. 
E. Bot. t. 553. E. FI. v. iii. p. 350. 

Wet pastures : Cambridgeshire and Norfolk. Frequent in Scotland 
upon the wet moors, where it may be seen gradually passing into L. 
Taraxacum. FI. all summer. If —It seems, however, according to 
Sprengel. to have been adopted, as a species, by many Botanists and 
under different names. 

8. Apargia. Schreh. Hawkbit. 

1 . A. Mspida, Willd. (rough Hawkbit); scape single-flowered, 
leaves runcinate hispid with forked hairs, flowers drooping in bud, 
“ florets hairy at their orifice glandulose at the tip, involucre hairy. 
Hook. Scot. i. p. 227. E.Fl.v. iii. p. 351 — Hedypnois hispida, 
Huds. — E. Bot. t. 554. — Leontodon hispidum, Linn. 

Meadows, pastures and gravelly heaths; frequent. Id. June, July. If . 

2. A. Tardxaci, Willd. (Dandelion Hawkbit); scapes thicken- 
ed above and hairy mostly single-flowered, leaves runcinate gla- 
brous, involucre hairy. Hook. Scot. i. p. 228. L. Fl.v. iii. p. 352. 
—Hedypnois Tarax. E. Bot. t. 1 109. — Ilieracium Tarax. Linn. 

Mountains of Wales, Scotland and Ireland. FI. Aug. If .—Remarka- 
ble for its scape being thickened upwards, and there, as is the involucre, 
clothed with black bail's. Flowers rather large, yellow. 

3. A. aulumndlis, Willd. (autumnal Hawkbit); scape branch- 


Huracium.] SYNGENESIA — JEQUALIS. 343 

ed scaly upwards, leaves lanceolate toothed or pinnatifid nearly 
glabrous, peduncles swollen beneath the somewhat downy involu- 
cres. Hook. Scot. i. p. 228. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 353.— Hedypnois 
autumnalis, E. Hot. t. 830. — Leontodon autumnale, Linn. 

Meadows and pastures, frequent. FI. Aug. If .—Involucre cylindri- 
cal, and tapering gradually into the pedicel, which is scaly. Flowers 
moderately large, yellow. ' Scarcely distinct from the preceding. ( Wils.) 

9. Thrincia. Roth. Thrincia. 

1. T. lurta, Roth, (hairy Thrincia); leaves lanceolate subsinu- 
ato-dentate somewhat hispid with frequently forked hairs, scapes 
single-flowered ascending glabrous as well as the involucre. Hook. 
FI. Land. N. S. cum Ic — Apargia hi.rta , Hoffm.—E. FI. v. Hi. 
p. 352. — Hedypnois hirta , E. Hot. t. 555 — Leontodurn hirt. Linn. 

Gravelly pastures and moors. FI. July, Aug. If . — In small, starved 
specimens', the leaves are frequently runcinate. The outer pericarps, 
which have scales for a pappus, are often abortive and smooth ; the 
inner ones are most beautifully striated and marked with raised dots. 

10. Hieracium. Linn. Hawkweed. 

* Scape leafless or rarely with one leaf, single-flowered. 

1. H. alpinum, Linn, (alpine single-flowered Hawkweed); 
scape single-flowered nearly leafless hairy as well as the oblongo- 
lanceolate almost entire leaves, involucre thickly clothed with long 
silky hairs. E. Hot. t. 1110. E. FI. v. in. p. 355. 

Elevated rocky mountains. Snowdon, Mr. II. Lhwyd. Near Llyn- 
y-Cwn, N. Wales; Mr. IV. Wilson. Highland mountains of Scotland. 
FI. July, Aug. If. — d — 6 inches high. Leaves with numerous, whitish 
hairs, especially at the base, where they taper into petioles. Hairs, in the 
upper part of the scape, black at the base, and often mixed with minute, 
black, glandulose ones. Involucre thickly clothed all over with dingy- 
coloured or fulvous, long silky hairs. Flower always solitary, large, of a 
full yellow. 

2. H. Halleri , Vill. (Hallerian Hcnvkioeed) ; scape 1-flowered 
with one or rarely 2 leaves hairy as well as the oblongo-spathulate 
distinctly toothed radical ones, involucre with long (fulvous) silky 
hairs. Hook. Scot. i. p. 229, (not FI. Lond. N. S. t. 215.) 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 271. — II. hybridum, Vill. Delph. t. 26. — II. 

pumilam and II. Halleri f Willd II. villosum, E. Hot. t. 2379, 

(surely, and correct for a cultivated specimen ; but not of foreign 
authors, nor of Jacq. Austr. t. 87.) 

Highland mountains of Scotland. Ben More in Glen Dochart, Ben 
Lawers, and the Clova mountains. FI. Aug. If. — Having received 
cultivated specimens of my II. llallcri of FI. Scot, from Mr. Drummond, 
1 can scarcely hesitate in referring the Engl. Bot. II. villosum to it, for 
that is a most faithful representation of the plant, as altered by culture; 
nor can I be wrong in pronouncing my plant to be the true Halleri of the 
French and German Botanists, from whom I possess numerous sped- 


344 SYNGENESIA — iEQUALIS. [Hieracium. 

mens. Bat then I have as little hesitation in saying that the plant is 
simply a luxuriant state of II. alpinum ; its general habit, hairy leaves, 
shaggy involucre and large solitary flowers proclaim it such. I have been 
led into an error, partly by Sir j. E. Smith’s remark, that II. Halleri 
was a caulescent species, which it cannot in reality be considered, and 
partly by a bad figure in Sturm’s Deutschland Flora; and in the New 
Series of FI. Lond., I have described a caulescent plant as the true 
Halleri: a species which I now refer to the II. jmlmonarium of Engl. 
Bot., or, as I there remarked, to a state of II. murornm. Those who 
have most endeavoured to unravel the difficulties attending the study 
of this highly perplexing genus, will be least disposed to judge severely 
such mistakes. — The real H. villosum is a decidedly caulescent plant, 
bearing many large leaves. Our present one is branched only when in cul- 
tivation and near the base. 

3. H. Pilosella, Linn. ( common Mouse-ear Hawkweed ); scape 
one-flowered leafless, leaves entire elliptico-laneeolate hairy downy 
beneath, scyons creeping. E. Bot. t. 1093. E. Ft. v. iii. p. 356. 

Banks and dry pastures, frequent. FI. May — July. — Distinguishable 
at all times, by its creeping scyons . Flowers of a pale, lemon-yellow. 

** Scape leafless or, rarely, with 1 leaf, many -flowered. 

4. H. dubium, Linn. ( branching Mouse-ear Hawkweed ); scape 
many-flowered leafless (or with 1 small leaf), leaves entire elliptico- 
laneeolate with only a few scattered hairs, scyons creeping. E. Bot. 
t. 2352. E. FI. v. iii. p. 356. 

Mountains or in mountainous countries, rare. Said to have been 
found in Westmoreland and Scotland. FI. July. 2f . — Taller and slen- 
derer than the last, with smaller fiowers. 

5. H. aurantiacum, Linn. ( orange Hawkweed); scape nearly 
leafless simple hairy bearing a corymb of many flowers, leaves 
obovato-lanceolate entire rough with longish hairs. E. Bot. t. 1469. 
E. FI. v. iii. p. 358. 

Woods in Banffshire and near Tarref. Coalston woods, E. Lothian. 
Woods east of Kenmore. Failsworth, near Manchester. I fear it is 
a very dubious native. FI. July. If . — Hairs long on the upper part of the 
scape; black at the base, as they are upon the involucre ; sometimes all 
black : hence often called Grim-the  Collier. Flowers deep orange. 

6. H. Auricula, Linn, (orange Mouse-ear Hawkweed); “leaves 
lanceolate acute nearly entire coarsely hairy green on both sides, 
scyons scarcely so long as the leaves, scape downy and hairy corym- 
bose, calyx shaggy.” E. Bot. t. 2368. E. FI. v. iii. p. 357. 

On Dalehead, near Grassmere, Cumberland, Hudson. FI. July. If. 

*** Stem with fete (1 or 2) leaves, many-flowered. 

7. H. Lawsoni, Vill. ( ylaucous hairy Hawkhcad); hairy espe- 
cially the petioles, stem more or less branched upwards having 
1 — 2 sessile leaves, those of the root ovato-lanceolate entire or 
toothed, involucres with hairs which are black at the base and 


Hieractum.) SYNGENESIA — ^QUALIS. 345 

mixed with black pedunculated glands.' — «. leaves shortly petiolate 

lanceolate, stem with 3 — 5 flowers. Hook. Scot. i.p. 230 H. 

Laivsoni, E. Bot. t. 2083. E. FI. v. iii.p. 3G3. — f3. leaves broadly 
ovato-lanceolate entire upon long petioles. Hook. Scot. i. p. 230. 

Mountains of Westmoreland, Wales and Scotland, in many places. 
Ft. August. If. — This species is best distinguished by its nearly entire 
and very villous leaves, especially their petioles, which are often quite 
silky. The whole plant is of a soft and flaccid texture. 

8. H. pulmonarium, Sm. ( Lungwort Hawk weed); hairy espe- 
cially the petioles, stem 2 — 6-flowered with 1 — 2 leaves, those of 
the root ovato-lauceolate acute sinuato-dentate lengthened into a 
petiole, those of the stem sessile, involucre hairy, hairs black at the 

base and often glandular. E. Bot. t. 2307. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 362 

H. murorum, >3. ? Hook. Scot. i. p. 230. — II. Halleri, Hook, in 
FI. Loud. N. S. t. 215, (excl. syn.) 

Rocky places, in the mountainous vallies of Scotland. FI. August. 
If.— I incorrectly published this as H. Halleri, in the New Series of 
the Flora Londinensis; but not without expressing my opinion that it 
might eventually prove a var. of H. murorum, from which however it 
may be known by being softer and more hairy, especially about the base 
of the stem and petioles of the leaves, which latter are narrower, tapering 
gradually into the footstalk, with the toothing not so much confined to 
the base of the leaf, and by the larger and paler flowers. The II. saxatile 
of Jacquin also comes very near to this. 

9. H. murorum , Linn. ( Wall Hawkweed); stern with 1 petiolated 
leaf branched upwards subcorymbose downy especially beneath 
the involucre where are a few black glands, radical leaves ovate 
mostly toothed at the base and hairy as well as the longish petioles, 
involucre downy. E. Bot. t. 2082. E. FI. v. in. p. 359. 

Woods, on walls and on rocks, common. FI. Aug. If . — Perhaps 
the three species of this section ought to be considered as varieties of 
each other. The present is from 4 — 6 inches, in poor soils, to 2 feet in 
height. The stem is rather closely pubescent than hairy, with a very few 
black glandular bristles. The involucre has the same short pubescence. 
The leaves vary much in their toothing and hairiness. 

**** Stem with many leaves, many-flowered. 

10. H. sylvaticum, Sm. ( Wood Hawkweed); stem many- 
leaved branched upwards and subcorymbose slightly hairy and 
more or less downy beneath the involucre, leaves ovato-lanceolate 
or lanceolate toothed with the sharp teeth pointing upward some- 
what hairy, involucre with very short pubescence. Hook. Scot, 
i. p. 231 — a., leaves green ovato-lanceolate with small teeth. 

Hook. 1. c — II. sylvaticum, E. Bot. t. 2031. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 36 1 

H. murorum , a. Sm. FI. Brit. p. 830. — j3. leaves ovato-lanceolate 
spotted with dark purple, with large teeth. Hook. 1. c — H. mac- 

2 2 


346 


SYNGENESI A — TEOUAEIS. 


[Ilicracium. 


tilatum, E. Bot. t. 2121. — y. leaves lanceolate spotted and clouded 
with purple. Hook. I c — II. pictum, Schleich. 

Hah Mountain woods, walls and banks, frequent.— p>. and y. not rare 
in Scotland. FI. Aug. If .-1-2 ft. high, scarcely hairy on the stem. 
The leaves are usually numerous, more or less distinctly toothed. Mr. 
Banks finds it, near Plymouth, with quite entire foliage. 

11. H. paludosum , Linn. ( Succory-leaved Hawkweed); gla- 
brous, stein panicled fistulose, leaves ovato-oblong acute toothed 
embracing the stem with their heart-shaped bases, scales of the 
6tem with black hairs or bristles. E. Bot. t. 1094. h. FI. v. Hi. 

Frequent in moist woods and rocky places, in the north of England, 
Wales and Scotland. FI. Aug. If .-One to 2 or even 3 feet high. 
Readily known by the absence of all pubescence, and by its very amplex- 
icaul stem-leaves with their spreading or deflexed teeth, as well as by the 
calyx, which has long, quite black hairs. 

12. H. molle, Jacq. {soft-leaved Hawkweed); “stem angular 
tubular leafy downy corymbose, leaves lanceolate slightly toothed 
hairy clasping the stem, lower ones stalked elliptical and obtuse. 
E. Bot. 1. 2210. E. FI. v. iii.p. .364. 

Woods in Scotland. Near Forfar, at the falls of the Tunimel and m 
m t 7 ,v |„i v Aiw. If.— Plant about 1 toot high, remarkable 

fol ks obtuse radicalfcflw*, which taper gradually into a long footstalk. 
Scales of the involucre with a few, black, glandular hairs 

13 H. cerinthoides, Linn. {Honey -wort-leaved Hawkweed); 
stem 'corymbose hairy glandular above, leaves hairy very slightly 
toothed, radical ones oblongo-obovatepeUolate caul, ne ones oblong 
semiamplexicaul, involucre hairy, h. Bot. t. ,3/8. h. FI. v. m. 

V ‘ Rocks in the Highlands, not uncommon, G. Don. FI. Aug. If. 

14. H. amplexicdule, Linn, {amplexicaul Hawkweed); g andu- 

loso-pilose, stem corymbose, leaves toothed radical one. i oblongo- 

ovate petiolate, cauline ones cordate at the base amplexicaul. All. 

; I f 1 / 50. f. 2. Hook. Scot. i. p. 232. 

w II I' the' castle of Cleish, Kinross-shire, Mr. Arnott. Clova 
Walls ot the castle ot »-ieis ' ' , ized on the walls of the Oxford 

Gard n e t rd>r R/c/iao, who' justly observes, that it has an equally good 
r e t to a p ace in the British Flora as Senecio squahdus and some other 
" 0 V/ Aug. If --A most distinct and well marked species every 
vi c e clothed with brownish glandular hairs, most dense on the pe- 
tal and involucre. The lower cauline leaves are more or less oblong, 
the upper ones truly cordate. , 

15 II dcnticii latum ; “stem erect leafy solid many flowered 
cymo'se with downy glandular stalks, leaves sesstle elhpticdanceo. 
late finely toothed nearly glabrous glaucous beneath E 
t. 212. E. EL v. Hi. p- 368.—//. prenanthoides, Sm. F 

p. 835. (not I <H.) 


E. Bot. 
FI. Br. 


Hieracium.] SYNGENESI A — iEQUALIS. 347 

Woods at Loch Rannoch, Perthshire; near Selkirk; and Findhorn, 
Elgin, Rev. G. Gordon. FI. July, Aug. If. — If I am correct in my ideas 
ot this, without having had an opportunity of seeing authentic speci- 
mens, it is a species not unfrequent in the Highlands, with the habit of 
II. prenanthoid.es , but with more lanceolate leaves , which are attenuated 
at the base, and by no means amplexicaul. 

16. H. prenanthoules, Vill. (rough-bordered Haivkiveed); stem 
erect leafy simply hairy, panicle corymbose with hispid and glan- 
dular stalks, leaves oblong cordate and amplexicaul at the base, 
upper ones gradually smaller and ovato-cordate acuminate, all 
glaucous beneath and remotely toothed. E. Bot. t. 2235 . E. El. 
v. Hi. p. 36S. 

River-sides in Scotland; but rare. Banks of the Esk ; Near Pit- 
main ; in Glen Lyon, and banks of the Don, in Braemar. FI. Aug. 1/1 . 
— 3 — 4- feet high, the leaves all cordate, and remarkably amplexicaul at 
the base, gradually smaller upwards. 

17. H. sabaudum, Sm. Linn.? ( shrubby broad-leaved Hawh- 
iceed); “ stem erect copiously leafy many-flowered, leaves ovato- 
lanceolate sharply toothed rough-edged somewhat clasping hairy 
beneath.” E. Bot. t. 349. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 367. 

“ Coppices, groves and thickets, frequent.” Sm. Surry, .7. S. Mill , 
F.sq. FI. Aug. Sept. If . . — The continental H. sabaudum, such as Al- 
lioni has figured, t. 21. f. 2, with very broad, deeply-toothed and crowded 
leaves, is surely very different from this, with which, though stated to 
be common, 1 regret to say I am unacquainted ; unless, as I strongly 
suspect, it be the same as what I have received, gathered at Hart- 
ford bridges, near Norwich, by Mr. Wigham, a very accurate Botanist of 
that city. The E. Bot. sabaudum well represents this plant; only that 
the leaves in my specimens are narrower, almost lanceolate, more entire, 
and the whole plant is clothed with rather short but rigid hairs, which, 
upon the stem in particular, are split at their extremities into 2 or 3 
recurved points. The involucre has its inner scales long and equal, the 
outer ones smaller and very lax, extending partly down the peduncle; the 
pappus is very white and feathery; the fruit linear, furrowed and finely 
striated transversely ; all which characters are well represented or de- 
scribed by Sir Jas. E. Smith. From the involucre and dense white pap- 
pus, indeed, I should almost be led to arrange this plant under Crepis, 
in which genus I have endeavoured in vain to find any to which it can 
be referred ; and I trust the attention of Norfolk Botanists will be further 
directed to it. Allioni’s figure in his FI. Pedemoniana , t. 21. f. 1 , has 
very much the habit of our plant, and seems very different from the 
H. prenanthoidcs, of which De Candolle makes it ins var. £ — Sprengel 
refers to Smith’s sabaudum , under II. boreale of Fries ; but I know not 
whether correctly. 

18. II. umbellatum, Linn, (narrow-leaved Uawhweed ); stem 
erect simple very leafy, leaves linear-lanceolate subglabrous slightly 
toothed, flowers subumbellate, peduncles downy, involucres gla- 
brous. E. Bot. t. 1771. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 369. 


348 SYNGENESIA — jEQUALIS. [ Hgpockceris . 

Groves, or stony and rocky places. FI. Aug. Sept. . — The most 
decidedly marked of any individual in this troublesome genus. 

11. Crepis. Linn. Hawk’s-heard. 

1. C. tecldrum, Linn. ( smooth Hawk' s-beard) ; leaves glabrous 
runcinate the upper ones linear-sagittate amplexicaul, stem gla- 
brous, panicle subcorymbose, involucre pubescent. E. Hot.t. 1111. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 372. 

Meadows, pastures, roofs of cottages, &c. FI. July. ©. — Stems 1 — .'i 
feet high. Radical leaves more or less pinnatifid or runcinate, their teeth 
or segments often horizontal, sometimes curved upwards. F/uivers 
small, yellow. 

2. C. biennis, Linn, (rough Hatch' s-beard'); leaves rough run- 
cinato-pinnatifid their lobes toothed, involucre downy and some- 
what bristly. E. Hot. t. 149. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 373. 

Chalky pastures in England; Kent, Suffolk, See. Near Bangor, N. 
Wales, Mr. IE. Wilson. FI. June, July. $. — Stems 2 — 4 feet high, fur- 
rowed, rough above. Flowers much larger than in the preceding. Pap- 
pus very white, and upon a fruit so elongated upwards as to form a stalk. 

12. Borkhausia. Mcench. Borkhausia. 

1. B . fuetida, De Cand. ( stinking Borkhausia) ; leaves scabrous 
sessile runcinato-pinnatifid upper ones lanceolate cut at the base, 
stem hairy, involucre downy — Crepis feetida, Linn. — E. Hot. 
t. 406. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 370. 

Dry chalky ground ; Cambridgeshire, Norfolk and Kent. FI. June, 
July. $ . — Stem spreading. Corollas red externally. The herb is very 
milky, and said to diffuse a smell resembling bitter almonds. 

13. Hypociiceris. Linn. Cat’s-ear. 

1. H. maculdta , Linn. ( spotted Cat’s-ear); stem almost leafless 
solitary, leaves obovato-oblong undivided toothed (spotted above). 
E. Bot. t. 225. E. FI. v. iii.p. SI 5. 

In open, chalky and limestone pastures. Ormeshead, N. Wales, Mr. 
IV. Wilson. Dry woods, east of Forfar, Mr. G. Don. FI. July. If. — 
Leaves almost all radical, scabrous. Stem or scape with one, or rarely 
3 — 5, large, deep yellow flowers , and 2 or 3 small lanceolate scales or 
bracteas, and, as well as the involucre, slightly hispid. 

2. II. glabra, Linn. ( smooth Cat’s-ear); nearly glabrous, invo- 
lucre oblong regularly imbricated, stem branched somewhat leafy, 
radical leaves dentato-sinuate. E. Bot. t. 575. E. Ft. v. Hi. p. 375. 

Fields and gravelly soils in many places, but not very common. FI. 
July, Aug. ©. — A foot or more high. Leaves oblong, slightly hairy. 
Flowers small, yellow. Pappus of the central florets stalked, that of 
the circumference sessile. 

3. H. radicata, Linn. ( long-rooted Cat's-ear); stem branched 
leafless glabrous, peduncles with small scales, leaves runcinate ob- 
tuse scabrous. E. Bot. t. 831. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 376. 


Saussurea.] SYNGENESIA — 7E0UALIS. 349 

Meadows, pastures and way-sides, frequent. FI. July. If . — Leaves 
all radical, spreading. Stem 1 ft. or more high. Peduncles a little 
thickened upward. Flowers rather large, yellow. Pappus stalked in fr. 

14. Lapsana. Linn. Nipple-wort. 

1. L. communis, Linn, (common Nipple-wort); involucre of 
the fruit angular, stem panicled, peduncles slender, leaves ovate 
petiolate angulato-dentate. E. Bot. t. 844. E. EL v. Hi. p. 376. 

Waste and cultivated ground, common. FI. July, Aug. ©. — Stems 
 2 — 4, feet high. Leaves soft and thin, slightly hairy; the radical ones 
more or less lyrate. Flowers small, yellow. 

2. L. pustlla, Willd. (dwarf Nipple-wort) ; scape branched very 
thick and fistulose upwards, leaves obovato-oblong toothed. Hook, 
m FI. Loud. N.S.t. 65. E. FI. v. iii.p. 377.— L. minima , DC. 
— Hook. Scot. i.p. 234 . — Hyoseris min. Linn — E. Bot. t. 95. 

Corn-fields, in gravelly soils. FI. June, July. ©. — Scapes 6 — 8 inches 
high, more or less branched, remarkable for their clavate and fistulose 
extremities. Flowers small, yellow. 

15. Cichorium. Linn. Wild Succory. 

1. C . Intybus, Linn. ( Wild Succory); flowers sessile axillary 
in pairs, leaves runcinate. E. Bot. t. 539. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 379. 

Borders of fields and waste places ; chiefly in a light, gravelly or chalky 
soil. FI. July, Aug. If .. — Stem 1 — 3 ft. high, erect, branched. Floivers 
numerous, large, bright but pale blue. — This is not the Endive or Succory 
of the gardens, which is C. Endivia, supposed to be a native of India. 
The specific name of both is derived from the Arabic Hendibeh. 

16. Arctium. Linn. Burdock. 

1. A. Lappa, Linn, (common Burdock); leaves cordate stalked. 
Hook. Scot. i. p. 235. — a. calyx glabrous. A. Lappa , E. Bot. t. 38. 
E. FI. v. iii.p. 380 — j3. calyx with a cobweb-like down. A. Bar- 
dana, Willd. — E. Bot. t. 2478. E. FI. v. iii.p. 381. 

Waste places and way-sides, common. FI. July, Aug. $ . — Three feet 
or more high. Radical leaves very large and often slightly toothed. 
Involucre with hooked scales, which fasten themselves most pertina- 
ciously to clothes and the coats of animals. These scales are sometimes 
glabrous, and occasionally have a more or less abundant cottony sub- 
stance interwoven with them; whence two species have been established 
by some authors. Flowers purple. 

17. Serratula. Linn. Saw-wort. 

1. S. tinctoria, Linn. ( common Saw-wort) ; leaves entire pin- 
natifid finely serrated, outer scales of the involucre ovate appressed, 
inner ones linear coloured. E. Bot. t. 38. E.Fl.v. iii.p. 382. 

Thickets and pastures, less frequent in Scotland. FI. Aug. If . — 
2 — 3 ft. high, branched, stiff. Flowers purple. — It dyes cloth yellow. 

18. Saussurea. De Cand. Saussurea. 

1. S. ulpina , DC. ( alpine Saussurea) ; leaves toothed cottony 


350 SYNGENESIA 7EQUALIS. [ Cllicus . 

beneath lanceolate, those of the root ovato-lanceolate stalked, flowers 
in a clustered umbel. E. Bot. t. 599. E. Ft. v. Hi. p. 383. 

Moist alpine rocks. Snowdon, Rap ; Mr. IV. Wilson. Frequent 
on the Highland mountains of Scotland. FI. Aug. 2f . — Stem 8 — 12 
inches high, erect, simple, woolly, heaves few upon the stem. Flowers 
rather large, purple. 

19. Caiiduus. Linn. Thistle. 

* Leaves decurrent. 

1. C. nutans , Linn. ( Musk Thistle); leaves decurrent spinous, 
flowers drooping, scales of the involucre lanceolate cottony, outer 
ones spreading. E. Bot. t. 1112. E. Ft. v. id. p. 384. 

Waste ground, in dry, stony or chalky soils. FI. July, Aug. $. 
(©. Sm.) — 2 — 3 feet high, not much branched, cottony, interruptedly 
winged. Leaves oblong, deeply sinuated. Flowers solitary, large, hand- 
some, purple: said to smell powerfully of musk in warm weather; most 
so in the evening, according to Lightfoot. 

2. C. acanthoides, Linn. ( welted Thistle); leaves decurrent 
sinuated spinous, involucre globose nearly sessile, its scales linear 
slightly recurved. E. But. t. 973. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 385. — C. poly- 
acanthos, Curt. 

Way-sides and waste places ; varying with white flowers. FI June, 
July. ©. — 3 — 4 feet high, uninterruptedly winged, branched. Flowers 
clustered at the ends of the branches, deep purple. 

3. C .tenuiflorus, Curt, (slender -flowered Thistle); leaves decur- 
rebt sinuated spinous somewhat cottony beneath, involucres nearly 
cylindrical clustered sessile, their scales lanceolate erect. E. Bot. 
t. 412. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 385. 

Waste sandy places, especially near the sea. FI. June, July. ©. — 
2 — 4 feet high, winged the whole way up the stem with the decurrent 
bases of the leaves. 

** Leaves sessile. 

4. C. marianus, Linn. (Milk Thistle); leaves amplexicaul 
waved spinous the radical ones pinnatifid, scales of the involucre 
subfoliaceous recurved spinous at the margin. E. Bot. t. 976. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 386. 

Banks and waste places: rare in Scotland. About Edinburgh, and 
on Dumbarton Rock. FI. July. $ . — Three to 5 feet high. Distin- 
guishable at once by the milky veins on its leaves, and the great recurved 
scales of the involucre. — A drop of the Virgin Mary’s milk was consid- 
ered to have produced these white veins, as that of Juno was tabled to 
be the origin of the milky wap. 

20. Cnicus. Earn. Plume-thistle. 

* Leaves decurrent. 

1. C. lanceolatus, Willd. ( Spear Plume-thistle); leaves decur- 
rent hispid pinnatifid, their segments generally two-lobed spreading 


351 


Cllicus.] SYNGENESIA 7EQUALIS. 

spinous, involucres ovate tomentose, their scales lanceolate spread- 
ing-. Hook. Scot. i. p. 236. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 388 — Cardans lan- 
ceolaius, Linn.—E. Eot. t. 107. 

Way-sides and pastures, frequent. FI. July, Aug. $ . — 3 — 4 feet 
high. Leaves downy beneath ; their points long and very sharp. 
Flowers standing singly, large. 

2. C. palustris, Willd. (Marsh Plume-thistle); leaves decurrent 
scabrous pinnatifid spinous, involucres ovate clustered, their scales 
ovato-lanceolate mucronate appressed. Rook. Scot. i. p. 236. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 3S8. — Carduus palustris, Linn. — E. Eot. t. 974. 

Moist meadows and shady places, frequent. FI. July. $ . — 4 — G ft. 
high, erect, very full of rather short spines. Remarkable for its clustered 
heads o i flowers, whose involucres have the scales broad, appressed, 
keeled and mucronated. 

** Leaves sessile, or nearly so. 

3. C. arvensis , Hofifm. ( creeping Plume-thistle); leaves sessile 

pinnatifid spinous, stem panicled, involucre ovate its scales ap- 
pressed mucronated. Hook. Scot.i.p. 237. E.Fl. v. Hi. p. 389 

Carduus arvensis, Curt. — E. Bot.t. 975 . — Serratula arc., Linn — 

Fields and by way-sides, too abundant. FI. July. If .. — 1 — 3 feet 
high. Rout very creeping. Stems angular, but not winged. 

4. C. Forsteri, Sm. ( branching Boy Plume-thistle); “ leaves 
slightly decurrent pinnatifid spinous downy beneath, stem panicled 
hollow, involucre ovate rather cottony, outer scales spinous.” 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 390. 

Formerly in boggy woods, near Frant, Sussex, 2 miles from Tunbridge 
Wells, Mr. T. F. Forster. Foot of St. George’s Hill, Weybridge, J. S. 
Mill, Esq. FI. July, Aug. If. — “ The fructification most accords with 
that of the last two sp., while the herbage and habit approach some of 
the following, or rather the exotic Cn. rivularis, Willd.” Sm. — Mr. 
Borrer suspects it to be a hybrid production between C. pratensis and C. 
palustris. 

5. C. ertophorus, Willd. (woolly-headed Plume-thistle); leaves 

sessile pinnatifid every other segment pointing upwards spinous 
scabrous, involucres sphserical woolly. Hook. Scot. i.p. 237. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 390 Carduus eriophorus, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 386. 

Waste ground and road-sides, in a chalky and limestone soil. Rare in 
Scotland. Near Edinb. ; Dumbarton and in Appin. FI. July. $ . — 
Stems much branched, furrowed, 3 feet high, the stoutest of the genus. 
Leaves acuminated, white and downy beneath ; their lobes alternately 
pointing upwards and downwards, and terminated by sharp spines. In- 
volucre very large ; its scales linear, mucronate, very much interwoven 
with a woolly substance. 

6. C. tuberosus, Willd. ( tuberous Plume-thistle); “ leaves deeply 
pinnatifid lobed fringed with prickles, lower ones on long stalks, 
stem almost single-flowered without wing or prickles, scales ol the 


[Carlina. 


352 SYNGENESIA — JEQUALIS. 

involucre minutely spinous nearly glabrous, root creeping tuber- 
ous.” E. Bot.t. 2562. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 391. 

In a copse-wood, called Great Ridge, on the Wiltshire downs, between 
Bovton house and Fonthill, abundantly ; A. B. Lambert, Esq. FI. Aug. 
11 . — A most distinct and handsome species. 

7. C. heterophyllus, Willd. (melancholy Plume-thistle); leaves 
semi-amplexicaul lanceolate soft ciliato-dentate undivided or laci- 
niated white and downy beneath, flowers mostly solitary. Hook. 
Scot.p. 372. E. FI. v. iii.p. 397. — Carduus heter. Linn — E.Bot. 
t. 675. 

Moist mountain pastures in the north, frequent. Ft. July. — 2 3 
ft. high. Stems striated, and, as well as the underside ol the leaves, 
covered with a white cottony down. Leaves mostly radical and peti- 
olated. Involucre oblong, dark green ; its scales lanceolate, acuminate 
but not spiny. 

8. C. pratensis , Willd. (Meadow Plume-thistle); upper leaves 

sessile lanceolate soft waved at the edge and unequally spinous pu- 
bescent cottony beneath, flowers mostly solitary. Hook • Scot.i.p. 237. 
E. FI. v. iii.p. 393 Carduus prat., Huds — E. Bot. t. 177. 

Low wet pastures ; rare in Scotland. Isla and Arran. FI. July. ![. . 
— About 1 foot high. Leaves waved, toothed and spiny. Flowers so- 
litary. Scales of the involucre with short spines, lanceolate, closely im- 
bricated, cobwebbed. 

9. C. acdulis, Willd. (dwarf Plume-thistle); stemless, involucre 
glabrous. Hook. Scot. i. p. 237. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 394*. — Carduus 
acaulis, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 161. 

Frequent and destuctive in dry gravelly or chalky pastures, in some 
parts of England; as Dorsetshire and Norfolk. Rare in Scotland, 
Light/. FI. July. 11 .—Leaves spreading close to the ground, oblong, 
pinnatiful, segments lobed and spinous, glabrous. From the centre ol 
these leaves arises one sessile, purple flower. Involucre obovato-cylin- 
drical, imbricated with close, oppressed, lanceolate, acute, greenish scales, 
not spinous. 

21. Onopordum. Linn. Cotton-thistle. 

1. O . Acanthium, Linn, (common Cotton- Thistle); scales ol the 
involucre spreading subulate, leaves ovato-oblong sinuated and 
spinous decurrent woolly on both sides. E. Bot. t. 977. L. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 395. 

Waste ground, road-sides, &e. in a gravelly soil. Less frequent in 
Scotland. FI. Aug. $ . — Four to G feet high, branched and winged at 
the summit ; wings very spinous. Involucre globose. Flowers purple. 
The seeds of this and of others of the Thistle tribe are much eaten by 
birds. It is cultivated in Scotland as the Scutch Thistle. 

22. Carlina. Linn. Carline Thistle. 

1. C. vulgaris, Linn, (common Carline); stem many-flowered 
corymbose pubescent, leaves lanceolate unequally spinous and 
sinuated downy beneath. E. Bot. t. 1 14*4. E. FI. v. iii.p. 397. 


Tanacctum .] SYNGENESIA — SUPERFLUA. 353 

Dry hilly pastures, and fields. FI. June. £ . — One foot high; very 
spinous, but the spines generally short. Ext. scales or leaflets of the 
involucre much resembling the leaves , but smaller; inner ones linear, 
membranous, yellow, entire, spreading and forming an horizontal ray 
around the purplish florets. Anthers with 2 bristles at the base, 

23. Bidens. Linn. Bur-marigold. 

1 . B. cernua, Linn. ( nodding Bur-marigolcl ) ; flowers drooping, 
bracteas lanceolate entire (longer than the involucre), leaves lan- 
ceolate serrated undivided, bristles of the fruit about 3 erect. 
E. Bot. t. 1 1 Id. E. FI. v. iii.p. 399. 

Sides of rivulets, ditches and lakes, frequent. FI. June — Aug. ©. — 
1 — 2 ft. and more high, branched and slightly hispid. Leaves glabrous, 
deeply serrated. Flowers large, greenish-yellow. 

2. B. tripartita, Linn. ( trifid Bur-marigold ) ; leaves tripartite, 
leaflets lanceolate deeply serrated, bristles of the pericarp 2 — 3. 
E. Bot. #.111 3. E. FI. v. iii.p. 399. 

Marshy places, sides of ponds and lakes. FI. July. 0. — Readily dis- 
tinguished by its tri- and sometimes quinquepartite leaves. The flowers, 
which are slightly drooping, are also smaller than those of B. cernua. 

24. Eupatorium. Linn. Hemp-agrimony. 

1. E. canndbinum , Linn. ( common Hemp-agrimony); leaves 
opposite subpetiolate 3 — 5-partite, their segments lanceolate deeply 
serrated. E. Bot. t. 428. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 400. 

Banks of rivers and watery places. FI. July, Aug. If . — Stems 3 — 4 ft. 
high, branched. Leaves downy, the middle lobe the longest. Flowers 
very numerous, pale reddish-purple, thickly crowded in terminal corymbs. 
Style longer than the cor., deeply cleft. Plant slightly aromatic. 

25. Chrysocoma. Linn. Goldylocks. 

1. C. Linosyris , Linn. ( flax-leaved Goldylocks) ; herbaceous, 
leaves linear glabrous, scales of the involucre loosely spreading. 
E. Bot. t. 2505. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 402. 

Rocky cliffs of Berryhead, Devon. Whorle-hill, Weston-supra-mare, 
Somerset; Mr. W. Christy. FI. Aug. Sept. 0. 

26. Diotis. Desf. Cotton-weed. 

1. D. maritima, Cass. ( seaside Cotton-weed .) — Hook, in FI. 
Lond.N. S.t. 137. E.Fl.v. Hi. p. 403. — Santolina marit. Linn. 
MSS. E. Bot. t. 141. — Athanasia and Filago, Linn. 

Sandy sea-shores, principally on the east and south of England. FI. 
Aug. Sept. If. — Roots running deep into the sand. Leaves numerous, 
oblong, covered with a dense white tomentum, as are the scales of the 
involucre, which in a great measure conceal the small yellow corollas. 

SYNGENESIA— SUPERFLUA. 

27. Tanacetum. Linn. Tansy. 

1. T. vulgare, Linn. ( common Tansy); leaves bipinnatifid inciso- 
serrate. E. Bot. t. 1229. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 405. 


351 


SYNGENESIA — SUPER, FLUA. 


[ Gnaphalium . 

Borders of fields and road-sides. FI. Aug. If. — 1 — 3 feet high. 
Flowers in a terminal corymb. — Whole plant bitter and aromatic, much 
used in medicine, and also in domestic economy. 

28. Artemisia. Linn. Wormwood, Southernwood, Mugwort. 

1. A. campestris, Linn. (Field Southernwood) ; leaves bipinna- 
tifid glabrous above with linear segments, stems twiggy, procumbent 
before flowering. E. Eot. t. 338. E. El. v. Hi. p. 406. 

Rare. Dry sandy heaths; Norfolk and Suffolk, principally in the 
vicinity of Thetford and Bury. FI. Aug. If. 

2. A. maritima, Linn. ( Sea Wormwood) ; erect, leaves downy 
bipinnatifid with linear segments, flowers racemed oblong, recepta- 
cle naked. — a. racemes drooping. A. maritima, E. Eot. t. 1/06. 
E. FI. v.iii.p. 407.— [3. racemes erect. — A.gallica, Willd. E.Bot. 
p. 1706. t. 1001, (A. marit.) 

Sea-shores and in salt-marshes, where the two varieties may be seen 
growing together, and sometimes from the same root. FI. Sept- If. . 

3. A. Absinthium, Linn. ( common Wormwood); leaves bipin- 
natifid clothed with short silky down, segments lanceolate, flowers 
hemisphserical drooping, receptacle hairy. E.Bot. t. 1230. E. FI. 
v. in. p. 408. 

Waste places and about villages, in dry soils. Near Edinb. FI. Aug. 

foot high, erect. Panicles of flowers erect, leafy. Floral 
leaves undivided. Flowers dingy yellow, rather large, hemispherical ; 
florets of the ray very short. — Aromatic and bitter, and has been much 
employed in medicine. 

4. A. vulgaris, Linn. (Mugwort); leaves pinnatifid their seg- 
ments white and downy beneath, flowers somewhat racemed ovate, 
receptacle naked. E. Bot. t. 978. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 409. 

Hedges and waste places, common. FI. Aug. If . Stems 3 4 feet 

high, furrowed. 

5. A. ccerulescens, Linn, (bluish or Lavander-leaved Mugwort): 
“ leaves hoary most of them lanceolate undivided tapering at the 
base, lower ones variously divided, flowers erect cylindrical, recep- 
tacle naked.” E. Bot. t. 2426. E. FI. v. Hi.p. 410. 

Sea-coast near Boston, Lincolnshire, and in the Isle of Wight : but 
it cannot be found there now. FI. Aug. Sept. If . 

29. Gnaphalium. Linn. Cudweed. 

* Flowers dioecious. (Antenuaria, Gccrtn.) 

1. G. dioicum, Linn. (Mountain Cudweed); shoots procumbent, 
stems simple, corymbs crowded, root-leaves spathulate woolly 
chiefly beneath, flowers dioecious, inner scales of the involucre 
elongated obtuse coloured. E.Bot. t. 267. /i. 11. v. iii.p. 413. 
(3. hyperboreum , leaves woolly on both sides. G. hyperb. Dona, 

Hort. Cant. ed. 7. p. 23 Antenuaria hyperborca , D. Bon in 

E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2640. 


Gnaphalium.] SYNGENESI A — SUPERFLUA. 355 

Mountain heaths, abundant. — 0. Isle of Skye, Mr. J. Mcickay. FI. 
June, July. If. — Flowering-stems 3 — 4 inches high. Leaves greenish 
and naked above, when old, white beneath. Inner scales of the involucre 
often rose-coloured, especially in the fertile flower. 

2. G. margaritaceum , Linn. ( American Cudweed, Pearly Ever- 
lasting'); herbaceous, stein branched above, leaves linear-lanceolate 
acute alternate cottony especially beneath, flowers corymbose level- 
topped. E. Bot. t. 2018. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 412. 

Moist meadows near Booking, Essex. Banks of the Rymny, South 
Wales; and near Dalgelly, Merionethshire, IV. F. Talbot , Esq. Wire 
Forest, Worcestershire ; and near Litchfield. FI. Aug. If. 

** Flowers perfect. 

3. G. luteo- album, Linn. ( Jersey Cudweed); herbaceous, leaves 
semiamplexicaul linear-oblong waved woolly on both sides, lower 
ones obtuse, flowers densely tufted. E. Bot. t. 1002. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 411. 

Jersey.. Between Hanxtown and Little Shelford, Cambridgeshire. 
Fields Larlingford, Norfolk; Rev. G. R. Lcathes. FI. July, Aug. 0. — 
Cor. yellow and distinct ; while those of the following sp. are inconspicuous. 

4. G. sylvaticum, Linn. ( Highland Cudweed); stem simple 

nearly erect downy, flowers axillary forming an interrupted leafy 
spike, leaves linear-lanceolate downy. Hook. Scot. i. p. 240. — u,. 
leaves woolly on both sides. G. sylvaticum, E. Bot. t. 913. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 414. — 13. leaves nearly glabrous above, spike longer more 
interrupted. G. rectum, Huds E. Bot. t. 1 24. E. FI. v. iii.p. 4 1 5. 

Groves, thickets and pastures ; frequent in Scotland. FI. Aug. If . — 
Scales of the involucre oblong, shining, with a broad, brown border. 

5. G. supinum, Linn. ( dwarf Cudweed); stem decumbent 
branching only from the base, flowering-stems erect, flowers soli- 
tary or racemed, leaves linear downy on both sides. E. Bot. t. 1193. 
E. FI. v. iii.p. 415. — G. alpinum, IJghf Scot. t. 20. f. 2. 

Summits of all the Highland mountains, abundant. FI. July, Aug. If. 
— Whole plant rarely exceeding 2 — 3 inches in height, clothed with a 
white cottony substance. Very nearly allied to the preceding, yet we 
do not find intermediate states. 

6. G. uliginosum, Linn. ( Marsh Cudweed); stem very much 
branched diffuse woolly, leaves linear-lanceolate downy, flowers 
in terminal crowded clusters which are shorter than the leaves. 
E. Bot. t. 1194. E. FI. v. iii.p. 416. 

Sandy and wet places ; especially where water occasionally stands. 
FI. Aug, Sept. ©. — A span high, much branched. Flowers 2 — 3 
together in the closely placed upper leaves, small, sessile, forming oblong 
clusters at the extremity of the branches. Seales of the involucre yel- 
1 owish-brown, shining, glabrous. 

7. G. gdllicum, Huds. (narrow -leaved Cudweed ); stem erect 
dichotomous, leaves linear-acuminate downy, flowers crowded 


SYNGENESI A — SUPERFLUA. 


356 


[Erigeron- 


axillary and terminal, clusters much shorter than the leaves. E. Bot. 
t. 2369. E. FL v. in. p. 417 — Filcujo gal/ica, Linn. 

Gravelly and sandy fields; about Castle Heveningham, Essex. In 
Derbyshire. I possess specimens gathered in Kent, by Mr. Jos. Hoods. 
Near Forfar ; and near Newburgh, Fifeshire. FL July, Aug. Q.—Stem 
about a span high, slender, leafy. Flowers small, oblong, in rather dis- 
tant, leafy clusters.— The greater length of the leaves seems chiefly to 
distinguish this from the following. 

8. G. minimum, Sm. (least Cudweed ); stem erect branched, 
branches spreading, leaves lanceolate acute cottony, flowers coni- 
cal clustered lateral and terminal, clusters longer than the leaves. 
E. Bot. t. 1 157 . E- FL v. Hi. p. 417 — Filago montana, Sibth. ( not 
Linn.) — F. arvensis, Ehrh. Herb. 100, (not of Linn.) Sin. 

Dry and gravelly places, frequent. FI. July, Aug. Q.— Stems 4—6 
inches high, slender, branched above in a dichotomous manner. In- 
volucres downy, broad at the base. Florets yellowish. — Said by Smith 
to be smaller and less woolly than the true F. vionL ot the Linn. Herb. 

9. G. germanicum, Huds. (common Cudweed ); stem eiect pio- 
liferous at the summit, leaves lanceolate downy acute, flowers 
globoso-capitate in the axils of the branches and terminal. E. Bot. 
t. 1946. E. Fl. v. iii.p. 418. 

Sandy and gravelly places and dry pastures. FL June, July. ©.—   
Stems 6—8 inches high, erect, very leafy, terminated by a globular head 
of small, ovate flowers, from beneath which spring 2—3 or more hori- 
zontal branches, in a proliferous manner, each terminated by a head o 
flowers. This curious mode of growth occasioned the term o\ Jlcrba 
impia to be applied by the old Botanists to this plant, as if the offspring 
were undutifully exalting itself above the parent. Scales ot the involu- 
cre yellowish, shining, very acute, submucronate. 

30. Conyza. Linn. Spikenard. 

1. C. squarrosa, Linn. (Ploughmans Spikenard); leaves pu- 
bescent ovato-lanceolate serrated the upper ones entiie, stem lti- 
baceous corymbose, scales of the involucre recurved leafy. E. ot. 

t. 1195. E. Fl. v. iii.p. 420. .... 

Frequent on chalky or clayey soil. Rare, it really wild, in Scot ant . 
Near Blair in Athol ? Dr. Parsons. Ft. Sept. Oct. $ .—Stem 2 — 3 teet 
high. Panicle leafy, with the leaves entire. Lower leaves stalked. 
Flowers yellow. Florets of the circumference very small, ligulate. 

31. Eri'geron. Linn. Flea-bane. 

1. E. canadensis, Linn. (Canada Flea-bane); hairy, leaves lan- 
ceolate nearly entire, flowers numerous panicled. E. Bot. t. 2019. 
E. FL v. Hi. p. 421. 

Waste and cultivated ground, in England, occasionally ; but probably 
introduced. Fl. Aug. Sept. Q.— Flowers yellowish-wlnte. 

2. E. acris, Linn, (blue Flea-bane) ; peduncles alternate 


Pctasites.] 


SYNGKNESIA — SUPERFLUA. 


357 


(scarcely “racemose”) single-flowered, pappus as long as the 
florets of the ray, leaves lanceolate obtuse. E. Bot. t. 158. E. FI. 
v. iii.p. 422. 

Dry gravelly or chalky pastures, walls, &c. FI. Aug. If • — 1 — I \ foot 
high ; whole plant scabrous, hispid, erect, panicled above and leafy ; 
flowers terminal, pedunculated from the axils of the leaves. Leaves be- 
low tapering into a footstalk. Florets of the disk yellow ; of the ray , 
ligulate, purplish. Pappus very long and tawny. 

3. E. alpinus , Linn. ( alpine Flea-bane); stems with usually 
only one flower, pappus much shorter than the florets of the ray, 
leaves lanceolate. Hook. Scot. i. p. 242. a., stems 1 — 3-flowered, 
involucre hairy. E. alpinus, Lhm. — E. Bot. t. 464. E. FI. v. Hi. 

p. 423 ,3. stem single-flowered, calyx woolly. E. uniflorus, 

Linn. — E. Bot. t. 2416. E. FI. v. iii.p. 423. 

Highland mountains, not common, except on the Breadalbane range. 
a. and /3. are both mentioned as growing on Ben Lawers, by Sir J. E. 
Smith. FI. July. 1 f . — Hairy or hispid, like the last; but with leaves 
much longer in proportion : — 3 — 5 inches high, simple, with rarely more 
than one flower at the summit. I have never seen the Lapland and 
arctic state of E. uniflorus, with the very woolly involucre, upon Ben 
Law ers, but in its extreme state, I yet believe it may be traced from 
alpinus. I fear the upright ray of the British E. uniflorus, mentioned 
by Smith, is not to be depended upon. 

32. Tussii.ago. Linn. Colt’s-foot. 

1. T. Farfara, Linn. (Colt’s-foot); scape single-flowered imbri- 
cated with scales, leaves cordate angular toothed downy beneath. 
E. Bot. t. 429. E. FI. v. iii.p. 425. 

Moist and clayey soils, too abundant. FI. March, April, before the 
leaves. If . — Flowers yellow ; florets of the disk few. The down of the 
leaves makes good tinder. The leaves themselves have been used medi- 
cinally, as an infusion, or smoked like tobacco, for the relief of asthma. 
Mr. W. Wilson observes that the central tubular florets are barren, 
those of the circumference generally fertile. 

33. Petasites. Desf. Butter-bur. 

1. P. vulgaris, Desf. (common Butter-bur); thyrsus dense ob- 
long, leaves cordate unequally toothed downy beneath, the lobes 
approximate. — T. Petasites, Hoppe. Willd. — Hook. Scot. i.p. 242. 
E. Fl. v. iii.p. 425. — A. flowers sterile, bearing anthers, rarely 
seed. T. Petasites, Linn — E. Bot. t. 431. — B. flowers fertile, 
bearing seed, rarely stamens. T. hybrida, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 430. 

Wet meadows, to which it is very injurious, and river-sides. Fl. Apr. 
May, before the leaves. If . — Pout extensively creeping, and thus mul- 
tiplying the plant. Leaves very large. Flowers of a pale flesh colour ; 
smaller, more lax, and in a longer thyrsus in the fertile plant. — Mr. W. 
Wilson, who studies nature deeply, suggested to me the propriety of 
distinguishing this as a genus from Tussilago Farfara, without being 


358 


SYNGENESIA SUPERFLUA. 


[Senecio. 


aware that it had been already done by Desfontaines and confirmed by 
Cassini. The early flowering of this plant induces the Swedish lar- 
mers to plant it near their Bee-hives. Thus we see in our gardens the 
bees assembled on its affinities, P. albas and fragrans, at a season when 
scarcely any other flowers are expanded. 

31. Senecio. Linn. Groundsel. 

* Flowers without rays. 

1. S. vulgaris , Linn. ( common Groundsel); leaves semiamplex- 
icaul pinnatifid toothed, flowers in clustered corymbs destitute of 
a ray. E. Eot. t. 74 t. E. 11 • v. iii. p. 428. 

Waste ground, fields and hedges, abundant. VI. all summer. © .—A 
span to a foot high. Flowers small, yellow.— Birds are fond of the buds 
and young leaves. 

* * Flowers rayed , with the ray rolled bach. 

2. S. visedsus , Linn. ( stinking Groundsel); ray revolute, leaves 
pinnatifid and viscid, scales of the involucre lax hairy, stem branch- 
ing diffuse. E. Bot. t. 32. E. Fl.v. iii.p. 429. 

Waste ground, especially on chalky or gravelly soil, in many places. 
FI. July, Aug. © —Stems 1—2 feet high, much branched and spreading:— 
remarkable for its viscid hairs and fetid smell. 

3. S. sylvdticus, Linn. (Mountain Groundsel); ray revolute 
sometimes wanting, leaves sessile pinnatifid lohed and toothed often 
eared at the base, outer scales of the involucre very short glabrous, 
stem erect strait, flowers corymbose. E. Dot. t. 748. L. FI. 

v iii p 430 13. leaves distinctly eared and amplexicaul at the 

base.' S. lividus, Linn. E. Bot. t. 2515. Hook. Scot. i. p. 243. 

E. FI. v. iii. p. 429. „ 

Dry upland soils, banks and gravelly pastures. FI. July, ©--One 
foot hwh. Leaves finely divided.— Plant with a disagreeable sine 1, but 
not so powerful as S. viscosus. The S. Uvulas of Linn, is a Spanish spe- 
cies, and unknown to me ; but whatever it is, 1 tear that the plant of 
E Bot cannot be considered specifically distinct from the present. 1 
form my opinion from Mr. Middleton’s original specimens, now before 
me Mr W. Wilson does not think it distinct; nor does Mr. Richmond, 
(Nat. Mag. for Mar. 1830, p. 197,) who observes that the green tips 
of the calycine scales, upon which much stress is laid, eventually become 
brown. 

*** Flowers with patent rays. Leaves pinnatifid. 

4. S. squdlidus, Linn. ( inelegant Ragwort); rav spreading its 
corollas elliptical entire, leaves glabrous pinnatifid with distant 
oblong and toothed segments. E. Bot. t. 600. E. F/. v. m. pAM. 

On walls in and about Oxford. Walls and rubbish at Buldeford, De- 
von E Forster, Esc,. FI. June- Oct. ©.—A most distinct species, but 
 which I had hardly ventured to consider indigenous, till its recent dis- 
covery in Devonshire, by Mi. borstet . 

5 . S. tenuifolius, Jac.p {hoary Ragwort); ray spreading its 


Aster.] 


SYNGENESIA — SUPERI'LUA. 


359 


corollas oblong, leaves closely pinnatifid their margins somewhat 
revolute pale and downy beneath, stem erect loosely cottony, all 
the fruit hairy. E. Bot. t. 574. E. El. v. Hi. p. 432. 

Hedges and road-sides in England, especially in a chalky or gravelly 
soil. Woodhall, near Airdrie, l)r. Graham. Anton’s-hill, near Cold- 
stream, Air. II. D. Thomson. Swinton, Rev. A. Baird , FI. July, Aug. 
1 f. — Allied to the following; but with more regular, less divided, and 
less spreading segments to the leaves. 

6. S. Jacobcea, Linn. ( common Ragwort'); ray spreading, leaves 
lyrate bipinnatifid, segments divaricated toothed glabrous, stem 
erect, fruit glabrous, those of the ray hairy. E. Bot. t. 1130. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 433. 

Way-sides and neglected pastures, too plentiful. FI. July, Aug. If . 
— Stems 2 — 3 feet high, striated, branched. Flowers large, golden-yellow, 
in corymbs. — Dr. Graham finds a var. in Sutherland without the ray, as 
does Mr. W. Wilson on Brandon Mountain. 

7. S. aqudticus, Huds. ( Marsh Ragwort); ray spreading, leaves 
lyrate serrated glabrous the lowermost obovate and undivided, in- 
volucre hemispherical, fruit all glabrous. E. Bot. t. 1131. E. FI. 
v. Hi. p. 434. 

Wet places and by the sides of rivers and ditches. FI. July, Aug. If., 
— Flowers larger than in the last species. 

*#*# Fl ower s rayed. Leaves undivided. 

8. S. paluddsus, Linn, (great Fen Ragicort); ray spreading 
toothed, leaves semiamplexicaul lanceolate sharply serrated some- 
what woolly beneath, stem perfectly strait hollow rather woolly, 
corymbs terminal spreading, bracteas subulate. E. Bot. t. 650. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 434. 

Rare ; Ditches and fens in the east of England : Suffolk, Lincolnshire 
and Cambridgeshire. FI. June, July. If..— Stem 5—6 feet high. Leaves 
and flowers large, the latter of many linear, toothed rays. 

9. S. saracenicus, Linn, (broad-leaved Groundsel) ; ray spread- 
ing nearly entire, leaves lanceolate sessile minutely glanduloso- 
serrate glabrous, stem erect solid glabrous, corymbs terminal of 
rather few flowers, bracteas linear-setaceous. E. Bot. t. 2211. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 435. 

Moist meadows and pastures, in several parts of England and Scot- 
land ; but very local, and probably often escaped from gardens. Woods 
at Bantry, Mr. Drummond. FI. July, Aug. If.— 3— 5 ft. high ; habit of 
the last. Flowers much smaller, with broader florets of the circumference. 

/ 

35. Aster. Linn. Starvvort. 

A. Tripolium , Linn. (Sea Star wort, or Michaelmas Daisy); 
stem glabrous corymbose, leaves linear-lanceolate fleshy obscurely 
3-nerved, scales of the involucre lanceolate membranous obtuse all 
imbricated. E. Bot. t. 87. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 436. 


360 


SYNGENESIA — SUPEEFLUA. 


[Cineraria. 


Salt-marshes, frequent. FI. Aug. Sept. If . — 1 3 feet high. The 

f lords of the ray not unfrequently wanting. 

36. Solidago. Linn. Golden-rod. 

1. S. Virgdurea, Linn, {common Golden-rod); cauline leaves 
lanceolate the lower ones elliptical, racemes panicled erect crowded. 
E. Bot. t. 301. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 438. — (3. small, with broader radi- 
cal leaves. S. cambrica, Huds. 

Woods and thickets.— 0. in mountainous countries, hi. July Sept. 
If , — Lower leaves broad, stalked : — very variable in its size, and m its 
more or less compact inflorescence. Used as a vulnerary and diuretic. 

37. Inula. Linn. Elecampane. 

1. I. Helenium, Linn. ( Elecampane ); leaves amplexicaul some- 
what toothed ovate wrinkled downy beneath, scales of the involu- 
cre ovate downy. E. Bot. t. 1546. E. FI. v. iii. p. 440. 

Moist pastures, rare; but found in several places in England, Scotland, 
and Ireland. FI. July, Aug. If .-3-5 ft. high, branched. Flower large, 
terminal, solitary, with many narrow, tncuspidate, yellow rays. 

38. Limbarda. Adans. Golden-Samphire. 

1. L. crithmoides, (golden Samphire); leaves linear fleshy gener- 
ally 3-toothed at the extremity. — Limbarda tricuspis, Cass — Lindl. 
—Inula crithm. Linn.—E. Bot. t. 68. E. FI. v. iii. p. 442. 

South and west shores of England and Wales, in salt-marshes, and as 
far north as Galloway. Howth, Ireland, Mr.J. T. Mac/cay. FL Aug. 
If —One foot high, a little branched at the summit, each branch bearing 
a solitary flower. In habit very different both from the preceding ant 
following genus. 

39. Pulicaria. Gcertn. Flea-bane. 

1 . p, dy sen (erica, Cass, {common Flea-bane); leaves oblong 

cordate or sagittate and amplexicaul at the base wrinkled downy, 
stem woolly panicled, scales of the involucre setaceous. Lindt. 
Sun. p. 143 Inula dusent. Linn — E. Bot. t. lllo. E. FI. v. in. 

p. 440. . 

Moist and watery places, frequent in England and in the count} of 
Dublin : rare in Scotland ; Mull of Galloway, Mr. Maugkan. Ft. Aug. 
If. .—About 1 foot high. Flowers with moderately long rays. 

2. P. vulgaris, Gcertn. {small Flea-bane); leaves lanceolate 
wavy hairy narrow at the base and semiamplexicauh stem much 
branched hairy, ray scarcely longer than the disk. C ass.— -Lindt. 
Inula pulic. Linn. — E. Bot. t. 1196. E. FI. v. iii. p. 44 . 

Moist sandy places, especially where water has stood, in England ; 
not found in Scotland or Ireland. FI. Sept. ©. 

40. Cineraria. Linn. Flea-wort. 

1. C. pulustris, Linn. {Marsh Flea-wort); shaggy , stem much 


361 


Chrysanthemum.] SYNGENESIA — SUPERFLUA. 

branched fistulose, leaves broadly lanceolate sinuato-dentate, flowers 
corymbose. E. Bot.t. 151. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 443. 

Margins ot pools and ditches, chiefly in Norfolk and Cambridgeshire. 
FI. June, July. If . 

2. C. campestris, Retz, Willd. [Field Flea-wort ); woolly, stem 
simple, root-leaves elliptical nearly entire those of the stem (small) 
lanceolate, flowers umbellate. Hook, in FI. Loud. t. 75. — C. in- 

tegrifolia, With. — E. Bot. t. 152. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 444 var. j3, 

Linn. Syst. Veg — Jacq. — C. alpina, y. Linn. Sp. PI. 

Chalky downs in the middle and S. of England. — fi. maritime rocks, 
Holyhead, Mr. IV. Wilson. FI. May, June. 1/ . ? £ . ? 

41. Doronicum. Linn. Leopard’s-bane. 

1. D. Pardalidnches, Linn, {great Leopard’ s-bane); leaves 
cordate toothed the lowermost on long naked petioles, the inter- 
mediate with the petioles dilated into two broad semiamplexicaul 
ears at the base, the uppermost sessile and aniplexicaul. Jacq. 
Austr. t. 350. Hook, in FI. Loud. t. 88. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 446. Bor- 
rer in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2654. 

Catton, by Norwich, Mr. Lindley. Mountains of Northumberland, 
Gerarde. Den of Dupplin and Dalkeith park, &c., Scotland; Mr. 
Borrer. FI. June, July. If.. — It would be better perhaps if the genus 
Doronicum were expunged from the British Flora ; for it is doubtful if 
any species is native. 

2. D. plantagineum , Linn.? {plantain-leaved Leopard' s-bane); 
leaves toothed, radical ones on naked stalks ovate or slightly cor- 
date produced at the base, cauline ones sessile except the lowest 
which has a winged stalk with aniplexicaul auricles, intermediate 
ones cordato-oblong, upper ovato-acuminate. Borr. in E. Bot. 
Suppl. under t. 2654. — D. Pardalianches, E. Bot. t. 630. 

Road-side, Salinghall, Essex, T. Watford, Esq. Widdington, Essex, 
E. Forster, Esq. FI. June, July. If. 

42. Bellis. Linn. Daisy. 

L B. peretinis, Linn, {common Daisy); scape naked single- 
flowered, leaves spathulate obovate crenate. E. Bot. t. 424. 
E. FI. v. iii.p. 447. 

Pastures, frequent. FI. from the early spring till the end of au- 
tumn. If.. 

43. Chrysanthemum. Linn. Ox-eye. 

1. C. Leucdnthemum , Linn, {great white Ox-eye); leaves 
aniplexicaul oblong obtuse cut and pinnatifid at the base, radical 
ones obovate petiolate, stem erect branched. E. Bot. t. 601. 
E. FI. v. iii.p. 449. 

Dry pastures, abundant. FI. June, July. If . — Stems 1 — 2 feet high, 
furrowed. Flowers large, their disk yellow, the ray white. 

2. C. segetum, Linn. {Corn Marigold, yellow Ox-eye); leaves 

R 


362 SYNGENESIA — SUPERFLUA. [Anthemis. 


amplexicaul glaucous inciso-serrated above toothed at the base. 
E. Bot. t. 540. E. FI. v. iii. p. 449. 

. Corn-fields, frequent; rare about Edinburgh. FI. June— Aug. ©.— 
One foot or more high. Flowers large, deep yellow. 


44. Pyrethrum. Hall. Feverfew. 


1. P. Parthenium, Sm. {common Feverfew); leaves petiolate 
flat bipinnate the segments ovate cut, peduncles branched corym- 
bose, stem erect, involucre hemispherical downy. E. Bot. t. 1231. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 451. — Matricaria Pcirthen. Linn. 

Waste places and in hedges. FI. July. If.— 1 — 2 ft. high, branched. 
Disk yellow, ray very short, white. Plant bitter and tonic. 

2. P. inodorum, Sm. ( Corn Feverfew or scentless Mayweed); 
leaves sessile bipinnatifid the segments capillary, stem branched 
spreading, border ot the fruit entire. E. Bot. t. 6 /6. E. El. v. iii. 
p. 452 Chrysanthemum inodorum , Linn. 

Fields and way-sides, common. — FI. Aug. — Oct. 0. Stem about 1 
foot high. Flowers large, upon long, naked peduncles. Disk veiy con- 
vex ; ray large. — Plant slightly aromatic. 

3. P. marttimum, Sm. {Sea-side Feverfew); leaves bipinnatifid 
the segments linear fleshy pointless, stem diffuse branched, border 
of the fruit lobed. E. Bot. t. 9/1. E. FI. v. iii. p. 452. — Matri- 
caria maritima, Linn. 

Sea-coast in many places, especially in Scotland. FI. July. If- • 
Perennial, and the Jlowers smaller than those of P. ivod. ; yet in the 
opinion of many acute observers it can only be esteemed a maritime var. 
t ; it. 

45. Matricaria. Linn. Wild Chamomile. 


1. M. Chamomilla, Linn, (ivild Chamomile); leaves glabrous 
bipinnatifid the segments capillary, involucre nearly plane its scales 
obtuse. E. Bot. t. 1232. E. L l. v. iii.p. 454. 

Corn-fields and waste ground, in various places. FI. Aug. ©.— 
Stem about 1 foot high, erect and branched. Flowers with a conical 
disk • the ray very obtuse, truncate and toothed. — This has a bitter taste, 
and ’a faint but aromatic smell, not unlike that of the common or true 
Chamomile, Anthemis nobilis. 


46. Anthemis. Linn. Chamomile. 

1. A. maritima, Linn. (Sea Chamomile); “leaves bipinnatifid 
acute fleshy dotted somewhat hairy, stem prostrate, scales ot the 
receptacle prominent sharp -pointed.” E. Bot. t. 23 1 0. E. FI. 
v. iii. p. 456. 

Sea-coast at Sunderland. Bearhaven, in S. W. of Ireland, Mr. IV. 
Wilson. FI. July. ©. 

2. A. nobilis, Linn. ( common Chamomile) ; leaves bipinnate 
segments linear-subulate a little downy, scales of the receptacle 


Achillea.] SYNGENESIA — SUPERFLUA. 363 

membranaceous scarcely longer than the disk. E. Bot. t. 980. 
E. FI. v. iii. p. 456. 

Dry gravelly pastures and waste places, in several parts of England. 
Isles ot Cumrae and Bute, Scotland, Mr. S. Murray. Kerry, Ireland, 
Mr. IV. J Vi/son. FI. Aug. 2f. — Stem about afoot long, procumbent 
and much branched, each branch terminated by a singl e flower, whose 
disk is yellow, at length conical, and ray white. The whole plant is in- 
tensely bitter, highly aromatic and much used medicinally. Its principal 
virtues are supposed to reside in the involucre, which contains an essen- 
tial oil. — Chamomile is derived from £«,««/, dwarf, and an apple, 

because the plant smells like apples, or rather like quinces. 

3. A. arvensis, Linn. (Corn Chamomile); leaves bipinnatifid 
segments linear-lanceolate pubescent, receptacle conical its scales 
lanceolate, fruit crowned with an entire pappus. E. Bot. t. 602. 
E. FI. v. Hi. p. 457. 

Corn-fields and way-sides, in several places ; but very local. Near 
Edinb. and Linlithgow. FI. July. $ . — Stem upright, much branched, 
and, as well as the leaves, hoary with down ; each branch terminated 
with a large flower, whose disk is yellow, the ray broad and white. 

4. A. Cotula, Linn. ( stinking Chamomile); leaves bipinnatifid 
glabrous their segments subulate, receptacle conical its scales seta- 
ceous, pappus none. E. Bot. t. 1772. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 458. 

W aste places, corn-fields and by road-sides. FI. July, Aug. 0. — 
Stem a foot or more high, glabrous. Flowers solitary, terminal, their 
disk convex, pale yellow ; ray rather large, white. The whole plant has 
a fetid smell and is said to blister the hands of those who gather it. 
When examined with a microscope, it is found to be sprinkled all over 
with little glands, in which the acrid matter is probably lodged. 

5. A. tinctoria, Linn. (Ox-eye Chamomile); leaves bipinnatifid 
serrated downy beneath, stem erpct branched subcorymbose. 
E. Bot. t. 1472. E. FI. v. iii. p. 459. 

Banks of the Tees, Durham, (Ray); Essex ; and near Forfar, Scot- 
land. FI. July, Aug. If. — Stem a foot or more high, cottony, as are 
the scales of the involucre. Flowers solitary, large, entirely yellow. 

47. Achillea. Linn. Yarrow. 

1. A. Ptdrmica, Linn. (Sneeze-wort Yarrow); leaves linear- 
lanceolate acuminate sharply serrated. E. Bot. t. 757. E. El. 
v. iii. p. 460. 

Moist meadows and pastures; especially in mountainous districts. 
FI. July, Aug. If .— Stem 1—3 feet high, erect, terminating in a rather 
large corymb, the disk as well as ray of whose flowers is white. — When 
dried and pulverized, the plant has been employed to excite sneezing. 

2. A. serrdta, Iletz ? (serrated Yarrow); “ leaves linear-lanceo- 
late sessile downy deeply serrated laciniated at the base, flowers 
almost simply corymbose.” E. Bot. t. 2531. E. El. v. iii.p. 401. 

Near Matlock, Derbyshire. FI. Aug. If. — Habit of the last, with 
smaller, buff-coloured flowers, and leaves much more deeply serrated, 


364 SYNGENESIA — FRUSTRANEA. [ Centaurea . 

especially at the base. Sprengel makes it the A. decolorans of Schrader, 
and gives England as the only station for it. 

3. A. Millefolium , Linn. ( common Yarrow or Milfoil); leaves 
slightly hairy bipinnate, segments linear toothed acute, stems fur- 
rowed. E. Bot. t. 758. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 462. 

Pastures and way-sides, frequent. FL all summer. If.. — Flowers 
small, white, or sometimes rose-coloured. The quality of this plant is 
highly astringent, and the Highlanders are said to make an ointment of 
it, which dries and heals wounds. 

4. A. tomentosa, Linn. ( woolly yellow Milfoil or Yarrow) ; 
leaves woolly bipinnatifid segments crowded linear acute, corymbs 
repeatedly compound. E. Bot. t. 2532. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 462. 

Dry hilly pastures, in Scotland. Spittle-hill, north-west of Balvie, 
Dumbartonshire; and near Paisley. Ireland, (E. Bot.) FL Aug. If .. — 
A span or rather more in height. Readily recognised by its small size, 
downy leaves, and much branched corymbs of yellow flowers. 

SYNGENESIA— FRUSTRANEA. 

48. Centaurea. Linn. Knapweed, Blue-bottle and Star-thistle. 

1. C. Jacea , Linn. ( brown radiant Knapweed); scales of the 
involucre scariose torn the outer pinnatifid, leaves linear-lanceo- 
late the lower ones broader and toothed, flowers radiant, pappus 
very short in a single row. E. Bot. t. 1678. E.Fl. v. Hi.]). 465. 

Hedges and waste places ; Sussex. Frequent in Angus-shire. Near 
Belfast^ Mr. Templeton. FL Aug. Sept. If .—Lower leaves obovato- 
lanceolate, petioled, toothed; upper ones entire, sessile. Scales of the 
involucre pale brown, shining, the outer ones deeply pinnatifid, the inner, 
or uppermost, torn ; in which respects it differs strikingly from C. nigra. 
Florets very numerous, spreading, purple. 

2. C. nigra, Linn, (black Knapweed); scales of the involucre 
ovate fringed with capillary teeth, lower leaves angular lyrate, 
upper ones lanceolate, ray wanting, pappus very short tutted. 
E. Bot. t. 278. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 465. 

Meadows and pastures, frequent. FL June — Aug. If. — Stem 2 — 3 
feet high. Leaves scabrous. Scales of the involucre almost black, the 
teeth brown. Florets purple, numerous, all fertile. 

3. C. Cyanus, Linn. (Corn Blue-bottle)-, scales of the involucre 
serrated, leaves linear entire the lowermost toothed. E. Bot. 
t. 277. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 466. 

Corn-fields, frequent. Fl. July. Aug. ©. — 2 — 3 ft. high, covered 
with a loose, cottony down, especially on the stems and under-side of 
the leaves. Florets of the disk small, purple; of the ray few, larger, 
bright blue, spreading. Scales of the involucre greenish, their margins 
brown. 

4. C. Scabiosa, Linn. ( yreater Knapweed); scales of the invo- 


GYNANDRIA — MONANDRIA. 


365 


Orchis. - ] 

lucre ciliated ovate downy, leaves rougbish pinnatifid, segments 
lanceolate acute. E. Bot.t. 56. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 467. 

Barren pastures, corn-fields, and road-sides. FI. July, Aug. If.— 
2—3 feet high, erect, much branched. Involucres globose, very lar'm, 
their scales cottony, almost black, the fringe pale.— A var. has been 
found in Scotland, by Mr. D. Don, with the leaves less deeply divided 
and the radical ones very large ; probably the C. coriacea of Willdenow. 

5. C. Isnardi, Linn. (Jersey Star -thistle); scales of the invo- 
lucre with pal mated spines, leaves somewhat lyrate and scabrous 
toothed slightly amplexicaul, flowers terminal solitary with one or 
more leaves at the base. E. Bot. t. 2256. E. FI. v. Hi. p. 468. 

Pastures in Jersey. FI. July, Aug. If. . 

C. Calcitrapa, Linn, (common Star -thistle); flowers sessile 
lateral, scales of the involucre with a long broad spine spinulose 
at their base, stem divaricated, leaves unequally pinnatifid spinu- 
loso-dentate. E. Bot. t. 125. E. FI. v. iii.p. 468. 

Gravelly, sandy, and waste places, in the middle and S. of England • 
especially near the sea. FI. July, Aug. © .—Flowers purple.— The 
spec, name is Caltrops (Latinized), an instrument of war with long points. 

7. C.solstitidlis, Linn, (yellow Star-thistle, St.Barnaby s-thistle) ; 
flowers terminal solitary, scales of the involucre with a long slender 
spine palmato-spinose at the base, stem winged from the decurrent 
bases of the lanceolate unarmed leaves, radical leaves lyrato-pinna- 
tifid. E. Bot. t. 243. E. FI. v. iii.p. 469. 

Occasionally seen in fields and waste places, principally in the E. and 
S. of England, and near Dublin; but probably imported, as Prof. Ilens- 
low says it certainly is, at Dartford, Kent. FI. July— Sept. Q.— Flowers 
yellow, as are the slender, needle-like spines of the involucre. 


CLASS XX. GYNANDRIA. 

Stamens situated upon the style or column , above the germen. 

ORD. I. MONANDRIA. 1 Stamen. (All belong to the 
Nat. Old. OKCHIDEiE. 1 

* Anther of 2 distinct vertical cells, fixed to the top of the column, 
immediately above the stigma. Pollen-masses stalked, composed 
of grains which cohere elastically, having a gland at the base of 
the stalk. 

1. Orchis. Flower ringent. Lip spurred. Glands of the 

In this beautiful tribe the British Genera have their roots often tuberous; 
the stems herbaceous ; the leaves striated, sheathing at the base. The flowers 
have u divisions, of which it is convenient, as Sir Jas. E. Smith has done, if 
not correct, to call the 3 outer a calyx, though they be often coloured, the 3 
inner a corolla ; of this latter the lower petal (so situated by the twisting of the 


366 GYNANDRIA MONANDRIA. [ Ncottia . 

stalks of the pollen -masses contained in a common little pouch — 
Name ; an ancient appellation of the plant. 

2. Gymnadenia. Lip spurred. Glands of the stalks of tha 
pollen-masses naked, approximated — Named from yvyvos, naked , 
and udqv, a gland, one of the essential characters of this Genus. 

3. Habenaria. Flower ringent. Lip spurred. Glands of 
the stalks of the pollen-masses naked, distant — Named from 
habena, a thong or lash, which the spur sometimes resembles. 

4. Aceras. Flower ringent. Lip without a spur. Glands 
of the stalks of the pollen-masses contained in a common little 

pouch Name — a, without, and xegaj, a horn ; in allusion to the 

absence of a spur. 

5. Herminium. Perianth erecto-patent. Lip without a spur. 
Glands of the stalks of the pollen-masses naked, distinct — Name 
probably derived from \ogiv, sogimg, fulcrum tori, in allusion to the 
thick, though short, column of the flower, or to the stem or scape 
of the flowers. 

6. Opiirys. Perianth somewhat patent. Lip without a spur. 
Glands of the stalks of the pollen-masses each in a distinct little 
pouch. — Name : — o<p?vg, the eye-brow, which Pliny says this plant 
was used to blacken. — The flowers of all the species are beautiful 
and curious, and more or less aptly resemble certain insects. 

** Anther parallel with the stigma. Pollen-masses farinaceous 

or composed of angular grains, fixed to the apex of the stigma, 

not stalked. 

7. Goodyera. Perianth converging, the 2 lateral calyx-leaves 
including the gibbous base of the lip which is entire at the extie- 
mity. Column free. Pollen angled — Named in compliment to 
Mr. John Goodyer, a Hampshire Botanist of the time of Gerarde. 

8. Neottia. Perianth converging, the 2 lateral calyx-leaves 
including the base of the beardless lip. Column wingless. Pollen 
farinaceous. Br . — Named from \no1nx, a Bird's nest, formerly 
applied by Dodonaeus, and even by Linnaeus, to our Listera j\idus- 
Avis, on account of its densely tufted fibres ; but subsequently 
abandoned. It has since been chosen by Jacquiu for the present 

inferior germen), is mostly larger, differently shaped from the rest and called 
the//» The style is represented hy a column more or less elongated, which 
bears the stigma, on which, and frequently at the extremity, the anther is fixed. 
The cells of the anther contain pollen, which is either pulverulent, loosely col- 
lected into a mass; or composed of grains elastically adhering, fixed to a stalk; 
or of a definite number of waxy masses. — 1 have followed the general arrange- 
ment of Mr. Brown, as by far the simplest and best of any l am acquainted 

with. 


Orchis,] GYNANDRIA — MONANDRIA. 367 

genus, which is sanctioned by the high authority of Swartz, 
Willdenow, Smith, and Brown. It is Spiranthes ot Richard. 

9. Listera. Perianth irregular. Lip 2-lobed. Column 
wingless. Anther fixed by its base. Pollen farinaceous. Br. — Named 
in honour of Dr. Martin Lister , an eminent British Naturalist. 

*** Anther terminal, persistent. Pollen-masses pulverulent or 
composed of angular granules , eventually fixed to the hack of the 
stigma. 

10. Epipactis. Lip very concave at the base, the extremity 
undivided or 3-lobed, the middle lobe large, and as it were, jointed. 

Pollen farinaceous. Br Name given to some kind of Hellebore 

by the Greeks. 

**** Anther terminal , deciduous. Pollen-masses at length waxy. 

11. Malaxis. Perianth spreading; lip without a spur, very 
small, superior, undivided : 2 lateral petals reflexed, smaller than 

the calyx-leaves. Column very short. Pollen-masses in 2 pairs 

Name, — pax ««(?, softness, from the tender nature of the plant. 

12. Lxparis. Perianth spreading, uniform, with linear seg- 
ments. Lip inferior, undivided, reflexed. Column elongated. 
Pollen-masses in 2 pairs. — Named from Xittx^o;, fat, or unctuous 
to the touch. 

13. Corallorhi'za. Lip produced at the base; its spur adnate 
with the germen or free. Column free. Pollen-masses 4, oblique, 

not parallel. Br Name: — xug«AA tov, coral, and a root, from 

the curious structure of the root. 

ORD. II. DIANDRIA. 2 Stamens. 

14. Cypripedium. Lip large, inflated. Column with a large, 
terminal, dilated lobe (or sterile stamen) separating the anthers. 2 
lateral or lower calyx-leaves often combined — Nat. Orel. Orchide^e, 

Juss -Named from K Venus , and -irodiov, a slipper : Venus’ 

slipper. 

ORD. III. HEXANDIIIA. 6 Stamens. 

15. Aristoloc iia. Perianth superior, single, tubular, often 
swelling at the base, the mouth dilated on one side, 1 -lipped. 
Stigma with 6 lobes. Capsule inferior, with 6 cells — Nat. Ord. 
Aristolochie^e, Juss . — Name supposed to originate in its medi- 
cinal virtues. 

GYNANDRIA— MONANDRIA. 

/ 

1. Orchis. Linn. Orchis. 

* Tubers 2, undivided. 

1. O. Mono, Linn. ( green-winged Meadow Orchis); lip 3- 


368 


GYNANDRIA — MONANDRIA. 


[Orchis, 


lobed somewhat crenate the middle lobe emarginate, calyx-leaves 
ascending libbed connivent enclosing the two lateral petals, spur 
ascending blunt rather shorter than the germen. E. Bot. t. 2059. 
E. FI. v. iv.p. 11 . 

Meadows and pastures. “ Frequent in Scotland Light/.; — but I never 
saw native Scotch specimens, and Mr. Arnott doubts if it has ever been 
found there. FI. June. If . — Stem from a span to a foot high. Flowers 
few, in a lax spike. Calyx purplish-green, forming a sort of helmet over 
the rest of the flower. Lip purple, pale in the middle, with purple 
spots. 

2. O. mascula, Linn. ( early purple Orchis); lip 3- lobed some- 
what crenate the middle lobe emarginate, two lateral calyx-leaves 
reflexed upwards, spur obtuse rather longer than the germen. 
E. Bot. t. 631. Hook, in Curt. FI. Loud. ed. 2, cum Ic. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 11. 

Woods and pastures, frequent. FI. June. If. — Stem 1 foot high. 
leaves generally marked with dark purple spots. Flowers in a lax ob- 
long spike, purple, sometimes fragrant; the centre of the lip whitish at 
the base and spotted, sometimes altogether white. 

3. O. ustulata, Linn. ( dwarf dcirk-ivingcd Orchis ) ; lip 3-partite 
marked with discoloured raised spots, segments narrow the middle 
one bifid, calyx-leaves connivent acute including the two lateral 
petals, spur very short, bracteas as long as the germen. E. Bot. t. 18. 
Hook, in Curt. FI. Lond. ed. 2, cum Ic. E. FI. v. iv. p. 12. 

Dry chalky pastures, in England. FI. June. If. — 4 — 5 inches high. 
Lip white, with purple, raised, not rough, spots, while the rest ot the 
flower is a dark, dingy purple. Cal. forming a sharp helmet-like covering, 
within which are the 2, small, linear, lateral Pet. Leaves lanceolate, acute. 

4. Q.fuscct, Jacq. (great brown-winged Orchis); lip deeply 3- 
lohed with raised rough dark points, lateral lobes linear-oblong, in- 
termediate one large obcordate crenate and emarginate with a point 
in the sinus, calyx-leaves rather obtuse connivent including the two 
lateral petals, spur obtuse about half as long as the germen. Hook, 
in Curt. FI. Lond. ed. 2, cum Ic. E. FI. v. iv. p. 13. — O. mili- 
taris, E. Bot. t. 16. 

Chalky pastures and borders of woods, in Kent. FI. May. If. Stem 
1 — 2 feet high. Leaves ovato-oblong, obtuse. Flowers forming a hand- 
some spike, with variegated purple petals ; the helmet of a dark greenish- 
purple, the lip much paler. 

5. O. militdris, Linn. ( Military Orchis); lip deeply 3-lobed 
with raised rough dark points, the two lateral lobes linear-oblong 
short, middle lobes dilated at the extremity and deeply emarginate 
with an intermediate point, calyx-leaves converging acuminate in- 
cluding the 2 lateral petals, spur obtuse about half as long as the 
germen. E . FI. v. iv. p. 14. Bichctio, in L. Bot. Suppl. t. 2b /o. 

Chalky hills, principally about Reading, on both sides of the Thames. 


Orchis.] 


GYNANDRI A — MONANDRIA. 


369 


FI. May. If. — Intermediate, in the structure of its flowers, between the 
preceding and the following ; but most allied to the former. Helmet pale 
ash-coloured. Lip deep purple, white in the middle. Leaves oblone, 
rather acute. b 

6. O. tephrosanthos, Vill. (Monkey Orchis); lip 3- partite with 
small rough raised dark spots, the segments linear, intermediate 
one deeply bifid with a point in the sinus, calyx-leaves acuminate 
connivent including the two lateral petals, spur half as long as the 
germen, bracteas very small. Bichen. in Linn. Trans, v. ocii.p. 33. 

Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 82. E. FI. v. iv. p. 16 O. militaris, 

(3. E. Bot. t. 1873.— s. Linn. 

Chalk hills in Berks, Oxfordshire and Kent. FI. May. 1/. — A beau- 
tiful and curious sp., smaller and more slender than the last. Spike short. 
Flowers pale purple, spotted. Segments of the lip narrow, deep purple, 
covered with minute crystalline points.— Among specimens communi- 
cated tome by Mr. Bicheno, were some monstrous flowers, each having 
2 opposite horizontal lips, 2 spurs, and only 2 opposite calyx-leaves. 

7. O. hircina, Scop .(Lizard Orchis ); lip 3-partite waved at 
the base, segments linear, intermediate one twisted very long bifid, 
calyx-leaves concavo-connivent including the small lateral linear 
petals, spur very short. Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 96. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 17. — Satyrium hircin. Linn. — E. Bot. t. 24. 

Chalk hills and bushy places, in Kent and Surry. FI. July. If. . — A 
most remarkable plant, which cannot be confounded with any other. 
The smell of its flowers is detestable and similar to that of a Goat, 
whence its Latin specific name. 

8. O. pyramidal is, Linn, (pyramidal Orchis); lip with 3 equal 
entire lobes and 2 protuberances at the base above, calyx-leaves 
spreading acuminate, spur subulato-filiform longer than the germen, 
stalks of the pollen-masses united by one gland. E. Bot. t. HO. 
Hook, in FI. Lond. IV. S. t. 106. E. FI. v. iv.p. 10. — Anacamptis , 
Rich. 

Pastures and waste ground, in a chalky or clayey soil. Isle of Colon- 
say, Scotland (Light/.) FI. July. If. — Leaves very acuminate. Flowers 
of a delicate rose-purple, sometimes white, spirally arranged in a close, 
broad and ovate spike. 

** Tubers 2, palmate. 

9. O. latifolia, Linn. (Marsh Orchis); lip slightly 3-lobed its 
sides reflexed crenate, calyx-leaves patent, 2 lateral petals conni- 
vent, spur cylindrical shorter than the germen, bracteas longer 
than the flower. E. Bot. t. 2308. Hook, in Curt. FI. Lond. cd. 
2, cum Ic. E. FI. v. iv. p. 21. 

Marshes and moist meadows, common. FI. June. If. — Flowers va- 
rymg fiom a pale rose colour to deep purple, the lip dotted and marked 
with puiple lines; white on the sands of Barrie, near Dundee, (Mr. 
Drummond). The species is known by its slightly-lobed lip, its broad, 

R 2 


370 GYNANDRIA — MONANDRIA. [ Habenaria . 

nearly erect, anti acuminated leaves, and, especially, by the bracteas, which 
are leafy and longer than the germen. 

10. O. maculata, Linn. ( spotted palmate Orchis); lip plane 3- 
lobed sometimes obscurely so, calyx-leaves spreading, two lateral 
petals connivent, spur cylindrical shorter than, and bracteas as long 
as, the germen. E   Bot. t. 632. Hook, in FI. Loud. JV. S. t. 112. 
E. FI. v . iv. p. 22. 

Pastures and heaths, frequent. Ft. June, July. If- — A toot high, 
slender. Leaves distant, spotted with purple. Flowers white or pale 
purple, more or less spotted and streaked, especially the lip. Its gene- 
rally deeply lobed lip having the central lobe the longest and ovate, 
together with the small, subulate bracteas, constitute in themselves suf- 
ficient marks of distinction between this and 0. latifolia. 

2. Gymnadenia. Br. Gymnadenia. 

1. G. conopsea, Br. ( fragrant Gymnadenia). Br. in Hort. 
K w, ed. 2. v. v.p. 191. Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 186 — Or- 
chis conopsea, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 10. E. FI. v. iv. p. 23. 

Dry pastures and heaths, in mountainous countries, especially in 
Scotland, most abundant; scenting the atmosphere with its fragrance. 
Common in chalky pastures, Surry, J. S. Mill, Esq. /•/. June, Aug. If . 

Stems ] foot high. Tabers palmate. Leaves linear-lanceolate, keeled. 

Flowers in an ovato-oblong, rather dense spike, rose-purple. Lip 3-lobed, 
not spotted, the lobes equal, entire, rounded. The 2 lateral calyx-leaves 
spreading, their margins revolute; 2 lateral petals connivent. Spur fili- 
form, twice as long as the germen. The 2 cells of the anthers are peifo- 
rated at the base, through which the naked, large and oblong glands of 
the stalks of the pollen-masses appear.— This genus is near the following 
in char., but differs in habit. 

3. Habenaria. Br. Habenaria. 

1. II. viridis, Br. (green Habenaria); spur very short 2-lobed, 
lip linear bifid with an intermediate tooth, biacteas much longei 
than the ilowers, tubers palmate. — Orchis viiidts , Sm. — L. FI. 
v. iv. p. 20. — Sutyrium viride , Linn, — E. Bot. t. 9-L 

Dry hilly pastures, not unfrequent. FI. June, July. If . — Stems 6 8 

inches high; lower leaves nearly ovate, obtuse; calyx and Intel al petals 
connivent and forming a helmet, green. Lip small, gieenish-brown. 

2. H. dlbida, Br. ( small white Habenaria); spur obtuse much 
shorter than the germen, lip 3-cleft the segments acute, middle one 
the longest, calyx-leaves and lateral petals nearly equal ovate con- 
cave. ~ Hook, in FI. Loud. N. S. t. 107 .— Orchis albida, Sm — 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 18. — Satyrium albidum, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 505. 

Mountain pastures, not unfrequent. FI. June, July. If. — About a 
span high. Leaves oblong, striated, lower ones obtuse. Flowers white, 
small, fragrant ; lip scarcely longer than the calyx, deflexed. 

3. H. bifolia, Br. ( Butterfly Habenaria); spur filiform twice as 
long as the germen, lip linear entire, calyx-leaves and lateral petals 


Ophrys.] GYNANDRIA — MONANDRIA. 371 

connivent, radical leaves 2 oblongo-obovate attenuated at the base. 

— Orchis hifo/ia, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 22. E. FI. v. iv. p. 9. 

Moist copses and pastures, frequent. FI. June. 2f. — Tabers undi- 
vided, tapering. Stem 1 to l | foot high, with 2, rarely 3, large radical 
leaves, and 3 — 4, very small, cauline ones. Spike long, of numerous, 
rather large, yellowish-white, very fragrant flowers. The bases of the 
cells of the anther are very distant from each other. — This is the genus 
Plalanthera of Richard. 

/ 

4. Aceras. Br. Man-orchis. 

1. A. anthropophora, Br. ( green Man-orchis) ; lip longer than 
the germen. E. FI. v. iv. p. 25 — Ophrys anthropophora , Linn . — 
E. But. t. 29. 

Dry chalky or clayey pastures, in Surry, Kent, Norfolk and Suffolk. 
FI. June If. — Tubers ovate. Stem about a foot high. Leaves mostly 
near the root. Flowers in a long spike. Lip tripartite, with linear seg- 
ments, yellowish with a red or brown margin, the middle lobe rather 
broad, deeply bifid. Helmet green, composed of the 3, connivent, con- 
cave calyx-leaves, including the 2, small, linear-lanceolate, obtuse lateral 
petals. 

5. Herminium. Br. Mask-Orchis. 

1. H. monorchis, Br. ( green Musk-orchis); radical leaves 2 
lanceolate. Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 138. E. FI. v. iv. p. 27'. 

— Ophrys monorchis, Linn. — E. But. t. 71. 

Chalky pastures, principally in the east and south-east of England. 
FI. June, July. If. — Tubers 2, very unequal. Plant 4 — 6 inches high, 
slender ; with 2 laneeolato-oblong leaves at the base, and a small one on 
the stem, or scape. Flowers small, green, spiked. Perianth bent down 
from the top of the erect germen. Cal. of 3 equal, ovate leaves, shorter 
than the corolla. Lateral petals ovate, acuminate, undivided; lower one 
or lip, 3.fid, the two side-lobes rather small, intermediate one much 
longer, linear. Pollen-mass on a short footstalk, with a large white gland. 

I 

6. Ophrys. Linn. Ophrys. 

1. O. apifera, Huds. ( Bee Ophrys); lip tumid trifid and re- 
flexed at the extremity, the intermediate lobe trifid, its middle 
segment longest subulate, anther elongated with a hooked point. 
E. Bot. t. 65. E. FI. v. iv. p. 30. — O. inseclifera, i. Linn. 

Chalky and clayey soils in various parts of England, in pastures and 
pits. FI. July. If . — Flowers large. Calyx purplish or greenish-white : 
lateral petals oblong, very small, of the same colour. Lip velvety or 
silky, of a rich brown variegated with yellow. 

2. O. arachnites, Willd. ( late Spider Ophrys); “lip longer than 
the calyx dilated somewhat tumid with 5 shallow indexed marginal 
lobes, the terminal one flattened, calyx coloured, column (anther) 
with a liooked point, petals deltoid downy.” E. Fl.v. iv. p. 273. 
G. E. Smith in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2596 : — in PI. of South Kent, 
p. 56. 


372 


GYNANDRIA — MONANDRIA. 


\Ncottia. 


Chalky clowns of South Kent, between Folkstone and Sittingbourne, 
Rev. G. E. Smith. FI. May, June. If . — I am indebted to Mr. Winter- 
bottom for authentic specimens of this, so well dried as to be beautifully 
expressive of the essential characters of the species. The Rev. G. E. 
Smith speaks of it as allied to O. apifera, “ with which, and probably 
O.fucifera, it forms frequent hybrids. The essential distinctions are to 
be sought in the position of the lobe at the base (extremity?) of the 
lower lip, which is never recurved; in the more or less deltoid form of 
the purplish or green petals ; in the more bent and short, as well as paler 
calyx-leaves ; and in the proportion borne to them by the lip, which is 
either equal or longer, and which presents in the true plant a nearly 
entire margin, and a more obvious shade of green in the various lines 
and spots upon its dull or intensely brown disk.” 

3. O .arantfera, Hulls. ( Spider Ophrys); lip tumid clothed with 
short dense hairs 3-lobed, middle lobe large emarginate, anther 
acute. E. Bot. t. 65. E. FI. v. iv. p. 31. 

Chalky and clayey pastures and pits. FI. Apr. May. If..— Lip shorter 
and broader than in U. apifera; its colour deep brown, with paler lines 
not unfrequently resembling the Greek letter •x. Calyx green. 

4. O. fucifera, Sm. ( Drone Ophrys); lip longer than the calyx 
obovate hairy undivided with a spreading wavy margin, column 
bluntly pointed incurved, petals roughish ovate at the base." E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 32. G. E. Smith in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2649. 

Kent; Mr. E. Bernard and Mr. T. F. Forster. FI. May, June. 
If .—I am indebted to the Rev. G. E. Smith for specimens of this new 
Ophrys, gathered at Folkstone, S. Kent. 

5. O. muscifera, Huds. (Fly Ophrys); lip oblong 3-fid middle 
segments larger 2-lobed, lateral petals filiform, anther short obtuse. 
E. Bot. t. 64. E. FI. v. iv. p. 29. 

Chalky and clayey pastures in England, abundant in many parts of 
Norfolk, Suffolk, Surry, and Kent. FI. June. If .—Well distinguished 
from all the preceding by its very slender, lateral petals, which resemble 
the antennae of an insect, and by its narrow lip, 2-lobed at the extremity, 
and having a broad pale bluish spot in its centre- 

7. Goodyera. Br. Goodyera. 

1. G. repens, Br. (creeping Goodyera ); lower leaves ovate 
petiolate, calyx-leaves petals and lip ovato-lanceolate, root creeping. 
Hook, in FI. Land. N. S. t. 144. 'E. FI. v. iv. p. 33 — Satyrium 
repens, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 289. 

Old fir forests in the north, and especially the N. Highlands of Scotland. 
FI. Aug. If .—Leaves mostly radical. Stem a span high, bearing brac- 
teiform leaves. Flowers small, white. Column very short. Pollen-masses 
broadly oval, sessile, composed of large granules, eventually fixed to the 
top of the stigma and falling away with a gland-like portion of it. 

8. Neottia. Jaecp Lady’s Tresses. 

]. N. spiralis, Rich, (fragrant Lady's Tresses); root-leaves 
oblong subpetiolate, spike twisted unilateral, lip oblong. Sm — 
E. FI. v. ip. p. 35. Ophrys spiralis, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 541. 


Epipadis.] GYNANDRIA — MONANDRIA. 373 

Dry hilly pastures in various parts of England, in a chalky or gravelly 
soil ; but uncertain in its appearance. FI. Aug. Sept. If . — T alters oblong, 
3 — 4. Stem 4 — 6 inches high, rather bracteated than leafy. Flowers 
singularly spiral on the stalk, greenish-white. Upper calyx-leaf and 2 
inner petals combined. Lip longer than the rest of the flower, oblong, 
broader and crenate at the apex. Stigma and anther both acuminate. 

2. N. gemmipara , Sm. ( proliferous Lady's Tresses); “ leaves 
lanceolate as tall as the stalk, spike 3-ranked twisted, bracteas 
glabrous.” E. FI. v. iv. p. 36. 

Dunbog, Bear-Haven, Ireland ; Mr. J. Drummond. FI. Oct. If • 

9. Li stera. Br. Bird’s-nest or Twayblade. 

1. L. ovcita, Br. (common Twayblade); stem with only 2 ovato- 
elliptical opposite leaves, column of fructification with a crest in 

which the anther is placed. E. FI. v. iv. p. 37 Oplirys ovata, 

Linn. — E. Bot. t. 1548. 

Woods and moist pastures, frequent. FI. June. If. — One foot high. 
Leaver striated. Flowers distant upon the spike, yellowish-green. Calyx- 
segments ovate; two lateral petals linear-oblong; lip long, bifid, without 
any teeth at the base. Bracteas very short. 

2. L. cordata, Br. ( heart-leaved Twayblade); stem with only 2 

cordate opposite leaves, column without any crest, lip with a tooth 
on each side at the base. E. FI. v. iv. p. 38. — Oplirys cordata, 
Linn E. Bot. t. 358. 

Sides of mountains in heathy spots, in the north of England and 
Scotland. FI. July, Aug. If . — Root a few long fleshy fibres. Stems 
3 — 5 inches high. Flowers few, very small, spiked, greenish-brown. 
Leaves of the perianth somewhat spreading, those of the calyx ovate. 
Lateral petals linear oblong. Lip pendent, linear. 

! 

3. L. Nidus- Avis, Hook. ( common Bird’s-nest); stem with 
sheathing scales leafless, column without any crest, lip linear-oblong 
with 2 spreading lobes, toothless at the base. Hook, in FI. Loud. 
N. S. t. 58. E. FI. v. iv. p. 38 — Oplirys Nidus- Avis, Linn . — 
E. Bot. t. 48. 

Shady woods in . many parts of England and Scotland. FI. May, 
June, If. — Root of many short, thick, densely aggregated, fleshy fibres. 
Stem I foot high. Flowers spiked, of a dingy brown. Calyx-leaves and 
lateral petals oblong-oval, nearly equal. Lobes of the lip spreading. — 
This can scarcely be generically distinguished from the preceding. 

10. Epipactis. Br. Helleborine. 

1. E. latifolia, Sw. ( broad-leaved Helleborine); leaves broadly 
ovate amplexicaul, perianth connivent, lower bracteas longer than 
the drooping flowers, lip 3-lobed, middle lobe roundish shortly 
acuminated. Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 102. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 40. — Serapias latifolia, Linn E. Bot. t. 269. 

Woods in mountainous countries^ not unfrequent. FI. July, Aug. 
If . — Root creeping, with long fibres, as in the following sp. Stem 1 — 3 
ft. high ; upper leaves lanceolate. Flowers in a very long, lax spike, 


374 


GYNANDRIA MONANDRIA. 


[Malaxis. 


greenish-purple, but varying much in intensity, sometimes dark purple, 
when it becomes the j3. of Sm. and I fear his E. purpurata also. 

2. E. purpurata , Sm. ( purple-leaved Helleborine); “ leaves 
ovato-lanceolate, bracteas linear all twice as long as the flowers, 
lip shorter than the calyx entire, germen downy.” E. FI. v. iv. p. 42. 

“ Parasitical on the stump of a Maple in Worcestershire, Rev. Dr. 
Abbot." FI. June. If. 

3. E. palustris, Sw. ( Marsh Hel/cborine); leaves lanceolate, 
perianth patent, bracteas mostly shorter than the slightly drooping 
flowers, lip 3-lobed, middle lobe oval crenate retuse longer than 
the rest of the perianth. Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S.t. 89. E. El. 

v.iv.p. 42 Serapias pafustris, Scop. — E. Bot. t. 270. — S. longi- 

folia, Linn. 

Moist and marshy places, especially in the vicinity of chalk. FI. July. 
If. — Stem 1 foot high, purplish above. Calyx purple-green; lateral 
petals and lip white, with rose-coloured streaks at the base. 

4. E. grandijlora , Sm. ( large white Helleborine); leaves ovato- 
lanceolate sessile, bracteas much longer than the erect flowers, peri- 
anth patent, lip 3-lobed, middle lobe large oval retuse shorter than 
the rest of the perianth. E. FI. v. iv. p. 43 — E. pollens , Sw. — 
Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 76. — Serapias grandijlora, Linn — 
E. Bot. t. 271. 

Woods and thickets, chiefly in a chalky soil. FI. June. If. — Stem 
a foot or more high. Cal.-leaves and petals nearly equal, large, oblongo- 
ovate, white, concave, including the small lip which is also white, but 
yellowish within. Column of fructification in this and the following spe- 
cies very long : in the preceding ones very short. 

5. E. ensifolia, Sw. ( narrow-leaved white Helleborine) ; leaves 
lanceolate much acuminated subdistichous, bracteas very minute 
subulate, flowers erect, lip 3-lobed, middle lobe large roundish 
obtuse much shorter than the rest of the perianth. Hook, in FI. 
Lond. N. S. t. 77. E. FI. v. iv. p. 44. — Serapias ensifolia, Linn. 
— E. Bot. t. 494. 

Mountainous woods in many places; but not general. FI. May, 
June. If. 

6. E. rubra, Sw. ( purple Helleborine); leaves lanceolate, brac- 
teas longer than the downy germen, perianth spreading, lip with 
its middle lobe acuminate marked with raised wavy lines. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 45. — Serapias rubra , Linn — E. Bot. t. 437. 

Rare in mountainous woods, in England. FI. May, June. If. — Calyx 
and inner petals purplish-red. Lip almost white. 

11. Malaxis. Sw. Bog-orchis. 

1. M. paludosa, Sw. (Marsh Bog-orchis); leaves 4—5 oval very 
concave papillose at the extremity, 1 lip concave acute. E. Bot. 

< These papillae the Rev. Professor Ilenslow has clearly ascertained to be 


GYNANDRIA — IIEXANDRIA. 


375 


Aristolochia.] 

t. 72. Hook, in FI. Loud. N. S. t. 197. E. FI. v. iv. p. 47.— 
Ophrys paludosa, Linn. 

Spongy bogs, in many places, but often overlooked on account of its 
small size. FI. Aug. Sept. If . — Stem 2 — 4 incites high. Flowers erect, 
minute, in a small greenish spile e. Calyx of 3, ovate, horizontally spread- 
ing leaves, two of them erect, their bases embracing the base of the su- 
perior lip which is thus also erect. Two lateral petals recurved. 

12. Li Paris. Rich. Li paris. 

1. L. Loeselii, Rich. ( two-leaved Liparis); leaves 2 broadly 
lanceolate, scape trigonal, lip entire longer than the perianth. — 31a- 
laxis Loeselii , Sw. — E. FI. v. iv. p. 48. — Ophrys Loeselii, Linn. 
— E. Bot. t. 47. 

Sandy bogs, in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire. FI. July. If . — 
6 — 8 inches high. Flowers few, in a lax spike, yellowish-green ; in their 
general structure very similar to those of the tropical and parasitical 
L.foliosa, But. Alag. t. 2709. 

13. Cor allorhiza. Hall. Coral-root. 

1. C. inndta , Br. ( spurless Coral-root); spur very short adnate. 
Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S.t. 142. E. FI. v. iv. p. 49. — Ophrys 
corallorhiza, Linn. — E. Bot. t. 1547. 

Marshy woods in Scotland, rare. Ross-shire ; near Edinb. ; Methven 
wood, Perthshire, (since destroyed) ; sandy places near the sea by Ir- 
vine, (Air. Goldie,) and at the sands of Barrie, Dundee, Mr. T. Drum- 
mond. FI. July. If . — Root oi thick, interwoven, fleshy fibres. Stem 6 
— 12 inches high, greenish-white, with 2 — 3 lanceolate, acute, sheathing 
scales, rather than leaves. Flowers 6 — 8, in a short lax spike, pale yel- 
lowish-green. Calyx-leaves linear-lanceolate, keeled, spreading; 2 lateral 
petals shorter than the calyx , erecto-connivent. Lip oblong, white, 
nearly entire, waved at the margin, with a few purple blotches, deflexed. 
Column elongated. 

GYNANDRIA — DIANDIIIA. 

14. Cypripedium. Linn. Lady’s Slipper. 

1. C. Calceolus, Linn, (common Lady's Slipper); stern leafy, 
terminal lobe of the column nearly oval, lip shorter than the calyx 
somewhat laterally compressed. E. Bot. t. 1. Hook, in FI. Lond. 
N. S. t. 42. E. FI. v. iv.jj. 51. 

Woods in the north of England, but rare. FI. June- If . — One of the 
most beautiful and interesting of our native plants. 

GYNANDRIA— HEXANDRIA. 

15. Aristolochia. Linn. Birthwort. 

LA. Clematitis, Linn, (common Birthwort); stem erect, leaves 

little bulbous gemma, and as such has described and figured them in the Alag. 
of Nat. Hist. v. i. p. 442; a fact suspected previously, in 1 S24, by Mr. W. 
VV ilson, who further finds an hi/bernaculum formed in the autumn among the 
decayed leaves. I hus, independent of seeds, this curious little plant has a inode 
of perpetuating itself, and of increase. 


376 


MONOECIA — TRIANDRIA. 


t Typha. 


heart-shaped, flowers upright, lip oblong shortly acuminate. E. Bot. 
t. 398. E. EL v. iv. p. 53. 

Copses and pastures, and especially among old ruins in the E. and S. 
of England. FI. July, Aug. If. — Flowers pale yellow. 


CLASS XXI. MONOECIA. 

Stamens and Pistils in separate flowers on the same plant. 

OIID. I. MONANDRIA. 1 Stamen. 

1. Euphorbia. Involucre ok one piece, including several barren 
flowers and 1 fertile — Barr.fl. A single stamen without calyx or 
corolla. — Fert.fl. A single pistil without calyx (or rarely a very 
minute one) or corolla. Germen 3-lobed. Styles 3, cleft. Caps. 

3- seeded Nat. Old. Euphorbiace;e, Juss. — Named from Eu- 

phorbus, Physician to Juba, king of Mauritania, who brought the 
plant into use. 

2. Callitriche. Barren fl. Perianth single, of 2 leaves (they 

are, rather, 2 braeteas) or none. Anther of 1 cell Fert.fl. Germen 

4- lobed, lobes laterally compressed, indehiscent, with 4, 1-seeded 
cells. — Nat. Orel. Halorage;e, Br. — Name ; xccXo;, beautiful, 
and tW-, hair. Its stems are long and slender, and resemble hairs. 

3. &ANNICHELLIA. Barren fl. Perianth none Fert. fl. 

Perianth single, of 1 leaf. Germens 4 or more. Style 1. Stigma 
peltate. Capsides nearly sessile — Nat. Ord. Alism ace.e, Juss. 
(Fluviales, Vent.) — Named in honour of John Jerome Zanni- 
chelli, a Venetian apothecary and botanist. 

4. Zostera. Stamens and pistils inserted in 2 rows upon one 
side of a spadix. Spatha foliaceous. Anthers ovate, sessile, alter- 
nating with the germens. Germen ovate. Style bifid. Fruit 
with 1 seed, bursting vertically, ( Wilson.) — Nat. Ord. Alis- 
m ace.e, Juss. (Fluviales, Vent.) — Named from CjjSrr^, & girdle, 
or ribbon, which the leaves somewhat resemble. 

(For Chara, See Cl. Cryptogamia.) 

ORD. II. DIANDRIA. 2 Stamens. 

(See Callitriche in Ord. I. Carex in Ord. III.) 

ORD. III. TRIANDRIA. 3 Stamens. 

5. Typha. Flowers collected into very dense, cylindrical spikes 
or catkins. — Barren fl. Perianth 0. Stain. 3 together upon a 
chaffy or hairy receptacle, united below into 1 filament. — Fert. fl. 
Perianth 0. Pericarp pedicellate, surrounded at the base with 


MONOECIA — TETRANDRIA. 


Buxus] 


377 


hairs resembling a pappus. — Nat. Ord. Typhace/e, Juss Named 

from nfoc, a marsh , where the plant grows. 

6. Sparganium. Flowers in sphserical, dense heads . — Barren 
fi. Perianth single, of 3 leaves . — Fertile jl. Perianth single, of 
3 leaves. Drupe dry, with 1 seed — Nat. Ord. Typhace^e, Juss. 
— Name c-Traegyavov, a little hand, from its narrow and long leaves. 

7. Carex. Flowers collected into an imbricated spike or catkin.' 

Calyx (as it is usually called), a scale — Barren Jl. Cor. 0. 

Fertile Jl. Cor. of 1 piece, urceolate, swollen. Stigmas 2 3. 

Nut triquetrous, included within the persistent corolla, (which is 
thus considered to form part of the fruit.) — Nat. Ord. Cype raceme, 
Juss — Name supposed to be derived from to shear or cut, in 
allusion to its sharp leaves and stems. 

8. Elyna. Spikelets 2-flowered, upper one sterile, lower one fer- 
tile, included in a broad sheathing bractea, (sometimes 1 wanting,) 
and each within a convolute scale. Cal. 0. Cor. 0. — Barren Jl. 
Siam. 3 . — Fertile Jl. Pistil 1. Stigmas 3. Nut obtusely trigonal, 

surrounded by its convolute scale In babit nearly allied to Scir- 

pus, and still more closely to B/ysmus ; but the flowers are 

monoecious. It wants the urceolate corolla of Carex Nat. Ord. 

CYPERACEiE, Juss . — Named, I presume, from f/xu, to involve or 
surround, as the scale does the flower. 


ORD. IV. TETRANDRIA. 4 Stamens. 

9. Littorella. Barren Jl. Cal. of 4 leaves. Cor. 4-fid. 
Siam, very long. — Fertile Jl. Cal. 0, (unless 3 bracteas can be so 
called). Cor. urceolate, contracted at the mouth. Style very long. 

Caps. 1 -seeded. — Nat. Ord. Plantagine/e, Juss -Named from 

littus, the shore, from its place of growth. 

/ 

10. Alnus. Flowers collected into imbricated catkins Barren 

Jl. Scale of the catkin 3-lobed, with 3 flowers. Perianth single, 4- 
partite — Fertile Jl. Scale of the catkin subtrifid. with 2 flowers. 
Perianths. Styles 2. Nut compressed. — Nat. Ord. Amextace.e, 
Juss — Name derived from the Celtic al, near, and lan, the river- 
hank. 

11. Buxus. Flowers clustered, axillary. — Barren Jl. Perianth 
single, of 4 leaves, 2 opposite ones smaller: (with one hractea at 
the base). Rudiment of a germen. — Fertile jl. Cal. as in the har- 
renjl. (with 3 bracteas at the base). Styles 3. Caps, with 3 beaks, 
3-celleil; cells 2-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Eupiiorbiace/e, Juss . — 

1 Whilst the scale i3 considered a calyx or part of the flower, the term 
Catkin, used by Sir J. E. Smith, is evidently improper. The flowers are, in 
this view, truly spicate. 


378 


MONOECIA HEXANDRIA. 


[Eriocaulon. 


Name, altered from the Greek name for the tree. — The Box 

is the badge of the Highland clan Macintosh. The variegated kind 
marks the clan Macpherson. 

12. Urtica. Barren ji. Perianth single, of 4 leaves, contain- 
ing the cup-shaped rudiment of a pisil. — Fertile Jl. Perianth single, 
of 2 leaves. Pericarp 1 -seeded, shining. — Nat. Ord. Urticea;, 
Juss . — Named from uro, to burn , in allusion to its stinging pro- 
perty. 

(See Eriocaulon in Ord. V. Myrica in Cl. XXII.) 

OIID. V. PENTANDItlA. 5 Samens. 

13. Xantiiium. Barren Jl. Involucre of few scales, with many 

small, capitate Jlowers, upon a common receptacle. Cal. 0. Cor. 
obovate, sessile. Anther terminating a tube which is inserted at 
the base of the cor. Germen 0. The rudiment of a style. — Fer- 
tile Ji. Involucre single, prickly, with 2 beaks, entirely enclosing 2 
flowers; the 2 stigmas oidy protruded from small apertures within 
the beaks. Cal. 0. Cor. 0. Fruit 1 -seeded, included in the 
enlarged and hardened involucre. — Nat. Ord. Composite, Juss. 
(Div. Ambrosiea;, Cass .). — Named from yellow , or fair, 

because an infusion of this plant was supposed to improve the 
colour of the hair. 

14. Amaranthus. Barren Jl. Perianth single, deeply 3 — 5- 
partite. Siam. 3— 5.— Fertile Jl. Perianth single, deeply 3-5- 
partite. Styles 3 or 2. Capsule of 1 cell, with 1 seed, bursting all 
round transversely. — Nat. Ord. Am a r anthacf./E, Juss — Named 
from a. , not, fxocgxivcn, to fade; or, flowers which do not fade. 

15. Bryonia. Barren Jl. Cal. 5-toothed. Cor. 5-cleft. Fila- 
ments 3. Anthers 5. — Fertile Jl. Cal. 5-dentate. Cor. 5-cleft. 
Style trifid. Berry inferior, globose, many-seeded — Nat. Ord. 

Cucurb itaceas, Juss Named from to shoot or grow 

rapidly, in allusion to the quick growth ot the stems. 

(See Fagus and Quercus in Ord. Polyandr. Atriplex in Class 

POLYGAMIA.) 

ORD. VI." HEXANDRIA. G Stamens. 

16. Eriocaulon. Flowers collected into a compact, scaly head. 
Barren Jl- in the centre. Perianth single, 4 — G-clelt, the inner 
segments united nearly to their summit. Siam. 4 — G. Fertile Jl. 
in the circumference. Perianth single, deeply 4-partite. Style 1. 
Stigmas 2 — 3. Capsule 2 — 3-lobed, 2 — 3-celled. Cells 1 -seeded. 

Nat.Ord. Resti ace.e, Br . — Named from sg/ov, wool, and kxv As?, 

the stem; in allusion to the downy stems or scapes of the species 
first known. 

(Sec Quercus in Ord. Polyandria.) 


Quercus.] 


MONOECIA — POLYANDRIA. 


379 


OllD. VII. POLYANDRIA. Many Stamens 

17. Ceratophyllum. Barren jl. Cal. inferior, multipartite. 
Cor. 0. Stam. 16 — 20. — Fertile Jl. Cal. multipartite. Cor. 0. 
Germen 1. Style filiform, curved. Stigma simple. Nut superior, 

1 -seeded Nat. Orel. Ceratophylleae, Gray — Name, — 

Kigctro;, a horn, from the spines of the fruit. 

18. Myriophyllum. Barren jl. Cal. inferior, of 4- leaves. 
Pet. 4. Stam. 8. — Fertile jl. Cal. of 4 leaves. Pel. 4. Stigmas 
4, sessile. Nuts 4, sessile, subglobose, 1 -seeded — Nat. Ord. 
Halorage/E, Br. — Name, — /zvpog, a myriad, and tpvXXov, a leaf, 
trom its numerous leaves. 

19. Sagittaria. Barren jl. Cal. 3-leaved. Pet. 3. Stam. 

numerous. — Fertile jl. Cal. 3-leaved. Pet. 3. Pistils very numer- 
ous, collected into a head. Pericarps 1- seeded, compressed, mar- 
gined Nat. Ord. Alismacf.a;, Rich. — Named from sagitta, an 

arrow, on account of the shape of its leaves. 

20. Arum. Spatha of one leaf, convolute at the base. Pe- 
rianth 0. Spadix with germens at the base. Siam, (sessile) near 
the middle of the spadix, which is naked above. Berry with 1 cell 
and many seeds. — Nat. Ord. Aroideaj, Juss. — Name, formerly 
written Aron, and supposed to be an ancient Egyptian word by 
which one of this tribe was known. 

21. Poterium. Flowers collected into a head, with 3 (or 4) 
bracteas at the base of each : upper ones fertile. — Barren jl. Cal. 
of 4 deep segments. Cor. 6. Stam. 30 — 40, with very long, flaccid 
filaments. — Fertile jl. Cal. tubular, contracted at the mouth, with 
4 deciduous teeth. Pistils 2. Stigmas tufted. Pericarps 2, 1- 
seeded, invested with the hardened 4-angled tube of the calyx. — 
Nat. Ord. Rosaceas, Juss. — Named from poterium, a drinking- 
cup : the plant having been used in the preparation of a drink, 
called in England a cool-tankard. 

22. Quercus. Barren jl. in a lax calkin or spike. Perianth 

single, 5—7-cleft. Stam. 5 — 10 Fertile jl. Involucre of many 

little scales, united into a cup. Perianth single, closely investing 
the germen, 6-toothed. Germen 3-celled. Style 1. Stigmas 3. 
Nut (or acorn ) 1 -celled , 1 -seeded, covered by the persistent, en- 
larged perianth, and surrounded at the base by the enlarged cup- 
shaped involucre — Nat. Ord. AmentacE/E, Juss Named from 

the Celtic quer, heautijul, and cuez, a tree. It produced the Mis- 
seltoe of the Druids, and was thence called also derw ; hence Iguj, 
in Greek, and Dryadcs. 

Fhe Oak, (Darach, Gael.) is the badge of the Clan Cameron. 


380 


MONOECIA MONADELPHIA. 


[Firms. 


23. Fagus. Barren ft. in a globose catkin. Perianth single, of 
1 leaf, campanulate, 6-cleft. Stam. 5 — 12 . — Fertile ft. 2, within a 
4-lobed prickly involucre. Perianth single, urceolate, with 4 — 5 
minute lobes. Germen incorporated with the perianth, 3-celled,2 
becoming abortive. Styles 3. Nuts 1 -seeded, invested with the 
enlarged involucre. — Nat. Old. Amentacete, Juss. — Name, — 
pzyog, in Greek, from tpuyu, to eat, on account of the nutritive 
qualities of the fruit. 

24. Castanea. Barren fl. in a very long cylindrical catkin. 
Perianth single, of 1 leaf, 6-cleft. Stam. 5 — 20 . — Fertile fl. 3, 
within a 4-lobed, thickly muricated involucre. Perianth single, 
urceolate, 5 — 6-lobed, having the rudiments of 12 slam. Germen 
incorporated with the perianth, 6-celled, each cell 2-seeded, 5 of 
the cells mostly abortive. Styles 6. Nut 1 — 2-seeded, invested 
with the enlarged involucre. — Nat. Old. Amentace/E, Juss. — 
Named from Castanea, in Thessaly, which produced magnificent 
Chestnut trees. 

25. Betula. Barren ft. in a cylindrical catkin ; its scales 3- 
flowered. Perianth 0. Stam. 10 — 12 . — Fertile fl. Scale of the 
catkin imperfectly 3-lobed, 3-flowered. Perianth 0. Styles 2. 
Germen compressed, with 2 cells, 1 of which is abortive. Nuts 
compressed, with a membranaceous margin, 1-seeded — Nat. Ord. 
Amentace.e, Juss. — Name derived from betu, the Celtic name 
for the birch. 

The Birch (Beatha in Gael.) is the badge of the Clan Buchanan. 

26. Carpinus. Barren fl. in a cylindrical catkin; its scales 
roundish, ciliated at the base. Stam. 8 — 20 — Fertile ft. in a lax 
catkin; its scales large, foliaceous, 3-lobed, 1-flowered. Involucre 
0. Perianth of 1 leaf, urceolate, 6-dentate, incorporated with the 
2-celled germen, of which 1 cell is abortive. Styles 2. Nut ovate, 
striated, 1-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Amentace^:, Juss. — Name, — car, 
wood , and pin, a head, in Celtic; it having been the wood employed 
to make the yokes of oxen. 

27. Corylus. Barren fl. in a cylindrical catkin ; its scales 3- 

cleft. Perianth 0. Stam. 8. Anthers 1-eelled . — Fertile fl. Peri- 
anth obsolete. Germens several, surrounded by a scaly involucre. 
Stigmas 2. Nut 1-seeded, invested at the base with the enlarged, 
united, coriaceous scales of the involucre. — Nut. Ord. Amentace.e, 
Juss. Named from a casque or cap : the fruit, with its in- 

volucre, appearing as if covered with a bonnet. 

The Hazel is the badge of the Highland Clan Colquhoun. 

OllD. VIII. MONADELPHIA. Stamens united into one set. 

28. Pjnus. Barren fl. in crowded, racemose catkins ; the scales 


MONOECIA — MON AND III A. 


381 


Euphorbia.] 


peltate, bearing 2, 1 -celled, sessile anthers. Perianth 0 — Fertile 
fl. in an ovate catkin ; its scales closely imbricated, 2-flowered. 
Perianth 0. Pericarp 1 -seeded, terminated by a long winged 
appendage, and covered with the imbricated scales, forming a cone 

(strobilus) Nat. Orel. AmentacevK, Juss — Name ; — pin or pen, 

means a crag or stony mountain, still so called in Wales (as Pen 
in Scotland) ; where the pine delights to grow, “ moored in the 
rifted rock.” 

The Pine is the badge of the Clan M l Gregor. 

MONOECIA — MONANDRIA. 

1. Euphorbia. Linn. Spurge. 

* Glands of the Involucre 4, rounded on the outside. 

1. E. Peplis, Linn, (purple Spurge); stem procumbent forked, 
leaves oblong heart-shaped nearly entire, glands of the involucre 
with small membranaceous scales beneath, capsule smooth, seeds 
smooth (white). E. Pot. t. 2002. E. Fl. v. iv. j). 59. 

Sandy coast, in Devon and Cornwall. Fl. July, Sept. ©. — Remark- 
able for its procumbent steins, of a glaucous hue, much tinged with 
purple. 

2. E. helioscopia, Linn. (Sim Spurge); umbel of 5 principal 
branches, bracteas and leaves membranaceous obovato-cuneate ser- 
rated upwards, capsule glabrous, seeds reticulated and pitted. 
E. Pot. t. 883. E. Fl. v. iv. p. 63. 

Abundant in waste and cultivated ground. Fl. July, Aug. ©. — The 
acrid milky juice is employed to destroy warts. 

3. E . platyphylla, Linn, (broad leaved warled Spurge); umbel 
of about 5 principal branches and with frequently scattered pedun- 
cles beneath, bracteas cordate, leaves membranaceous broadly obo- 
vato -lanceolate acute finely serrulated hairy beneath, glands of the 
involucre oval, capsule wai ted, seeds smooth (brownish). Jacq. Ic. 

Rar. t. 376, (excellent.) Sm. Fl. Brit. p. 517 E. stricta, Linn. 

and E. Pot. t. 333, (starved specimens). E. Fl. v. iv. p. 64. 

Corn-fields ; Albourne and near Henfield, Sussex ; Mr. Borrer, (ex- 
actly corresponding with Jacquin’s plant.) Essex, Cambridgeshire, Kent, 
Tunbridge Wells, (Rev. Prof. Henslow ); Suffolk, and probably other 
countries.— I have received it also from Canada, whether perhaps it had 
been introduced from Europe. 

4. E. hiberna , Linn. (Irish Spurge); umbel of about 5 principal 
branches, bracteas and leaves elliptical entire, glands of the invo- 
lucre 4 kidney-shaped with intermediate rounded lobes, capsule 
waited glabrous, seeds smooth. E. Pot. t. 1337. E. Fl. v. iv.p. 67. 

In hedges and thickets, in the south of Ireland. Between Feversham 
and Sittingbourne, Kent; Huds. Fl. June. 1£. — 11 — 2 feet high. 1 

1 While botanizing in the S. of Ireland, Mr. W. Christy learned from Dr, 
Taylor, that this plant is extensively used by the peasantry of Kerry for poison. 


382 


MONOECIA — MONANDRIA. 


[ Euphorbia . 


5. E. pilosa, ( hairy Spurge); umbel of about 5 principal 
branches with several scattered inferior ones, bracteas and lpaves 
elliptical finely serrated hairy, glands of the involucre 4 oval with 
intervening rounded lobes, capsule smoothish shaggy, seeds glossy 
smooth. Reichenb. Ic. Hot. t. 145. Hook. Hr. FI . ed. 1. 

“ Abundant in the hedges at Slinfold, Sussex ; naturalized Mr. 
Borrcr ; who observes that formerly Mr. Manningham, Dillenius’ friend, 
was the incumbent there. It has, at any rate, as good a claim to be 
considered native, as some other species of this genus. II. July. If. 
Habit and size of the last, often tinged with purple. 

** Glands of the Involucre pointed or angular. 

G. E. Esula, Linn. ( leafy branched Spurge); umbel of many 
principal branches and several scattered peduncles below, bracteas 
cordate, leaves membranaceous oblongo-lanceolate mostly entire, 
glands of the involucre with two horns, germens glabrous “ sca- 
brous,” seeds obovate smooth. E. Hot. t. 1399. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 65. 

Woods near Edinb. and at Slinfold, Sussex. Banks of Tweed near 
Coldstream, -Mr. II. 1). Thomson. FI. July. If. 

7. E. Cyparissias , Linn. ( Cypress Spurge); umbel of many 
principal branches and several scattered peduncles below, bracteas 
cordate, leaves linear entire membranaceous glabrous, glands of the 
involucre lunate, germens scabrous, seeds obovate smooth. E. Hot. 
t. 840. E. FI. v. iv. p. 66. 

Groves and thickets, Staffordshire, Bedfordshire, Northumberland. 
FI, June, July. If.— Readily distinguished by its numerous, narrow, 
linear leaves. 

8. E. pardlia, Linn. (Sea Spurge); umbel of about 5 principal 
branches often with inferior scattered ones, bracteas cordate con- 
cave, leaves coriaceous obovato- and linear-lanceolate (generally) 
imbricated glaucous entire concave, glands ot the involucre (5) lu- 
nate, capsules wrinkled, seeds smooth. E. But. t. 195. E. FI. v. iv. 

p. 63. 

Sandy sea-coast of England, and near Dublin ; but not general. FI. 
Aug. Sept. If.— Stems numerous from the same root, woody below. 
Leaves very closely imbricated, especially on the young shoots. 

9. E. portlandica, Linn. ( Portland Spurge); umbel with about 
5 principal dichotomous branches and several inferior scattered 
ones, bracteas triangular-cordate, leaves membranaceous obovato- 
hnceolate generally obtuse and submucronate, glands ot the in\o- 
lucre (4) lunate with two long points, capsule rough at the angles, 
seeds dotted (almost white). E. But. t. 441. E. FI. v. iv.p. 62. 


in-r or rather stupifying, fish ; in the same manner as the exotic; E. piscatona. 
So* powerful are its qualities, that a small creel or basket filled with the bruised 
plant suffices to poison the fish for several miles down a river. 


MONOECIA — MONANDRIA. 


383 


CaUitriche . ] 

Sandy sea-coast, in the extreme south and west of England; Wales ; 
Isle of Man, Mr. IV. IVi/son. Galloway coast, Scotland, Mr. Jus. Smith. 
Near Dublin, Mr. J. T. Maclcay. FI. Aug. If . — C — 10 inches high. 
This is very rare, if not unknown, on the continent. 

10 E. exigua , Linn. ( divarf Spurge); umbel of generally 3 
principal branches, leaves linear-lanceolate as well as the bracteas 
rather rigid entire glabrous often truncate and mucronate, glands 
of the involucre with two horns, capsules nearly smooth, seeds 
wrinkled. E. Hot. t. 1336. E. FI. v. iv. p. 60. 

Corn-fields, in a light soil, frequent. FI. July. If. — 4* to 6 inches 
high, branched at the base. Seeds small, white. 

11. E. Peplus, Linn. ( petty Spurge ); umbel of about 3 prin- 
cipal branches, bracteas ovate, leaves membranaceous broadly obo- 
vate on short stalks entire glabrous, glands of the involucre lunate 
the horns very long, germen somewhat winged and scabrous, seeds 
dotted. E. Bot. t. 959. E. FI. v. iv. p. 60. 

Cultivated and waste ground, abundant. FI. July, Aug. If. 

12. E. Ldthyris, Linn. ( Caper- Spurge); umbel of 3 — 4 prin- 
cipal branches, bracteas cordato-acuminate, leaves submembrana- 
ceous 4-farious oblongo-lanceolate entire cordate at the base, glands 
of the involucre bluntly lunate, germen glabrous, seeds smooth. 
E. Bot. t. 2255. E. FI. v. iv. p. 61. 

Thickets about Ufton near Reading. Steep Holmes in the Severn ; 
not truly wild. Crawfurdland, near Kilmarnock, Miss Craufurd. FI. 
June, July. If . 

13. E. nmygdaloides, Linn. ( Wood- Spurge'); umbel of about 
6 principal branches and several scattered peduncles below, leaves 
nearly membranaceous obovato-lanceolate hairy beneath attenuated 
at the base entire, bracteas perfoliated, glands lunate, capsules 
minutely dotted, seeds smooth. E. Bot. t. 256. E. FI. v. iv. p. 68. 
— E. sylvatica, Linn. — Jcicq. 

Woods and thickets in England, especially in clayey soil. South of 
Ireland, Miss Hutchins and Mr. Drummond. FI. March, Apr. If .- — 
Stans red, almost shrubby. 

14. E. Chardcias, Linn, (red shrubby Spurge); umbel of many 
principal downy branches with several peduncles below, bracteas 
broad perfoliate acute, leaves lanceolate, glands of the involucre 
lunate, germens scabrous, seeds smooth. E. Bot. t. 442. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 68. 

In Needwood forest, Staffordshire. FI. March, Apr. Tj . — A large 
and handsome species, not uncommon in gardens. 

2. Callitriche. Linn. Water-starwort. 

1. C. verna, Linn. ( vernal Water-starwort); fructiferous pedun- 
cles very short with two bracteas at their base, fruit regularly tetra- 
gonal, each portion bluntly keeled at the back. Am. — E. FI. v. i, 


MONOECIA — MONANDRIA. 


384 


[ Zostera , 


p. 10. Am. in Ed. Journ. of Nat. and Geogr. Sc. v. i. p. 426. — 
C. aquatica, E. Bot. t. 722. I look- in FI. Land. N. S. t. 127. 

Ditches, pools and slow streams, abundant. FI. Apr. May. ©. — This 
varies much, as do almost all aquatic plants, in its foliage. Leaves inva- 
riably connate. ( W. Wilson.) Upper and floating ones generally oval 
and stalked, 3-ribbed ; lower ones single-ribbed, linear ; rarely all linear. 

2. C. pedunculata, De Cand. ( pedunculated Wa te r-sta rwort ) ; 
fructiferous peduncles more or less elongated without bracteas at 
the base, fruit regular tetragonal, each portion bluntly keeled at 
the back. Am. in Journ. of Nat. and Geogr. Sc. v. i. p. 427. — 
C. autumnalis, Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2606. (excl. the syn.) 

Ditch at Amberley, Sussex; Mr. Borrer. FI. June. 0. 

v 

3. C. autumnalis , Linn. ( autumnal Water-starwort); fructifer- 
ous peduncles very short without bracteas, fruit irregularly 
tetragonal, each portion broadly and acutely winged at the back. 

Am E. FI. v. i. p. 10. — C. aquatica , y. E. Bot, t. 722, ( the 

small figure.) 

Ditches, near London. Outlet of Llyn Maelog, Anglesea ; Mr. W. 
Wilson. Loch of Cluny, Scotland. FI. June — Oct. ©. Leaves always 
sessile, (W. Wilson ) — Mr. Arnott has, I believe, first correctly distin- 
guished the 3 British species of Callitriche, and has published them, with 
many excellent remarks on the genus, in the work just mentioned. 

3. Zannichellia. Linn. Horned-pondweed. 

1. Z. palustris, Linn. ( common Horned-pondweed ); anthers 4- 
celled, stigmas entire, pericarps toothed on the back. E. Bot. 
t. 1844. E. El. v. iv. p. 70. 

Ditches and stagnant waters. FI. Aug. © .—Floating. Stems long, 
filiform, branched. Leaves opposite, linear, entire, sometimes emargi- 
nate at the point. Flowers axillary, from a membranaceous bractea. 
Fertile fi. upon a very short stalk, from the base of which arises a single 
naked anther , borne on a long white filament. 

4. Zostera. Linn. Grass-wrack. 

1. Z. marina, Linn, (common Grass-wrack ); leaves entire, 
somewhat 3-nerved, stem roundish. E. Bot. t. 467. Hook, in FI. 
Loud. N. S. t. 35. E. FI. v. i. p. 5. 

Creeks and salt-water ditches, and on the sea-shore, common. FU 
through the summer. If. . — Stems various in length, as are the linear, 
obtuse, somewhat 3-nerved leaves, which have sheathing bases. Spadix 
linear, arising from a sheathing portion of the leaf, which thus forms the 
spatha. Flowers green, on one side of the spadix, quite destitute of 
perianth, in two rows. Pistils and anthers alternate, generally 2 anthers 
and then 1 pistil; both ovate, or oblongo-ovate, the german terminated 
by a long, filiform, bipartite style. Anthers bursting irregularly. — This 
plant is used in the packing of glass-bottles and earthenware. In the 
south of Russia, Pallas tells us, it is found among pottery in old tombs. 
Beds are frequently made of it, especially in the north of Europe: and 


MONOECIA — TRIANDUIA. 


Spargnnium.] 


385 


it is sold in our shops, under the name of “ Alva (Ulva) marina ,” for 
similar purposes. 

MONOECIA — TRIANDRIA. 

5. Typha. Linn. Cat’s-tail or Reed-mace. 

1" T. /at folia , Linn. ( great Cat’s-tail or Reed-mace ); leaves 
linear nearly plane, sterile and fertile catkin continuous. E. Bot. 
t. 1455. E. FI. v. iv.p. 71. 

Borders of ponds and lakes. FI. July, Aug. If. .—Stems 3— 6 feet 
high- Leaves very long, sometimes nearly an inch broad. Catkins very 
long, close together; fertile one greenish-brown; sterile one yellow, with 
one or two large membranaceous bracteas. 

2. T. angustifolia , Linn, (lesser. Cat’s-tail or Reed-mace) ; leaves 
linear grooved below, sterile and fertile catkins a little distant from 
each other. E. Bot. t. 1456. E. FI. v. iv.p. 72. 

Pools and ditches, less frequent than the preceding. About London : 
not uncommon in the E. of England, as Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex ; 
Loch of Lindore, Fife, Mr. D. Don. FI. July. If —Smaller than the 
last, with much narrower leaves and catkins. Sterile Jl., according to Sm. 
(which in T. latifolia have hairs on the receptacle), mixed with chaffy scales. 

3. T. minor , Sm. (dwarf Cat’s-tail or Reed-mace); leaves 
linear-setaceous, barren and fertile catkins distant the latter ellip- 
tical. E. Bot. t. 1457. E. FI. v. iv. p. 73. — T. minima and T. 
minor? Willd . — T. angustifolia, [3. Linn. 

Said, by Dillenius, to have been found by Mr. I) and ridge on Houns- 
low Heath. FI. July. If . — A very distinct species ; but I fear it has 
little claim to be considered British. 

6. Sparganium. Lint/. Bur-reed. 

1. S. ramosum , Muds, (branched Bur-reed); leaves triangular 

at the base^ their sides concave, common flower-stalk branched, 
stigma linear. E. Bot. t. 744. E. FI. v. iv.p. 74 S. erect., Linn. 

Banks ot ditches, lakes and stagnant waters. FI. July. If . Stem 2 

leet and more high, with a few, long, sword-shaped leaves or bracteas, 
having broad membranous sheathing bases on the upper or branching 
part. Root-leaves very long, linear-ensiform, triangular at the base, then- 
sides concave. Sterile flowers in spherical heads, distantly placed ; fertile 
ones below. J 

2. S. simplex, Huds. (unbranched upright Bur-reed); leaves 

triangular at the base their sides flat, common flower-stalk simple, 
stigma linear. E. Bot. t. 745. E. FI. v. iv.p. 75 S', erect., (3. Linn. 

Ditches and stagnant waters, especially in a gravelly soil. FI. July, 
.tf •~ Muc j h smaller than the last. Stem rarely, if at all, branched, though 
the lower heads of flowers are stalked. The sides of the leaves are plane, 
not concave or grooved. The flowers pale yellow. 

3. S. nutans, Linn, (floating Bur-reed); leaves floating plane, 
c ommon flower-stalk simple, stigma ovate very short, head of sterile 
flowers mostly solitary. E. Bot. t. 273. E. FI. v. iv.p. 75. 

s 


MONOECIA TRIANDRIA. 


[C'arcx. 


386 

Lakes, ditches and stagnant waters ; abundant in the north. FI. July, 

If . — Leaves very long, linear, pellucid. 

7. Carex. Linn. Carex or Sedge. 

* Spike simple, solitary. 

1. C. dioica, Linn. ( creeping separate-headed Carex); spike 
simple dioecious, fruit mostly ascending ovate shortly acuminated 
rough at the margin upwards, leaves and stem smootmsh, root 

creeping. E. Eot   t. 543. E. FI. v. iv.p. ( <• 

Spongy bogs. FI. May, June. V- .—A span high. Stigmas 2. 

2. C. Davalliana, Sm. ( prickly separate- headed Carex); spike 
simple dioecious, fruit ovate much acuminated recurvato-deflexed 
rough at the margin upwards, leaves and stem rough, root tufted. 

E. Bot. t. 2123. E. FI. v. iv. p. 78. 

Subalpine bogs? rare. Lansdown, near Bath. Mearns-shire and 
near Edinb.? County of Down and near Belfast. FI. June. U. 

A span to a foot high. Much resembling the last, which I fear is not un- 
frequentlv mistaken for it, as Dr. Greville thinks is the case in the Edinb. 
station.— The Bath plant is no doubt correct, and there Mr. E. borstei 
assures us it grows “ on the slope of a hill on which there is a clump ot 

firs 

3. C. pulicdris, Linn. ( Flea Carex); spike simple, upper half 
with barren flowers, fruit lax oblongo-lanceolate acuminate reflexed, 
stigmas 2. E . Bot. t. 1051. E. FI. v. iv. p. 78. 

Bogs, frequent. FI. May, June. If • A span high. Stems smooth. 
Leaves, as in all of this division, setaceous or filiform. Fiuit daik 
brown, shining, smooth. . 

4. C. pauci flora, Lightf. {few -flowered Carex); spike simple 
of few flowers the uppermost barren, fruit lax lanceolato-subulate 
patenti-reflexed, stigmas 3. E. Bot. t. 2041. E. FI. v.iv.p. i 

C. leucoglockin, E/ah. _ , . 

Not unfrequent on the Highland mountains of Scotland, in moon 
places. Crag Lake, Northumberland, Mr. Winch. Ft. June. If. 
Habit of the last. Fruit of a pale yellowish colour, striated. 

** Spikelets aggregated, their uppermost flowers mostly sterile. 

Stigmas 2. 

5. C. incurva, Lightf. (curved Carex); spikelets sterile at their 
extremity collected into a roundish head, bracteas membranaceous 
shorter than the spikelets, fruit broadly ovate acuminated nearly 
entire at the point, stem obtusely angular, leaves channelled. B. Mot. 
t. 927. E. FI. v.iv.p. 85. — C.juncifolia , All. 

Sandv sea-shores in the N. of Scotland. FI. June, —Hoot much 
creeping. Stems 2—4 inches high, curved. Head of flowers large. 

6 C. arendria , Linn. ( Sea Carex); lower spikelets fertile, 
upper ones sterile all crowded into an oblong interrupted head, 
fruit with a membranous margin shorter than the calyx, bracteas 


Car ex. 


MONOECIA — TRIANDRIA. 


387 


membranaceous lower ones somewhat leafy, stem triangular, leaves 
plane. E. Bot. t. 928. E. El. v. iv.p. 85. 

Sandy sea-shores, frequent, where it is of great service in binding the 
soil. 7-7, June. If. —Roots excessively long and creeping. Stems romdi, 
8 inches to a foot high. Fruit with a green membranous wing. 

7. C. intermedia , Gooden, (soft brown Carex); inferior and 
terminal spikelets fertile, all crowded into an oblong interrupted 
head, the intermediate ones sterile, fruit acutely margined longer 
than the calyx, bracteas membranaceous the lower ones somewhat 
leafy, stem triangular, leaves plane. E. Bot. t. 2042. E. FI. v. iv. 

p. 86. 

Marshy ground and wet meadows. FI. June. If. — Root creeping, 
running deep into the mud. Stems 1 — ]| foot high. Spikes, or heads of 
spikelets, similar in general appearance to the last. Fruit large, not so 
distinctly winged as gradually flattened towards the margin, more striated 
on its flat or inner side, the beak broader at its summit. Stem much taller 
and the leaves less confined to the lower part of it. 

8. C. divisa, Huds. (bracteated Marsh Carex); spikelets sterile 
at their extremity crowded into a somewhat ovate head, the lower 
ones simple or compound with a leafy erect bractea at their base, 
fruit roundish-ovate convex on one side slightly concave on the 
other acutely angular cloven at the point. E. Bot. t. 1096. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 87. 

Marshy places, especially near the sea ; principally in the east of Eng- 
land, and in Angus-shire. FI. May, June. If. — Stems about 1 foot high: 
knver bracteas mostly with a long leafy point. 

9. C. muricata, Linn. ( greater prickly Carex); spikelets sterile 
at their extremity slightly compound collected into an oblong rather 
dense spike, fruit plano-convex ovato-acuminate acute angular 
spreading rough at the beak. E. Bot. t. 1097. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 88. — C. spicata, Huds. — Lightf., not Linn. 

Marshy and especially gravelly pastures. FI. May, June. If . — 1 2 

ft. high, slender. Bracteas small, lanceolate, subsetaceous. Fruit yel- 
low-brown, broad, rather large. 

10. C. divulsa, Gooden, (grey Carex); spikelets sterile at their 
extremities distant upon an elongated spike, fruit plano-convex 
ovato-acuminate acute angular “erect” (Sm.) rough at the beak. 
E. Bot. t. 629, (young spike). E. FI. v. iv.p. 89 — C. muricata, 
(3. Wald — Hook. Scot. i.p. 89. 

Moist shady pastures, not rare. FI. May, June. If.— This species 
assuredly much resembles the preceding : the fruit I cannot in any re- 
spect find different. The colour is paler, the spikes more elongated and 
slender, with more distant spikelets . I believe I stand singly among 
British Botanists in not considering this plant distinct from C. muricata . 

11. C. vulpina, Linn, (great Carex); spikelets sterile at their 
extremities compound collected into a cylindrical crowded spike, 
fruit ovato-acuminate plano-convex acute angular divergent, stem 


388 


MONOECIA — TRIANDRIA. 


[Caret. 


very acutely triangular, leaves broad. E. Bot. t. 307. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 90. 

Wet shady places, especially near water. FI. June. V-   — Two feet 
or more high : stem stout, rough, as well as the broad leaves at their 
margin. Brae teas small, setaceous. Spike large, greenish. Fruit pale, 
rough at the margin of the lengthened beak, and bifid at the point. 

12. C. teretiuscula, Gooden. ( lesser panicled Carex); spikelets 
sterile at their extremity scarcely compound and collected into a 
slender cylindrical interrupted spike, fruit ovato-acuminate even 
above not margined gradually attenuated into a rather long ser- 
rulated bifid beak, stem bluntly triangular, leaves very narrow. 
E. Bot. t. 1065. E. FI. v. iv.p. 91 — C. paniculata, Hook. Scot, 
i. p. 263. 

Boggy, watery meadows, in various places. FI. May, June. If .— this 
I had^ in the FL Scot., considered a var. of the following. Now, in de- 
ference to very high authority, I have restored it to its rank as a species. 
Mr. W. Wilson, as well as Sir J. E. Smith, is satisfied the two are 
distinct. Yet the Rev. Jas. Dalton, who has studied Carices with great 
care, and whose knowledge and classical attainments are only equalled 
by the excellence of his heart, “ is willing to allow C. teretiuscula to be 
a variety of C. paniculata, though it does not grow in clumps like the 
latter.” ' It is, too, much smaller, with greatly narrower leaves, blunter 
-stems, with browner, more acuminated fruit, less broad, less gibbous 
beneath, less flat on its upper side, which is destitute of margin and of 
raised lines at the base. 

13. C. paniculata, Linn, (great panicled Carex); spikelets 
sterile at their extremity compound collected into a sort of pani- 
culated spike, fruit ovate gibbous beneath slightly margined fiat 
above and striated at the base, acuminated into a rather short bifid 
serrulated beak, stem acutely triangular, leaves broad. E. Bot. 
t. 1064. E. FI. v. iv.p. 92. 

Swampy and spongy bogs. FI. June, f • — hoots densely tutted. 
Much larger than the last, and certainly better distinguished by its habit 
and general aspect, than by words. The C. paradoxa of continental 
authors appears to be almost intermediate between them. 

*** Spikelets aggregated, their lowermost flowers sterile. Stigmas 2, 
(in C. J'ahlii 3.) 

14. C. stellidcita, Gooden, (little prickly Carex); spikelets few 

(3 4) sterile at their base roundish distant, fruit ovate much 

attenuated plano-convex acute angular spreading rough at the 
margin. E. Bot. t. 806. E. El. v. iv. p. 80. 

Marshes and heathy places. FI. May, June. If . — A span to a foot 
high. Leaves nearly as long as the stem. Distinguished by its few, 
much beaked capsules, placed in small distant roundish spikelets, and 
which spread, when ripe, in every direction. 

15. C. curia, Gooden, (white Carex); spikelets sterile at their 


MONOECIA — TRIANDRIA. 


389 


base about 5 rather distant elliptical, bracteas very minute (except 
the lower one), fruit broadly ovate acute plane above slightly con- 
vex beneath subobtusangular faintly striated as long as the scales. 
E. Eot. t. 1386. E. El. v. iv. p. 81. 

Bogs, in several places, but not very general. Coast of Kent, Rev. 
G. E. Smith. FI. June. If . — Distinguished by its pale elliptical spikelets, 
and imbricated, compressed, almost elliptical fruit. 

16. C. Valilu , Schk. (close-bearded alpine Carex ); spikes 3 — 4 
roundish or oblong aggregated the terminal one with barren flowers 
at its base, stigmas 3, fruit obovate scabrous above with minute 
crystalline prickles shortly beaked longer than the ovate obtuse 
calyx, stem triangular rough at the edges. Grev. in E. Bol. Suppl. 
t. 2666 — C. alpina, Sw. 

Rocks above the head of Loch Callader in Braemar ; Dr. Greville, 
Mr. Balfour. 1830. FI. Aug. Sept. If. — This is a most interesting addi- 
tion to the British Flora. 

17. C. elongata , Linn. ( elongated Carex); spikelets numerous 
oblong lax rather distant sterile with minute pointed bracteas, fruit 
plano-convex oblongo-acuminate scarcely bifid at the point patent 
longer than the scales. Host, Gram. Austr. v. ii. t. 79, (excellent'). 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 82. 

Marshes, very rare. Aldwark, Yorkshire; Mr. Jonathan Salt, 1807. 
Pit side at Over, Cheshire, 1827, Mr. W. Wilson. FI. June. If..— Roots 
tufted. Stems 1 to 1 4 foot high, with 3 acute angles, rather rough, as 
well as the leaves. Spikelets brown. Fruit lax. — 1 am indebted to Mr. 
Wilson for excellent specimens of this exceedingly rare, yet very distinct 
Carex. 

18. C. ovalis, Gooden. ( oval-spiked Carex); spikelets about 6 
sterile at the base oval approximate, fruit as long as the calyx 
ovato-acuminate compressed plano-convex striated with a broad 
membranous margin rough at the edge, the beak bifid. E. Bol . 
t. 806. E. FI. v. iv. p. 82. 

Bogs and marshy places. FI. June. If— Stems 1 foot high, triangular. 
Spikelets brownish-green, shining. Calyx-scales concealing the fruit. 
Bracteas small, uppermost ones resembling the calyx-scales. 

19. C. tenella, Schk. (slender-headed Carex); “spikelets 3 brac- 
teated distant minute of about 3 florets, fruit elliptical convex at 
each side very smooth and even with a blunt entire beak, stamens 

2.” Sm. — Schk. Car. 23, t. P.p.f 104, (excl. of i.h. 1.) Sm 

E. FI. v. iv. p. 83. 

In a wood by the River Esk, Angus-shire, very rare ; Mr. G. Don. 
FI. May, June. If . — With this I am unacquainted. May it not be a 
starved state of the following? 

20. C. remota, Linn, (remote Carex); 6pikelets several (small) 
sterile at their base very distant, fruit longer than the calyx ob- 


390 


MONOECIA — TRIANDRIA. 


[Car ex. 


longo-ovate shortly acuminate plano-convex acute angular bifid at 
the point, bracteas very long and narrow leafy reaching beyond 
the spike. E. Bot. t. 832. E. FI. v. iv. p. 84. 

Woods and moist shady places. FI. June. If— Whole plant very 
slender, pale green, one foot to foot high. Resembling the follow- 
ing in many respects : but “ the stem has blunter angles ; the lowest brac- 
tea is much longer than in that species •. the leaves are compresso-cana- 
liculate (with incurved sides) and much narrower: — the cal. scales, 
too, are narrower, their nerve quite smooth, discontinued below the mem- 
branous summit.” IV- W ikon. 

21. C. axillaris, Gooden, (axillary clustered Carex) ; spikelets 
several sterile at their base very distant, fruit longer than the calyx 
oblongo-ovate shortly acuminate plano-convex acute angular the 
beak deeply bifid, bracteas setaceous lower one long, the rest 
scarcely so long as the spike. E. Bot. t. 993. E. FI. v. iv. p. 84. 

Marshes, rare. Putney, by London ; and Earsham, Norfolk. Over in 
Cheshire; Killin, Scotland; Mr. JV. Wilson. Near Crichton Castle, 
Edinb.; Dr. Bainbrulge. FI. June. If.— Stouter and taller than the 
last : spikelets with more flowers, lower one compound. Cal. scales with 
2, close, green, generally rough nerves, reaching to the summit, hence 
more rigid. 

**** Barren and fertile flowers in separate spikes : barren spike 
mostly single. Bracteas membranaceous. Stigmas 3. 

22. C. digitata, Linn, {fingered Carex'); bracteas membranace- 
ous sheathing, spikes filiform erect lax, fertile about 3 longer than 
the barren one, fruit obovato-triquetrous downy on a short stalk, 
leaves plane. E. Bot. t. 615. E. FI. v. iv. j). 93. 

Rare, in woods in limestone countries : near Bath and Bristol ; and 
Thorpe-arch and Mackershaw wood, Ripon, Yorkshire. FI. May. If . 
Root of tufted fibres. Stem 8— 10 inches high. Leaves soft, shorter than 
the stem. — 1 do not see how the C. ornithopoda, Willd. differs from this. 

23. C. clandestina, Gooden. ( dwarf silvery Carex); bracteas 
membranous, fertile spikes remote of very few flowers concealed 
by the bracteas, fruit broadly obovato-triquetrous slightly downy 
contracted at the base, leaves longer than the stems channelled 
rough rigid. E. Bot. t. 2124. E. FI. v. iv. p. 94. 

On the limestone rocks at St. Vincent’s, Bristol ; Mr. Sole. Ft. May. 
If . — Remarkable for the few flowers ot its fertile spikes which are con- 
cealed by the comparatively large, membranaceous bracteas. as the short 
stems are by the leaves. 

***** Barren and fertile flowers in separate spikes : the barren 
mostly solitary. 'Bracteas leafy, often sheathing. 

f Stigmas 3. 

24. C. pendula, Iluds. (great pendulous Carex) ; sheaths elon- 
gated nearly equal to the flower-stalks, fertile spikes cylindrical 


Carer.] MONOECIA — TRIANDUIA. 391 

very long ami drooping, fruit ovate shortly acuminate bifid at the 
extremity closely imbricated, leaves broad. E. Bot. t. 2315. E. FL 
v. iv. p. 95. 

Moist, wooded and shady places, not very general. FI. May, June, 
If. — 3 — 4 ft. high; 8 feet near Auchincruive, Ayrshire, (Mr. Jas. Wil- 
son): — well distinguished by its long, pendulous, cylindrical spikes. 

25. C. strigosa, Huds. (loose pendulous Carex) ; sheaths elon- 
gated equal to the flower-stalks, fertile spikes slender filiform nearly 
erect, fruit ovato-lanceolate nerved slightly recurved loosely imbri- 
cated, leaves rather broad. E. Bot. t. 994. E. FL v. iv. p. 95. 

Groves and thickets in several parts of the east and middle of Eng- 
land. Coast of Kent, common, Rev. G. E. Smith. Arniston woods, 
Edinb. FI. May, June. If . — 1 — 2 feet high. Cal.-scales a little shorter 
than the fruit. 

26. C. sylvdtica, Huds. (pendulous Wood Carex); sheaths half 
as long as the flower-stalks, fertile spikes filiform rather slender 
slightly drooping, fruit broadly ovate much acuminated cleft at the 
point, leaves narrow. E. Bot. t. 995. E. FL v. iv. p. 96, 

Moist woods, frequent. FI. May, June. If . — Similar to the last; but 
the spikes are shorter and broader: th e fruit very different, glabrous, and 
so acuminated as to terminate in a long beak. Cal.-scalcs longer in pro- 
portion. — Linnaeus tells us that this plant, when carded and dressed, is 
employed by the Laplanders to protect their feet from the cold. 

27. C. depauperata, Gooden, (starved Wood Carex); sheaths 
much shorter than the flower-stalks, fertile spikes erect remote very 
few-flowered, fruit large nearly globose inflated terminating in a 
long beaked bifid point. E. Bot. t. 1098. E. FL v. iv. p. 97. 

Dry woods, rare. Godalmin, Surry ; Charlton wood, Kent: and near 
Forfar. FI. May, June. If . — 1 — 1^ ft. high. Spikes very distant; their 
few flowers , and large inflated beaked fruit, decidedly marking the species. 

28. C. Mielichoferi , Willd. (loose- spiked Rock Carex); “ sheaths 
not half the length of the flower-stalks, fertile spikes 3 distant 
erect lax, fruit ovate tumid triangular rough-edged, its beak cloven 
membranous at the summit.” E.Bot. t. 2293. Hook. Scot.i. p. 264.? 
E. Fl. v. iv. p. 98. 

Rocky ledges of Craigalleach, Breadalbane ; Mr. Borrer. FL Aug. 
If . — I had drawn up my character of C. Mielich. in Fl. Scot, from what 
I considered to be the same plant as is figured in E. Bot., of which a single 
specimen was sent to me by Mr. Don with his MSS. name of nivicola ; 
but Sm. has referred that plant to the following. 1 must confess myself 
therefore ignorant of the present species ; yet will observe that the E. 
Bot. figure is admirably characteristic of Mr. Don’s plant just alluded to. 

29. C. speirostdekya, Sw. (dense short-spiked Carex); “ sheaths 
shorter than the flower-stalks, fertile spikes about 3 distant erect 
ovate dense many-flowered, fruit ovate triangular ribbed smooth 
with a deeply cloven beak membranous at the orifice.” E. Fl. v. iv. 


392 


IUONOECIA TRIANDRIA. 


[Car ex. 


p. 98. — C. Mielichoferi, Hook. Scot. i. p. 264, ( according to Smith, 
who must have had specimens of the same plant from Don, to leave 
ascertained this point.) — C. distans, “ FI. Dan. t. 1049.” 

Marshes, Mugdoch Castle, near Glasgow, and on the hills of Lanark- 
shire and Perthshire. FI. July, Aug. If. — If Sir J. E. Smith be cor- 
rect in referring Mr. Don’s nivicola to this, I can only say that I have 
never seen any thing like it near Glasgow; that the appearance of the 
specimen is altogether that of an alpine plant, and the idea of its being 
so is strengthened by Mr. Don’s MSS. name nivicola. There must exist 
some mistake respecting it, which I have not the means of rectifying. 

30. C . phceostdchya, Sni. (short brown-spiked Carex); “sheaths 
shorter than the flower-stalks, fertile spikes 2 distant erect ovate, 
fruit ovate triangular smooth with a cloven beak, scales of the bar- 
ren spikes pointed, of the fertile ones obtuse.” E. FI. v. iv. p. 99. 
“ C. salina, Don, H. Frit. 216.” 

Rocks of the Cairngorum and Clova mountains ; Mr. G. Don. FI. 
June. If. — “Very distinct from the preceding, although its character- 
istic marks are not easily defined.” Sm. 

31. C. capillaris, Linn. ( dwarf capillary Carex); common 
sheath half the length of the flower-stalks, fertile spikes few-flow- 
ered lax drooping, fruit oblongo-obovate acuminate as long as the 
ovate membranous deciduous calyx. E. Bot. t. 2069. E. El. v. iv. 

p. 100. 

Plentiful on some of the Highland mountains, especially the Bread- 
albane range. On Ben-y-Gloe, near Blair in Athol ; Dr. Greville, Mr. 
Arnott, and Hooker. FI. June, July. If. — 2 — 6 inches high. Leaves 
mostly radical, scarcely half the length of the stem, soft. One single 
bractea includes the lower part of all the peduncles, with its sheathing 
base. Sterile spike single, frequently below the fertile ones. Fruit dark- 
brown, shining. 

32. C. limosa, Linn. ( Mud Carex); sheaths extremely short 
scarcely any, fertile spikes oblongo-ovate pendulous, bracteas sub- 
setaceous, calyx acute as long as the fruit, fruit elliptico-rotundate 
striated shortly mucronated. E. Bot. t. 2043. Hook. Scot. i.p. 265. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 1 02. 

Bogs and marshes. Rare in England ; mostly found in the northern 
and mountainous parts : more frequent in Scotland and Ireland. FI. 
June. If. — Root ascending obliquely. Stems 8 — 10 inches high. Leaves 
very narrow. Fertile spikes 2 ; cal.-scales dark brown, subapiculate. Fruit 
greenish-brown. 

33. C. rariflora, Sm. (loose-floivered alpine Carex); sheaths 
very short almost none, fertile spikes narrow-oblong very few- 
flowered lax pendulous, bracteas subsetaceous, calyx acute longer 
and broader than the fruit, fruit ovate somewhat acute striated. 
E. Bot. t. 2516. E. FI. v. iv. p. 100 — C. limosa, y. Wahl. 

Bog at the head of Glen Doll, Angus-shire; Mr. G. Don. FI. June. If . 
— Root creeping. Stems about (3 inches high. Leaves about half as long, 


Carex.] 


MONOECIA — TRIANDIIJA. 


393 


but broader than those of the last, with which it has, I think, been im- 
properly united by Wahlenberg. Cal.-scales obtuse, very deep brown, 
with a pale dorsal line, and forming a striking contrast with the pale- 
coloured fruit. 

3d. C. Pseudo-cyperus , Linn. ( Cyperus-like Carex); sheaths 
scarcely any (except sometimes to the lowermost bractea), fertile 
spikes upon long footstalks cylindrical pendulous, bracteas very 
leafy, calyx setaceous, fruit oblong very much acuminate cloven at 
the tips striated. E. Bot. t. 242. E. FI. v. iv. p. 101. 

Moist places, by the sides of lakes and ponds; not very general. El. 
June. If.. — Stems 2 — 3 feet high, acutely triangular. Leaves 4 an inch 
wide. — One of the best marked and most beautiful of the genus. 

35. C. ustuldta , Willd. ( scorched alpine Carex); sheaths elong- 
ated shorter than the flower-stalks, fertile spikes oval pendulous, 
bracteas scarcely leafy, fruit elliptical shortly acuminated (black) 
bifid at the point. E. Bot. t. 2404. E. FI. v. iv. p. 103. 

Ben Lawers, Mr. G. Don. FI. July. If., — Stem about a span high, 
with broad, short leaves, principally from the base. Fertile spikes 2 or 3, 
on slender drooping stalks, and remarkable for their deep purple black 
colour. 

36. C. atrdta, Linn. ( black Carex); sheaths scarcely any, fertile 
spikes pedunculated ovate inclined, the terminal one with sterile 
flowers at the base, bracteas subfoliaceous, fruit roundish-ovate 
compressed with the beak bifid at the point. E. Bot. t. 2044. E.Fl. 
v. iv. p. 103. 

On the Welsh mountains; Snowdon, rare, Mr. W. Wilson; and on 
the Breadalbane range, Scotland, among wet rocks. FI. June. If . — 
About 1 foot high. Leaves unusually broad for the size of the plant. 
Calyx-scales dark brown, opaque. Fruit pale yellowish-brown. — Here 
there is no distinct and entirely sterile spike, but there are a few anther- 
bearing scales in the lower part of the terminal fertile spike: yet in gene- 
ral habit this plant perfectly agrees with the other species of the present 
division. 

37. C. pallescens, Linn. ( pale Carex); sheaths hardly any, 
fertile spikes pedunculated oblongo-cylindrical scarcely pendulous, 
bracteas subfoliaceous, fruit obovato-elliptical tumid striated obtuse 
glabrous. E. But. t. 2185. E. Fl.v. iv. p. 105. 

Marshy places, frequent. FI. June. If.— A foot or more high. 
Leaves slightly downy. Spikes obtuse, pale green. Fruit very obtuse. 

38. C. Jldva, Linn. ( yellow Carex); sheaths short about equal 
to the flower-stalks, bracteas long leafy, sterile spike distinctly 
stalked, lertile spikes roundish-oval rather distant, fruit obovate 
turgid spreading with a long more or less deflexed beak bifid at 
the point. E. Bot. t. 1294. Hook. Scot. i. p. 266, (x.) E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 107. 

Turfy bogs, frequent. FI. May, June. If. — 6 to 8 inches or a foot 

S 2 


394 


MONOECIA TRIANDRIA. 


[Car ex. 


hi<*h. Bracteas very foliaceous, the lower one resembling the broad 
acuminated leaves. ' Spikes , and indeed the whole plant, of a yellowish 
hue. 

39. C. Oederi, Ehrli. ( Oederian Car ex); sheaths short about 
equal to the flower-stalks, bracteas long leafy, sterile spike almost 
sessile, fertile ones roundish-oval approximate lower one subcom- 
pound’, fruit obovate turgid spreading with a long nearly strait beak 
bifid at the point. E. Bot.t. 1773. E. FI. v. iv. p. 107. — C.jlavu, 
(3. Hook. Scot. i. p. 266. 

Bogs and moist heaths, frequent. FI. May, June. If. — I scarcely see 
how this is to be distinguished from the last, but by the characters just 
mentioned ; and these appear to depend very much upon the stunted 
growth of the plant, which is not more than 4 or 5 inches high ; all the 
'spikes also are more compact and almost clustered. Yet many of our 
most acute British Botanists consider it distinct; among them Mr.^Dal- 
ton and Mr. W. Wilson, to whose authority I yield. 

40. C.fulva, Gooden, {tawny Carex); sheaths elongated shorter 
than the peduncles, bracteas foliaceous, scales acute, fertile spikes 
oblongo-ovate distant, fruit broadly ovate ascending glabrous acu- 
minated into a strait beak bifid at the point, stem scabious. E. Hot. 
t. 1295. E. FI v. iv. p. 107. 

Boggy meadows, not untrequent. FI. June. 7f . 1 ft. high; with the 

habit of C. distans, but smaller; with shorter, more lax, paler-coloured 
and fewer-flowered spikes; and acute, not mucronate, cal.-scales. 

41. C. extensa, Gooden. ( long-bracteated Carex); sheaths very 
short (scarcely any) with extremely long foliaceous bracteas, fertile 
spikes nearly sessile oblong, scales slightly mucronate, tiuit o' ate 
striated with a short acuminated beak bifid at the point, leaves very 
narrow, stem smooth. E. Hot. t. 833. E. FI. v. iv. p. 108. 

Marshes, rare, near the sea, on the E. and S. of England. Near 
Liverpool and shores of the Menai, Mr. IV. Wilson. Coast of Fifeshire, 
Mr. A. Chalmers. In Ireland. FI. June. If.— About 1 foot high. 
Quite distinct from C. fiava, with which it has been confounded, in its 
very narrow convolute leaves , never spreading and short-beaked fruit. 

42. C. distans , Linn. ( loose Carex); sheaths elongated about 
equal to the flower-stalks with leafy bracteas, fertile spikes some- 
times compound remote oblong erect, calyx mucronate, fruit ovate 
somewhat inflated subtriquetrous uniformly nerved with a rather 
short beak bifid at the point. E. Hot. t. 1234. Hook. Scot. i. p. 267, 
( excl . the syn. C. binervis.) E FI. v. iv. p. 109. 

Muddy marshes near the sea, probably in many places. About Angle- 
sea, Mr. W. Wilson, who has supplied me with many specimens ; with 
C. binerv., in boggy ground, coast of Kent, Rev. G. E. Smith. Coast 
near Montrose, Mr. Drummond. FI. June. If. — 8 inches to 1 and 2 
feet high, slender. Spikes very distantly placed, their rather long 
peduncles entirely concealed by the sheathing bases of the bracteas. 


Care, r.] 


MONOECIA TRIANDRIA. 


395 


Scales of the calyx rather pale brown. Fruit green, inclining to brown 
when ripe. — Extremely near the following, if not the same, and Mr. W; 
Wilson observes, “ I would gladly consider it a maritime state of C. 
binerv.” A plant very nearly allied to this sp., Mr. Wilson finds on the 
banks of the Menai, near Bangor, with the spikes shorter, the fruit 
smooth, shining, widely spreading, more decidedly beaked and more 
inflated below. 

43. C. binervis, Sin. (green-ribbed Carex); sheaths elongated 
about equal to the flower-stalks with leafy bracteas, fertile spikes 
remote cylindrical the lower ones partly compound erect, scales 
mucronate, fruit ovate scarcely inflated rather acutely triquetrous 
with 2 principal (green) nerves near the margin at the back and a 
rather short beak bifid at the point. E. Bot. t. 1099. Hook. 
Scot. i. p. 267, (under C. distans.) E. FI. v. iv.p. 110. 

Dry heaths and moors, frequent. FI. June. If . . — Generally taller, and 
in every part more rigid, than the last. Calyx-scales and especially the 
fruit , more highly coloured, the latter more acutely triquetrous, with two 
nerves near the margin on the back, which are always green, though the 
rest of the fruit be more or less brown. But there are states of which 
Mr. W. Wilson and myself scarcely know whether they should be re- 
ferred to the one or to the other. 

44. C. prcecox , Jacq. (vernal Carex'); sheaths short (scarcely 
any) equal to tho flower-stalks, fertile spikes oblong approximate, 
scales elliptic-oblong, fruit obovate subtriquetrous acute downy. 
E. Bot. t. 1099. E. FI. v. iv. p. 111. 

Dry pastures and heaths. FI. Apr. May. If. . — 1 loot creeping. Stems 
3 inches to a foot high. Leaves short, rather broad. Lower bracteas 
small, but leafy; upper ones very minute. Its numerous yellow anthers 
are conspicuous at an early season of the year. 

45. C. pilulifera , Linn, (round-headed Carex); sheaths none, 
bracteas small subfoliaceous, fertile spikes sessile roundish approxi- 
mate, scales strongly mucronate, fruit obovato-globose acute and 
downy, stems weak scabrous. E. Bot. t. 885. E. FI. v. iv.p. 112. 
— C. montana , Linn. 

Moory ground, frequent. FI. June. If . — Stems varying much in 
height, from 6 — 12 inches, slender. — Readily distinguished by the pubes- 
cent, almost spherical fruit, which gives name to the species. 

46. C. tomentosa, Linn, (larger downy fruited Carex); sheaths 
scarcely any, fertile spikes about 2 nearly sessile shortly cylindri- 
cal obtuse with acute scales, fruit globose densely downy with a 
short beak scarcely bifid at the point. E. Bot. t. 2046. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 113. 

Meadows near Merston Measey, Wiltshire. Mr. Teesdale. FI. June. 
If. — A well marked and very rare species, no other station being known 
for it, in Britain, than that just-mentioned, whence I have an original 
specimen, given me by the Rev. James Dalton. 


39(5 


MONOECIA TRIANDRIA. 


[Cara. 


47. C. panicea, Linn. ( Pink-leaved Carex ); sheaths elongated 
shorter tlian tlie flower-stalks, fertile spikes subcylindrieal with 
distant flowers, bracteas leafy, fruit subglobose somewhat inflated 
obtuse glabrous entire at the point. E. Bot. t. 1505. E. FI. v. iv. 
p . 114. 

Marshy places and bogs, common. FL June. If. — Stems 1 — foot 
high. Leaves rather broad, glaucous, rough at the edges, much resem- 
bling, as Sir J. E. Smith observes, the foliage of C   recurva; but the 
characters of the two are widely different. Calyx-scales dark-brown, the 
keel green. Fruit greenish-brown. 

48. C. recurva , Huds. (glaucous Heath Carex ); sheaths short 
scarcely any, bracteas leafy, fertile spikes cylindrical scarcely droop- 
ing densely imbricated on long slender stalks, fruit obovato-globose 
slightly downy entire at the small point. E. Bot. t. 1506. E. FI. 
v. iv.p. 114. — C. Micheliana, E. Bot. t. 2236, (fr. glabrous.) 

Moist meadows, moors and groves. FI. June. If. — Leaves mostly 
radical, very glaucous. Stems about 1 foot high. Fertile spikes 2, 
barren ones often 2 or 3. Fruit closely placed, brownish when ripe. 

Stigmas 2. 

49. C.pulla, Gooden. ( russet Carex) ; sheaths none, bracteas 
foliaceous, fertile spikes ovate obtuse the lower one stalked, scales 
oblong, fruit spreading elliptical inflated with a very short beak 
bifid at the point. E. Bot. t. 2045. E. FI. v. iv. p. 104. 

Rare; near springs on the higher regions of the Scottish mountains. 
Ben Lomond, Mr. G. Dun. Breadalbane range, not unfrequent. 
Glen Tilt, Mr. Anderson. Mountains above Loch Scavig in Skye. FI. 
June. T? . — Six to 8 inches high. Leaves remarkably acuminated, 
slightly keeled at the back, with trigonous points resembling some of 
the narrow-leaved species of Eriophorum. Spikes almost shaggy with 
the long white stigmas. Scales shining, of a deep chocolate brown. 
Fruit at first pale, dark brown when ripe. 

50. C. ccespitosa, Linn. ( tufted Bog Carex) ; sheaths none, 
bracteas foliaceous auricled at the base, fertile spikes sessile cylin- 
drical obtuse imbricated compact, fruit elliptical compressed with 
a very short entire point, leaves mostly erect narrow-linear. 
E. Bot. t. 1507. Ilooh. Scot. i. p. 268, (excl. syn. C. rigida?) 
E. FL v. iv.p. 117. 

Marshes and wet pastures, frequent. FI. May, June. If. — Eight 
inches to a foot high. “ Root creeping, but not tufted. I suspect that 
it has been, in this respect, confounded with C. stricta. Stem with 
blunter angles than C. rigida or C. stricta. Stigmas nearly sessile on the 
corolla, spreading and flexuose, with coarse pubescence, similar to the 
following, but larger and more loose. Cor. sessile. Fruit without ribs 
(in a young state at least), also sessile. Beak like that of C. rigida, 
except that it is not cloven or notched.” Mr. IV. IVilson. 

51. C. rigida, Gooden, (rigid Carex); sheaths none, bracteas 


Car ex.] 


31 0 NOECI A — T R I AN D It I A. 


397 


foliaceous aurided at the base, fertile spikes subcylindrical obtuse 
loosely imbricated the lower one pedunculated, fruit obovate attenu- 
ated at the base slightly stalked with a very short entire point, 
leaves mostly recurved broadly linear. E. Bot. t. 204-7. E. Ft. 

v. iv. p. 116 — C. ccespitosa, (3. Hook. Scot. i. p. 268 C. saxatilis , 

FI. Dan. Willd. (not Linn., according to Sin.) — (3. larger, leaves 
broader, spikes elongated. 

On Snowdon, the Cheviots; and all the more elevated Highland hills, 
especially upon their summits. — /3. On the Clova mountains. Mr. T. 
Drummond. FI. June, July. If. — Roots creeping, 4 — G inches high; 
in /3. nearly a foot. — “ Bracteas often erect, not unfrequently recurved. 
Stigmas nearly or quite sessile, erect, not spreading, minutely papillose. 
Corolla with a short stalk. Nearly allied to C. ccespitosa ; nor is it dis- 
tinguishable by any other marks than the broad leaves, stalked corolla, 
and neatly formed, erect stigmas, which, if constant, may perhaps serve 
to keep it in the rank of a species.” Mr. W. Wilson. 1 have preferred 
giving the remarks of my acute friend Mr. Wilson, made from living spe- 
cimens, to my own : and from these 1 think it will be seen that this is 
at any rate a very doubtful species. 

52. C. stricta, Gooden. ( strait-leaved Carex ); sheaths none, 

bracteas with small auricles at the base short subfoliaceous, fertile 
spikes nearly sessile cylindrical elongated closely imbricated often 
acuminated with barren flowers at the extremity, fruit ovate some- 
what acute plane above on each side, on a very short stalk, stem 
acutely angular strait, leaves long strait narrow-linear their bases 
often reticulated. E. Bot. t. 914. E. FI. v. iv.p. 1 18 C. ccespi- 

tosa, Hads. — j3. Lightf. 

Marshes, common. FI. Apr. May. If .—2 ft. or more high. Leaves 
rough, filamentous at their sheathing bases. Spikes long, erect. Cal. 
scales lanceolate, dark brown. The roots are fibrous and tufted, and 
the plant is much taller than C. ccespitosa. The fruit comes gradually 
to a point, and Mr. Wilson observes this point or mouth to°be beset 
with very minute spinules. The fertile spike he finds has very constantly 
8 rows of fruit. y 

****** Barren and fertile flowers in separate spikes. Barren 
spikes 2 or more. Stigmas 3, {except in C. acuta.) 

53. C. acuta, Linn, {slender -spiked Carex); stigmas 2, sheaths 
none, bracteas long foliaceous, fertile spikes long cylindrical acu- 
minate slendei eiect when in fruit, fruit oval swelling subacuminate 
entire at the point, stem acutely angular scabrous. E. Bot. t. 580. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 119 — C. gracilis, Cart. 

Moist meadows and wet pastures, frequent. FI. May. If —Two to 
3 feet high. Leaves broad, scarcely glaucous, rough. 

54. C. paludosa, Gooden, {lesser common Carex); sheaths none, 
nacteas very long foliaceous, calyx of the sterile spikes obtuse, fer- 


398 


MONOECIA TRIANDTUA. 


[Cur ex. 


tile spikes cylindrical obtuse, fruit oblongo-ovate acute bifid at the 
point striated. E. Bot. t. 807. E. FI. v. iv.p. 120 — C. acuta, Curt. 

Banks of rivers and ditches, common. Ft. May. If .—Two feet or 
more high. Leaves very broad, keeled, rough. 

55. C. riparia, Curt, (great common Carex); sheaths none, 
bracteas very long foliaceous, scales of the sterile spikes acuminated, 
fertile spikes scarcely pedunculated broadly cylindrical acute, fruit 
oblongo-ovate striated subacuminated deeply bifid at the point. 
E. Bot. t. 579. E. FI. v. iv. p. 121. — C. acuta, Huds — Light/. 

Sides of ditches and rivers, common. FI. May. If . — Larger than the 
last, with much broader leaves and spikes ; and well distinguished by the 
acuminated scales of its sterile spikes. 

56. C .Icevigata, Sm. (smooth-stalked beaked Carex); sheaths 
elongated shorter than the flower-stalks, bracteas foliaceous, fertile 
spikes drooping cylindrical, all the scales acuminated or mucronate, 
fruit ovate triangular striated with rather a long acuminated beak 
bifid at the point. E. Bot. t. 1387. Hook. Scot. i.p. 269. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 122 . 

Marshes and boggy thickets, in several places both of England and 
Scotland. Anglesea; Mr. IV. Wilson. Near Belfast; Mr. T. Drum- 
mond. FI. June. If . — 2—3 ft. high. Leaves broad, but rather short. 
It has rarely more than one sterile spike, which is always triquetrous : 
but its similarity to the following species authorizes its being placed in 
this division. If arranged in the section with “ 1 sterile spike,” its station 
should be near C. distans, from which Mr. Wilson does not think it different. 

57. C. vesicdria, Linn, (short-spiked Bladder Carex) ; sheaths 
none, bracteas foliaceous long, fertile spikes cylindrical slightly 
drooping, scales lanceolate, fruit broadly ovate inflated subulato- 
rostrate bifid at the point. E. Bot.t. i /9. E. LI. v. iv.p. 123. 

Bogs and marshes : apparently most frequent in the north. FI. May. 

june.^lf . — li 2 feet high. Leaves rather broad. Stems acute, angular. 

Fruit tawny, very large, shining, much inflated. 

58. C. ampullacea, Gooden, (slender-beaked Bottle Carex); 
sheaths none, bracteas foliaceous, fertile spikes cylindrical long 
nearly erect, scales lanceolate, fruit crowded subglobose inflated se- 
taceo-rostrate slightly bifid at the point. E. Bot. t. 1 80. E. FI. 
v. iv.p. 124. 

Bo^s and marshes ; more abundant in Scotland than in England. FI. 
j une . D lf —Differs from the last by the smooth and nearly rounded stem, 
by the channelled glaucous leaves, and by the fruit which is brownish 
anti not half so large, with a narrower beak and different shape. 

59. C. hirta, Linn, (hairy Carex); hairy, sheaths elongated 
nearly equal to the flower-stalks, bracteas long foliaceous, fertile 
spikes short cylindrical distant the scales cuspidate, fruit hairy 
ovate with a long beak. E. Bot. t. 685. E. LI. v. iv. p. 12o. 

Wet pastures and woods, frequent. FI. May, June. 2f -One to 2 


MONOECIA — TRIANDKIA. 


399 


Elyna .] 

feet high, more or less hairy in every part. Mr. D. Turner finds a var. 
in Yorkshire, with the lower part of the fertile spike compound. 

60. C .Jiliformis, Linn, (slender-leaved Carex) ; glabrous, sheaths 
scarcely any, hracteas long very narrow, fertile spikes shortly 
pedunculate oblongo-eylindrieal their scales cuspidate, fruit ovate 
shortly beaked deeply bifid at the point very pubescent. E. Bot. 
t. 904. E. FI. v. iv. p. 128. 

Boggy marshes, rare; chiefly found in Scotland. Cheshire and 
Anglesea, Mr. IV. Wilson. FI. May. If. — 1 — -2 ft. high. Leaves slender, 
their margins involute, filamentous at their bases near the roots. 

61. C. hordeiformis, Host, (Barley Carex) ; sheaths as long as 
the flower-stalks, hracteas foliaceous very long, sterile spikes about 
2 remote, fertile oblong remote sessile, scales mucronate, fruit 
oblong acuminate striated rough at the margin deeply bifid at the 
point, stem smooth bluntly angular. Host, Gram. v. i. p. 57. t. 76. 
— C. secalina , Wald. — Schkuhr, t. S.f 65. E. FI. v. iv. p. 126. 

Small valley about 3 miles west of Panmure, Forfar, amongst some 

bushes near a spring, rare; Mr. T. Drummond. FI. June. If 

About 1 foot high, with very long hracteas over-topping all the spikes. 
Sterile spikes slender ; fertile stout, erect, about 3, the two upper ones 
often approximate, the lower very remote. Fruit large, resembling a 
grain of barley, whence Host’s appropriate name, which is, too, older 
than that of Wahl. Host, indeed, quotes Thuillier and Villars for 
the same name: but Sprengel refers to the plant of the latter as C. 
hordeistichos. 

62. C. stictocarpa, Sm. (dotted Carex'); “ fertile catkins 2 ovate 
stalked, scales pointed, sheaths scarcely any, fruit obovate obtuse 
pointless finely dotted.” E. FI. v.iv.p. 127. 

Lofty mountains of Clova, Angus-shire, Mr. G. Don. FI. June, July? 
V-   — Of this plant 1 am quite ignorant, and its author had seen only a 
single specimen. 

63. C. angustifolia, Sm. (narrow-leaved Carex); “ fertile catkins 
one or two ovate stalked, scales obtuse, sheaths none, fruit ovate 
compressed smooth with a short abrupt beak, leaves linear chan- 
nelled.” E. FI. v. ii. p. 127. 

Marshes, in Angus-shire, Mr. G. Don. FI. June. If?— This, too is 
unknown to me. 8ir J. E. Smith had seen but one specimen, “ and that, 
none of the best.” The leaves are described as approaching to C. nardi- 
folia, Willd. ; the fruit and scales to C. stricta : the stigmas were wanting. 

8. Elyna. Schrad. Elyna. 

1. E. caricina, M. et K. (compound-headed Elyna); spikelets 
a Kgregate compound. Mert. and Eoch, El. Germ. v. i. p. 459. — 
Kobresia caricina , Willd. — E. FI. v. iv. p. 129. — Schcenus mo- 
noicus, E. Bot. t. 1410. 

Moors, in Durham and Yorkshire. On Cronkley fell and about 
Widdy bank in Leesdale Forest. On Shroine ach Lochan, Perthshire, 
J/r. W. Wilson. FI. Aug. If. — Scarcely a span high, densely tufted, 


400 


MONOECIA — TETRANDRIA. 


[ Urtica. 


with narrow-linear leaves, shorter than the naked stem. Bracteas and 
scales remarkably convolute, brown. Germen oblong, scarcely trigonal. 
— E. scirpina of the continent is a 2d sp. of this genus. 

MONOECI A— TETllANDRIA. 

9. Littorella. Linn. Shore-weed. 

1. L. lacustris, Linn. ( Plantain Shore-weed.) E.Bot.t. 469. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 130 Plantago unijioru, Linn. Sp. PI. 

In watery, sandy, and stony places. Particularly abundant on the 
margins of the Highland lakes, where it forms a green turf. FI, June. If. . 
—Leaves all radical, linear, fleshy, semicylindrical, about 2 inches long. 
Scapes several. Sterile Jl. solitary, sometimes 2 (Mr. IF. Wilson), upon 
a scape 2 — 3 inches long. Cur. white, with the tube inflated. Fertile 
flowers sessile in the axils of the leaves, surrounding the sterile scape. 
Germen oblong, green. Style very long, filiform. Stigma a mere point. 

10. Alnus. Tourn. Alder. 

1. A. (jlutinosa , Gsert. (common Alder); leaves roundish-cunei- 
form obtuse lobed at the margin and serrated somewhat glutinous 
downy in the axils of the nerves beneath. Hook, in FI. Lond. 
N. S. t. 59. E. FI. v. iv. p. 131 — Betula Alnus, Linn. — E. Bot. 
t. 1508. 

Wet meadows and moist grounds by water, frequent. — “ The Alders 
dank that fringe the pool.” FI. March, Apr. Tj . — A well known tree, 
whose wood is employed for various purposes and is particularly valua- 
ble for the piles of bridges, as it remains undecayed under water for a 
considerable length of time ; thus, the celebrated and ancient bridge 
called the Rialto, at Venice, is built on Alder-piles ; as are many large 
edifices at Amsterdam. The Wc and leaves are employed in dyeing and 
tanning leather: the former for staining sabots or wooden shoes, (which 
are also made of the tree) and fishermen’s nets ; its astringent quality 
strongly recommending it for the latter purpose. — Sterile catkins long, 
large and cylindrical, pendent, their footstalks branched. Fertile catkins 
small, ovate, with deep-red scales. 

11. Buxus. Linn. Box. 

1. B. sempervirens, Linn, (common Box-tree); leaves oval ob- 
long retuse convex coriaceous shining, their stalks slightly hairy, 
anthers ovato-sagittate. E. Bot. t. 1341. E. FI. v. iv. p. lo3. 

Dry chalky hills, principally in the south of England. Id. April. Tj. 
—A small tree, if suffered to attain its natural stature. A dwarf var. is 
extensively employed as edgings in gardens. The wood is of great value 
for turning, carving, and engraving upon. 

12. Urtica. Linn. Nettle. 

1. U. pilulifera, Linn. {Roman Nettle); leaves opposite ovate 
serrated with transverse nerves, fertile flowers in globular heads. 
E. Bot. t. 148. E. FI. v. iv. p. 134. 


Bryonia.] MONOECIA — rENTANDUIA. 401 

Under walls and among rubbish, principally near the sea. In Norfolk 
and Suffolk. Ballylickey, S. ot Ireland; Miss Hutchins. FI. June, 
July. 0. — The most venomous of our British Nettles. 

2. U. urens, Linn. ( small Nettle'); leaves opposite elliptical 
with about 5 nearly parallel ribs, clusters of flowers sub-simple. 
E. Bot. t. 1236. E. FI. v. iv. p. 134. 

Waste places and cultivated ground, frequent. FI. June — Oct. 0. 

3. U. dioica, Linn, (great Nettle); leaves ovate acuminate cor- 
date at the base, clusters much branched in pairs mostly dioecious. 
E. Bot. t. 1750. E. FI. v. iv. p. 135. 

Waste places, under walls and hedge-banks, frequent. FI. July, Aug. 
"U • — The root, boiled with alum, dyes yarn of a yellow colour ; from the 
fibres of the stalk a kind of hemp is manufactured, as with the U. can- 
nabina of N. America. In Scotland the young tops of nettles are boiled 
and eaten by the common people. “ Nae doubt I suld understand my ain 
trade of horticulture, seeing I was bred in the parish of Dreepdaily, 
near Glasco’, where they raise lang-kail under glass and force the early 
nettles for their spring-kail.” — Andrew Fairservice in Bob Roy. 

MONOECIA— PENTANDRIA. 

13. Xanthium. Linn. Bur-weed. 

1. X. strumarium, Linn, (broad-leaved Bur-weed); stem un- 
armed, leaves cordate angulato-dentate with 3 principal nerves at 
the base, beaks of the fruit strait the prickles hooked. E. Bot. 
t. 2544. E. FI. v. iv. p. 136. 

Rare, in waste ground in the S. of England, and Kerry, Ireland; Mr. 
Smith. FI. Aug. Sept. © . — A rank, weed-like plant, remarkable for the 
curious structure of its flowers, and the prickly involucres which sur- 
round the. fertile ones, enlarging and becoming part of the fruit. 

14. Amarantiius. Linn. Amaranth. 

1. A. Blitum, Linn. ( wild Amaranth) ; flowers 3-cleft and 
triandrous in small lateral clusters, the segments very obtuse, 
leaves ovate obtuse, stem spreading. E. Bot. t. 2212. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 137. 

Low waste grounds and near dunghills : about Cambridge, London, 
and in Huntingdonshire. FI. Aug. 0. 

15. Bryonia. Linn. Bryony. 

1. B. dioica, Jacq. (red-berried Bryony); leaves palmate rough 
on both sides, flowers dioecious. E. Bot. t. 439. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 138. 

Thickets and hedges, frequent in England ; scarcely indigenous in 
Scotland. FI. May. If.. — Root very large, white and branched. Stem 
long, slender, branched, weak and climbing, with simple tendrils. Leaves 
large. Blowers in axillary bunches. Cor. whitish, with green veins. 
Berries red. The plant abounds with a fetid and acrid juice. 


402 


M O NOE Cl A POLY AN D R I A . [ Myriophyllum , 


MONOECIA— HEXANDRIA. 

16. Eriocaulon. Linn. Pipewort. 

1. E. septan gulare, With. ( jointed Pipewort ); scapes striated 
longer than the cellular compressed subulate glabrous leaves, flowers 
4-cleft hairy at the extremities as well as the scales, stamens 4, 
capsule 2 celled. E. Pot. t. 733. Hook, in FI. Lond. JV. S. t. 52. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 140. 

Lakes in mountainous countries, rare. In Skve, (I)r. Hope,') Coll, 
(Dr. M‘Culloeh) and a few of the neighbouring islands of the Hebrides. 
Cunnamara, N. W. of Ireland, frequent; Dr. Wade and Air. J. T. 
Mackay. FI. August. If..— Roots creeping and throwing out innumer- 
able, white, curiously articulated fibres , which penetrate deep into the 
mud. Leaves pellucid, beautifully cellular, as is the scape. Head of 
numerous, compact, minute flowers; each with an obovate, membranous, 
concave scale, nearly as long as itself Fwo outer segments oi \A\e jiei ianth 
duplicato-carinate, purplish ; two inner white, of the central sterile flowers 
united for a great portion of the length, so as to be two-lipped at the 
extremity ; each lip bearing a stamen, and above that a black sessile 
gland; and on each side, between the two lips, a stamen : in the centre 
between these are 2 black, stalked glands, (abortive styles?). In the/<?r- 
tile flowers, the + segments are almost equally divided to their base, the 
inner having a black, sessile gland at the extremity. Pistil shortly stipi- 
tate. Germen of 2 globose lobes. Style short. Stigmas 2, long, subulate.— 
In the Flora Londinensis figure I have not represented the sterile flower 
correctly, as to its usual appearance ; nor the situation ot the gland, 
which is not below, but above, the point ol insertion of the stamen. 


MONOECIA— POLYANDIIIA. 


17. Ceratophyllum. Linn. Hornwort. 

1. C. demersnm, Linn, (common Hornwort); fruit armed witli 
2 spines near the base and terminated by the curved subulate 
style. E. Pot. t. 947. E. FI. v. iv. p. 141. 

Frequent in slow streams and ditches. FI. July. If. Floating. 
Stem long, slender. Leaves setaceous, whorled, 2 or 3 three times forked, 
distantly serrated. Flowers small, whorled, in the axils of the leaves. 
Anthers sessile, crowded, spotted, 2-beaked, 2-celled.— The foliage of 
this plant is often inflated and jointed, so as to look like a Conferva. 

2. C. svbmersum, Linn, (unarmed Hornwort); fruit without 
spines. E. Pot. t. 679. E. FI. v. iv. p. 142. 

Ditches, in the east and south of England. FI. Sept. If. Scarcely 
different from the preceding, but in the absence ot spines on the fruit- 


18. Myriophyllum. Linn. Water-Milfoil. 

1. M. spicatum , Linn, (spiked Water-Milfoil); sterile flowers 
forming an interrupted leafless spike. E. Pot. t. 83. E. FI. v. iv. 


p. 143. 

Ditches and stagnant waters. 


FI. July, Aug. If. — Stems slender, 


MONOECIA — POLYANDRIA. 


Quercus.] 


403 


much branched. Leaves 4 in a whorl, finely pectinated and always sub- 
merged. Spikes slender, 3 — 5 inches long. 

2. M. verticilldtum, Linn. ( whorled Water Milfoil); flowers 
all axillary. E. Bot. t. 83. E. Fl.v. iv.p. 143. 

Ponds and ditches in Norfolk and Cambridgeshire. Cheshire and 
Anglesea; Mr. IF. Wilson. FL July. 2f . 

19. Sagittaria. Linn. Arrow-head. 

1. S. sagittifolia, Linn, (common Arrow-head) ; leaves arrow- 
shaped, the lobes lanceolate strait. E. Bot. t. 84. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 144. 

Ditches and margins of rivers in England, and Ireland. FI. July, Aug. 
V - — A beautiful aquatic, with large, truly arrow-shaped /eaves, rising 
above the surface of the water. 

/ 

20. Arum. Linn. Cuckow-pint. 

1. A. maculatum, Linn. (Cuckow-pint or Wake-robin); leaves 
all radical hastato- sagittate, lobes deflexed, spadix club-shaped 
obtuse shorter than the spatha. E. Bot. t. 1298. Hook, in Curt. 
FL Lond. ed. 2. cum Ic. E. FI. v. iv.p. 146. 

Groves and hedges, frequent in England ; rare in Scotland and Ire- 
land. FL Apr. May. If. — Rout a tuber, affording an abundant amyla- 
ceous substance ; which, if properly prepared and the acrid juice ex- 
pressed, proves an excellent substitute for bread-flour, and is sold for that 
purpose in great abundance at Weymouth and in Portland Island. Leaves 
large, shining, often spotted with black. Spatha large, convolute. Above 
the germens, on the spadix, is a ring or circle of 2-celled, sessile anthers , 
and above these, another ring of apparently imperfect germens. The 
extremity of the spadix is purplish. Berries remaining during winter, 
after the leaves and spadix have decayed ; crowded into an oblong 
spike of a bright scarlet colour. 

21. Poterium. Linn. Salad-Burnet. 

1. P. Sanguisoiba, Linn, (common Salad-Burnet); spines none, 
stem somewhat angular. F. Bot. t. 860. E. FL v. iv. p. 147. 

Dry and most frequently chalky pastures, abundant. Rather rare in 
Scotland and Ireland. FL July. If. — One to 2 feet high. Leaves pin- 
nated, with ovate, serrated leajtets. Flowers dull purplish. — The leaves 
taste and smell like cucumber, and are eaten in salad. 

22. Quercus. Linn. Oak. 

1. Q. Fobur, Linn, (common British Oak); leaves deciduous 
shortly stalked oblongo-obovate deeply sinuate their sinuses rather 
acute lobes obtuse, fruits 2 — 3 upon a long peduncle. E. Bot. 

t. 1342. E. FL v. iv. p. 1 49 Q. pedunculata, Willd. and foreign 

authors. — Q. racemosa, Lam. 

Woods and hedges. Fl. Apr. May. T? . — The uses of this most im- 
portant of trees are universally known. Its acorns were formerly the 
food of olir British ancestors, but are now left to hogs and squirrels or 


104 . 


MONOECIA POLYANDRIA. 


[ Castaneu . 


the larger gallinaceous birds. The word Robur is derived from rove, 
another Celtic word for the oak: whence arises robur, strength, in Latin. 

2. Q. sessilijlora, Salisb. (sessile-fruited Oak); leaves deciduous 
on long stalks oblongo-obovate deeply sinuate their sinuses rather 
acute lobes obtuse, fruits clustered upon a very short stalk or sessile. 
E. Bit. t. 1845. E. FI. v. iv. p. 150. — Q. Robur, IVi/ld. and 
most foreign authors. 

Woods and hedges, not uncommon. FI. Apr. May. k> • — The specific 
name is calculated to mislead. The flowers are sessile in both species. 
But here, the catkin or spike is almost or quite sessile : in Q. Robur, on 
a long peduncle. — The wood of the present species is said to be much 
inferior to the last : and a general opinion having prevailed that it has 
been the more extensively planted, especially in Scotland, no little alarm 
was in consequence excited, lest our forests should be thereby deteri- 
orated. We, know, however, that the noble proprietor of some of the 
most extensive oak plantations in the west of Scotland, has ascertained 
such not be the case, in his domains. Then, on the other hand, we 
are aware that an eminent modern author has lately expressed his 
opinion that it is the Q   sessilifolia which yields the best timber for ship- 
ping. This subject deserves the serious consideration of the planter. 

23. Fagus. Linn. Beech. 

1. F. sylvatica, Linn. ( Beech Tree); leaves ovate glabrous obso- 
letely dentate their margins ciliated. E. Rot. t. 1846. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 152. 

Woods, especially on a chalky soil. Scarcely wild in Scotland ; but 
abundant in forests in the south of England. FI. Apr. May. Tj . — The 
tree bears clipping, and then, as Mr. Stewart Murray observes to me, its 
leaves are retained during winter. The wood is employed for an infinity 
of purposes, by carpenters, turners, wheelwrights, &c. Swine are driven 
into the forests of Beech to feed upon the mast in Autumn. 

24. Castanea. Tourn. Chestnut. 

1. C. vulgaris, Lam. ( Spanish Chestnut); leaves oblongo-lan- 
ceolate acuminate mucronato-serrate glabrous on each side. Hook. 
Scot. i. p. 273. — Fagus castan., Linn. — E. Bot. t. 886. E. FI. 
v . iv. p. 151. 

Woods, apparently wild, in the S. and S.W. of England. Ft. May. 
B . — This noble tree is much cultivated in plantations on account of its 
timber, of which Evelyn, says, “ it hath formerly built a good part of our 
ancient houses in the city of London,” and that he had “ one large barn 
near the city entirely framed of it.” The church of St. Nicholas at Gt. 
Yarmouth, erected in the reign of Win. Rufus, is roofed with Chestnut. 
It affords excellent stakes for palisades and props for vines and hops. 
It is good for mill-timber and for water-works : but if water touch the 
root of the growing tree, it spoils both the fruit and timber. The nuts 
are used as an article of daily food in the S. of Europe, and in parts of 
France I have had them served up for breakfast, boiled in milk. 


Corylus.] 


MONOECIA — POLYANDUIA. 


405 


25. Betula. Linn. Birch. 

1. B. alba, Linn, (common Birch); leaves ovato-deltoid acute 
doubly serrated glabrous. E. Bot. t. 2198. E. Fl.v. iv. p. 153. 

Woods, especially in heathy soils and in mountainous countries. FI. 
Apr. May. T?. — There is a var. of this tree, (B. pendula, Roth.—Lindl. 
Syn. p. 229,) with remarkably drooping branches, which are more ver- 
rucose than in the common appearance. It is not unfrequent in the 
Highlands of Scotland, and generally known by the name of the droop- 
ing birch. To this Scott alludes; 

“ Where weeps the Bircli of silver bark, 

With long dishevelled hair.” 

The wood is tough and white and employed for various purposes. Much 
is burnt into charcoal. Brooms are made of it, and well-known instru- 
ments of castigation. Of the bark, in some countries, hats and drinking 
cups are formed; and what is more important, the oil obtained from the 
degot, or “ white rind," is used in tanning the well-known Russia leather. 
It is moreover employed by the people of the same country as a vermi- 
fuge, and a balsam in the cure of wounds. A wine is made of the sap 
in Scotland. The whole tree diffuses an agreeable odour, and is noticed 
by Burns as the “ fragrant birk." 

2. B. ndna , Linn, (dwarf Birch); leaves orbicular crenate. 
E. Bot. t. 2326. E. FI. v. iv.p. 154. 

In several parts of the Highlands of Scotland. Rare in the Lowlands. 
FI. May. Tj . — This is a small shrubby plant, not exceeding 1— -2 feet 
in height. The leaves are on short footstalks. Fertile catkins at the 
extremity of the branches, small. — Even this humble shrub the poor 
Laplander turns to use. It is almost all he meets with in certain situa- 
tions that can be converted into fuel for cooking food and driving away 
the gnats ; and covered with Rein-deer’s skin, it serves him for a bed. 

26. Carpinus. Linn. Hornbeam. 

1. C. Betulus, Linn. (Hornbeam); scales or bracteas of the 
fruit oblong serrated with 2 smaller lateral lobes. E. Bot. t. 2032. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 156. 

In woods and hedges, in a meagre, damp, tenacious soil. It forms a 
principal part of the ancient forests on the north and east sides of Lon- 
don. (Sm.). FI. May. R . — Rather a small tree, with ovate or subcor- 
date, doubly-serrated, acute leaves, of which the veins are somewhat 
hairy, and which are beautifully plaited when young. The wood of the 
Hornbeam is white, tough and hard, and burns like a candle. It is used 
in turnery work, for implements of husbandry, cogs of wheels, &c. The 
inner bark yields a yellow dye. 

27. Corylus. Linn. Hasel-nut. 

1. C. Avellana, Linn, (common Hazel-nut); stipules oblong 
obtuse, leaves roundish cordate pointed, involucre of the fruit 
campanulate rather spreading torn at the margin. E. Bot. t. 72 3. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 157. 

Hedges and copses, abundant. FI. March, Apr. T? . — The wood of 
Ilasel ts employed for a number of domestic and agricultural purposes, 


406 


DIOECIA TRIANDRIA. 


[Empetrum. 

and makes an excellent charcoal for drawing. The nuts are well known 
at our tables. The young forked twigs of this plant constitute the cele- 
brated divining-rod, ( virguta divinatoria) : for an account of which see 
No. 44. of the Quarterly Review. From the Anglo-Saxons we have 
derived our word Hasel-nut, which they called Uasel-nutu, from Hasel, 
a cap, and Knutu, a nut. 

MONOECIA — MONADELPHIA. 

28. Pinus. Linn. Fir. 

1. P. sylvestris, Linn. ( Scotch Fir); leaves in pairs rigid, cones 
conico-ovate acute young ones stalked recurved as long as the 
leaves generally in pairs, crest of the anthers very small. E. Bot. 
t. 2460. E. FI. v. iv.p. 158. 

Highlands of Scotland, where it constitutes vast natural forests. FI. 
May, June. If . — A tree of great value but little beauty, except indeed 
when it grows in large masses, as in some of the Highland forests. It 
affords the red or yellow deal. A plank from the largest tree that was 
cut down in the Duke of Gordon’s forests of Glenmore, was shown to 
me by the late Duke at Gordon Castle; it measured feet in diameter. 
The bark has been used with much success in tanning, and in the north 
of Europe is made into a wretched substitute for bread. Tar, pitch and 
turpentine are the produce of this tree; and in the Highlands, the resin- 
ous roots, dug up in the bogs, afford a suceedaneum for candles. 


CLASS XXII. DIOECIA. 

Stamens and pistils in separate flowers and on different plants. 

(Monandria. 1 Stamen. For some Salices see Ord. II.) 

ORD. I. DIANDRIA. Stamens 1 — 5, mostly 2. 

1. Salix. Barren fl. Scales of the catkin single-flowered, im- 
bricated, with a nectariferous gland. Perianth 0. Siam. 1 — 5. — 
Fertile fl. Scales of the catkin single-flowered, imbricated, with a 
nectariferous gland. Perianth 0. Stigmas 2, often cleft. Caps. 1- 
celled, 2-valved, many-seeded. Seeds comose — Nat. Ord. Amen- 
tace/E, Juss   — Named from sal, near, and /is, water, in Celtic: 
denoting a tree which grows near water. — I he sallow, seileach in 
Gaelic, is the badge of the Highland Clan Cumming. 

ORD. II. TRIANDRIA. 3 Stamens. 

2. Empetrum. Barren fl. Perianth, many imbricating scales. 
of which the 3 inner are often regular, spreading and petaloid. 
Stam. 3, with long filaments. Rudiment of a pistil with a many- 

cleft stigma Fertile fl. Perianth as in the barren. German 

globose. Style short. Stigma dilated, peltate, rayed. Berry 


Tamus.] DIOECIA — HEXANDRIA. 407 

superior, globose with 6 — 9 seeds. — Nat. Ord. Empetreae, Nutt. 
— Named from sv, in, and virgos a stone ; growing in stony places. 

3. Ruscus. Barren ft. Perianth single, of 6 leaves. Fila- 
ments combined at the base. Anthers 3 — G . — Fertile fl. Peri- 
anth single of 6 leaves. Nectary tubular. Style 1. Stigma 1. 
Berry superior; 3-celled ; cells 2-seeded. — Nat. Orel. Smilaceae, 
Br. — Name ; anciently Bruscus; from Beuskelen, Celtic, mean- 
ing Box-Holly. 

( See Valeriana dioica in Cl. III. Some Salices in Ord. I.) 

ORD. III. TETRANDRIA. 4 Stamens. 

4. Vxscum. Barren fl. Ccd. obsolete. Pet. 4, ovate, flesby, 
united at the base and bearing each a single anther adnate with the 
upper surface Fertile fl. Cal. an obscure margin, superior. Pe- 
tals 4, erect, ovate, very minute. Stigma sessile. Berry infe- 
rior, bearing one seed, with 1 — 2 Embryos, sometimes 3 ( Mr. W. 
Wilson ). Nat. Ord. Lorantheae, Juss — Name, — i^og, Greek, 
from givid, Celtic, the shrub, par excellence, a sacred plant with 
our ancestors. 

5. Hippophae. Barren fl. collected into a small sort of cat- 
kin, each scale bearing a flower. Perianth single, of 2 deep, 
roundish valves. Anthers linear, sessile — Fertile fl. solitary. 
Perianth single, tubular, cloven at the summit. Germen superior. 
Style short. Stigma subulate, exserted. Nut one-seeded, sur- 
rounded by the large, coloured, berry-like calyx. — Nat. Ord. 
Eleagnaeae, Br . — Name tirm >s, a horse, and to brighten, but 
why so called cannot be determined. 

6. Myrica. Barren fl. Scales of the catkin concave. Peri- 
anth 0 Fertile fl. Scales of the catkin concave. Perianth 0. 

Styles 2. Drupe 1 -celled, 1-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Amentaceae, 
Juss. — Name, /xvgr/.'/t, in Greek, synonymous with the Tamarix. 

( See Rhaninus in Cl. V. Urtica in Cl. XXI.) 

ORD. IV. PENTANDRIA. 5 Stamens. 

7. Humulus. Barren fl. Perianth single, of 5 leaves. An- 
thers with 2 pores at the extremity — Fertile fl. Scales of the 
catkin large, persistent, concave, entire, single-flowered. Perianth 

0. Styles 2. Seed 1 Nat. Ord. Urticeae, Juss. — Name, 

humus, rich soil or mould, in which the plant flourishes. 

( See Ribes in Cl. V. Bryonia in Cl. XXI. Salix in Okd. I.) 

ORD. V. HEXANDRIA. 6 Stamens. 

8. Tamus. Barren fl. Perianth single, in 6, deep segments. — 
Fertile fl. Perianth single, in 6 deep segments, contracted at the 


DIOECIA — MONADELPHI A. 


408 


[Juniperus- 


neck, superior. Stigmas 3. Berry of 3 cells — Nat. Orel. Smil- 
ace®, Juss. — Name, supposed to be the Uva Taminia of Pliny, 
or Black Bryony. 

( See Rumex in Cl. VI.) 


ORD. VI. OCTANDRIA. 8 Stamens. 

9. Populus. Barren fl. Scales of the calkins jagged. An- 
thers 8 — 30, arising from a turbinate, oblique, entire, single peri- 
anth. — Fertile fl. Scales of the catkin jagged. Perianth turbi- 
nate. Stigmas 4 or 8. Caps, superior, 2-celled, 2-valved, many- 

seeded. Seeds comose — Nat. Ord. AmentAce®, Juss Name, 

populus, or the tree of the people , as it was esteemed to be in the 
time of the Romans and of the French revolution. — The Poplar 
is the badge of the Clan Ferguson. 

10. Rhodi'ola. Barren fl. Cal. 4-partite. Pet. 4. Glands 

4, emarginate Fertile fl. Cal. 4-partite. Pet. 4. Glands 4. 

emarginate. Germens 4. Caps, many-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Cras- 
sulace®, D.C. — Name, — goSov, a Rose; from the scent of the 
roots. 

ORD. VII. ENNEANDRIA. 9 Stamens. 


11. Mf.rcurialis. Barren fl. Perianth single, tripartite. 
Stam. 9 — 12. Anthers of 2, globose lobes. — Fertile fl. Peri- 
anth single, tripartite. Styles 2. Caps. 2-celled ; cells 1-seeded. 
— Nat. Ord. Euphorbiace®, Jttss. — So named, because the God 
Mercury is said to have discovered the virtues, of what kind soever 
they may be, of this plant. 

12. Hydrocharis. Flouiers spathaceous. Barren fl. Cal. 

in 3 deep segments. Cor. of 3 petals. Stam. 9, in 3 rows, within 
which are 3 imperfect styles. — Fertile fl. Cal. in 3 deep segments. 
Bet. 3. Styles 6, each with 2 stigmas. Caps, inferior, coriaceous, 
roundish, 6-celled, many-seeded. — Nat. Ord. Hydrocharide®, 
Juss Named from water, and yx^u, to rejoice : being aqua- 

tic plants. 

(Ord. Decandria. See Silene and Lychnis in Cl. X. — Ord. Icosandria. 
See Rubus and Fragaria in Cl. XII. — Ord. Polyandria. See Stratiotes 
in Cl. XXI. See Populus in Ord. VI.) 

ORD. VIII. MONADELPHIA. Stamens combined. 

13. Juniperus. Barren fl. Scales of the catkin subpeltate. 
Perianth 0. Slum 4 — 8, 1 -celled — Fertile fl. Scales of the 
calkin few, united, at length fleshy and surrounding the 3-seeded 
berry. — Nat. Ord. Conifer®, Juss — Name, jeneprus, in Celtic, 
rude, rough, as is the plant itself. 


Sa/i.v.] 


DIOECIA DIANDItlA. 


409 


14. Taxus. Barren fi. Catkins oval, scaly at the base. Slam. 

numerous. Anthers peltate, 6 — 8-celled ; cells opening beneath 

Fertile f. solitary, scaly at the base. Style 0. Drupe fleshy, 

perforated at the extremity — Nat. Orel. Conifers, Juss 

Name, — rogov, an arroio ; it is said because arrows were poisoned 
with its juice. 

DIOECIA— DIANDRIA. 

1. Salix. Linn. Willow, Sallow and Osier. 

The many important uses, rendered by the different species of Willow 
and Osier, serve to rank them among the first in our list of oeconomi* 
cal plants. The larger kinds, which are, too, of the most rapid growth, 
yield timber and exceed 60 feet in height ; whilst the least of them, which 
grows on the summits of our Highland mountains, (S. herbacea ,) can 
scarcely be said to rise above the surface of the soil in which it vegetates. 
Many are in great request for baskets, hoops, and crates: their barHs used 
by the tanner, and that of one species ( S . Itussclliana), as a substitute for 
the true Peruvian bark. A correct knowledge of the species, then, is of 
primary importance; no less to the cultivator than to the botanist. 
Yet there is not in the whole range of the vegetable creation, a genus, 
liable to more variation at different periods of growth, in different 
soils and situations and under different circumstances; so that the accu- 
rate determination of its species has baffled the researches of the ablest 
botanists. For myself, I acknowledge that I apply to the description 
of them for the present work with no feigned reluctance; the more °-en- 
uine from a consciousness that in my Flora Scotica, I had unfortunately 
given offence to one who was infinitely my superior, both in ase and 
learning, the estimable author of the English Flora, by stating my 
opinion too confidently in regard to the limits of species. I will not say 
that a more devoted attention to the subject has materially altered my 
opinion on the points in question ; but I have here pursued a different 
line of conduct, ar.d at least when the union of any two or more species 
may be considered a dubious procedure, I have adopted the species of 
my illustrious predecessor, and given my ideas (and those of other friends 
when I could obtain them,) on the propriety of the measure, in language* 

1 trust, not calculated to hurt the feelings of any one. 

My able friend Mr. Borrer has materially aided me by specimens and 
by remarks ; and no one has ever studied the willows, whether in the 
growing or in tlm dried state, more deeply or with a less prejudiced mind. 
He has himself extensively cultivated them : but the richest collection 
of living Willows is, unquestionably, that at Woburn Abbey, Bedford- 
shire, which has given rise to a splendid work, the “ Satictum Woburn- 
ensc" of Ilis Grace the Duke of Bedford, of which a limited number 
of copies only have been printed. It is truly gratifying to the humbler 
botanist to find a man of that nobleman’s exalted rank in society and 
the senate, not disdaining to take pleasure in the study 1 of nature, and 

* ,.^' s a<> . e was first led to devote his attention to plants by a severe attack 

of illness, which unfitted him for the more important duties of his station: and 
“if in this,” he says in a former and almost equally beautiful book, the 
‘ Hortus -Lricaus Woburncnsis,' “ I have been able to beguile even a single 

T 


410 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


[Sa/ijr. 


even recommending it to the attention of others by works which a private 
individual could never accomplish. We have then in the Srtliclum II o- 
burnense a standard set of figures (amongst many exotic ones) of all the 
British species ; which, together with those of E. Botany, do, it must 
be confessed, give to the British naturalist an advantage over all that 
continental authors have published on the subject, and to them I refer 
in every instance and with great satisfaction. The arrangement ot the 
species in the “ Salic turn” is due to the botanical skill and knowledge of 
Mr. Forbes, head gardener at Woburn, which his Grace has fully ac- 
knowledged: and that department does him great credit- 

The arrangement here adopted of the British species is suggested by 
my friend Mr. Borrer. It is a natural one, undoubtedly, and like all 
natural groupes, difficult to be defined in words. 

* Monandrce. Borr. Filament 1, with a double anther, or in 
S. rubra, forked upwards and bearing two anthers. Trees oj 
low stature, or shrubs, with twiggy branches and more or less 
lanceolate and serrated leaves often broader upwards. Catkins 
very compact. — “ The wild and willowed shores of Teviot, 
Mr. Borrer has found to afford some puzzling varieties of this 
groupe. 

1. S .purpurea, Linn, (bitter purple Willow'); monandrous, 
decumbent, leaves lanceolate broadest upwards attenuated below 
serrated glabrous, germens ovate very pubescent sessile, stigma 
ovate nearly sessile. E. Bot. t. 1388. E. FI. v. iv. p. 187. Salict. 

Wob. p. 1 . t. 1 . 

Meadows between Thorpe and Norwich, Sm. Eskdale, LightJ. 
Melrose, Maughan. FI. March. Tj . — A small shrub , with purple trail- 
ing branches. Leaves glaucous, especially beneath. Fertile catkins singu- 
larly compact. This, according to Sir jas. E. Smith, is a valuable osiei 
for basket-work and for plaiting into low close fences, its bark being so 
intensely bitter that hares and rabbits will not touch it. 

2. S. Helix, Linn. (Rose Willow ); monandrous, erect, leaves 
lanceolate broadest upwards attenuated below serrated glabrous, 
germens oblongo-ovate very pubescent sessile, style short, stigmas 
almost linear emarginate. E. Bot. t. 1343. E. FI. v. iv. p. 188. 
Salict. Wob. p. 3. t. 2. 

Marshes and the banks of rivers. FI. March, Apr. T? . — In the her- 
barium, this can scarcely be distinguished from the preceding, except In 
its larger catkins, longer germens and styles, bifid stigmas, and yellow 
glossy bark. In a growing state, the plant is recognizable by being upright 
and taller. The fertile catkins are represented much too broad in the 
E. Bot. figure, as Mr. Borrer observes. They are very accurate, accord- 
ing to my specimens, in the Saliclum IVoburnense . — The leaves and twigs, 

hour of irksomeness, dining a protracted period of sickness and suffering, I 
am abundantly grateful to that Providence which in its universal dispensations, 
has permitted me to indulge in a pursuit at once so pleasing and so rational. 
Introd. p. iii. 


Salix.] DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 411 

we are told, are less bitter than in the former, well adapted for basket- 
work (Mr. Forbes') and more ornamental in plantations. 

3. S. Lamberliana, Sm. (Boylon Willow); monandrous, erect, 
leaves lanceolate broadest upwards serrated glabrous, germens 
shortly ovate very pubescent sessile, stigmas ovate emarginate. 
E. Bot. t. 1359. E. FI. v. iv. p. 190. Salic/. Wob. p. 5. t. 3. 

First discovered on the banks of the Willy at Boyton, Wilts, and at 
Staines, by Aylmer Bourke Lambert, Esq.: and since in other parts of 
England; as near Icklingham, Suffolk; near Norwich ; and at Henley 
upon Thames. Near Edinburgh, Mr. Maughan. FI. Apr. Tj • — Very 
nearly allied to the last, but distinguishable by its leaves, which aregenerally 
broader at the base, and the purplish glaucous hue of the young shoots. 

4. S. Woollyaridna, Borr. MSS. (Mr. Woollgars Willow); mon- 
androus, erect, leaves cuneato-lanceolate serrated glabrous, germens 
ovate very pubescent sessile downy, stigmas nearly sessile ovate 
scarcely emarginate — Borrer in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2651. — S. 
monandra , Salict. Wob. p. 7. t. 4, (excl. the syn. of Boffin, except 
that of t. 1. f. 1.) S. monandra , var. Hoffm. Hist. Sal. v. i. p. 21. 
/. 1 ./. 1 . 

About Lewes, Sussex, in osier-holts, but scarcely wild ; Mr. Wooll- 
gar. At King6ton-upon-Thames, apparently wild ; Mr. Borrer. Ft. 
'lay. I; • — Under S. monandra are included by Hoffm., not only S. pur- 
purea and S. Ilelix, but also, according to Mr. Borrer, our present indi- 
vidual, distinguishing it however as a var. ; as such therefore it had been 
long known to Mr. Borrer and the late Mr. Woollgar, though the latter 
gentleman was so far of opinion that it was a distinct species, that he 
used to call it S. cuneifolia, from the shape of its leaves, especially the 
upper ones. The name monandra can now scarcely be retained without 
creating much needless confusion, and I gladly adopt that of Mr. Borrer 
in compliment to a gentleman who supplied Sir J. E. Smith with several 
of his willows and who formed his opinion upon the species from long 
and accurate observations. The present one is alluded to in the E. FI. 
under S. Lamberliana, with which it agrees in the stigmas; while the 
catkins are most like those of S. Forbyana and of a peculiarly soft tex- 
ture. In the willow garden at Woburn Abbey, whither it was sent by 
Mr. Forster as S. monandra, and consequently published under that name 
in the “ Salictum ,” it attained only to the height of 6 feet in five years. 
Mr. Forbes observes that its shoots and twigs much resemble those of 

S. Helix, while the leaves and stigmas are widely different. 

5. S. Forbyana, Sm. (fine Basket Osier); monandrous, erect, 
leaves with small downy stipules lanceolato-oblong serrated gla- 
brous, style equal in length to the linear divided stigmas. E. Bot. 
t. 1344. E. FI. v. iv. p. 191. Salict. Wob. p. 9. t. 5. 

Meadows and osier-grounds at Fincham, Norfolk (Bev. Jos. Forby), 
and near Lynn. Cambridgeshire, truly wild; Sm. Ft. Apr. L. — Stems 
yellowish-green, glossy. Allied to S. Helix, especially in the fructifica- 
tion ; but differing in foliage. This species is much esteemed by basket- 
makers for the finer sorts of wicker-work. 


412 


D10ECIA — DIANDRIA. 


[So lit. 


6. S. rubra , Huds. (green-leaved Osier); stamens 2 combined 
at the base, leaves linear-lanceolate broader in the fertile plant, acu- 
minated serrated glabrous green on both sides, capsules oblongo- 
ovate very pubescent sessile, style elongated, stigmas linear undi- 
vided. E. Bot. t. 1 1 45. E. FI v. iv. /j. 191. Salic,. Web. p. 1 1 . 
t. 6 . — S.Jissa, Iloffm. 

Low meadows and osier-holts, but rare; Maidenhead; Windsor; near 
Salisbury; Cambridgeshire. Carlisle, Mr. Winch. Frequent in hedges 
and osier-grounds, Scotland, D. Don. FI. Apr. May. Tj. A small tree, 
with longer and more lanceolate and acuminated leaves than any other 
in the present groupe; in the latter particular coming near, as Sir J. E. 
Smith remarks, to S. viminalis, but wanting its dense white pubescence. 
The stamens are always more or less combined, below only, into one fila- 
ment; as in S. Croweana, w hich in other respects is quite a different plant. 

** Triandrse. Borr. Stain. 3. Leaves lanceolate , approaching to 
ovate, with evident deciduous stipules, serrated, glabrous. Catkins 
lax. Gcrmens stedked, mostly glabrous — Most of the sp. consti- 
tute excellent osiers, and become trees if left to themselves. 

7. S. undulata, Ehrh. (sharp-leaved triandrous Willow); trian- 
drous, leaves lanceolate acuminate serrated glabrous, germens 
stalked ovato-acuminate, style as long as the linear bifid stigmas, 
scales very villous. “ Ehrh. Beitr. v. vi. p. 161. Arb. 10S.” — 
S. lanceolatci, Sin. — E. Bot. t. 1436. E. FI. v. iv. p. 16S. Salict. 
Web. p. 27. t. 14. 

Near Lewes, Sussex, (the fertile plant ;) Mr. Borrer, who does not 
regard it as a native there. Angus-shire, Mr. G. Don. FI. Apr. May. 

pT, A small tree , which casts its bark annually. It is cultivated and 

cut. down every year for the use of basket-makers ; but Mr. Forbes ob- 
serves that it is not so well calculated for the finer sorts of wicker-work 
as S. triandra. Dr. Meyer of Gottingen has sent me specimens of the 
S. undulala of Ehrh.; compared with the Ehrhartian Herbarium ; and Mr. 
Borrer is satisfied that they are identical with Smith’s lanceolata; at least 
w ith the Sussex specimens communicated by Mr. Woollgar to him, and 
which are probably the same with the fertile individuals figured in E. 
Bot. Indeed that station is the only one mentioned by Sir J. E. Smith 
as English. Mr. Borrer has received German specimens of S. undulata 
with sTlky germens, and these are probably the S. undulata o( the Salic- 
tum Woburnense, which differs only in that respect, and in its more wavy 
leaves, from our present plant. 

8. S. triandra, Linn, (long-leaved triandrous Willow); trian- 
drous, leaves oblongo-lanceolate acute serrated glabrous, germens 
stalked oblongo-ovate glabrous as well as the retuse scale, stigmas 
sessile retuse. E. Bot. t. 1435. E. Fl.v. iv. p. 166. Salict. Wob. 
p. 29. t. 15. 

Wet woods and osier-grounds, frequent. FI. May and Aug. (Sm.) T? • 

This becomes a tall tree, 20—30 feet high if left to itself, casting its 

bark in autumn. It is abundantly cultivated and reckoned among 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


413 


Sa/i.v.] 

the most valuable of the osiers. Mr. Forbes speaks of another state of 
the plant raised at Woburn, with larger and broader foliage ; to which 
probably the leaves in E. Bot. may be referred; for they are much larger 
and broader than as described by that author. Mr. Woollgar used 
to distinguish this species by the dark-barked smooth shoots of the fer- 
tile plant. The sterile one he never met with at Lewes. Nearly allied 
to this is the French Willow of the Sussex osier-grounds, which grows 
(according to Smith) from 12 to 15 feet high, with leaves of a fine bright 
green and large yellow catkins, with stamens thrice the length of the scales; 
the leaves only half the size of triandra, with more slender footstalks and 
larger stipules. This was the S. contorta of Mr. Crowe’s garden ap- 
parently the Hoppeana of Willd. (according to my specimens from Saltz- 
burg,) differing only in the notched or refuse bracleas. Mr. Borrer seems 
to think that it is the S. triandra of Curt. FI. Land, 

9. S. Hoffmannidna, Sm. ( sliort-leaved triandrous Willow); 
triandrous, leaves shortly and broadly lanceolate acute slightly 
rounded at the base serrated glabrous, “ germens stalked ovate 
compressed glabrous, stigmas nearly sessile.” E. FI. v. iv.p. 168. 

Salict. Wob. p. 31. t. 16. Borr. in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2620 S. 

triandra, Hoffm. Sal. v. i. v. 45. t. 9, 10. t. 23. f. (excl. the vars. ?) 
Borr. 

Sides of streams, in Sussex (sterile plant,) Mr. Borrer; and near Cam 
bridge, Rev. J. Holmes. FI. May. Tj . — A much branched shrub, or 
crooked tree ; scarcely exceeding 12 ft. Bark of the stem and large 
branches deciduous, as in the other triandrous Willows. The humbler 
growth, the short, flat, lanceolate leaves move rounded at their base, with 
larger, rounded, ear-shaped stipules, distinguish this plant from S.triaiul., 
with which it is said to agree in the fertile Jl., as it does in wanting the 
deep furrows of the young twigs, so remarkable in S. amygdalina. 

10. S. amygdalina, Linn. ( Almond-leaved Willow ); triandrous, 
leaves oblongo-ovate acute rounded at the base serrated glabrous, 
germens much stalked ovate glabrous, stigmas sessile bifid, young 
branches furrowed. E. Bot. t. 1936. E. FI. v. iv. p. 169. Salict. 
Wob. p. 35. t. 18. 

Banks of rivers and ditches; Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire; Scot- 
land, Dr. Parsons. FI. Apr. May and Aug. T? . — A tree, growing to the 
height of 20 — 30 feet in the woods at Woburn, with much furrowed, 
yellowish, young branches. The plant is considered inferior as an osier 
to S. triandra, which it approaches very nearly in botanical character. 
About Lewes, Mr. Borrer says both the fertile and barren plants are con- 
fined to the osier-beds, as are S. triandra and S. “ triandra, undulata” of 
Mertens. 

*** Pentandne. Borr. Stamens more than 3, usually 5. Mo- 
derately sized trees, with ample, glossy, fragrant foliage, exuding 

a resin from the glandular serratures of the leaves. Stamens, in 

1 According to Sir J. E. Smith: but Mr. E. Forster says that the 5. contorta 
ot Mr. Crowe is a willow called <l S. triandra undiduta by Prof. Mertens. 


414 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


[Salix. 

each catkin , so numerous and long as to render the flowers , which 
too are in perfection at the same time with the foliage, quite 
handsome; while the tree itself is the most ornamental of the whole 
genus. Germens glabrous. 

11. S . pentdndra, Linn, (sweet Bay -leaved Willow ); stamens 5, 
leaves elliptical-lanceolate acuminated glanduloso-serrated glabrous 
with several glands at the base, germens lanceolate glabrous 
nearly sessile, style scarcely any, stigmas bifid. E. Bot. t. 1805. 
E. Fl.v.iv.p. 171. Salict.Wob. p. 67. t. 34. 

Banks of rivers and watery places; most frequent in the N. FI May, 
June. B . — 18 — 20 ft. high. Its large and copious, shining foliage almost 
gives this plant the appearance of an evergreen. Sterile calkins broad, 
fragrant, as well as the leaves. The tough flexible shoots, Mr. Forbes 
says, are good for basket-work.— Mr. Borrer doubts if the American 
S. lucida, (Salic t. IVob. t. 32,) be different from this : and Mr. Forbes 
states that species to have been confounded in gardens with the following. 

12. S. Meyeridna , Willd. Enum. (Meyerian Willow); stamens 

3 6, leaves .elliptic-lanceolate acuminated glanduloso-serrated 

glabrous with few (2 — 4) glands at the base, germens lanceolate 

glabrous stalked Salict. Wob. p. 65. t. 33, (sterile fl.) — S. tetra.ii- 

dra, Willd. and S. hexandra ? Ehrh. (tide Prof. Mertens). 

Brough, Westmoreland, (the sterile plant,) Mr. Borrer, who thinks 
21 r. Winch had sent it to Mr. E. Forster from near Newcastle. FL Apr. 
(Mr. Forbes). Tj . — I should fear this is too near S. pentandra, judging 
from the dried specimen. The fertile plant I have only seen from abroad- 
In the specimen from Prof. Mertens, the capsules are on long pedicels. 
The sterile plant alone is, I believe, known in a living state in this country. 

*#** Fragiles. Borr. Stamens 2, (as in the folloioing groupes). 
Trees of considerable size, with lanceolate, glabrous, serrated, sti- 
pulated leaves, and very lax catkins with elongated, more or less 
stalked glabrous germens. 

13. S. decipiens, Hoffm. (white Welsh or varnished Willow); 
leaves lanceolate pointed serrated very glabrous, floral ones partly 
obovate and recurved, footstalks somewhat glandular, germens 
tapering stalked glabrous, style longer than the cloven stigmas, 
branches smooth highly polished. Sin. — E. Bot. t. 1937. E. Fl. 
v. iv. p. 183. Salict. Wob. p. 57. t. 29. 

Low meadows, moist hedges and osier-grounds, in several parts of 
England. (Sin.). Codington woods, Edinb. Mr. Maughan. Ft. May. 

Tj . — Of this I am only acquainted with the sterile plant ; nor has 8ir 
J. E. Smith, nor Mr. Forbes, figured any other. It is described as a 
lofty tree ; when treated as an Osier, producing, for a few years, good 
rods for basket-work, but gradually becoming shorter, and not worth 
cultivating. Many botanists, it is observed in E. FL, have confounded 
this with S. fragilis, to which it is referred in Fl. Brit. Mr. Borrer 
observes that it is the S. amerina of Walker. 

14. S. fragilis, Linn, (crack Willow); leaves ovato-lanceolate 


Salt, v.] 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


115 


acute serrated glabrous, germeus shortly pedicellate oblongo-ovate 
glabrous, style short, stigmas bifid, scales pubescent and much cili- 
ated. E. Bot. t. 1807. E. FL v. iv.p. 1 84-. SalictAVob. p. 53. 
t. 27. (not of Woodville? and other medical writers ?) 

Banks of rivers and marshy ground, frequent. FI. Apr. May. Tj . — 
“ A tall bushy-headed tree, whose branches are set on obliquely, some- 
what crossing each other, not continued in a strait line, by which it may 
readily be distinguished in winter.” Sin. These branches are fragile, 
especially in spring, and hence the wood is of little or no value. 
Whatever good qualities have been attributed to the present species. 
Sir J. E. Smith observes, belong to the following, which has often been 
mistaken for it. 

15. 8. Russellidna, Sm. ( Bedford Willow ); leaves lanceolate 
tapering at each extremity strongly serrated glabrous very pale 
beneath, germens stalked lanceolate acuminate glabrous, style as 
long as the bifid stigmas, scales narrow-lanceolate slightly ciliated 
or pubescent. E. Bot.t. 1S08. E. FI. v.iv.p. 186. Salict. Wob. 
p. 55. t. 28, and frontispiece , ( the tree). — S. fragilis , Woodville f 
and other medical writers. 

Marshy woods, osier-grounds and in many places. FL Apr. May. Tj . —   
This extremely valuable tree was first brought into notice by His Grace 
the late Duke of Bedford, and thence most appropriately honoured by 
bearing his name. Of the size to which it reaches, some interesting details 
are given in the present Duke of Bedford’s Introduction to the Salictum 
Woburnense. It was one of this species, the favourite tree of Dr. Johnson 
at Litchfield, which was very recently destroyed by a hurricane, after it 
had attained a height of 60 feet, and a girth of 13 feet. Another tree 
at Gordon Castle, Scotland, at the age of 61, was 57 feet high, and 
above 1 1 feet in its greatest circumference. Great as is the affinity, bo- 
tanically speaking, between this plant and the preceding, its properties 
are wholly different. So important is it as a plantation tree, that Mr. 
Lowe in his Survey of the County of Notts, states that at 8 years growth, 
the poles yielded a net profit of 2147. per acre ; and in 2 years longer, 
they would probably have produced 300/. per acre. The late George 
Biggin, Esq., of Cosgrove Priory, an able chemist, ascertained that the 
bark of this tree contains the tanning principle in a superior degree to 
that of the Oak : and it is supposed that the medical properties stated 
to belong to S. fragilis, are attributed to it by mistake and should be 
referred to the present. — The leaves are of a peculiarly handsome shape 
when in perfection, deeply serrated and much attenuated. 

***** Alb as. Borr. Trees of considerable elevation, having lanceo- 
late serrated leaves , with long silky hairs beneath , especially in a 
yoi.tng state , which give to the foliage a light or whitish hue : 
the serratures glandular. Catkins lax : germens glabrous. 

16. S. alba, Linn. ( common white Willow); leaves elliptical- 
lanceolate regularly glanduloso-serrate acute silky beneath often so 
above, germens ovalo-acuminate nearly sessile glabrous, stigmas 
nearly sessile short recurved bifid, scales short pubescent at the 


416 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


[Salix. 

margin. E. Bot. t. 2430. E. FI. v. iv. p. 321. Sulict. Wob. 

p. 271. t. 136 (3. under-side of tlie leaves less silky, often quite 

glabrous. S'. ccerulea, (blue Willow ). E. Sol. t. 2431. Sulict. 
Wob. p. 273. t. 137. 

River-sides, moist woods, See. FI. May. Tj . — A well known tree, of 
considerable size, and of which the var. /3. is of such exceedingly rapid 
growth, that it is by many still deemed a distinct species ; and Mr. For- 
bes observes that the new leaves, after the wood has been cut, are of a 
larger size, and, as well as the twigs, of a darker hue than the real <S. 
alba. They seem to be alike valuable for their bark and their timber, 
and are both amply deserving of cultivation. 

17. S. vitellina, Linn, (yellow Willow or golden Osier); leaves 
lanceolate with glandular serratures acuminate more or less silky 
beneath often so above, germens lanceolate sessile glabrous, style 
short, stigmas bipartite, scales lanceolate. E. Sot. t. 2430. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 182. Sulict. Wob.p. 39. t. 20. 

Hedges and osier-grounds, in many places. FI. May. T? . — This is 
rendered striking by the bright yellow colour of its branches, and the 
leaves often partake of the same tint. With this exception, the plant, 
as Mr. Borrer observes, is “ extremely nearly allied to S. alba." Flaller, 
too, united them. It is used as an Osier in many places. 

* 6. Gris etc. Borr. 

18. S. petioldris, Sm. (dark long-leaved Willow); leaves lan- 
ceolate serrated when young grey with short silky hairs especially 
beneath, germens stalked ovato-lanceolate very silky, stigmas 
divided nearly sessile, scales villous scarcely longer than the pedi- 
cel . E. Bot. t. 1471. E. FI. v. iv.p. 181.’ 

Scotland, Mr. Dickson. Angus-shire, Mr. G. Don. Ft. Apr. Tj .— A 
very distinct species, with dark branches, and dusky-coloured, greyish- 
green leaves, silky with short soft hairs; in a young state, even silveiy 
beneath. The catkins arc scarcely an inch long, rather lax; much less 
in my specimens and in the Jig. in Sulict. IVob. than in E. Bot., and re- 
markable for the lengthened stalks ol the germens and dense silky cover- 
ing of the latter. I have never seen native specimens. 

* 7. liosmarinifoliae. Borr. Small , erect shrubs. Leaves linear- 

lanceolate , entire, or with extremely minute, glandular teeth. 

Catkins short, lax. Germens stalked, silky. 

19. S. rosmarini folia, Linn. (Rosemary -leaved Willow); leaves 
linear-lanceolate quite entire or with a few very minute glandular 
teeth silky, the young ones especially, catkins shortly oblong 
curved lax, germens stalked silky lanceolato-acuminate, style about 
as Ion" as the linear divided stigmas, scales short villous. E. Bot. 
t. 1365. E. FI. v. iv.p. 214. Sulict. Wob.p. 173. t. 87. 

Found by Sherard. Sent by Mr. Dickson to Mr. Crowe. (Sm.) FI. 
A,,,-, —a slender, upright shrub, 2—3 feet high, with silky leaves. 


DJOECIA — DIANDItlA. 


Sa/Lr.] 


417 


almost glabrous in the adult plant. Whole plant, when dry, turning 
almost black, as does the following. 

20. S. angustifolia, Wulf.? {little Tree Willow ); leaves linear- 
lanceolate nearly glabrous with minute glandular teeth, the young 
leaves silky glaucous beneath, catkins ovate erect, germens ovato- 
acuminate densely silky stalked, style about as long as the hroad 
erect entire stigmas, scales very villous nearly as long as the young 
germens — S. Arbuscula, Sm — E. Tot. t. 1366. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 198. Scilict. Wob.p. 171. t. 86. (not of continental authors.) 

Highlands of Scotland, Mr. Dickson. Clova Mountains, Mr. G. Don. 
Near Dumfries, Mr. Maughan. Apr. Tj . — Mr. Forbes has well observed 
that the present is closely allied to the last, and lie is even disposed to 
consider them the same ; and it is certainly a matter of surprise, that 
two plants so much resembling each other, should be placed so far apart 
as they are in E. FI. Still I agree with Mr. Borrer in thinking them 
distinct, though the difference lies almost entirely in their germens; 
these are shorter in the present plant, with denser, less glossy and less 
truly silky hairs, with ovate and quite entire stigmas , and more shaggy 
scales. Although this may be, as Sir J. E. Smith assures us, the S. Ar- 
buscula of Linn. Herb., yet Mr. Borrer, on a recent examination, has 
come to a different opinion, and the plant is quite at variance with the 
Arbuscula of other continental authors, and with the figures both of Lin- 
naeus and Wahlenberg, which represent the leaves distinctly serrated. 
This latter is well figured in the Salictum Woburnense at t. 138, having 
been introduced to the gardens at Woburn by Lord John Russell, from 
Switzerland. The name of our plant, I have, at the suggestion of Mr. 
Borrer, changed to S. angustifolia, as being, probably, the plant of Wulfen. 

* 8. Fuse®. JJorr. Small shrubs, with generally procumbent stems 
and leaves between elliptical and lanceolate , mostly silky beneath , 
nearly entire. Catkins ovate or cylindrical. Germens silky, 
stalked . — The habit of S.fusca rather approaches the Monandra; 
group. 

21. S. Doniana, Sm. (Donian Willow ); leaves partly opposite 
obovato-lanceolate acute slightly serrated even livid and some- 
what silky beneath, stipules linear, branches erect, catkins erect 
cylindrical, germens stalked silky longer than the obovate scale 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 213. Borrer in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2599. 

Scotland; Mr. G. Don. El. May. Tj . — Shrub 6 feet or more high, 
resembling S. purpurea; but the sterile flowers are unknown, and Mr. 
Borrer considers it correctly placed in the present division, on account 
of the stalked germens which have little resemblance to those of the 
Monandra;, but are closely analogous with those of S.fusca, to which 
species he thinks there is considerable affinity in the foliage also. 

22. S. fusca, Linn. ( dwarf silky Willow'); leaves elliptical or 
elliptic-lanceolate acute entire or with minute glandular serratures 
somewhat downy glaucous and generally very silky beneath, ger- 

T 2 


DIOECIA DIANDRIA. 


418 


[ Salix . 


mens upon a long stalk lanceolate very silky, stigmas bifid, stems 
more or less procumbent. S. repens, Hook. Scot. i. p. 284. 

«. stem much branched upright, decumbent below, leaves elliptical- 
lanceolate. S. fusca, E. But. t. I960. E. EL v. iv. p. 210. Salict. ll r ob. 
p. 165. t. 83. 

/3. stem depressed with short upright branches, leaves elliptic-lan- 
ceolate. S. repens , E. Bot. t. 18.3, (with young leaves only). E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 209. Salict. Wob. p. 1G7. t. 84. 

y. stem prostrate with elongated strait branches, leaves elliptic- 
oblong. S. prostrata,' E. Bul.t. 1959. Salict. Wob.p. 163. t. 82. 

2. stem recumbent, leaves elliptical. S.fcelida, E. FI. v. iv. p. 208. — 
S. adscendens, F. Bot. t. 19G2. Salict. Wob.]). 159. t. 80. — subvar. leaves 
smaller. S.fcelida, p. E. Ft. v. iv.p. 208. — S. parvifolia, E. Bot. t. 1961. 
Salict. Wob.p. 161. t. 81. 

s. stem procumbent, leaves elliptic-lanceolate. S. incubacea, Linn. — 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 21 2, ( cxel . of all the other syns.? Borr.) Bon er in E. Bot. 
Suppl. t. 2600. 

£. stem erect or spreading, leaves elliptical with a recurved point very 
silvery beneath. S. argentea, E. Bot. t. 1364. E. FI. v. iv. p. 207. 

Moist and dry heaths, moors and sandy situations. FI. Apr. May. 
Tj . — I am happy to learn, from Mr. Borrer, that he not only consents 
to the union of the above-mentioned species of other authors, but has 
suggested the order of their arrangement; with the single exception of 
S. fusca of Sm., which he is disposed to consider different from that of 
Linn., at least as seen growing in the garden ; for he allows that “ the 
dried specimens show no character;” in which latter opinion I cordially 
agree with him.— The plant itself is usually a small procumbent shrub, 
with rather long strait branches ; but varying exceedingly, according to 
situation and other circumstances, as do the leaves also, which are more 
or less glabrous above, and more or less silky beneath where the nerves 
are prominent. 

23. S. ambigua, Ehrh. ( ambiguous Willow); leaves obovato- 
oblong slightly serrated upwards downy above, soft and silky veiny 
beneath, catkins lax, germens lanceolato-subulate very silky upon 
long hairy stalks, style more or less elongated, stigmas entire or 
divided obovate. 

«. stigmas sessile or nearly so, leaves moderately hairy or silky. S. 
ambigua, Ehrh. and Willd. (Borrer), not ot Pursh, whose plant Mr. 
Borrer says is very near S.fragilis, taller var. — S. proteifolia , Schleicher, 
Salict. Wob.p. 149. t. 75. 

p. stigmas sessile or nearly so (quite entire), leaves ohovate very silky 
on both sides. 

y. style elongated, leaves oblong moderately hairy or silky. S. spa- 
tliulata , Willd. (Borr.). — S.versifolia, Wahl. Lapp. p. 271. t. 18./. 2. 
Seringe, Saules dc la Suisse, n. 66. 

«. Epping-forest, Mr. E. Forster. Hopton, Suffolk, and Isle of Staffa ; 
Mr. Borrer. — P. Bogs near Forfar, Mr. T. Drummond. — y. Epping-forest, 
Mr. E. Forster. Hopton, Suffolk ; and between Balnagard and Aberfel- 

1 The Epping-forest “ prostrata ,” mentioned in E. FI., is, on the authority 
of Mr. E. Forster, one of the varieties of »S. ambigua. 


SalLr.] 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


419 


die, Scotland; Mr. Borrer. FI. May. Tj . — Shrub 3 to 5 — 6 feet high, 
with dingy-coloured bark, and hoary, more or less silvery leaves. Mr. 
Borrer was once disposed to consider the S. ambigua of Ehrh., the S. pro- 
teifulia, Schleich., and the S. spalhulata of Willd., distinct ; but he subse- 
quently was induced to unite the two former; and I think, judging from 
specimens communicated, by my friend, of the latter, that he will not 
think me very wrong for combining the three. They are altogether most 
ambiguous plants; and put on very different appearances in different 
stages of their growth. My var. /3. is of the most peculiar aspect, and 
I have never seen any specimens but those gathered by Mr. Drummond. 

* 10. Reticulatae. Borr. 

24. S. reticulata , Linn. reticulated Willow); leaves nearly 
elliptic-orbicular mostly glabrous remarkably reticulated with 
veins and glaucous beneath, germens sessile oblongo-ovate downy, 
style short, stigmas bifid. E. Bot. t. 1908. E. El. v. iv. p. 200, 
Salict. Wob. p. 133. t. 67. 

Lofty mountains of the north of England, Wales ? and especially Scot- 
land. FI. June, July. B • — Stem short, very woody, much branched, 
procumbent : when cultivated, forming a beautiful tuft of considerable 
extent, with its curiously reticulated and large handsome leaves. The 
catkins and stems have a reddish or purplish tinge. 1 possess this from 
Arctic America with long silky hairs on both sides of the leaves : the 
young foliage indeed is often floccose. 

*11. Glaucce. Borr. Small, erect, very closely allied shrubs; 

remarkable for their soft hairy and silky oblongo-lanceolate leaves, 

often white and cottony beneath. Germens sessile, very downy 

or silky. 

25. S. glauca, Linn. ( glaucous Mountain Willow) ; leaves ovato- 
lanceolate entire downy snow-white and very cottony beneath, 
germen sessile narrow-elliptical ovate very downy, stigmas nearly 
sessile bifid. E. Bot. t. 1810. E. FI. v. iv. p. 201. Salict. Wob. 
p. 135. t. 68. 

Highlands of Scotland, Mr. Dickson. Clova mountains, Mr. G. c$- D. 
Don. FI. July. T? • — Nearly allied to the following; but differing in the 
germen, which is shorter, more obtuse and with nearly sessile stigmas. 

26. S. arenaria, Linn. ( downy Mountain Willow) ; leaves ob- 
longo-lanceolate entire downy especially beneath, germens sessile 
lanceolate thickly downy with a very long style, stigmas linear 
often entire, scales very silky. E. Bot. t. 1809. E. FI. v. iv.p. 204. 
Salict. Wob. p. 169. t. 70. — S. limosa, Wahl. Lapp. p. 265. t. 16. 

S' 4 . 

Highland mountains, especially those of Breadalbane and Clova. 
FI. June. . — 1 — 2 ft. high, with dark-brown, glossy bark. Leaves 
clothed with silky down, slightly so above, more so beneath where they 
are almost white. Germen with a remarkably long, slender, dark-coloured 
style. Scales almost black, very villous with long silky hairs. 

27. S. Stuartiuna, Sm. (small-leaved shaggy Willow); “leaves 


420 


DIOECIA DIANDRIA. 


[Salic. 


nearly entire ovato- lanceolate acute shaggy above densely silky 
somewhat cottony beneath, style as long as the almost sessile 
woolly germen, stigmas capillary deeply divided the length of the 
style.” E. Bot. t. 2586. Hook. Scot. i. p. 283, ( under S. aren.) 
E. Fl.v. iv.p. 203. Salict. Wob. p. 143. t. 72 — S. lapponum. 
Walker. 

Breadalbane mountains, Bev. Dr. Stuart. Near the upper end of the 
burn of Fionlarig, Mr. Borrer. Ben Lawcrs, Mr. Turner. FI. July, 
Aug. Tj . — I regret that, often as I have visited the Breadalbane moun- 
tains, 1 have not been able to distinguish S. Stuartiarm from the preceding. 
Mr. Borrer says, “ the leaves are sharp at each end, grey with hairs 
above, even when full grown.” So are many of my acknowledged spe- 
cimens of S. arenaria. It was named in compliment to one of the best 
men and most learned scholars that Scotland has prod ced, the late 
Rev. Dr. Stuart of Luss. 

* 12. Viminales. Borr. Trees of a more or less considerable size ; 

with long pliant branches and lanceolate leaves. Germens 

nearly sessile, hairy or silky; their styles elongated, their stigmas 

linear, mostly entire. 

28. S .viminalis, Linn. ( common Osier); leaves linear-lanceolate 
obscurely crenate white and silky beneath, stipules very small sub- 
lanceolate, branches strait and twiggy, germens upon very short 
stalks lanceolato-subulate, style elongated, stigmas long linear mostly 
entire. E. Bot. t. 1898. ' E. FI. v. iv. p. 228. Salict. Wob. 
p. 265. t. 133. 

Wet places, osier-grounds, &c. frequent. FI. Apr. May. Tj • — This 
is held in great esteem for basket work. 

29. S. stipularis, Sm. ( auricled Osier); leaves lanceolate very 
indistinctly crenate white and downy beneath, stipules large semi- 
cordate acute often with a tooth or lobe at the base, germens stalked 
lanceolate very downy, style elongated, stigmas linear undivided, 
scales very shaggy. E. Bot. t. 1214. E.Fl.v. iv. p. 230. Salict. 

JJ ob. p. 263. t. 132. 

Osier-holts, hedges and woods, near Bury St. Edmunds, Mr. Crowe. 

FI. March. T? Allied to the preceding in fructification: differing in its 

larger and coarser leaves, less white beneath, and with large, very remark- 
able stymies. 

30. S. Smithiana, Willd. ( silky-leaved Osier); leaves lanceo- 

late obscurely crenate white and covered with satiny pubescence 
bpneath, stipules very small narrow acute, germens lanceolato- 
subulate very silky shortly stalked, style elongated, stigmas long 
linear mostly entire. E. El. v. iv. p. 229. Salict. ITob. p. 367. 
t. 234 S. mollissima , E. Bot. t. 1509. (not Ehrh.) 

Meadows and osier-grounds. About Bury, Mr. Crowe. Glamorgan- 
shire, Mr. Turner. Near Warrington, Mr. IV. Wilson. Scotland, Mr. 
D. Don. FI. Apr. May. Tj • 


Sal u\] 


DIOECIA DIANDEIA. 


421 


31. S. ferruginea , And. MSS. ( ferruginous Willow ); leaves 
obovato-lanceolate very acute attenuated below slightly downy 
above, silky and greyish beneath rather obscurely serrated, stipules 
very minute, catkins stalked, germens ovato-subulate stalked silky, 
style about as long as the linear entire stigmas. Forbes in Solid. 
Wob. p. 255. t. 128. Borrer in E. Bot. Suppl. 2665. 

First found by the late Mr. Cl . Anderson. Nuthurst, Sussex ; Mr. 
Borrer, to whom I am indebted for specimens, and who observes that it 
comes nearest to S. Smil/iiana. FI. Apr. May. Tj . — It forms a bushy 
shrub, 12 — 14 feet high, according to Mr. Forbes. 

32. S. acuminata, Sm. ( long-leaved Willow ); “ leaves lanceo- 
lato-oblong pointed wavy finely toothed glaucous and downy 
beneath, stipules half-ovate then kidney-shaped, catkins cylindrical, 
germen stalked ovate hairy, style as long as the undivided stigmas.” 
Sm.—E. Bot t. 1434. E. FI. v. iv.p. 227. Solid. Wob. p. 261. 
t. 131. 

Rather moist woods and hedges, frequent. (Sm.). FI. Apr. Tj . — In 
my specimens, the germens and scales of the catkins are remarkably shaggy. 
Mr. Borrer, who observes that this is the S. lanceolate of Seringe, has 
never gathered the species wild, nor has Mr. Forbes; who, as well as 
8ir J. E. .Smith, places it among the true Sallows, our “ Cinerece tribe.” 

33. S. holosericea, Willd. (soft shaggy-flowered Willow ); leaves 
lanceolate acuminate serrated glabrous above, pale downy and 
strongly veined beneath, catkins cylindrical, germens stalked 
densely clothed with silky wool, stigmas ovate sessile, scales (black) 
very shaggy. Willd. Sp. PL v. iv. p. 708 ? Bluff et Fing. FI. 
Germ. v. ii. p. 565. 

About I. ewes, Sussex; Mr. Borrer. FI. Apr. May. Tj . — This is a 
plant which Mr. Borrer received from Sir J. E. Smith, marked S. acu- 
minata, var. ritgosa ; but which he thinks probably allied to the S. ho- 
losericea of Willd., and distinguishes it from the true acuminata, by 
its sessile pale-coloured stigmas and leaves greener and more rugose above 
and more strongly veined beneath. Mr. Forster says that Mr. Crowe 
regarded it as a var. of S. Smithiana, or as an undescribed species. 

* 13. Cinereae. Borr. Trees or low shrubs ; with downy branches, 

and mostly obovate, grey, hoary, toothed, more or less wrinkled 

and stipuled leaves, very veiny beneath. Germens sericeo-to- 

mentose . — This grovpe is usually denominated the Sallows. 

34. S. cinereu, Linn, (grey Salloiv); leaves obovato-elliptical 
sometimes approaching to lanceolate more or less glaucous above, 
beneath pubescent and reticulated with veins the margins slightly 
recurved, stipules semicordate, germens stalked lanceolato-subulate 
silky, styles short, stigmas mostly entire. E. Bot. t. 1897. E. FI. 
v. iv. j). 215. Solid. Wob. p. 249. 1. 125. 

Banks of rivers and in moist woods, abundant. FI. Apr. . — A tree, 
20—30 feet high, of no beauty and little use. 


122 


DIOECIA DIANDRIA. 


[Saiix. 


35. S. aqudtica, Sm. ( Water Sallow) ; stem and branches 
erect, leaves slightly serrated obovato-elliptical minutely downy 
flat rather glaucous beneath, stipules rounded toothed, germens 
silky stalked, stigmas nearly sessile. E. Bot. t. 1137. Hook. Scot, 
i. p. 281 , {with S. cinerea). E.Fl.v.iv.p. 218. Scilict. Wob. 
p. 253. t. 127. 

Wet hedge-rows, swampy places, &c. FI. Apr. T? . 

36. S. oleifolia, Sm. ( olive-leavecl Sallow) ; “ stem erect, 
branches strait spreading, leaves obovato-lanceolate flat rather rigid 
minutely toothed acute glaucous reticulated and finely hairy be- 
neath, stipules small notched rounded, catkins oval nearly half as 

broad as long.” Sm E. Bot. t. 1102. Hook. Scot. i. p. 281, 

(with S. cinerea). E. Fl.v.iv.p. 219. Salict. Wob. p.2b\.t. 126. 

Abundant in Norfolk : about Tonbridge, as well as in other parts of 
England, and in Scotland. FI. March. T? .— Mr. Forbes is disposed, 
with Sir J. E Smith, to consider this and the two preceding species 
really distinct. Mr. Borrer says, “ I do not venture to unite the three, 
although I could never satisfy myself as to their characters. They all 
vary much in foliage and in fructification.” 

37. S. aurita, Linn, (round-eared Sallow) ; leaves obovate 
repando-dentate wrinkled with veins more or less pubescent very 
downy beneath, tipped with a small bent point recurved at the 
margins, stipules roundish semicordate, germens laneeolato-subulate 
stalked silky, style very short, stigmas generally entire. E. Bot. 
t. 1187. E. FI. v. iv. p. 216. Salict. Wob. p. 217. t. 121. 

Moist woods and thickets, abundant. FI. May. Tj . — A small, bushy 
tree; with straggling branches. “ One of the least equivocal species; 
although its leaves vary in length and in roundness. 1 hey are usually 
much wrinkled and vaulted, the stipules large and stalked.” Borrer. .il SS. 

38. S. caprea, Linn, (great round-leaved Sallow); leaves ovato- 
elliptical acute serrated and waved at the margin downy beneath, 
stipules semicordate, germens pedicellate laneeolato-subulate silky, 
stigmas sessile undivided. E. Bot. t. 1188. E. FI. v. iv. p. 225. 
Salict. Wob. p. 213. t. 122. 

Woods and dry pastures, common. FI. Apr. May. T? -“A small tree , 
which distinguishes itself, in the spring, by being loaded with handsome 
yellow blossoms before any of its leaves appear. The catkins, of both 
kinds, are broader and shorter than in most ot the species with crowded 
J/owcrs. The Highlanders employ the bark to tan leather, and^ the 
handles of various agricultural implements are made ot the wood. The 
bark has even been used with success, instead ot that from Peru. 

39. S. sphacelata, Sm. (ivithered pointed- Sallow); “stem erect, 
leaves elliptico-obovate even veiny entire or slightly serrated downy 
on both sides discoloured at the point, stipules half heart-shaped 
toothed erect, germens stalked ovato-lanceolate silky, stigmas 
notched longer than the style.’ Sm. — E.Bot. t. 2333. B. FI. 
v.iv.p. 221. Salict. Wob. p. 211. t. 221. 


Salix.] 


DIOECI A — DIANDRIA. 


123 


At Fionlarig, near the head of Loch Tay, Rev. Dr. Stuart. FI. April, 
May. Tj . — With this I am unacquainted, and Mr. Borrer doubts if it be 
a good species. 

* Id. Nigricantes. Borr. A groupe as difficult to define as are 
the species which compose it. Many approach the last division 
very nearly , having more or less ovate or obovate leaves, hut 
they are less wrinkled, and, when dry, generally become black, 
whatever care may be taken in the preservation of them. Shrubs 
with long branches, or small trees. Germens glabrous or silky, 
stalked. Style more or less bifid. 

40. S. cotinifolia, Sm. ( Quince-leaved Sallow'); leaves ellipti- 
cal-orbicular obsoletely toothed slightly downy above more so glau- 
cous and veiny beneath, germens stalked lanceolato-acuminate, style 
bifid, stigmas roundish notched. E. Bot. t. 1403. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 220. Salict. Wob.p. 227. t. 114. 

Norfolk, and near Glenluce and Forfar, Scotland. FI. Apr. May. 
Tj . — A low shrub, with leaves 2 or more inches long, shaped almost like 
those of the garden Rhus Cutinus. In my plant the styles are distinctly 
and deeply bind, each segment bearing a short, emarginate stigma. 

41. S. hirta, Sm. (hairy -branched Sallow); “stem erect, 
branches densely hairy, leaves elliptic-heart-shaped pointed finely 
crenate downy on both sides, stipules half heart-shaped flat-toothed 

nearly glabrous.” Sm E. Bot. t. 1404. E. FI. v. iv. p. 221. 

Salict. Wob.p. 225. t. 113. 

Norfolk, Mr. Crowe. Castle Eden, Yorkshire, Mr. IV. Backhouse. 
FI. Apr. May. Tj . — A small tree, in many respects approaching the pre- 
ceding : the leaves, however, in my specimens, are less broad at the 
base, or as Mr. Forbes justly observes, less heart-shaped. The fertile 
catkin was unknown to Sir J. E. Smith, as it was to the author of the 
“ Salictum” till after the plate was engraved. But 1 have a fertile 
branch from Mr. Borrer, as well as from Mr. Backhouse; in which, as 
in the preceding, the style is bifid, though only for a very short way, 
bearing capitate emarginate stigmas. 

42. S. nigricans, Sm. ( dark-leaved Willow); “ leaves elliptic- 
lanceolate acute crenate glabrous with a downy rib above glaucous 
beneath, stamens 2 thrice the length of the hairy scales, germens 
lanceolate downy on a short downy stalk.” Sm. — E. Bot. t. 1213. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 172. Salict. Wob.p. 73. t. 37. — S. phylicifolia, 
(3. Linn. (Sm.) 

Fens, osier-grounds, woods and thickets. Wrongay fen, Norfolk, 
and near Shobden Court, Herefordshire. (Sm.) FI. Apr. I? . — A large 
shrub, of which it does not appear that the fertile catkins have been 
found in Britain. 

43. S. Andersoniana , Sm. (green Mountain Sallow); leaves 
elliptic-oblong acute faintly crenato-dentate the upper ones chiefly 


424. 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


[Salix. 


subpul)escent all glaucous beneath, stipules small subovate, branches 
minutely downy, germens stalked linear-subulate glabrous, style 
elongated bifid at the extremity, stigmas bifid, scales fringed with 
a few long silky hairs. E. Bot. t. 2343. E. FI. v. iv. p. 223. Sa- 
lict. Wob. p. 217. /. 109. 

Sides of streams, among the Breadalbane mountains. Banks of the 
Tyne, below Newcastle; Mr. Winch. FI. May, June. Tj • 

44. S. Eorsteridna, Sm. (glaucous Mountain Sallow'); “ stem 
erect, branches minutely downy, leaves elliptic-obovate acute cre- 
nate slightly downy glaucous beneath, stipules vaulted, catkins 
elongated ( Borr .), germens stalked awl-shaped silky, style (at 
length bifid at the extremity) as long as the blunt emarginate (or 
bifid) stigmas.” Sm. — E. Eot. t. 2344. E. FI. v. iv. p. 224. Sa- 
lict. Wob. p. 219. t. 110. 

Not rare in Scotland, Mr. E. Forster: on the Breadalbane mountains 
along with the preceding. Heaton Dene, banks of the Tyne; Mr. Winch. 
FI. May, June. Tj • — Similar to the last: distinguishable by its more or 
less silky germens, and, as Mr. Borrer observes, Jonger catkins; to which 
Mr. Forster adds the crowded germens and the greater dissimilarity ot 
colour on the two sides of the leaf. 

45. S. rupestris, Donn, ( silky Eoclt Salloiv); “ stem trailing, 
leaves obovate acute serrated flat even silky on both sides, stipules 
hairy, branches minutely downy, germens stalked awl-shaped silky, 
style as long as the blunt undivided stigmas.” Sm. — E.Bot. t. 2342. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 222. Solid. Web. p. 221. t. 111. 

Near Blanchland, Northumberland ; Mr. Winch. Rocks of Craig- 
alleach and Mael Ghyrdy, Scotland. FI. May. T? —I do not myself 
understand this species, 1 must confess; notwithstanding that Mr. Bor- 
rer has kindly assisted me with specimens. Indeed he himself says “ the 
germen is silky or naked, unless 1 unite different things.” Mr. borbes 
observes that it is very distinct from the two preceding and that its 
branches are tough and useful for tying, &c. 

46. S petrcea, And. MSS. ( Eoclt Salloiv); “ leaves elliptic- 
oblong serrated wrinkled and minutely hairy on their upper sur- 
face glaucous reticulated with prominent veius and slightly hairy 
beneath, stipules half-heart-shaped serrated, catkins about half an 
inch (or an inch) long, germens nearly sessile ovate glabrous 
(sometimes partially silky), style divided as long as the parted 
stigmas.” Forbes in Solid. Wob. p. 1 93. t. 97. 

Cultivated by the Duke of Bedford, Mr. Forster, and Mr. Borrer, 
from plants gathered in Britain by the late Mr. G. Anderson, who gave 
to the species the name of S. petrcea. FI. Apr. May. Tj . — My specimens 
have the germens lanceolate, acuminate, partially silky or glabrous. A 
shrub, G— 7 feet high, according to Mr. Forbes. 

* 15. Bicolores. Borr. Leaves glabrous, or nearly so, dark green 


Salit.] DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 425 

above, very glaucous beneath, between obovate and lanceolate. 

Germens very silky Twiggy bushes. 

47. S. tenuior, Borr. (narrow-leaved intermediate Willow); 
leaves on slender stalks obovato-lanceolate acute obsoletely crenate 
flat naked on both sides glaucous beneath, stipules acute glandu- 
lose, catkins slender lax, scales acute longer than the silky stalk 
of the capsule, style longer than the ovate stigmas. Borrer in 
E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2650. 

Banks of the Lochy, near Killin. FI. May. B . — Nearly allied to 
S. canina, (S. bicolor, E. Bot. t. 1806,) with which, according to Mr. Bor- 
rer, Sir J. E. Smith seems to have united it. 

48. S. laurina, Sm. in Linn. Tr. [shining dark green Willow); 
leaves elliptic-oblong acute waved and slightly serrated, nearly 
glabrous glaucous beneath, footstalks dilated at the base, stipules 
pointed serrated, scales obtuse hairy, half as long as the densely 
downy ovate long-stalked germens.” Sm. — S. bicolor, E. Bot. 
t. 1806. E. FI. v. iv. p. 178. Salict. Wob. p. 75. t. 38. 

Woods and thickets, in various parts of Britain. Sm. Fi. Apr. May. 
B • — This Mr. Borrer considers a very distinct species. 

49. S. radteans, Sm. ( Tea-leaved Willow); leaves obovato- 
or elliptic-lanceolate with often wavy serratures glabrous glaucous 
beneath, germens lanceolate stalked very silky as well as the scales, 

style elongated, stigmas entire or bifid. Hook. Scot. i.p. 280 

S. pkylici folia, Linn. ? (not Hook. Scot.) E. Bot. t. 1958. E. FI. 
v. iv.p. 173. Scdict. Wob. p. 91. f. 46. 

Breadalbane mountains of Scotland; first found by the late Rev. Dr. 
Stuart. FI. May. B . — “ As Linnaeus, no doubt, included several other 
Willows under his S. pliylicifolia, it would be better to call this by Smith’s 
first name, radicans .” Borrer. 

50. S. Borreriana, Sm. ( Borrerian Willow); leaves broadly 
lanceolate with shallow nearly even serratures very glabrous glau- 
cous beneath, stipules lanceolate small, branches erect, catkins lax, 
germens lanceolato-subulate on long stalks quite glabrous, style 
long bifid, stigmas linear bifid, scales of the catkins acute shaggy. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 174. Borr. in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2619. Scdict. 
Wob. p. 89. t. 45. — S. phylicifolia, Hook. Scot. i.p. 281. Wahl. 
Lapp. p. 270. t. 17./. 2? 

Highland mountain-vallies ; Glen Nevis and Breadalbane; first disco- 
vered by Mr. Borrer. FI. April, before the leaves appear, and again in 
the willow garden of Woburn, in July, when the plant is in full leaf. B • 
— Allied to the preceding, but distinguished by the accurate Mr. Borrer, 
even while its fertile catkins were unknown to him ; these, which Mr. W. 
Wilson and myself have found at Killin, still further strengthen the 
character of the species. 

51. S. Davallidna, Sm. (Davallian Willow); “ leaves obovato- 
lanceolate finely serrated or minutely toothed tapering at each end 


DIOECIA DIANDRIA. 


426 


[Sulix. 


glabrous rather glaucous beneath, footstalks midrib and young 
branches somewhat downy, catkins with small rounded scales, cap- 
sules lanceolate glabrous or somewhat silky.” Sm. E. FL v. iv. 

p. 175. Solid. Wob. p. 93. t. 47 S. phylicfolia , Willd. (?) 

omitting the syn. (Sm.) 

Brought from Scotland and cultivated by Mr. G. Anderson. FI. May. 
T? • — Mr. Borrer’s specimen, which he believes to be the same as the 
h. FI. plant, and which he received from the late Mr. Anderson (under 
the name o( S. tetrapla, Walk.) has the germens very silky. The same 
plant, Mr. Borrer sent to Sir J. E. Smith as “tetrapla, Walk.;” and 
aboas being named (erroneously Mr. Borrer believes) “ S. phylicifolia " 

52. S. tetrapla, Walk, (four-ranked Willow ); “ leaves elliptic- 
oblong pointed unequally serrated nearly glabrous glaucous with 
prominent veins beneath, stipules half arrow-shaped, scales mostly 
shorter than the hairy stalks of the ovato-oblong glabrous germens, 

style as long as the stigmas.” Sm “ Walk. Ess. 468, according 

to Mr. Anderson .” E. Fl.v. iv. p. 177. 

Gathered in Breadalbane by Mr. Borrer. (Sm.) FI. May. Tj . 

53. S. Weigeliana , Willd. ( Weigelian Willow) ; leaves obovate 
or elliptical somewhat pointed finely serrated glabrous glaucous 
beneath, catkins dense with hairy scales longer than the stalks of 
the awl-shaped germens, style longer than the stigmas. (Sm.) 

a. germens silky throughout. S. Weigeliana , Willd. — E. Bot. Suppl. 
t. 2656, (not Salict. JVub.). 

/3. germens glabrous except toward the point. S. Wufcniana, E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 176, (not of Willd.) 

a. Highlands of Scotland and at Kirkby Lonsdale ; Mr. Borrer. 

/3. Teesdale, Mr. Borrer. FI. Apr. May. Tj . — Mr. Borrer suspects 
that the fertile S. Croweana of E. Ft. belongs to this species. 

54. S. tenuifolia , Sm. FI. Br. (thin-leaved Willow); “leaves 
elliptical acute serrated nearly glabrous glaucous beneath, stipules 
small or none, scales hairy, capsule ovate glabrous on a short 

smooth stalk. Sm FI. Br. p. 1052, (not F. Bot. according to 

Mr. Borrer which is S. bicolor of Ehr/t., not Sm.) E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 179. Salict. Wob.p. 99. t. 50, (the true plant.) 

Above the bridge at Kirkby Lonsdale, 1783; Sir J. E. Smith. FI. 
May, June. 7j . — Of this Mr. Borrer observes, that the best authenti- 
cated specimens he has seen, scarcely differ from the preceding, but in 
having the germcn and its stalk perfectly glabrous. 

55. S. nitens, And. MSS. (shining-leaved Willow); “ leaves 
elliptical acute unequally serrated very glabrous and glaucous 
beneath, minutely downy with a downy midrib above, stipules 
obsolete, branches spreading, catkins nearly sessile with acute 
shaggy scales.” E. FI. v. iv. p. 175. Salict. Wob. p. 87. t. 44. 
Borrer in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2055. 


Sa/i.r.] 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


427 


Found in Scotland by Mr. G. Anderson. FI. Apr. Tj . — A bushy 
shrub , 10 — 12 feet high. The fertile catkins have not been described. 

56. S. Crowedna , Sm. (Croweati Willow); stamens combined 
below, leaves elliptical slightly serrated quite glabrous glaucous 
beneath. E. Bot. t. 1146. E. FI. v. iv. p. 192. Salict. Wob. 
p. 103. t. 52. 

Swampy meadows and thickets. Norfolk, Mr. Crowe. N. of England, 
Mr. Winch. FI. Apr. May. T? • — Mr. Borrer presumes that the connate 
filaments are but an accidental monstrosity, in that individual from which 
all the plants, that he has examined, have originated : and Mr. Forbes 
describes and figures in the “ Salic turn.'' a still more remarkable struc- 
ture : “ the barren catkins changing into fertile ones, with the style and 
stigma perfect, as in the fertile floret .” He has watched the progressive 
change and observed that the monadelphous filaments appeared a little 
thicker in the middle, where they were united and gradually became 
pistils. — A similar alteration has been remarked by Mr. Borrer in S. olei- 
fo/ia, and by Air. R. Gee in S. cincrca. See E. FI. v. iv. p. 220, and 216. 
Sir J. E. Smith describes the germens of S. Croweana as downy ; Mr. 
Borrer finds them nearly glabrous, as figured in Salict. Wob. 

57. S. bicolor , Ehrh. ( two-colourecl Willotu); leaves elliptical 
green and shining above, glabrous and glaucous beneath serrated 
with oblique points, stipules crescent-shaped serrated, barren cat- 
kins copious bright yellow, filaments slightly bearded at the base. 
Forbes. — S. tenuifolia, E. Eot. t. 2186, (as to figure , not FI. Br.) 
Hook. Scot. i. p. 282. — S. fioribunda , Forbes in Salict. Wob. 
p. 107. t. 54. 

Highlands of Scotland; in Glenlyon, 1810; Air. Borrer. Banks of 
the Ettrick, Mr. G. Anderson. FI. Apr. and again in July. (Forbes). 
B . — I believe the sterile plant alone of this, is certainly known. In 
w r hat Mr. Borrer considers to be its fertile state, the adult leaves , he 
says, are mostly quite without hairs, whilst those of the sterile plant 
are rather plentifully but inconspicuously sprinkled, especially on the 
under-side : as Mr. Forbes indeed observes in the description of the 
young leaves of his fioribunda , a plant received by him from Mr. E. 
Forster, as the S. tenuifolia, E. Bot. 

58. S. phillyreifolia, Borr. ( Phillyrea- leaved Willow); leaves 
elliptic-lanceolate acute at each end strongly serrated naked on 
both sides glaucous beneath, stipules small, young shoots pubes- 
cent, scales oblong hairy longer than the glabrous stalk of the gla- 
brous germen, style as long as the stigmas. Borr. in E. Bot. 
Suppl. t. 2660. 

Highland valleys of Scotland, in Inverness-shire and Perthshire. Mr. 
Borrer. FI. Apr. B • — “A beautiful and apparently distinct Willow, 
bearing considerable resemblance in its leaves to Phillyrea latfo/ia. 
It differs from S. bicolor and S. Dieksoniana, which have leaves approach- 
ing to obovate with a point, and which are, for the most part, obsoletely 
serrated.” Borr. 

59. 8. Dieksoniana, (broad-leaved Mountain Willow); “leaves 


428 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


[ Sa/ix • 


elliptical acute slightly toothed glabrous glaucous beneath, young 
branches very glabrous, catkins ovate short erect, germens stalked 
ovate silky, stigmas nearly sessile.” E.Bot.t. 1390. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 196. Salict. Wob. p. 109. t. 55. /'. 2. 

Scotland, Mr. Dickson. FI. Apr. Tj . — I remarked, in FI. Scot., that 
my specimens of this plant from Mr. Borrer, did not accord with the 
E. Dot. figure, but closely resembled S. radieans. The same individuals 
have been reviewed by Mr. Borrer and returned without any observation ; 
from which I infer that they are what he still considers the true Dick- 
soniana. Now these accord precisely with the S. Dicksoniana which the 
Duke of Bedford received from various collections as such : and the 
discrepance between it and the figure in E. Bot. did not escape the notice 
of Mr. Forbes, who has, in addition to the Woburn plant, represented a 
catkin and pistil from E. But. 1 can therefore only repeat what I 
have said in FI. Scot., that if S. Dicksoniana be a good species, I am quite 
unacquainted with it. 

* 16. VacciniifolUe. Borr. Small, procumbent or rarely erect 

shrubs; tvith leaves bearing a considerable resemblance to those 

of a Vaccinium, opaque , glaucous beneath. Germens downy, 

sessile. 

60. S. vacciniifolia, Walk. Ess. (Bilberry-leaved Willow ); 
leaves lanceolate-ovate serrated glabrous and even above, glaucous 
and silky beneath, capsules ovate silky, stems decumbent. Sm . — 
E. Bot. t. 2341. E. FI. v. iv. p. 194. Salict. Wob. p. 1 13. t. hi. 
— S. pr unifolia, (3. Hook. Scot. i. p. 282. — S. livida, Hook. Scot, 
i. p. 281. E. FI. v. iv. p. 199. 

Highland mountains, not unfrequent. Sm. First found at the head ot 
Annandale and described by the late Dr. Walker. Hart-fell, near Mot- 
fat, Mr. Maughan. FI. Apr. (Sm. Forbes)— June in the Highlands. Tj . 
— A humble and pretty little shrub, which 1 had referred to a variety ot 
S. prun folia. This and all the 3 following are very closely allied. 

61. S. carindta, Sm. (folded- leaved Willow); leaves ovate ser- 
rated glabrous glaucous beneath and frequently folded so as to form 
a keel, germens sessile oblongo- ovate extremely silky, style short, 
stigmas emarginate. E. Bot. t. 1363. E. Fl.v. iv.p. 197. Salict. 
Wob. p. 117. t. 59. 

Highlands of Scotland. FI. Apr. — June. T? . — Two feet high. Taller 
and stouter than the last, with more upright branches and longer and 
often keeled leaves. 

62. S. prunifolia, Sm. ( Plum-leaved Willow); leaves ovate 
serrated more or less veiny glabrous glaucous beneath, germens 
sessile oblong-ovate extremely silky, style short, stigmas emargi- 
nate. E. Bot. t. 1361. E. EL v. iv.p. 193. Salict. Wob. p. 111. 
t. 57. — S. myrsinites, Lightf. ( not Linn.) 

Highland mountains of Scotland, frequent. FI. Apr.— June. Tj . 

63. S. venulosa, Sm. (veiny-leaved Willow); “ leaves ovate ser- 


DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. 


429 


Salix.] 


rated naked reticulated with piorninent veins above rather glaucous 
beneath, capsules ovate silky, stem erect much branched.” Sm . — 
E. Bot. t. 1362. Hoo/t. Scot. i. p. 282, (with S. prunifolia). 
E. FI. v. iv.p. 195. Salict. Wob. p. 115. t. 58. 

Highlands of Scotland, Mr. Dickson. FI. Apr. — June Tj • — Mr. E. 
Forster agrees with me in considering this only a var. of S. prunifolia. 
The last four species, if such they may be called, I have gathered on the 
Breadalbane mountains, for a succession of years, with blossoms in per- 
fection in the month of June. In gardens, they flower in April. 

* 17. Myrsinites. Borr. Small, bushy plants ; with glossy, rigid, 

small, oval or broadly elliptical, serrated leaves, and downy 

germens. 

64. S. myrsinites, Linn, (green Whor tie- leaved Willow); leaves 
elliptical waved serrated shining often hairy with prominent veins, 
catkins short lax, germens sessile lanceolate loosely silky, style half 
their length, and as well as the linear stigmas bifid. E. Bot. 
t. 1360. E. FI. v. iv. jo. 195. Salict. Wob. p. 1 1 9. t. 60. — (3. Sm. 
leaves smaller narrower. S. arbutifolia, — S. myrsinites, Linn. 
Lapp. t. 7 . f 6. t. 8.f. f. FI. Dan. t. 1054. 

Highland mountains, but rare. Craigalleach, Mr. Borrer. Brae 
Riaeh, Greville, Arnott, Hooker. Clova mountains, Mr. T. Drummond. — 
/S. Craigalleach. FI. June. T? . — A low glossy bushy shrub, with thick much 
branching stems and leaves which Wahlenberg not inaptly compares to 
those of Betula nana, and which frequently remain, withered indeed, till 
the following year, being much and prominently veined. The flowers 
appear when the plant is in full leaf. Scales of the catkin small, blackish, 
with long silky hairs. Plants very dark, almost black when dry. My 
Craigalleach specimens agree not only with Lapland ones, but also with 
a specimen from the Linnaean Herb, in my possession. The S. Macnab- 
iana of Mr. Macgillivray in Jamieson’s Journ., Mr. Borrer refers to 
the var. /3. of this plant. 

65. S.procumbens, Forbes, (smooth-leaved cdpine Willow ); leaves 
oval (rarely acute) obscurely serrated shining quite glabrous, ger- 
mens nearly sessile lanceolate very silky, style very short cleft 
almost to the base, stigmas short bifid obtuse. Sal. Wob. p. 121. 
A 61. S. leevis, ed. \. p. 432. 

Highlands of Scotland. Glen Coe, Rev. Dr. Stuart {Borrer.) Bread 
albane mountains, 1801, Mr. Winch. Brae-Riach, one of the Cairn- 
gorum range. FI. June. T? • — A low shrub, bearing a considerable 
resemblance to the last, but I think truly distinct. I have long had from 
Mr. Winch both cult, and wild specimens. This, in all its parts, espe- 
cially the foliage, catkins and germens, is twice the size of the former, 
with flatter leaves, less serrated at the margin and drying to a yellowish- 
brown colour. The germen, style and stigma, too, will be found to difler 
from those of S. myrsinites, and the scales are much longer and more 
hairy. It is a beautiful shrub, and has been cultivated for years, in the 
Edinb. Bot. Garden, where it retains all its characters. This seems to 
be the S. retusa, With. Bot. Arr. ed. 4. v. 2. p. 49, with a flg. 


430 DIOECIA — DIANDRIA. [Sali. r. 

*18. Herbace®. Borr. Minute shrub ; remarkable for the small 
few-flowered catkins. 

60. S. herbdcea, Linn. ( least Willow ); leaves orbicular serrated 
glabrous shining veined, germens sessile lanceolate glabrous, style 
and stigmas bifid, catkins of few flowers. E.Bot. t. 1907. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 200. Salict. Wob.p. 123. t. 62. 

Snowdon, Sherard; and other Welsh mountains, Mr. IV. Wilson. On 
Skiddaw. Plentiful upon the summits of all the Highland mountains. 
FI. June. T? . — The least of our British species ; though not so small as 
is generally supposed, for its stems divide and creep below the surface of 
the earth, scarcely rising an inch above. 

* 19. H astatic. Borr. Low shrubs ; with very broad leaves and 
exceedinyly shaycjy and silky catkins. 

67. S. hastdta , Linn. (. Apple- leaved Willow'); leaves broadly 
elliptical waved thin and crackling quite glabrous glaucous beneath, 
stipules large heart-shaped about as long as the foot-stalks, germens 
on a short stalk lanceolate acuminated glabrous, styles elongated, 
stigmas cloven, scales very shaggy with long silky hairs. Salict. 

Wob.p. 69. t. 35 S. malifolia, Sm. El. Brit. p. 1053. E. Bot. 

t. 1617. E. FI. v. iv. p. ISO. Salict. Wob.p. 71. t. 36. 

Scotland; Mr. Dickson. Sands of Barrie, near Dundee, Mr. T. 
Drummond. Norfolk? Mr. Crowe. FI. May. Tj. — 2 — 6 ft high. Re- 
markable for its broadly elliptical, shortly acuminated leaves, large stipules 
and very silky or shaggy compact calkins, about 1 j inch long. Mr. Bor- 
rer assures me that S. malifolia, Sm. is only a state of S. haslata, Linn., 
with a more attenuated base to its leaf ; and this opinion is confirmed 
by Mr. Forbes, who received from Sir J. E. Smith, plants of S. malifolia, 
and found that the leaves of their vigorous shoots became cordate. 

68. S. landta, Linn. ( woolly broad-leaved Willow) ; leaves 

broadly oval pointed entire shaggy glaucous beneath, catkins sessile 
clothed with long yellow silky hairs, germen nearly sessile lanceo- 
late glabrous longer than the style, stigmas undivided. E. Fl.v.iv. 
p. 205. Hook, in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2624. Salict. Wob. p. 141. 
t. 71 . f. 2 S. chrysanthos, FI. Dan. t. 1057 ? 

Scottish mountains, rare. First found in Glen Calladcr, by Mr. G. 
Don. Head of the Glen of Dole, 2 miles W. of Acharne, the uppermost 
farm-house of Clova, Angus-shire ; Mr. T. Drummond. FI. May. Tj . 
About three feet high, with large pale greyish shaggy foliage, anil catkins 
that may be reckoned among the handsomest of the Genus. 1 his species 
Wahlenberg reckons the most beautiful in Sweden, it not in the whole 
world. “ The splendid golden catkins,” he justly observes, “ at the ends 
of the young branches, light up, as it were, the whole shrub, and are 
accompanied bv the tender foliage, sparkling with gold and silver.” r lhe 
young plant is clothed with copious, long, silky, yellowish hairs. Sir J. 
E. Smith refers to the FI. Dan. S. capreu , as this plant; but that has the 
style cleft and the stigmas bipartite. Again, in the S. chrysanthos of the 
same work, though in other respects it represents bur plant, there are 


Ihppophae.] 


DIOECIA TETRANDRIA. 


431 


2 styles given in the plate; so that Mr. Forbes with justice doubts if it 
be the same. The stamens are 2 or 3 in the real .S', lanata, with their 
filaments more or less combined. 

DIOECIA— TllIANDRIA. 

2. Empetrum. Linn. Crow-berry. 

1. E. nigrum, Linn. ( black Crow-berry or Crake-berry ); pro- 
cumbent, leaves linear-oblong. E. Bot. t. 326. E. El. v. iv. p. 
234. 

Mountainous heaths in the north, abundant. FI. May. Tj .—A small, 
procumbent, much branching shrub, whose leaves have their margins so 
recurved as to meet behind. Flowers axillary towards the summit of 
the branches, small, purplish. Berries black, clustered, affording 
abundant food to the moor-game. Boiled in alum they yield a blackish- 
brown dye. A smaller bushy var. is cultivated in gardens, under the 
name of E. scoticum, on which I have found perfect flowers.— The Crow- 
berry is the badge of the Clan M'Lean. 

3. Ruscus. Linn. Butcher’s-broom. 

1. R. aculeatus, Linn, (common Butcher s -broom) ; stem rigid 
branched, leaves ovato-acuminate very rigid and pungent bearing 
the solitary flower on their upper surface. E. Bot. t. 560. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 235. 

Bushy and heathy places and woods, especially in a gravelly soil. 
Abundant in the south of England ; rare in Scotland. Bothwell woods : 
Skeldon woods near Ayr, Mr. Jas. Wilson. FI. March, Apr. 2jC. — 
Flowers minute, white, arising from the disk of the evergreen leaves. 
Berry red. 

DIOECIA— TETRANDRIA. 

4. ViscuiU. Linn. Misseltoe. 

1. V. album, Linn. ( common Misseltoe); leaves obovato-lanceo- 
late obtuse, stems dichotomous, heads of flowers in the axils of an 
upper pair of leaves. E. Bot. t. 1470. E. FI. v. iv. p. 236. 

Parasitic ; mostly on apple-trees, very seldom on the oak ; frequent in 
the southern parts of England. On Acer campestre in Stoke Park, near 
Stapylton, Glocester; Mr. W. Christy. Meikleour, Scotland, Mr. S. 
Murray. FI. May. Tj .— Whole plant of a yellow hue, thick anil suc- 
culent. The Misseltoe was held sacred by the ancient Britons. 

5. Hippophae. Linn. Sallow-thorn. 

1. H. rhamnoid.es, Linn. ( common Sallow-thorn, or Sea Buck- 
thorn). E. Bot. t. 425. E. FI. v. iv. p. 238. 

Sand-hills and cliffs upon the coast of the east and south-east of Eng- 
land. FI. May. T? . — A thorny shrub, 4 — 5 feet high, larger when culti- 
vated in gardens, as it is on account of its silvery leaves, which are linear- 
lanceolate. Flowers very small, axillary, coming out with the young 
leaves. Berry bright orange. 


132 


DIOECIA OCTANDRIA. 


[ Popu/us . 


G. Myrica. Linn. Gale. 

1. M. Gale, Linn. ( sweet Gale or Dutch Myrtle ); leaves lan- 
ceolate broader upwards serrated, stem shrubby. E. Dot. t. 562. 
E. El. v. iv. p. 239. 

Rogs and moory ground, most abundant, especially in Scotland. FI, 
May. Tj . — The plant diffuses an agreeable smell, 

“ Gale from the bog shall waft Arabian balm,” 

and the leaves have a bitter taste, hence they are sometimes employed 
instead of hops. In Tsla and Jura the inhabitants scent their clothes 
with them, and in many parts of Scotland, beds are made of the twigs. — 
The Gale , or Bog-myrtle, is the badge of the Clan Campbell. 

DIOECIA— PENTANDRI A. 

7. Humulus. Linn. Hop. 

1. H. Lupulus , Linn. ( common Hop'). E. Dot. t. 427. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 240. 

Thickets and hedges in various places, scarcely indigenous. FI, July. 
11 . — Stems long, weak and climbing, scabrous. Leaves petiolate, oppo- 
site, 3 — 5-lohed, serrated, veiny, rough. Flowers greenish-yellow. The 
fragrant bitter, so valuable in the manufacture of Beer, resides in the 
catkins, or cones of the hop , as they are often called. 

DIOECIA— HEXANDRIA. 

8. Tamus. Linn. Black Bryony. 

1. T. communis, Linn. ( common Dlaclt Dryony); leaves undi- 
vided cordate acute. E. Dot. t. 91. E. FI. v. iv. p. 241. 

Hedges and thickets, England. FI. June- If. . — Root very large, acrid, 
black externally, fleshy. Stems long, twining and reaching among trees 
and bushes, to a great extent. Flowers greenish-white. Berry red. 

DIOECIA— OCTANDRIA. 

9. Populus. Linn. Popular. 

1. P. alb t, Linn . (great iv/rite Poplar or Abele); Laves round- 
ish-cordate lobed toothed glabrous above downy and very white 
beneath, fertile catkins ovate, stigmas 4. E.Bot. t. 1618. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 243. 

Moist and mountain woods. “ A few stunted plants of P. alba com- 
pose all the trees of the island of Lewes.” M l Culloch . FI. Apr. Tj . — 
A large tree , with smooth bark and spreading branches ; of very rapid 
growth. The wood is white and soft and only used for coarse work. 

2. P. canescens, Sin. ( grey Poplar); leaves roundish deeply 
waved toothed hoary and downy beneath, fertile catkins cylindrical, 
stigmas 8. E. Dot. t. 1619. E. FI. v. iv. p. 243. 

Wet turfy meadows and dry heaths : frequent in Norfolk ; ( Sm .) FI. 
March. Tj .— Tree tall and handsome; of slower growth than the preced- 
ing, and producing better wood. 


DIOECIA — ENNEANRRIA. 


433 


Mercurialis.] 

3. P. tremula , Linn. (Aspen); leaves nearly orbicular broadly 
toothed glabrous on both sides, stalks compressed, “stigmas 4 
erect auricled at the base.” E. Bot. t. 1 809. Hook. Scot. i. p. 289. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 244. 

Moist woods ; frequent in Scotland, and even at an elevation of 1500 
teet above the level of the sea, on Ben More, in Mull, Mr. Trevelyan. 
FI. March, Apr. T? . — This tree is well known by the tremulous move- 
ment of its leaves with the slightest breath of wind. The motion is 
aided by the compression of the stalk. The bar/c is said to be a favourite 
food of the beavers; and the wood serves for pack-saddles, milk-pails, 
&c. Lightfoot tells us that the Highlanders entertain a superstitions' 
notion that our Saviour’s cross was made of this tree, and for that rea- 
son they suppose that its leaves can never rest. 

4. P .nigra, Linn, (black Poplar); leaves deltoid acute serrated 
glabrous on both sides, fertile catkins cylindrical lax, “ stigmas 4.” 
E. Bot. t. 1910. E. FI. v. iv. p. 245. 

, W atery places and river-banks. Scarcely indigenous to Scotland. 
FI. Apr. Tj . — A very large tree of quick growth, producing a light, not val- 
uable wood; as is the case with most trees that come soon to perfection. 

10. Rhodiola. Linn. Rose-root. 

1. R. rosea, Linn. ( Rose-root ). E. Bot. t. 508. E. FI. v. iv. 

p. 216. 

Wet rocks, on the high mountains of the north of England and Ire- 
land and in the north-west of Scotland, abundant ; likewise on cliffs 
by the sea-shore. FI. June. 2f . — Root large, woody, when dry yielding 
a smell that has been compared to that of Roses. Stem 6—8 or 10 
inches high, simple. Leaves numerous, obovato-oblong, serrated at the 
point, and in the sterile plant often tipped with a reddish tinge. Flowers 
in a small, compact, terminal cyme, yellow ; agreeing with Sedum in every 
thing but the number of their parts, and having the habit of S. Tele- 
phiurn. — The Rose-root is the badge of the Highland Clan Gunn. 

DIOECIA— ENNEANDRIA. 

11. Mercurialis. Linn. Mercury. 

1. M. perennis, Linn, (perennial or Dogs Mercury); stem 
perfectly simple, leaves rough, root creeping perennial. E Bot 
t. 1872. E. FI. v. iv. p. 248. 

Woods and shady places, abundant. FI. Apr. May. If. — About 1 
foot high. Leaves mostly on the upper part of the stem, ovate, serrated. 
Flowers \n axillary, short, lax spikes. The plant in drying often becomes 
of a bluish, or blackish, green. 

2. M. annua, Linn, (annual Mercury); stem with opposite 
branches, leaves glabrous, root fibrous annual. E. Bot. t. 559. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 248. 

Waste places about towns and villages, not common. FI. Aug © 

1 ft. high. Sterile flowers in long, interrupted axillary, spikes. 

u 


434 


BIOECIA MON A DELPHI A. 


[Taxus. 


12. Hydrocharis. Linn. Frog-bit. 

1. H. Morstis fiance, Linn. ( common Frog-bit). E. Bot. t. £08. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 250. 

Ditches and ponds in England and Ireland. Scarcely found in Scot- 
land. FI. July. If. — Floating, and sending down long radicles from 
the horizontal stems. Leaves petioled, reniform, entire. Flowers subum- 
bellate, large, white, delicate, arising from pellucid membranous spathas. 

DIOECIA — MONADELPHIA. 

13. Juni'perus. Linn. Juniper. 

1. J. communis, Linn. ( common Juniper); leaves 3 in a whorl 
mucronate spreading or imbricated longer than the berry. E. Bot. 

t. 1100. E.Fl.v. iv.p. 25 1 (3. nana, small, procumbent. J. nana, 

Willd E. FI. v. iv. p. 252. 

Woods and heaths, frequent.— /3. abundant in the mountains of Wales, 
Scotland, and Ireland, and on low ground in the northern parts. FI. 
May. , — a shrub, extremely variable in size, bearing numerous, linear, 
mucronate and pungent leaves • Flowers axillary, small. The berries, 
which are bluish-black, form an important article of commerce in Hol- 
land, where they are employed in the distillation of Geneva, and impart 
to it that peculiar flavour which our distillers try to imitate by oil ot 
turpentine. The wood is reddish and serves for veneering.— The Juniper 
is the badge of the Clan Murray. 

14. Taxus. Linn. Yew. 

1 . T. baccata, Linn. ( common Yew) ; leaves 2-ranked crowded 
linear acute, flowers axillary sessile. E. Bot. t. 746. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 253. 

Mountain woods. FI. March. Tj . — A low tree, but with a trunk 
often of considerable diameter. The noble yew which still remains m 
Fortingal Church-yard at the entrance to Glen Lyon, measures accord- 
ing to Pennant, 564 feet in circumference. It is the badge of the Clan 
Fraser. The wood “is hard, beautifully veined, much valued for Cabinet- 
makers’ work, and was formerly still more highly prized tor making bows, 
and on that account is said to have been planted extensively by our 
ancestors, in church-yards. Leaves distichous, linear, persistent, deep 
green. Drupes red, esteemed poisonous. The Irish, or Florence-court 
Yew, now generally known in our gardens, has scattered leaves, and as 
Mr. J. T. Mackay observes, a different habit from the common kind, 
and is deserving of more accurate investigation. It is 1 . fastigiata ot 
Lindl. Syn .; but, if a species, is not wild in Britain. 


A trip I ex.] 


POLYGAMIA — MONOECIA. 


435 


CLASS XXIII. POLYGAMIA. 

Stamens and pistils on the same or different flowers and on 

the same or different plants , and having 2 different kinds 
. of Perianth. 

ORD. I. MONOECIA. Flowers different on the same plant. 

/ 

L Atriplex. Sterile fl. and united fl. (which too are mostly 
barren), perianth single, 5-partite, inferior. Siam. 5. Style bi- 
partite. — Pistilliferous fl. Perianth single, of 2, persistent, enlarged 
valves. Siam. 0. Fruit depressed, 1 -seeded, covered by the cal. 
— Nat. Ord. ChenopodejE, Juss. — Named from x, not, and 
to nourish. 

POLYGAMIA— MONOECIA. 

t 

1. Atriplex. Linn. Oraclie. 

1. A. portulacoides, Linn. ( shrubby Oraclie or Sea Purslane ); 
stem shrubby, leaves obovato- lanceolate entire silvery white. E.Bot. 
t. 261. E. Fl. v. iv.p. 256. 

Muddy sea-shores, England and Ireland. Near Helensburgh, Scot- 
land. FL July, Aug. Tj .— 1 — 2 ft. and more high, with small, yellowish 
flowers in axillary spikes. 

2. A. lacinidtci, Linn, (frosted Sea Orciche) ; stem herbaceous 
spreading, leaves ovato-deltoid dentato-sinuate very mealy beneath. 
E. Bot. 1. 165. E. Fl. v. iv. p. 257. 

Sandy sea-shores, not uncommon. Fl. July, Aug. ©. — Whole plant 
hoary. Flowers: sterile ones in terminal spikes ; the others axillary, 
nearly solitary. ’ 

3. A. patula, Linn, (spreading Halberd. leaved Oraclie ); stem 
herbaceous spreading, leaves triangular-hastate glabrous above irre- 
gularly toothed, the upper ones entire, perianth of the fruit more or 
less tuberculated at the sides. E.Bot. t. 936. E. Fl. v. iv.p. 257. 

Cultivated and waste ground, and in salt-marshes. Fl. July. ©.— 
Stems straggling ; branches long, striated. Flowers in small clusters, in 
long, interrupted, axillary spikes. 

4. A. angustifolia, Sm. (spreading narrow-leaved Oraclie); 
“ s ^ em herbaceous spreading, leaves lanceolate entire the lower ones 
paitly 3-lobed, calyx of the fruit halberd-shaped slightly warty at 
the sides. Sm. — E. Bot. t. 1774. E. Fl. v. iv. p. 258. 

Cultivated and waste ground. Fl. July. ©. — This seems to be but a 
narrow-leaved var. of the preceding. 

5. A. erecta, Huds. (upright Spear-leaved Oraclie); “ stem her- 
baceous erect, leaves ovato-lanceolate lower ones sinuated, calyx of 


436 CRYPTOGAM I A — FILICES. [Polypodium. 

the fruit all over armed with sharp tubercles.” Sin. — E . Eut. 
t. 2223. E. FI. v. iv. j>. 260. 

Waste ground, very rare. Near Battersea fields, (Sm.). FI. Aug. © . 
— Messrs. Mill and Cole , who find this plant in the same station, observe 
that it is covered with chrystalline glands, rather than with powder or 
scales, and that the cal. of the fruit is set with sharp, herbaceous points. 

6. A. littoralis, Linn. ( Grass-leaved Sea Orache) ; stem herba- 
ceous erect, leaves all linear entire or toothed, perianth of the fruit 
sinuated and muricated at the back. E. Bot. t. 708. h. FI. v. iv. 
p. 260. 

Muddy salt-marshes, chiefly on the east coast. FI. July. ©.—The 
under-side of the leaves and the flowers are mealy. The latter are in 
rather crowded, axillary and terminal spikes. 

7. A. pedunculata, Linn. ( stalked Sea Orache); stem herbaceous 
zigzag with spreading branches, leaves obovato-lanceolate, seed- 
bearing flowers cuneate 2-horned on long stalks. E.Bot. t. 232. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 261. — Diotis atriplicoides , 31. Bieb. 

On the east and south coast of England, in muddy salt-marshes. 
Cunnamara, Ireland; l)r. U'acle. FI. Aug. Sept. ©. — Whole plant 
covered with scaly mealiness; well distinguished from all the other 
species by its long peduncles and the peculiar shape of the seed-bearing 
perianth, especially w'hen the fruit is ripe. 

END OF THE PH/ENOGAMOUS OR FLOWERING PLANTS. 


CLASS XXIV. CRYPTOGAMIA {part of). 

Stamens and pistils not visible. 

OED. 1. FILICES. Ferns. 

Fructification only of one kind upon the same species. Cap- 
sules spiked or racemed, or generally collected into clusters of various 
shapes ( sori ) mostly upon the back or margin of the frond , naked 
or covered with an involucre ; with or without an elastic ring. 

Seeds minute Perennial plants, having leafy fronds ; with circinate 

aestivation ; in perfection during the greater part of the year, espe- 
cially the summer months. 

* Capsules 1 -celled, with an articulated, elastic, more or less com- 
plete ring, opening transversdy and irregularly. ( Po lypodi ace.e, 
Kauf). 

1. Grammitis. Sori oblong, sublinear, strait, scattered. In- 
volucre none. — Name ; — y.pvi, a line; from the lines of fi notifica- 
tions. 

2. Poly podium. Sori roundish. Involucre 0, — Named from 


CItYPTOGAMI A — I ILICES. 


437 


Cryptogram ma.~\ 


*o\v, many, and tb;, woJtxr, a foot ; from the numerous roots, or 
segments of the fronds. 

3. Woodsia. Sori scattered, roundish, having, beneath, an 
involucre which is cut at the edge into many, often capillary, seg- 
ments. — Named in compliment to Joseph Woods, Esq., author of 
an excellent Monograph of the British Roses, See. 

4. Aspidium. Sori roundish, scattered. Involucre orbicular, 
fixed by the centre, or orbiculari-reniform and fixed at the sinus. — 
Name, — strict, uftiSos, a shield, which its involucres resemble, 
especially those of the first division. 

5. Cistopteris. Sori roundish. Involucre inserted, by its 
broad cucullate base, at the underside of the sorus, opening by 
a lengthened free extremity, which points towards the apex of the 
frond. — Name compounded of xt<Srr\, a little box, and <irTegn, a Fern. — . 
I have taken a different view of the structure of the Involucre from 
that of Sir J. E. Smith, and I trust a correct one. Its texture is 
thin and delicate and altogether widely different from Aspidium. 
Species with the above character exist in N. and S. America, as 
well as in Europe. 

6. Asplemium. Sori oblong or linear. Involucres of the same 
shape, superficial, arising from the lateral veins and opening on one 
side longitudinally towards the central nerve or midrib. — Name, — a, 
out, and sirXrii/, the spleen, the plant having been supposed useful in 
removing obstruction of the viscera. 

7. Scolopendrium. Sori linear, transverse, on lateral nerves. 
Involucre double, occupying both sides of the sorus, superficial, 
opening, as it were, by a longitudinal suture. — Named from the 
lines of fructification resembling the feet of a Scolopendra. 

8. Pteris. Sori continuous, linear, marginal. Involucres formed 
of the inflexed margin of the frond,' frequently dilated into a mem- 
brane, opening internally. — Name, Tregtj, in Greek, a Fern ; from 
xn § v £, a jAume or feather. 

9. Cryptogramma. Sori linear or roundish, oblique, inserted 
upon the lateral nerves of the pinnule, at length confluent and thus 
appearing marginal. Common Involucre formed by the revolute 
margins of the pinnules, which in a young state meet at the back. 


1 This exists whether the fructification he present or not, and cannot therefore 
be deemed a true involucre, which Mr. T. Smith discovered to exist on the 
opposite side of the sorus, so narrow as to be soon concealed by tiie line of cap- 
sules in Pteris aquilina and its allied species: hence he conceives these might 
form a distinct genus, (see Mr. Smith’s Letter in Hook. Ft. .Scot. P. ii. p. 15(5, 
note); indeed with this view of the structure of its fructification, the genus does 
not ditfer from Lindscea. To me, however, the narrow involucre appears to be 
divided into a number of segments so deep as to constitute a series of scales. 


4.38 


CRYPTOGA M I A — I.Y COPODI ACE.E. [Lycopodium. 

Partial none. — Name; — x gUTrro;, concealed, and yov.ytj.ri-, a line; 
from the concealed lines of capsules. 

10. Bleciinum. Sori linear, longitudinal, contiguous, parallel, 
one on each side of the rib. Involucre superficial, continuous, 
opening interiorly. — Name, fiXrixw, another Greek name for a 
Fern. 

11. Adiantum. Sori oblong or roundish. Involucres mem- 
branaceous, arising from distinct portions of the margin of the 
frond, turned in, opening interiorly. — Name, xdixvro (, — that which 
is of a dry nature. 

12. Trichomanes. Sori marginal. Capsules upon an elon- 
gated receptacle, within a cylindrical, or suburceolate, monophyllous 
involucre which is of the same texture as the frond, opening above. 
— Name ; rotyj>g, a hair, and yxvtx, excess : from the hair-like, 
exserted receptacles of the sori. 

13. Hymenophyllum. Sori marginal. Capsules upon a nar- 
row receptacle, within a 2-valved involucre which is of the same 
texture as the frond, opening above. — Named from uyriv, a mem- 
brane, and fvXKov, a leaf ; an admirably characteristic appellation. 

** Capsules without an elastic jointed ring, spiked or racemose, 

regularly 2-valved. (Osmundacbje and Ophioglosseas, Br.') 

14. Osmunda. Capsides subglobose, pedicellate, clustered, 
striated, half 2-valved. Involucre none. — Name, probably given, 
as Sir J. E. Smith suggests, in honour of some person. Osmund, 
in Saxon, is said to mean domestic peace. 

15. Botrychium. Capsules subglobose, sessile, clustered at 
the margin and on one side of a pinnated rachis, 1 -celled, 2-valved, 
compressed, opening transversely. Involucre none. — Name ; — 
(3orgv;, a bunch of grapes ; from the appearance of the branched 
clusters of capsules. 

16. Ophioglossum. Capsules 1-celled, 2-valved, opening 
transversely, connate, so as to form a compact 2-ranked spike. In- 
volucre none. — Name, — oft;, of to;, a serpent, and y'Komx, a tongue, 
which the spike of fructification somewhat resembles. 

ORD. II. LYCOPODIACE.E. 

Fructifications sessile, in the axils of leaves or bracteas. Capsules 
without a ring, 2 — 3-valved. 

1. Lytopodium. Capsules 1-celled ; some 2-valved, including 
a fine powdery substance, others 3-valved, containing a few large 
grains or seeds. — Named from \uv.o;, a wolf and rrou;, vodo;, afoot, 
which the branches of some species are supposed to resemble. 


Polypodium .] 


CRYPTOGAMIA — FILICES. 


439 


ORD. III. MARSILEACEiE. Br. 

Capsules without a ring, within involucres that are near the root 
of the plant. — Aquatics. 

1. Isoetes. Involucres formed by the swollen base of the leaves, 

one-celled. Seeds angular, inserted upon many filiform recepta- 
cles Named from ico;, equal, and ero;, the year ; or ever- green. 

2. Pilulari a. Involucres solitary, nearly sessile, globose, cori- 
aceous, 4-celled: each cell containing 2 different kinds of bodies ; 
( anthers ? and pistils ?). — Name ; pilula, a little pill, which its 
fructifications resemble. 

ORD. IV. EQUISETACEiE. Rich. 

Fructifications terminal, in spikes or catkins, consisting of peltate, 
polygonous scales, on the under-side of which are from 4 — 7 
involucres, which open longitudinally and contain numerous glo- 
bose bodies, ( capsules ?) enfolded by 4 filaments, clubbed at 
their extremities, (which some take for stamens .) — Stems rigid, 
Icafiess, jointed, striated, the articulations sheathed at the base ; 
brandies, if any, mostly whorled, and as many will be found as 
there are strice upon the stem and teeth to the sheath, if the teeth 
do not continue more or less combined. 

1. Equisetum. Character of the genus the same as that of the 

Order Named from Equus, a horse , and seta, a hair, or bristle ; 

meaning horse-tail. 

CRYPTOGAMIA— FILICES. 

1. Grammitis. Sw. Grammitis. 

1. G. Ceterach, Sw. ( seedy Grammitis ); fronds pinnatifid cover- 
ed beneath with imbricated chaffy scales, segments ovate obtuse, 

scales entire. Hook. Scot. ii. p. 153 Scolopendrium Ceterach, 

E. Bot. t. 1244. E. FI. v. iv. p. 315. — Asplenium Ceterach, Linn. 

Rocks and walls, most abundant in limestone countries, and the 
south of England and Ireland : rare in Scotland. Near Perth. Dun- 
donald, near Paisley, I)r. Young. Carse of Gowrie, Mr. .las. Macnab. 
Mr. W. Wilson finds evident traces of an involucre on the lower side of 
the sorus, viz. “ a narrow membrane fringed with the same chaffy scales, 
which cover the back of the frond.” 

2. Polypodium. Linn. Polypody. 

1. P. vulgdre, Linn. ( common Polypody); fronds deeply pinna- 
tifid, the segments linear-lanceolate obtuse crenulate approximate, 
upper ones gradually smaller. E. Bot. t. 1 149. E. FI. v. iv. p. 280. 

Rocks, walls, trunks of trees and banks, frequent. — The lobes are 
sometimes deeply serrated and even pinnatifid or laciniated,as it has been 
found in Ireland and Wales, when it becomes the P. cambricum of Linn. 


440 


CRYPTOGAM I A FILICES. 


[ Aspidium . 


2. P. Phegopteris, Linn. ( pale Mountain Polypody); fronds 
hipiunatifid the two lowermost pinnae standing forward, their seg- 
ments linear-lanceolate o!>tuse entire ciliated, the lowermost ones 
adnato-decurrent, veins hairy, sori marginal. E. Bot. t. 2224. 

E. FI. v. iv. p. 282. 

Shaded rocky places, in mountainous countries. 

3. P. Dryopteris , Linn. ( tender three-branched Polypody); 
fronds ternate bipinnate, divisions patulous and deflexed, the seg- 
ments obtuse subcrenated, sori marginal, root-stock filiform. 
E. Bot. t. GIG. E. FI. v. iv. p. 282. 

Dry stony places, in mountainous countries. Common in Scotland. 

4. P. calcareum , Sm. (rigid three-branched Polypody); “ frond 
3-branched, branches doubly pinnate erect rather rigid, segments 
obtuse somewhat crenated, masses of capsules crowded finally con- 
fluent.” Sm. — E. Bot. t. 1525. E. Ft. v. iv. p. 283. 

Matlock baths, and other parts of Derbyshire, in broken limestone 
ground. Cheddar Cliffs, J\ Ir. Christy. — This, which I possess from Sir 
J. E. Smith, seems rather distinguished by its thicker and more rigid 
texture, than by any decided spec. char. 

3. Woodsia. Br. Woodsia. 

L W. ilvensis, Br. ( oblong Woodsia); fronds lanceolate pin- 
nate, pinnae deeply pinnatifid with many oblong segments chaffy 
beneath and on the rachis and stipes. E. FI. v. iv. p. 322. Hook, 
in E. Bot. Suppl. t. 2616 Acrostichum ilvense, Linn. 

Mountains, very rare. Wales, Mr. Lhwyd and il Ir. IV. Wilson. Near 
Caldron spout, Teesdale ; Mr. James Backhouse and Mr. Hailstone . — 
Plant small, 2 — 3 inches high. 

2. W. hyperbbrea, Br. (rounded-leaved Woodsia'); fronds lanceo- 
late pinnate, pinnae ovato-cordate inciso-pinnatifid hairy beneath, 
sori solitary at length confluent. Hook. Scot. ii. p. 153. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 323. — Polypodium liyperboreum , Siv — E. Bot. t. 2023. 

On Snowdon in Wales, and Ben Lawers in Scotland. — About the 
same size as the last, but quite distinct as a species. 

4. Aspidium. Siv. Shield-fern. 

* Involucre orbicular, fixed by the centre , hence peltate. 

(Aspidium, Br.) 

1. A. Lonchitis, Sw. ( rough alpine Shield-fern); fronds linear- 
lanceolate pinnate, pinnae lanceolato-falcate acute ciliato-serrate, 
the upper base acutely auricled the lower one cuneate, superior 
pinnae bearing the fructifications, stipes chaffy. Hook. Scot. ii. 
p. 153. E. FI. v. iv. p. 284. — Polypod. Lonch. Linn. — E. Bot. 
t. 797 . 

Shady clefts of rocks and under stones, on the high mountains of 
Wales and Scotland. — A very handsome northern Fern. 

2. A. lobdtum, Svv. ( close-leaved prickly Shield-fern'); fronds 


CRYPTOGAM I A — TILICES. 


441 


Aspidium.] 

oblong-lanceolate bipinnate, pinnules rigid convex ovate subiunate 
acuminate aristate oblique and cuneated at tbe base and decurrent, 
the margins faintly serrated spinulose, vvitii a distinct tooth at the 
base on the upper-side, the one next the main rachis longer than 
the rest, stipes and rachis more or less chaffy, fructifications con- 
fined to the upper half of the fronds. E. Dot. t. 1563. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 290 — A. aculeatum, Willd — Hook. Dr. FI. ed. 1 . p. 443. — 

1 3. lonchitidoides ; small, the pinnules combined so as to form only 
a pinnate frond. — Filix lonchitidi affinis, Rail Syn.ed. 3 . p. 121. 
— A. aculeatum, (3. E. FI. v. iv. p. 290. 

Moist woods, shady banks, and rocky places. 

3. A. aculeatum , Svv. (soft prickly Shield-fern'); fronds broadly 
lanceolate bipinnate, pinnules subrigid somewhat convex slightly 
petioled ovato-sublunate acuminate or acute aristate obliquely trun- 
cate and auricled at the base on the upper side, the one next the 
main rachis somewhat larger than the rest, the margins distinctly 
serrated and spinulose, stipes and rachis chaffy, fructifications 
copious. E. Dot. t. 1562, (bad.) E. FI. v. iv.p. 290, (excl. syn. 
var. /3.) 

Woods and hedge-banks in England. Lancashire? Mr. IV. Wilson. 
Abundant in a hedge-bank near Henfield, Mr. Borrer. 

4. A. angular e, Sm. and Willd. (angular-leaved Shield-fern ); 
fronds broadly lanceolate bipinnate, pinnules thin and membrana- 
ceous plane petioled ovate subiunate obtuse aristate obliquely 
truncate at the base with a large auricle on the upper side, the 
margins deeply serrated spinulose, the lowermost ones often deeply 
pinnatifid, that next the main rachis scarcely larger than the rest, 
(excepting in var. (3.), stipes and rachis very chaffy, fructifications 
copious. E. FI. v. iv. p. 291 — A. aculeatum, (3. FI. Dr. p. 1 122. 
— A. lobatum, Willd.? — Hook. Dr. FI. ed. 1 . p. 413. — /§. subtri- 
pinnate ; pinnules, especially the lower' ones, and that much larger 
one next the main rachis, distinctly pinnate. 

Woods and hedge-banks, frequent in England, as far north as York- 
shire, (Dr. Greville.) N. Wales, Mr. IV. Wilson. Mr. Bowman. Colin 
Glen, Belfast, Mr. T. Drummond.— /3. with the last. — Of this plant 
I possess specimens from Mr. Wigham of Norwich, who was so much in 
the habit of consulting Sir J. E. Smith, when any difficulty occurred in 
the naming of a species, that I have every reason to believe the present to 
be the plant so called in E. Flora. It is, too, what is generally considered 
A. aculeatum by British Botanists, and has hence only been placed in 
opposition to A. lobatum, Sm.; from which, at first sight, and in essential 
character, it does appear distinct ; but after a most careful examination 
of numerous specimens I am compelled to say, that there is a third kind, 
the A. aculeatum of E. FI., which does partake of the character of the 
other two, and which some refer to A. lobatum, and others as confidently 
to A. aculeatum. Hence, as it appears to me, they must all be united, or, 
as Smith has done, they must constitute 3. species. In Scotland the 

U 2 


44-2 CllYPTOGAMIA — FILICES. [. Aspidium . 

A. lobatum is very common, but I am not aware that the present species 
or variety is ever found. 

** Involucre orbiculari-r enif or m, fixed by the sinus. (Nephrodium, 

Rich. Br.) 

5. A. Oreopteris, Sw. ( Heath Shield-fern ); fronds pinnate, 
pinnae lanceolate pinnatifid glabrous resinoso-glandulose beneath, 
the segments lanceolate obtuse entire, lowermost ones longer, sori 
marginal. Hook. Scot. ii. p. 154. E. FI. v. iv.p. 286 — Polypo- 
dium Oreopteris, Ehrh — E. Bot. t. 1019. 

Mountainous countries, in heaths and dry pastures. Abundant in 
Scotland. 

6. A. Thelypteris, Sw. ( Marsh Shield-fern ); fronds pinnate, 
pinnae linear-lanceolate pinnatifid and as well as the rachis slightly 
pubescent, the segments ovate acute entire, sori marginal contiguous 
at length confluent. Hook. Scot. ii. p. 154. E. FI. v. iv.p. 285. 
— Polypodium Thelypteris, Linn — E- Bot. t. 1018. 

Marshy and boggy places. Root creeping. 

7. A. cristatum, Sw. (crested Shield-fern'); fronds linear-lanceo- 

late pinnate, pinnae cordato-attenuated deeply pinnatifid scarcely 
again pinnate, segments oblongo-ovate obtuse acutely and doubly 
serrated. E. Bot. t. 2125. Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 113 — 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 289 Polypodium cristatum, Linn. 

Boggy heaths, very rare. Only found, I believe, near Holt, Norfolk, 
Rev. R. B. Francis. Westleton, Suffolk, I). E. Davey, Es<j. A species 
most distinct, even in the outline of its frond, which is narrowed below, 
from any of the following. 

8. A. Filix mas, Sw. (male Shield fern); fronds bipinnate, pin- 
nules oblong obtuse serrated, sori near the central nerve, stipes and 
rachis chaffy. E. Bot. t. 1458, and t. 1949, (A. cristatum ) — 
Polypodium Filix mas , Linn. 

Woods and shady banks, frequent. — A beautiful, though very common 
fern ; 3 — 4 feet high ; its fronds growing in a circle. Mr. Wilson 
has observed it in N. Wales with a caudex rising more than 6 inches 
above the ground. 

9. A. ricjidum, Sw. ( rigid Shield -fern); fronds narrow-lanceo- 

late bipinnate, pinnules subcordato-oblong obtuse pinnatifido-ser- 
rate the segments subbidentate, the teeth mucronulate, stipes and 
rachis chaffy, fructifications in the upper half of the frond. Schkuhr, 
Fil. t. 38 A. spinulosum, y. Hook. Br. FI. ed. 1 . 

On Ingleborough, Yorkshire ; Rev. IV. T. Brcc. — This 1 had united 
with A. spinulosum in the first ed. of this work. But its narrower, less 
compound, more compact frond and pinnules, the lower ones of the latter 
scarcely more divided than the rest, will, I am now inclined to think, 
keep it distinct. 

10. A. spinulosum , Willd. ( prickly -toothed Shield fern); fronds 


Cistopteris.] 


CRYPTOGAMIA — FIUCES. 


443 


subtripinnate, pinnules oblong distinct inciso-pinnatifid, segments 
mucronato-serrate, stipes chaffy. A.dilatat. Hook. Scot. ii. p. 154. 

“• fronds triangulari-ovate, lower primary pinnae only once pinnate. 
A. spinulosum, E. Bot. t. 1460. E.Fl.v. iv. p. 292. — Polypod. spinulos.' 
Betz. 

/3. fronds triangulari-ovate, lower primary pinnae bipinnate, pinnules 
often convex. A. dilatation , Willd.—E. Bot. t. 14G1. E. FI. v. iv. p. 293. 
— Polypodium dilatation, Hoffm. 

y pinnules and segments very unequal in size and in their spinulose 
serratures, (a monstrosity?) 

Moist woods, Alder-cars, and shady and rocky places, abundant. — 
a. most frequent in rocky and subalpine countries. — (b. generally in moist 
woods. — y. Bingley Wood, near Halifax, Mr. W. Wilson. About Nor- 
wich, Mr. B. Wigham. Glen Falloch, Scotland. 

This is an extremely variable plant, it must be confessed ; but an atten- 
tive observer of nature will not find it difficult to trace the different 
states passing into each other. The texture of th e frond, too, is highly 
variable. It is the most compound of all our British Aspidia. In 
stony places on the Scottish mountains, especially the Breadalbane 
and Cairngorum ranges, the frond is almost ovate, but with nearly paral- 
lel sides, the whole compact in its ramification and loaded with fructi- 
fications. I fear the following species ought to be enumerated in 
the above list ; but not having seen authentic specimens, I prefer giving 
it in the words of Sir J. E. Smith. 

11. A . dumetornm, Sm. ( thicket Shield-fern); “ frond doubly 
pinnate, leaflets pinnatifid, lobes with terminal sharp prickly teeth, 
common stalk scaly, cover orbicular flat with a deep notch.” Sm. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 294 . 

Bushy, stony and rocky places, in the north. (Sm.) 

5. Cistopteris. Bernhardi. Bladder-fern. (Cystea, Sm.) 

1. C. dentdta, (toothed Bladder- Fern); fronds bipinnate, pinnae 
ovato-lanceolate, pinnules ovate obtuse bluntly and unequally 
toothed rarely pinnatifid, rachis winged. 

«. fronds oblongo-lanceolate. Cystea dentata, E. FI. v. iv. p. 300 

Aspidium dentation, Sw. — Hook. Scut. ii. p. 155. — Cyathea dentata, 
E. Bot. t. 1588 . — Polypodium dentation, Dicks. 

6. fronds oblongo-ovate. Cystea angustata, E. FI. v. iv. p. 301. — 
Polypodium rhceticum, Dicks. — Cyathea fragilis, (b. Sm. 

North of England and Wales, abundant. Scotland, Mr. Dickson. Ben 

1 It is but justice to my valued and accurate friend Mr. E. Forster to say, 
that he considers the A. spinulosum and itilatatum to be quite distinct, the for- 
mer being “ a much more elegant plant, with the pinnules more finely divided, 
fiat, the nerves deeply indented, visible therefore at a much greater distance: 
in A. dilatatum, the pinnules are always convex, or have a tendency to be so; 
and the nerves are much less conspicuous, not being so deeply indented. 

1 should not say ‘always convex,’ for in Cornwall 1 found a monstrous vur., 
where the pinnules appeared to be turned inside outwards; the upper surface 
concave, and vice versa.” This latter is accurately figured by Mr. ilree in the 
Hat. Hist. Mag. v. iv. p. 162. That gentleman finds it at Penzance and in 
Ireland; Mr. S. Murray in Arrau and other parts of Scotland. 


CRYPTOGAM I A — FILICES. 


414 


\Asplenium. 


Lawers. — This is certainly the most common Cistopteris in Wales, where 
it seems to hold the place that C, fragilis does in Scotland, and from 
which it may be distinct. I possess specimens of Cystea dentata and 
C. angustala from Mr. Dickson, and 1 can find no difference; except that 
the latter is a little broader in the frond than the former, and perhaps 
the pinnules are rather more divided, so as to approach nearer to the 
following species. This is the same as the Aspidium tcnue of American 
Botanists. 

2. C. fragilis, Bernh. ( brittle Bladder- Fern); fronds bipinnate, 
pinnae ovato-laneeolate, pinnules ovato-lanceolate deeply pinnatifid, 
segments ovate or lanceolate toothed, rachis winged. — Cystea fra- 
gilis, E. FI. v. iv. p. 298. — Aspidium fragile, Sw. — Hook. Scot, 
ii. p. 155. — Cyathea fragilis, E. Dot. t. 1587. 

Rocks anil walls, in the mountainous parts of Great Britain. Ched- 
dar, Somersetshire, Rev. Mr. Berkeley. Wall, at Albury, Surry ; Mr. 
J. S. Mill. Most abundant in Scotland. It will be seen that this princi- 
pally differs from the preceding, in its more divided pinnae and narrower 
segments. 

3. C. alpina, Desv. ( laciniated Bladder- Fern); fronds tripinnate, 
pinnules confluent ovato-oblong pinnatifid rather spreading, the 
segments broadly and shortly linear obtuse, with 2 or 3 blunt erect 
teeth, rachis winged. — Aspidium alpinum, Sw. Willd. — Polypo- 
dium alpinum, Jacq. Ic. v. Hi. t. 642, (excellent) — Cystea regia, 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 302, (excl. the alpine stations.) — Cyathea regia, 
Forst. — FI. Br. p. 1140. — Cyathea incisa, E. Bot. t. 163. 

On a wall (since destroyed) at Low Layton, Essex, plentiful ; Mr. 
T. F. Forster . — Having received authentic specimens of the Layton 
plant, from Mr. E. Forster, and compared them with continental ones, 
and with figures and descriptions of Aspidium alpinum, especially the 
plates of Jacquin and Schkuhr, I can, without hesitation, pronounce 
them to be identical. But I dare not introduce the Welsh, nor the 
Scotch station ; believing, as 1 do, that C. fragilis or dentata has there 
been mistaken for it. The species is most distinct, the fronds being more 
divided even than in the last, the divisions linear, with few and very 
blunt teeth. The fructification is exactly that of a Cistopteris. 

6. Asplenium. Linn. Spleenwort. 

1. A. septentrionale, Hull, ( forked Spleemvorl); fronds bipartite, 
segments linear acutely 3- toothed at the extremity. E. Bot. 
t. 1007. Hook, in FI. Loud. t. 162. E. FI. v. iv. p. 301. — Acros- 
tichum sept., Linn. 

Clefts of rocks, in mountainous parts of the north. Caernarvonshire, 
Mr. Lhwyd. Near Llyn y Cwm, N. Wales, Mr. IV. Wilson. On Ingle- 
borough and at Ambleside, ( E. FI.). Arthur’s seat, Edinburgh, plen- 
tiful. Stenton rock, Dunkeld, Mr. Arnott. 

2. A. altern folium, Wulf. ( alternate-leaved Spleemvorl); fronds 
pinnate, pinnae alternate lanceolato-cuneate toothed at the apex, 


CRYPTOGAM I A FIL1CES. 


Asplenium.'] 


445 


lower ones trifid and toothed, involucre entire. E. Bot. t. 2258. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 308 A. gertvanicum, Willd. 

Rocks, Scotland, very rare. Near Kelso, Mr. Dickson ; and near 
Perth, Mr. Bishop. 

3. A. Trichomanes, Linn. ( common Wall Spleenwort); fronds 
pinnate, pinnae roundish-oblong obtuse crenated truncato-cuneate at 
the base, (stipes and rachis black). E. Eat. t. 57G. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 305. 

Rocks and walls, common. 

4. A. viride, Huds. ( green Spleenwort ); fronds pinnated, pinnae 
roundish-ovate obtusely serrated cuneate at the base (rachis green). 
E. Bot. t. 2257. E. FI. v. iv. p. 306. 

Moist rocks, N. of England, Wales, and Scotland. Frequent in the 
Highlands. 

5. A. marinum , Linn. ( Sea Spleemvort); fronds pinnate, pinna* 
oblong obtuse inciso-serrate, the superior base rounded and sub- 
auriculated the inferior one truncated. E. Bot. t. 392. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 307. 

In clefts and caves of rocks on the sea-coast ; not unfrequent, espe- 
cially in the north. 

6. A. Ruta muraria , Linn. ( Wall-rue Spleenwort); fronds 
bipinnate especially below, pinnules obovato-cuneate lobed or blunt- 
ly toothed, involucre jagged at the margin. E. Bot.t. 150. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 309. 

Walls and fissures of rocks, frequent. 

7. A. lunceolatum , Huds. ( green lanceolate Spleenwort); fronds 
lanceolate and bipinnate, pinnules obovate attenuated at the base 
deeply and sharply serrated, those of the lower pinna} somewhat 
lobed, principal rachis not winged, sori at length confluent. E. Bot. 
t. 240. E. FI. v. iv. p. 311. 

Rocks, very rare; in the south of England. Jersey, Cornwall, Tonbridge; 
on Adderbury Church, Oxfordshire. Abundant at Penzance, Rev. J. S. 
Tozcr. — Very nearly allied to the following, but distinguishable by the 
abovementioned characters. 

8. A. Adiantum nigrum , Linn. ( black-stalked Spleenwort); 
fronds ovate or deltoid below tripinnate, pinnules ovatu-lanceolate 
inciso-pinnatifid toothed, principal rachis winged, sori at length 
confluent. E. Bot. t. 1950. E. FI. v. iv. p. 310. 

Banks and fissures of rocks, common.— Stipes purplish-black, as in 
the preceding species. A ear., with linear pinnules, is found by Mr. VV. 
Wilson in Ireland. 


9. A. Filix feemina, Bernh. ( female Spleen-wort ); fronds broadly 
lanceolate bipinnate, pinnules linear-oblong acute often drooping 
inciso-serrate, serratures bi-tridentate acute, lower one at the upper 


446 


CRYPTOGAMIA — FILICES. [Cryptogramma. 

margin large auricled, sori oblong at length arched at the base 

Athyrium Filix foemina, Roth. — Aspidium Filix focmina, Siv . — 

E. Bot. t. 1459, (not good). E. FI. v. iv. p. 295 Polypod. 

Filix form. Linn. — / 3 . smaller. Aspidium irriguum, E. Bot. t. 2199. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 296. 

Moist shady places, abundant. — I have seen Sir J. E. Smith’s speci- 
men of Aspidium irriguum, which I fear can only be considered a dwarf 
state of the Filix focmina. 

10. A .fontanum, Br. ( smooth Rock Spleemvort); fronds linear- 
lanceolate bipinnate, pinnules obovato- cuneate (small) with few 
large deep and sharp teeth, principal and partial rachis winged 

throughout. E.Fl.v.iv.p. 312 Aspidium fontan. Siv. Willd. 

— E. Bot. t. 2024. — A. Halleri, Willd. — Polypod. fontan. Willd. 

Walls and rocks, very rare. On Amersham or Agmondesham church, 
Bucks ; Mr. Bradney. Stony-place Wybourn, Westmoreland, or Wi- 
born, Cumberland; Hudson. A very distinct and handsome little sp. 

7. Scolopendrium. Sm. Ilart’s-Tougue. 

1. S. vulgdre, Sym. ( common Hart' s-tongue); fronds simple 
oblongo-ligulate acute heart-shaped at the base, stipes scaly. 

E. Bot. t. 1 1 50. E. FI. v. iv. p. 3 1 4 .S', officinarum, Sw . — 

Willd. — Asplenium Scolopendrium , Linn. 

Shady banks, rocky or stony places, in cold and damp situations. — 
In the moat at Kenilworth Castle, I have gathered this handsome fern 
more than 2 feet long. 

8. Pteris. Linn. Brake. 

1. P. aquilina, Linn, (common Brahe); fronds tripartite, 
branches bipinnate, pinnules linear-lanceolate, superior undivided 
inferior pinnatifid, the segments oblong obtuse. E.Bot.t. 1679. 
E. FI. v. iv.p. 318. 

Woods, heaths and stony or sandy soils; abundant. This is the favourite 
haunt of the Deer; — “ The wild Buck bells from ferny brake.” 

It is employed for thatching houses, and as litter for cattle. The ashes are 
useful in the manufacture of soap and glass. Its astringent quality has 
recommended it for dressing and preparing Kid and Chamois leather, 
and the country people in Scotland employ it medicinally as a vermi- 
fuge. — The Brake or Bracken is the badge of the Clan Robertson. 

9. Cryptogramma. Br. Rock-brake. 

1. C. crispa, Br. ( curled Roch-brahc); sterile fronds bipinnate, 
pinnules bi-tripinnatifid, segments linear-oblong often bidentate at 
the extremity, fertile fronds bipinnate, tripinnate below, pinnules 

linear-oblong rather obtuse entire narrow at the base Pteris crispa, 

Linn — E. Bot. t. 1160. Hook. Scot. ii. p. 156. E. FI. v. iv. 
p. 319 — Allosorus, Kaulf. — Phoro/obus, Desv. 


Hymenoph yllu m.) CIIYI’TOGAMIA — F I L I C E S. 


447 


Among loose stones in mountainous countries in the north : more 
abundant in the north-west of England than in Scotland. — A very ele- 
gant Fern, properly distinguished by Mr. Brown from Pteris, differing 
as it does in habit, even more than in generic character. 

10. Blechnum. Linn. Hard-fern. 

1. B. boredle, S\v. ( northern Hard-Fern); sterile fronds pecti- 
nato-pinnatifid the segments lanceolate rather obtuse, fertile fronds 
pinnate, pinnae linear acuminate. E. Bot. t. 1 159. E. EL v. iv. 
p. 316. 

Woods and heaths, abundant; especially in a poor light soil. 

11. Adiantum. Linn. Maidenhair. 

1. A. Capillus Veneris , Linn. {True Maidenhair); frond bi- 
pinnate, pinnules thin membranaceous obovato-cuneate inciso-sub- 
lobate, segments of the fertile pinnules terminated by a linear-oblong 
sorus, sterile ones serrated. E. Bot. t. 320. E. EL v. iv. p. 321. 

Moist rocks and walls, especially near the sea; rare. Dripping rocks, 
near St. Ives; Rev. J. S. Tuzer. Barry island and Port Kirig, Glamor- 
gan, Mr. Lhwyd. South isles of Arran, Galloway, Ireland, Mr. Stone- 
street and Mr. J. T. Mackay. By the Carron, Kincardineshire, Prof. 
Beattie. — A most delicate and graceful Fern, very abundant in the south 
of Europe, where I have seen it lining the inside of wells with a tapestry 
of the tenderest green. 

12. Trichomanes. Linn. Bristle-fern. 

1. T. brevisetum, Br. ( short-styled Bristle- fern); fronds 3 — 4- 
pinnatifid glabrous, segments linear entire or bifid obtuse, involu- 
cres solitary in the axils of the upper segments margined cylindri- 
cal, the mouth scarcely 2-lipped shorter than the receptacle. 

E. FI. v. iv. p. 325 F. europceum , Sin. in Bees’ Cycl . — T. 

alatum, Hook, in FI. Loud. N. S.t. 53, (not Willd.) — T.pyxidi- 
ferum, Huds. — Hymenophyllum alatum, E.Bot.t. 1417. — Hymcn- 
ophyllum Tunbridgense , (3. Sin. FI. Brit. 

Wet rocks in mountainous countries, rare. Near Bingley, Yorkshire, 
Dr. Richardson. Powerscourt, and near the cascade at the foot of Turk 
mountain, Killarney; Mr. J. T. Mackay. Hermitage Glen, Wicklow ; 
J. Nuttall, Esc/. — This rare and beautiful Fern, as well as the species of 
the following Genus, have a habit very different from the rest of our 
Ferns and belong to a groupe which abounds in the tropics. Their fronds 
are membranous and elegantly reticulated ; and their depressed sessile 
capsules have jointed rings which completely surround them transversely, 
and they are fixed at a distance from the ring to the receptacle. 

13. Hymenophyllum. Sin. Filmy-fern. 

1. H. Tunbridgense, Sm. ( Tunbridge Filmy fern); fronds ten- 
der pinnate, pinnaj distichous vertical pinnatifid the segments 
linear undivided or bifid and as well as the axillary solitary subor- 


448 


CRY PTOGAMI A FILICES. 


\Botrychium. 

bicular compressed involucre spinuloso-serrate, racliis strongly 
winged. E. Dot . t. 162. Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. <.71. E. FI. 
v. iv. p. 327. 

Moist rocks among moss, in mountainous countries- First found at 
Tonbridge. Abundant in the north-west of England and in Wales and 
many parts of Ireland. Banks of the Clyde. — Habit tender and deli- 
cate. Pinna pointing in two opposite directions, flat and vertical, on 
the same plane with the winged rnchis. Involucres nearly orbicular, 
slightly swollen at the base, where the cluster of capsules is lodged, the 
rest compressed, especially at the margin of the valves. When dry, 
there is a degree of elasticity in the plant. 

2. H. Wilsoni, ( Scottish Filmy-fern); fronds rigid pinnate, 
pinnae recurved subunilateral pinnatifid the segments linear undi- 
vided or bifid spinuloso-serrate, involucres axillary solitary ovate 
inflated entire, rachis only slightly margined towards the extre- 
mity. Hook. Dr. FI. ed. 1. — Wils. in E. Dot. Suppl.t. 2686. 

Wet rocks. North of England and Wales. Abundant in the High- 
lands of Scotland and in many parts of Ireland. — More rigid, yet more 
coarsely reticulated than the last; quite different in its mode of growth, 
for all the pinna are strongly curved backwards, in a direction contrary 
to that of the fructification : the involucre is totally different, larger, 
browner, of a more rigid texture, truly ovate, each valve remarkably con- 
vex for its whole length, the edges only of the valves being applied to 
eac h other, and they are quite entire. 

14. Osmunda. Linn. Osmund-royal, or Flowering-Fern. 

1. O. regalis , Linn. ( common Osmund-royal); fronds bipinnate, 
pinnules oblong nearly entire the lower base somewhat auricled, 
the infet^or ones opposite, fertile panicle bipinnate occupying the 
extremity of the frond. E. Dot. t. 209. Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. 
t. 150. E. FI. v. iv. p. 327. 

Boggy places, wet margins of woods ; very frequent in the N T . W. of 
Scotland, and S. of Ireland; Mr. ./. T. Macing. — The noblest and 
most striking of our Ferns. Mr. Stewart Murray has measured a tuft 
of its fronds on the banks of the Clyde, which from the base, where they 
sprung from the ground, were 1 1 £ feet high. 

15. Botrychium. Siv. Moonwort. 

1. B. Lunaria, Sw. ( common Moonwort); frond pinnated soli- 
tary, pinnte lunate or subflabelliform crenate. Hook, in FI. Lond. 
N. S. t. 66. E. FI. v. iv. p. 328. — Osmunda Lun., Linn — E. Dot. 
<.318. 

Dry mountain pastures. — Varieties of this are found, with more than 
one frond upon a stalk and with the pinnules laciniated and even pinna- 
tifid. Captain Carmichael communicated specimens to me, which bore 
capsules on the margins of their lower pinnules. In Cheshire Mr. W. 
\\ ilson finds it with 3 stalks of fructification. 


449 


Lycopodium .] CRYPTOGAM I A — LYCOPODI ACEiE. 

16. Ophioglossum. Linn. Adder’s tongue. 

1. O. vulgatwn, Linn. ( common Adder s tongue); spike cau- 
line, frond ovate obtuse. E.Bot.t. 108. Hook, in FI. Lond. N.S. 
t. 78- E. FI. v. iv. p. 329. 

Moist pastures and in woods. 

CllYPTOGAMIA— LYCOPODI ACEiE. 

1. Lycopodium. Linn. Club-moss. 

1. L. clavalum, Linn. ( common Club-moss) ; spikes in pairs 
cylindrical stalked, their scales ovate acuminate eroso-dentate, stem 
creeping, branches ascending, leaves scattered incurved and hair- 
pointed. E. Bot. t. 224. E. FI. v. iv. p. 331. 

Heathy pastures, especially in mountainous countries. — The seeds are 
used to produce artificial lightning on the stage ; and the Poles make a 
decoction of the plant to cure persons afflicted with that terrible disease, 
the plica polonica. Stems many feet long. 

2. L. annotinum , Linn. ( interrupted Club-moss); spikes ob- 
longo-cylindrieal solitary sessile terminal, stem creeping, branches 
ascending dichotomous, branchlets simple, leaves in about 5 rows 
linear-lanceolate mucronate serrulate patent. E.Bot.t. 1727. E.Fl. 
v. iv.p. 331. 

Stony mountains of Caernarvonshire, Mr. Lhwyd. Llyn-y-Cwm r 
N. Wales, (very rare) Mr. IV. Wilson ; and in the Highlands of Scot- 
land; but by no means general. Not unfrequent on the Cairngorum 
range. 

3. L. inunddtum, Linn. (Marsh Club-moss); spikes terminal 
sessile leafy solitary, stem (short) creeping, branches simple few, 
leaves linear scattered acute curved upwards. E.Bot. t. 239. E. El. 
v. iv. p. 332. 

Moist heathy places ; but not very common. 

4. L. selaginoides, Linn. ( lesser alpine Club-moss) ; spikes ter- 
minal solitary sessile, stem creeping, branches few ascending 
simple, leaves scattered lanceolate subpatent ciliato-denticulate. 
E. Bot. t. 1148. E. FI. v. iv.p. 332. 

Boggy and springy spots, by the sides of mountains in the north ; not 
unfrequent. Esher Common, Surry, J. S . Mill, Esq. Sandy coast of 
Lancashire and Anglesea, Mr. IV. Wilson. 

5. L. alpinum, Linn. (Savin-leaved Club-moss) ; spikes terminal 
solitary sessile short cylindrical, stem prostrate, branches dichoto- 
mous and fascicled, leaves in 4 rows oblong convex acute op- 
pressed. E. Bot. t. 234. E. FI. v. iv. p. 335. 

On the more elevated mountains of the north, frequent. This plant 
is the badge of the Highland Clan Macrae. It is used in many coun- 
tries to dye woollen cloth of a yellow colour. 


450 CRYPTOGAMIA — EQUISETACEiE. [Equisctuni. 

G. L. Selago, Linn. ( Fir Club-moss) ; capsules in the axils of 
the common leaves (not spiked), stem dichotomously branched 
erect fastigiate, leaves in about 8 rows linear-lanceolate acuminate 
entire imbricated rigid. E. Bot. t. 233. E. FI. v. iv. p. 333. 

Heathy and stony soils, most abundant in mountainous countries. — 
Used in the Highlands, instead of alum, to fix colours in dyeing, and 
as an emetic or cathartic, but it operates violently. The Swedes use 
it to destroy lice on swine and other animals. 

CRYPTOGAMIA — MARSILEACEAL 
1. Isoetes. Linn. Quill-wort. 

I. L. lacustris, Linn. ( European Quill-tvort) ; leaves subulate 
bluntly 4-angular of 4 longitudinal internally jointed tubes. E. Bot. 
t. 1084. Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 131. E. FI. v. iv. p. 243. 

Bottoms of lakes in the north of England, Wales and Scotland. — A 
very singular aquatic ; its fructification being entirely concealed at the 
base of the cellular, subulate leaves. Mr. W. Wilson considers the fruc- 
tification to be of two kinds : — in one the contained granules are oval, 
pellucid, and without sutures; in the other, they are spherical and split- 
ting at the sutures into 4 portions (one portion hemispherical the other 
3 triangular) and they are rough on the surface. The same acute Bota- 
nist also finds 2 vars. in Wales : the one densely tufted with slender 
erect leaves, the other solitary and with broader leaves widely spreading. 
May not the former be the I. setacea of Bose ? 

2. Pilularia. Linn. Pill-wort. 

1. P. globulifera, Linn, (creeping Pillwort). E. Bot. t. 521. 
Hook, in FI. Lond. N. S. t. 83. E. FI. v. iv. p. 342. 

Margins of lakes and pools, and in places that are partially overflowed. 
Stems creeping, long and entangled. Leaves setaceous, erect, 2 or 3 
from one point, 4 — 5 inches long. Involucres at the base of the leaves, 
about the size of small peas, brown, downy on the outside. 

CRYPTOGAMIA — EQUISETACEAE. 

1. Equisetum. Linn. Horse-tail. 

* Fertile stems simple, succulent, brownish, appearing before the 

sterile ones and soon dying away, when the latter alone remain 

through the summer , with whorled branches. 

1. E. fluvidtile, Linn. ( great Water Horse-tail) ; sterile stems 
with very numerous (about 30) strire and nearly erect simple 
branches, stem cylindrical smoothish, sheaths with close small sub- 
ulate teeth, fertile stems (short) without branches clothed with 
ample loose sheaths having many subulate teeth. E. Bot. t. 2022. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 337. 

Muddy lakes, sides of rivers and pools, frequent. Fr. Apr.— The 
largest of all our species, its sterile stems or fronds being 3 — 4 feet high. 


451 


Equiselum.] CRYPT0GAM1A — EOUISETACE/E. 

2. E. Drummondii, (l>lunt- topped Horse-tail ) ; frond very ob- 
tuse at the extremity, sterile stem especially upwards scabrous 
with prominent points and about 20 stria;, teeth of the sheath ap- 
pressed, branches simple patent, fertile stem without branches its 
sheaths approximate oppressed with subulate teeth. Hr. HI. ed. 1. 

Scotland, rare ; banks of the Isla and Esk, in Forfarshire, extending 
up the vallies to their sources; Mr. T. Drummond. Fr. Apr. — Allied 
to the following species, but unquestionably distinct. Its colour is 
greener and less glaucous, its stems rougher, with closely set, raised 
points, its angles and branches much more numerous, and the whole bar- 
ren frond is singularly blunt (in its outline) at the extremity, by which 
it may at once be known from E. arvense. The sheaths, though paler 
at the base, have blacker and more prominent ribs upwards, and they 
are so close as to imbricate each other: their teeth also are more numer- 
ous when they separate into the proper number. 

3. E. arvense, Linn. ( Corn Horse-tail '); frond attenuated up- 
wards, sterile stem slightly scabrous with 12 — 14 furrows, teeth 
of the sheath lanceolato-subulate, branches simple erecto-patent, 
fertile stem without branches its sheaths remote loose. E. Hot. 
t. 2020. E. FI. v. iv. p. 337. 

Corn-fields and road-sides, frequent. Fr. Apr.; afterwards the sterile 
stems appear. 

** Fertile stems at length throwing out whorled branches, or bearing 

the fructifications at the same time with the ivhorled branches. 

4. E. sylvaticum, Linn, (branched Wood Horse-tail); sterile 
and fertile stems with about 12 furrows, branches compound 
whorled deflexed, sheaths lax with about 6 or 12 long mem- 
branaceous obtuse teeth. E. Bot.t. 1874. E. Fl.v. iv.p. 336. 

Moist woods, hedge-banks ; abundant in the north. Fr. Apr. May. 
— A graceful species, less rigid and more herbaceous than any of the 
following. Sterile plants pyramidal in their calkin ; fertile ones abrupt at 
the top, especially after the fructification has passed away. 

5. E. limosum, Linn. ( smooth naked Horse-tail;) stem smooth 
striated, striae about 16 — 18, teeth of the sheaths short rigid 
distinct, branches nearly erect simple often abortive, catkin terminal 
upon the stem. E . Hot. t. 929. E. FI. v. iv. p. 339. 

Marshy watery places and ditches, frequent. Fr. June, July. — Next 
in size to E.fiuviatile : agreeing, too, somewhat in habit ; but with fewer 
angles and teeth and fewer branches in a whorl ; and these latter often 
short and imperfect, or wanting ; differing, too, by the catkins being upon 
stems that are similar to the barren ones. 

6. E. palustre, Linn. ( Marsh Horse-tail); stem furrowed rough- 
ish with 7 or 8 angles, branches simple gradually shorter upwards 
(sometimes abortive), catkin terminal on the stem. E. Bot. t. 2021 . 

E. FI. v. iv.p. 339 j3. alpina ; much smaller, with 4 — 5 angles 

and teeth to the sheaths, upper branches abortive. 


452 


CRYPTOGAMIA — EQUISETACEJE. [Equuetum. 

Boggy soils, frequent. — fi. Boggy places near springs, on the higher 
parts of the Breadalbane mountains. Fr. June, July. 

*** Stems simple, or branched only at the base : fructifications 

terminal. 

7. E. hyemale , Linn, (rough Horse-tail ); stem throwing up 
simple branches only from the base scabrous furrowed rough, 
sheaths with about 14 very small obtuse often deciduous white 
teeth (black at the extremity), catkin terminal. E. Hot. t. 915. 
E. FI. v. iv. p. 339. 

Boggy woods; principally in the middle and north of England; in 
Scotland, and Ireland. Fr. July, Aug. — Most of the Horse-tails are 
more or less rough to the touch and their cuticle abounds in si/ex, or 
flinty earth ; so that they are admirably suited for the polishing of hard 
woods, ivory, brass, &c. This species, E. hyemale, is by far the best 
kind for such purposes, and is imported largely from Holland, under the 
name of Dutch Rushes. In Northumberland, Lightfoot tells us that the 
dairy-maids employ it to scour ami clean their milk-pails. 

8. E. variegatum, Schleich. ( variegated rough Horsetail); stems 
filiform rough branched only at the base with 4 — 8 furrows, 
sheaths with white membranaceous lanceolate teeth (black at their 
base), catkin terminal. E.Bot. t. 1 987. E. FI. v. iv. p. 340. 

Sandy sea-shores. Sands of Barrie, Mr. G. Dun. Southport, Lan- 
cashire; and Bootle, near Liverpool ; and at Mucruss, Ireland, growing 
in water, Mr. W. Wilson. Portmarnock sands, Ireland, Dr. Taylor. 
Fr. July, Aug. — The smallest of our species, usually decumbent, 6 — 8 
inches long, slender. At Mucruss, Mr. Wilson finds this plant growing 
in water and upright to thrice that size, with a stem smoother, about 
10-furrowed and more polished in the furrows, and the sheaths not so 
conspicuously or so constantly furnished with acuminated teeth or sum- 
mits as is usual in the ordinary state of the plant. 


APPENDIX; 

In which the Genera of the 452 preceding pages are arranged according to the 
NATURAL METHOD. 


The Appendix was destined to contain remarks upon many of the 
most important Natural Orders of British Plants : but this little volume 
having already attained a greater length than was originally proposed, 
these notices must be very brief indeed. — According to the method in 
question, the vegetable kingdom is divided into 3 primary groupes or 
Classes. 1. Acotyledones, 2. Moxocotyledones, 3. Dicotyledones. 

CLASS I. ACOTYLEDONES. Juss. (Cryptogamia. 1 Linn.) No 
evident flowers. Seeds or organs of reproduction without Embryo, con- 
sequently acotyledonous . — Vegetation. In all, except the Ferns, the struc- 
ture seems to be entirely cellular. The Ferns alone have tubular ves- 
sels among the cells, and hence approach the 2d Class. The Orders 
not being very numerous in this Class, are not subdivided. 

Ord. I. FUNGI. 

The lowest in the scale of vegetables, yet very variable in appearance; 
growing upon the ground, or parasitic on other vegetable substances ; 
rarely, if ever, aquatic, and scarcely ever green ; filamentous, gelatinous, 
corky, coriaceous, fleshy or membranaceous. In the larger sense of the 
word, the whole plant may be considered as fructification ; since, distinct 
from it, there is no true stem ; there are no branches ; no leaves. After 
being once dried, they do not revive by the application of moisture like 
the greater number of plants in this Class; and generally speaking, they 
are of very short duration, soon decaying, and frequently becoming putrid 
in decay. 

Div. I. Seeds internal. Sphjjria, &c. — Uredo. Of this genus there 
are two destructive species: 1. U. Segetum ; a black dust, residing 
within the fruit or glumes of grasses, especially of Wheat, Barley, and 
Oats ; thus destroying the kernel and doing vast injury to our crops, 
converting the part affected into a black powder, and known by the 
name of brand, dust-brand, smut, burnt-corn. This kind has no particular 
scent. — 2. U. Caries, DC.; a brownish-black dust, consisting of larger 
grains than the last, and filling the kernel itself of wheat, &c. with a fetid 
greasy powder. Far more injurious than the last, and not externally 
conspicuous, but causing the seed to swell, and thus to look diseased. 
In thrashing, the breaking of these grains affects the whole mass. This 
is known to farmers, as bolls, bladder- or pepper-brand, stinking-brand. 
Puccima ; P. gram inis, Pers.; forming long blackish-brown parallel lines 

' These will be treated at large in a separate volume, which is in considera- 
ble forwardness, and which may be considered as the 2d of the present, or as 
the 5th vol. of Sir J. E. Smith’s English Flora. 


454 


APPENDIX. NATURAL ORDERS. 


on the stem and leaves of the Grass-tribe. It constitutes the blight, mil- 
dew, and rust in corn. In the same groupe of Fungi are found the 
Mucors, or mould of cheese, &c. the Tubers or Truffles, and the curious 
genera Geastrum and Phallus. 

Div. II. Fleshy Fungi, bearing seeds externally. Amanita. — A. mus- 
caria , Pers. ; pileus orange-red or brown, at length nearly plane, the 
warts, gills and stipes white, stipes annulate. — Frequent in woods, 
where it is conspicuous by its bright colour. — Said to be poisonous. — 
Agaricus. — A. campestris, the true Mushroom ; distinguished by the 
purplish-brown colour of its gills, from many other species that are 
esteemed at our tables, and from many that are known to be poisonous. — 
Merulius cantharellus is abundantly eaten upon the continent, as well 
as in England. M. lachrymans produces the dry-rot in timber. Bole- 
tus fomentarius forms Amadou, or German tinder. Morchella esculenta 
is the Morell. Several species of Rhizomorpha insinuate themselves 
between the bark and wood of trees, and hasten the decay of the timber. 

Ord. II. LICHENES. 

Thallus (or frond) polymorphous, without root, perennial, abounding 
in excessively minute bodies for the purpose of propagation, either im- 
bedded in the substance or scattered upon its surface, or included in 
peculiar organs, which are considered the fruit or apothecia. The Li- 
chens have a closer affinity to the Fungi than to any other Order. Some- 
times they are formed of a simple, pulverulent crust or frond ; sometimes 
they are membranous, coriaceous, gelati nous, lobed and variously branched, 
at all times destitute of leaves. They present various colours, not unfre- 
quently tending to green. In this extensive Order we have many useful and 
curious plants. The species of the genus Gyropiiora constitute the Tripe 
de Roche of the Canadian Flunters. The genus Graphis, as its name 
implies, not inaptly resembles written characters in its fructification. 
Lecanora yields the Perelle, (L. Perel/us) of the French, and the Cud- 
bear, (L. tartarea); Roccella, the Archil (R. tinctoria), so important to 
the Dyer. Parmelia omplialodes, and P. snxalilis are used for the same 
purpose by the peasantry of Scotland. In Cenomyce, we have the Rein- 
Deer moss, as it is erroneously called, (C. rangiferina), and in Cetraria, 
the Iccland-moss, (C. islandica.) 

Ord. III. ALGiE. 

Vegetables, for the most part, aquatic, destitute of roots, or furnished 
only with a fibrous or scutate base, for the purpose of attachment, not of 
nourishment, whose fronds are either gelatinous, filamentose or coria- 
ceous, having, for fructification, seeds or sporides, either imbedded in 
tubercles, or processes arising from the frond, or immersed or more or 
less scattered on the surface. Many of them float in the water. They 
arc subpellucid, often beautifully cellular, their colour frequently green, 
brownish, bright-red or pink. After having been kept dry for a con- 
siderable length of time, they will revive by immersion in water : but 
that portion of the plant only imbibes the fluid which is covered by it. 

Div. I. Tremellineie, (gelatinous Algce); to which belongs the curi- 
ous Red Snout (Palmella nivalis ) of our arctic navigators, and which 
has been found in Scotland and the north of England. 


APPENDIX. — NATURAL ORDERS. 


455 


Div. II. Confervoide®, (distinctly jointed. Alga.) Here belong the 
extensive genus Conferva, the singular Oscillatori/e, which are 
found in fresh-water, and many others, such as Ceramium, Poly si* 
phonia, &c. peculiar to the sea. 

Div. III. Ui.voide.e, ( thin and membranous Alga.) These include the 
beautiful Zonaria pavonia and the genus Ui.va; ot which two or three 
species are eaten and known by the name ot Laver. 

Div. IV. Fucoide.e. This division comprises the rest of the Sea- 
weeds, as they are commonly called; such as Fucus nutans, so abundant 
in some seas as to impede the progress of vessels; F. nodosus, F. vesi- 
cu/osus, F. serratus, and F. loreus, of all which, kelp is made : Laminaria 
esculenta and saccliarina, frequently eaten upon our northern shores or 
in other countries : the genera Delesseria, Sph.erococcus, Ghon- 
dria, and Halymenia, which exhibit the most beautiful red and rose 
tints. In the latter genus are found H. edulis (pepper Dulse) and H. 
palmata (true Dulse). — Many, if not all the Fuel, contain iodine, in a 
state of hydriodate of Potash or Soda. 

Ord. IV. CHARACEiE. 

Fructification of 2 kinds. Capsules (?) axillary, solitary, sessile, oval, 
spirally twisted, invested with a pellucid membrane and crowned with 
5 lobes, containing very minute seeds and globules of a reddish or 
orange colour, surrounded by a pellucid covering, at length opening into 
3 or 4 valves, (8, Wils.) and containing a mass of very minute filaments. 
— Aquatic plants, with pellucid, filiform stems, which are sometimes 
coated with a calcareous crust, and whorled branches. The fruit ol this 
genus is often found fossilized in chalk, and known under the name of 
Gyrogonites. — This Order contains the genus Chara, which Sir J. E. 
Smith places in the Class Monandria ol the artificial arrangement. 

Ord. V. FIEPATICjE. 

Fructification mostly of 2 kinds ; consisting of very minute, rounded, 
reticulated bodies, often called anthers ; and capsules, in an early stage 
covered with a calyptra, and surrounded by a. perianth, at length bursting 
the calyptra irregularly and (usually) opening from the extremity into 
2 or more equal valves (without an operculum), one-celled, containing 
numerous seeds and spirally-twisted filaments. Minute plants, frondose 
or foliose ; mostly loosely cellular, reviving, when dried, by the applica- 
tion of moisture. In this Order, we have the extensive genus, Junger- 
mannia, and the highly curious one, Marchantia. 

Ord. VI. MUSCI. Mosses. 

Fructification of 2 kinds ; anthers, so called, concealed among leaves, 
and cajmdes, in an early stage, covered with a calyptra, which bursts 
transversely and regularly at the base, and rises up with the mostly 
pedunculated and operculated capsule. The operculum, or lid, is ideciduous 
in most instances. Mouth of the capsule naked or furnished with a single 
or double fringe or peristome ; containing seeds, surrounding a columella, 
(except in some Piiasca) enclosed in a seminal bag, destitute ot spiral 
filaments. Plants of small size, of a more or less compactly cellular 
structure, readily reviving by the application ot moisture after being dry. 


45G 


APrENDIX. — NATURAE ORDERS. 


bearing leaves which are very rarely, indeed, divided, often nerved, entire 
or toothed and serrated at the margin. 

Div. I. Destitute of Peristome. Andrea, Gymnostomum, &c. 

Div. II. Peristome single, of 4, 8, 16, 32, or 64 teeth . — Tetraphis, 
SPLACHNPM, POLYTRICHUM, DlCRANUM, &C. 

Div. III. Peristome double.— Funaria, Orthotrichum, Hypnum, 
Be yum, &c. 

Ord. VII. FILICES, see p. 439. 

Class II. MONOCOTYLEDONES. Juss. 

Embryo with 1 cotyledon or seed-lobe, which contains the 'plumule ; 
the opposite extremity including the radicle. Stems formed of cells, 
and tubular vessels, which are irregularly scattered, with no distinction 
of bark, wood, and pith; the oldest formation most external, the centre 
the softest. Leaves alternate, often sheathing, generally with parallel 
nerves. Flowers evident ; the parts of which they are composed mostly 
arranged in a ternary manner : the perianth very frequently single. 

DIV. I. Perianth inferior { sometimes wanting). 

Ord. I. Aroidee, (often poisonous, yet their roots afford an abundant 
fecula, which is used as food.) Arum. Acorus. 

Ord. II. Pisti ace/E. Lemna. 

Ord. III. Typhacee. Typha. Sparganium. 

Ord. IV. Alismace.e. Alisma. Actinocarpus. Sagittaria. Subord. 
Fluviales. Potamogeton. Zostera. Ruppia. Zannichellia. 

Ord. V- Cyperacee. Cladium. Cyperus, &c. p. 15. Elyna. Carex. 

Ord.VI. Graminee. {Glume calyx, L.) 1 — 2- or many-flowered, mostly 
of 2 valves, rarely of 1, or wanting. Perianth {corolla, L.) glumaceous, 
1 — 2-valved. St am. hypogynous. Anthers versatile. Ovary superior, 
with 1 ovule. Styles 2, rarely 1 or 3. Stigmas plumose. Fruit a caryop- 
sis or utricu/us. Embryo scutelliform, lateral, on the outside of the base 
of a farinaceous copious albumen. Plumule naked. Stems or culms fis- 
tulose, generally simple and herbaceous, jointed, sometimes branched, 
rarely shrubby. Leaves one to each joint, with a sheath slit longitudinally 
on one side, having a membranous appendage (ligule) at its summit. 
Flowers small, panicled or spiked. Br. (A most natural Order, and one of 
the highest importance in the whole vegetable kingdom, comprehending 
the true Grasses)- Anthoxanthum. Nardus. Alopecurus, &c. p. 16. 

Ord. VII. Restiace-e. Eriocaulon. 

Ord. VIII. J unci. Juncus. Luzula. Nartheeium. 

Ord. IX. Juncaginfje. Triglochin. Scheuchzeria. 

Ord. X. Butomee. Butomus. 

Ord. XI. Melanthace e. (The Colchicum is said to form a powerful 
ingredient in the Eau medicinale). Colchicum. Tofieldia. 

Ord. XII. Liliace-e. (This Order contains many important plants. 
The roots of some, as Onions, are esculent, and most of the bulbous 
roots abound in an acrid or bitter principle, whence they arc used me- 
dicinally, as the Squill of the shops. Aloes yield a very potent drug. 
Tulip-roots are eaten in Russia; and those of Scilla esculenta in great 


APPENDIX. NATURAL ORDERS. 


457 


quantities in North-West America, where they are called Quamash •) 
Allium, &c. p. 150. 

Ord. XIII. Smilaceye. Convallaria. Ruscus. Paris. 

Div. II. Perianth superior. 

Ord. XIV. Dioscoreye. Tamus. 

Ord. XV. Amaryllide.e. Narcissus. Galanthus. Leucojum. 

Ord. XVI. Irideye. (The stigmas of a Crocus, C. sativus, constitute 
Saffron. The roots of some species of Iris are purgative.) Iris. Trieho- 
nema. Crocus. 

Ord. XVII. Hydrociiaride.e. Hydrocharis. Stratiotes. 

Ord. XVIII. Orcuideye. Orchis, &c. p. 365. 

Class III. DICOT YLEDONES. 

Div. I. Perianth single or none. 

Ord. I. Conifers. (This and the next Order contain nearly all our 
Forest-trees'). Pinus. Juniperus. Taxus. 

Ord. II. Amentace-e. Subord. 1. Ulmace.e. Ulmus. — Subord. 2. 
Betuline.e. Betula. Alnus. — Subord. 3. Salicineye. Salix. Populus. 
— Subord. 4. Cupuliferye. Fagus. Castanea. Quercus. Corylus. 
Carpinus. 

Ord. III. Urticeye. (Affording hemp from some Nettles and from the 
Genus Cannabis ; a narcotic bitter from the Hop and Hemp ; esculents 
from the Bread-fruit and Fig, which latter also yields Caoutchouc and 
a nutritive milk from the Cow-tree, Galoctodendron utile, Humb.). Urtica. 
Parietaria. Humulus. 

Ord. IV. Euphorbiaceye. ( Anthers and pistils in distinct flowers, 
naked, or with a free, 3- or more (ACR. perianth. Barren fi. Stain. 1 — 12. 
Anthers didymous. Fertile Jl. Ovary 1. Styles 2 — 3. Stigmas 2 — 3, 
bipartite or 2-lobed. Capsule elastically opening into 2 — 3, 1- or 2-seeded 
cocci. Seeds suspended. Embryo in the axis of a fleshy albumen. Radicle 
superior. Cotyledons flat. — Stems herbaceous or woody. Leaves alternate, 
opyposite or whorled. — Acrid milky vegetables, yielding food and poison, 
medicine, dye, and Caoutchouc or India-rubber). Mercurialis. Euphor- 
bia. Ruscus. 

Ord. V. Empetreye. Empetrum. 

Ord. VI. Aristolochiye. Asarum. Aristolochia. 

Ord. VII. Eleagneye. Hippophae. 

Ord. VIII. SantalacejE. Thesium. 

Ord. IX. Thymeleye. (The inner bark of some species contains so 
much fibre as to constitute a hemp or paper.) Daphne. 

Ord. X. Polygone_e. (Seeds very farinaceous and esculent.) Poly- 
gonum. Rumex. Oxyria. 

Ord. XI. Chenopodeye. (All yield carbonate of soda, and hence 
Barilla. Beet-roots afford the very fine sugar that is now extensively 
manufactured in France.) Chenopodium. Atriplex. Beta. Salsola. 
Salicornia. 

Ord. XII. Sclerantiieye. Scleranthus. 


x 


458 


APPENDIX. NATURAL ORDERS. 


Okd. XIII. Asiaranthace.e. Amaranthus. 

Ord. XIV. PLANTAGiNEiE. Littorella. Plantago. 

D iv. II. Perianth double. 

Sect. I. Cor. monopetalous, hypogynous, ( not attached to the calyx.') 

Ord. XV. Plumbaginete. Statice. 

Ord. XVI. Primulacea:. Anagallis. Cyclamen. Lysimachia. Hot- 
tonia. Primula. Centunculus. Trientalis. Samolus. Glaux. 

Ord. XVII. Lentibularue. Utricularia. Pinguicula. 

Ord. XVIII. Verbenace^:. Verbena. 

Ord. XIX. Labiatte. {Cal. tubular. Cor. monopetalous, hypogynous, 
irregular. Stam. 4, mostly didynamous, 2 sometimes sterile or wanting. 
Style 1. Stigma 2-lobed- Achenia 4, enclosed in the calyx. Seed soli- 
tary, erect. Embryo erect. Albumen 0. — Leaves opposite. Stem square. 
Br. — An extensive and eminently natural Order, abounding in essential 
oils, camphor, and bitter extractive : many of the individuals are there- 
fore employed medicinally.) With 2 stamens; Lycopus and Salvia. 
With 4 didynamous stamens ; Mentha, &c. p. 267. 

Ord. XX. Scrophularineje, (including Melampyrace.e, Rich.) 
{Cal. persistent. Cor. monopetalous, hypogynous, generally irregu- 
lar, deciduous, with an imbricated aestivation. Stam. generally 4, didyna- 
mous, rarely equal, sometimes 2. Style 1. Stigma 2-lobed, rarely undi- 
vided. Caps, (very seldom a Berry) 2-celled, 2 — 4-valved ; the valves 
entire or bifid, with a dissepiment either double from the indexed margins 
of the valves, or simple, parallel and entire, or opposite and bipartite. 
Receptacle of the seeds central, united to the dissepiment, or eventually 
separating. Seeds few or numerous. Embryo straight, enclosed in the 
axis of a fleshy albumen. — Herbs {sometimes shrubs) usually uith opposite 
leaves. Br. — In this Order are many powerfully medicinal plants, as 
the Hedge-hyssop (Gratiola) the Foxglove, Ac.) With 2 stamens; 
Veronica. With 4 didynamous stam. Bartsia, Euphrasia, Rhinanthus, 
Melampyrum, Pedicularis, &c. p. 270. 

Ord. XXI. Orobanche.e. Orobanche. Lathraea. 

Ord. XXII. Solane/e. {Cal. 5- rarely 4- partite, persistent. Cor. 
monopetalous, hypogynous, its limb 5-cleft, equal or somewhat unequal, 
deciduous, with a plicate aestivation. Stam. inserted into the Cor., al- 
ternate with its segments and equalling them in number, 1 sometimes abor- 
tive. Ovary 1 — 2- or 4-celled, many-seeded. Style 1. Stigma obtuse, 
rarely lobed. Pericarp 1 — 2- or 4-celled; either a capsule, with a parallel 
double dissepiment, or a berry, with the receptacles united to the disse- 
piments. Seeds numerous. Embryo included in a fleshy albumen, more 
or less curved, often out of the axis. Radicle opposite the hi/um.— 
Herbs or shrubs. Leaves alternate, without stipules, sometimes opposite 
beneath the flowers. Br. — Linnaeus called this family Luridi, and fancied, 
that their lurid appearance indicated the dangerous properties common 
to many of them. They are acrid and narcotic, as the Deadly Nightshade , 
the Mandragora, Henbane, Thorn-Apple, Tobacco, dec. whilst the root ot 
one, when cooked, affords a most important article of food ; Potatoes : 
and the fruits of the Love-Apple, Winter-cherry, and Capsicum arc con- 


APPENDIX. NATURAL ORDERS. 


459 


diments.) We have in Britain, only Datura, Hyoscyamus, Solanum, 
Atropa, and Verbascum. 

Oui). XXI II. Boraginm. (Cal. 5-rarely 4-) partite, persistent. 
,. BPog.vnous, monopetalous, most frequently regular, 5-cleft, some- 

V? les " c .* w,til imbricated aestivation. S/am. inserted into the cor., 
alternate with its segments, and equal to them in number, rarely more. 
Ovmy 4- partite, 4-seeded, or simple, 2— 4-celled. Ovules definite, pen- 
Uulous. Schema 4, apart or united at the base, or a 4-celled drupe, or a 
oeiTj/ with 2—4 nuts. Seeds without, or nearly without albumen. Radicle 
superior.— Herbs or Shrubs. Leaves alternate, without stipules, usual! a 
scabrous. Flowers frequently in \-sided, more or less compound spikes or 
racemes.— The Boragineee are mild, emollient and mucilaginous, some- 
times slightly bitter and narcotic. The roots of several species afford a 
red dye. Echmm, &c. p. 79. 

Ord. XXIV. Coxvolvulace.e, (which are acrid and purgative, yield- 
ing Scammony, Jalap, &c.; nevertheless the roots of the Batatas are 
abundantly eaten in the Tropics). Convolvulus, Cuscuta. 

Ord. XXV. Polemoniaceje. Polemonium. 

Ord. XXVI. Gentiane.e, (containing the most powerful of all vege- 
tal) e bitters). Exacum. Erythraea. Gentiana. Swertia. Chlora. Meny- 
anthes. Villarsia. J 

Ord XXVII. Apocyne.e, (abounding in a poisonous milky juice, to 
which belong the Strychnos Nux vomica, the famous Upas, the Tanghin, 
or Poison-tree of Madagascar; Asclepias vomitoria, &c. The Urceola 
elastwa produces Caoutchouc). Vinca. 

Ord. XX \ III. Oeeine.e. Fraxinus. Ligustrum. 

Ord. XXIX. Moxotrope.e. Pyrola. Monotropa. 

Ord. XXX. Ericineas. Erica. Calluna. Menziesia. Azalea. Ledum. 
Andromeda. Arbutus. 

Sec t. II. Cor. monopetalous, perigynous ( inserted upon the calyx). 

Subsect. I. Cor. monopetalous. 

Ord. XXXI. Vacciniee. Vaccinium. 

Ord. XXXII. Campanulaceje, (lactescent and bitter, as is the fol- 
lowing Order). Campanula. Phyteuma. 

Ord. XXXIII. Lobeliace.e. Lobelia. Jasione. 

cnt ( ; r R ”' XX Y [ Y’ CoMPOsI ™. (Cal. adherent with the ovary, the limb 
entne oi toothed or mostly expanded into a feathery pappus, which 

-r, ’ey j 111 !' " r j regular or irregular. St am. 5, syngenesious. 
i U J C , ’ Shea , thed b >' tIle tube of the anthers. Stigmas simple 
I, achemum. Seed erect, without albumen. Embryo 

straight. Radicle opposite the hilum.-Stems, in the British genera, 
herbaceous. Leaves opposite or alternate. Flowers capitate, inserted 
l\ ° a 1oa( receptacle and surrounded by an involucre.) Tbibe I. 
dcuoRACE.E, (bitter and narcotic, abounding in milky juice.) Trago- 
pogon, &c. p 334. Tribe 2. Cinarocepiialze. (bitter, and tonic). 
Aictium , Carduus, &c. p.335. Centaurea, p. 339.— Tribe 3. Corym- 
ui i uas, (aromatic, stimulant, containing bitter principle and essential oil. 
Eupatonum, &c. p. 336, and 337. Tanacetum, &c. p. 337. 


460 


APPENDIX. — NATURAL ORDERS. 


Ord. XXXV. DiPSACEiE. Dipsacus. Scabiosa. Knautia. 

Ord. XXXVI. Valeriane/e. Valeriana. Fedia. 

Ord. XXXVII. Rubiacejs, (a most important natural family; ot 
which those individuals with woody, shrubby stems, and opposite stipu- 
lated leaves, afford the true Cinchonas or Peruvian Bark ; toffee, Arc. 
These are confined to hot or warm climates; whereas we, in our 
country, possess only that groupe with herbaceous stems and whorled 
leaves yielding a dye in their roots, and called Stellate by L.nnmus ; 
thus characterized -.—Cal. adherent with the ovary, entire or toothed at 
the^nargin. regular, 4-5-lobed. Slam. 4-5, between the divisions 
of the cor. Ovary 1 . Style 2-partite or bifid. Stigma double. Pericarp 
2-cel led, 2- seeded. Embryo straight, imbedded m the ax,s of a ho ™ 
albumen. Radicle inferior. -Herbs with whorled leaves. Flowers axil- 
lary and terminal.) Rubia. Galium. Sherardia. Asperula. 

Ord. XXXVIII. Caprifoliace.e. Lonicera. Linnma. Viburnum. 
Sambucus. Hedera. Cornus. 

Ord. XXXIX. Lorantiie.e. Viscum. 

Subsect. II. Cor. polypetalous. 

Ord. XL. Umbeleieer.e. (Cal. adherent with the Ovaries, 5-toothed; 
teeth minute, often obsolete. Cor. of 5, often bifid « r ^cordate ^ 
sometimes very unequal, the outer ones the largest _ f T' ’ ! - k 
with the petals, inserted on the underside ot a thick fleshy disk, at 
the base of the styles. Styles 2. Stigmas capitate. Achema ~, com- 
bined attached to a central stalked receptacle separating when rip . 
Seed sol itary pendulous. Embryo minute, in the base ot a horny albu- 
men- mS pointing to the A,7uro.-Herbs. Leaves alternate, generally 

compound and embracing the stem with their "'"f s especiaU ^such 
in umbels —This Order includes many poisonous plants, especia j 
£ git watery places ; man, esculent ami aromat.c ones, usually such 
as inhabit dry situations.) llydrocotyle, &c. p. 85, 86. . 

Ord. XLI. Halorageje. Hippuris. Mynophyllum. Callitriche. 

Ord. XLII. Ceratopiiyllee. Ceratophyllum. 

Ord. XLIII. Onagrarieje. Epilobium. (Enothera. Isnardia. Circma. 
Ord. XLIV. Cucurbitace.e. Bryonia. 

Ord. XLV. Lythrarle. Lythrum. Peplis. 

Ord. XLVI. Saxifrage.*:. Saxifraga. Chrysosplemum. Adoxa. 

Ord. XLVII. Grossularue. Ribes. . . T11 . p , 

Ord. XLVIII. Paronychie. Corrigiola. Hermana. Illecebrum. 

lycarpon. 

Ord. XLIX. Tamariscinee. Tamarix. 

Ord. L. Cbassulace*. Tillaea. Cotyledon. Sempervivum. Sedum. 
Rhodiola. 

o' lD LH 1 RoIacef "( cIr+-5-lobed , free or adherent with the 

comWncJ 


APPENDIX. NATURAL ORDERS. 


461 


together, or making one with the calyx. Styles simple, generally from 
below the extremity of the ovary, distinct or combined. Seeds ascending 
or suspended, nearly without albumen. Embryo straight, with fleshy or 
foliaceous cotyledons. — Herbs or shrubs or trees, with alternate stipulated 
leaves. Stipules one on each side the base of the petiole. — The pulpy or 
fleshy fruits are esculent: the plant is often poisonous from prussic 
acid, with which many of the species abound. Laurel-water is ex- 
tracted, not from a true Laurel, but from Prunus Lauro-cerasus. The 
bitter Almond owes its flavour to the presence of that acid. Some pro- 
duce a gum : others are astringent. Roots of Tormentil yield a dye : 
others are febrifuges. The qualities residing in the species of this Order 
entitle it to a high rank among British plants. Subord. 1. Amygdaiale. 
Prunus, &c. p. 218 . — Subord. 2. Spir.eacea:. Spiraea. — Subord. 3. 
Dryade/e. Dryas. Geum. Rubus. Fragaria. Comarum. Potentilla. Tor- 
mentilla. Sibbaldia. Agrimonia. — Subord. 4. Sanguisorbe.e. Alchemilla. 
Sanguisorba. Poterium. — Subord. 5. Rose;e. Rosa. — Subord. 6. Po- 
BiACEiE. Mespilus. Crataegus. Cotoneaster. Pyrus. 

Ord. LIII. LeguminosjE. (Cal. inferior, 5-cleft, or 5-toothed. Cor. 
of 5 petals, papilionaceous. Slam. 10. monadelphous or diadelphous. 
Ovary 1 -cel led. Style and stigma 1. Legumen 2-valved, dehiscent, or 
indehiscent. Seeds with or without albumen, upon a marginal receptacle. 
Embryo with the radicle recurved upon the cotyledons, which are long and 
thick. — Herbs or shrubs. Leaves alternate, mostly compound and pinnated, 
with or without tendrils, stipuled. — They possess very various principles 
and properties, and many of the plants composing this Order are of the 
greatest service in the Arts, in Medicine, and domestic economy. Their 
 seeds afford food for man and various animals, their herbage for cattle.) 
Ulex, &c. p. 313. 

Ord. LIV. Rhamneje. (Fruit, of some, purgative, and affording dyes 
of the Jujube, nutritive : the bark of others is astringent.) Rhamnus. 

Ord. LV. Celastrinea:. Euonymus. Ilex. Staphylea. 

Sect. III. Cor. polypetalous, hypogynous. 

Ord. LVI. Hypericinea;. (Aromatic and resinous ; juice sometimes 
purgative.) Hypericum. 

Ord. LVII. Acerinea;. Acer. 

Ord. LVIII. Tiliacf.a:. Tilia. 

Ord. LIX. Malvacka:. ( Cal. 5-cleft, calyculate. Cor. of 5 petals, 
regular. St am. indefinite, monadelphous, often united with the petals at 
their base. Anthers reniform, 1-celled. Ovary 1. Styles single, or 
several combined. Stigmas several. Fruit of many cells and many 
valves, or of many capsules, which are dehiscent or indehiscent, inserted 
into a compact body, or placed in a whorl round the base of the style. 
Seed solitary, ascending. Albumen mucilaginous, not abundant. Embryo 
curved. Cotyledons foliaceous, plaited. — Herbs or shrubs, or trees. 
Leaves alternate, with stipules. Flowers axillary. — They abound in 
mucilage, especially the seeds. The stems and roots afford an excellent 
fibre.) Lavatera, Malva, Althaea. 

Ord. LX. Geraniacea:. Geranium. Erodium. 

Ord. LXI. Oxalideaj, (producing oxalic acid). Oxalis. 


462 


-APPKNDtX. — NATURAL ORD F I! S’. 


Okd. LXII. IiALSAMiNKiE. Impatiens. 

Ohd. LXIII. Line.k, (whose stems contain the fibres which constitute 
flax.) Linum. Radiola. 

Ord. LXIV. CaryophyllEjE. Buffonia. Moenchia. Sagina. Holos- 
teum. Saponaria, &c. p. 186. 

Ord. LXV. Elatinete. Elatine. 

OnD. LX VI. Frankeniacee. Frankettia. 

Ord. LXVII. Droseraceje. Drosera. Parnassia. 

Ord. LXVIII. Resedacee. Reseda. 

Ord. LXIX. Cistee. Helianthemum. 

Ord. LXX. Vioearie. Viola. (Roots powerfully emetic and yield- 
ing Ipecacuanha). 

Ord. LXXI. Polygale.e. Polygala. 

Ord. LXXII. Crucjferye. (Cal. of 4 leaves. Pet. 4. Slam. 6, 
tetradynamous, alternate with the petals ; 2 solitary, 4 in 2 pairs. Ovary 
and style 1, hypogynous glands at the base of the stamens. Peri- 
carp, (a pouch or pud,) 2-celled, 2-valved, many-seeded. Dissepiment 
parallel with the valves. Seeds on a marginal receptacle, without 
albumen. Radicle curved upwards towards the margins of the cotyle- 
dons (o =), or against the back of one of them (o ||), opposite to the 
hilum. — Herbs. Leaves alternate. Flowers in corymbs or racemes . — A 
most important Nat. Order, many of the plants which it includes being 
cultivated as esculent ; the cabbage, turnep, mustard, and cress of various 
kinds, horse-radish, &c. &c. They contain an essential oil, which ren- 
ders them stimulating, while their seeds yield a fine and mild oleaginous 
fluid ; as rape ; and they are antiscorbutic. The mustard-seed is used 
for sinapisms. Several kinds contain sulphur, and the basis of Ammonia, 
nitrogen). Cakile, &c. p. 290. 

Ord. LXXIII. Fumariace*. Fumaria. Corydalis. 

Ord. LXXIV. Papaveraceae. (Cal. of 2, deciduous leaves. Cor. 
of 4-8 petals. Stain, indefinite. Ovary 1. Stigma lobed. Capsule 
1 -celled, many-seeded. Seeds upon parietal receptacles, which form 
incomplete dissepiments. Embryo in the base of a fleshy albumen . — 
Herbaceous plants, with alternate leaves. — Opium is the product of these 
plants, which largely afford a milky, acrid and narcotic juice ; while the 
seeds of all, except Argcmone mexicana, are mild and oleaginous.) 
Papaver, &c. p. 258. 

Ord. LXXV. NYMPHiEACE.'E. Nymphaea. Nuphar. 

Ord. LXX VI. Berbcride.e. Epiinedium. 

Ord. LXXVII. Ranunc ui.ace.-e. (Cal. of mostly 5, rarely 3 or 6 
leaves. Pet. definite or indefinite, sometimes wanting. Anthers adnate, 
mostly reversed. Ovaries 1 or many, 1- or many-celled. Fruit con- 
sisting of several 1-seeded carpels , rarely a berry, sometimes follicled. 
Embryo strait, placed in the base of a horny albumen. — Herbaceous or 
shrubby. Leaves simple or divided, with more or less dilated stalls. Acrid 
and poisonous.) Actaea. Myosurus. Paeonia, &c. p. 264- Thalictrum. 
&c. p. 265. 


CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. 


[The Author has to express his regret that the Genus Ekyngium has by 
an accident been omitted in the body of the Work.] 

Page 86, after the Generic character of Sanicula, add 

48*. Eryngium:. Cal. of 5 teeth, leafy. Pet. erect, oblong, with long 
inflected points. Fruit subterete, obovate. Carpels covered with chaffy 
scales, without ridges or vittae. Seed semiterete. — Involucre of many leaves. 
Flowers upon a scaly receptacle, collected into a compact head. — Name, 
i^oyyiov of Dioscorides. 

48*. Eryngium. Linn. Eryngo. 

1. E. maritimum, Linn. ( Sea-Eryngo, Sea-Holly) ; radical leaves round- 
ish plaited spinous stalked, upper ones lobed palmated amplexicaul rigid, 
involucres longer than the heads, scales of the receptacle 3-cleft. E. Bot. 
t. 718. E- FI v   ii. p. 35. 

Sandy sea-shores, frequent. FI. July, Aug. If . — Whole plant very stiff 
and rigid, glaucous. Leaves and involucres beautifully veiny. Flowers blue, 
in dense heads, having at first sight more the appearance of a compound flower 
(of the Class Syngenesia) than of an umbelliferous Plant. The roots are 
well tasted, when candied, and they are considered stimulating and restora- 
tive, having been so employed in the days of Shakspeare. Linnoeus recom- 
mends the bleached shoots as a substitute for Asparagus. 

2. E. campestre, Linn. (Field Eryngo) ; radical leaves subternate, lobes 
pinnatitid, cauline ones bipinnatifid amplexicaul all with spinous teeth, invo- 
lucres lanceolate spinous, scales of the receptacle undivided. E. Bot. t. 57. 
E. FI. v- ii. p. 35. 

Very rare; and found, originally in Ray’s time, truly wild in England; 
near Plymouth, whence Mr. Banks of that place has sent me beautiful speci- 
mens. Near Daventry, Rev. Mr. Wood and Mr. Griffiths. Sandy fields, 
near Lismore, Waterford, Ireland, Mr. Drummond, (in Mackay’s Cat.) The 
Northumberland stations have originated probably in ballast. FI. July', 
Aug. If. 

Page 383, 1. 24, for “ Miss Craufurd,” read Miss Drysdale . — The Rev. 
Mr. Patrick in his Descr. of Indigenous Plants of Lanarkshire, observes 
that the Euphorbia Lathyris is now found apparently wild in several places 
about Hamilton. 








' 


' 

. 

' 






: •   





































ALPHABETICAL LATIN INDEX 


TO THE 

GENERIC AND SPECIFIC NAMES, THE SYNONYMS OF LINNJEUS AND OF 
SIR J. E. SMITH’S ENGLISH FLORA AND ENGLISH BOTANY. 



PAGE 


PAGE 


PAG U 

Acer, L. 

173 

Ajuga, L. 

267 

Anetlium Fceniculum , L. 

129 

Pseudo-platanus,L. 

175 

alpina, L. 

276 

Angelica, L. 

90 

campestre, L. 

175 

Chamrcpitys, Sm. . 

276 

Archangelica, L. 

131 

Aceras, Br. . 

366 

pyramidalis, L. 

276 

sylvestris, L. 

131 

anthropophora, Er. 

371 

reptans, L. 

275 

Anthem is, L. 

339 

ACHILLjEA, L. 

339 

Alchemilla, L. 

01 

arvensis, L. 

363 

Millefolium, L. 

361 

alpina, L. 

72 

Cotula, L. 

363 

Ptarmica, L. 

363 

arvensis, Sm. 

72 

maritima, L. 

302 

serrata, Retz? 

363 

vulgaris, L. 

71 

nobilis, L. 

362 

tomentosa, L. 

364 

Alisma, L. 

153 

tinctoria, L. 

363 

Acinos, Mcench, 

269 

Damasonium t L. 

171 

Antiiericlm, L. 

151 

vulgaris, Pers. 

280 

natans, L. 

171 

caUjcnlatum , L. 

170 

Aconitum, L. 

254 

Plantago, L. 

171 

serotinum, L. 

159 

Nap ell us, L. 

260 

ranunculoides, L. 

172 

Anthoxanthl m, L. 

4 

A coitus, L. 

152 

repens , Sm. 

172 

odoratum, L. 

13 

Calamus, L. 

160 

Allium, L. 

150 

A nth Rise us, Pers. . 

92 

Acrostichum ilvense , L. 

440 

Ampeloprasum, L. 

156 

Cerefolium, Koch, 

135 

sepfentrionale , L. 

446 

arenarium, L. 

156 

sylvestris, Koch, 

135 

Act.ea, L. 

253 

carinatum, L. 

156 

vulgaris, Pers. 

135 

spicata, L. 

257 

oleraceum, L. 

156 

AxthyLlis, L. 

313 

Actinocarpus, Br. 

153 

Schcenoprasum, L. 

157 

Vulneraria, L. 

318 

Damasonium, Br. 

171 

vineale, L. 

156 

Antirrhinum, L. 

271 

Adiantum, L. 

440 

ursinum, L. 

157 

Cymbalaria , L. 

285 

Capillus Veneris, L. 

447 

Alnus, Tourn. 

377 

El a tine ^ L. 

285 

Adonis, L. 

255 

glutinosa, Ga:rt. 

400 

Lin aria i L. 

286 

autumnalis, L. 

263 

Alopecurus, L. 

16 

majus, L.   

285 

Adoxa, L. 

174 

agrestis, L. 

32 

Orontium,L. 

285 

moschatellina, L. . 

183 

alpinus, Sm. 

32 

repens , L. 

280 

iEGOPODIUM, L. 

87 

bulbosus, L. 

32 

spuriilm , L. 

285 

Podagraria, L. 

126 

fulvus, Sm. 

33 

Apargia, Schreb. 

331 

iETHUSA, L. 

89 

geniculatus, L. 

33 

autumnalis, Willd. 

312 

Cynapium, L. 

129 

pratensis, L. 

32 

hirta , Sm. 

343 

Agrimonia, L. 

215 

Alsine media , L. 

203 

hispida, Willd. 

312 

Eupatoria, L. 

216 

Althaea, L. 

307 

Taraxaci, Willd. 

342 

Acrostemma, L. 

187 

hirsuta, L. 

312 

Aphanes arvensis , L. 

72 

Githago, L. 

2)0 

officinalis, L. 

311 

Apium, L. 

86 

Agrostis, L. 

17 

Alyssum marit'unum , Sm. 291) 

graveolens, L. 

124 

alba, L. 

38 

minimum , L. 

299 

Petrosclinum , L. 

125 

canina, L. 

36 

Amaranthus, L. 

378 

Aquilegia, L. 

254 

lit tor alls ^ Sm. 

35 

Blitum, L. 

401 

vulgaris, L. 

261 

minima , L. 

57 

Ammopiula, Host, 

17 

Arauis, I,. 

292 

panicea , Sm. 

35 

arundinacea, Host, 

29 

ciliata, Br. 

301 

setacea, Curt. 

37 

AnagalLiS, L. 

80 

hirsuta, Br. 

301 

Spica-venti, L. 

37 

arvensis, L. 

103 

hispida , Sm. 

301 

stolunifera , L. 

38 

ccerulea, Sm. 

103 

petra?a, DC. 

301 

vulgaris. With. 

38 

tenella, L. 

103 

stricta, Huds. 

301 

Aira, L. 

18 

Anciiusa, L. 

80 

t kalian a, L. 

301 

alpina, L 

39 

officinalis, L. . 

99 

Turrita, L. 

301 

aquatica , L. 

33 

sempervirens, L. 

99 

Arbutus, L. 

165 

ceespitosa, L. 

39 

Andromeda, L. 

185 

alpina, L. 

189 

canescens, L. 

40 

polifolia, L. . 

139 

Unedo, L. 

189 

caryophyllea, L. 

40 

Anemone, L. 

255 

Uva-ursi, L. 

190 

cristata, L. 

39 

apennina, L . 

263 

Arctium, L. 

333 

flexuosa, L. 

40 

nemorosa, L. 

202 

Bardaiia , Sm. 

349 

IceujgaUt, Sm. 

39 

Pulsatilla, L. 

262 

Lappa, L. 

319 

pra:»cox, L. 

40 

ranunculoides, I.. 

203 

Auenaria, L. . . 

186 


IIUUJ, I 

x 2 


I N DF.X 


466 



paue 


PAGO 


PAG It 

ciliata, L. 

206 

glvcyphyllus, L. 

323 

minor, L. 

47 

fastigiata, Sm. 

‘200 

hypoglottis, Ij. 

323 

B ROM US, L. 

19 

marina, CEd. 

207 

uralensis, DC. 

323 

arvensis, L. 

51 

peploides, L. 

205 

Athamanta Libanotis , L 

131 

asper, L. 

50 

rubella. Hook. 

200 

Me urn, L. 

130 

diandrus, Curt. 

50 

rubra, L. 

207 

Athanasia maritima , L. 

353 

erectus, Huds. 

52 

serpyllifolia, L. 

205 

Atriplex, L. 

435 

giganteus, Vill. 

50 

tenuifolia, L. 

200 

angustit'olia, Sm. 

435 

madritensis , L. 

50 

trinervis, L 

205 

erecta, Huds. 

435 

mollis, L. 

51 

verna, L. 

206 

laciniata, L. 

435 

multiflorns , Sm. 

51 

Aristolociiia, L. 

367 

littoralis, L. 

430 

pinnatus , L. 

56 

Clematitis, L. 

375 

patula, L. 

435 

racemosus, Ij. 

51 

Artemisia, L. 

337 

pedunculata, L. 

436 

secalinus, L. 

51 

Absinthium, L. 

354 

portulacoides, L. . 

435 

squarrosus, L. 

51 

campestris, L. 

354 

Atropa, L. 

81 

sterilis, L. 

50 

ccerulescens, L. 

354 

Belladonna, L. 

109 

sylvaticns , L. 

56 

galliea , Sm. 

354 

Avf.na, L. 

20 

trijlorus , L. 

50 

maritima, L. 

354 

alpina, Sm. 

52 

velutinus, Schrad. 

51 

vulgaris, L. 

351 

clatior , L. 

41 

Bryonia, L. 

378 

Aram, L. 

379 

fatua, L. 

52 

dioica, Jacq. 

401 

maculatum, L. 

403 

flavescens, L 

53 

Buffonia, Sauv. 

61 

Arundo, L. 

20 

planiculmis, Schrad. 

53 

annua, DC. 

73 

arenaria, Sm. 

31 

pratensis, L. 

52 

tenuifolia , Sm. 

73 

Calamagroslis , L. 

36 

pubescens, L. 

53 

Bunias Cakile , L. 

293 

epigejos , L. 

36 

strigosa, Schrad. 

52 

Bunium, Koch, 

88 

Phragmites, L. 

53 

Azalea, L. 

82 

flexuosum, With. 

127 

strict a, Sm. 

36 

procumbens, L. 

111 

Bulbocastanum , Hook. 

127 

Arriienatherum, Beauv. 13 



Buplf.urum, L. 

88 

avenaceum, Beauv. 

41 

Ballota, L. 

267 

Odontites, L. 

281 

Asa rum, L. 

215 

nigra, L. 

276 

rotundi folium, L. 

128 

europa?um, L. 

215 

Barra rea, Br. 

292 

tenuissimura, L. 

128 

Asparagus, L. 

151 

pra*cox, Br. 

302 

Butomus, L. 

IS! 

officinalis, L. 

159 

vulgaris, Br. 

302 

umbellatus, L. 

181 

Asperugo, L. 

80 

Bartsia, L. 

270 

Buxus, L. 

377 

procumbens, L. 

103 

alpina, L. 

282 

sempervirens,- L. 

400 

Asperula, L. 

60 

Odontites, Huds. 

292 



arvensis, L. 

69 

viscosa, L.* 

282 

Cakile, Ga?rt. 

290 

Cynanchica, L. 

69 

Bellis, L. 

338 

maritima, Willd. 

293 

odorata, L. 

08 

perennis, L. 

361 

Calamagrostis, Adans. 

17 

Aspidium, Sw. 

437 

Berberis, L. 

149 

epigejos, Both, 

36 

aculeatum, Sw. 

441 

vulgaris, L. 

153 

lanceolata, Both, 

36 

angulare, Willd. 

411 

Beta, L. 

94 

stricta, Lindl. 

36 

cristatum, Sw. 

4-12 

maritima, L. 

140 

Calamintha, INlcench, 

269 

dent at uni , Hook. 

413 

Betonica, L. 

268 

Nepeta, Pursh, 

2S0 

dilatation , Sm. 

413 

olficinalis, L. 

278 

officinalis, Mcench, 

280 

dumetorum, Sm. 

413 

Betula, L. 

380 

Callitriche, L. 

376 

Filix feemina , Sm. 

415 

alba, L. 

405 

ai/uatica, Sm. 

383 

Filix mas, Sw. 

412 

Ain us , L. 

400 

autunmalis, L. 

381 

fontanum, Sm. 

416 

nana, L. 

405 

autumnalis , Hook. 

384 

fragile. Hook, 

444 

Biuens, L. 

336 

pedunculata, DC. 

384 

irriguum , Sm. 

417 

cernua, L. 

353 

verna, L. 

383 

lobatum, Sw. 

410 

tripartita, L. 

353 

Calluna, Salisb. 

173 

Lone hit is, Sw. 

440 

Blech num, L. . 

440 

vulgaris, Salisb. 

177 

Oreopteris, Sw. 

412 

borcale, Sw. 

447 

Caltha, L. 

176 

regium , Hook. 

410 

Bi.vsmus, Panz. 

15 

palustris, L. 

2 56 

rigidum, Sw. 

412 

compressus, Panz. 

28 

radicans , Sm. 

266 

sninulosum, Willd. 

412 

rufus, Link, . 

28 

Cam elina, Crantr, . 

292 

Thelypteris, Sw. 

442 

Bon A(Jo, L. 

79 

sativa, Crantz, 

299 

Asplenium, L. 

437 

officinalis, L 

98 

Campanula, L. 

83 

Adiantuin nigrum, L. 

415 

Boukiiausia, Moencli, 

335 

glomerata, 1^. 

115 

alternifolium, Wulf. 

441 

feetida, DC. 

318 

hederacea, L. 

115 

Ce ter achy L. 

439 

Botryciiium, Sw. 

438 

hybrids, L. 

116 

Filix feemina, Bernh. 

445 

Lunaria, Sw. 

448 

latifolia, L. 

114 

l'ontanum, Br. 

416 

Bracii vponn m, Beauv. 

20 

patula, L 

111 

lanceolatum, Huds. 

115 

pinnatum, Beauv. 

56 

persicifolia, L. . 

111 

marinum, L. 

445 

sylvaticum, Beauv. 

56 

rapunculoides, L. 

115 

Ruta muraria, L. 

445 

Brassica, L. 

293 

Bapunculus, L. 

111 

Scolopcndrium , L. . 

446 

campestris, L. 

305 

rotundi folia, L. 

111 

septentrionale, Hull, 

111 

monensis, Br. 

305 

Trachelium, L. 

115 

Trichomancs, L. 

4 15 

Napus, L. 

305 

Capsella, DC. 

291 

viride, Huds. 

445 

oleracca, L. 

305 

Bursa- l’astoris, DC. 

291 

Aster, L. 

338 

oriental is, L. . 

301 

Carda.mine, L. 

292 

Tripoli am, L. 

359 

Rapa, L. 

305 

amara, L. 

300 

Astragalus, L. 

314 

Briza, L. 

19 

bellidifolia, L. 

301 

campestris , L)C. 

323 

media, L. 

46 

bidbifera , Br. 

300 


hastulata, Sm. 

PAUE 

301 

hirsuta, L. 

300 

impatiens, L. 

300 

pratensis, L. 

300 

Carduijs, L. 

330 

acanthoides, L. 

350 

acaulis , L. 

352 

enophorus , L. 

351 

heterophyllus , L. 

352 

lanceolatus , L. 

351 

Marianus, L. 

350 

nutans, L. 

350 

palustris. 

351 

tenuiflorus, Curt. 

350 

Carex, L. 

377 

acuta, L. 

397 

ampullacea, Good. 

398 

angusti/olia, Sm. 

399 

arenaria, L. 

380 

atrar^, L. 

393 

axillaris. Good. 

390 

binervds, Sm. . 

395 

ca?spitpsa, L. . 

390 

capillaris, L. . 

392 

clandestina, Good. 

390 

curta, Good. . 

388 

Davalliana, Sm. 

380 

depauperata, Good. 

391 

digitata, L. 

390 

dioica, L. 

380 

distans, L. 

391 

divisa, Huds. 

387 

divulsa, Good. 

387 

elongata, L. 

389 

extensa, Good. 

391 

filiformis, L. 

399 

flava, L. 

393 

fulva, Good. 

391 

hirta, L. 

398 

hordeiformis, Host 

399 

incurva, Lightf. 

380 

intermedia, Good. 

387 

laevigata, Sm. . 

398 

limosa, L. 

392 

Micheliana , Sm. 

396 

Mielichofcri, Willd. 

391 

Mielichoferi , Hook, 

392 

Tnontana , L. 

395 

muricata, L. . 

387 

tEderi, Ehrli. 

391 

ovali6. Good. 

389 

pallescens, L. 

393 

palud;sa. Good. 

397 

panic-’ a, L. 

396 

paniculata, L. 

388 

pauciflora, Lightf. 

386 

pendula, Huds. 

390 

l>ha?ostachya, Sm. 

392 

pilulifera, L. 
pra?cox, Jacq. 

395 

395 

Pseudo-Cyperus, L. 

393 

pulicaris, L. 

386 

pulla, Ciood. 

390 

rari flora, Sm. 

392 

recurva, Huds. 

390 

remota, L. 

389 

rigida, Good. 

390 

riparia, Curt. 

398 

secalina , Sm. 

390 

speirostachya, Sw. 

391 

stellulata, Good. 

388 

stictocarpa, Sm. 

399 

stricta, Good. 

397 

strigosa, Huds. 

391 

>ylvatifa, Huds. 

391 


INDEX. 

PAGR 


tenella, Scbk. . :<8l) 

teretiuscula, Good. 388 

tomentosa, L. . 395 

uliginosa , L. . . ‘28 

ustulata, Willd. . 393 

Vahlii, Schk. . 389 

vesicaria, L. . . 398 

vulpina, L. . . 387 

Car Lina, L. . . 336 

vulgaris, L. . 352 

Carpi nus, L. . 380 

Bet ulus, L. . . 405 

Carum, L. . . 88 

Carui, L. . . 126 

verticillatura, Koch 126 

Castanea, Tourn. . 380 

vulgaris, Lara. . 401 

Catabrosa, Beauv. . 18 

aquatica, Beauv. . 38 

Caucalis, L. . . 91 

Anthriscus , Sm. . 133 

daucoides, L. . 133 

infest a , Sm- . 134 

latifolia, L. . . 133 

nodosa , Sm. . 134 

Centaurea, L. . 339 

Calcitrapa, L. . 365 

Cyan us, L. . . 364 

Isnardi, L. . . 365 

Jacea, L. . . 364 

nigra, L. . . 364 

Scabiosa, L. . 364 

solstitialis, L. . 365 

Centunculus, L. . 60 

minimus, L. . 70 

Cerastium, L. . 187 

alpinum, L. . 213 

aquaticum, L. . 213 

arvense, L. . 213 

latifolium, L. . 213 

semidecandrum, L. 212 

' tetrandrum, Curt. 212 

viscosum, L. . 212 

vulgatum, L. . 211 

Ceratophyllum, L. 379 

demersum, L. . 402 

submersum, L. . 402 

Chasroph yllum, L 92 

aromaticum, L. . 136 

aureum, L. . . 135 

sativum , Sm. . 135 

sylvestre , L. . 135 

temulentum, L. . 136 

Cheirantiius, L. . 293 

Cheiri, L. . . 304 

fruticulosiis , L. . 301 

incamts , L. . . 304 

sinuatus , L. . 304 

ClI ELIDONIUM, L. . 253 

cornicvlatum, L. . 257 

Glaucium , L. . 257 

hybridum , . . 257 

majus, L. . . 257 

ClIERLERIA, L. . 186 

scdoides, L. . 207 

Chironia Centaurium , Sm. 107 

lit (oralis, Sm. . 108 

pule hell a, Sm. . 107 

Ciilora, L. . . 173 

perfoliata, L. . 175 

Chknopodium, L. . 91 

acutifolium , Sm. . 138 

album, L. . . 110 

Bonus Henricus, 1 . 139 

botryodeSj Sm. . 159 


fici folium, L. 

46T 

PAGE 

141 

fruticosum, Schrad. 

139 

glaucum, L. 

141 

hybridum, L. 

131 

maritimum, L. 

131 

mu rale, L. 

139 

olidum, Curt. 

132 

polyspermum, L. . 

131 

rubrum, L. 

138 

urbicum, L. 

138 

viridc , L. 

111 

Vulvaria , L. 

131 

Chrysanthemum, L. 

3:«i 

inodor um, L. 

300 

Loucanthemum, L. 

308 

segetum, L. 

300 

Chrysocoma, L. 

339 

Linosyris, L. 

358 

Ciiryso.splenium, L. 

189 

alternifolium, L. 

198 

oppositifolium, L. 

198 

Cichorium, L. 

339 

Intybus, L. 

340 

Cicuta, I . . 

83 

virosa, L. 

125 

Cineraria, L. 

330 

campestris, Retz 

300 

integrifolia , Sm. 

305 

palustris, L. 

300 

ClRCiEU, L. 

3 

alpina, L. 

11 

lutetiana, L. 

11 

Cistopteris, Bernh. 

437 

alpina, Desv. 

444 

dentata, Hook. 

443 

fragilis, Bernh. 

4-44 

Cist us anglicus , L. 

258 

guttatus , L. 

258 

Helianthemum , L. 

258 

ledijolius , L. 

258 

tnarifolius , Sm. 

258 

nil otic us, L. 

258 

po/ifolius , L. 

259 

surrejanus , L. 

258 

tomentosus , Sm. 

258 

Cladium, Schrad. 

4 

Mariscus, Br. 

13 

Clematis, L. 

255 

Vitalba, L. 

262 

Clinopodium, L. 

209 

vulgarc, L. 

280 

Clypeo/a maritima , L. 

299 

Cnicus, I,. 

336 

acaulis, Willd. 

352 

arvensis, Hoffm. 

350 

eriophorus, Willd. 

353 

Forsteri, Sm. 

351 

heterophyllus, Willd. 

352 

lanceolatus, Willd. 

351 

palustris, Willd. 

351 

pratensis, Willd. 

352 

tuberosus, Willd. . 

352 

Cnidium Silaus , Sm. . 

130 

Cochlea ui a, L. 

291 

anglica, L. . 

297 

Armoracia, L. 

297 

Coronopus , L. 

291 

danica, L. 

297 

grcenlandica, L. 

297 

officinalis, L. 

297 

Colchicum, L. 
autumnale, L. 

153 

171 

Coma rum, L. 

219 

palustre, L. 

250 

Comum,. L. . , 

93 


468 


INDEX 



PAGE 


PAGE 



PAGE 

macuJatum, L. 

130 

cceruleus , T,. 

42 

cajspitosa, Link, 


30 

Conopodium; Koch, 

126 

cristatus, L. 

47 

fluitans. Hook. 


30 

fiexuosum, Hook. 

120 

echinatus, L. 

47 

multicaulis, Sm. 


29 

Con V ALL ARIA, L. 

150 

CvpERqs, L. 

15 

palustris, Br. 


29 

majalis, L. 

153 

fuscus, L. 

20 

pauciflora, Link, 


30 

multiflora, L. 

155 

longus, L. . 

20 

Ely m us, L. 


20 

Polygonatum, L. 

155 

Cypripedium, L. 

307 

arenarius, L. 


51 

verticillata, L. 

155 

Calceplus, L. 

375 

cfijiinus, L. 


55 

Convolvulus, L. 

82 

Cystca angustata, Sm. 

443 

europa?us, L. 


54 

arvcnsis, L. . 

110 

dentata, Sm. 

413 

genicplatus. Curt. 


51 

sepium, L. 

110 

fragilis, Sm. 

444 

Elyna, Sch rad. 


377 

Soldanella, L. 

111 

regia , Sm. 

441 

car ic in a, M. & K. 


3SK) 

CONYZA, L. 

307 

Cytisus, L. 

313 

Empetrum, L. . 


400 

squarrosa, L. 

350 

scoparius, DC. 

319 

nigrum, L. 


431 

CORALLORHIZA, Hall. 

307 



Epilobium, L. 


171 

innata, Br. . 

375 

Dactvlis, I.. 

19 

alpinurn, L. 


180 

Com and rum, L. 

at 

glomerata, L. 

47 

alsinifolium, Vill. 


180 

sativum, L. 

110 

stricta, Sm. 

57 

angustifolium, L. 


179 

Corm s, L. 

00 

Daphne, L. 

171 

hirsutum,.L. 


179 

san guinea, L. . 

70 

Laureola, L. . 

180 

montanum, L. 


179 

succica, L. 

71 

Mezereum, L. 

180 

palustre, L. 


179 

Coronopus, Gairt. 

200 

Datura, L. 

81 

parviflorum, Schreb. 

179 

didyma, Sm. . 

20 1 

Stramonium, L. 

103 

roseum, Scbreb. 


179 

Ruellii, Sm. 

291 

Daucus, L. 

91 

tetragonum, L. 


179 

Corrigiola, L. 

95 

Carota, L. 

133 

Epimedium, L. 


on 

littoral is, L. 

m 

maritimus, With. . 

133 

alpinum, L. 


70 

CORYDALIS, DC. 

312 

Delphinium, L. 

251 

Epipactis, Br. . 


367 

claviculata, DC. 

315 

Con sol ilia, L. 

200 

ensifolia, Siv. 


374 

lutea, Lindl. 

315 

Dentaria, L. 

292 

grand i flora, Sm. 


374 

solida. Hook. 

315 

bulbifera, L. 

300 

latifolia, Sw. 


373 

CoRYLUS, L. 

380 

Diantiius, L. 

180 

palustris, Sw. 


374 

Avellana, L. . 

405 

Armeria, L. 

200 

purpurata, Sm. 


371 

Coton raster, Lindl. 

218 

ctesius, Sm. 

201 

rubra, Sw. 


374 

vulgaris, Lindl. 

221 

Caryophyllus, L. 

200 

Equisetum, L. 


437 

Cotyledon, L. 

ISO 

deltoides, L. 

200 

arvense, L. 


459 

utea, Huds. . 

203 

g/aucus, D. 

200 

Drummondii, Hook. 

451 

Umbilicus, Huds. 

207 

prolifer, L. 

200 

fluviatile, L. 


450 

Crambe, L. 

290 

Digitalis, L. 

271 

hyemale, L. 


451 

maritima, L. 

293 

purpurea, L. . 

287 

limosum, L. 


450 

Cr at.egus, L. 

218 

Digitaria, Scop. 

21 

palustre, L. 


150 

Aria , L. . 

222 

humifusa, Pers. 

5S 

sylvaticum, L. 


450 

oxvacantha, L. 

220 

sanguinalis, Scop. 

57 

variegatum, Schleich. 

451 

torminalis , L. 

222 

Dions, Desf. 

330 

Erica, L. . 


173 

Crepis, L. 

335 

maritima, Cass. 

353 

ciliaris, L. 


170 

biennis, L. 

318 

Dipsacus, L. 

59 

cinerea, L. 


170 

ft ctidci , L. 

348 

Fullonum, L. 

02 

Dabeoci, L. 


176 

pulchra , L. 

312 

pilosus, L. 

03 

mediterranea, L. 


170 

Rectorum, L. 

348 

sylvestris, JL. 

03 

Tetralix, L. . 


170 

Crithmum, L. . 

90 

Doronicum, L. 

383 

vagans, L. 


176 

maritimum, L. • 

131 

Pardalianches, L. 

301 

vulgaris, L. 


177 

Crocus, L. 

11 

plantagineum, L, 

301 

Erigeron, L. 


337 

aulumnalisy Sm. 

21 

Draba, L. 

291 

acris, L. 


350 

minimus, lied. 

21 

aizoidcs, L. 

298 

alpinus, L. 


357 

nudiflorus, Sm. 

25 

hirta, Sm. 

298 

canadensis, L. 


350 

reticulatus, Bieb. 

21 

incana, L. 

299 

unf/iorus, L. 


357 

sativus, L. 

21 

muralis, L. 

299 

Eriocaulon, L. 


37S 

vernus, Willd. 

21 

rupestris, Br. 

298 

septangulare, W ith. 

402 

Cryptogramma, Br. . 

43 

verna, I.. 

298 

Eriophorum, L. 


10 

crispa, Br. 

4-10 

Drosera, L. . 

96 

alpinum, L. 


30 

Cucubalus Behen , Sm. 

201 

anglica, Huds. 

118 

august i loll um, Roth, 

31 

Cuscuta, L. 

81 

lougifoiia, L. 

118 

capitatum, Host, 


31 

Epithymum, L. 

121 

rotundifolia, L. 

14.8 

gracile, Roth, 


31 

europaia, L. 

123 

Dryas, L. 

219 

polystachion, L. 


31 

Cyathea dentata , Sm. 

443 

octopetala, L. . 

253 

pubescens, Sm. 


31 

fragilis , Sm. 

411 



vaginatum, L. 


31 

*>ir/Stf,.Sm. . • 

l-IL 

Eciiinopiiora, L. 

93 

Erodii m, L’Hcrit. 


307 

regia , Sm. . * 

4-11 

spinosa, L. 

130 

cicutarium, Sm. 


908 

Cyclamen, L. . • 

80 

Echium, L. 

70 

maritimum, Sm. 


308 

hedersfolium, Willd. 

105 

vulgare, L. 

90 

mosehatum, Sm. 


308 

Cynodon, Rich. 

21 

Ei.ati.ne, L. 

171 

Ervum, L. , 


313 

Dactylon, Pcrs. 

57 

hexandra, DC. . 

183 

hirsutum, L. 


322 

Cynoglossum, L. 

80 

Hydropiper, L. 

181 

tetraspermum, L. 


322 

officinale, L. 

103 

tripetala, Sm. 

183 

Eryngium, L. 


135 

sylvaticum, Harnk. 

103 

Eleocuaris, Br. 

15 

campestre, L. . 


135 

Cynosurvs, L. . 

19 

acicularis, Hoem. 

30 

maritimum, L. 


135 


Erysimum, L. . 
AlUaria, L. 
Barbarea, L. 
cheiranthoides, L. 
Officinale, L. 
orientale, Br. 
prtzcox, Sm. 
Erythr.ea, Reneal. 
Centaurium, Pcrs. 
pulchella, Hook, 
littoralii,- Hook, 
latifolia, Sm. 
Euonymus, L. 

europa?us, L. 
Eupatorium, L. 

cannabinum, 
Euphorbiv, L. 
amygdaloidos, L. 
Cliaracias, L. 
Cyparissias, L.‘ 
Esula, L. 
exigua, L. 
helioscopia, L. 
hiberna, L. 
Lathyris, L. 
par aba, L. 

Peplis, L. 

Peplps, L. 
pilosa, Reich, 
plstvphylla, L. 
portlandica, L. 
strict a , L. 
syivatica, L. 
Euphrasia, L. 

officinalis, L. 
Exacum, L. 

filiforme, Sm. 
Fagus, L. . 
Castanca, L. 
svlvatica, L. 

Fedia, Valil, 
dentata, Vahl, 
olitoria, Vahl, 
eriocarpa, Rcem. 
mixta, Vahl, 
Festuca, L. 
bromoides, L. 
calamaria, Sm. 
ccvsia, Sm. 
decidua, Sm. 
dccumbens , L. 
duriuscula, L. 
elatior, L. 
gigantca, Sm. 
loliacea, Iluds. 
Myurus, L. 
ovina, L. 
pinnata , Sm. 
pratensis, Huds. 
rubra, L. 
syivatica , Sm. 
trifiora , Sm. 
uniglurnis, Soland 
yivipara , Sm. 
Filago galica, L. 

maritima , L. 
Fikmculum, Hcffm. 

vulgare, Ga?rt. 
Fragaria, L. 
calycina, Lois, 
elatior, Ehrh. 
ster'Uis , L. 
vesca, L. 

Fran ken i a, L. 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

292 

la? vis, L. 

301 

pulverulenta, L. 

302 

Fraxinus, L. 

301 

excelsior, L. 

303 

heterophylla , Sm. 

303 

Fritillaria, L. 

302 

Meleagris, L. 

81 

Fumaria, L. 

107 

caprcolata, L. 

107 

claviculata , L. 

107 

llltCUy L. 

103 

officinalis, L. 

83 

par vi flora, Lam. 

117 

336 

Gagea, Salisb. 

353 

lutea, Ker 

376 

Gala nth us, L. 

383 

nivalis, L. 

383 

Galeobdolon, Huds 

382 

luteum, Huds- 

382 

Galeopsis, L. 

383 

Ladanum, L. 

381 

Tetrahit, L. 

381 

versicolor, Curt. 

383 

villosa, Huds. 

382 

Galium, L. 

381 

anglicum, Sm. 

383 

Aparine. L. 

382 

aristatum, L. 

381 

boreale, L. 

382 

cinereum, All. 

3S1 

cruciatum, L. 

383 

diffusum, Hook. ? 

270 

erectum, Huds. 

282 

Mollugo, L. 

69 

palustre, L. 

68 

parisiense, L. 

3S0 

pusillum, L. 

404 

saccharatum, All. 

404 

saxatile, L. 

14 

spurium, L. 
tricorne, With. 

23 

uliginosum, L. 

23 

verrucosuviy Sm. 

24 

verum, L. 

23 

Wither nigh, Sm. 

19 

Gastridium, Beauv. 

49 

lendigerum, Beauv 

49 

Genista, L. 

48 

anglica, L. 

49 

pilosa, L. 

46 

scoparia , Hook. 

48 

tinctoria, L. 

50 

Gentiana, L. 

50 

acaulis, L. 

49 

Amarella, L. 

40 

campestris, L. 

48 

Centaurium , L. 

56 

filiformiSy L. 

49 

nivalis, L. 

48 

rncumonanthe, L 

56 

verna, L. 

50 

Geranium, L. 

49 

cicutariuni, L. 

48 

columbinum, 

357 

dissectum, L. 

353 

lucidum, L. 

89 

mariHinum, L. 

129 

molle, L. 

219 

moschatiwiy L. 

250 

nodosum, L. 

249 

pha?um, L. 

252 

pratense, L. 

219 

pyrenaicum, L. 

149 

pusillum, L. 


OAGJi 


4G9 

pa (in 

153 

robertianum, L. 

319 

153 

rotundifolium, L. . 

310 

4 

sanguincum, L. 

SOS 

12 

sylvaticum, L. 

309 

12 

Geum, L. 

219 

151 

rivale, L. 

252 

159 

urbauum, L. 

252 

312 

Glaucium, Tourn. 

253 

315 

luteum, Ij. 

257 

315 

phccniceum, Gfert. 

257 

315 

violaccum, Juss. 

257 

315 

Glaux, L. 

84 

316 

maritima, I,. 

121 


Gleciioma, L. 

269 

150 

hedcracea, L. 

279 

157 

Glyceria aquatica, Sm. 

43 

150 

distans , Sm. 

43 

154 

duitans , Sm. 

43 

268 

maritima , Sm. 

43 

277 

procumbens, Sm. 

44. 

268 

rigida, Sm. 

44 

277 

Gnaphalium, L. 

337 

277 

dioicum, L. 

354 

277 

gallicum, Huds. 

355 

277 

germanicum, Huds. 

3.56 

59 

luteo-album, L. 

355 

66 

margaritaceum, L. 

355 

67 

minimum, Sm. 

356 

66 

rectum, Sm. 

355 

67 

supinum, L 

355 

65 

sylvaticum, L. 
uliginosum, L. 

355 

64 

355 

65 

Goodyera, Br. 

366 

65 

repens, Br. 

372 

66 

Grammitis, S\v. 

436 

64 

Ceterach, Sw. 

439 

66 

Gymnadenia, Br. 

366 

66 

conopsea, Br. 

370 

66 

65 

Habenaria, Br. 

366 

67 

albida, Br. 

370 

67 

bifolia, Br. 

370 

65 

viridis, Br. 

370 

66 

Hedera, L. 

84 

64 

Helix, I, 

121 

61 

Hedypnois hirta , Sm. 

343 

17 

Hcdysarum Onobrychis, L. 3*24 

35 

Hrlianthemum, Tourn. 254 

313 

canum. Dun. 

258 

317 

guttatum, Mill. 

258 

317 

ledi folium, Willd. 

258 

318 

polifolium, Hook. 

259 

317 

vulgare, G[ert. 

258 

84 

Helleborus, L. 

255 

122 

feetidus, L. 

266 

123 

viridis, L. 

266 

123 

Helmintiiia, Juss. 

334 

107 

echioides, Ga?rt. 

340 

69 

Helosciadium, Koch, 

87 

123 

nodiflorum, Koch, 
repens, Koch, 
inundatum, Koch, 

125 

122 

125 

123 

126 

307 

Heracleum, L. 

yo 

308 

Sphondylium, L. 

132 

310 

Herminium, Br. 

366 

310 

monorchis, Br. 

371 

309 

Herniaria, L. 

94 

308 

glabra, L. 

141 

310 

hirsuta, L. 

141 

308 

Hesperis, L. 

293 

309 

inodora, L. 

305 

308 

matronalis, L. 

305 

309 

Hieracium, L. , 

335 

309 

alpinum, L. • 

313 

310 

amplcxicaulc, L. . 

346 


470 


INDKX. 



PAGE 


PAOE 


PAGE 

aurautiacum, L. 

Ml 1 

Ibebis, I,. 

291 

Scariola, L. 

341 

Auricula, L. 

314 

amara, 14. 

295 

virnsa, It 

311 

cerinthoides, L. 

316 

nudicauJis, Sm. 

295 

XjAcjurus, L. 

17 

denticulatum, Hook. 

340 

Ilex, L. 

01 

ovatus, L. 

35 

dubiurn, L. 

344 

Aquifolium, L. 

73 

Lamium, L. 

208 

Halleri, Vjll. 

343 

Illecf.brum, L. 

84 

album, L. 

277 

Hulleri , Hook. 

345 

verticillatum, L. 

122 

amplexicaule, L. 

278 

Lawsoni, Vill. 

344 

Impatikns, L. 

83 

incisum. Willd. 

278 

molle, Jacq. 

340 

Noli.me-tangere, L. 

119 maculatum, L. 

277 

muroruin, L. 

345 

Imperntoria OstruthiumJ,. 132 

purpureum, L. 

277 

paludosum, L. 

340 

Inula, L. 

338 

Lapsana, L. 

336 

Pilosella, L. 

344 

crithmoides , L. 

300 

communis, L. 

349 

prenanthoides, Vill. 

347 

dy sent erica i L. 

300 

minima , Hook. 

349 

pulmonarium, Sm. 

345 

Helenium, L. 

300 

pusilla, Willd. 

349 

sabauduin, Sm. 

347 

pulicaris , L. 

360 

LatiiRtEA, L. 

270 

sylvaticum, Sm. 

345 

Iris, L. 

14 

squamaria, L. 

284 

Taraxaci , L. 

342 

Pseud-acorus, L. 

25 

Latiiyrus, L. 

313 

umbellatum, L. 

347 

fcetidissima, L. 

25 

Aphaca, L. 

319 

villosum, Sm. 

343 

I SATIS, L. 

290 

hirsutus, L. 

319 

Hierochloe, Gmel. 

18 

tinctoria, L. 

294 

latifolius, L. 

320 

borealis, Rcem. 

42 

Isnardia, L. 

61 

Nissolia, L. 

319 

Hippocrepis, L. 

314 

palustris, L. 

72 

palustris, L. 

320 

comosa, L. 

324 

Isoetes, L. 

439 

pisiformis, L. 

320 

Hippopuae, L. 

407 

lacustris, L. 

450 

pratensis, E, 

319 

rhamnoides, L. 

431 

Ixia Bulbocodium , Sm. 

25 

sylvestris, L. 

319 

Hippuris, L. 

1 

Jasione, L. 

82 

Lavatera, L. 

307 

vulgaris, L. 

2 

montana, L. 

112 

arborea, L. 

311 

Holcus, L. 

18 

J UNCUS, L. 

152 

Ledum, L. 

185 

avenaceus , Sm. 

41 

acutiflorus, Ehrh. 

102 

palustre, L. 

189 

lanatus, L. 

41 

acutus, L. 

102 

Lemna, L. 

4 

mollis, L. 

41 

araticus , Hook. 

101 

gibba, L. 

13 

odoratus , L. 

42 

articulatuSy Sm. 

102 

minor, L. 

12 

HOLOSTEl M, L. 

22 

balticus, Willd. 

101 

polyrhiza, L. 

13 

umbellatum, L. 

58 

biglumis, L. 

165 

trisulca, L. 

12 

Hordeum, L. 

20 

bufonius, L. 

104 

Leontodon, L. 

334 

maritimum, With. 

55 

bulbosusy L. 

103 

autumnalCy L. 

343 

muripum, I>. 

54 

ca?npestris, L. 

100 

hirtuniy L. 

343 

pratense, Huds. 

55 

capitatus, Willd. 

105 

/ ispidumy L. 

312 

Hottonia, L. 

81 

castaneus, Sm. 

103 

palustre, Sm. 

342 

palustris, L. 

100 

ccenosus , Sm. 

103 

Taraxacum, L 

342 

Hum ulus, L. 

407 

compressus, Jacq. 

103 

Leonurus, L. 

268 

Lupulus, L. 

432 

conglomeratus, L. 

101 

Cardiaca, L. 

276 

Hutchinsia, Br. 

201 

effusus, L. 

160 

Lepidium, L. 

291 

petra?a, Br. 

295 

filiformis, L. 

161 

campestre, Br. 

296 

Hyacintiius, L. 

151 

Forsteriy Sm. 

106 

didymmtiy L. 

294 

non-scriptus, L. 

158 

Gesneriy Sm. , 

103 

l)raba, L. 

296 

racemosits, L. 

158 

glaucus, Sibth. 

160 

hir tumy Sm. 

296 

Hydrocharis, L. 

408 

graciliSy Sm. 

104 

latifolium, L. 

296 

Morsus Bana?, L. 

434 

lampocarpus, Ehrh. 

162 

petr.Tum, Sm. 

295 

Hydrocotyle, L. 

80 

maritimus, Sm. 

101 

ruderale, L. 

296 

vulgaris, L. 

124 

nigritcUuSy Sm. 

102 

Smithii, Hook. 

296 

Hymenophyllum, Sm. 

438 

obtusiHorus, Ehrh. 

102 

Leucojum, L. 

150 

alutum , Sm. 

447 

pilosi/Sy L. 

166 

a?stivum, 

154 

Tunbridgense, Sm. 

447 

potycephaluSy Hook. 

102 

Ligusticum, L. 

89 

Wilsoni, Hook. 

448 

squarrosps, L. 

164 

cornubiensey L. 

137 

Hyoscyamus, L. 

81 

subverlicillatuSy Sm. 

103 

Meaniy Hook. 

130 

niger, L. 

108 

syl vatic us , Sm. 

100 

scoticum, L. 

130 

Ilyoseris minima , L. 

319 

tenuis, Willd. 

104 

Ligustrum, L. 

3 

Hypericum, L. 

334 

trifidi^s, L. 

103 

vulgare, L. 

4 

A nd roscpmum, L. 

332 

trigluipis, L. 

105 

Limbarda, Adans. 

338 

barbatum, JacQ. 

333 

uliginosus, Sibth. 

102 

crithmoides, Hook. 

360 

calycinum, L. 

331 

Juniperus, L. 

408 

Limosella, L. 

271 

dubiurn, L. 

332 

communis, L. 

434 

aquatica, 

287 

elodes, L. 

333 

nanny Sm. 

434 

Lin aria, Juss. 

X 1 

hirsutum, L. 

3413 



Cymbalaria, Mill. 


humifusum, L. 

332 

Knappia, Sm. 

21 

Eiatine, Desf. 

285 

mon tan um, L. 

333 

agrostidea, Sm. 

57 

minor, Desf. 

280 

perforatum, L. 

332 

Knautia, E. 

59 

repens, Ait. 

280 

pulchrum, L. 

333 

arvensis, Coult. 

63 

spuria, Mill. 

285 

quadrangulum, L. 

332 

Kobresia caricinay Sm. 

399 

vulgaris, Mcench 

887 

HYPOCIU5RIS, L. 

335 

Koniga, A dans. 

292 

Lin n*:a, Gronov. 

272 

glabra, I,. 

348 

maritima, Br. 

299 

borealis, Gronov. 

283 

maculata, L. . 

348 



Ll.Nl M, I,. 

90 

radicata, L. 

318 

Lactuca, L. 

334 

angustifolium, Huds. 

117 



saligna, L. 

311 

catharticum, L. 

117 




INDEX. 



171 


PACE 


PAUE 


PAGE 

catharticum, L. 

117 

rotundifolia, I.. 

311 

Monotjiopa, L. 

18 4 

percnhe, L. 

147 

sylvestris, L. 

311 

Hypqpitys, L. 

187 

/i 'tidiela, 1 .. 

'70 

Maruuoium, L. 

269 

Montia, I ,. 

21 

usitatlssimum, L. 

117 

vulgare, I,. 

280 

fon tana, L. 

58 

Li Paris?. Hidh 

367 

Matricaria, L. 

339 

Muscari, Tourn. 

150 

Loeseli, Rich. 

375 

Chamomilla, h. , 

362 

racemosum, Mill. 

158 

Lister \, Br. 

3(57 

mar 'Uhnn , L. 

362 

Myagrum sativum , L. 

299 

cordata, Br 

373 

Part/ienium, L. 

362 

Myosotis, L. 

89 

Nidus- A vis, Hook. 

373 

Matthiola, 1!'-. 

293 

alpestris, Schmid. . 

190 

ovata, Br. 

373 

incana, Br. 

304 

arvensis, Hofiin. 

101 

Litiiospermum, L. 

71) 

sinuata, Br. . 

304 

arvensis , Sm. 

102 

arvense, L. , 

>17 

Meconopsis, Vig. 

253 

ca?spitosa, Schul. 

100 

maritimum, Lehm. 

1)7 

cambrica, \'ig. 

257 

collina, Hofiin. 

llll 

otticinale, L. 

>17 

Medicago, I.. 

314 

palustris, Kiph. 

99 

purpirro-coeruleum, L. 

>17 

denticulata, Willd. 

331 

sylvatica, Hoffin. . 

101 

Littorella, L. 

377 

falcata, L. 

330 

versicolor, Lehm. . 

102 

iacustris, L. 

400 

lapulina, L. 

330 

Myosurus, L. . 

96 

Lobelia, L. 

83 

maculata, Sibth. 

330 

minimus, L. 

149 

Dortmanna, L. 

113 

minima, L. 

331 

Mv rica, L. 

407 

urens, L. 

113 

muricata, All. 

330 

Calc, L. 

432 

Lolium, L. 

21 

sativa, L. 

330 

Myriophyllum, L. . 

379 

arvense, With. 

5(5 

Melissa Calamintha, L. 

280 

spicatum, L. . 

402 

perentie, L. 

5(5 

Nepela, I,. 

280 

verticillatum, L. 

403 

tcmulentura, L. 

57 

Melampyrum, L. 

270 

Myrrii is, Tourn. 

93 

Lomcera, L. 

83 

arvense, L. 

283 

aromatica , Sm. 

130 

Capri folium, L. 

11(5 

cristatum, Ij. 

283 

aurea , Sm. 

130 

Periclymenum, L. 

1 1G 

pratense, L. 

283 

odorata, Scop. 

132 

Xylosteum, L. 

117 

sylvaticum, Ij. 

284 

temulenta , Sm. 

130 

Lotus, L. 

314 

Melica, L. 

18 



angustissimus, L. 

329 

ccerulea, L. 

41 

Narcissus, L. 

150 

corniculatus, L. 

328 

nutans, L. 

40 

biflorus, Curt. 

155 

deprcssus , Sm. 

329 

uniflora, L. 

40 

poeticus, L. 

155 

dijfusuSt Sm. 

329 

Melilotus, Tnurn. 

314 

Pseudo-narcissus, L. 

154 

major, Scop. 

329 

leucantha, Koch, . 

324 

Nardus, L. 

16 

tenuis, W. & K. 

329 

officinalis, L. 

324 

stricta, L. 

32 

Luzula, DC. 

152 

Melittis, L. 

269 

Nartiiecium, Huds. 

151 

arcuata, Hook. 

lfifi 

grandiflora , Sm. 

281 

ossifragum, Huds. . 

159 

campestris, Br. 

166 

Melisophyllum, L. 

281 

Nasturtium, Br. 

292 

congest a, Sm. 

166 

Mentha, L. 

267 

amphibium, Br. 

303 

Forsteri, DC. 

166 

acutifolia, Sm. 

273 

otticinale, Br. 

302 

9/iazima, Hook. 

166 

agtestis, Sole, 

274 

sylvestre, Br. 

302 

pilosa, Willd. 

166 

arvensis, L. 

274 

terrestre, Br. 

303 

spicata, DC. 

167 

citrata, Ehrh. 

273 

Neottia, Jacq. 

366 

sylvatica, Bich. 

165 

gentilis, I.. 

273 

gemmipara, Sm. 

373 

LYCHNfS, L. 

187 

gracilis, Sm. 

274 

spiralis, Rich. 

372 

alpina, L. 

211 

hirsuta, L. 

273 

Nepeta, L. 

268 

dioica, L. 

211 

odorata , Sm. 

273 

Cataria, L. 

259 

Flos-Cuculi, L. 

211 

piperita, Sm. 

273 

Nupiiar, Sm., . 

254 

Viscaria, L. 

‘211 

Pulegium, L. 

274 

Kalmiana i Hook. 

260 

Lycopodh M, L. 

438 

rotundifolia, L. 

272 

lutea, Sm. 

260 

alpinum, L. 

419 

rubra, Sm. 

273 

minima , Sm. 

260 

annotinum, L. 

419 

sativa, L. 

273 

pumila, DC. 

260 

davatum, L. 

419 

sylvestris, L. 

272 

Nymph.ea, L. 

254 

inundatum, L. 

419 

viridis, I.. 

272 

alba, L. . 

259 

Selago, L. 

450 

Menvanthes, Ij. 

81 

lutea , L. 

260 

selaginoides, L. 

449 

nymphreoides, L. 

107 



LYCorsis, L. 

80 

trifoliata, I.. . 

106 

CEnantme, L. . 

88 

arvensis, L. 

98 

MfNziEsu, Sm. 

17.3 

apiifolia, Brot. 

129 

Lycopus, L. 

3 

ccerulea, Sm. 

175 

crocata, L. 

128 

europ&us, L. 

11 

polifolia, Juss. 

175 

fistulosa, L. 

128 

Lysimachia, L. 

80 

Mi rcurialis, L. 

408 

peucedanifolia, Poll. 

128 

Nemorum, L. 

104 

annua, L. 

433 

Phellandrium, Spreng. 

129 

Nummularia, L. 

105 

perennis, L. 

43.3 

pimpinelloides, L. . 

128 

punctata, L. 

104 

Mkspilus, Ij. 

218 

(Enotiiera, L. . 

174 

thyrsiflora, L. 

104 

Cotoneaster , L. 

221 

biennis, L. 

178 

vulgaris, L. 

104 

germanica, L. 

220 

Onouryc mis, Tourn. 

314 

Lythrum, L. 

2-15 

Oxyacantha , Sm. 

221 

sativa, Lam. . 

324 

hyssopifolium, L. 

21(5 

Melm, Tourn. 

89 

Ononis, L. 

313 

Salicaria, L. 

216 

athamanticum, Jacq. 

130 

arvensis, L. 

318 



Foeniculmn, Sm. 

129 

Onopordum, L. 

336 

Malaxis, Sw. 

3(57 

Milium, I,. 

17 

Acanthium, L. 

352 

Locse/ii, Sm. 

375 

effusum, L. 

35 

Ophioglossum, L. 

438 

paludosa, Sw. 

374 

lendigerutn, Sm. 

35 

vulgatum, L. 

449 

Malva, L. 

307 

Mienchia, Elirh. 

62 

Opiirys, L. 

366 

moschata, I/. 

311 

erecla, Sm. 

78 

anthropophpra , I.. 

371 


472 


INDEX 



PAGE 


PAGE 


PAGE 

apifera, Huds. 

371 

hybridum, I,. 

250 

compressa, I,. , 

44 

arachnites, Willd. . 

371 

nudicaule, L. 

256 

decumbent, Sm. . 

40 

aranifera, Huds. 

372 

RhiEas, I.. 

250 

distans, L. , 

43 

corallorhiza, L. 

375 

somniferum, L. . 

250 

Jlciuosa, Sm. , 

45 

cordata , L. 

373 

Parigtaria, L. 

01 

fluitans, Scop. 

43 

fucifera, Sm. 

372 

officinalis, L. . 

74 

glauca, Sm. 

43 

inscctifera , L. 

371 

Paris, L. . 

174 

laxa, Hasnke, 

40 

Loeselii , L. 

375 

quadrifolia, L. 

183 

maritima, Huds. . 

45 

monorchis , L. 

371 

Par.vassia, L. . 

95 

nemoralis, L. 

40 

muscifera, Huds. . 

372 

palustris, L, . , 

144 

procumbens, Curt. 

44 

Nidus- Avis, L. 

373 

Pastinaca, L. . 

90 

pratensis, L. . 

45 

ovata , L. 

373 

sativa, L. 

132 

rigida, L. 

44 

paludosa , L. 

371 

Pediculaius, L. 

270 

trivialis, L. 

45 

spiralis , L. , 

373 

palustris, L. 

291 

POLF.MONIUM, L. 

82 

Orchis, L. 

305 

sylvatica, h. . 

284 

cceruleum, L. 

111 

albida, Sm. 

370 

Peplis, L. 

119 

Poi.YCARPON, L. 

22 

bijolia , L. 

370 

Portula, L. 

154 

tetraphyllum, L. 

59 

couopsca , L. 

370 

PlCTASITES, Desf. 

337 

POLYGALA, L. 

312 

fusca, Jacq. . 

308 

vulgaris, Desf. 

357 

vulgaris, L. 

310 

hircina, Scop. 

309 

Petrosgli.num, HofFm. 

87 

Polygonum, L. 

174 

lati folia, L. 

309 

sativum, Koch, 

125 

amphibium, L. 

182 

raaculata, L. . 

370 

segetum, Koch, 

125 

aviculare, L. . 

182 

mascula, L. 

30S 

Peucedanum, . 

90 

Iiistorta, L. 

181 

militaris, L. . 

309 

officinale, L. . 

131 

Convolvulus, L. 

192 

Morio, L. 

307 

Ostruthium, Koch, 

132 

Fagopyrum, L. 

182 

pyramidalis, L. 

309 

palustre, Moench, . 

132 

Hydropiper, L. 

182 

tephrosanthos, Vill. 

309 

Silaus, L. 

1.31 

lapathifolium, L. . 

182 

viridis , Sra. 

370 

PlIALARIS, L. 

10 

minus, Huds. 

183 

ustulata, L. . 

308 

arenaria, Sm. 

35 

Persicaria, L. 

192 

Origanum, L. . 

207 

arundinacea, L. 

33 

viviparum, L. 

181 

vulgare, L. 

275 

canariensis, L. 

33 

PoLYPODIU.M, L. 

430 

Orni I'll OG ALUM, L. . 

150 

p/tleoides , L. . 

34 

aculcatum, L. 

443 

luteum , L. 

157 

Phellandrium aqua-1 

129 

calcareum, Sm. 

440 

nutans, L 

157 

ticum, L. . j 


crista turn , L. . . 

442 

pyrenaicura, L. 

157 

PlILEUM, L. 

17 

Dryopteris, L. 

440 

umbellatum, L. 

157 

alpinum, L. 

34 

Filis f tEmina, L. 

447 

Ornitiiopus, L. . 

314 

arenarium, L. 

25 

Fi/u mas, L. 

442 

perpusillus, L. 

323 

asperum, Jacq. 

34 

hgperboreum, Sm. . 

440 

Orobanche, L. 

272 

lloehmeri, Schrad. 

34 

Lonchilis, L. . 

410 

caryophyllacea, Sra. 

289 

Michelii, AIL 

34 

Oreopteris, Sm. 

412 

coerulea, Vill. 

289 

paniculatum , Sm. . 

29 

Phegopteris, L. 

440 

elatior, Sutt. 

289 

pratense, L. . 

34 

regium ? L. 

440 

major* L. 

289 

Physospermum, Cuss. 

93 

Thdypleris, L. 

442 

minor, Sra. 

289 

Cornubiense, Hook. 

137 

vulgare, L. . 

439 

ramosa, L. 

290 

Phyteuma, L. . 

83 

Polypogon, Desf. 

17 

rubra, Sra. 

289 

orbiculare, L. 

113 

littoralis, Sm. 

30 

Orobus, L. 

313 

spicatum, L. . 

113 

monspeliensis, Desf. 

35 

niger, L. 

319 

Picris, L. 

331 

Populus, L. 

40S 

sylvaticus, L. . 

319 

hieracioides, L. 

338 

alba, L. . 

132 

tuberosus, L. . 

318 

Pilularia, L. . 

439 

canescens, Sm. 

432 

Osmu.vda, L. 

438 

globulifera, L. 

450 

nigra, L. 

433 

Lunaria , L. 

4-19 

Pi.mpinella, L. 

88 

tremula, L. 

433 

regalis, L. 

449 

dioica, Sm. . . 

125 

i OTA MOG ETON, L. 

01 

Oxalis, L. 

187 

magna, L. 

127 

acutifolius, Link, . 

74 

Acetosella, L. 

210 

Saxifraga, L. 

127 

compressus, L. 

74 

corniculata, L. 

210 

PlNGUICULA, L. 

3 

crispus, L. 

74 

OXYRIA, Hill, 

152 

grandiflora, Willd. 

9 

cuspidatus, Sm. 

75 

reniforrais, Hook. 

107 

lusitanica, L.   

9 

densus, L. 

73 

OXYTROPIS, DC. 

314 

vulgaris, 1-. 

9 

Jluitans, Sm. . 

70 

carapestris, DC. 

323 

Pinus, L. 

380 

gramineus, L. 

74 

uralcnsis, DC. 

323 

sylvestris, L. . 

406 

heterophyllus, Schreb. 

75 



Pisum maritimum, L. 

320 

lanceolatus, Sm. 

75 

P.IiONIA, L. 

251 

Plant ago, L. 

(iO 

lucens, L. 

75 

corallina, Retz, 

200 

lanceolata, L. 

09 

marinas, L. 

74 

Panicum, L. 

19 

major, I.. 

OS) 

natanp, L. 

77 

Crus -cor vi, L. . 

42 

maritima, L. 

09 

oblongus, Viv. 

70 

Crus-galli, 

42 

media, L. 

09 

perfoliatus, L. 

75 

Dactylon , L. . 

57 

Coronopus, I.. 

70 

pectinatus, L. 

74 

sanguinale , L. 

59 

unifiora , L. 

400 

pusillus, L. 

74 

verticillatum , L. 

42 

Poa, L. 

19 

rufescens, Schrad. 

70 

viride , L. 

43 

alpina, I.. . 

44 

zosterafolius, Schum. 

75 

Papaver, L. 

253 

angustifolia, L. 

45 

Potentilla, L. 

219 

Argeraone, L. 

250 

annua, L. , 

45 

alba, L. 

252 

cambric um , L. 

257 

aquatica, L. . 

43 

alpestris, Hall. 

251 

dubiura, L. 

250 

bulbosa, L. . . 

45 

anserina, L. . 

250 


argentea, L. . 
aurea, Sm. 

Fragaria, Hook. 
Fragariastrum, Ehrh. 
fruticosa. L. . 
opaca, L. 
reptans, L. 
rupestns, L. . 
tridentata, Sol. 
verna, L. 

Poterium, L. . 

Sanguisorba, I- 
Prenantues, L. 
hieraciifolia, Willd. 
muralis, L. 

Primula, I. 
elatior.With. 
farinosa, L. 
scotica, Hook, 
veris, L. 
vulgaris, Huds, 
Prunella, L. 

vulgaris, L. 

Prunus, L. 

Cerasus, L. 
domestiea, L. 
insititia, L. 

Padus, L. 
spinosa, L. 

Pteris, L. 
aquilina, L. 
crispa, L. 

Pixicaria, Giert 
dysenterica, Cass. . 
vulgaris, Gaart. 
PuLMONARIA, L. 
angustifolia, L. 
maritima, L. . 
officinalis, L. 
Ptrethrum, Hall, ; 
inodoruni, Sm. 
maritimum, Sm. 
Parthenium, Sm. . 
Pvrola, L. 
media, Sw. 
minor, L. 
rosea, Sm. 
rotundifolia, L. 
secunda, L. . 
uniflora, L. 

Pvnus, L. 

Aria, Sm. 

aucuparia, Giert. . 
communis, L. 
domestiea, Sm. 
Malus, L. 

pinnatifida, Ehrh. . 
torminalis, Sm. 

Quercus, L. 

Rohur, L. 
sessiliflora, Salisb. 

Radiola, Gmel. 

millegrana, Sm. 
Ranunculus, L. 
acris, L. 

alpestris, L. , 

aquatilis, L. , 

arvensis, L. . 
auricomus, L. . 

bulbosus, L. . 
Ficaria, L. . . 

Flammula, L. . 

gramineus, L. 


INDEX. 473 


PACE 


PACK 

PAGE 

230 

hederaceus, L. 

263 

macrophyilus, W. A' N. 

24<) 

251 

hirsutus, Curt. 

265 

nitidus, Sm. 

24vl 

252 

Lingua, L. 

263 

rhamnifolius, W. .N: N. 

241- 

252 

parviflorus, L. 

265 

saxatilis, L. 

241) 

250 

repens, L. 

265 

suberectus, And. . 

243 

251 

sceleratus, L. 

261 

Rum ex, L. 

1 52 

252 

R A PH ANUS, L. . 

203 

acetosa, L. 

Ki9 

250 

maritiraus, Sm. 

307 

Acetosella, L. 

1H1) 

252 

Raphanistrum, L. . 

306 

acutus, L. 

lfiS 

250 

RE9EDA, L. 

215 

alpinus, L. 

lfjS 

370 

fruticulosa, L. 

217 

aqualicus, L. 

1(>S 

403 

Luteola, L. 

216 

crispus, I.. 

J67 

331 

lutea, L. 

216 

diaymts, L. 

167 

342 

Rhamnus, L. 

83 

Hydrolapathum, Huds. 167 

312 

catharticus, L. 

117 

maritimus, L. 

1(51) 

so 

Frangula, L. 

117 

obtusifolius, L. 

169 

105 

Rhodiola, L. 

408 

palust.ris, Sm. 

170 

106 

rosea, L. 

433 

pulcher, L. 

169 

106 

Rhinanthus, L. 

270 

sanguineus, L. 

169 

105 

Crista-Galli, L. 

282 

Ruppia, L. 

62 

105 

major, Ehrh. . 

283 

maritima, L. 

77 

260 

Rhynchospora, Vahl, 

15 

Ruscus, L. 

407 

281 

alba, Vahl, 

20 

aculeatus, L. 

431 

218 

fusca, Sm. 

20 



220 

Ribes, L. 

84 

Sagina, L 

62 

219 

alpinum, L. 

121 

apetala, L. 

78 

220 

Grossularia, L. 

121 

erecta, L. 

78 

220 

nigrum, L. 

121 

maritima, Don, 

78 

220 

petramm, Wulf. 

120 

procumbens, L, 

77 

437 

ruhrum, L. 

120 

Sagittaria, L. 

379 

446 

spicatum, Robs. 

120 

sagittifolia, L. 

403 

446 

Uva- Crispa , L. 

121 

Salicornia, L. 

1 

338 

Rosa, L. 

219 

fruticosa, Sm. 

2 

360 

arvensis, Huds. 

241 

herbacea, L. 

1 

360 

Borreri , Sm. 

232 

procumbens , Sm. 

2 

79 

bractescens, Woods, 

238 

radicans, Sm. 

2 

97 

cassia, Sm. 

230 

Salix, L. 

406 

08 

canina, L. 

235 

acuminata, Sm. 

421 

97 

cinnamomea, L. 

224 

alba, L. 

415 

339 

collina , Sm. 

210 

ambigua, Ehrh. 

418 

362 

Dicksoni, Lindl. 

223 

amygdalina, L. 

413 

362 

Doniana , Sm. 

229 

Andersoniana, Sm. 

423 

362 

Forsteri , Sra. 

236 

angustifolia, Wuif. ? 

417 

185 

gracilis, Sm. . 

229 

aquatica, Sm. 

422 

188 

hibernica, Sm. 

227 

arenaria, L. 

419 

188 

inodora, Fries, 

232 

Arbuscula , Sm. 

419 

188 

involuta, Sm. 

228 

argentea, Sm. 

418 

188 

micrantha, Sm. 

233 

aurita, L. 

422 

189 

pimpinell /folia, L. . 

226 

bicolor, Ehrh. 

427 

188 

rubella, Sm. 

225 

bicolor, Sm. 

425 

218 

rubiginosa, L. 

234 

Borreriana, Sm. 

425 

222 

Sabini, Woods, 

229 

caprea, I.. 

422 

221 

scabriuscula , Sm. 

231 

carinata, Sm. 

428 

221 

sepium, Thuil. 

235 

ccerulea, Sm. 

416 

221 

spinosissima, L. 

226 

cinerea, L. 

421 

221 

systyla, Woods, 

240 

cotinifolia, Sm. 

423 

222 

tomentosa, Sm. 

231 

C’rowcana, Sm. 

427 

221 

villosa, L, 

230 

Davalliana, Sm. 

425 


Wilsoni, Borr. 

227 

dccipiens, HofFm. . 

414 

397 

Rottbollia, L. 

21 

Dicksoniana! Sm. . 

427 

403 

incurvata, L. 

57 

Doniana, Sm. 

417 

404 

Rubia, L. 

60 

ferruginea, And. . 

421 


peregrina, L. 

67 

Forbyana, Sm. 

411 

62 

Rubus, L. 

219 

Forstcriana, Sm. 

424 

79 

affinis, Sm. 

247 

fragilis, L. 

414 

255 

arcticus, L. 

219 

fusca, L. 

417 

265 

emsius, L. 

248 

glauca, L. 

419 

261 

carpi nifoli us, W. Sc N. 2-14 

hastata, L. 

430 

263 

Chamannorus, L. . 

219 

Helix, L. 

410 

265 

corylifulius, Sm. 

248 

herbacea, L. 

430 

264 

fruticosus, L. 

215 

birta, Sm. 

423 

265 

glandulosus , Sm. 

247 

Hoffrnanniana, Sm. 

413 

264 

uheus, L. . 

242 

holosericea, Willd. . 

421 

264 

Koehleri, W. & N. 

247 

incubacea, L. 

418 

261 

leucostachys, Sm. , 

246 

Ucvis, Hook. 

429 


JNDEX 


474 


Lambcrtiana, Sin. 

PAGE 


PAGE 


PAGE 

411 

ca*spitosa, L. 

195 

galericulata, I.. 

281 

lanata, L. 

430 

cornua, L. 

191 

minor, I.. 

281 

Icinceolata , Sm. 

412 

denudata, Don, 

198 

Serum, L. 

187 

laurina, Sin. 

425 

elongella, Sm. 

198 

acre, I.. 

209 

livid a, Hook. 

428 

Geum, L. 

191 

album, I,. 

208 

maJifolia , Sm. 

430 

granulata, L. 

194 

anglicum, Huds. 

208 

Meyeriana, Willd. 

414 

Hirculus, L. 

193 

dasyphyllum, L. 

208 

mollmima , Sm. 

420 

hirsuta, L. 

192 

Forsterianum, Sm. 

210 

myrsinitcs, L. 

429 

hirta. Sm. 

197 

glaucum, Donn, 

209 

nigricans, Sm. 

423 

hypnoides, L. 

195 

reflexum, I,. 

209 

nitons, And. 

426 

incurvifolia, Don, 

198 

rupestre, L. 

209 

oleifolia, Sm 

422 

lrete-virens, Don, 

198 

sexangulare, L. 

209 

parvifolia , Sm. 

448 

leptophylla , Sm. 

197 

Telephium, L. 

208 

pentandra, L. 

414 

muscoides, Wulf.P 

195 

villosum, L. 

209 

petiolaris, Sm. 

416 

nivalis, L. 

193 

Selinum pa/ustre, Sm. 

118 

petra?a, And. 

424 

oppositifoba, L. 

193 

Sempkrmvum, L. 

215 

phylicifo/ia, Hook. 

425 

palmata , Sm. 

195 

tectorum, L. 

217 

p hylic (folia, Sm. 

425 

pedatidda, Ehrh. 

199 

Senebiera Corunopus , DC. ^94 

phillyreifolia, Borr. 

427 

pygmcea , Sm. 

195 

didyma, Sm. 

294 

procumbens, Forb. 

429 

rivu laris, L. 

194 

Senecio, L. 

338 

pi’ostrata, Sm. 

418 

stellaris, L. 

192 

aquaticus, Huds. 

359 

prunifolia, Sm. 

428 

tridactylites, L. 

195 

Jacoba?a, L. 

359 

purpurea, L. 

410 

umbrosa, L. 

192 

lividus, I *. 

358 

radicans, Sm. 
rejh ns. Sin. 

425 

418 

Scabiosa, L. 
arvensis, L. 

59 

63 

paludosus, L. 
saracenicus, L. 

359 

359 

reticulata, L. 

449 

columbaria, L. . 

63 

squalidus, L. 

357 

rosmarinifolia, L. 

416 

succisa, L. 

63 

sylvaticus, L. 

357 

rubra, Huds. 

412 

Scandix, L. 

92 

tenuifolius, Jacq. 

357 

rupestris, Don, 

424 

Anthriscus , L. 

135 

viscosus, L. 

358 

Kusselliana, Sm. 

445 

cere folium, L. 

135 

vulgaris, L. 

358 

Smithiana, Willd. . 

420 

odorata, L. 

136 

Serapias ensifolia, L. 

374 

spbacelata, Sm. 

422 

Pecten, L. 

134 

grandijlora, L. 

374 

stipularis, Sm. 

420 

Schucnus, L. 

15 

latifolia, L. • 

373 

Stuartiana, Sm. 

419 

albus, L. 

26 

long (folia, L. 

374 

tenuifolia, Sm. 

426 

compressus, L. 

28 

pattens, Hook. 

374 

tenu (folia. Hook. 

427 

fuse us, L. 

26 

rubra , I.. . 

374 

tonuior, Borr. 

425 

Mariscus , 

13 

SERRATI.LA, L. 

335 

tetrapla. Walk. 

426 

monoicus, Sm. 

399 

arvensis, L. , 

351 

triandra, L. 

412 

nigricans, L. 

26 

tinctoria, L. 

349 

undulata, Ehrh. 

412 

SCH EUCHZER I A, L. 

153 

Seseli,.L. 

89 

vacciniifolia, Walk. 

428 

palustris, L. 

170 

Libanotis, Koch, . 

130 

venulosa, Sm. 

429 

SciLI A, L. 

151 

pumilum , L. 

125 

viminalis, L. 

420 

autumnalis, L. 

158 

Skslkrla, L. 

18 

vitellina, L. 

416 

bi folia, L. 

158 

cmruloa. Scop. 

42 

Weigeliana, Willd. 

426 

nutans, Sm. 

158 

Setaria, Beaur. 

19 

Woollgariana, Borr. 

111 

verna, Huds. 

158 

verticillata, Beauv. 

42 

Wulfeniana, Sm. 

426 

SciRPUS, L. 

15 

viridi§, Bqauv. 

42 

Salsoi^a, L. 

94 

acicuiaris, Sm. 

30 

Sherarpia, L. . 

60 

fruHcosa, L. 

138 

ccespitosus, Sm. 

30 

arvensis, L. 

68 

Kali, L. 

140 

caricinus, Sm. 

28 

SlBBALDjA, E. 

96 

Salvia, L. 

3 

carinatus, Sm. 

28 

procupibens, L. 

147 

pratensis, L. 

11 

Jiuitans , L. 

30 

SlB'IilORPIA, L. 

271 

verbenaca, L. 

11 

glaucus, Sm. * . 

27 

euroj)a?a, L. 

288 

Sa.miiucus, L. 

95 

Holoschcpnus, L. 

27 

Silals, Besser, 

S9 

Ebulus, L. 

143 

lacustris, L. 

27 

pratensis, Bess. 

130 

nigra, L. 

113 

maritimus, L. , 

28 

Silene, L. 

186 

Sa molds, L. 

82 

multicaidis , Sm. 

29 

acaulis, L. 

201 

Valerandi, L. 

112 

palustris, Sm. 

29 

angliqa, L. 

202 

Sanguisorba, L. 

61 

paucifLorus, Sm. 

30 

Armeria, L. 

203 

media, L. 

72 

rufus , Sm. 

29 

conica, L. 

202 

officinalis. L. 

72 

setaceus, L. 

27 

in data, Sm. 

201 

Sanicula, L 

86 

sylvaticus, L. 

28 

maritima, With. 

201 

europea?a, L. 

124 

triqueter, L. 

28 

noctidora, L. 

203 

San Ivlina mar Him a, . 

353 

SCLERANTHUS, L. 

185 

nutans, L. 

202 

Saponauia, L. 

186 

anuus, L. 

190 

Otitqs, Sm. 

201 

officinalis, L. 

199 

perennis, L. 

190 

paradox a, Sm. 

202 

Satyrium albidum, L. 

370 

ScoLOPENDRlUM, Sill. 

437 

quinq.uevulnera, I.. 

202 

hircinum, L. 

369 

Cctarach , Sm. 

439 

Si N A PIS, L. 

293 

repens , L. 

372 

vulgare, Sym. 

416 

alba, L. 

306 

viride , L. 

370 

SCROPIIULARI A, I,. 

271 

arvensis, I>. 

306 

Saussurka, DC. 

335 

acpiatica, L. 

886 

muralis, Br. 

306 

alpina, DC. 

349 

nodosa, L. 

Scorodonia, L. 

286 

nigra, L. 

306 

Sa XII RAG A, L. 

185 

886 

tenuifolia, Br. 

306 

affinis, Don, 

198 

vernalis, L. 

887 

Sison, L. 

87 

aizoidqs, L. 

191 

Sri tki.i.jA iu a, L. 

269 

Amomum, L. 

126 




INDEX. 



475 


taoe 


PACE 


PAUH 

inundatum , Hook. 

126 

media. With. 

203 

Tricromanes, L. 

440 

scgetum , L. 

125 

nemorum, I,. 

203 

at at ion. Hook. 

417 

verticillatum, L. 

127 

scapigera, Willd. 

205 

brevisetum, Br. 

417 

Sisymbrium, ll 

292 

uliginosa, Murr. 

204 

TRicnoiyEMA, Ker, 

14 

ampMbtum , L. 

303 

Stipa, L. 

17 

Bulbocodium, Ker, 

25 

Irio, L. 

303 

pen n at a, L. 

35 

Trientalis, Hupp. 

172 

monetise, L. 

305 

Stratiotes, L. 

255 

europtea, L. 

172 

mu rale, L. 

306 

aloides, L. 

261 

Tri folium, L. 

314 

Nasturtium , L. 

302 

SUBULAIIIA, L. 

291 

arvense, L. 

326 

officinale, L. 

303 

aquatica, L. 

298 

filiforme, L. 

328 

Sophia, L. 

303 

SwERTIA, I.. 

84 

fragiferum, L. 

327 

sylvestre, L. 

302 

perennis, L. 

122 

glomeratum, L. 

327 

tcnuifolium , L. 

306 

Symphytum, L. 

79 

maritimum, Huds. 

326 

t err e sire, Sjn. 

303 

officinale, L. 

98 

medium, L. 

326 

thalianum, Hook. 

303 

tuberosum, L. 

98 

Met Hot us, L. 

324 

Sium, L. 

88 



minus, Sm. 

328 

angustifolium, L. 

127 

Tamarix, L. 

95 

ochroleucum, L. 

325 

inundation, Wigg. 

126 

gallica, L. 

141 

ornithopodioides, L. 

324 

latifolium, L. 

127 

Tamus, L. 

407 

pratense, L. 

325 

nodijiorum, L. 

125 

communis, L. 

432 

procumbens, L. 

328 

repens , L. 

125 

Tanacetum, L. 

337 

repens, L. 

325 

verticillatum, Sm. 

126 

vulgare, L. 

353 

resupinatum, L. 

327 

Smyrnium, L. 

03 

Taxus, I,. 

409 

scabrum, L. 

326 

Olusatrum, L. 

137 

baccata, L. 

431 

stellatum, L. 

326 

Solanum, J,. 

81 

Teesbalia, Br. 

291 

striatum, L. 

327 

Dulcamara, L. . . 

100 

nudicaulis, Br. , 

295 

subtervaneum, L. . 

325 

nigrum, L. 

109 

Teucrium, L. 

267 

suffbeatum, L. 

327 

Soi.idago, L. 

338 

ChamaxIrySjL. 

275 

Triglocbin, L. 

153 

Virgaurea, L. 

360 

ChamtepUys , L. 

276 

maritimum, L. 

170 

Sonciius, I,. 

331 

Scordium, L. 

275 

palustre, L. 

170 

alpinus, I,. 

340 

Scorodonia, L. 

275 

Trinia, Hoffm. 

87 

arvensis, L. 

341 

Thalictrum, L. 

255 

glaberrima, HofTm. 

125 

cceruleus, Sm. 

340 

alpinum, L. 

261 

Triodia, Br. 

19 

oleraceus, L. 

341 

fiavum, L. 

262 

decumbens, Beauv. 

44 

palustris, L. 

311 

majus, Jacq. 

261 

Triticum, L. 

20 

Sorbus domestica, L. 

221 

minus, L. 

261 

caninum, Huds. 

55 

aucuparia, Sm. 

222 

Tiiesium, L. 

84 

cristatum, Schreb. . 

55 

hybrid a, L. 

222 

linophyllum, L. 

122 

junceum, L. 

55 

Sparganium, L. 

377 

Th LASPI, L. 

291 

loliaceum, Sm. 

56 

erection, L. 

385 

alpestre, L. 

295 

repens, L. 

55 

natans, L. 

385 

arvense, L. 

294 

Trollius, L. 

255 

ramosum, Huds. 

385 

Bursa Pas/oris, L. 

295- 

europ£Eiis, L. . 

265 

simplex, Huds. 

385 

campestre, L. 

296 

Tulipa, L. 

151 

Spartina, Willd. 

21 

perfoliatum, L. 

294 

sylvestris, L. . 

160 

stricta, Sm. 

57 

Thrincia, Roth, 

335 

Turritis, L. 

292 

Spartimu scuparium , L. 

317 

hirta, Roth, 

341 

alpina , L. 

301 

Spergula, L. 

187 

Thymus, L. 

267 

glabra, L. 

302 

arvensis, L. 

214 

Acinos , I.. 

280 

hirsuta, L. 

301 

nodosa, L. 

211 

Ca/aminlha, Sm. 

280 

Tussilago, L. 

337 

saginoides, L. 

211 

Nepeta, Sm. 

280 

Farfara, L. 

357 

subulata, Sw. 

214 

Serpyllum, L. 

274 

hybrida, L. 

357 

Spiraea, L. 

218 

Tilia, L. 

254 

Pe/asites, L. . 

357 

Filipendula, L. 

222 

t'uropa a. L. 

259 

Typha, L. 

376 

salicifolia, L. 

222 

grandifolia, Ehrh. 

259 

angustifolia, L. 

385 

Ulmaria, L. 

222 

parvifolia, Ehrh. 

259 

latifolia, L. 

385 

Stachys, L. 

268 

Till/EA, L. 

62 

minor, Sm. 

385 

ambigua, Sm. 

278 

muscosa, 1 . 

78 



annua, L. 

279 

Tofieldia, Huds. 

152 

Ulex, L. 

313 

arvensis, L. 

279 

palustris, Huds. 

170 

europjeus, L. . 

316 

germanica, L. 

279 

Toriiylium, L. 

91 

nanus, Forst. 

316 

palustris, L. 

279 

latifolium, L. 

134 

Ulmus, I,. 

94 

sylvatica, I.. 

278 

maximum, L. 

133 

campestris, K 

141 

Staphylea,L; 

95 

nodosum , I.. 

134 

campestns , Hook. 

142 

pinnata, L. 

144 

officinale, L. 

133 

carpinifolia, Lindl. 

142 

Statice, L. 

95 

Tokilis, Adans. 

92 

glabra, Mill. 

142 

Armeria, L. 

145 

Anthriscus, Gasrt. 

115 

major, Sm. 

142 

Limonium, L. 

145 

iutesta, Spreng. 

1 15 

mon tana, Bauh. 

112 

reticulata, L. 

146 

nodosa, Grert. 

116 

stricta, Lindl. 

142 

reticulata , Hook. .* 

146 

Tormentilla, L. 

219 

suberosa, Ehrh. 

141 

spathulata, Desf. 

145 

officinalis, Sm. 

253 

Urtica, L. 

378 

Stellaria, L. 

186 

reptans, L. 

253 

dioica, Is. 

401 

cerastoides, L. 

204 

Traoopooon, Ii. . 

334 

pilulil’era, Ij. 

400 

glauca, With. 

204 

major, Jacq. 

339 

urens, L. 

401 

graminea, L. 

201 

porrifolius, L. 

340 

Utricularia, L. 

3 

holostea, L. 

203 

pratensis,L. 

379 

intermedia, Haync, 

10 


470 


INDEX 



PAGE 


PAGE 


PAGE 

minor, L. 

10 

Anagallis, L. 

0 

sepium, L. 

322 

vulgaris, L. 

10 

arvensis, L. . 

8 

sylvatica, I.. 

320 



Beccabunga, L. . 

0 

Villarsia, Vent. 

81 

Vaccinium, L. . 

173 

Chamaidrys, L. 

7 

nymphasoides, Vent 

107 

Myrtillus, L. . 

177 

Jiliformis, 8m. 

8 

Vinca, L. 

92 

Oxycoccos, L. 

179 

1’rut iculasa, L. , 

6 

major, L. 

112 

uliginosum, L. . 

177 

h . deril'olia, L. 

7 

minor, L. 

112 

Vitis-idfea, L. 

179 

hirsuta, Hopk. 

7 

Viola, L. 

93 

Volant ia Aparine, L. 

07 

hyhrida, L. . . 

5 

canina, L. . 

119 

Valeriana, L. 

14 

montana, L. . 

7 

flavicornis, Sm. 

119 

dentata, Sin. 

23 

officinalis, L. 

fi 

hirta, L. 

119 

dioina, L. 

22 

polita. Fries, 

8 

lactea, .Sm. 

119 

Locusta, L. 

23 

saxatilis, L. . 

5 

lutea, Huds. . 

120 

officinalis, L. 

22 

scutellata, I.. 

0 

odorata, 1.. 

118 

pyrenaica, L. 

22 

serpvllifolia, L. 

5 

palustris, L. 

119 

rubra, L. 

22 

spicata, L. 

5 

tricolor, L. 

119 

Vella, L. 

291 

triphyllos, L. 

8 

Viscum, I,. 

407 

annua, L. 

294 

verna, L, . , 

9 

album, L. 

431 

Vebbascum, L. 

82 

Viburnum, L. . 

95 



Blattaria, L. 

no 

Lantana, L. . 

143 

Woodsia, Br. 

137 

Lychnitis, L. , 

109 

Opulus, L. 

143 

hyperborea, Br. 

440 

nigrum, L. 

no 

Vicia, L. 

313 

ilvensis, Br. 

440 

pulverulentum, Vill. 

no 

august i folia, Sibtli . 

321 



thapsiforme, Schrad. 

109 

bithynica, L. 

322 

Xanthium, L. 

378 

Thapsus, L. . 

109 

Cracca, L. 

321 

strumarium, L. 

401 

virgatum, With. 

no 

hybrida, L. 

322 



Verbena, L. 

271 

licvigata, Sm. 

322 

Zannicuellia, L. 

370 

officinalis, L. . . 

288 

lathyroides, L. 

321 

palustris, L. 

384 

Veronica, L. 

3 

lutea, L. 

321 

ZOSTERA, U 

370 

agrestis, L. 

8 

sativa, L. 

321 

marina, L. 

384 

alpina, L. 

5 

t 





ENGLISH INDEX 


TO THE 

GENERA AND THE MOST POPULAR SPECIFIC NAMES. 


Abele . 

Adder’s tongue 
Adonis 
Agrimony . 

Alder 

Alexanders . 

Alkanet 
Allseed 
Amaranth . 
Andromeda . 
Anemone 
Angelica 
Arrow-grass 
Arrow-head 
Asarabacca . 

Ash • • 

Asparagus . 

Aspen 

Apple 

Avens 

Awl-wort 

Azalea 

Balsam 
Bald-money . 

Barberry 
Bane-berry . 

Barley 

Barrenwort . 

Bartsia 
Basil Thyme 
Bastard Balm 
Bastard Stone Parsley 
Bastard Toad-flax . 
Beak’d Parsley 
Beak-rush . 
Bear-berry . 
Beard-grass . 
Bed-straw 
Beech 
Beet 

Bell-flower . 
Bent-grass . 

Betony 

Bilberry 

Bindweed 

Birch 

Bird-cherry . 
Bird’s-foot . 
Bird’s-foot-trefoil . 
Bird’s nest . 

Bird’s nest-orchis . 
Birthwort 

Bistort • • 

Bitter-sweet 
Bitter-vetch . 
Blackberry . 

Black Saltwort 
Blackthorn . 

Black Bryony 

Bladder-fern 

Bladder-nut • 

Bladder-seed 

Bladder-wort 

Blinks 

Blue-bottle . 


PAGE 

432 
440 
263 
216 

400 
1S7 

09 

59 

401 
189 
2G2 
131 
170 
403 
215 

12 

159 

433 
221 
252 
298 
111 


113 

130 

153 

257 

54 

70 

282 

280 

281 

126 

122 

135 

26 

188 

35 
64 

404 

140 

114 

36 
278 
177 
110 
403 
220 
323 
328 
187 
373 
375 
181 
109 
S18 
245 
121 
220 
432 
443 
144 
137 

10 

58 

364 


Blysmus 
Bog-Asphodel 
Bog- ore his . 
Bog-rush 
Borage 
Borkhausia . 

Box 
Brake 
Bramble 
Bristle-fern . 
Bristle-grass 
Brome-grass 
Brooklime . 
Brook-weed 
Broom 
Broom-rape 
Bryony 
Bu’ckbean 
Buckthorn 
Buckwheat 
Buffbnia 
Bugle 
Bugloss 
Bullace-tree 
Burdock 
Burnet 
Burnet-Saxifrage 
Bur-marigold 
Bur-Parsley 
Bur-reed 
Bur-weed 
Butcher’s-broom 
Butter-bur . 
Butter-wort . 


Cabbage 
Calamint 
Campion or Catch 
Canary-grass 
C'andy-tuft . 
Caraway 
Carex 

Carline-thistle 
Carnation 
Carrot 
Catchfly 
Cat-mint 
Cat’s-ear 
Cat’s-tail 
Cat’s-tail-grass 
Celandine . 
Celery 
Centaury 
Chaff'weed . 
Chamomile 
Cherry 
Chervil 
Chestnut 
Chickweed winte 
Chickweed . 
Chives 
Charlock 
Cicely 

Cinque-foil . 
Cleavers 

Clove gilly-flower 


PAGE 

28 Clover 
159 Cloud-berry 
374 Clary 

26 Club-moss . 

98 Club-rush 
348 Cockle 
400 Cock’s foot.grass 
446 Cole-seed 
243 Colt’s-foot 


447 

42 

50 

6 

112 


Columbine . 
Comfrey 
Coral-root . 
Cord-grass . 
Coriander 
J18 Cornel 
289 Corn-flag 
401 Corn-Sallad 
106 Corydalis 
117 Cotoneaster 
Cotton-grass 
Cotton-thistle 
Cotton.weed 
Cow-bane 
Cowslip 
349 Cow-parsnep 
72 Cow-wheat . 
Cranberry . 
Crane’s-bill . 
Cress 


181 

73 

275 

98 

220 


127 

353 

133 


reen 


385 

Cress-Rocket 

294 

401 

Crocus 

24 

431 

Crow-berry . 

431 

357 

Crowfoot 

263 

9 

Cuckow-pint 

403 


Cudweed 

355 

305 

Currant 

120 

280 

Cyperus 

26 

201 

Cyphel . • 

207 

33 

Cytisus 

318 

£95 



126 

Daffodil 

154 

386 

Dandelion . 

342 

352 

Daisy 

361 

200 

Dame’s violet 

305 

133 

Dane-wort . 

143 

211 

Darnel • • 

56 

279 

Dead-nettle . 

277 

348 

Dock 

167 

385 

Dodder 

123 

34 

Dewberry . 

249 

257 

Dog-rose 

235 

124 

Dog’s-tail-grass 

47 

101 

Dog’s-tooth.grass 

57 

70 

Dropwort _ . 

222 

362 

Dryas 

20l> 

219 

Duckweed . 

12 

135 

Dwale . . • 

109 

404 



172 

Earth-nut . 

127 

203 

Elder 

143 

157 

Elecampane 

360 

306 

136 

Elm 

Elvna . • 

141 

399 

250 

Enchanter’s Nightshade 

11 

67 

Eryngo 

135 

200 

Evening Primrose . 

178 


PAGE 

325 

249 

11 

449 

27 

211 

47 

305 

357 

261 

98 

300 

375 

137 

70 

25 

23 

315 

221 

30 

352 

353 
124 
105 
132 
283 
178 
308 
302 


778 


INDEX. 


Everlasting Pea 
Eye-bright . 

False Brome-gras 

Feather-grass 

Felwort 

Fennel 

Ferns 

Fescue-grass 

Feverfew 

Field-madder 

Fig-wort 

Filmy fern . 

Finger-grass 

Fir 

Flax 

Flax-seed 

Flea-bane 

Flea-wort 

Flo wcr-de- Luce 

Flowering-fern 

Flowering-rush 

Fluellin 

Fool's Parsley 

Foxglove 

Forget-me-not 

Fox-tail grass 

Fritillary 

Frog-bit 

Fumitory 

Furze 

Gagea 

Gale 

Gal ingale 
Garlic 
Gentian 
Gentianella . 
Germander . 
Gipsy- wort . 
Glasswort 
Globe-flower 
Goat’s beard 
Gold of Pleasure 
Golden-rod . 
Golden-samphire 
Golden-saxifrage 
Goldylocks . 
Goody era 
Good King Henry 
Gooseberry . 
Goose-foot . 
Goose-grass . 
Gout-weed . 
Gramm itis . 
Grape- Hyacinth 
Grass of Parnassus 
Grass, wrack 
Green- weed 
Gromwell 
Ground Ivy . 
Groundsel . 
Guelder-rose 
Gymnadenia 

Habenaria . 
Hair-grass . 

Hard- fern 
Hard-grass . 
Hare’s-ear t 
Hare’s-tail grass 
Ha rt '8-tongue 
Hart wort 
Hazel-nut . 
Hawkbit 
Hawkwepd . 


PACE 


PAOF. 



PAO E 

aiy 

Hawsk'-beard 

348 

Madwort 


103 

282 

Hawthorn . 

221 

Maidenhair . 


447 


Heart’s-Ease 

119 

Mallow 


311 

56 

Heath 

176 

Man -orchis . 


371 

35 

Heath-grass 

46 

Maple 


175 

122 

Hedge-mustard 

303 

Marestail 


4 

129 

Hedge-parsley 

134 

Marjoram 


275 

439 

Hellebore . 

266 

Marsh-mallow 


311 

48 

Hellcborine 

373 

Marsh cinque-foil 


250 

362 

Hemlock 

136 

Marsh marigold 


266 

68 

Hemp-agrimony 

353 

Marsh-wort 


125 

286 

Hemp-nettle 

277 

Master-wort 


132 

447 

Henbane 

108 

May . 


221 

57 

Herb-Bennet 

252 

Matgrass 


32 

4U6 

Herb-llobert 

310 

Meadow-grass 


43 

147 

Herb.Paris . . 

183 

Meadow-rue 


261 

79 

Hog’s Fennel, 

131 

Meadow-Saffron 


171 

5, 360 

Holy-grass . 

42 

Meadow-saxifrage 


130 

360 

Holly 

73 

Meadow-sweet 


222 

25 

Honewort . 

125 

Medick 


330 

448 

Honeysuckle 

116 

Medlar 


220 

184 

Hop 

432 

Melic-grass . 


40 

285 

Horehound . 

276 

Melilot 


324 

129 

Hornbeam . 

405 

Menziesia 


175 

287 

Horned-pondweed . 

384 

Mercury 


433 

99 

Horned-poppy 

256 

Meu 


130 

' 32 

Hornwort 

402 

Milfoil 


364 

159 

Horse-tail . 

450 

Mezereon 


ISO 

434 

Horse-radish 

297 

Michaelmas Daisy 


359 

315 

Horse-shoe-vetch . 

324 

Milkwort 


316 

316 

Hound’s-tongue 

103 

Mignonette, wild 


216 


Houseleek . 

217 

Milk-vetch . 


323 

157 

Hutchinsia . 

295 

Millet grass . 


35 

432 

Hyacinth 

158 

Mint 


272 

26 



Misseltoe 


431 

156 

Iris 

25 

Moenchia 


78 

122 

Isnardia 

72 

o 

o 

-C 

V5 

5 


260 

68 

Ivy 

121 

Monks’ Rhubarb 


168 

275 



Mountain Ash 


221 

11 

Jacob’s Ladder 

111 

Moonwort . 


448 

I 

Jagged-chickweed . 

58 

Moorgrass . 


42 

265 

Juniper 

434 

Moschatell . 


183 

339 



Motherwort 


276 

299 

Kale 

293 

Mountain-sorrel 


167 

360 

Kidney-vetch 

318 

Mouse-ear Chickweed 

211 

360 

Knappia . 

56 

Mouse-tail . 


149 

190 

Knapweed . 

364 

Mudwort 


287 

353 

Knautia 

63 

Mugwort 


354 

372 

Knawel 

190 

Mullein 


109 

130 

Knot-grass . 

122 

Musk-orchis 


371 

120 

Koniga 

300 

Mustard 


306 

138 






67 

Larkspur 

260 

Nasturtium . 


302 

126 

Lady’s-mantie 

71 

Navew 


305 

439 

Lady’s slipper 

375 

Nettle 


400 

158 

Lady’s-smock 

300 

Nightshade . 


109 

144 

Lady’s-tresses 

372 

Nipple- wort . 


349 

384 

Lamb’s lettuce 

23 

Nit-grass 


35 

317 

Ledum 

189 

None-so-pretty 


192 

97 

Leopard ’s-bane 

361 




279 

Lettuce 

341 

Oak 


403 

358 

Lily of the valley . 

155 

Oat or Oat-grass 


52 

143 

Ling 

177 

Oat-like grass 


41 

370 

Linuxa 

28S 

Onion 


156 


Lime 

259 

Ophrys 


371 

370 

Liparis 

375 

Orache 


435 

39 

Lobelia 

113 

Orchis 


367 

447 

Livelong 

208 

Orpine 


208 

67 

London Pride 

192 

Osier 


409 

128 

Loosestrife . 

104 

Osmund-royal 


448 

35 

Louse-wort . 

284 

Ox-eye 


361 

445 

I.ovagc 

130 

Ox-lip 


105 

133 

Lungwort . 

97 

Ox-tongue . 


340 

405 

342 

Lyme-grass . 

54 

Oxytropis 


323 

343 

Madder 

67 

Paigle . . 


105 


INDEX. 479 


Pansy 

PACK 

119 

Panic-grass . 

42 

Parsnep . . 

132 

Parsley 

125 

Pennyroyal . . 

274 

Pear Tree . . 

221 

Pearl-wort . . 

*77 

Pearly Everlasting . 

355 

Penny-cress . 

294 

Penny-wort . 

207 

Peony 

260 

Pepper-saxifrage . 

130 

Pepper-wort 

296 

Periwinkle 

112 

Persicaria . . 

181 

Petty-whin . 

317 

Pheasant’s-Eye 

263 

Picris 

340 

Pill-wort 

450 

Pimpernel . . 

103 

Pink 

200 

Pipcwort 

402 

Plantain 

69 

Plum 

219 

Plume-thistle . 

350 

Pond-weed . 

73 

Poor man’s weather-g 

lass 103 

Poplar 

432 

Poppy 

256 

Polypody 

439 

Prickly Samphire . 

136 

Primrose 

105 

Privet 

3 

Purple Loosestrife . 

217 

Purslane 

154 

Queen of the meadows 222 

Quaking grass 

46 

Quill-wort . 

450 

Quicken tree 

221 

Radish 

306 

Ragwort 

359 

Ragged Robin 

211 

Rampion 

113 

Ramsons 

157 

Reed 

53 

Reed-mace . 

385 

Raspberry . 

243 

Rape 

305 

Rest-harrow 

318 

Rock-brake 

446 

Rocket 

216 

Rock-cress . 

301 

Rock-rose 

258 

Rose 

223 

Rose-root 

433 

Rowan-tree . 

221 

Ruppia 

77 

Rupture-wort 

141 

Rush 

160 

Rye-grass 

56 

Sage . 

11 

Saint-foin 

324 

Salad-Burnet 

403 

Sallow . . 

409 

Sallow-thorn , 

431 

Salt-wort . , 

140 

Samphire 

131 

Sandwort 

205 

Saniele 

124 

Saponaria 

199 

Saxifrage 

191 

Saussurea 

349 

Saw-wort 

349 

Scabious 

63 


Scheuchzeria 

l’AO K 

170 

Scorpion-grass 

99 

Scottish Asphodel . 

170 

Scurvy-grass 

297 

Sea-heath 

153 

Sea-milkwort 

121 

Sea_ Lavender 

145 

Sea. reed 

34 

Sea- Rocket . 

293 

Sedge . 

386 

Self-heal 

281 

Service Tree 

221 

Silver-weed . 

251 

Sheep' ’s-bit . . 

112 

Shepherd ’s-needle . 

133 

Shepherd’s-purse . 

295 

Sherardia 

68 

Shield-fern 

440 

Shore weed . 

400 

Sibbaldia 

147 

Sibthorpia . 

288 

Skull-cap 

281 

Sloe . 

220 

Sm allage 

124 

Small-reed . 

36 

Sheep’s Scabious 

112 

Snakeweed 

181 

Snapdragon . 

285 

Snowdrop 

154 

Snow-flake . 

154 

Spear-wort . . 

263 

Spider, wort 

159 

Soft-grass 

41 

Solomon’s seal 

155 

Sorrel 

167 

Southernwood 

353 

Sow- bread . 

105 

Sow-thistle . 

340 

Speedwell 

5 

Soap-wort 

199 

Spignel 

130 

Spikenard . . 

356 

Spike-rush . 

29 

Spindle-tree . 

117 

Spirea . 

222 

Spleen wort 

445 

Spurge 

381 

Spurge- Laurel 

180 

Spurrey 

214 

Squill 

158 

St. John’s -wort 

331 

Star of Bethlehem 

157 

Star-lruit 

171 

Star-thistle 

364 

Starwort 

309 

Stitch wort 

203 

Stock 

304 

Stone-crop . 

£08 

Stork’s bill . 

308 

Strapwort 

144 

Strawberry . 

249 

Strawberry-tree 

189 

Sweet Briar 

234 

Sun dew 

148 

Sweet-flag . 

160 

Sulphur-weed 

131 

Tansy 

353 

'Lamar isk 

144 

Tare 

322 

Teasel 

62 

Teesdalia 

295 

Thai e-cress . 

303 

Thistle 

350 

Thorn-apple 

108 

Thrift 

145 

Thrincia 

343 

Edward K In ill, Printer, 

Ulastfow. 


Thyme 

TAURI 

274 

Tilhea 

78 

Toad-flax 

286 

Tooth-root . 

300 

Tooth-wort . . 

284 

Tormentil . 

252 

Touch-me-not . 

118 

Tower-mustard 

302 

Traveller’s Joy 

262 

Treacle-mustard 

304 

Tree-mallow 

311 

Trefoil 

324 

Trichonema 

25 

Tulip 

160 

Turnep 

305 

'Tutsan 

332 

T way-blade   . 

373 

Twig-rush . 

13 

Valerian 

22 

Venus’ Comb 

134 

Vernal-grass 

13 

Vervain 

288 

Vetch 

320 

Vetchling 

319 

Villarsia 

107 

Violet 

118 

Viper’s Bugloss 

.96 

Wake- Robin 

403 

Wall-flower 

304 

Wall-Lettuce 

342 

Wall.Pellitory 

71 

Wart-cress . 

294 

Water.dropwort 

128 

Water- Ho rehound 

11 

Water-milfoil 

402 

Water-plantain 

171 

Water- Parsnep 

127 

Water-soldier 

261 

Water-starwort . 

383 

Water- Violet 

106 

Water- wort 

183 

Weasel-snout 

277 

Weld 

216 

Welsh-poppy 

256 

wheat or Wheat-grass 55 

White.horehound . 

286 

White- rot 

124 

White-thorn 

221 

White water-Lily . 

259 

Whitlow-grass 

298 

Whorl-grass 

38 

Whortle-berry 

177 

Wild Basil . 

280 

Wild Chamomile . 

362 

Wild Succory 

349 

Willow 

409 

Willow-herb 

E9 

Winter-cress 

302 

Winter-green 

188 

Woad 

294 

Wolf’s bane . 

260 

Woodbine . 

116 

Woodruff 

68 

Wood- rush . 

165 

Woodsia 

440 

Wood-sorrel 

211 

Wormwood 

354 

Wound-wort 

278 

Yarrow 

363 

Yellow-rattle 

282 

Yellow water-Lily . 

260 

Yellow-weed 

216 

Yellow-wort 

175 

Yew 

434 









v 


In £f\ 













  

. A* 






t •/£*•& 'Qi 









