This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 



y Google 




2044 106 357 643 



i 



HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 

OF THE 

GRAY HERBARIUM 




y Google 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 

NEW 

BOTANIST'S GUIDE 

TO 

THE LOCALITIES 

OP 

THE RARER PLANTS OF BRITAIN. 

BY 

HEWETT COTTRELL WATSON. 



VOL. IL 

SCO«kAJn» AVB A]»7AOa»T ZB&as. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR 

LONGMAN, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS, 

PATEKNOSTSlb-ROW. 

1837. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LONDOK: 

Printed by A. Spomswoooi, 
New-Street-Square. 



y Google 



THE 

NEW 

BOTANIST'S GUIDE 

TO 

THE LOCALITIES 

OF 

THE RARER PLANTS OF BRITAIN. 

BY 

HEWETT COTTRELL WATSON. 



LONDON: 



LONGMAN, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS, 

PATEKNOSTSIl-ROW. 

1837. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



n iiJ^J^C^^JOOkArv^ 



LoNOOir : 

Printed by A. SMrmswooDE, 

Ne w JStreet-Square . 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



DIRECTIONS TO THE BINDER. 



The Binder is recommended to unite both volumes of 
the New Botanist's Guide under the same cover; the 
Preface being removed to Vol. I., where it will follow 
the Dedication. The Notice and Corrections, etc., 
given in the first volume, (pages v, vi, vii,) may then be 
altogether left out. The second title-page of this volume 
will form page 405 of the united volumes. 



A 2 



y Google 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PREPACK 



DuRiHG the interval of nearly a year and a half since 
the publication of the first volume of the New Botanist's 
Guide, many additions and some corrections have been 
obtidned, which are added as a Supplement in the second 
volume. While the published portion of the work has 
been thus improved, comparatively little advantage has 
accrued to the Scottish portion, forming the first part 
of the second volume; so few additions having been 
made to it, that it appears now almost the same as it 
might have done a year or two ago. This circumstance 
afibrds us a good illustration of the usefulness of collect- 
ing into a small focus the chief part of what is already 
known in regard to the locsdities of plants. Every 
botanist is able to add something to the general stock 
of knowledge, and many are desirous to do so ; but few 
of them can know what is most worth communicating, 
on the score of novelty or otherwise, until some one has 
taken the trouble of drawing together the detached facts 
and fragments into groups sufiiciently methodical for 
reference. The Editor of these volumes would certainly 
have preferred to see some other individual take up the 
task ; but not finding any one disposed to do so, amongst 
those to whom the suggestion was made, and feeling 
much the want of such a book for his own use, he at 
A 3 



y Google 



yi PREFACE. 

length resolved to set about it as a private MS. Publi- 
cation was ultimately decided on, as the best means of 
advancing this department of botany, in which the co- 
operation of many persons is so necessary for success. 
Even with the assistance which has been freely given by 
others, in communicating details of stations, the editorial 
labour has been very far from slight ; and it is unavoid- 
ably of that dull plodding kind which b apt to be felt 
as a tedious task rather than a pleasurable occupation. 
He has, nevertheless, been somewhat encouraged and 
cheered in his labours, by the conviction that die work 
will afford assistance in investigations which may ulti- 
mately prove of very high importance^ although such a 
result may not be apparent in our own day. 

Several criticisms and suggestions having been offered 
by botanical friends, it is wished to make some explan- 
ations in reply to their comments, partly in farther ex- 
planation of the work, and partly as hints for any future 
writer on the same subject. It was explained, in the 
Introduction to the first volume, that two ol^ects were 
kept in view in preparing the worL Of these, an 
endeavour to ascertain the mere distribution (or areas) 
of the species, by making a series of local Hsts from such 
data as were within reach, was the first and most desired 
one. The other use of the compilation, as a guide-book 
to the localities, was a second and secondary object, 
easily combined with the former, and lending considerable 
assistance to it. Several of my friends have regarded 
the work solely in this latter view, and thus have been 
unable to conceive wherefore the names of plants should 
be repeated in the Ibts for counties in which they are 
abundantiy common ; and also, why such vague localities 
as " Somerset," « Bristol," « Norfolk," &c. &c., should be 
mentioned. Though useless indications to mere collectors, 
such notices were intended to record the fact of the plants 



yGooQle 



gl, 



PREFACE. Vll 

being found in the county or vicinity mentioned, — a fact 
which will be useful to any one investigating the distribution 
of the species. And since the woilt was designed to shew 
both the locsdities and areas of all species entitled to be 
called rarey with reference to Britain in general, it became 
necessary to mention them in all the counties within 
which I had ascertained them to grow, although they 
might be common in some particular county. 

The name of Botanist's Chiide was taken as a familiar 
and explanatory title, and as an admission of the general 
plan of the work being borrowed from Turner anrl 
Dillwyn's Guide. Indeed, it was on expressing a wish 
that a new edition of their Guide should be puWished, 
that the undertaking of a similar work was first suggested 
to me, although not then assented to. Yet the addition 
of " New" to the name of the work ought to have indicated 
that it was not designed to be simply a second edition 
of that published by Turner and Dillwyn; while the 
numerous additions, with some changes of plan, it is con- 
ceived, must fully make good my right to call it a different 
work. The list of contributors, and of works from which 
localities have been copied, pages 669 — 674«., will shew at 
a glance how large a portion of the contents have been de- 
rived from other sources. Almost without exception, the 
whole of the second volume is additional, and in the first 
volume, fully three-fourths of the references are made to 
other works or authors. Again, Turner and Dillwyn 
seem to have had no settled plan or test as to which 
species were. to be admitted, and which were to be ex- 
cluded from their county lists. The selection of a certain 
set of species according to some fixed test, even though 
it may not be altogether unobjectionable, and then 
tracing them through the whole of Britain, appears to 
be a decided improvement, as making the negative 
evidence available to the botanical geographer. Another 
A 4 



yGooQle 



gL 



YIU £BEFACB« 

great cUfference is foniid in the exolasion of cryptogamie 
plants. To a few persons this will i^pear a defect ; but - 
if we bear in mind ib&t scarcely one in six of our 
botanical collectors feel equaUy interested in cryptogamie 
plants as they do in the other kinds, unless it be for the 
ferns, the consequence of including the oryptogamic 
orders would have be^i felt in a great increase of price 
to the consumer, without due equivalent, or a great 
additional loss Uy the producer. In Turner and Dillwyn's 
Guide, the cryptogamie plants average nearly one in 
three, in the county lists^ which must have added to the 
cost of their volumes in nearly the same proportion. In 
the present work, the omission of these plants, the small 
type, and the closer lines have enabled me to give pro- 
bably six times the number of localities for the phanero- 
gamic plants, in the same number of pages. The defect 
or omission can be remedied by any one who is anxious 
to have it done, and is willing to give so much time and 
trouble to it. I should be glad to see such a continuation 
of this Guide. 

With regard to the line of distinction between rare 
and comnum plants. — No better test than the one adopted, 
has been suggested to me ; and, indeed, no objection has 
been offered to the plan or principle followed. But some 
few friends have favoured me with remarks to the effect 
that certain species, — Habenaria viridis and Pinguicula 
vulgaris, for example, have been excluded, which are as 
well entitled to be called rare, as are others which have 
been admitted, — examples of which occur in Clematis 
Vitalba and Tamus communis. Amongst other species, 
these have been instanced ; and a northern botanist will 
readily guess that such examples must have been given by 
one chiefly familiar with the plants of the southern half of 
England ; the two latter not being indigenous in Scotland, 
where the two former are plentiful, although frequent 



yGooQle 



gL 



PREFACE. IX 

enough in the south of England, where th^ others are 
rarities. Similar local differences will usually explain 
and answer the objections ; nevertheless there is some 
ground for them. Between the least rare of the rarer 
plants, and the least conmion of the commoner plants, 
there can be only a shade of difference, and any adopted 
test will fail of 'extreme precision ; but in cases where the 
rarity or commonness of a plant is thus in suspense, as it 
were, it becomes of small moment whether we admit it 
or reject it. The test adopted, that of the comparative 
frequency in the local Floras, is a substitution of the 
average observation of several good observers in different 
places, for the partial observation of the individual ; which 
latter is really the sole test when any one person takes 
the result of his own observations or memory as the 
criterion. The local catalogues as yet published are not 
sufficient for complete precision, but as they keep in- 
creasing in number the test will become more exact ; if, 
indeed, the present work does not now afford a better one, 
for all the plants enumerated in it. Of the excluded 
ones, perhaps, there are only two species which ought 
to have been admitted, namely. Inula Helenium and 
Potamogeton heterophyllus ; the former rejected as 
occurring in ten out of twelve Floras used for the com- 
parisons, and the latter having been accidentally omitted 
in transcribing the list of rarer plants, although falling 
within the prescribed limits of rarity. Some few other 
species might have been introduced without any impro- 
priety, although there may not be much call for their 
admission; such, for instance, as Epilobium angusti- 
folinm, Arabis hirsuta, Cerastium aquaticum, and Avena 
pubescens ; the last of which has been introduced into 
the Scottish lists, though inadvertently. But a test 
which excludes little above oue-third of the whole number 
of British plants is more likely to admit too many than 
A 5 



y Google 



X PREFACE. 

too few ; and, accordingly, I fear the greatest defects Bte 
on this side. All the maritime plants of course come 
under the denomination of rare, in consequence of tlwir 
almost total absence from the inland counties. The same 
occurs with some confused, doubtful, or misnamed 
species, though really found to be common when sought 
for. We have examples in Tragopogon major (identical 
with T.pratensis of British authors,) Veronica polita 
(confused with V. agrestis, and almost equally common,) 
CEnanthe apiifolia (identical with CE. crocata,) and 
several willows and brambles. These are omitted in the 
Supplement. Callitriche pedunculata, Habenaria chlor- 
antha, Carduus crispus, and others, are probably com- 
mon, though overlooked, or not distinguished from 
nearly allied species or varieties. 

It is also to be remembered, that a work of this kind i» 
a compilation, chiefly composed of what has been said by 
others about the localities of plants; and that it must 
unavoidably include, in many instances, not only what 
still iSf but also what has been, and even what has been 
only supposed to be. A copious source of error is implied 
in the last words in italics, and one that it is impossible 
wholly to keep clear from. I do not hold myself 
accountable for the mistakes of others, and the frequent 
use of the sign of doubt (?) will indicate that many 
errors have been presumed. Were my own share of the 
volumes clear of defects, I might feel surprised at the 
mistakes of others; but, unfortunately, thb is by no 
means the case, although comparatively with the quantity 
of unconnected details, the errors of serious import are 
few. In transcribing from the manuscript notes of 
others, sometimes neither methodically arranged nor 
written in very legible characters, I have occasionally 
mistaken words, particularly proper names which have 
not been familiar. Again, when there are several places* 



yGooQle 



gL 



PREFACE. XI 

of the same name, unless an author or correspondent 
specifies which of such places is intended by him, there 
i» great chance of error arising from misposition, and 
the consequent creation, (so to express it,) of a false 
station. Perhaps one half the places in Britain have 
names in common to at least two of them, and several 
names apply to as many dozens or scores of places. This 
circumstance has caused me, as well as other botanical 
writers, to misplace some habitats or stations ; but about 
half a dozen of similar errors are so remarkable as to call 
for an explanation. They arose from writing down the 
localities, a» procured, on separate slips of paper ; and in 
afterwards arranging some thousands of these slips of 
paper, according to counties, a few clung together, or got 
misplaced by some other means, and six or eight were 
even printed without the false position being noted by 
myself until too late. The necessary corrections are 
made in the Supplement. Of course, this does not 
invalidate the stations, which will be correct in them- 
selves, although copied on a wrong page of this work. 
It will also be observed that the^ same locality is occa. 
sionally given twice over, as taken from different author- 
ities. This is done chiefly with the rarest species, where 
the two descriptions form a better guide in connexion, or 
mutually confirm each other. The object is usually so 
evident that I should not have deemed any explanation 
called for, had not four botanists severally told me that 
the different descriptions of the station for Cyperus fuscus 
(Page 102) were intended for one single place. In this 
instance, I was aware of the fact, but sometimes consider- 
able doubt might be felt, and then the two descriptions 
would both be given. The plan of citing the specimens pre- 
served in my Herbarium has also induced some repetition. 
Independently of the smaller defects arising from 
errors of the pen or the press, a compilation like the 
A 6 



yGooQle 



gL 



Xll PREFACE. 

present unavoidably contains errors of a more weighty 
kind, depending less upon the editor than upon others. 
In a science -where so many individual objects and petty 
details have to be considered, none of its votaries, be 
they learners or learned, can avoid occasional inadvert- 
encies ; and in recording the localities of plants, there is 
the double chance of error^ arising from a mistake either 
as to the plant itself or as to the place where it has been 
found. Few — perhaps none of our later botanists who 
have written a Flora, or published any extended list of 
stations, have wholly avoided such errors ; and the farther 
we go back in date, the greater was the liability thereto. 
If once printed in a work of any authority, these inac- 
curacies are perpetuated by succeeding writers who copy 
them, and the mass of error goes on accumulating. The 
customary mode of continuing to repeat the first authority 
for a station, even one of a century or two in standing, 
must greatly tend to keep up these blemishes in botanical 
books. It is on such account that I have been induced 
to depart from the routine, and always to give the pre- 
ference to a modem work or living botanist, especially 
the latter. If there is already another authority in print, 
the second becomes a confirmation ; and in increasing our 
evidence of the fact in question, it becomes better worth 
printing than a literal repetition of what has been already 
made public. But in default of better or more recent 
authority, a large number of stations have been intro- 
duced into these volumes really on old or very doubtful 
authority ; — a much greater number than should enter 
them had they now to be reprinted. Increased familiarity 
with the subject has led to the persuasion, that it is far 
better to lose some good facts, than to receive them when 
largely mingled with erroneous statements. In the first 
volume, regret was more than once expressed, that the 
circumstance of writing in the country, out of convenient 



yGooQle 



gL 



PREFACE. XUl 

reach of libraries of reference, bad prevented tbe searcb 
througb county histories, guide books, and other non- 
botanical works, for the localities of plants occasionally 
recorded in such publications. I must now, however, 
retract such expressions, and intimate an opinion that it 
is just as well to neglect non-botanical works, unless when 
the lists of plants contained in them have been drawn up 
by competent botanists, and from actual observation. 

A friend remarked that there was something rather 
egotistical " in appearance, if not in reality," in the parti- 
cular reference to specimens in my own herbarium. This 
may be so ; yet the plan seemed desirable, because the 
" spy following the name of a person does not intend only 
that he had sent a specimen, but implies that a specimen 
in proof of the station is preserved in my Herbarium, 
and can be inspected in case of doubt. It will be ob- 
served that a large number of the localities recorded in 
these volumes are now confirmed by this visible testi- 
mony, which, on the death of the present possessor, can 
be given to some botanical or scientific society, as being 
an useful record and proof for our successors. Besides, 
were it merely a matter of entire indifierence, those 
friends deserve a preference who have taken the trouble 
to procure and send the specimens; and much rather 
should it be given to them, when the correctness of the 
alleged facts thus becomes more surely certified. 

It has been suggested that county lists relate to an 
inconvenient extent of surface, and that subdivisions into 
parishes, or even areas of smaller extent, would be pre- 
ferable. This seems plausible ; and could the suggestion 
be carried into effect, a work so constructed would prove 
extremely useful. Unfortunately, many difficulties would 
have to be encountered. For example, numerous indic- 
ations of localities are made either to counties simply, or 
to the vicinities of particular towns or villages, so that a 



yGooQle 



gL 



XIV PREFACE. 

Stranger (and one writing a Guide to Britain in general 
must be a stranger to a large portion of the country) 
cannot possibly tell in how many, or in which parishes, 
the plant in question is to be met with. Fully the half 
of our published localities would be found unavailable 
in any attempt to make a Guide on this plan. Supposing 
the loss of these general indications to be compensated 
by a large accession of accurately noted stations from new 
or renewed observation, a second very weighty objection 
arises, and one that would become more serious in pro- 
portion as the first mentioned difficulty was lessened. I 
allude to the great increase of bulk and cost, which would 
unavoidably attend such an increased number of local 
lists. We may find an instance of this in a book pub- 
lished since the first volume of the present work was 
issued, namely, Mr. Cooper's Flora Metropolitanoy men- 
tioned on page 586. It is really a Botanist's Guide, almost 
on the plan under consideration, and having no claim to 
be entitled a Flora. This work relates to an area about 
equal in extent to a single county of average size ; lists of 
some of the plants, at a hundred and fifty different places 
within the area, being given. The price of the Flora 
Metropolitana is 4^. 6d^ and it cannot be called an over- 
charged book. The average cost of a county list, in the 
first volume of the present work, is below 2^.; the list 
for Yorkshire, the largest of them, being only Sd. If the 
stations of the Flora Metropolitana had been printed in 
the same form, they would not have filled so many pages 
as this Yorkshire list, and therefore might have cost 
fewer pence. I do not make such comparisons with 
any wish to depreciate the work of Mr. Cooper, which I. 
regard as a useful addition to the botanist's library, but 
solely with the view of shewing that the same kind of 
facts are here conveyed in a much cheaper and more, 
portable form, — advantages which it is worth while to. 



y Google 



PREFACE. XV 

make some sacrifices for. A Botanist's Guide to the 
whole of Britain, on the same plan as the Fhra Metro' 
politana^ would have extended through twenty or thirty 
volumes such as that of Mr. Cooper, and at a cost of five 
guineas, instead of being published at one-sixth part of 
that price. I believe that lists for counties, or areas of 
larger extent, will give the best combination of usefulness 
and moderate cost; leaving to individuals the task of 
re-casting the general list into subordinate ones, for any 
particular counties in which they may feel especially 
interested. Some further remarks on the increase of cost 
connected with a more expanded form of description, 
may be seen on page 591. In books that are designed 
to be useful to others^ the cost should be kept down as 
much as possible. 

One gentleman wrote me that he had been much dis- 
appointed at finding so few localities indicated about the 
town in which he is a resident ; but since neither this 
gentleman nor any one else, so far as is known to me, ha» 
ever published any list or localities of plants to be found 
in that part of the country, it was impossible that I could 
ascertain what plants were growing there ; my abode 
being one or two hundred miles off, and the town having 
been seen by myself only two or three times, from the 
windows of a mail, in the night. Moreover, I must not 
pretend to inform botanists what plants they tread upon 
round their own houses. Surely they may be presumed 
to know this much better than a distant stranger can do ; 
and if desirous of seeing the plants of their own neigh* 
bourhoods more fully mentioned, the localities of such 
might have been communicated to this work, or other- 
wise made public by themselves. The gentleman alluded 
to favoured me with a list of the plants which he had 
gathered within a distance of five or six miles from home. 
They amounted to 187, including the commonest kinds* 



y Google 



XVI PREFACE* 

It might have been supposed that a single day would 
have sufficed for procuring this number; and if, as a 
resident botanist, he had carried his own labours to this 
extent only, he should not have felt disappointed with 
the small success or efforts of others. 

When the manuscript sheets of the first volume were 
on the point of going to the printer, two or three friends 
strongly urged the addition of the vascular, or ductulose, 
cryptogamic plants. In consequence of this advice, a note 
was introduced on page 5, expressing a wish to make such 
addition in an Appendix, which it was then anticipated 
would soon become requisite. The Supplement, in the 
latter part of the second volume, supplies the intended 
Appendix; but on further reflection it was deemed 
advisable still to omit all the cryptogamic plants. Lo- 
calities for such have not been sent to me in any 
thing like the same proportion as for the flowering 
plants ; nor have I bestowed any proper attention upon 
them myself. Consequently, the lists would not be at 
all full ; and though half a loaf is said to be better than 
no bread, I trust the half loaf, or more, may be soon 
supplied by another hand. Mr. Francis informs me that 
he is bringing out a small work devoted to these orders 
of plants, illustrated by figures, and which is intended 
to contain as fiiU an enumeration of localities as he can 
ascertain. This intimation induced me to copy the 
greater part of the notes of localities which I had re- 
ceived up to the summer of 1836, and to send them for 
his use, instead of introducing them into the present work. 
At the time of writing this, the work of Mr. Francis is not 
published ; but I have seen some of the figures, which are 
expressive, though small. 

Thus far I have been writing a Preface in answer to 
the comments and suggestions of others, touching the 



yGooQle 



gl 



PRBFACB. XVU 

contents of these two volumes only. Simultaneously 
with the first of these was published a second vrorky 
intimately connected with them, and which I had once 
intended to constitute a part of one single work, em- 
bracing the contents of all the three volumes, together 
with other matters not yet published. A reviewer in 
the Medical Gazette has recognised their connection, 
and termed the New Botanist's Guide " part and parcel '* 
of the Remarks on the Geographical Distribution of 
British Plants, The connection will become more ap- 
parent when the other matters alluded to are published. 
Meantime, the < Remarks ' have been only imperfectly 
understood, probably because the work contains chiefly 
general and generalised facts, the ultimate bearings of 
which will not be discovered by persons who have paid 
little or no attention to the relations between vegetation 
and physical geography. A reviewer in the Athensum 
(apparently rather at a loss what opinion to form respect^ 
ing the < Remarks,') resorted to the old-fashioned yet 
sensible enough " cui botiOy* by asking what useful result 
is to ensue from such investigations into the distribution 
of plants, and seemed to pity the author's oversight in 
not explaining why such facts were put on record. Thus 
called on, I wish to devote a page or two to this subject, 
and know not any more appropriate place and oppor- 
tunity than is here afforded. Readers may pass them 
over, if the subject appears irrelevant in their eyes. Cer- 
tainly, we ought to keep an eye steadily to the value 
and probable usefulness of scientific enquiries; but if 
** cui bono" had been efiectively thrust forward to press 
down every bud of science in its first rudimentary state, 
how could we ever have seen one single well-grown and 
fruit-bearing branch formed ? 

The ultimate tendency of botany, as of any other 
science worthy of cultivation, should be found in some 



yGooQle 



gL 



XVHl PREFACE. 

beneficial results to the human race, equivalent to the 
cost of time and money expended on the pursuit. Unles* 
some such results be in prospect, however distantly, it is 
difficult to conceive what adequate advantages are to be 
derived from our sedulous efforts to describe and give 
names to every peculiarity of structure, form and pro- 
portion in plants; from our voluminous collections of 
specimens, dried and living, including the productions of 
nearly every clime and country ; from our intense (a psycho-^ 
legist might say, monamaniacal) devotion to the devising 
of systems and classifications ; and from the great expense 
of time and money necessarily made in effecting all this. 
Unless there be some prospect of equivalent return, I 
repeat, some reasonable hope of thereby eventually adding 
much to the stock of power and enjoyment which man* 
kind at present derives from the vegetable world, it wiH 
be the duty of political economists to stigmatise botanists 
as the unproductive consumers or supernumerary drones 
of society. 

Now mere descriptions, mere classifications, mere in-' 
vention of names, howsoever complete and ingenious^ 
produce nothing to the human race. They only consume 
time and labour. And although such occupation may be 
an agreeable amusement to the parties personally con- 
cerned in it, yet, taken alone, it is as valueless to the 
world as would have been their occupation for an equal 
length of time at a card-table. We cannot make the earth 
yield us a greater quantity of food and clothing, through 
means of its vegetable productions, merely by knowing 
their names, resemblances and structure. After learning 
these things, (which I by no means undervalue, as a 
groundwork for something more,) we must still take 
other steps, by studying the relations existing between 
vegetables and the rest of creation. One set of these 
relations is found in the connections established between 



yGooQle 



gL 



PREFACE. XIX 

v^etation, on the one band, and the physical conditions 
of its existence, on the other; that is to say, the influence 
of climate, soil, and the other external circumstances 
determining the vegetation of the globe, whether general 
or special. The more we come to understand these con- 
nections, the greater will be our power of modifying them 
for our benefit But we must first carefuUy ascertain the 
facts, before we can rationally expect or hope to make 
them beneficial. Hitherto, almost all our applied know- 
ledge on this subject has been purely empirical ; having 
been left to farmers and gardeners, who have derived little 
assistance from technical botanists. Experiments and 
accidental observations, with some aid from chemistry 
and mechanical inventions, have enabled practical farmers 
greatly to augment and improve the vegetable produce of 
Britain : but it is hardly saying too much, to suggest that 
a scientific knowledge of the laws of vegetation, though 
it will be slowly acquired, must place a future race of 
cultivators as much above the present workmen, in skill 
and power, as the scientific chemist of to-day is superior 
to the cooks and the drug-venders, who were the che- 
mists, empirically, centuries ago. The collecting and 
arranging of facts, such as appear likely to bear upon 
one department of a study which may become so im- 
portant to mankind, has been my aim hitherto, as it has 
been the aim of others. No one has yet advanced a 
step beyond this preliminary labour, in so far as that 
one department is concerned ; and no one can go beyond 
it at present. An attempt to do so, would be only a leap 
from twilight into utter darkness. My reviewer appears 
to have forgotten this, in his allusion to Humboldt 
That philosopher only collected facts together, (chiefly 
those ascertained by others,) and made an imperfect 
generalisation of them. He could do no more than this, 
and most assuredly he " built " no " system ; " for how 



yGooQle 



gL 



XX PREFACE. 

can a system be built, before the constituent materials 
are half of them procured ? 

I should scarcely have felt disposed thus to put for- 
ward any immediate answer to the strictures in question, 
had it not been for a supposition that the reviewer's mask 
was here worn by one to whom the botanists of England 
are under weighty obligations ; but who, on this occasion, 
was not the less stepping out of his own chosen and 
familiar road. The answer has been made, in reply to the 
question of usefulness, construing this in a moral or public 
sense ; but if it were designed to have only an individual 
application, the reply must be put on the same ground, 
by reference to individual tastes. One class of minds 
derive their intellectual gratification from direct or simple 
observation almost exclusively ; a second class of minds 
are more pleased by occupying themselves with the rela- 
tions between objects or events. If plants become the 
objects of interest, the former minds describe and classify 
them ; while the latter may feel little interest in descrip- 
tions and classifications, yet derive much pleasure from 
tracing the relations established between plants and 
animals, or between plants and their geographical posi- 
tions. For one of these to object to the studies of the 
other, would be as sensible a proceeding as it would be for 
the historian to find fault with the moral philosopher, oi 
for the anatomist to censure the physiologist, each because 
the other had a different taste and pursuit. 

Should the preceding reply be deemed insufficient, I 
must further plead that others are guilty of a similar 
neglect of answering the "cwt bono" by anticipation. 
Dr. Lindley's Introduction to Botany is divided into seven 
" Books." The sixth of these is devoted exclusively to 
the " Geography ; or the Distribution of Plants upon the 
Surface of the Globe ;" " Organography,'* and " Physi- 
ology," are the subjects treated of in the first and second 



y Google 



PREFACE. XXI 

Books ; and it thus appears that the author has held the 
Geography of Plants to be a division or department of 
Botany equivalent to the other two very important depart- 
ments just named. Yet Dr. Lindley does not explain why 
the subject is brought forward thus prominently, even in 
writing an << Introduction.*' In treating of it, he says, <<I shall 
confine myself to an exposition of the positive facts which 
appear to have been hitherto distinctly ascertained." Now 
my << Remarks'* might be exactly characterised by the 
sentence quoted. They differ from Dr. Lindley's sketch, 
in relating only to the plants of one country instead of 
to those of several scattered parts of the globe. They 
are also facts much more ^< distinctly ascertained'' than are 
several of the statements copied into Dr. Lindley's work. 
And theyare addressed to persons who are presumed to feel 
some interest in the subject, and who no more require to 
be told the use of such facts, than the practical botanist 
requires to have his " Synopsis of the British Flora " pre- 
faced by a dissertation on the utility of knowing plants 
and their names. I may now request my reviewer to put 
his query to DnXindley, and ask why the required in- 
formation is not to be found in his <^ Introduction to 
Botany," where the subject occupies a position so pro- 
minent? And having thus shifted the burden to one of 
the pillars of botany, I shall be content to take refuge 
under the roof which that pillar may support. 

Before concluding this lengthy Preface, I wish to offer 
a few suggestions for the consideration of any future 
writer on the topography of oi^r native plants. Perhaps 
the arrangement into county lists might be advantageously 
changed in a future Botanist's Guide. The boundaries 
are often artificial and very irregular, and are , otherwise 
inconvenient to botanical purposes. Local Floras or 
Catalogues are already pretty numerous, and they are 



y Google 



ZXU PREFACE. 



increasing. A Guide might be advantageously made by 
adopting just so many divisions, or centres, as there are 
lodd lists published for; all intervening spaces being 
temporarily added to the district of the nearest Flora or 
Catalogue. A series of nearly complete local lists would 
be thus obtained, such as might be readily and usefully 
compared with each other ; and the book would be made 
of more portable size, and could be sold at a smaller 
price, than one in which the lists were more numerous. 
This hint applies only to works whose plan is two-fold,' 
like that of the present volumes. If designed to be 
used solely as guides for collectors, the completeness of 
the local lists is of little moment, and only such stations 
should be included as are explicitly described, and re- 
lating to the rarest plants: counties or still smaller 
divisions of the surface might then be taken. An useful 
pocket Guide might be made by selecting such Ipcalities 
from the lists in these volumes, with the addition of any 
other well-described stations. The price of such a work 
would not exceed four or ^ve shillings, and being within 
the reach of many more persons, it might repay its 
expences. Should any botanist feel disposed to act on 
this suggestion, I shall be happy to give him more explicit 
information respecting any of the stations followed hy 
my own initials. 

As for local catalogues that are designed to include 
only lists of species, they could be printed for a few 
ghlUings, on either of the following plans ; and in this 
condensed form they would be valuable contributions to 
such botanical periodicals as it is wished to make into 
works of regidar reference, instead of being filled only 
with the fleeting intelligence of the day ; provided always^ 
as the lawyers write, the said lists were drawn up by 
competent persons, and with due care and knowledge. 
One method would be that of referring to the nearest 



yGooQle 



gL 



PREFACE. XXIU 

local Flora or Catalogue published, and simply enumerat- 
ing the species of each tract wanting in the other. In 
t;his way, we might print the equivalent of a county list 
on a single octavo page. Another method would be to 
tiave a list of three to five hundred of the commonest 
plants, as a general standard of reference ; the local list 
in this case being shewn by naming all the other species 
found in the tract under consideration, and also speci- 
fying any of these common ones which might be wanting 
there. A county list need seldom exceed two or three 
pages on this plan. The species excluded from these 
volumes, on account of the frequency of their occur- 
rence, amount to SSG, and are shewn by two lists in my 
'Geography of British Plants.* The names of these 
make up the bulk of most local lists, and the repetition 
of them might be avoided, by a simple reference to those 
lists, except for such of the plants as are absent, which 
would average about three dozen in a county. 

Thames JDitton^ Surry , 
Marchy 1837. 



NOTICE. 

The first impression of this volume was completed in 
March 1837 ; and it was intended to be published on the 
31st of that month. A few days before that date, the 
whole impression was destroyed by an accidental fire, on 
the premises of the printer. A reprint became neces- 
sary, and an opportunity appears to have been thus 
afforded for the introduction of many additions, supplied 
to the editor since the printing of the former impression 
commenced. Unfortunately, he had already ma4e other 



y Google 



XXiv NOTICE. 

engagements which have entirely prevented him giving 
up the time requisite to arrange the additional matter, and 
introduce it here. In consequence, the work appears as 
written in the autumn of 1836 ; the only choice being 
either a reprint without additions or the non-publication 
of the volume. A copy of proofs being in the editor's 
hands sufficient for his own use, he would have preferred 
not to reprint the volume ; but a sense of obligation to 
the friends who have favoured him with so much of its 
contents, in the expectation of such being made public, 
renders it incumbent upon him to have the book pub- 
lished. The work of Mr. Francis, mentioned on page xvi, 
has been published, and by the numerous localities, 
indicated for the ferns and allied orders, will supply the 
omission of them in this Gruide. 



y Google 



ISLE OF HAN. 407 



LIII. ISLE OF. MAN. 

Mt information about the flora of this island, is derived chiefly irom 
a list of species observed there by Mr. James Macnab, and a catalogue 
of the Manx flora politely sent to me by Mr. Edward Forbes. As 
the latter indicates also the comparative frequency of the species, and 
the soil or substratum on which they are found, this catalogue is re- 
ferred to, in preference to Mr. Macnab*s list. A small botanico-ge- 
olc^ic chart, by Mr. Forbes, accompanied the list ; and the island is 
thus described ; — *« The Isle of Man is thirty miles long, by about 
twelve at its broadest part. The greater portion of the isdiuid is com- 
posed of clay-slate which at the sea coast is overlapped by greywacke 
and transition slate. At the north of the island is a large tract, almost 
flat, of sandy marl, the central part of which is covered by peat bogs. 
Sandstone appears at Peel, and the peninsula of Langness is partly 
composed of sand. At Castletown the coast is formed of a bed of 
transition limestone, the only instance of that rock in the island. Beds 
of peat are interspersed amongst the clay-slate, presenting the same 
botanical characters with those on the sand. The greatest elevation to 
which the slate rises is Snaefell, which is 2007 feet above the level of 
the sea. The mountainous 'district generally presents elevations of 
from 1000 to 1600 feet, but is unproductive in botanical treasiu'es. As 
my residence in the island, since I engaged in botanical pursuits, has 
b^n only in the months of September and October, and once in May, 
during the first two weeks, I have not been able to examine its pro- 
ductions in the way of grasses, carices, orchidecB and wiUows, and ex- 
pect to find many rare summer plants there ; yet I believe the list will 
present a tolerably correct idea of the distribution of the other phasno- 
gamous tribes in the island. There are several species, which are very 
common in most places, but which, as far as I can ascertain, we want 
altogether, such as Lamium album, Galium cruciatum, Veronica 
hederifolia, Alchemilla vulgaris, Geum urbanum, Linaria vulgaris, 

AUTHORITIES. 

Forbes, cat. Mr. Forbes's Catalogue above mentioned. 

Mcumab, cat, Mr. Macnab's List above mentioned. 

Conir^ Winch's Contributions to the Flora of Cumberland. 1833. 



Cakile maritima. On the clay-slate, scarce. Forbes, cat. 

Caambe maritima. On the greywacke, rare. Forbes, cat. 

(The locality is marked on the W, side of the island, almost 
opposite the S. Berule, on the map accompanying the cata- 
logue.) 

B 2 



yGooQle 



gL 



408 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

LxriDiuH Smithii, Isle of Man. JE, Forbes, sp, (This is not 
marked in the catalogues of Mr. Forbeis or Mr. Macnab, 
while L. campestre occurs in both of them. The specimen of 
this, as the specimens of other Manx plants mentioned to have 
been received from Mr. Forbes, came without any name at- 
tached. Hence, I cannot say whether this species, called 
L. Smithii by myself, is what that gentleman has considered 
L. campestre. Mr. Forbes' catalogue indicates the latter as 
growing on the sand or sandstone and clay-slate, very com- 
monly. H,W,) 

CocHLEARiA officinalis. On the greywacke and sand, common.. 
ForbeSi cat, 

ffrcRnlandica, On the greywacke, scarce. ForbeSf cat. 
(I have a specimen of this genus, from Mr. Forbes, to which 
the name C. danica appears applicable, but I speak hesi^ 
tatingly. H. W.) 

f EaYsiMUM cheiranthoides. On the sand, rare. Forbes, cat, 

Bbassica monensis. On the sand, scarce. Forbes, cat, and sp. Be- 
tween the landing-place at Ramsey and the town, plentifully. 
Eng, Fl, Near Peel and the point of Ayr. Ckmtr, Dou- 
glass (Mr. T. Jowett) G. Howitt, sp.' 

"Reseda frutictdosa. On she sand, scarce; on old walls, abundant. 
Forbes, cat. and sp, (On the map, localities are marked to 
the eastward of Castletown, and two-thirds of the distance 
from Peel towards Surly Point.) 

Viola lutea. Isle of Man. Macnab, cat, 

Sagina maritima. On the sand, rare. Forbes, cat. 

SvERGVi^A subulata. Man. (Mr. T. Jowett.) G. Howitt, sp. On the 
greywacke, rare. Forbes, cat. 

Arenaria peploides. On the sand, common. Forbes, cat, 

————— marina. On the greywacke and limestone, very common. 
Forbes, cat. Man. (Mr. T. Jowett.) G. Howitt, sp. 

Cerastium tetrandrum. On the sand, scarce. Forbes, cat, 

arvense. On the sand, very rare. Forbes, cat, and »p. 

LiNUM angustifoUum, On the greywacke, very rare. Forbes, cat. 
and sp. • 

Radiola miUegrana, On the clay-slate and peat, common. Forbes, 
cat. 

Lavatera arborea. Isle of Man. Macnab, cat, 

Htpsricum Androscemum, On the greywacke, clay-slate, and sand, 
common. Forbes, cat. Man. (Mr. T. Jowett.) G. Howitt, sp, 
elodes. On the clay-slate and greywacke, common. 
Forbes, cat. and sp. 

Erodium maritimum. On th^ greywacke and limestone, scarce. 
Forbes, cat. and sp. 

Ononis spinosa. Borders of peat, very rare. Forbes, cat. 

ViciA angustifdia. On the sand, scarce. Forbes, cat, and «p. 

lathyroides. On the sand, scarce. Forbes, cat. 

Melilotus leucantha. On the clay-slate, very rare. Forbes, cat. 

* Prunus domestica. On the clay-slate, very rare, but apparently 
quite wild, though rarely flowering. Forbes, cat. 



yGooQle 



gL 



ISIiE OF MAN, 409 

Rosa ^nogissima. On the sand, day-vlate and greywacke, very com- 
mon. Forbes, cat. 

tomentosa. On the sand and clay'Skte, very common. Forbes, 

cat. 

RuBUs carpmifoUus* On the c]ay-slate> very rare. Forbes, eat, 

• . Koehleri. Oa the clay-slate and sand, very common. Forbes, 

cat. 

— — saxaHUs. On the clay-slate, very rare. Forbes, cat. 

CoMAKUM paiu«(ra. On the peat and clay- slate, common. Forbes, cat. 

Skdum anglicvm. Very common. Forbes, cat, 

CoTYLVnoN Umbilicus. On the clay-slate, very common. Forbes, 
cat. Isle of Man« W. Brand, sp. (probably received from 
Mr. Forbes.) 

Rbqdiola rosea. Isle of Man. Maentxb, cat. 

Saupbaoa aizoides* Isle of Man. Maenab, cat. 

* Cabuh Carvi, Isle of Man, but not observed by myself. Forbes, cat. 
• verticiOatum. Near Ramsey. Conir, 

CBnanthb pimpinettoides. On the limestone, very rare. Forbes, cat. 

Cbithmum maritimum. On the greywacke, scarce. Forbes, cat. 
Isle of Man. (Mr. Forbes.) W. Brand, sp. 

f F(ENicuLi7M vtdgare. On the sand, rare and doubtfiilly indigenous. 
Forbes, cat. 

f Mtbrhis odorata. On the clay-slate, scarce. Forbes, cat. 

Onofordum Acanthium. On the sand, very rare. Forbes, cat. 

Artemisia maritima. Isle of Man. Maenab, cat. 

f Gnafhalium margaritaceum. On the sand, very rare and appa- 
rently wild. Forbes, cat. and sp. ( On the map the locality 
is marked about midway between Ramsey and the Point of 
Ayr.) 

Pybbthrum maritimum ? On the greywacke and limestone, common. 
Forbes, cat. 

Campanula hederacea. Isle of Man. (Mr. T. Jowett. ) G. Hotoitt, sp. 

Convolvulus SoldaneBa, On the sand, very rare. Forbes, cat. and sp. 
(In the map, the locality is marked at a spot about 
two- thirds of the distance from Peel towards Surly Point. ) 

Mtosotis ccespitosa. Very common. Forbes, cat. 

. coUina. On the sand, scarce. Forbes, cat, 

Ltcofus europcRus. On the peat, common. Forbes, cat. and sp. 

Mbntha Ftdegxum. On the peat, scarce. Forbes, cat. Isle of Man. 
(Mr. Forbes.) W. Brand, sp. 

Lamium incisum. On the sand, common. Forbes, cat. 

Stachts ambiffua. On the sand, scarce. Forbes, cat. 

CAtAMiNTHA Ncpcto, On the sand, very rare. Forbes, cat. 

Scutellaria minor. On the greywacke, rare. Forbes, cat. Man. 
(Mr. T. Jowett.) G. ffowitt, sp. 

PiNOUicuLA hMtVcmica. IsleofMaa. (Mr. Forbes.) W» Brand, sp, 

Centuncu lu s mim'mus. Isle of Man. (Mr. T. Jowett.) G. ffowitt, sp. 

Staticb Armeria. On the greywacke and limestone, very common. 
Forbes, cat, 

Plantaoo maritima. On the greywacke and limestone, common. 



Forbes, cat. 



B 3 



y Google 



410 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Glaux maritima. On the sand and limestone, scarce. Forbes, cat, 

Salsola Kali, On the sand, common. Forbes, cat. 

Chenopodium tmtrale. On the sand, common. Forbes, cat. 

Beta maritima. Isle of Man. (Mr. T. Jowett.) G. Howitt, sp. 

Euphorbia ParaJias. On th6 greywacke, very rare. Forbes, cat. 

porOandica. Isle of Man. (Mr. T. Jowett.) G. Howitt, sp. 

Emfet&um nigrum. On the clay>slate, common. Forbes, cat. 

Salix pentandra. On the clay-date, I'are. Forbes, eat. 

TaioLocHiN maritimvm. Isle of Man. Macnab, 4xU. 

LisTERA cordat(u On Snafield. Contr, 

SciLLA vema. On the greywacke, sand and limestone, common. 
Forbes, cat. and sp. 

? — autumnalis. ( This is mentioned as a Manx plant, in my Out- 
lines of the Geographical Distribution of British Plants, on 
the authority of Mr. Macnab's Catalogue. The species in- 
tended, however, was S. vema, the mark being accidentally 
attached to the wrong name, in checking off a list) 

SciRPUs Savii. Isle of Man. Forbes, sp. 

Eleocharis aeicHlaris. On the clay>slate, common. Forbes, casL 

Blysmus rufus. Isle of Man. Winch, mss. 

Carex arenaria. On the sand, scarce. Forbes, cat. 

externa. Isle of Man. ( Mr. T. Jowett ) G. Howitt, sp. 

(Ederi. On the clay, slate, common. Forbes, eat, 

" siricta ? Isle of Man. W. Brand, sp. 

Phleum arenarium. Isle of Man. Forbes, sp. 

Triticum loliaceum. Isle of Man. Forbes, sp. 



LIV. WIGTONSHIRE. 

Glaucium luteum. East side of the Mull of Galloway. G. Maenab, 

mss. 
Lbpioium Smithii, Road-side near Newtown- Stewart. G, Maenab, 

mss. 
Crambs maritima. At West Tarbet G. Maenab, mss. 
Bbassica monensis. Sea shore, Ayr and Galloway. J. H. Balfour, 

sp. 
Raphakus maritimus. Near Kirkmaiden, Galloway, J, H. BaJifow^ 

sp. Mull of Galloway, abundant G. Maenab, sp. Beach» 

three miles from the Mull of Galloway. Eng, Fl 
Hypericum Androscemum. Near Portpatrick. /. H. Balfour, sp. 



yGooQle 



gl 



WIGTOKSHIRS. 411 

Htpsbicuk elodes. Near Port Logan. /. H, Balfour, sp. Diteh 
by the road-side between Newtown- Stewart and Glenluce» 
alx)ut six miles from Glenluce. Fl. Scot, 

EaoDiuM maritimum. Northward of Port William^ Excurs. 

Ulex nanus. Loch Galdenock. /. H, Balfour, tp. 

Ononis recUnata, Near West Tarbet, GaUoway. /. H, Balfour, 
sp. Among the debris at the foot of the clifl& overhanging 
the rocky shore on the W. side of the Mull of GaUoway, 
undoubtedly wild. Excur*. 

OxYTROPis uralensis. GaUoway. J, H, Balfimr, sp* At West 
Tarbet. (?. Macnab, mss, 

SxDUM rupestrt, Loch-Naw, GaUoway. /. H, Balfour, sp. Banks 
of Loch-Naw. Excurs, 

CaiTHMUM maritimum. Near the Point of MuU, on the W. sid6. 
G, Maenab, mss, Kirkmaiden ; between MuU and Kirk- 
patrick. Fl, Scot, 

Apium graneolens. Near the MuU of GaUoway. J, H, Balfour, sp, 

Cakum verticillatum. Near Wigton. Excurs, 

HsLosciADiuM repens? Galloway. /. H, Balfour, sp, (I should 
refer Dr. Balfour's specimen to H. nodiflorum. H, W, ) 

CEnanthe peucedanifolia? Mull of GaUoway. G, Macnab, sp, 
GaUoway. J, H. Balfour, sp. At West Tarbet. G. 
Macnab, mss, (Probably these localities, though differ- 
ently worded, may all be one and the same. The specimens, 
both from Dr. Balfour and Dr. GUbert Macnab, 1 should 
have referred to (£. pimpineUoides, on account of the many- 
leaved involucrum. The same remark wUl apply to a speci- 
men, received from Mr. G. N. Lloyd as CE. peucedanifoUa, 
and which was gathered in the south of Scotland, probably 
in Kirkcudbrightshire. With three authorities against me, 
I have not ventured to change the name, though marking 
the species as doubtful. H, W,) 

Fedia dentata, GaUoway. Excurs, 

LiMBARDA crithmaides. At West Tarbet, and near the Point of 
Mull, on the W. side. G. Macnab, sp. MuU- Head of 
Galloway, with Inula dysenterica. FL Scot, 

Artemisia maritima. In various places Eastward of Burrow Head, 
particularly near Cragleton Castle and at St. Mary's Isle. 
Excurs. 

Ptrxthrum jnariiimum. GaUoway. J, H. Balfour, sp, 

Andromeda polifoUa, Wigtonshire. Boue, Inaugural Dissertation. 

Convolvulus SoldaneUa, Sea-shore, GaUoway, /. H, Balfour, sp. 
£. side of the Mull of Galloway. G, Macnab, mss, 

SoLANUM nigrum. Neighbourhood of Sandhead, and northward of 
Port WiUiam. Excurs. 

Bartsia viscosa. Between Port William and Glasserton. Excurs. 

Lycopus europceus. Loch-Naw. /. H. Balfour, sp. Along the 
shores southward and eastward of Glenluce. Excurs. 

Stachts ambigua. Near Stranraer and Portpatrick. /. H. Balfour, 
sp, 

B 4 



y Google 



412 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

IrAMiuM intemediwn. Near Sondhead. E*eur», 
FiHGuicuLA htsiiamotu Gralloway. Wmch, add, 
Statice spathulata. Near the Mull of Galloway. J. H. Balfour^ 
ap. Near the Pomt of MuU, on the W. side. G. Maenabj 

VMS, 

AvRirtix poriulaeoide$. Mull of Galloway- J. IL Ba^imr, 9. 

Poi^TGOKUM maritimum. South shore of Galloway, abundant. Ex- 
cmr8. 

Euphorbia porUandica, Mull of Galloway. /. H, Bidfimr and 
6r. MaeiuAf sps,. 

Salix eottnifciia, Road-side betweoi Newtown-Stewartand Glenluce. 
JF7. Seat. 

AusMA natans. Black Loch, six miles from Stranraer. Br, FL 

Orchis pyramidaUs, E. side of the Mull of Galloway ; near Port- 
. Patrick. Eamtrs. 

HjfutVAAtA chlorantha. Gralloway. Excwrs. 

im^njL e^Haia. Wigtonshire. BouS, Inaugwral, DiaaertatioH. 

MkX^tls paludoaa. Mull of Galloway. FL Scot, 

Jvvttf^inaritimuf. West Tarbet, Galloway. /. S. Baffimr, 8p, 
* ^ Many places on the coast Excwrs, 

SciRPirs ISami. East Tarbet, GaUoway. J. H, Balfour, sp. Near 
IDrummore, and other places on the south coast Exetara, 

? Clamum Mariaeua, Galloway. Br, FL Doubtful. Excura. 

Carxx axtenaa. Mull of Galloway, pretty abundant ; at West 
Tarbet G, Macnab, ap. Damp spots in the steep bank 
overhai^^g the coast on the W. side of the Mull of Gal- 
loway. Exeura. 

Brokus t)eluHnua, Near Sandhead. Exeura, 

TRTricuM loUaceum, South shore of Galloway, from Drummore, 
eastward. Excwa. 



LV. KIRKCUDBRIGHTSHIRE. 

As both the present and preceding counties were included, in part 
at least, under the district of Galloway, I have been rather at a loss, in 
a few instances, to which county certain plants should be referred when 
** Galloway" has been indicated for them, without any more precise 
localisation. 



Thauctrom majua. 1 Banks of the Dee^ Kirkcudbrightshire. G, N. 

————— minMa. J Uoyd, maa, 

Crakbe maritima. Coast of Balmae and Ross-hilL G. N, JJoyd,. 



yGooQle 



gL 



KIRKCUDBRIOHTSRIRE. 4) S 

Droseiia qngUca, Kirkcoaael Moss, six miles from Dmnfries. Fl- 

Scot, 
HrpE&icuM elode*. Ditches on the road>side near Loch-Crie. G. 

Macnab, sp. 
Ai,THMA. officirudis. Near Arfoigbnd, on the ScAwaj Firth. Fl 

Scot, 
Ulex nanus, Gralloway. G. N. Uoydi sp, 
* Lathtrus hUifdius, Woods near Kirkcudbright. FL Scot. 

Abund^tly in the woods at St. Mary's Isle, introduced. 

Excurs. 
RuBus saxatilis. On rocks in the bed of the Dee, near Tongueland • 

Bridge. G, N, Lloyd, mss, 
Sanguisobba officinalis. Banks of the Nith at Kirkconnel*, Stew- 

artry of Kirkcudbright. FL Scot. 
£BTNOinM maritimum. Brig-house Bay, Ross-hill. G. N, Lbyd, 

mss. 
CaiTHMUM maritimum. On rocks along the coast, from Balmae to 

Balcarry ; also at Ross-hilL G. K. Lloyd, mss, 
Cabum verticiUatum, Marshy ground, Ross-hill. G. N, Lloyd, 

mss. Between Gatehouse and Kirkcudbright. Excurs. 
Meum athamanticum. Carsphaim. G. Gordon, mss, 
Helosciadiuh repens. Watery places, coast of Balmae. G, JN", Lloyd, 

sp. 
CEnanthe peucedanifolia ? Coast of Balmae, and marshy ground at 

Ross-hilL G. N. Lloyd, mss. (See the remarks to this 

and the preceding species, under Wigtonshire. ) 

pimpinelloides. Kirkcudbrightshire. G, Gordon, piss. 

Galium boreale. On rocks in the bed of the Dee, near the Fisher- 
man's house. G. N. Lloyd, mss. 
HiXRACiUM umbeUatum. Kirkcudbrightshire. G. Gordon, mss. 
Artemisia maritima. On the coast of Galloway, at St. Mary's Isle, 

with A. gallica. Fl. Scot. Near Cragleton Castle ; and in 

various places eastward of Burrow Head. Excurs. 
LiMBARDA crithmoides, Arbigland, in the county of Galloway. FL 

Scot. 
Senecio viscosus. Kirkcudbrightshire. G. Gordon, mss. 
— — — ~ saracenicus. Between Castle- Douglas and near New GaU 

loway. FL Scot. 
? Anthemis maritima. Coast of Balmae, and St. Mary's Isle. G. N. 

Lloyd, mss. (I fear this may prove to be only Pyrethrum 

maritimum. H. W.) 
Ptbethrum maritimum. Brig-house Bay, Galloway. FL Scot. 
Centaorea Jizcea, Between Parton and Crossmichael. G. Gordon, 

mss. 
Lobelia Dortmanna. Loch N. W. from New- Abbey. G. Gordon, 

mss. 
AvBKO^j^nA polifolia. Kirkconnel Moss.* Fl. Scot, 
CuscuTA Epithymum. On furze-bushes, near Mollance. Fl. Scot, 

* There are two places named Kirkconnel, on the river Nith, one near the mouth 
of the river, in Kirkcudbrightshire, the other near its head, in Dumfrieshire. t 
{>re8ume the former to have been intended, in the Flora Scotica. 
b 5 



y Google 



414? THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

MELAMiTauM sylvaiicum. Banks of the Dee, near Queen Maiy'f 

Cave. G. N. Lloyd, mss, 
Stachts ambigua. Field, near the Balmae shore. G. N, IXoyd, 

Tnss. 
Statick Litnonium. Coast of Galloway, near Kirkcudbright, common^ 

Fl. Scot. St. Mary's Isle. G. N, Uoyd, mss. 
Sfarganium natans. In a pond at Balmae. G. N, LJoydj mss, 
RuppiA maritima, Kirkcudbright Loch. G. N, Lloyd, mss. 
JuNcus obtusiflorus. Marshy ground on Ross-hill, and on the coast of 

Balmae. G. N. Lloyd, mss. 
Bltsmus rufus. Solway Firth, Kirkcudbrightshire. Cr. GotdoKf 

mss. 
Rhtncospora alba. Kirkconnel Moss. G. N. Lloyd, mss. 
Festuca rvbra^ At Arbigland, in Galloway. Eng. FL 
RoTT^oirLiA incurvata, Arbigland, in Galloway. FL Scot. 



LVI. DUMFRIESSHIRE. 

Ranunculus Flammula (var. reptans). (By the edge of Castle Lochf^ 

Lochmaben. G. N. Lloyd, mss» 
CoKYHALia davictdata. RuthwelU G. Gordon, mss. 
Nasturtium sylvestre. On the side of the Water of Ea, below Kirk** 

michael House. FL Scot. 
Brassica monensis* Shores of the Solway Firth, abundant. Fl. 

Scot. 
Droskra anglica. Locher Moss. G. N, Lloyd, mss. 
Rhahnus catharticus. About Dumfries. Fl» Scot. 
Orobus sylvaticus. Sanquhar. FL Scot, 
Sanguisorba officinalis. Dumfriesshire. JF. Brand, sp. Low moist 

meadows, near Dumfries. FL Scot. 
RuBus suberectus. Locher Moss. G. N, Lloyd, mss. 

  macrophyUus. About Dumfries, and on Sir William Jardine's 

estates. G. N. Lloyd, mss. 
Epilobium oZstmyb/tum. Side of a rivulet on Hart-felL Fl. Scot. 
Carum verticiUatum. Nithsdak and Galloway, and in Annandale, 

particularly between the form-house of Stark, in Ruthwel^ 

and the bathing-place on the shore. FL Scot, Sanquhar. 

Winch, add, 
CicuTA virosa. Castle Loch and Lochmaben. G, N. Lloyd, mss. 
HiRRACiuM certnthoides. Dumfriesshire. BouS, Inaugural ZHssert- 

ation. 

paludosum. Near Mo£Pat Eng, FL 

    umbeUatum. Dumfriesshire. . G. Gordon, mss, 

-Saussurea alpina. Near Moffat ; and in a deep gulley, at the foot 

of White Coom Edge, Annandale. Fl. Scot. 



y Google 



AYRSHIRE. 415 

f DoEONiciTM PardaUanchea, About Hoddam Castle, in Annandale. 

Fl. Scot. 
Andromeda polifoiUa, Abundant on the Solway Moss. Fl ScoL 

Locber Moss ; and on Sir William Jardlne's property. G, N. 

Lhydf mss. 
CuscuTA europacu On flax about Dumfries* G. N* Hoyd, m$s. 
f ScROPHULARiA vemolU, Hoddam Castle, Annandale. FL Scot. 
Mentha gentilis. Banks of Moffat Water, below Carrifrew. Fh 

Scot. 
Galeopsis versUolor. Gretna Green. Eng, Fl. 
Utricularia minor. Turf pits, east side of Black Loch, Kirkmichael. 

Fl. Scot. 
Salix purpurea. Banks of the Esk, near Netherby. Fl. Scot. 

  pentandra. About Moffat. Eng. FL 

  radicans. Banks of the river Nith, towards Sanquhar. FL 

Scot 

  angustifolia. Near Dumfries. Br. FL Banks of the Nith, 

twenty miles above Dumfries. Fl. Scot. (The latter locality 
is given for S. arbuscula ; but whether the species so named 
in Flora Scotica be identical with S. angustifolia of the 
British FlorOi I know not. It would appear to be so, from 
the opinion expressed by Sir William Hooker.) 

'  vacciniifolia. Foot of Hart-fell, near Moffat. FL Scot. 

CoNVALLARiA multijlora. About Jibber Castle, near Drumlanrig, 
in Nithsdale. FL Scot. 

Rhtncospora alba. Solway Moss. Winch, add. Locher Moss. 
G. N. Lloyd, mss. 

SciRpus maritimus. Locher. G, Gordon, mss. 

Eleocharis acicidaris. On the edge of Castle Loch, Lochmaben* 
G. N". JJoyd, mss. 

Carzx Icsvigata. Near Moffat. Winch, sp. 



LVII. AYRSHIRE. 

Thauctrum majus. Near Fenwickland. Br. FL 

t HsLLXBORUs viridi^. Woods near Ayr. (Herbarium of the late 

Mr. James Wilson. ) A. D. Madagan, sp. By the Doune^ 

^r.Fl. 
Cakile maritima. Ayrshire. Jos. Hooker, sp. 
* Camxlina scUiva. Flax-fields. J, Wilson^ sp. 
Tbbsdalia nudicavUs. Links near Ayr. FL Scot. 
Cardamine impatiens. Banks of the Doune. Br. FL 
Dbntaria buUnfera. Ayrshire. J. Wilson, sp. 
&RASSICA moncnsis. Sea shore, Ayr and Galloway. J. H. Balfour, sp. 

Coast near tjie town of Ayr. G. Macndb, mss. Mouth oC 
B 6 



y Google 



41 6 frifi i^JfiW iOtANIST*S GUIDE. 

the Clyde, about Largs, and on the coast thence to Ayt i 

also opposite the shores of Bute and Arran. FL Scot. 
Raphanus maritimui. Various parts of the coast of Ayrshire. Fi' 

Scot, 
Sagina nutritima, Ayrshire. Jos. Hooker, sp. 
Radiola miUegrancu Prestwick Moor, near Ayr. G. Macmb' *p. 
Rhamnus Frangula, Cullum-wood, near Auchincruive. FL Seat. 
OvioviB tpinoia. About three miles S.E. of Ayr. (Mr. Goldie.) 

James Macnab, sp, 
HipPocREPis comosa. Dundonald Castle, near Ayr, upon ground 

of a chalky nature. FL Scot. (Is there any chalk near 

Ayr?) 
T&irouuM omithopodioides. Low Green, Ayr. /. H, Balfour, sp* 

Coast about two miles from Ayr. G. Macnab, sp. 
ViciA angusHfolia. All along the coast. Br. FL 
lathyroides. Coast between Ayr and Culzean. G. Macnab, sp. 

Along the coast about Largs. FL Scot. 
' lutea. Rocks, Dunure Casde, abundant. Br. FL 

* Rosa cinnamomea. At Birkhill, Gralston, apparently wild. Br. 

FL 
Drtas odopetaia. Ayrshire. Bov£, Inaugurat Dissertation. 
Cotyledon UmbiUcus. Common on rocks aiid old walls along the 

coast from Kelly to Largs. Fl. Scot. Coast between 

Dunure and Culzean. G, Macnab, mss. 
Eetngium maritimum. Ayrshire. Jos. Hooker, sp. Coast near the 

town of Ayr. G. Macnab, mss. 
CaiTHMUM maritimum. Culzean. Br. FL 
Smtrnium Olusatrum. Near Culzean Castle. FL Scot. 
Sekecio saracenicus* Ayrshire. Jos. Hooker, sp. 
Convolvulus SoldaneUa. Sandy hills between Troone and Irvine; 

near Ayr. Fl, Scot. Coast of Ayrshire. W, Twpnam, ^. 
LiTHospERHUM maritimum. On the coast. G. Macnab, sp, 
LiNARLA. repens. Rocks &cing the sea, near Culzean, in the parish of 

Kirkoswald ; also about four miles from that place. FL 

Scot. 
Mblamptrum sylvaticum. Auchindraine woods, on the Doune ; 

Craigs of Ness ; &c. Br, FL 
f ScROPHULARLA. vemoUs, Between Holmston and the river Ayr, 

Br. FL 
Veronica hlrsuta. Dry heathy places in Carrick. Br. FL 
Scutellaria minor. Beith. Fl. Scot. 

PiNGuicuLA lusitdniccu Ayrshire. BouS, Inaugurtd Dissertation. 
CentuncuIus minimus, Prestwick Moor, near Ajrr, G. Macnab, sp. 
Plantago maritima (var. major). On the island of Cumrae, among 

rocks. Br. Fl. 
Chenopodium maritimum. Ayrshire. BouS, Inaugural Dissertaium, 
Atriplex laciniata. Sea-shore of Ayrshire. J. H. Balfour, sp. 
Polygonum aviculare {y&t. maritimum). Ayrshire. (Mr. S. Murray. ) 

J. Hooker, sp. 
RuMEX aquaticus. ' Moist places near Ayr* Br. Fl. 

* Euphorbia Lathyris. Crawfurdland, near Kilmarnock. Br. Fl. 



y Google 



REKFRBWSHIRE. 417 

Habbnaria aUnda, Plentiful among the heather, <m the Carrick 

hills. F(Urieh*8 Catalogue. 
Co&ALLORHizA innoto. Sandy places near the sea, by Irvine. Br, 

Fl 
Iris Pseudacorus (var. citrina). Ayrshire. Br, FL 
Ruscus acitlecUug, Skeldon Woods, near Ayr. Br, Fl' 
AcoRUS Calamui, Ayrshire. /. W^ilson, sp, 
LuzuLA Forsteri, Banks of the Doune. Br, FL 
JoNcus viaritimus, Ayrshire* Br, FL 
Cares limosa. Knockdon Loch, near Ayr. G, Macnab, tp, 

^ -r fiUfomds, At the S. end of Ayr Links. Eng. Fl. 

Calamagrostis Fpigejos, Dalrymple Wood, Ayr. Br. FL 

Ammofhila arundittacea, Ayrshire. /< Mooker, »p, 

Triticum Junceum, Ayrshire. /. Hooker, tp, 

Elymus arenarim, Sear-ooast, near Ayr. FL Scot. Common along 

the coast. Anderson^a Guide, 



LVIII. RENFREWSHIRE. 



AUTHORITY. 



Montgomery, catt — A Catalogue of plants observed in Renfrewshire, 
by Mr. J. Montgomery. (Communicated by Mr. Joseph Hooker.) 



Troluus europams* Cloak. Montgomery, cat, 

CoRYDALis claviculata, Renfrewshire. Mantgomery, cat, 

CocHLEARiA officinalis. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat, 

Drosera longifcHia, In a marsh between Glasgow and Paisley. Glot. 

SiLENE maritima, Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat. 

Stellaria nemorum, Taylor's Glen, Port Glasgow. Montgomery, cat. 

Arenaria marina, Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat, 

Radiol A miUegrana. Gouroch. Montgomery, cat. 

Hypericum Androstemum, Shore at Gouroch. Montgomery, cat. 

Geranium eylvaticum, Renfrewshire. Montg9mery,\cat. 

Prunus Padue, Cloak. Montgomery, cat. Banks of the Cart. Glot. 

SpiRjBA salicifolia. Banks of Loden. Montgomery, cat, 

RuBus suberectus, Road^alde between Govan and Renfrew. Fl. Scot, 

CoMARUM palustre, Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat, 

Rosa tomentosa, Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat, 

* OENOTHERA biennis. Corn-field in Xjochwinuoch parish, naturalised. 

Montgomery, eat, 
Sedum anglicum, Renfrewshire* Montgomery, cat, 
' " viUosum, Lochwinnoch. Montgomery, cat, 
RiBEs alpinum. Castle Semple. Montgomery, cat, 
t nigrum, Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat, 

* Saxifraoa undtrosa. On the banks of the Cart, at Cartside. Ght, 



y Google 



418 THE NEW BOtANlST*S GUIDE. 

* SAXiFRAdA hypnoides. Renfrewshire. Monigomery, cat* 
Chrysosflenium aUemifolium. Cloak. Montgomen/i cat, 
Meum aiham anticum. Lochwinnoch. Montgomery, cat. 

Carum verticiUatum. About Greenock. Fl. Scot. Lochwinnoch. 

Montgomery, cat. 
f Mtrrhis ochrata. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat* 
CEv xJfTH^ pimpinelloides. Near Greenock. Fl. Scot. 
f Viburnum Lantana. Castle Semple. Montgomery, cat* 

* LoNiCERA Caprifolium. Castle Semple. Montgomery, cat. 
Galium horeah. Lochwinnoch. Montgomery, cat, 

f Valerian A jDyrenatcct. Cloak-burn, Lochwinnoch. Montgomery, cat* 
HiERAciuM 8ylvaticum% Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat. 
' ' — pcUudosum. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat* 
Cnicus heterophyllus. Cloak. Montgomery, cat. 
Gnaphalium diouium^ Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat* 
Senecio viscosus. Renfrewshire* Montgomery, cat, 
j-   saracenicus. Cloak. Montgomery, cat. 

Pyrethrum mariUmum. Firth of Clyde. Montgomery, cat. 
Aster Tripolium. Firth of Clyde. Montgomery, cat. 
Achillea tomentosa. On the hills in the neighbourhood of Paisley* 

Glot. 
Campanula hederacea. Near the shores of the Clyde, two or three 

hundred yards to the westwaM of Clough Lighthouse ; 

abundant in the immediate neighbourhood of Greenock. 

Fl. Scot. 
Anoromepa pdifolia. Paisley moss. Fl. Scot, 
LiTHosPERMUM maritimum, Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat* 
Symphytum tttberoaum. Castle Scrapie. Montgomery, cat. 
f Atropa Belladonna. Lochwinnoch, perhaps naturalised. Mont-* 

gomery, cat. On the banks of the Cart, near Cathcart MUl* 

Glot. 
Bartsia viacosa. Near Greenock and Gouroch. Montgomery, cat. 
Galeopsis versicolor. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat. 
Lamium incisum. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat. 
Stychis amhigua. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat. 
Lycopus europaus. Shores of Holy Loch ; Kelly ; &c. Montgomery, 

cat. 
LATHRiBA squamaria. Cart-side near Glasgow ; and about Cathcart 

Castle. Fl. Scot. Castle Semple woods. Anderson's Guide 

to the Highlands. 
Static* Armeria. Firth of Clyde. Montgomery, cat. 
Glaux maritima. Firth of Clyde. Montgomery, cat. 
Plantago maritima. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat* 
Empetrum nigrum. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat* 
f Carpinus Betulus. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat. 
Salix cinerea, Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat, 
f PiNus sylvestris. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat. 
Sagittaria sagittifdia. Paisley. J. Hooker, sp. 
Triglochin maritimum, Gouroch, Greenock, &o. Montgomery, cat* 
Habenaria aJbida. Lochwinnoch. Montgomery, cat. 
LisTERA cordata. Misty Law. Montgomery, cat* 



yGooQle 



gL 



LANARKSHIRE. 419 

* QalaHtAvs nivalis. Castle Seniple. Montgomery, cat, 
f CoNVALLAKiA mojaUs, Castle Semple. Montgomery, cai* 
Aco&us Calamus, Lochwinnoch ; Castle Semple Loch. Br. Pi. 
j^siSKA marina. Firth of Clyde. Montgomery, cat, 
Eriophorum vaginatum, Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat. 
Eleocharis acicularis, Lochwinnoch. Montgomery, cat* 
PoA maritima, Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat, 
Bromus arvensis. Renfrewshire. Montgomery, cat* 



LIX. LANARKSHIRE. 

TiiE/Twa Ghttiana (Flora of the Clyde, or of Glasgow,) includes 
tnost of the plants of Lanarkshire, together with others occurring in the 
adjacent parts of the counties of Renfrew, Dumbarton and Stirling^ 
The Indigenous Plants of Lanarkshire, a work more recently published, 
is a descriptive Flora of the county. I can giv6 very few particular 
localities or stations, in addition to those indicated in the two works 
mentioned, but my Herbarium contains a large number of specimens 
from these counties, and the shores of the fitth of Clyde ; for which t 
am indebted to Mr. Joseph Hooker. Unfortunately, the method 
chosen by Mr. Hooker, for intimating the counties in which the spe-^ 
cimens were gathered, (by means of a printed list and initial letters, 
without tickets to the specimens,) is so liable to inadvertences on the 
})art of the sender, and misapprehension on the part of the receiver, 
that the chances are very great, for some of the specimens being re- 
ferred to wrong counties. But we may safely trust that they have all 
been gathered in one or other of the four counties mentioned, or on 
the coasts of the fiith of Clyde, as in Ayr, Argyle, or the adjacent 
islands ; and, probably enough, in nineteen out of twenty specimens, the 
counties will be correctly itidicated. This explanation is particularly 
made, because it may possibly happen that I name a specimen from a 
county, in which the species does not really exist, 

AUTHORITY. 

Lan. A Popular Description erf the Indigenous Plants of Lanark-* 
shire. Patrick. 1831. 



* Adonis autumnalis. Occasionally atnong corn. Gloi. 

Trollids europceus. Between the Lead and Avon, at Avon Mill ^ 
Avon, opposite Barncluith j Clyde, above Ross, at Bothwell 
and Daldowie ; Glenhove New Monkland, &c. Lan, Pas- 
tures near Airdrie, abundantly ; banks of the Clyde at Ken* 
muir. Glot4 



yGooQle 



gL 



420 THE NEW BOTANISTS GUIDE. 

* AcoNiTUM NapeUiu* Not uncommon in wild places about Hamilton^ 

and often far from houses or gardens; plantations below 

Hamilton bridge; bum>side near Gour*s Linn Quarry; 

wild banks of the Avon, near Bamcluith, abundant Lan. 
"S vruAB, pumila, Lanarkshire. J, Hooker^ sp» (Not mentioned by 

Patrick.) 
Tebsoalia nudicaulis. Sandy fields at Tollcross, abundantly. Glot. 

* Iberis amara. Sands below Hamilton bridge, nearly opposite the 

termination of the plantation. Lan. No longer to be foimd 
in Lightfoot's station of *< fields between Hamilton and Glas- 
gow," Ght. 

? Lepidium laHfolium, Once foimd on the rock on which Bothwell 
Castle is built. Lan, 

Smithiu Near Blantyre Priory. Lan. 

CocHLEARiA officinalis, Lanarkshire. Jos. HookeTf sp. 

Camelina sativa. South side of Frankfield Loch, and in New Monk- 
land. Lan. 

Cardamine amara. By the great burn, Hamilton wood; by the 
Lead above Avon Mill ; on the Clyde at Uddingston and 
Kenmuir, &c. Lan, Banks of the Kelvin near Gairbraid; 
banks of the Calder, a little above the bridge ; glen near 
Castlemilk. Ght, 

-»— — impatiens. Rocks on the banks of the river above the 
falls of the Clyde. Lan, 

f Hesperis matronalis. In the fields near Holytown, scarcely indi- 
genous. Ght. In the plantation below Hamilton bridge. 
Lan, 

Viola lutea, Middlefield Law, Avondale ; Cathkin hills, &c. Lan^ 

Silene maritima, Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp, 

Siellaria nemorum, Castlemilk ; bum-side at Chanton-hall ; Clyde 
below Hamilton bridge, very abundant. Lan, 

Arena RIA vema. Dry gravelly places on the North bank of the 
Canal between Calder and Kirkintilloch. Lan. 

Radiola miUegrana. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. (Not mentioned 
by Patrick.) 

HvpERicuM dvbium. Woods at Skellyton and Stonebyres. Lan. 
In a wood two miles from Lanark, on the Hamilton road. 
Ght. 

I Geranium phsum. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. Banks of the 
Clyde at Blantyre Priory. Glot. Withm the ruins at 
Blantyre Priory. Lan, 
I sylvaticum. Banks of the Nethen ; Clyde at Kenmuir ; 

at Jerviston, abundant. Lan. Banks of the Calder, in a 
wood near the bridge, abundantly. Glot. 

f Impatiens NoU-me-tangere, Abundantly in a wet glen at Castle- 
milk, perhaps escaped from gardens. Ght, 

f OzALis cormcuUOa. Found as a weed clinging to the roots of other 
plants about Bamcluith and Clauds-bum. Lan. On an 
old wall between the Avon and Barncluith. Ght. (I have 
a small specimen from Mr. Joseph Hooker, but do not feel 
quite satisfied as to its identity with O. corniculata.) 



yGooQle 



gL 



LAKABKSHIRJB. 4:21 

* Staphtlba pinnata. Lanarkshire. J, Hooker, tp, 

O&oBus sylvaticue. Woods at the &lls of Clyde ; at CartUme Craigs, 

on the north side of the river. Glot 
Astragalus glycyphyUua, On the green before Chatplherault. Lan. 

* Mkdicago scUiva. In meadows and pastures, occasionally. GloL 
F&uNus Padus, Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, tp, Hamilton woods; 

banks of the Clyde, Kelvin, and Cart. Glot, Clyde above 
Cunningar; on the Calder between Crossbaaket and Gil- 
bumsynk, Lan, 

* — — domesHca, Frequent in woods and hedges. Lan. 

t Spulsa salicifolia. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp» Banks at Cart- 
lane Craigs ; plantation beyond the Manse at Shotts. Lan. 

RoBus uLxatiUs. Top of a rock by the railway nearly opposite Cadzow 
Castle; among hazle bushes a little above Calder wood; 
Cleghorn wood ; Bonnington, near Lanark. Lan. 

— — - ChanuBtnonu. Estate of Dalblair near Muirkirk ; Cleghorn 
and Bonnington woods, with the former species. Lan, 

f Fragabia datior. On an old wall in the orchard at Jerviston. Lan. 

* PoTBNTiLL A /rtrficosa. Falls of the Clyde. J. Hooker, sp. (Planted 

there?) 
CoMABUM pcUustre. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. Deadwaters Ross. 

Lan. 
f Rosa villosa. Woods at Crossbasket near Glasgow, scarcely wild. 

Fl. Scot. ( Is the same species as the R. villosa of the British 

Flora intended here ?) 
Ptrus communis. On the banks of the Avon below Chatelherault. 

Lan, 
-^— - Aria. Coach road near ChatelheraulL Lan. 
CiRCAA alpina. On the great burn, Hamilton wood ; at Mauchlan- 

hole, Kilbride. Lan. 
Sebvm viHosum. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. Road-side near Hawks- 
land, Lesmahagow; at Highflat and Rigfoot, Kilbride; 

road-side near Airdrie ; on Meams Muir, abundant. Lan. 

On the hills above Castlemilk and Cathkin. Glot. 
RiBKs rvbnun. Avon banks opposite Bamduith, perfectly wild, and 

in woods and by sides of rivers. Lan. 
-»— a^num. Woods at Cadzow Castle, near Hamilton. Glot. By 

the carriage way about Cadzow Castle, abundant. Lan. 
— nigrum. Clyde between Merry ton and Cunningar, and in woods, 

occamonally. Lan. 

* Saxifrga Geum. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. 

» umbrosa. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. In the woods 

at Bothwell, abundantly, probably introduced. Glot. By 
a rill above Dalziel Camp. Lan. 

f  — oppositifoUa. In great abundance on the perpendicular 

rocks of the west side of the Clyde, above Corehouse, about 
500 feet above the level of the sea, and halfway between the 
two great Falls; and opposite a moss-house in the Bon* 
nington pleasure-grounds, on the east-side of the river. James 
Macnab, sp. 

Chrtsosflenium aUemifolium. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. In 



yGooQle 



gL 



422 THE NSW BOTANISt*S GUIDE. 

the glen at Castlemilk; Beetle's burn, near Clyde Iron 
Works. Glot, At Cadzow Castle ; on the Avon opposite 
Bamduith ; Barnduith bum above the wooden bridge ; 
Mauchlan-hole, Kilbride, &o. Laru 

Meum athamanticum. Rare, near Plowland, Avondale. Lan, Kit- 
tochside and Cross-hill, in Kilbride; on Cathkin hills. Ght, 

CicuTA virosa. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. About the sides of 
lochs, &c. not common. Lan. 

f Anthriscus Cerefolium, Rubbish about Barncluith. Lan. Foimd 
in this district of country in very great plenty. Glot, 

f Carum Carui. In the haugh at Dalbeth. GloL Glenhove, New- 
monkland, abundant. Lan. 

f Myrrhis odorata. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. About Hamilton, 
common ; abundantly about Cathcart. Glot Bank below 
.the old house of Jerviston ; by the wall. Brae Park, Silver- 
tonhill ; above the New Mill dam ; bum-side near Whistle- 
berry ; below Chantonhall ; Bamduith Green, &c. Lan. 

f Peucedanum Ostnithium. On an old wall at Langland House; 
and in waste ground near Jackton. Glot. 

* Petroselinum sativuTn. Old walls and rocks at Bothwell Castle. 

Lan. 

f Corianorum sativum. Banks of the Canal, Possil, near Glasgow. 
IF. Christy, sp. 

Viburnum Lantana, Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. 

Galium boreah. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. On the Clyde oppo- 
site Ross ; on the old dam at Dalziel Camp, abundant; Car- 
rayle, &c. Lan. Banks of the Clyde, in many places. Ght. 

f Valeriana pyrenaica. Banks of the Calder at Daldowie and at 
Langside ; banks of the Clyde above Hamilton. Ght. On 
the Avon at the Wood Yett ; on the Calder at Woodhall. 
Lan. 

* DipsAcus FttUonum. On the Avon immediately above Bamduith ; 

a few plants about Craignethan Castle. Lan. 
? Tragopooon porrifdius. In moist meadows, very rare. Ght. 
(This species is not mentioned by Patrick, nor does Hop- 
kirk name either a locality or an authority for its existence 
near Glasgow.) 
HiBRAciuM pubnonarium. Abundantly in a field on the banks of the 
Cidder, beside the bridge. Ght. 

  sylvaticum. Lanark Lesmahagow, Strathavon, New 
Monkland. Lan. 

• prenanthoides. On the banks of the Clyde, near West- 



horn. Ght. 

— — paludosum. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. Abundant by 
waters and in wet rocky peaces ; by Bamduith bum, &c. Lan. 

Cnicus heterophyUus. At Daldowie. Ght. 

Onopordum Acanthium. Near the coach-house, Bamduith, &c. Lan. 

Gnafhalium dioicum. Frequent on dry barren pastures; Hedge- 
bank opposite the stone Magazine beyond Cleek-him«in-Toll, 
&c. Lan. 

f Ssnecio viscosua. At Rawhead, Kilbride. Lan* 



y Google 



LANARKSHIRE. 423 

SsNECfo saracenicus. Banks of the Clyde at Both well bridge. R* 
Maughan, sp. In an island in the Clyde, a little below Both- 
well bridge, and on the Clyde below Hamilton bridge. Lan. 

* DoRONicuM Pardaiianches, Fields and hedges about Hamilton, 

scarcely wUd. Glot, A few plants by Barncluith burn at 
Castlehill. Lan. 

Lobelia Dortmanruu Lochs on the borders of Oldmonkland parish. 
Lan. 

Camvasvla latifoHtu Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, 8p» Banks of the Clyde 
at Daldowie and Kenmuir ; woods at Crossbasket and Cam- 
buslang. Glot. Near the hedge between Avon bridge and 
Rawhead farm-house ; Hamilton wood, Jerviston, &c Lan. 

Trachelium. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. 

* hederacea. On the south bank of the Clyde, whence it 
has been conveyed with the turf to grass- wallu in the garden 
of Sir Michael Shaw Stewart, of Ardgmran. Br, FL 
(Perhaps in Renfrewshire?) 

Vaccinium Vttis'Idcea. On the very edge of the precipice between 
Corhouse and Bonnington fall. Lan. 
  Oxycoccos. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, tp. Moors in 

Kilbride, Sbotts, and Avondale. Lan, 

PmoLA media. Huggenfield Loch. J. Hooker, sp. Falls of the 
Clyde, in the situation mentioned by Lightfoot for the ro- 
tundifolia, <* between the falls of Corra Linn and Bonning- 
ton ;" in a plantation between Dalbeth House and the road, 
abundantly ; woods at the Cartlane Craigs ; in a small wood 
near Frank6eld Loch. Glot. 

— — minor. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. On the Clyde 'be- 
tween the falls of Corra Linn and Bonnington; Hamilton 
wood, on the summit of a rock exactly opposite Silverton- 
hill, sparingly ; wood behind the Gardener's Lodge at Both- 
well Castle. Lan. (Patrick does not mention the media, 
and some of these localities may belong to that species.) 

f PoLEMONiUM c€Bruleum. On the Calder, below Cleland, growing 
with Inula Helenium, and on the banks of the Avon at 
Barncluith, abundant. lAin, 

CuscuTA europ<Ba. On flax at Cameron New Monkland. Lan. 
(C Epithymum is mentioned by Hopkirk, as growing on 
the stalks of flax about Hamilton and Woodhall. Probably 
the other species was intended.) 

f Anchusa sempervirens. Craignethan Castle ; rubbish at Wood- 
house ; behind the garden walk at Chatelherault ; banks of 
the Avon opposite Cadzow Castle, very abundant. Lan. 
Banks of the Clyde above Hamilton ; at Castlemilk. GloL 

? '   officinalis. Said to have been found at Addington, eight 

miles firom Glasgow. Br. FL 

* PviMOSAKu, officiiudis, Lanarkshire* J. Hooker, sp. On the 

banks of the Clyde about Dalbeth and Easter-hill, probably 
an outcast from a garden. Ght. 
Symfhttum tuberosum, Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. Banks of the 
Clyde at Clyde Works, Daldowie^ Bothwell, and Hamil* 



yGooQle 



gL 



424* THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

ton ; banks of the Calder, abundantly. Glot. Banks at 
Botiiwell Castle ; bum-side at Grrove Mount. Lan. 

f ScROPHULARiA vemoUa, Walls of Bothwell Castle. Lan. 

Vehonica polita. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp, 

*   .  ,.. .. I, Buxbouindi. Near Glasgow. Br, FL 

Ltcopus europ<Bus. Lanarkshire, and in several places near the Clyde. 

/. Hooker, sp, (Not mentioned by Patrick.) 
t Lbonurus Cardiaca, About Craignethan Castle, and near Cor- 

house, Lesmahagow. Lan, 
Mentha rvbra. On the Clyde below Ross wood. Lan. 
Lamium indsum. Found occasionally near Glasgow. Ght, About 

Jerviston, abundant. Lan, 
f — ^— maculatum, Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, «p. 
Galsofsis verHcohr. Frequent. Glot, 

Scutellaria minor. Banks of the Clyde at Rosebank. FL Scot. 
Lath&^a squamaria. Cart-side near Glasgow, and about Cathcart 

Castle. FL Scot, ( Perhaps not within the present county, 

since Patrick omits it. ) 
Utricularla intermedia ? In a marsh at Possil and Robroyston. FL 

Scot, (U. vulgaris of the Flora Glottiana,) 
Ltsisiachla thyrsijlora, Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. Bay in the 

Forth and Clyde Canal, at Castle- Cary bridge, about sixteen 

miles from Hamilton. Lan, Canal-side near Possil. Br. 

Fl, 
AvAOALLis ctBTuka. Said to grow in the fields about Lanark. 

Ght, 
Centumculus minimus. Marsh near Langside; in Kenmuir bog. 

Glot, 
Plavtago mariHma, Road-side at Gour's Brae-head, Avondale, and 

near the entry of the avenue into White-moss, Kilbride. 

Lan, 
LiTTORELLA lacustris. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. Edges of 

Frankfield, Huggenfield, Bardowie, and Bishop lochs. 

Gkt, Lochs in Old Monkland, &c. Lan, 
RuMsx pukher. On an embankment of stones by the Avon, between 

Barncluith and Hamilton wood. Lan, 

* EupuoRBLA Lathyris, In the garden at Barncluith, now become a 

troublesome weed. Gl^, 
EicPKTRUM nigrum, Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. Moors, Cathkin, 

Kilbride, and Crawford. Lan. 
f Carfinus Betulus. Lanarkshire. J, Hooker, sp, 

* Castamea vulgaris. Abundant, especially about Hamilton. Lan. 
Bbtula naj%a. At Bertram, about a mile from Carnwath. Ght. 
Salix pentandra. Marsh near Kenmuir; banks of the Clyde at 

Dalbeth. Ght, Banks of the Clyde below Hamilton 

bridge. Lan, 
— *— <- Helix. Frequent on the banks of the Clyde, as at Cambusne- 

than, &c. Lan. 
"   Russeliana. In plantations. Lan. 
viteUina, Frequent on the banks of the Clyde. Glot, At 

Jerviston. Lan, 



yGooQle 



gL 



LANARKSHIRE. 425 

Saux petiohris. Fossil Marsh, north side of the (anal. It Scot, 
•^— einerea. Banks of the Avon, above Bamcluith, &c. Lem, 

aquatica. Banks of the Clyde above Hamilton. Ght, 

licohr. Banks of the Clyde, a little above Gla^ow. FL Scot. 

* PiNus sylvestris. In the woods, Lanark. Glot, Cultivated for 

timber. Lan, 
Habeka&ia aUnda, In a hilly pasture above Castleoailk. Glot, 

By the water of Briech, south from Whitburn. Lan. 
LisTERA cordata. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. Said to grow in 

Tinto. Lan. 

* Galanthus nivalis. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. Plentifully on 

the banks about Castlemilk. Lan. 
Ruscns actdeatus. In the woods, BothweU. Glot, 
CovvALLARiA majaUs. Bothwell. J. Hooker, sp. In the woods at 

the Falls of the Clyde. Ght, Waste places about Bam- 

duith. Lan, 

multijiora. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. Woods at 

Bothwell. Lan. 

* Orn rfHoG ALUM unibeHaium. Border of a field at Bamcluitfa ; Mount 

at Chatelherault. Lan, 
f Allium Sehaenoprasum. Occasionally in the neighbourhood of 
gardens ; old quarry at CoalshUI, near Holy-town. Lan. 

* TuLiPA sylvestris. In a field near Hamilton. Glot. Field at 

Smiddy croft; orchard at Orbiston; about Blantyre 
Priory ; but in each of these places becoming scarcer an- 
nually. Lan. 

Sparoanium natans. Lanarkshire. J. Hooker, sp. Frankfield 
Loch, abundantly. Glot. Lochs, to the north of Old 
Monkland. Lan. 

PoTAMOOETON rufesccns. Near Glasgow. Br. Fl. Clyde at Dal- 
beth, and between Blantyre Mills and Bothwell bridge. 
Lan. 

— gramineus. In the Clyde. Glot. 

Rhtkcospora aBa. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. Not common ; 
Lochrigg Shotts; Glengivel Water, Avondale. Lan. 

Eriophorum vaginatam. Lanarkshire. J, Hooker, sp. Bog between 
Boghead and Chapelton. Lan, 

? Cakex. paucijhra. Near Glasgow. (Hudson.) Glot. (Not men- 
tioned by Patrick.) 
» teretiusctda. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, sp. In a bog on the 
Clyde, two miles from Hamilton. Glot, Deadwaters, 
Allington Farm. Lan. 

I speirostachya. Marshes, Mugdock Castle, and on the hills of 

Lanarkshire. Eng. Fl. 
- binervis. Hill by the road, approaching Frankfield Loch ; 
hills at Wals];on. Lan. 

stricta. In the bog at Dunsire; at Kenmuir; near Dal- 

dowie. Lan. 

— Uevigata. In a marsh near Glasgow. (Mackay.) Ght. 
Wet woods east of Mugdock Castle. Lan. (I have given 
the plants of Mugdock Castle and its vicinity under the 



y Google 



426 THE NEW BOTANiSX^S GUIDE. 

county of Stirling, concluding the castle to be in that 

county, though Patrick does twice name it, under this 

genus, as if in Lanarkshire. H, W,) 
PoA aquatica. Lanarkshire. /. Hooker, ap, 
Fbstuca calamaria, Kenmuir Bank, Glasgow. FL Scot, 
BaoMus arreiMM. Between Dalbeth and Clyde Iron Works, and 

about Cathcart. Fl. Scot. 
B&oMus racemosus. Between Glasgow and Frankfield Loch. FL 

Scot, 
? DioiTARiA sanguinaUi, A single plant found at Dalbeth. Glot, 



LX. PEEBLESHIRE. 



Viola foc^ea? Peebles. R, MaugJian, sp, (I think the specimen 
from Mr. Maughan ought to be called V. flavicomis. H, W, ) 

OaoBUS sylvaticus. Near West Linton. G. Macnab, sp, 

Galium puaiUum, Moors on the Tweed below Peebles. Winch, 
add. 

Pt&ola rotundifolia, Peebleshire. FL Scot. 

Primula /artnoMi. Bog near West Linton. Cr. Mcumah, sp. 

Bstula nana. In Tweed-dale. Eng. FL 



LXI. SELKIRKSHIRE. 

HiEBACiuM denticidatum. In Harewood, near Selkirk. Eng. FL 
f Gnaphalium margaritaceum. Banks of the Yarrow, among 
willows, about three miles from St. Mary's Loch. Exeurs. 
T&ientalis eurt^a. Blackhouse heights. FL Scot, 



LXII. ROXBURGHSHIRE. 



AUTHORITT. 



Duncan, cat. — Catalogue of Plants observed near Jedburgh. 
Rev. James Duncan. 



Thalictrum ntajus. Makerston. Duncan, cai. 

Trollius europaui. Marshy place near Huntlaw. Duncan^ cat. 

? Glaucium /ttfeum. Banksof Denholm Cauld. Duncan, cat. (This 

is a sea-side plant, and unless there be some enroi) we must 

suppose it to have been introduced here.) 



yGooQle 



gL 



ROXBURGHSHIRE. 427 

Tkesdalia nudicavUs, Yetholm. G. Macnab, »p. 

* Cochlea Ri A officinalis. In Melrose churchyard. Duncan, cat, 

* Ibxbis amara. On a sandy bank of the Tiviot, a little to the east 

of Denholm, probably an outcast from some garden. Duncan, 

cat, 
Viola lutea, Minto HOI ; Bowden Muir ; Lanton HilL Dwnean, 

cat. Hills above Yetholm. Flora of Berwick. 
Dlanthus deUoides. Minto Rocks ; rocks at the side of Kirkton 

Bum ; Makerston ; Chester's Craig ; rising ground south 

of Midlem. Duncan, cat, 
Cbrastium arvense. Foot of walls near Wark, by Kelso, abundant. 

Fl Scot. 
Geranium syhaticum. Denholm Dean. Duncan, cat, 
Prunus Padus. Near Jedburgh. Duncan, cat. 
Sanguisorba officinalis. Old road-side leading from Lillieslief to 

Shaw Bum ; ground west from Hollindean Parks. Duncan, 

cat. 

* Spikma salicifolia. Minto Wood. Duncan, cat 
RuBUS ChanuBmorus. Cheviot, very plentiful. Duncan, eat, 
CoMAKVM palustre. (Five localities appear to be given for this in 

Mr. Duncan's MS. catalogue, but I am not able to make out 

the names of any of the places* H. IF. ) 
SiLAUs pratensis. Road sides, near Kelso. Fl. Scot. 
CicuTA virosa. Yetholm Lock. Duncan, cat. 
Fedia dentata. Cornfields to the west of Denham Dean. Duncan, 

cat, 
Lactuca virosa. Melrose. Br. Fl. 
HiBRACiuM pulmonarium. On rocks on the hill above Yetholm, 

Winch, add. 
— — sylvaticum. Denholm Dean. Duncan, cat. 
— ^— — paludosum, Denholm Dean. Duncan, cat, 
Cnicus heterophyUus, Denholm Dean ; Midshiel's Haugh. Duncan, 

cat. 
Onopordum Acanthium. Near Melrose. J^^ Scot. 
Gnaphalium dioicum. Ruber's Law. Duncan, cat. 
Campanula latifolia. Denholm Dean ; Minto Bank ; wood below 

Bedrule MilL Duncan, cat. 
Vaccinium Vitis-Idcea. Cheviot; hills a few miles south-east of 

Greenhill. Duncan, cat, 
Ptrola minor "i Fir-wood south from Denholm; Well's Woods. 

Duncan, cat. 
Ltcopus europ<Bus, Prinside Loch. R, Embleton, mss, 
Mentha piperita. In the plantations of Eildon Hall, footpath lead- 
ing to Melrose. Duncan, cat, 
— - rubra. Banks of Tiviot, frequently. Duncan, cat, 
Galeopsis versicolor. Not unfrequent. Duncan, cat. 
Euphorbia Esvla, Banks of Tiviot, opposite Minto. Duncan, eat, 
Empbtrum nigrum. Hills to the south-east of Greenhill, plentifully. 

Duncan, cat, 
Salk purpurea. N. bank of the Tweed, opposite Melrose. Fl 

Scot, 



y Google 



428 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

* Galanthus nivalia. Wilton Manse ; about a quarter of a mile abore 

Melrdse. Duncan, cat 
Bromus secalintu. Near Jedburgh. Duncan, cat, 
Atema fatua. Near Jedburgh. Duncan, cat 
LoLiuM temtdenium. In fields, and the gravelly bank of the Hviot, 

occasioually. Duncan, ceU, 



LXIII. BERWICKSHIRE. 



authorities. 



Berw. A Flora of Berwick-upon-Tweed. 1829 and 1831. G.John- 
ston. (Berwickshire and the borders of adjacent counties.) 

Chib, Proceedings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, 1832 and 
1835. 



Thauctbum minus, Tweed banks opposite Spring Gardens ; Spittal 

Links, and banks beyond Hudshead ; common on the coast. 

Berw, 
— -.— - majus. Rocky and woody banks of the Eye at Netber- 

byres. Berw, 
Trollius europ<Bus. Not uncommon ; Haidendean, abundant ; Fel- 

kington Bog, sparingly ; Buncle Wood ; banks of the Leet 

at Swinton; in the marshy field near Edington Moor; 

Lamberton Moor. Bene, 
f Hellsborus viridis. Dunglass Gleu. Fl, Scot (within Hadding- 
tonshire?) 
Glaucium luteum, Sandy sea-coast at Coldingham ; shore between 

Dunglass Dean and the Coves, plentiful. Berw, 
CoRTDAUs clavicuJata. Rocks in Longridge Dean, plentiful ; Pease 

Bridge Dean, on stony spots between the Forrester's houses, 

plentiful. Berw, 
TxESDALiA nudicauUs, In the gravelly vale between Middleton and 

Langley Ford, plentiful. Berw, 
CocHLEARiA officinalis, Plentifiil on our sea^coast; also on dykes 

near the Magdalen-field farm-house. Berw, 
-^— ^^ danica. On the Pinnacles, one of the Fern Islands. 

B€rw, 
Cakilb maritima. Frequent. Berw, 
C&AMBS maritima. On the shore by Fastcastle. (Dr. Parsons.) 

Berw, 
Lepidium Smithii, Road-side near Whitekirk. Excurs, 
Cardamive amara. Banks of the Eye about Netherbyres ; in wet 

places about the base of Cockbum Law, plentiful ; about the 



y Google 



BERWICKSHIRE. 42$ 

head of Langton Wood ; in the Pease Glen, and in Dunglass 
Dean. Beno, 
Nastu&tium 8ylve9tre, River-side a little above West Ord ; about 

the Union Bridge. Bene. 
f Sisymbrium Irio* On the walls of Berwick. R, EmbieUm^ gp. 

Most abundant at the Pier.gate. Berw. 
f Barbarea prtBCOx, Hedge side between Wooler and EarL Berw. 
SiNAFis tenuifdia. Walls of Berwick. Berw. 
f HssPBRis matronalis. In the bed of a rivulet between Bumhouses 

and Reston-mill, to all appearance truly wild. Berw. 
Viola Ivtea. About two miles south of Fastcastle ; plentiful on the 
banks just above Fastcastle ; on the summit of Cockburn 
Law. Berw. 
Drosera angUca. Coldingham Moor between Renton-Bell and the 

old post road to Edinburgh. Berw. 
DiAMTHUs deltoides. Hedge-banks between Wooler and Earl ; Chapel- 
hill, Belford ; craigs by Craig, mill ; frequent in the vicinity 
of Wooler ; very common in the west of Berwickshire, but 
rare on its eastern side ; where, however, it occurs in tolerable 
abundance at St. Helen's Church, and in Lumsden Dean. 
Berw. Plentiful near Coldstream. R. Emhleton^ nus. 
SU.EME maritima. Common on the coast ; Fam Islands. Berw. 
Sagina maritima. By the side of the Canal below New- Water Haugh ; 
on rocks in Holy Island, between the Heugh and the Castle, 
Fam Islands. Berw. 
Spergula subulata. Amongst the craigs at Easington ; and at 

Spindlestone, plentiflil ; Coldingham Moor. Berw. 
Arenaria peploides, Lamberton Shields ; Spittal sands and coast to 
the southward. Berw, 

marina. Sea-coast ; sides of the Tweed above the bridge. 

Berw. 
. venuu On St. AbbVhead, plentiful; in a deep glen 

about a mile south of Fastcastle; Spindlestone Craigs. 
Berw, 
CsRASTiuM arvense. Near King's Mount Bastion ; Castlebanks; Spittal 
and Sorammerston Links, &c. Berw. 

tetrandum. On the links at Bamborough and Holy 

Island ; Spittal Links, and southward. Berw, 
Radiola miUegraiutf Ancroft Moor. Berw. 

* TiLiA grandifdia. In the park at Nenthom, naturalised. Berw. 

* Htpericum Androsamum. Formerly found in Birgham Haugh ; 

and seen in other parts of Berwickshire, but in every place 

too obviously the outcast of gardens. Berw. 
X7ERAKIDM eylvaticum. Woods about Houndwood and Renton; 

banks of Wooler Water above and below Langley-ford. 

Berw. 
f .— ^— . phaum. Banks of the Eden, near Stitchell. Berw, 
^— — ^— sanguineum. On the links of Holy Island ; sea-banks at 

Hudshead ; links from Scrammerston southwards, abundant. 

Berw. 
Orobus sglvaticut, . On a bank facing the Tweed, on the north side, 

VOL. II. c * 



yGooQle 



gl, 



430 THE NSW botanist's GUIDE. 

about a quarter of a mile below the public house at the 
Bield (Llghtfoot) ; near Longformacus. Berw. 

Lathykus syheMtrii, Banks of the Whiteadder, at Hutton Mill^ 
R. EfMetoth *p* 

ViciA kUhyroideM, Heugh, Holy Island { Chapd-bill, Belford, and 
other basaltic heights between it and Bamboreugh ; on the 
precipitous and dry rocky banks of Ale-water. Berw, 

Astragalus glycyphyUm, Brow of Cockle-hill at Learmouth ; banks 
of Tweed by the road to Carham ; hilly pastures at Money- 
Laws ; in the ravine above Bummouth. Berw. In several 
places between the Slccar Point and the mouth of the Pease 
Bum. Club. 

— ^— hypoglottis. Links of Holy Island; Spittal Links, 
and the links beyond Scrammerston ; sea-banks below Red- 
heugh. Berw, 

M fULOTus leticantha. Old Limestone quarry at Saterpath Haven ; 
New- Water Haugh Wood; Coupland plantations near 
Wooler. Berw. (Trifolium officinale Fl Berw.) 

Trifouum seabrwn. Rocks in Hdly Island. Berw. 

Lotus tenuis. St. Abb's Head. R. EmbleUm^ sp. Cultivated fields 
between Coldingham Lough and the sea. Club. 

* Mbdicago sativa. Field above the quarry on Sunnyside ; com- 
fidd near Gun^^reen-hill. Berw. 

Prunus Padu». Woods about Houndwood and Renton Inns ; in a 
dean about a mile south of Fastcastle. Berw. 

f SpiRiBA ioMdfolia. Marchmotit woods, apparently quite wild^ 
Berw. 

Rosa wpimonuima. Common ; the only spedes foimd wild in Holy 
Island. Berw. 

tonu!nto$(u Common. Berw. 

— — ^— ^-^ (scabrluscula). Banks of the Tweed above the Union 
Bridge, plentiful ; and occasionally in hedges. Berw. 
I cantna (sarmentacea). Frequent, Berw. 

— (dumetorum). Not rare; side of the road between 

New Farm and the Old Lamberton Tdl ; below Lamberton 
Shields ; on banks between M iddleton and Langley Ford. 
Berw. ( This is the R. dumetorum of Smith, not of £nglish 
Botany, according to the author of the Flora of Berwick. ) 
• (Forsteri). Ancroft Dean. Berw. 



casta. On the bank at the road-side above Whiteadder Bridge. 

Berw. 
RuBUs KoehUri. Hedges, not rare. Berw. 
— — macrophyUus. Near Houndwood. Berw. 
  saxatiUs. Lees' Cleugh, a wooded ravine near Langton Lees 

farm-house, plentiftil. Berw. 
— — ChanuBmorus, On Cheviot, plentiful. Berw. 
PoTEMTiLLA argetUea, Road-side west of Stitchell. Berw. 
— -— vema. Spindlestone Hills, Northumberiand. Berw. 
Coma RUM pahistre. Below Murton Craigs ; Haiden Dean ; below 

Shoreswood-hall ; Longridge Dean. Berw. 
Sanguisorba officinaUs. Bradford Dean. Club. 



y Google 



BERWICKSHIRE. 431 

Spilobktm ahinifaUum, In rivulets on the sides of the Cberiot Hills, 

as mentioned by Ray. Berw, 
Skdum anglicum. Heugh, Holy Island; and about the Castle. 

Berw, 
   viUosum, By rivulets and in bogs at the foot of Cheviot ; 

basaltic heights between fielford and Bamborough ; boggy 

spots between Whitchester and Longformacus ; and at the 

top of a hill, at the road-side, about halfway between Dunse 

and Longformacus. Berw, 
Rhodiola rosea. On Fastcastle ; on rocks between Lamberton and 

Bummouth ; at the foot of a deep glen about a mile soutli 

of Fastcastle. Berw. Clififs at St. Abb's Head. R. Em- 

bUtoUfSp, 
* RiBBS rvbnan and nigmm. In deans, on the sites of deserted mills 

and cottages. Berw, 
Saxifkaga steUarii, On and about the Cheviots. Berw. 
— ^ Hirctdiu, Near Langton (Dr. Johnston.) B. Bowman, sp. 

Moor south of Langton Lees farm-house. Br. FL Near 

Langton Wood. Clubi (Perhaps these all intend the same 

locality ?) 

' hypnoides. Dunsdale and Henhde Hopes, part of the 



Cheviots. Club, 

Ckkysosplxnium aUemifoiUum, Langton woods ; at Longformacus ; 
near Cockbum Mill ; Dunglass Dean. Club, 

CicuTA virosa, ** Prinside Loch, Berwickshire." Berw. (Rox- 
burghshire ?) 

* Myrruis odorata. Pinnacle-hill near Kelso ; borders of Colding- 

ham Moor, yet scarce run wild. Berw, 

CEnakthx PheSandrium, Femeyrig Marsh, sparingly. Berw. 

SxTRNitf H Olusairum. On the sea-coast at Dunglass, on the edge of 
Berwickshire. Berw, 

JaovsncuM scoticwn. Sea-shore at Lamberton Shields ; shore at 
Eyemouth; on rocks between Fastcastle and Redheugh. 
Berw, 

SisoN Amomum. Hirsell Lough. R, Embleton, sp. Near Coldstream. 
Br. FL 

SiLAUS pratensis. Common in Berwickshire ; and not rare in the 
north of Durham. Berw, 

ViBURKUM Lantana, At Sir John Hall's, in Dunglass Glen. Berw* 

Co&Nus sueciea. On Cheviot, close to the spring where those ascend- 
ing generally rest themselves. Berw, 

Galium horecSe, Gateheugh ; bog south of Hardacres, near Eccles ; 
road-side, north of Hatchetneze, Coldstream ; road-side 
half way between Fishwick and West Fishwick. Berw. 

* DiPSAcus FuHontan, In the hedge of a cottage garden near Nether- 

byres, and in the edge of the field adjoining. Berw. 
Traoopogon major. Frequent on the banks of the Tweed at Birgham 

and Lennel, and in fields near Eccles ; frequent all over the 

east and north of Berwickshire and North Durham. Berw. 
Lactuca virosa. Banks of the Tweed, near the Chain bridge. 

R, Embleton, sp. Near Twizel House ; lane wes^ of Old 
c 2 



yGooQle 



gL 



432 THE NEW BOTANISTS GUIDE. 

Ladykirk ; banks of the Tweed from the Chain bridge 16 

Norham, most abundant; Ayton road, near the six-mile 

stone ; Twizell Toll. Berw. 
HiERACiuM tylvaHcum, On the Old Castle; banks between the 

Foundry and Spittal. Berw, 
— — pcUudosum. Castle- hills ; boggy ravine east of West Ord, 

&c. Berw, 
' umbeUatum, Haiden Dean, on the site of an old Roman 

Station. Berw. Near Woodend, in the parish of Langton. 

avb, 
• prenanthoides. Wooded bank, opposite Bank-house, 



Berwickshire ; banks of the Dye at Lonformacus ; Pease 
Bridge Dean. Club, 
> moUe, Langton woods, plentiful ; wood opposite Bank- 



house, near Renton. Br, Fl, 

Cnicus heterophyUus. At the foot of Cheviot ; Langton Lees* Cleugh ; 
banks of the Whiteadder above Claribad Mill. Berw, 

? Onopobdum Acanthium, To be expunged from the Flora of 
Berwick. Johnston, nus, 

Artemisia maritima. Coast beyond Goswick ; on the Emblestones ; 
the variety gaUica, on St. Cutbbert's, Holy Island, sparin^y. 
Berw, 

Gnaphalium dioicum, St. Abb*s Head. B, EnMeton, ap, Etal 
Moor, by the road to the Coal- works; Lamberton Moor; 
moors above Kyloe. *Berw, 

Erioeeon acris. Links at Holy Island, in a direction north from the 
Castle. Berw, 

SsMECio viscoeus. About the riding-stable at Easington, plentiful ; 
Magdalen fields, at the Cow-port; in the wood above 
Netherbyres ; near Lumsden, and other places in Berwick- 
shire. Berw, 

Aster Tripdium, Sides of the Tweed above the bridge ; and coast 
beyond Goswick Links, plentiful. Berw. 

Ptbethrum maritimum. Sea-banks about the Needle-eye, but in in- 
accessible places. Berw, 

* Anthemis nobilis. About Chimside Bridge, not wild. Berw, 

Campanula latifoUa, Wood southwest of Polwarth Church, and 
Castle-law woods ; Langton Wood and Lees* Cleugh, plen- 
tiful ; woods above the Pease Bridge, abundant Berw, 

Vaccinium Vitifi'Idaa, Higher parts of Cheviot; on the wooded 
rocky hill above Hepburn at Chillingham ; banks of the 
Whiteadder, above Abbey St. Bathans, sparingly ; on Hedge- 
hope, abimdant ; about the top of Dirrington Law, plenti- 
ful. Berw, 

— — — '»— Oxycoccos. Moors between Belford and Wooler, plen- 
tiful ; Haiden Dean ; bog below Shoreswood Hall. Berw, 

Arbutus Uva-ursi. On the west side of Dirrington Law, pJentifuL 
Berw, 

PvROLA rotundifoUa, In the dean below Allerton Mill, plentiful, 
about midway between the mill and the lime road ; Haiden 
Dean, abundant. Berw, 



y Google 



BBRWICKSUIRE. 433 

Pt&ola media. On the wooded and heathy bank above the School- 
house at Abbey St. Bathans, most abundant; Lumsden, 
Ancroft, Haiden, and Longridge Deans. Berw, 

— — minor. Wood at Orange-lane 5 plantation to the north of 
Loch Lithtillum, abundant ; Langton Wood ; Blackadder 
plantations, abundant ; wooded banks of the Dye above 
Longformacus, a single specimen. Berw. 

— secunda, Yevering Bell Hill (Dr. Johnston). R, Emhleton, 
sp. 

Ektthkjba UttoraUs. On the Links south of Bamborough Castle^ 
and on Holy Island, plentiful. Berw. 

* PoLBMONiuM ccBTttlewn. Sometimes escapes from gardens. Berw. 
Mtosotis ctBspitosa, In the lane below Unthank Colliery ; not un- 

common in watery places. Berw. 
> repent. In the vale below Langley Ford, Northumberland ; 

Horncliff Dean, North Durham ; in the wooded dean above 
the Pease Bridge, near the burn, Berwickshire. Berw. 

* sylvatica. Langton Woods. Club. 

LiTHOsPERMUM maritimwn. On the shores at the mouth of the Pease- 
bum ; Lumsden shore, plentiful. Club. Den of Dunglass. 
Fl. Scot, 

* Akchusa sempervirent. In a hedge behind Ramsay's Barn ; bank 

in front of Netherbyres House ; near the Grieve*s House; 

On hills of columnar greenstone to the north of Hume 

Castle. Berw, 
Symphytum tuberosum. Side of the Whiteadder, half way between 

its mouth and the bridge, rare ; Westruther. Berw. 
AsFEByoo procumbens. In the Holy Island (Ray) ; on Bamborough 

Castle, confined to a small spot. Berw, 
f PuLMONAEiA officinoKs, In gardens frequent, and occasionally cast 

out with the rubbbh, to flourish by a hedge side for a season 

or two. Berw, 
f. Vbbbascum nigrum. Waste ground at Ord, probably an outcast of 

the garden, but observed there for many successive years. 

Berw, 
f Atkopa Belladonna, On the banks of Wooler Water, near Wooler ; 

by a rivulet which enters the Tweed above Horncliff. Berw, 
JR,HiVAi(THUs major. Found by Richardson, in 1723, amongst the 

com near Westnewton in Northumberland, on the borders 

of Scotland. Berw, 
Mklampyrum pratense (montanum). On the south-east side of Che- 
viot. Berw, (I suspect this to be rather a common moun- 

tain-form of M. pratense.) 
.. tylvoHewn, Banks of the Dye above Longformacus. 

Berw, 
y%KOfKicA poUta, Cultivated grounds; near Gavington, plentiful. 

Berw* 
-f —^ Buxbaumii, In the shrubbery in front of the house at 

Whiterig, Berwickshire. Berw, 
Mbivtha tyhestris. In the neighbourhood of Blanerae> abundant. 

XJbtb, 

c 3 



yGooQle 



gL 



434! THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Mentha mridis. Sides of the Whiteadder, near EdringpUm, ""wild.** 
i2. Embleton, sp. At the sides of the Whiteadder above 
Gainslaw-ford, on the north side, in two or three large 
patches, and apparently perfectly wild. Berw, 

-^— — (crispa). Side of Wooler Water, near Coldgate Mill ; 

and about one mile and a half above Langleyford, on the 
borders of a rivulet flowing down from the Cheviot, and 
near its junction with the Wooler Water. Club. (l^oeoU 
mens from Mr, Embleton and Mr, James Macnab. ) 

  Piperita. Sides of the rivulet below Lamberton Shields. 

Berw, 
• rubra. About Whiteadder Island ; probably at the side of 



the Blackadder below Mungo*s Wells. Berw. 
————— gentilis. Sides of Wooler Water, near the Haugh-head. 

sparingly ; side of the water-course above the carding-xmll 

at Wooler, apparently -n^ld. Berw, 
Lamium incisum. Frequent. Berw. 
Galeopsis versicolor. Near Bumhouses and Whitchester ; about 

Wooler ; abundant in a field below Langleyford ; between 

Huntly-wood and Ledgerwood. Berw. 
Stachts ambigua. In Edmonstone Dean, Berwickshire, among 

whins, sparingly. Clttb. 
LATHa.£A squamaria. In some natural wood above the Retreat, 

plentiful Berw. 
Statice Armeria. Sea-shore. Berw, 

' Limonium. St. Cuthberfs, Holy Island. Berw, 
Plantago marxHrna. Sea and river banks ; Lamberton Moor. Berw. 
LmoKBLLA lacuMtris, Margins of the Lough on Holy Island, abun- 
dant. Berw, 
Glauz maritima. Muddy places on the sea-coast to the southward ; 

and sides of the Tweed above the bridge. Berw, 
Salsola Kali. Sandy sea-shores, frequent. Berw, 
Chbno7odium mvrale. Holy Island, between the town and Castle. 

Berw. 

urbiemm, Hirsell Woods. C7«6. 

— ^— — - maritimMm. Coast beyond Beal ; Holy Island. Beno, 

Ataiplbx littoraKs. Coast beyond Beal. Berw. 

Salico&kia herbacea. Between Ooswick links and Fenham ; Holy 

Island. Berw. 
Euphorbia Esukx, Birgham Haugh. Berw. Banks of the Tweed, 

near Coldstream. Br, Fl. 
Empetbum nigrum. Moon very common ; also on se»-banks. Berw. 
QuERCUs sessiliflora. Near West Fishwick. Berw. 

* Castanba vulgaris. Plantations, common. Berw, 

* Cabpinus Betulus, Plantations, not common. Berw. 
Tbiglochin mariiimum. Abundant on marshy spots on all our coasts, 

'^ and at the sides of the river within the influence of the tide. 
Berw. 
LisTBBA eordata, Buncle Wood, Berwickshire. Berw, 

* Galanthus nivalis. Near Cfaillingham. Berw, 

* Nabcissus Pseudo^narcissus. Near Chlllingham. Berw. 



yGooQle 



gL 



BERWICKSHIR8* 435 

Aluum SchcenoprasuTtL. Fastcastle, on the borders of Berwickshire. 

Fl. Scot 

arenarium. Mouth of the Whiteadder, plentifu]* Berw. 

oleraceum. On the Heugh, Holy Island ; on the rocks at 

Spindlestone. Berw, 
SciLLA vema. Sea banks at Gunsgreen, plentiful. Bene. 
TuLiPA sylvestris. Naturalised in the woods at Netherbyres. Bene. 
? CoNVALLARiA Polygonatum. On Kyloe rocks, a few miles south of 

Berwick. Berw, Now extinct there. jB. EmbUton^ mss, 
Sfa&oanium nataru. In the foss at the top of Coldingham Lough, 

abundant ; Northfield Mill-pond. Club. 
PoTAMOGETON rufescens. Femeyrig Marsh, in the parish of Eccles, 

plentifully. Berw, 

prtelongus, Berwickshire. Br. Fl 

ZosTB&A marina. Between Goswick Links and the Old Law ; on the 

road from Goswick to Holy Island. Berw, 
Lemna trisulca. Clear still waters, as in the pond at the Grieve's 

House. Berw. 
£RiorHoauM vaginatum. Below Shoreswood Hall ; Murton Craigs ; 

common on the more elevated moors. Berw, 
— «— — pubeMcens, Castle-hills ; field below the Old Lamberton 

Toll : Lamberton Moor, &c. Berw. 
Carex arenaria. Sandy sea-shore, abundant. Berw, 

intermedia. Frequent; Castle-hills, &o. Berw, 

Umosiu Haiden Dean, sparingly. Berw, 
  OederL In a bog near May field, abundantly. Club. 

• fulva. Near Le^erwood; bogs about Bunele; plentiful in 

the bog below Lintlaw. Cltd>. (The same localities are 

given for C. speurostachya, in Br, Fl Srd edition. ) 
  binervis. Plentiful on all our moors. Berw, 
— -^ rigida. Summit of Cheviot. Berw. 
levigata. Wooded banks of Wooler Water, below Langley- 

ford ; in moist places at the base of the wooded hill above 

Hepburn, Northumberland. Berw, 
Phlehm arenarium. Common on the sandy sea-coast ; Holy Island. 

Berw. 
MvucA niOaaM. Gateheugh, Berwickshire. Berw, 
FoA mariUma, S^des of the Tweed above the bridge ; shores of Holy 

Island, abundantly ; St Abb's Head, and on the sea-shore 

from that to Redfaeugh. Berw. 

procumbem, Fam Islands. Berw. 

Fbstuca rubra. On the coasts of Holy Island ; Spittal Sands. Berw. 
— — bromoidee. On the dyke near Ramsay's bam ; about Ord 

Moor; and other places. Berw, 
Bkomus raeemoius. Fields near Coldstream and Anton's Hill. Club. 
AvKHAfatata. Corn-fields. Berw, 

I li pubeaeent. Not uncommon in dry limestone pastures; sea 

and river banks. Berw, 
Ajiukdo arenaria, Sandy sea-coast from Spittal southward. Berw, 
Lonuu temuientum. Near Shoreswood Hall. Berw, 
«— — »- arvense. Corn-fields at Easington, rare. Berw. 

c 4 



y Google 



436 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

HoRDEUM pratense, Yarrow-haugh ; side of the river below the 

mouth of the Whiteadder. Berw. 
TarncuM^'tcncettnk Sandy sea-ooast from Spittal southward. Berw. 



LXIV. HADDINGTONSHIRE. 



AUTHORIT7. 



Edin, — A Catalogue of the Phenogamic Plants growing in the neigb* 
bourhood of Edinburgh. James Woodforde. 1814. 



f Hkllkborus viridis, Dunglass Glen. FL Scot, 
Glaucium luteum. Sandy shores near Gosford. Edin, 
Altssum ccdycinum, Dirleton Common. /. H. Balfour, «p. 
SiLEMK arnica, Dirleton Common. /. H, Balfour, sp. And sandy 

fields in the neighbourhood, profuse. Excurs, 
-«— ^ anglica. Near Dirleton, pretty abundant. Excurs, 
— — nocHflora, Aberlady, and fields near Dirleton. Exeurs, 
Arenaria marina. Morrison's Haven, near Preston^pans ; . Aber- 
lady Links. Edin, 
Cerastium arvense, Guillon Links. W, Brands, sp, 

tetrandrum. Near Preston-pans. Edin, 

Lavatera arborea. On the Bass Island. Edin, 

Geranium sanguineum. Sea-shore at Gosford Gate near Aberlady. 

Edin, 
Erodiuu moschatum. Near Preston-pans. Edin* 
Astragalus hypoghttis. All along the coast from Preston-pans to 

Gosford; Guillon Links. Edin. 
Melilotus U%u:aniha, Corn-fields at Aberlady Bay. Br, FL 
Trifolium scabrum. Dry pastures at Dunbar, by ^e sea. FL ScoL 
•Rosa spinosissima. Links near Cockenzie. Edin, 
Sazifraga Hirculus, About three miles beyond Blackshiels, about 
twenty miles from Edinburgh, in a straight line, and ten 
from the Berwickshire station. Excurs, 
Ertngium nuaritimum, Dunbar. J^ SccH, 
? Crithmum maritimum. At Aberlady. Br, FL 
Helosciadium repens. Pools at Guillon Links. Edin, 
(Ekanthb pimpineUoides. On the shore, a mile east of Dunbar. 

W, H, CampbeO, mss, 
3iuM latifdUum, Wet ground on the coast, a mile east from Dunbar. 

Excurs, 
f Smtrkium Olusatrum, Dirleton Castle. Edin, 
Viburnum Lantana, Dunglass Glen. FL Scot, 
Fedia denititau Field at Dirleton. G, Macnab, $p. . 



yGooQle 



gl, 



HAtDINOTONSHIRE. 437 

Onofordum AeatUhium. Sea-shore beyond Preston-pans ; near Cock- 

\ enzie ; Links at Port Seaton. Edin. 
Abxkmisia maritima. By Guillon Loch ; Lufihess Mill ; banks of 

the Peffer Bum, near Aberlady, with A. gallica. Ediu. 

(I know not to what county is to be assigned the locality of 

« St. Mary's Isle,** for A. gallica.) H, W. 
AsTBK Tripolium. Aberlady Bay. Edin, 
Campanula glomerata. Links near Gosford. Edin, 
hybrida. Sparingly in a field at Dirleton ; abundantly in 

a neglected field at Luffness. Excurt, 
Eetthr^a UttoraKs. Guillon Links. Edin. (The same locality is 

given for £. pulchella, but it is suggested that £. littoralis 

has been mistaken for that species.) 

* Anchusa sempervirens. Den of Dunglass. Fl. Scot, 

f Aspskugo procumhens. Ruins of the old castle at Dunbar. R. 
Maughan, sp. Guillon Links. Edin, Near Lufifhess, in a 
neglected field. Excun. 

Vbkbascuh nigrum. Near Bogle Hill, east of Cockenzie ; Links be- 
tween Seaton and Gosiford. Edin, 

LiMosELLA aquatiea. Pool near Guillon Links. G, Macnahj sp, 

AciNOs vulgaris, Dirleton Common. /. H, Balfour, sp. Near Aber- 
lady. Excurs, 

LnroiixLLA lacustris. Pool on Guillon Links. Edin, 

Glaux maritima, Guillon Links and Aberlady Bay. Edin, 

Salicomia Jierbacea, Morrison's Hayen, near Preston-pans; Aber- 
lady Bay and Links, abundantly. Edin, 

Chknopodium maritimum, Morrison's Haven ; Aberlady Bay. Edin. 

Atriplxx littoralis, Guillon Links. W. Twynam, sp. 

Beta maritima. Opposite Gosford Gate. Edin, Bass Island. Fl, Scot, 

HirropHAE rhamnoides. , Sea^ore near Gosford ; road-side near 
Hales, abundantly. Edin. 

Euphorbia £«ti/a. Near Gladsmuir Kirk, in a lane leading from 
the Haddington road to ElvingsUm. Edin, 

Triolocbin maritimum, Guillon and Aberlady Links. Edin. 

* Narcissus bijlorus. Bass Rock, introduced. IV, Brands, sp. 
? Asparagus officinalis Links near Gosford. Edin. 

.RuppiA maritima. Salt-water pools on Guillon Links ; Aberlady 

Bay. Edin. 
ZosTERA marina. Aberlady Bay. G. Macnab, sp. 
jf UNCUS obtunflorus. On the shore, a mile east from Dunbar. W, ff. 

Campbell, mss. 
SciRPUs maritimus. Stream-side near Luffhess. Edin, 
BvTsuvB rufus, Guillon Loch ; Aberlady Bay ; Dunbar. Edin, 
? Carex DavalUana. Side of Guillon Loch. Edin, 

I arenaria. Links eastward of Cockenzie. Edin, 
  intermedia, Guillon Links. Edin, 
I   extensa. On the -shore a mile east from Dunbar. W. H. 
CampbeU, mss, 
Alopecurus agrestis. Sandy field near Gosford. Excurs, 
Phlsum arenarium. Near Preston-pans. Edin. 

c 6 



y Google 



438 THE NEW botanist's OUIDE. 

PoA mariHtna, Forming nearly the whole pasture in the salt marshes 

at Aberlady Bay. Edin, 
RoTTBOLLiA incuTvcUa (filiformis). Salt marshes near Aberlady* 

Edin. 



LXV. EDINBURGHSHIRE. 

No part of Britain appears to have been more scoured over by bo- 
tanists, than have the coasts of the Firth of Forth, in the vicinity of 
the city of Edinburgh. Greville's Flora Edtnensis describes most of 
the species found within ten or a dozen miles of Edinburgh, but Wood- 
ford's Catalogue, being of rather later date, has a few additions to the 
species and localities ; and it is, on such account, referred to instead of 
the proper Flora of die tract. Several new additions, however, have 
been recently made to the botanical productions of this, as well as of 
other, parts of Scotland, either by the present Prossessor of the Science 
in the University of Edinburgh, or by his pupils. The Botanical So- 
ciety of Edinburgh has lately published a Catalogue of all the repu- 
tedly British phaenogamic plants and ferns, distinguishing such as are 
found within thirty miles of the city, and noting their rarity or fre- 
quency in its vicinity. Since this Catalogue must embrace several 
counties, and the plants of each not being distinguished, I am unable 
to make any reference to it here ; but the cost of the Catalogue itself 
is so very trifling that any person can procure it who may feel an inter- 
est in knowing what plants have been found in this part of Britain. 
It gives, at the same time, the most complete list yet published of all 
the species said to have been found in the British Islands. 

AUTHORITT. 

Edin, — A Catalogue of the indigenous Phenogamic Plants growing 
in the NeighboBrhood o£ Edinbiu^h. James Woodforde, 
182^. 



* Clematis Vttatbcu By the bridge near to the Palace in Dalkeith 

Park ; Colinton Woods. Edin, 
Thauctrum minus. Sandy shore of the Forth, near Caroline Paric 

£r. W. sp. 
TaoLLius europmu. By the Water of Leiib, opposite the mill above 

Currie. H, W, sp. Meadow ground south of Ravelrig 

Toll; near Borthwick Castle; Lugton Woods; woods at 

Midcalder. Edin, 
f Hellebokus viridis, Wall-top near Lasswade. Edin, 

* Adonis autumnalis. Near Edinburgh. J, Graves, sp. 

* Delphinium Contolida. Shore near Edinburgh. J, Graves, tp. 



yGooQle 



gL 



BDINBUROHSHIRB. 439 

* MicoKOPtis cawhriea. Pastore gvomd near WoocHial], introduoed. 

W. Brands, cp. Banks of the Water of Leith, near Wood- 
hall; Braid Woods. EcUn. 

Glaucium luteum. Gravelly bed of the Water of Leith, beyond 
Coltbridge. Edin. 

? £piMBDiuM alpinvM, Hunter's Tryste. Edin, (No longer found 
there, and, in all probability, an introduced plant originally. ) 

CoKTDAUs elavieulata. Ravelston Quarry. Edin, 

FvMAaiA parviflora. Calton Hill, and on all sides of Edinburgh. 
W. Brands, sp. Near Musselburgh. G» Macnab, sp. At 
Hill-side, north of the Calton Hill, and (the variety leu- 
cantha) at Mr. Waddel's grounds at Hermitage. Br. Fl, 

Cakile maritima. Shore near Caroline Park. H. W, tp. Leitli 
Sands ; between Newhaven and Caroline Park. Edin, 

LxpiDiuM Smitkii, Woods near Rossl3m ; in a com-fidd at Bell's 
Mills. Edin. 

CocHLBARiA offictnoKs* luchkeith ; Cramond Island ; sea-shore be- 
tween ^ranton Wood and Cramond ; Fisherrow and Mus- 
selburgh Links. Edin, (I think to have observed the 
plants about Granton and Cramond frequently presenting 
the elliptical pouch oi E, anglica, and have specimens in my 
herbarium, gathered near the latter place, which I should 
re^ to C, anglica, ) 

— — — — danica. Firth of Forth, probably from Cramond Island. 
H. W, sp, Cramond Island. Edin, 

? Dkaba muralis. Field behind the old Botanic Garden; near 
Bellevue. Edin, 

I Camxlima sativa. Banks of the £sk, above Inveresk. B, Maughan, 
sp. Field, Lochend, near Edinburgh. G. Macnab, sp. 
Calton Hill. Edin. 

? Dkmtaria huJbifera. Banks of the Esk, below Dalkeith. Br. FL 
(Not admitted by the Botanical Society.) 

Cakdamimb amara. Water of Leith, above Currie. H. W. sp. 
Marsh about a mile west from Lasswade ; Water of Leith 
near St. Bernard's Well; near Bell's Mill and Kevock 
Mill ; banks of the Esk above Dalkeith. Edin, 

f Barbaeba pr<Bcox. In the bed of the Water of Leith, near St. 
Bernard's Well. Edin, 

Nastubtixjm sylvestre. By the Water of Leith. W, Brands, sp. 

* "R^snLiasmcLtronaHs, Fields near the Hunter's Tryste. W.Christy, 

sp. Debris of Salisbury Craigs ; banks of Glencorse Bum ; 

Colinton and Auchindenny Woods ; banks below Arthiur's 

Seat ; banks of the Water of Leith. Edin, 
<|- Bbassica i)teraeea, Inchkeith. 
-^— — — campestris. By the side of the road leading from Leith 

to Queensferry, near Bangholm. Edin. 
RsnBA lutea. Debrb of Salisbury Craigs. Edin, 
Viola hOea. Woods near Ravelrig Toll, and observed on Dalmahoy, 

Braid, and Pentland Hills. H, W. sp, Arthur's Seat; 

Blackford Hills; Corstorphine Hills. Edin^ 
c 6 



y Google 



440 THE NSW botanist's guide. 

Viola flavieomis. Several stations near Edinburgh. Exeurs, 
DiANTHUs deltoides, Blackford Hill, and above the railway on Arthur's 

Seat, as well as on the northern side of the latter hill. H. 

W, wp. Banks of Lochend ; Pentland Hills. Edin. 

* — .- harbatus. Rosslyn Wood ; banks of the Water of Leith, 

between Coltbri^ge and Saughton«hall ; Gilinton Woods ; 

near Maleny. Edin, 
hrcums Visearia, Blackford EUll. W. Brands, tp, Ontherocks, 

called the ** Basaltic Columns,'* above the railway upder 

Arthur's Seat. H. W. sp. Rocks by Braid Hermitage; 

Dimdas Hill [Linlithgowshire ?]. Edin, 
SiLENK marvHma, Cramond Idbnd ; Inchkelth ; rocks near Caroline 

Park. Edin. 
Sagina nutritima, Cramond Island. /. H, Balfour, $p. Other 

islands and shores of the Firth of Forth. H, W, sp. Near 

the wet-dock at Leith. Edin, 
Spergula tubukUa, Dalmahoy Hill. W. H. CampbeU, q}, Cors- 

torphine Hill ; and on a little bank by the road-side shortly 

before reaching Ravehrig Toll, from Edinburgh, ff, W, sp. 

On a wall near Ravehrig Toll. Edin, 
Stxllaria Memorum. Rosslyn Woods. H, W, Arniston and Kew- 

battle Woods. Edin. 
Arznaua peploides. Between Newhaven and Cramond, in various 

parts of the shore of the Forth. H, W, tp, Leith Sands; 

Fisherrow and Musselburgh Links. Edin, 

vema. Plentiful on Salisbury Craigs and Arthur's Seat» 

and occasionally on the Pentland Hills. H* W, sp, Black- 
ford HilL Edin, 
? . tenuifdUa, Cramond Island. Edin, (I much suspect 

that Sagina maritima is the plant to which this name has 

been applied. H. W,^ 
CERAsnuM tetrandnim* Frequent on Arthur's Seat, and on walls 

and banks about Edinburgh. H, W, sp, Fisherrow Links ; 

Braid HiU; Calton Hill; Inchkeith. 
GxRAMiuM sangvineum. Rocks on Arthur's Seat, above the railway. 

H, W, sp, Salisbury Craigs. Edin, 
  sylvaticum, Rosslyn and Auchindinny Woods. H. W^ 

Clinton and Arniston Woods. Edin, 

* I phae!¥m» Colinton and Granton Woods. Edin, 

•^ —....i.^-. pyrtnaicum. By the road under Salisbury Craigs, at the 
end towards Duddingiston. H, W, sp. Near Craigmillar 
Castle ; near Bell's Mills ; in a lane leading from the south- 
east part of Edinburgh to the King's Park, abundantly. Edin. 

* Staphtlea pinnata. Colinton Woods, evidently introduced. S, 

W, ip. 

? Ulbx nanus, Pentland Hills. Edin, (Not recognised as an 
Edinburgh plant, by the Botanical Society, and a Braid- 
Hill specimen, which I have seen under this naqie, is merely 
U. europaeus.) 

Ononis spinosfl ? Fisherrow Links. E^n. 



yGooQle 



gL 



EDt^NBUROHftHntE. 441 

Okobus syUHxHcttt, Sparingly at the end of Braid HiUs towards the 

high-road leading thence to the Pentlands. ff. W, $p. 

Woods near Currie. Edin, 
f Lathykvs s^lveatris* Debris of fialisbur^r Craigs, on the north «id«« 

Edin. 
*   Aphaccu In a wheat field near Edinburgh. J, Grm/tg^ 

sp. 
YiciA angustifolia. Arthur's Seat W. Brandg, sp. Near Dudding- 

ston Loch, on the sloping bank above the Railway ; Dalma- 

hoy Hill, on the 'side towards Ravelrig Bog; Cramood 

Isle. H. W, sp. 
hxthyroides. Side of Arthur's Seat above the Railway ; and isles 

in the Forth. H, W, sp. Blackford Hill; fields east of 

Portobello ; Leith gravd-pit. Edin. 
Astragalus hypoglottis. Slope of Arthur's Seat, above the Railway, 

and on the shore of the Forth between Newhaven and 

Cramond. H. W. sp, 
-^-^— — ^- glycypkyUus, Cory ton Woods ; banks of the Water of 

Leith, between Coltbridge and Saughton-halL Edin. 
Mblilotus leucantha. In a deserted . quarry on the banks of the 

Union Canal, near Edinburgh. Excurs, 
Trifoliuh omithopodioides. Musselburgh Links. G. Mcumab, sp. 

In a field near Maitland Bridge, between Edinburgh and 

Musselburgh ; Fisherrow Links ; Figget Whins. Edin, 
— — scahrum. Near Edinburgh. G. Uoydy sp. King's Park ; 

dry soils by the sea-shore near Edinburgh. Edin, 
Lotus tenuis. Edinburgh. G. Lloyd, sp. 

* MsDicAoo sativa, Figget Whins. Edin. . 

PauNUs Padus. Colinton Woods. H. W. sp. Rosslyn Woods; 
Banks of Bevelaw Bum ; Auchindinny and Amiston Woods. 
Edin, 

* — - domMixca. Craigmillar Castle ; Colinton Woods. Edin. 
Sfibaa. salicifolia, Arniston Woods; Cragie-hall and Cramond 

Bridge. Edin. 
Ptrus Aria, Rocks in the King's Park, near the Powder Magazine ; 

wood on the Dalkeith road; wood near Craiglochart. 

Edin, 
RoaA.^ spinosissima, Newbattle Marsh. H. W. sp. Arthur's Seat ; 

road-sides between Duddington and Musselbur^. Edin. 
— ^ SaJUni ( Doniana). Banks of the Water of Leith near Colinton. 

Edin, 
— tomentosa. Banks of the Water of Leith, at Bog's Mill, near 

Slateford. R, Maughan, sp. Sea-side between Caroline 

Park and Cramond ; between Ravelston Wood and Edin- 
burgh (R. mollis). Edin. 
•— — inodora. Near Edinburgh. Edin, 
RuBus saxatilis, Auchindinny Woods. H, W, Rosslyn Woods; 

Pentland Hills, near Colinton. Edin, 
•— ~ Chamasmorus, Top of the Eastern Cairn Hill, one of the 

Pentlands. Edin, 



yGooQle 



gl 



i42 THB NBW botanist's ^UIDE. 

PdvmmxA aryentta, Blackford Hill, on the rocks and debiis* 
H, W. ap, Craig Brae near Dnndas Castle; Binny Craig. 
Edin. 

vemeu Arthur^ Seat. W. BrandSf sp. South-west side 

of Arthur's Seat ; rocks and walls at Craiglochart. Edin. 

CoMABUM paUutre, Near the Braid Hills. H. If. tp. Hunter"^ 
Bog ; in a marsh on the east side of Arthur's Seat ; Dud- 
din^ston Loch ; Braid Hill Marshes ; Pentland Hills ; 
Ravelrig Bog. Edin. 

* CvtcMJL aipina. West side of Arthur's Seat Edin. 
CKKAT0PH7LLUH denursum^ Cannonmills Loch, 1809, abundant. 

Edin. 

    I M <tt6meffw»? Duddingston Loch. W, Stables, sp. 

f Skdum daayphyUum. Colinton Woods, on a dry bank. W. 

Brandt, sp. 
     I viBosmn. Penecuik Moot. W. Brands, sp. Wet places in 

fields at the base of the Pentland Hills, near Currie. H. W. 

sp. By the sides of rivulets on the Pentland HiUs. Edin, 
RiBBS aipinum. Dalhousie. W. Brands, sp. In an old quarry, in 

Auchindinny Wood. H. W. sp. 
\ nigrum. By the side of the stream in Auchindinny Wood* 

scarcely to be called indigenous there. H, W. sp. 

* I wlbrum. Woods on Corstorphine Hill, and other places, pro- 

bably sown by birds. H. W. 

* Saxifbaoa umbrosa. Rosslyn, Colinton, and Auchindinny Woods; 

Corstorphine Hill; banks of a stream above Newbattle. 
Edin. 
I hypnoides. Very sparingly on Arthur's Seat, among some 

loose stones above the Basiedtic Columns, perhaps planted; 
more plentiful on Dahnahoy Hill. H. W. sp. 

Chbtsosplbmium aUemifolium. Woodcock Dale. W. H. Campbell, 
sp. Rosslyn Woods. H. W. sp. On wet rocks opposite 
Hawthornden ; banks of a small stream near the New 
Bridge in Rosslyn Woods ; banks of the Water of Leith, 
about two miles above Currie ; St. Bernard's Well ; Bilston 
Bum ; Newbattle, Amiston, and Auchindinny Woods. Edin. 

Ebtnoium maritimvm. Fisherrow and Musselburgh Links. Edin. 

I Ckufhmum maritimvm. Islands in the Forth of Firth ; not (bund m 
the present day. Edin. 

XEwAiiraB PheOandrivm, Ditch opposite Beech Wood, near Cors- 
torphine. R. Maughan, sp. 

Pbucidakitx pahatrs. Marsh near Colinton. Edin. 

* ' Ostrvtkiwn. Under Borthwick Castle. H. W. sp. 
LioosncuM seoHcum. Back of the Glassworks at Leith. Edin. 
SiLAUS pratensis. Marsh near the Roman Camp at Newbattle. 

H. W. sp. Borders of corn-fields near Oxenfi>rd Casde. 

Edin. 
SiuM hxtifolium. Duddingston Loch. Edin. 
Hblosoiadium repens. Near Edinburgh ; banks of a pond at Hsh- 

errow. Edin. 
CicoTA tirosa, Lochend. Edin, 



y Google 



Mtbbbis odoraia. By the Firth of Forth, wider the wall of Caro- 
line Park. H, W, 8p, Near Mavisbonk j by the Water of 
Leith, two miles above Currie ; Amiston Woods | foot of the 
Castle-bank, to the north-east. Ed^ 

f Charofhtllum aureum. Near Corstorphlne. EoUn. 

* PxTEossLiNUM Mtivum, Salisbury Craigs ; Craigmillar Castie; old 

walls at Inverleith ; on an old wall at Ci^tbridge ; by the 
road-side between Colinton and Dregfaom., Edin. 

* Ca&om Carui. Rocks on the west side of the Castle. Edin. 
f Smtkkium OIkm^^iii. Craigmillar Castle. fT. Brand, tp, 

? To&iLis infestcu Road-sides about Edinburgh, common. Fl, Scot, 
(This locality is inserted in the Flora Sootica, on the author 
rity of Dr. GreviUe. Some mistake there must be, for no 
other person appears to have found the plant here. ) 

* AifTBKiscos Cerefolium. Shore near Caroline Park, introduced with 

rubbish from the garden, but now thriying luxuriantly. 
Excurs. 1835. 
f ViBUKNUM Lantana. Rosslyn Woods. Edin, 
Apium graveoUns, Ditches behind Musselburgh. Edin, 
LoKicXRA Caprifolium. Colinton Woods, and Corstorphine HilL 

R» Mauffhan, 8p» 
? Co&mrs sueeica, Pentland Hills, as reported, but there would seem 

to have been some mistake. 
LiMK^A boreoHs, Banks of the Esk at Dalhousie. Br. FL (This 
locality is erroneous ; but we learn from the Excursions that 
there is another ; and however averse to the concealment of 
botanical stations in general, I must allow it to be justifiable 
when the herbivorous rapacity of Dr. Graham's regiment 
of botanists comes in question. H. W.) 
? Gauum ereetwn. Fish-wife's Causeway, near Portobello. Edin, 
pnsiUum, Habbie's How, on the Pentland Hills. Edin, 

* Valkriaita rttbra. Old walls at Inverleith. Edin, 

* ' • '> pyrenaica, Dalhousie Woods. W, Brands, sp, Co- 
linton Woods. Edin, 

Fbdia dentata. Near Crossgate Toll, three miles south of Mussel- 
burgh ; fields between Newhaven and Caroline Park ; Water 
of Leith, ^. Edin, Fields near the northern end of the 
Pentland Hills. H, W, sp, 

Traoofogon major ? Shore of the Forth, near Caroline Park. H. 
jr.sp. 

Lactuca virosa. Arthur's Seat. G, Macnab, sp. Debris of Salis- 
bury Craigs. H, W, sp. Bebw the Basaltic Columns in 
the King's Park. Edin. 

7 Sovcsvspalustris. Lochend. Edin. (Is it still there?) 

HiERACiuM sylvaHeum, Habbie's How, on the Pentland Hills; 
Braid Hills; Arthur's Seat. Edin. 

- pahtdosum, Amiston Woods, by the banks of the South 
£sk, at Temple, about a mile above Amiston; Rosslyn 
Woods, abundantly. Edin, 
— — prenanthoides. Near Cramond Bridge. Edin, 



yGooQle 



gL 



444 THE jiTEW botanist's guide. 

CNicm eriophonu. By the roftd<4ide near Ozenford Castle, and Cbes- 

terhaU. Edin. S 

' I heterophyUiu, Auchindinny Woods ; G, N- JJoyd, sp. 

Ro^yn Woods ; Pentland Hills, near Currie. Edin, 
Onofordum Aeanthium. Near Musselburgh. Edin, 
<y VAPHALiuM dioieum, Arthur's Seat, towards the back of Salisbury 

Craigs. H,W,sp, Dalmahoy Hill ; Pentland Hills. Edin. 
AsTsa Tripalium* Morrison's Haven, near Portobello. Edin, 
Sbnicio viscosus, Salisbury Craigs and Arthur's Seat. , H, W, sp. 

Calton Hill ; Blackford Hill ; near Newhaven ; Figget 

Whins. Edin, 
I saracenicus. Banks of the Almond. W, Brands f sp. Above 

Cramond Bridge, 
f DoaoKicuM Pardalianches, Rosslyn and Colinton Woods. Edin, 

Dalkeith Park. Eng, Bat, Supp, 
I   planiagineum, Dalhousie Woods, apparently wild. G, 

Macnab, »p, 
PraxTHanM nuxritimum. West side of Inchkeith. ff, W, 
Campanula latifolia, Rosslyn and Colinton Woods. Edin, 

I TracheUum, Wood opposite Slateford Bleaching Field. 

G, N, Lloyd, tp. 

rapuneuloides. In a corn-field at the foot of Braid 



Hill, towards Edinburgh. EcUn, 
Vaccikium Fitis-Idaa, Pentland Hills, above Swanston Wood. 

Edin, 
— -^-— Oxycocoos, Marsh on the Pentland Hills, behind Currie. 

Edin, 
"PrBXii^ rotundifolia, Auchindinny and Rosslyn Woods. Edin, 
— ~- minor. Wood above Newbattle Marsh ; Auchindinny Wood ; 

Ravelrig Bog, with the Corallorhiza innata, among the 
, willows. H, W, sp. Wood half way between the turnpike 

on the Auchindinny road to Rosslyn ; Newhall. Edin, 

* PoLBMONiuM cemdeum, Arniston Woods ; Blackford HilL Edin, 
CuscuTA europiBa, On flax, in a field near Musselburgh. Edin, 

MroBons sylvaiica, Hawthomden. W, Brands, sp, Rosslyn and 

Arniston Woods ; King's Park. Edin, 

edUina, Arthur's Seat. W, Brands, sp. Salisbury Craigs. 

H, W, sp. 
f Ai^CHUSA sempervirens. Ruins of Craigmillar Castle. St. W, sp. 

Dean Banks. W. Brands, sp. Banks of the Water of Leith 

about two miles above Currie. Edin, 

* FuLuav ARIA officinalis. Dalhousie Woods. W. Brands, sp, Ar- 

niston Woods, probably introduced. G. N, Lloyd, sp. 

Banks of the North £sk, near Kevock MilL Edin, 
. Stmphttum tufterofum. Dean Bank. W, Brands, sp. Woods near 

Edinburgh, ff, W, sp. Banks of the North Esk between 

Mavisbank and Lasswade; Colinton Woods; Stateford; 

Woodhall; opposite the New Well, at the Water of Leith. 

Edin, 
Vkbbascum nigrum. Banks of the river Esk, oppoaite coal-pits^ and 

at Borthwick Castle. Edin, 



y Google 



EDINBURGHSHIRE. 445 

f ' Atropa Bdladonna. About Borthwick CastlCi probably introduced. 
jff. W. ap. 

LiKABiA repeiM. Banks of the £sk above Musselburgh. Edin, 

* ScKOPHULARiA verjudis.. Old walls near Hatton. Edin. (I have 
a specimen, gathered in a locality shown to me by Mr. G. 
Lloyd ; but this locality being on a heap of garden reftiae, 
just under a garden wall, the plant is scarcely admissible 
even as a naturalised plant. I am unaware whether there is 
any other more certain station. ) H, W. 

Vebonica polUa. Road-side between Braid and Pentland Hills» 
nearer to the latter. H. W, sp, 

? Mkktha rotundifoHa, Near Auchindinny. Br, FL (This station 
is not recognised by the Botanical Society.) 

t viridis. Cairn Hill, near Edinburgh. Br. FL 

f — — piperita. Near Edinburgh. Edin, 

rubra. Near Musselburgh. R, Maughant sp, 

gentUis. Banks of the Esk, near Hawthornden. W, 

Brands^ sp. Below Hawthornden. Excurt, 

Lamiuh maeulatam. Banks of the Esk, above Musselburgh, 1929. 
R, Maughan, sp. 
' incisum. Near the Aqueduct. H, W. sp. In a field near 
Newhaven ; road-side between Merchiston Castle and Col- 
lington. Edin, 

— — intermedium. In several places round Edinburgh. Exatrs, 
Field near Craiglochart. W, H, CampbeUf mss, 

Oaleofsis Ladanum, Field near Dalhousie. W. Brands, sp. Lime- 
kilns at the Roman Camp, Newbattle. G, JJoyd, sp. 
Road-side near Oxenford Castle ; and at Crossgate Toll. 
Edin, 
  versicolor. Corn-field near Braid. W. Brands, sp. 

Stachts amhigua. Fields near Lasswade ; Habbie's How, on the 
Pentland Hills ; fields under the Pentland Hills; fields in 
Auchindinny Woods. Edin. 

f Lkonorus Cardiaca, Edinburgh. G, Lloyd, sp. In a shady 
walk behind Fisherrow, and in Colinton Woods. Edin, 

Acivos vulgaris. Roman Camp at Dalkeith. Exeurs, 

Lathilsa squamaria. Arniston Woods. G. Lloyd, sp, Dalhousie 
Woods, under a hawthorn, near the Castle. H, W, sp. 
Wood opposite Melville Castle, near Lasswade, growing 
under beech trees, along with Mercurialis perennis. Mavis- 
bankj near Lasswade ; woods between Auchindinny and 
Rosslyn ; banks of the Esk, near Kevock Mill. Edin. 

PaiMcn.A datior, Colinton Woods. Edin* 

farinosa. Bridge-house Moor. W. Brands, sp. Boggy 
ground above Woodhouslee. Edin, 

Ltsimachia thyrsiflora. Duddingston Loch. Edin, 

TRiKirrALis europita. Near the Old Reservoir above Colinton, and 
at Ravelrig. Exeurs, (Some years ago I .saw a specimen^ 
which was supposed to have been gathered in this county ; 
though particular circumstances led to strong suspicions of 
error, and a belief that the specimen must have come^fron 



yGooQle 



gL 



446 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Perthshire. The Exeurtumit however, now confirm the 
existence of this plant witlun the county of Edinburgh. 
Otherwise I should have attached a mark of doubt to it. 
H. W.) 

Statics Armeria, Shores of the Forth. H, W, sp* Summit of 
Arthur's Seat. Edm, 

Flantago mariiima. Shore near Granton and Caroline Parks; 
Cramond Island, &c. ff. W, 

LiTTORELLA locustris, Fcutland Hills, near Currie. G. Lhyd, sp. 

Glaux maritima. Fisherrow and Musselburgh Links. Edin. Shore 
opposite Cramond Island. H. W, 

CBBKofoniDM didum. Race Course, Musselburgh. Edin, Fisher- 
row Links. R, Maughan, sp. 

— — .urbicum. Rubbish and waste places near towns. Edin. 

— ^ • hybridum. Cultivated fields. Edin, 

Salsola KalL Between Caroline and Cranton Parks ; about Mussel- 
burgh. Edin. 

BrcA maritima. Near Cramond. Edin, 

? ATaiPLSx porhdacoides. Coast at Leith. Edin. 

— — — laciniata. Shore between Newhaven and Caroline Park ; 
shore near Seafield Baths; Fisherrow and Musselburgh 
Links. Edin. 
• Uttoralis, East of Caroline Park. Edin. 



* PoLTGOHUM Fagopyrvm, Banks of the Nor^ Esk, above Lasswade. 

R. Maughan, sp. Arniston Woods. Edin. 

* RuHEx scutaiue. Craigmillar Castle. W. Brands, sp. 

* HrrPOPHAE rhamnmdes. By the shore of the Forth, near Caroline 

Park, apparently planted. H. W. sp. 
Euphorbia Cyparissias. Edinburgh. G. Hoyd, sp. Colinton 

Woods. Edin. 
" Esula. Hedge near Duddingston. . W, Brands, sp, 

Empbtbuh nigrum. PenUand Hills, above Swanston Wood, and also 

near Habbie's How. Edin. 
QiXK&CDs sessiUflora. Rosslyn and Auchlndinny Woods. Edin. 

* Castanea vulgaris. Colinton Woods. Edin, 

f Carpinus Betulus. Hedges about Rosslyn. Edin. 
Saux Helix. Banks of the Stream at Rosslyn. W. Brands, sp 
  Lamhertiana. Banks of the Water of Leith, above Coltbridge ; 
banks of the Esk, above Musselburgh. Edin. 
I I triandra. Near Craigcrook. Edin. 

' ' » I decipiens. Colinton Woods. Edin, Wood near Ravelrig 
Toll. ff. W. sp, 
f -»— Bussdiana, Planted trees about Newhaven, and other pkoes 
near Edinburgh. H. W. sp, Duddingston Loch, Edin. 
' pentandra. Banks of the Esk ; Watet of Leith ; at Ravehrig 

Toll; Rosslyn Woods. Edin. Road-side between Pendand 
and Auchindinny. H, W, 
 I I III' nigricans. Banks of the Esk ; Craigcrook. 
. . .   arenaria. Banks of the Water of Leith, below Colinton. 
R. Maughan, sp, Colinton Woods, rare. Edin. 
> .1   tinefea. Bogs on the south side of Dalmahoy Hill; Rosslyn 
Woods. Edin^ 



y Google 



EDINBUB6HSHIRB. 447 

Saux S^^mom. Craigcrook. G. Lhpd, $p. Banks of the £sk» 
above Musselburgh. Edin, 

* PiNus sylvettris. Rosslyn Woods, &c. Edin, 

* Stratiotes aioides, Duddingston Looh. H, W* jp. 

? Hto&ocha&is Morsus-raiuB, Ditches and lakes, rare. Edin, 
Habksakia chlorantha. Very commoii in **tuhalpine" situations, 

near Edinburgh. Excurs* 
LisTK&A cardata, Ravelrig Bog, in the cluster of villowa. H. W. sp. 
Co&Au^RHizA imnata. Fir-wood at the end <^ Ravelrig Marsh, 

very abundant. /. Macnab, tp. And among the willows, 

with Listera oordata. ff. W. sp, 

* I&isfBgtitiUsinM. Near the Pentland Hills (Mr. Graves). Excm^ 

* Galanthus nivalis. Near Craigmillar Castle. W. Brands^ sp. 

Amiston Woods, and in the Park, but very near the House. 

H, W, sp, 
f Narcissus FsKudO'Nartissv*, By the side of a wood on Corstor- 

phine Hill. Edin, 
f CoNVALLARiA majolts, CoUnton Woods, probably introduced. 

H, W, sp* Amiston Woods. Edin, 
? Allium carinatum, A single specimen said to have been found on 

the south bank of the Water of Leith, above Currie, in July, 

1822. Edin, 

* Ornithooaluh umbdUUum, In a park on the road-side fVom Edin- 

burgh to Bonnington» probably introduced. G. Llojfd, sp. 

* TuLiPA atflvestris. A large patch in a field near Edinburgh. 

Exeurs. 
Spargakium nojtans. Braid- Hill Marshes; Pentland Hills, near 

Currie ; peat-pits on the south side of Dalmahoy Hill. 

Edin, 
PoTAMooBTON Tufescens, Streams on the Pentland Hills. Edin, 
ZosiERA marina. Shore of the Forth, nearly opposite Cramond 

Island, ff. W, sp. Black Rocks at Leith. Edin, 
Lemna trisulca, Duddingston Loch and Lochend, abundant. Edin, 
— - gibba, Lochend and Duddingston Loch. Edin, 
Bl^smus compressus. In the marshy ground below Borthwiok Ca s tle. 

H, W. sp. 
usocHARis paucijhra. Hunter's Bog; Leith Links; Pendaiid 

Hills. Edin, 
• midticaulis, Pentland Hills. Edin, 
- €u:icularis. About a mile north-west from Lasswadew 

Edin, 
EaiorHOi^uM vaginatum, Pentland Hills, near Currie, and west of 

Habbte's How, abundant ; Dalmahoy Hill ; Ravelrig Bog. 

Edin. 
? Carex DavaHiana, Near Crossgate Toll, three miles south of 

Musselburgh. Edin, 
  UrtHusetda, Ravelrig Bog. H. W. sp. Marshes at the 

foot of Duttdas Hill, near Kirkliston ; Pentland Hills ; EdU, 
— — arenaria. Shore near Caroline Park. H, W. sp. Figget 

Whins ; Fisherrow and Musselburgh Links. Edin, 
I intermedia. Marshy place on the north side of Arthur's 

Seat. H, W, sp. Marsh between Portobello and Arthur's 



yGoc^Qle 



igl, 



448 THE NSTT botanist's GUIDE. 

Seat ; Hunter's Bog, in the King*s Park ; banks of Lochend ; 

Braid and Pentland HiUs. Edin. 
Caekx axiUarU. Near Edinburgh. G, N. Uoyd, tp. Banks of 

the North Esk, above Melville Castle. Edin. 
" strigosa. Amiston Woods. Edin, 
," 8peira$tachya:' Near Swanston Wood, on the Pentlands. 

Dr. Lemann, (If this be not identiced with the following 

species, I think it will be found to be the same plant as 

C. distans of Woodforde's Catalogue and the Edinburgh 

botanists. * 
' < JuUhu <* Subalpine** situations, near Edinburgh. Exevrt. 
' — stricta. Braid Hill Marshes ; banks of the Water of Leith, 

above Currie. Edin, 

JiUformis. Ravelrig Bog. G. Ltoyd, «p. 

? Agrostis Spica-Fenti. Rosslyn Woods. Edin. 

Ammofhila arundincux€u Sands on the shore about Caroline Park. 

ff. W. sp. Portobello ; Musselburgh ; Figget Whins. Edin. 
McucA nutans. Hawthornden. W. Campbell, sp. By the path 

side between. Rosslyn and Hawthornden. Edin, 
PoA aquatica. Water of Leith, near Cannonmills Bridge. G. Uoyd, 

sp. At Bonnington Bridge, on the banks of the Water of 

Leith ; by the same stream about a quarter of a mile below 

Cannonnulls Bridge. Edin. 
— — maritima. Sea^side at Caroline Park. Edin, 
FssTircA bromoides. Near Edinburgh, ff. W. sp. Wall-top north 

of Ravelston, plentifully ; frequent on walls about Edinburgh^ 

on the wall by the road-side about half a mile west of Slat^ 

ford. Edin. 
— - Calamaria ? Rosslyn Woods. J. Macndb, sp. 
Bbomus arvensis. Duddingston. /• H. Balfour, sp. Field at the 

end of Duddingston Loch, abundant; also on the side of 

Braid Hill; near Newhaven; and in other places about 

Edinburgh. Excurs. 
' racemosus. North of Edinburgh ; Caroline Park. Edin., 
7 ' vdutinus. Fields behind the Botanic Garden in Leith Walk ; 

between Edinburgh and Newhaven. Edin. 

*   ' ' t erectus. King's Park ; below Salisbury Craigs. Edin^ j 
— — ^— diandrus. About Edinburgh, not common. Edin, 
AvENA strigosa. Meadowbank. Edin. 

* pubescens, Arthur's Seat; Salisbury Craigs; shores of the 

Firth. Editi. 
TamcuM /unceum. Shore of the Forth, near Cramond. H, W. sp. 

Shore at Caroline and Granton Parks; near Portobello and 

Musselburgh. Edin. 
>' loUacevm. Abundant on the coast at Caroline Fkurk. 

/. Macndb, sp. Rocks east of Granton ; shore at Portobello. 

Edin. 
McfiTBOLLiA ineurvaia, Musselburgh Links. Edin. 

* There ii a seriet of roedet widely different at the two extremes, yet so ffradaally 
approachiDg to each other, through intermediate degrees, as to make it dfflcult to 
duraw the Imes of distinction ; namely, Carex CEderi, flava, ftdva, speirbttochya, 
Jdiftans, hinenris, and Isevigata. 



yGooQle 



gL 



LINLITHGOWSHIRE. 449 



LXVI. LINLITHGOWSHIRE. 



AUTHORITY. 

Edin. — A Catalogue of Plants growing in the neighbourhood of 
Edmburgh. Woodforde, 1824. 



Crambe maritima. Shore of the Forth, between Cramond and 
Queensferry, nearer to the former. H. W. sp, 

f Erysimum cheiranihoides. Very sparingly by the Forth, some miles 
west of Queensferry, probably brought by coal-vessels, 1831. 
H, W, sp. 

SiLEKE maritima. Shore of the Forth near Cramond. H. IF, sp, 

Saoina maritima. Coast near Dalmeny. G, Macnab, sp. Queens- 
ferry. Edin. 

f Geranium />A^t(m.' Near Linlithgow. Edin, 

ViciA angustifclia. Dalmeny. /. H, Balfour, sp. 

Astragalus glycyphyUos. In many places on the coast between 
Nether Cramond and South Queensferry. Edin, 

* Medicaoo sativa. Banks of the Union Canal, ten miles from 

Edinburgh. M. Maughan, sp. 

* Spir AA salicifolia. Woods at Newhall, near Queensferry. H, W. «p, 
Sedum viUosum. Near Linlithgow. Edin. 

Meum athamanticum. West Lothian. Fl, Scot. 
LiousTicuM scoHcum. Rocks on the shore near Newhall. H. W. 
f Peucedanum Ostruthium. Plantation opposite the house of Black 
Hall, West Lothian. Fl Scot. 

* Carum Carui. Between Newhall and Queensferry. Edin. 

f LoKiCERA Caprifolium. Hedges near South Queensferry. R. 

Maughan, sp. Hedges at Dalmeny. Br. FL 
f Valeriana pyrenaica. Abercorn Woods. Edin* 
HiEKACivM prenanthoides. Near Cramond Bridge. Edin. 
Pyrola minor. Newhall ; woods above South Queensferry. Edin, 

* Polemonium cceruleum. A few miles east from South Queensferry, 

on the sandy shore. G. Lloyd, sp. 
Primula datior. Bushy places on the north side of the road, between 

Cramond Bridge and Queensferry. H. W, 
Lysimachia thyrsijlora. Canal between Edinburgh and Glasgow, in 

many places, very abundantly. Excurs, 
Plant a GO maritima. Shore near Queensferry. H* W. 
Cbenopodium maritimum. Coast at Dalmeny. . G, Macnab, sp^ And 

westward of Queensferry. H. W. sp. 
Atriplex littoralis. Shore westward of Queensferry. H. W. sp. 

Below the house of Carriden, in West Lothian. Fl. ScoL 
Beta maritima. Near Cramond. Edin. 

* AsARUM eur^vKeum, West Binny, near Linlithgow. Edin. 



yGooQle 



gL 



450 , THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

EuFHOiiBiA Esvla, Wood near a rivulet at Abercorn, thirteen miles 
west of Edinburgh ; in a field near West Pilton, seven miles 
north-west of Edinburgh. Edin, 

JuKCUS dbtusijhnu. Ditches in Abercom Park, near the lower fish- 
pond, abundant. Edin. 

Bltsmus rufiu. By the Forth, about a mile (two miles, Edin» ) east 
of Queensferry. H. W. tp, 

Sci&rns maritimus. On the coast westward of Queensferry. H, W, sp. 

A&UNDO arenaria. Coast about Kewhall and Dalmeny Park. H, W. 

RoiTBOLLiA incurvata (filiformis). Shore of the Forth, some miles 
westward of Queensferry. Mr. Gentle, sp, 

TKTncmJunctum, Suidy shore, westward of Cramond Isle. H, W, 



LXVn. FIFESHIRE. 

Including Kinross and Qackmannan shires. 



AUTHORITT. 



Edin, — A Catdogue of Plants growing near Edinburgh. Wood- 
forde, 1824. 



Thauctritm minus. North Queensferry ; coast west of Kirkcaldy. 
Edin, 

. majus. On a hiUy slope facing the water, by the road- 
side, a quarter, or half a mile from North Queensferry. 
H, W, sp, 

Rakukculus Flammula (reptans). By Loch Leven. (Dr. Wight.) 
W. H, CampbeU, sp, 

AcTJEA spicata, Cleish Woods, Kinross-shire. Br. FL 

Mecokopsis cambrica, Cleish Woods. jF?. Scot. 

Epimedium alpinum. Mr. Amott, I believe^ gathered it at Cleish 
some years ago. Grtxham, Excurs, (I know not whether 
<< Bandrum,** mentioned as a locality, in Graham's Exeur- 
sums, 18S5, is within Fifeshire.) 

Glaucium luteum. Shore near North Queensferry. Edin, 

Lefioium latifolium. By the castle of Weems. Edin. 

CocHLSARiA officinalis, Inchcolm $ all along the shore from Bumtis* 
land to Aberdoiu'. Edin. 

Camelika sativa. Near Inyerkeithing. Edin. 

Ibsris amara, Inchcolm. Excurs, 

? Subularia aquatica, Otterston Loch. Edin. 

t Arabib Turrita. Castle of Cleish. Fl Scot, 



y Google 



7I7ESHIRB. 451 

SiNAPis tenuijblia, Su David's. W, H, CampbeO, tp. Near loTer- 
keithing. H. IF. sp. Coast between Burntisland and 
Queensferry. EcUn. 

* — muraUs. North coast of the Forth, introduced with ballast. 
fF, Brands, ap. Coast of the Firth of Forth, abore Queens- 
ferry, in two places. Excurs, 

Brassica. campesiris ? Inefagarvie. JF, Brand, tp. 

olenicea. In many places on Inchcolm. Edin. 

Reseda lutea. Hills between Pettycur and Burntisland ; near Kirk- 
caldy; near Raith. Edin. To the south-west of New- 
burgh. FL Scot. 

Viola lutea. Hilly pastures above Burntisland. H. W. sp. 

DiANTHUs deHoides. Rocks near Newburgh. FL Scot. 

Lychnis Viscaria. Rocks &cing the west, a little to the east of New- 
burgh; glen between Kinross and ^e Bridge of £am. 
H. Scot. 

SiLENE maritima. Inchcolm ; North Queensferry ; Pettycur ; King- 
horn ; shore west c^ Kirkcaldy. Edin. 

noctiJhrcL Fife. Excurs. 

nutans. HUls at North Queensferry. R. Maughan, sp. 

anglica. North Queensferry, scarce. Excurs. Between 

Dundee and St. Andrews. Eng. Fl. (Is St. Andrews in 
Fifeshire intended here ?) 

Sagina maritijna. Isle of May, abundant. FI. Seat. 

&PEK6ULA subulatcu Hills to the west of North Queensferry, near the 
turnpike. Edin. Hills south of Newburgh. FL Scot. 

AsKKARiA marina. Inverkeithing and Queensferry. Edin. 

? ' tenuifoKa. Near Pettycur Harbour. Edin. 

fastigiata. Fifeshire. FL Scot. 

Cerastium tetrandrum. Inchcolm ; Isle of May. Edin. 

Radiola mUkgrana. Kinross-shire. FL Scot. 

Lavateba arborea. Inchgarvie and Mykrick Inch. Edin. 

f Ge&akeum />A«ettm. Kankeelour. FL Scot. 

OaoBus sylvaticus. Bank to the south-west of Newburgh. FL Scot. 

ViciA lutea. Hills near the shore west of Queensferry. ff. IF. sp. 

OxTTEOPis uralensis. Hilly pasture to the north- westward of Queens- 
ferry. H. W. sp. 

Astragalus hgpoglottis. Hills at Queensferry ; with a white flower, 
and a foot high, a little to the west of Kirkaldy, by the 
sea-side. Edin, 

— glycyphyUus. Cliffs by the road-side westward of Queens-^ 
ferry. H. W. sp. 

Trifolium scabrum. Burntisland. J. H. Balfour, sp. 

omithopodioides. Shore near Inverkeithing. Excurs. 

Mbdicago ntaculata. Near Aberdour. J. H. Bcdfour, sp. Doni- 
bristle Park; coast between Donibristle and Aberdour. 
Excurs. 

f Spirjba saUcifoUa. Cleish Woods. Fl. Scot. 

Rosa spinosissima. Back of Balnarty Hill. FL Scot. 

RuBUS carpinifolius. Fifeshire, and other counties of Scotland. Eng. 
Bot. Supp. 



y Google 



459 ^^^ ^^^ botanist's guide. 

PoTXNTiLLA vetTui. Hills about Queensferry. Edin. Near New- 
burgh. FL Scot. 

Sedum anglicum. Isle of May. H, W. «p. 

-f RiBES rvbrum. Culross Woods. Fl, Scot. 

LiGUSTicuM fcoticum. In several parts of the coast between Burntis- 
land and Queensferry. H. W, sp, Queensferry; Kinghorn; 
coast between East and West Weems. EcUn, 

CicuTA virota. Otterston Loch, Fifeshire ; Pow Mill, Kinross-shire. 
FL Scot, 

f Mtrrhis odoroto. Hilly fields above Burntisland. H, W, Cleish 
and Arlary, Kinross-shire. Fl Scot. 

f Peucepanuh Osirutkium, At Milnathort, two miles north from 
Kinross. Fl Scot. 

f PxTBOSELiNUM tcUivum, Coast near Inverkeithing. JS. W. tp. 

SiCY&KiUM Olusatrum, Sea shore below the old Castle of Ravens- 
heugh, between Dysart and Kirkaldy; by the side of a 
rivulet at Kinghorn. Edin. 

FxciA dentata. Fields between Queensferry and Inverkeithing, 
abundant. Excurs. Field near Kirkaldy. Edin. 

Valeeiana pyrenaioa. ** Ditches in the west of Kinross-shire, as at 
Blair Adam, Cleish, and near Dupplin.'* F2. Scot. 

f DiFSACUS Fulhnum. At Lord Elgin's Lime-works, near Dunferm- 
line. Fl. Scot. 

Hie&acium Lawsoni, On the rocks to the westward of Queensferry, 
just above the turnpike ; shady places almost on a level with 
the sea, between Pettycur and Burntisland. Edin. 

    moUe. Near Inverkeithing (not seen by Dr. Graham). 

Excurs. 

amplexicauJe. Kinross-shire. W. Stables, tp. Walls of the 

Castle of Cleish. FL Scot. 

ONOPORDUit AcantMum. Weems ; between Limekilns and Charles- 
town. JBdin, 

Gkaphauum dioicum. Queensferry. W, Brands, sp. 
•   gaUicum. Near Newburgh. FL Scot. 

Sekecio viscosus. At Leven on the coast near the salt-works; at 
Dysart by the pier ; and at Charlestown, Lord Elgin's lime- 
works. FL Scot. 
  sarticenieus. Near Dumfermline. Excurs. 

AsTEK TripoUum. Sea mill-dam, Burntisland Bay; Inverkeithing 
Bay. Edin. 

Do&OKicuM Paradalianehes. Truly a native of many moist woods in 
a clay-soil in Forfarshire and Fifeshire. (D. Don.) Eng. 
Bot. Supp. 

— — ^— — plantagineum, Morlit Excurs, 

PTaETHBUM maritimunu Inchcolm, abundantly. Edin. 

Camfanula glomerata. Near Pettycur. G. Macnab, sp. Sea^Hk 
between Kinghorn and Kirkcaldy. H. W. sp. Between 
Pettycur and Kinghorn, nearest the latter. Edin. 
  latifolia. Kinross- shire. Fl. Scot. 
' rapunculoides. Abundant in a field three miles west of 



yGooQle 



gL 



FIFESHIRE. 453 

Kirkcaldy. G, Macnab, tp. Cornfields two miles north- 
west firom Kirkcaldy. Edin. 
Campanula Trachdium, Near Donnibristle. Excurt, 
Vaccinium Oxycoccos, West side of Otterston Loch. Edin, 
Mtosotis coiDina ? Queensferry. H, W, sp. 
LiTHospEBHUM marittmum. Near Seafield Tower. Edin, Coast 

near St. Andrew's. FL Scot, 
f Akchusa sempervirens. Road-sides between Crossgates and Keltie, 

Kinross-shire. 1*7. Scot, 
Stmfbttum tuberosum, Cleish. FL Scot. 

f At&opa BeUadonna, Crombie Point, near Aberdour. W, Brands, 
sp. Sea-side immediately west of the waggon-road from 
Limekilns; Inchcolm. Edin, 
Veronica Btixbaumii, Near Dunfermline; near Inverkeithing. 

Excurs^ 
Lycopus europ<Bus. Margins of the Loch of Lindore. FL Scot, 
f Labuum maculatum. Wood on the estate of Carnock. Excurs, 
Orobancbe rubra. Near Seafield Tower, between Kirkcaldy and 

Kinghorn. Edin, 
Primula eZo^'or. Woods about Aberdour. H. W,sp, Near Queens- 
ferry. Excurs. 
Trientalis europaa, Townhill Wood, Dunfermline. Excurs. 
Statice Armeria, Inchcolm. Edin, Isle of May, and coast of Fife 

In various places. H. W, sp. 
LrrroRELLA lacustris. In a marsh on Duneam Hill. Edin, 
Glaux maritima, Queensferry ; Burntisland ; Petty cur. Edin, 
Salicornia herbacea, Inverkeithing Bay. Edin. 
Salsola Kali, Inchcolm. Edin, 
CHENOFoniUM maritimum, Inverkeithing. Edin, 
Beta maritima. Shore near Kirkcaldy. Edin, 
Atriplex littoraJis, St. David's. J, H, Balfour, sp. About Dysart 

Rock. Edin, 
— — — laciniata, Inchcolm. Edin. 

Polygonum viviparum. Very sparingly, on a low hill near Queens- 
ferry. H, W. sp, 
RuMEX maritimus, Burntisland ; between Kinghorn and Pettycur. 

Edin* 
f — cUpinus, Dollar. W. C. Trevdyan, mss. 
Empbtrum nigrunu Moors near Lochgelly. H. W. sp. 
Mercurialis annua, Burntisland. Edin. 
• Casta NE A vulgaris. Woods at Aberdour. Edin. 
Saux ferruginea. Fifeshire. Br, FL 
Triolochin maritimum, Inverkeithing Bay. Edin. 
Orchis pyramidaUs. On the Fifeshire side of the Frith of Forth, 
1834. Excurs. (It is a mistake to give this as the first 
recorded station in Scotland. See the Flora Scotica, for a 
station in Colonsay, on the authority of Lightfoot.) " 
Habekaria aUnda. A single plant found on the hills above Queens- 
ferry. Edin, 
Malaxis paludosa. Marshes near St. Andrew's, Fifeshire ; rills near 
the foot of Dunglow, Kinross-shire. Fl. Scot. 

VOL. II. D 



y Google 



454? THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CoRALLo&HizA iufuxttu Near Dunfermline. W. Brandtt </>. 

f Ikis foetidifsima. Fordel Woods. (Rev. A. Robertson.) Exeun, 

f Narcissus Pseudo-NarcUtus, Meadows in the ndghbourhood of 

Culross. Fl Scot. 
CoNVALLABiA mojalU, Cleish. Fl. Scot. 
Allium arenarium. Near Aberdour. J. H. Balfour, tp. Shore of 

the Firth, near Donnibristle ; Pitreavie, near Dunfermline. 

Excurs. 

f oleraceum. Near St. David's, Edin. 

Gaoka lutea. Auchtertool Linn. Edin. Den of Forret, four nules 

from Cupar. FL Scot. 
f CoLCHicuH autumnaU. ** Alloa, the seat of Mr. Erskine. " FL Scot. 
Ttfha angustifolia. Loch of Lindore, abundantly. FL Scot. 
Sparoanium natana* Loch on Duneam Hill. Edin. 
P<ytAvioGvroy pr{elonffu$. Near Kirkcaldy. Excurs. LochLeren. 

Br. FL 
ZosTERA marina. Sea-shore between Burntisland and Pettycur, 

abundantly. Edin. 
JuNCUS maritimus. St. Andrew's. Br. FL 
ScHGENDS nigricans. Bog near Anstruther. Edin. 
Eleocharis acicularis. Loch Leven, and Loch west of Dunning. 

FL Scot. 
— — — - paucijlora. Plentiful on the Ochill Hills ; Loch Leven 

and Cleish Hills. FL Scot. 

mvlticaulis. Near Dunfermline. Excurs. 

Carex teretiuscula. North Queensferry. Edin. 

extensa. Otterston Loch. W. Brands, sp. Near Elie. 

G. Macnah, sp. Near Aberdour. J. H. Balfour, sp. Sea- 
coast between Starley Burn and Aberdour. Edin. Coast 
two miles east of St. Andrew's. FL Scot. 

— limdsa. Otterston Loch. W. Brands, sp. 

. stricta. Marsh a little to the west of Queensferry. Edin. 

  ItBviffata. Cardenden, four miles north-west from Kiriccaldy. 

Edin. 
f Alopecurus agrestis. Among i-ubbish near Alloa, perhaps brought 

with ballast. W. Brands, sp. 

fulvus. Fifeshire. FL Scot. 

Phleuh arenarium. Near Burntisland; between Pettycur and 

Kirkcaldy. Edin. 
Ammofhila arundinacea. Between Burntisland and Pettycur. Edim. 
* PoLTPOOON monspeliensis. Rubbish hills, St. David's, found only 

by Mr. VVallich. JF. Brands, sp. 
PoA aquatica. Kilmeny. FL Scot. 
maritima. About Kirkcaldy, at the west end, near the bridge. 

Edin. 

  distans. Coast near Aberdour. H. W. sp. Inverkeithing. 

W. Brands, sp. 
? Brachyfodium /nnnahem. Near North Queensferry. Edin. 
Bromus secalinus. Cleish ; coast of Fifeshire. Fl. Scot. 
erectus. Between Pettycur and Kirkcaldy. Edin. 

  diandrus. About Kinross. Br. FL 



yGooQle 



gL 



STIRLTNGSHIRE. 455 

* Bromus rigidus. On ballast-heaps, St. David's, certainly introduced. 

Excun, 
AvxNA pvbescetu. Very abundant about Queensferry, a little to the 

eastward. Edin, 
Triticvu juncevm. Between Burntisland and Pettycur. Edin, 
— — — loliaceum. Burntisland. J. H, Balfour, sp. Isle of May. 

H. W,8p, Near Burntisland and Pettycur. Edin, North 

Queensferry. Excurs, 
t RoTTBOLLiA incurvota. Ballast-heaps, St. David's, in its recurved 

form, and probably introduced. Excurs, 



LXVIII. STIRLINGSHIRE. 

Thb plants of *< Ben Lomond,*' followed by the name of Mr. 
Joseph Hooker, were received amongst a number of Dunbartonshire 
plants; but with an intimation that <' all the Alpine plants" were from 
Ben Lomond. As the term alpine, however, expresses nothing ab- 
solute, it is far from improbable that either too many or too few have 
thus been separated from the others, and assigned to Ben Lomond. 
Whether this be the case or not, it is of very little importance in re- 
gard to the specimens belonging to the commoner species of the moun- 
tain tracts, there being little doubt that they would be found in both 
counties, if sought for. 

Thalictrum alpinum, Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp, 

* Efimsdiusi alpinum. About the ruins of Mugdock Castle, abun- 

dantly. Glot. 
NuFHAR pumila. Mugdock Loch, near Glasgow. Br. Fl. Loch of 

Monteith, between the islands and shore. Fl. Scot. 
SuBULARiA aquatica. Loch Lomond, by Inch Tavannoch. Fl. Scot, 
Cardamine amara. In a glen near Mugdock Castle. Glot. Stir- 
lingshire, abundant. G. Macnab, mss. 
f 'Brassica oleracea. Rock of Stirling Castle. H. W. sp, 
Viola lutea. On Cathkin Hills, plentifully. Ght. 
SiLBNE acaulis, Ben Lomond. J, Hooker, sp. 
Cherleria sedoides, Ben Lomond, 1800. Winch, mss, 
Cerastium alpinum, Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. 
——^ loHfolium, Ben Lomond, very rare. Br. Fl, 
f Alth^a officinalis. In a marshy place, Caropsie Hills. Ght. 

* OxALis cornicvlata. Near Stirling. FL Scot. 
Prunus Padus. Banks of the Kelvin. Glot. 

RuBus Chanuemorus, Ben Lomond. /. Hooker, sp. On the Camp- 

sie Hills. Glot. 
SiBBALDiA procumbens. Ben Lomond. /. Hooker, sp. 
D 2 



yGooQle 



gL 



4f56 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Alchemilla tdpina, Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. 

Epilobium alpinum. Ben Lomond. Winchf add. 

Skditm angUeum, Rocks at Stirling. Winch, add. It grows about 

the Castle, though possibly introduced there. H, W. 
Rhodiola rotea* Ben Lomond. J, Hooker, sp, 
Saxifkaga steOarU, Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. Campsie Hills. 
Glot. 

. nivalis. Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. 

\ oppositifoHa. Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. 



— icetevirens. Hills to the north of Loch Lomond. Eng. Fl. 
CicuTA virosa. About Mugdock, Bardowie, and Douglaston Lochs. 

Ght. Ditches near Stirling. Winch, mss. 
SiuM loHfolium. Forth and Clyde Canal, a little above loch 16, near 

Falkirk. R. Maughan, sp. Forth and Clyde Canal, three 

miles from Falkirk, towards Glasgow. Fl. Scot. 
Gauum pusiUum. Strathblane Hills, north of Glasgow. Fl. Scot. 
Lactuca virosa. Rock of Stirling Castle. G. Macnab, sp. 
HiB&AciuM Lawsoni. Dry rocks on the ascent to Ben Lomond, from 

Tarbet, about half-way up. Fl Scot, 
f — — auraniiacum. In the fields about Balvie and Dou- 

galston, originally, probably, from a garden. Glot. 
Cnicus heterophyUus. A littie way up Ben Lomond. Eng. FL 
Saussueea' o/jptno. Ben Lomond. Winch, mss. 
Gnafhalium dioicum. Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. 
supinum. Ben Lomond. /. Hooker, sp. At the top 

of the Hill. Fl. Scot. 
+ DoROKicuM jdantagiTieum? Banks of the Carron, near ♦ ♦ * 

(The name on the ticket is not legible.) Stirlingshire, 

probably introduced. G. Macnab, sp. 
f Senecio saracenicus. Border of a field near Mugdock Castle. Glot. 
f Campanula Tracheliunu On the walls of Mugdock Castle. Glot. 
XiOBELiA Dortmanna. In Bardowie and Mugdock Lochs, plentifully. 

Glot. 
Vaccikium Vitis^IdcBa. Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. Campsie 

HiUs. Fl. Scot. 
Andromeda poUfolia. Blair Drummond, near Stirling. W. Bush- 
man, sp. (Probably within Perthshire.) 
Azalea procumbens. Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. 
? Anchusa officinalis. Said to have been found at Kilsyth and Am- 

brae. Br. FL 
Verbascum Lychnites. Rock of Stirling Castle. H. W. sp. Back 

walk at Stirling, called Edmonton*s Walk. FL Scot. 
f Atropa Belladonna. King's Park at Stirling. FL Soot, 
f Scrophularia vemalis. Stirlingshire, quite wild. G. Macnab, mss. 
Veronica cdpina. Ben Lomond. FL Scot. 
Ltcopus europaus. Banks of the canal, near Grangemouth. G. 

Macnab, sp. 
Mentha crispa. Banks of the Carron, three miles above Falkirk. 

(Mr. Robert Paterson) ? sp. 
LisiMACHiA thyrsijlora. By the canal, above Grangemouth. G. 

Macnab, mss. 



y Google 



DUMBARTONSHIRE. 457 

Trientalis ettropaa. On Ben Lomond, about one mile of the way 
up. FL Scot. Tor-wood, Stirlingshire. G. Macnab, sp» 

LiTTOBELLA lacustHs. Bardowie Lochs ; pond at Dougalston. Ght. 

OxY&iA renifbrmis. Ben Lomond. /. Hookery sp, 

Habenaria (dbida. Pastures to the east of Mugdoek Cattle. Glot. 
Campsie Hills. Fl. Scot. 

LisTERA cordata. Ben Lomond. Fl. Scot, 

f CoNVALLARiA muUifiora, On the ruins of Mugdoek Castle. Ght. 

Sparganium natans. Mugdoek Loch, abundantly ; pond at Dougal- 
ston. Glot. 

LuzuLA spicata. Ben Lomond. /. Hooker, sp. 

JuKcus triglumu. Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. 

Eleocharis pauciflora. Near Mugdoek Castle, north of Glasgow ; 
middle of Ben Lomond. Fl Scot. 
• cuncularis. Plentifiilly about Bardowie Loch. Glot. 

Carex puUa, Ben Lomond. Br. Fl. 

> rigida. Ben Lomond. H. W. sp. 

— — speirostachya. Marshes on the Campsie Hills. Eng. Bot. 
Supp. ' 

AiKA alpina. Ben Lomond. /. Hooker, sp. 

Seslbbia ccBTuUa. Plentiful on Ben Lomond. FL Soot. 

PoA a^tuu Ben Lomond. J. Hooker, sp. 



LXIX. DUMBARTONSHIRE. 

TftOLLivs europaus. Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp. Between 
Tarbet and Loch l4ong, on the hills. H. W. 

* Epimedium tUpinunu Mugdoek Castle. /• Hooket, sp. 

Chelidonium majus (laciniatum ?). Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp, 

Glaucium Ivteum. On the shore at Helensburgh, plentifully. Glot. 

CoRTDALis damctiUaa. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp, 

Lefidium Smithii. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. 

CocHLSARiA officinalis. Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp. 

TuaazTis glabra. In the wood opposite the Inn, Bowling Bay, spar- 
ingly. Glot. 

Drosbra Itmgifolia, Marshy place at Ardoch Cottage. Ght. 

»»— — . anglica. Glen FaUocdi, near the 'shore of Loch Lomond. 
G. Howitt, sp. 

Silbne maritima. Dumbiutonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Banks of the 
Clyde at Helensburgh. Ght, 

Stellaria nemorvm. Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp, 

Arbnaria marina. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Banks of the 
Clyde, at Helensburgh* Glot. 

— ~— — pephides, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Banks of the 
Clyde from Dumbarton to Ardencaple. Glot, 
D 3 



y Google 



458 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Ckrastium latifoUum. Dumbartonshire, Boue, Inaug, Diss. 

Radiola miUegrana. On the road-side between Dumbarton and 
Helensburgh, plentifully. Ght, 

Hypericum AndroscBmum. Woods of Loch Lomond, southward of 
Tarbet, in various places. H, W. sp, 

— dodes. Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp. 

Ononis spinosa, Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp. 

ViciA lathyroides, Dumbarton Castle. Fl Scot. 

"Pykvs pinnatijida. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. 

Dry AS octopetala, Dumbartonshire. * BoitS, Inaug. Diss. 

Rosa tomentosa. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. 

RuBUs suberectus. Dum artonshire. J. Hooker, sp. 

saxaiilis. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Hills near Tar- 
bet. H. W. 

Chanuemorus. Dumbartonshire. BouS, Inaug. Diss. 

CiRCJSA alpina. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. In Ardencaple 
Wood. Ght. 

SsouM viUosum. About Balvie, plentifully. Glot, 

anglieum. Helensburgh. J. Hooker, sp. On the rock of 
Dumbarton Castle; rocks opposite the Inn, Bowling Bay; 
walls about Helensburgh. Gb^. Occasionally on the road- 
side between Luss and Tarbet, and about the head of Lodi 
Long. H. W. 

Saxif&aoa steBaris, Dumbarton Moors. GloL Hills near Tar- 
bet. H. jr. 

" aizoides. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Hills about 
Tarbet, and descending almost to the level of Loch Lomond. 
H. W. 

CicuTA virosa. Dumbartonshire. J, Hooker, sp. Loch near New 
Kilpatrick. GloL 

C^RUM verticillatum. Banks of the Gare Loch. G, Maenab, sp. 
Abundant at Luss ; banks of the Clyde from BowHng Bay 
to Helensburgh, plentifully. Glot. 

MzuM athamantieum. About Balvie. Glot. Loch Lomond. FL Shot. 

Prucedandh palustre. In a ditch in Ardencaple Wood. Glot. 

- Ostruihium, Banks of the Clyde, in several places^ 
particularly about Ardencaple. Gkt. Edge of a wood on 
the side of Gare Loch, sparingly. FL Scot, 

OcNANTHB pimpineUoides, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. On 
the banks of the Clyde at Bowling Bay, with the fistuhsa; 
below Dumbarton. Glot. 
f Myrrbis odorata. About Milngavie and Balvie, common. GloL 

Galium boreale. Banks of the Clyde, in many places, as Bowling 

Bay, Sec, Ght, 
* HiKRACiUM awantiacum. In the fields about Balvie and Dongal- 

ston, probably originating from some garden. Ght. 
— — — sylvaticum. (pictum). Luss River. Fl, Scot. 

denticulatum? Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp, 
(Perhaps H. subaudum.) 
' moUe. Lower fell of the Tummel, Glen Luss. FL Scot. 

(1 know not whether the river Tummel or Tumel, in Perth- 



y Google 



DUMBARTONSHIRE. 459 

shire, or the small stream at Luss, in Dumbartonshire, is 
intended here.) 
HiERACiUM paludosum. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, »p, 
Cnicus heterophyUus, Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp, 
— eriophorus. Dumbarton Castle ? Fl. Scot, 
Gnapualium dioicum. Hilly pastures, Cathkin and Balvie, plenti- 
fully. Glot 
Srnecio viscosus, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. 
Aster Tripdium. Dumbartonshire. J, Hooker, sp. Banks of the 

Clyde, from Dumbarton to Ardencaple, abundantly. Glot, 
PvaETHRUM maritimum, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp, 
ACHILL.AA tomentosa. On Spittal Hill to the north-west of Balvie. 

Glot, 
Lobelia Dortmanna. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Loch 

Lomond. H, W, 
Campanula latifoUct, Dumbartonshire. J, Hooker, sp. [ 
Vaccinium Vitis-Id4Ba, Cardross. J, Montgomery, mss. 
Azalea, procumbens, Dumbartonshire. JBouS, Inaug, Diss, 
Anchusa sempervirens. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp, 
Verbascuh Lychnites. In a lane leading from the Glass-work to the 

Clyde, Dumbarton. Ght, 
Bartsia viscosa. Banks of the Gare Loch. W, Brands, sp. Gare 

Loch, below Helensburgh ; in a field opposite the Hill of 

Dumbuck, near. Dumbarton. FU Scot, Banks of the 

Clyde at Ardoch Cottage; abundantly behind, the Inn, 

Ardencaple. Glot, 
Veronica polita, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp, 
Mentha piperita, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. 
Galeopsis versicolor. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp,. 
Lahium incisum, Dumbartonshire. X, Hooked, sp, 
Stachts ambigua, Helensburgh. J, Hooker, sp, 
Scutellaria minor. Dumbartonshire. J, Hooker, sp. Bog between 

Luss and Helensburgh. Br. FL. 
Utricularia minor. In the Loch at New Kilpatrick. Glot. 
Anagallis c€Brulea. Dunglass, on the Clyde. Fl, Scot, 
Ltsimachia thyrsiflora. Near Ross-dhu, by Loch Lomond. Br, FL 
Statice Armeria, Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp. Banks of the 

Clyde, from Bowling Bay to Ardencaple. Ght. 
Flantago maritima. Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp. On dry 

banks near Helensburgh. Glot, By Loch Lomond. Br. FL 
Littorella lacustris, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp, 
Glaux maritima, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Banks of the 

Clyde, from Dumbarton to Bowling Bay. Glot. 
Salicornia herbacea. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. On the shore 

at Helensburgh. Glot 
Chenopodium maritimum. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Banks 

of the Clyde, at Helensburgh and Ardencaple. Glot. 

"^"""^ n^toT'*"' } 0° *»>« »»>ore, Helensburgh. Ght. 
-f RuMEX acinus. Road-side from Helensburgh to the head of the 

D 4 



yGooQle 



gL 



460 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Gare Loch ; and in two or three stations in that neighbour- 
hood ; Glen Luss. Br, Fl, 

Empetrum nigrum. Moors, Cathkin and Helensburgh. Ght, 

Salix vUeUina. Near Dumbarton (the fertile plant). FL Scot, 

Triglochin maritimum. Bowling Bay. J, Hooker, sp. Banks of 
the Clyde, at Kilpatrick. Glot, 

Habenaria aJbida. Hill-side above Arroquhar. H. W, sp. 

ZosTERA marina, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Thrown on the 
shore, by the tide, at Helensburgh. Glot. 

Sparganium natans. Ditch leading into the loch at New Kilpatrick. 
Ght 

Bltsmus rufus, Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp. Boggy place on 
the bank of the Clyde at Kilpatrick, and Bowling Bay. Ght. 

compressus. Dumbarton Castle, by the river side. FI. Scot. 

Rhyncospora alba. Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. 

Eriophorum vaginatum. Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp. 

SciRPUs maritimus. Banks of the Clyde from Dumbarton to Bowling 
Bay, plentifully. Glot. 

Eleocharis pattciflora, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. Moors 
above Dumbarton. Glot. 

Carbx arenaria. On the banks of the Clyde, between Old Kilpatrick 
and Helensburgh. Glot. 

'— — depauperata. In a small wood near Balvie. Glot, 

I speirottachya. At Mugdock Castle, nine miles north of Glas- 
gow. Eng. FL 

—.-— Umosa, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp, 

PoA maritima, Dumbartonshire. /. Hooker, sp. 

Festuca bromoides. Dumbartonshire. J. Hooker, sp. 
calamaria, Dumbartonshire. Fl. Scot, 



LXX. ARGYLESHIRE. 

Including the adjacent Isles from Arran to Mull. 

Thalictruh alpinum. On the moors northward of Loch Eil, and 

on Ben Buich, above the head of Loch Fine. H, W, sp, 

minus, Kilchomin, in Isla, and at Icolmkill. Fl, Seat, 

NuPHAR pumila. In a pool near the farm of Corrie Chastel, at the 

foot of Ben Cruachan; Loch Duble, near Inverary. FL 

Scot, 
Glauciuh luteum, Argyleshire. J. Hooker, sp. Arran, abundant, 

FL Scot, 
Crambe maritima, Isla. FT, Scot. 
CocHLEARiA officinalis, Argyleshire. /. Hooker, sp. 
— — — anglica. Rocks of Icolmkill. FL Scot. 



yGooQle 



gl 



AROYUBSHiaE. 461 

CocHLiARiA danica. Arran. FL Scot 

* Caxkuka tatitM, Appin. FL Scot, 
SvBuuAiax aqwOiea. Lodi Awe. Winch, add, 

* IsATis tinctoria. Beach at Dunoon. Br, FL 
Dbaba tncano. Ida. FL Scot^ 

Arjuos petram, Ben More, in MuU. Ft Scot, 

* Ertsimum eheiraitthoides. At the head of Locb-na-Gaul, in Mull. 

Fl. Scot. 
Brassica moncnsis, Bute. J, Hooker, tp, Bute, south of Mount- 

stewart ; on the west side of Arran ; IrfiTnlash Bay ; west 

side of Cantire. Fl, Scot, Lorn. Br. FL 
campeitris. Corn-fields in Bute and Arran ; Appin. Fl, 

Scot, 
Raphanits fnaritimm. On the heach in the Isle of Bute. FL Scot. 
DaosERA angUca, Abundant in Arran. FL Scot. Mull. H. W. 

Viola lutea. Isle of Arran. Br, FL 

SiLsyx aeoMlis, Glencoe. G, Gordon, mas. Loeheil Moors. H, W, 

— maritima. North shore of Loch Eil. H. W, 

Cberlbbka sedoides. On Ben Adialader, in the Braes of Glenurchay. 

17. SooL 
Radiola miUegrana. Argyleshire. J. Hooker, sp. About Loch 

Ransa. in Arran ; Icolmkill. FL Scot, 
HYrmBiovM. Androeamum, At Inv^^uy; Loch Ransa, in Arran. 

FL Scot, Woods, on the north shore of Loch Long. 

Winch, mu, Glencoe ; sides of Loch Long* and Crinan 

Canal. Ander8on*8 Guide, 
— — ^ elodee, Argyleshire. /• Hooker, tp, Islay ; at Loch 

Ransa, and along the yalley to Brodie, in Arran. Fl. Scot. 

Roseneath. Anderson's Guide. 
G^RAvixju sanffuinemm. lona. FL Scot, 
t pyrenaicum. Near Rothesay, Isle of Bute. FL Scot. 

  sylvaticum. Banks of the Urchay, near Dalmally. H, W. 
OxYTRons imUeneia. Upon Cam-dearg, one of the lower heads of 

Ben Sgutlert, a high mountain of Glen Creran, in Upper 

Lorn. FL Scot, 
Lathy&us etflveetrit. Bennan Head, Arran. Br, FL 
RuBUs evberectus. Upper end of Loch Fine, and between that and 

Loch Goyle. H, W, sp. Woods at Inverary; banks of 

Loch Duble, two miles from Inverary. FL Scot, 
? arcticus. Rocky parts in the Isle of Mull. (Dr. Walker.) 

FL Scot, 
Dbtas octopetala. Upon Cam-dearg, in Glen Creran ; near the top 

of Malmore, in Glencoe. FL Scot. 
Alchbmilla (dpina, Cona Water, in Glencoe. G, Gordon, mss. 

By the road-side> in Glencoe, and between Inveroran and • 

Tyndrum ; also on the hills, as the Loeheil Moors. H. W. 
Rosa c<Bsia, Taynuilt, in Mid>Lom. FL Scot. Highland valleys 

of Argyleshire. Br, Fl. 
invciuta. Hebrides, and Western Highlands of Scotland ; near 

Meggamie, in Glen Lyon ; Isle <xf Arran. Br, FL 
D 5 



y Google 



462 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Rosa Sabini (Doniana). Isla, Morvern, and elsewhere in the High* 

lands. Br. FL (The Rev. Dr. Walker gives these localitiesr 

for R. involuta, but according to Sir W. J. Hooker, the 

present species was probably intended. 
Praus pinnaiijida. In rocky situations on Caim-na-CalUch, and 

other mountains at the north end of Arran. Eng. FL 
CiRCAA cdpina. Argyleshire. /. Hooker, sp. Road-side by Loch« 

Leven, near Ballahulish. H. W. 
CoTiTLKDON Umhdicus, Near Rothesay. /. H» BcHfour, sp. Drum- 
' madoon, west side of Arran ; Craig of Ailsa ; ruins of 

IcolmkiU. Fl Scot, 
Seduh anglieum. Argyleshire ; probably from the head of Loch 

Long. H. W. sp. 
Rhodiola rosea, Glencoe. G. Gordon, mst. Locheil Moors. 

H. W, 
RiBES nigrum. Wood on the bank of the Sound of Islay, with R. 

rubrum. FL Scot. 
-— — rubrum. Islay, among brushwood on the banks of the Sound. 

FL Scot. 
Saxifraoa steUaris, Goat-fell, in Arran. FL Scot. Glencoe. G. 

Gordon, mss. Locheil Moors. H. W. Ben Bowie, near 

Inverary. /. Montgomery, mss, 

aizoides. Argyleshire. J. Hooher, sp. Locheil Moors ; - 

Glencoe ; road-side between Inveroran and Tyndrum. 
H.W. 

f Carum Carui. Isle of Oronsay. FL Scot. 

Daucus mariiimus. Isle of Lismore. Br. Fl. 

Peuckoanum OstrutJtium. Near Mountstewart, Isle of Bute. FL 

Scot. 
CEv AVTHE pimpineUoides. Arran. Eng. FL 
ToRiLis infesta. Isle of Lismore, near Upper Lorn. FL Scot. 
Eryngium miaritimum. Mackrianish Bay, in Cantire ; lona ; Bute^ 

near Mountstewart. Fl. Scot. Arran. BouS, Inaug. Diss. 
Galium horeale. Banks of the Clyde, and in Arran. FL Scot. 
? RuBiA peregrina. ** Surely Dr. Mitchell >must be mistaken in 

saying that this is < plentiful all over the sandy islands of the 

west of Scotland.*'* Br. FL (Some species of Galium may 

have been mistaken for it.) 
HiERACiuM alpinum. Near the summits of Highland mountains, as 

in Glencoe ; on Ben Arthur, opposite Arroquhar. Fl. Sh^. 

Locheil Moors. H. W. 
  Lawsoni. Foot of Ben Cniachan ; rock in Corrie 

Cruachan. Fl. Scot. 
sylvaticum. (plctum). Fall of the Aray, two miles above 

Inverary. FL Scot. 
Saussurba alpina. Glenurchay ; Ben Arthur, by Arroquhar. Fl. 

Scot. 
Cnicus eriophorus. Appin. FL Scot. 

— heterophyUus. By the stream, on the south side of the Cale- 

donian Canal, a little above the lochs called < Neptune's 
Staircase.' H. W. 



y Google 



AR6YLSSHIRE. 463 

? Cmcus pratentM, « Moist pastures in Loch-na-diud,^ Isla. Dr. 

Walker. I think Mr, Murray brought an indifferent specimen 

of it from Arran.** FL Scot, (These localities require 

more direct confirmation. It is not a northern plant.) 
ArAEGiA Taraxttd, Cona Water, in Glencoe. G, Gordotty nu*. 
GKArHAUuM dioicuni, Argyleshire. J. Hooker, sp. Near Neptune's 

Staircase. H. W. 

supinvm, , Locheil Moors. H, W. 

Aster TripoiUtan. Argyleshire. Bou£, Inaug. Diss, 

Anthkmis nobiKs, Isles of Bute and Cambray. AndersoH*s Guide* 

Ptrethrum maritimum. Isle of Stafia. H, W, sp. Isle of Bute, 

and west side of Cantire, between Mackrtanish and Barr ; 

Appin ; side of West Tarbet Loch, and near Ballahulish. 

Fl Scot, 
Campanula kUifolieu Glengamoch. /. Montgomery, mss. 
Lobelia Dortmanna, Glencoe. G. Gordon, mss. 
Vacciniuh VUts-Idaa, Hills about Loch £il. Loch Fine, &c 

H. W. 
uliginosum. Locheil Moors ; on the hill to the north of 

Dunaquoich, by Inverary. H. W. sp, 
Abbutus alpina, Locheil Moors, ff. W. 
Uva- Ursi, Locheil Moors. H. W. In the Isle of Mull, 

at the end next Icolmkill, for the space of several miles. 

Eng, FL 
Azalea procumbens. Locheil Moors. H. W. Ben Cruachan. Fl, 

Scot. 
Ptbola media. By the stream, on the contrary side of the Caledonian 

Canal, from the Neptune Inn, and nearly opposite to the 

Inn. If. W, sp. Near Tobermory, in the Isle of Mull. 

G» Gordon, sp, 
— ^-- minor. Near Tobermory. G. Gordon, sp. 
— ^-»— secunda. Between Ballahulish and Appin House in Upper 

Lorn. FL Scot. 
Ertthraa latifolia. Isle of Stafia. Br. Fl, 
Convolvulus Soldanella. West coast of Cantire, between Mackrianish 

and Barr ; Isle of Oronsay, plentifully. FL Scot, 
f Anchusa sempervirens. At Inverary. Eng. Fl, 
LiTHosFERMUM morittmum. Argyleshire. J, Hooker, sp. Bute, 

Arran, &c. FL Scot. 
Atropa Belladonna.. Ruins of lona. Anderson*s Guide. 
Bartsia viscosa. About Locli Goyle, near Loch Long. Fl. Scot. 
? Veronica fruticulosa, " Mr. Don supposes Mr. Walker gathered 

it on Ben Cruachan.*' FL Scot, 
Ltcopus europceus. Upper end of Loch Goyle, and by the north 
side of Loch EiL H, W, sp. Arran. FL Scot. Bute ; 

Cfimbray. Anderson's Guide. Bunawe. Winc/i, add, 
Mentha geatUis, Bank of a rivulet, running into Loch Ransa, in 
Arran. FL Scot, 

Ajjj Q A pyramidalis, Appin. Fl. Scot, ^ . 

Galeopsis versicolor, Locheil* G. Gordon, mss. 
D 6 



y Google 



464 THE HEW RITANIST's GUIDE. 

Stachts coMgwou Banks of Lodi Dnldc^ near Inverary ; and woods 

at TnTcrary. FL Scot. 
Lathilsa iqmamana, Morrem, in the Sound of MoD. FL Scot. 
Orobakchk rs&ra. Stafia. H. W. «p. 
PiNGuicuuL huUanica, Aigylediire. J.\Hboker, tp. Bote ; Arran ; 

Man. ^ SeaL 
Utricula&ia imtermedia. Near Bunawe. Winch, add, 
Trientaus ettropatu Loch Ransa, Arran. .FL Seot, 
Plantago maritima. Argyleshire. /. Montgomery, am. West end 

of Caledonian CanaL ff. W. 
Glaux nuxntbna. Arran, Bou^, Tnaug. Diss. 
Chcwopooium mariUmum, North side of Loch EiL H* W. 
PoLTOoxuK apieulare (var. maritinmnL) Arran. Br. FL 
OxTRiA, renifomus. Boad-side in Glencoe, and between King's House 
and Inireroran; also on the mountains^ in many places. 
H. W. sp. 
EMpEmux nigrum, Locheil Moors ; near King's House ; InTeroran, 

&c H. W, 
? Salix mffrtinUet. Mountains of Glencoe. FL ScaL 

proctanbens. Glencoe. Br. FL (It would appeto from the 
British Flora, that this species was intended in the station 
given for the preceding, in Fhra Scotica.} 
  kerbacea. Locheil Moors and Ben Buich. ff, W. sp. 

OacHis pyramidaUs. In dry pastures, very rare, as near Kiloran, in 
the island of Colonsay. Lightfoots FL Sect. (In two or 
three periodicals, this has been lately noticed as a species 
new to Scotland. Hooker has the locality « ThOoran.*') 
Habenakia aOnda. Glencoe. G. Gordon, mss. Appin. .Fl. Scot. 
Listera cordata. Plentiful on the north-east side of Barrone HiU, 

Bute. FL Scot. 
? lEriFAcns ensifolia. Arran. Anderson*s Guide. (Is not the follow- 
ing species intended ?) 
— — — grandijhra. At Loch Ransa, in Arran ; Appin. Fl. 

Scot. 
f Narcissus Pseudo^narcissus. Wood at Dunoon. Fl. Seot. 
SciLLA vema. looa and Staffi^ abundantly. FL Seot. 
Allium Schcenoprasum. Nether Lorn. FL Scot. 
* Orkithogalum umbdlatum. Atgyleshire. J. Hooker, sp. 
Sparganium natans. In a pond on the north side of the Caledonian 
Canal, immediately north-eastward of Neptune's Staircase. 
H. W. sp. 
2^STERA marina. Shore at Inverary. Winch, add. 
Luzula spicata. Ben Cruachan. H^nch, add, Ben Buich. H. W. 
Joscvatriglumis. Ben Cruachan. Winch, add. Ben Buich. H, W. 

biglumis. Goat Hill, in Arran. Fl. Seot. 

Eriophorum vaginatum. Appin. FL Scat. 
SciRPUs maritimus. Arran. J. Hooker, sp. 
Rhtncospora alba. Near Bunawe. Winch, add. 
ELEocHARispatM^/Zora. Ben Cruachan. Winch, add. 
Bltshus rufus. Arran. /. Hooker, sp. Mull. Fl, Scot. 

' - compressus. By the sides of Lochs in Islay. Fl. Scot. 



y Google 



PERTHSHIRE. 465 

ScHcxNUs nigricaru. Bute. J, Hooker, tp. Locbeil Moors» at about 

400 yards above Loch £il; the highest station in which 

I have observed it. H. W. 
Carex paucifhra. Argyleshire. /. Hooker, ip. Bogs half way up 

Goat Fell, in Arran, in the ascent from Brodrick Castle. 

FL Scot, 
~ arenaria. Argyleshire. /. Hdoker, tp, 

•'^ puBa, Ben Buich, near the head of Loch Fine. H. W. sp. 

Umosa, Appin. FL Scot. 

— Pteudo-Cyperms. Islay. FL Scot.' 

— rigida, Locheil Moors ; Ben Buich. H. W, 

Ammophila arundirutcea. Cantire. Fl. Scot, 

Aula dipina. Viviparous on Ben Cruachan. Br. FL 

Calamaokostis Epigejos ** of British Flora." Mac Lean of Coil's 

woods, near Tobermory. G. Gordon, mss. 
Meuca nutans. Lord Breadalbane's woods, Armaddy, in Nether 

Lorn. FL Scot. 
AvBNA pianieulmis. Glen Sannox, on the ascent of Goat Fell from 

Loch Rannoch, Isle of Arran. Br. FL 
Eltmus arenariut. Locheil. G. Gordon, mss. Isle of Bute. 

Eng. FL 
TarricuMjunccwm. Bute; west coast of Cantire; Oransay; Icolhi- 

kill. Fl. Scot, 
LouuM termdentum. Near Rothesay in Bute. R. Maugkdn, tp. 



LXXI. PERTHSHIRE. 



Thauctrum alpinum. Ben Lawers, and neighbouring mountains, in 

plenty. H. W. sp. 
«'-~— — — — minus. Pastures at Loch Rannoch. FL Scot. 
Trollius europans. South side of Loch Tay, between Cloichem and 

Finglen. H. W. sp. 
CoRYDALis davicutata. Tops of cottages, entrance of Glen Lyon. 

W, Brands, sp, 
Draba vema (0). On rocks near the lake upon Ben Lawers. 

Hooker, sp, 
• incana. Rocks near the lake and near the summit of Ben 

Lawers, and on the Killin Mountains.* H, W. sp. Craig- 

na-cailleach. FL Scot. 
rupestris. Rocks almost at the summit of Ben Lawers. 

H. W. sp, 

* There are several heads or summits of the mass of mountains, on the north side 
o( Loch Tay, between Ben Lawers and Killin, to which I am unable to assign their 
individual names, as Craig-Chailleach, Mael Greadha, Mael Duncrosk, &c. ; and 
hence they are here caUed " Killhi Mountains." 



y Google 



466 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Tkbsdalia nudicavUt* Auchterarder. Fl Scot. 
Lkpidium Smithii. In Perthshire,- near the seat of the earl of Kin- 
noul ; and by the river Earn. Eng, FL Road-side near 
Perth. H. W, 
CocHLBA&LA. offidnoU* 7 Ben Lawers and Killin Mountains ; but 

whether this or C. danica I can scarcely say. H, W. sp, 
SuBULABiA ciqvatica. Loch of Lubnaig, at the foot of Ben LedL 

W. Brands, tp. Loch Tay ; Loch of Clunie. Fl. Scot. 
DiMTARiA bulbifera. Near Dupplin. Br, FL 
Ababis petraa. Near the summit of Craig-Chailleach. FL Scot. 

Ben More. Winch, add. 
Rbsboa lutea. Carse of Gowrie. FL Scot. 

Viola lutea. Fields by the Dochart, near Killin, and on the moun- 
tains about Loch Tay. ff. W. 
DiANTHUs Armeria. Carse of Gowrie. W. Brands, sp. Leetown in 

the Carse of Gowrie. Br. FL 
SiLKNx angUca. Near Perth. Br. FL 
— — — » acatdis. Ben Lawers and a4jacent mountains, in plenty. 

H. W. sp. 
Lychnis Viscaria. Den of Balthayock. FL Scot. 
Elatinb hexandra. Near Callander. /. Macnab, sp. Loch Ruisky, 

near Callander. Br. Fl. 
Chbblbbia sedoides. In some plenty on Ben Lawers and Killin 
Mountains. H. W. sp. Ben Teskemey and Ben ChaUum, 
in Breadalbane ; Mael-grea and Malnantarmonach, between 
Breadalbane and Glen Lyon. FL Scot. 
Spurgdla saginoides. Ben Lawers, and Killin Mountains. H. W. sp. 
MaelChyrdy. Fl. Scot. Craig Calliach, &c. not uncommon. 
Bot. Misc. 

subulata Craig Rossie, one of the OchDs, plentiful Fl. 

Scot. 
Stbllaria scapiffera. Hills to the north of Dunkeld. FL Scot. 
— — — cerastoides. Mountains above Killin. FL Scot. 
Abxnabia rvbeUa. Killin Mountains, in two places, probably one of 
them on Craig- Chailleach ; as the Dryas grew within a few 
yards. H. W. sp. Near the summit of Ben Lawers. 
Eng, Fl. Mael Greadha, very sparingly ; rather plentiful on 
the east side of Craig Calliadi ; at a considerable distance 
below the summit of Ben Lawers, towards the south-west 
Bot. Misc. 
— — vema. Mael Dun-crosk, a very small distance from Craig 
Calliach ; where, at nearly the same elevation, A. rubella 
occurs, but not A. verna. Bot. Misc. 
Cerastium ai^num. Ben Lawers ; Ben More ; Killin Mountains. 

H. W. sp. 
— — — latifolium. Ben Lawers, above the lake. H. W. sp. 

Ben Voirlich. FL Scot. 
Radiola miUegrana. Near Loch Tummel. W. Brands, sp. Clunie. 

FL Scot. 
• TiLiA grandifdia. Blair in Athol. Br. FL 
Geranium sglvaticum. In many places about Loeh Tay, and the va- 



y Google 



PERTHSHIRE. 467 

liety with sterile anthers and small petals, near Finlaring, by 

Loch Tay. H. W, sp, 
GxRAKiUM pyrenaicum. Hill of Kinnoul. Fl. Scot, 
— »-» sanguinewn. Banks of Loch Rannoch. FL Scot. ' 
f Htpkricdh barbatum. By the side of a hedge, near the wood of 

Aberdalgy in Strath-earn. Eng* FL Woods near Aber- 

dalgy in Strath>eam. Fl* Scot, 
' dubium. Woods of Kippen Ross, near Dunblane. FL 

Scot. 
Astragalus hypoghttU, Hill of Moncrie^ near Perth ; dry ground 

near York Cascade, at the Duke of Athol's, Blair ; banks of 

the Tay near Delvine ; hill of Kinnoul, by Perth. FL Scot. 

Tay-side, six miles below Dunkeld. Andenon*s Guide, 
YiciA lathgroides. Hill of Kinnoul, by Perth. Ft. Scot. 
RuBUS tuberectus, Breadalbane. H. W, sp. 

— taxatUU. Moness. Winch, nus. 

— — ^ ChanuBmorus. Ben Lawers, particularly near the lake ; Ben 
More; Killin Mountains. H. W, sp. 

? — arcticus. High regions of Ben-y-glo, Blair. FL Scot, 

PoTXNTiLLA argcntca. Near Perth. H, W, sp. Den of Bethaick, 
near Perth ; Craig-end, between Perth and the Bridge of 
Earn. Fl. Scot. 

— — cUpestris. Ben Lawers, about the lake ; Killin Moun- 
tains, ff. W. sp, 

opaca. Braes of Balquidder. FL Scot. 

Detas octopetala. Craigalleach. Hooker, sp. Killin Mountains, 
probably the same locality. H. W. sp. Glen Tilt. W. 
Brands, sp. Rather plentiful upon Craig Calliach. Bot, 
Misc. 

SiBBALDiA procumbens. Near the summit of Ben More ; Killin 
Mountains ; Ben Lawers. H. W. sp. 

Alchxmilla alpina. Road-side in Glen Shee, descending almost to 
Caldy Bridge ; near the bridge at Killin, on the rocks in the 
bed of the Dochart ; and thence ascending the hills to a great 
height, as on Ben More, Ben Lawers, and the Killin Moun- 
tains. H. W. sp, 

Rosa inwduta. Near Meggamie, in Glen Lyon. Br, FL 

Sabini. Dunkeld. FL Scot, 

^—^ ccssia. In Strath Tay, between Dunkeld and Aberfeldie ; side 

of Loch Tay. Fl Scot. 
Epilobium o/ptntem. Bev Lavf/s; Killin Mountains; Ben More. 

H.W, 
— — alsinifolium. Ben x^awers. H, W. sp. On the east side 

of Mael Greadha, below the rocks. Bot. Misc. 
CxRCJBA alpina. South side of Loch Tay about Finglen; Ben 

Lawers, &c. H. W, sp, 
* Sedum album. Rock by the road-side near Perth ; but close by a 

garden, ff. W, sp, 
I viUosum. Near the sources of rivulets half-way up Ben 

Lawers. Bot. Misc. 
Rhodiola rosea. Ben Lawers; Killin Mountains, ff. If. 



y Google 



468 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

RiBBs petraum, A single specimen on the side of Loch Dochart, 
almost close to the road from Glen Falloch to Elillin. H. 
W.sp, 
* Sax/fraga unibrosa. Woods at Blair Athol. Winch, add, 
*- ateUarii, Ben Lawers ; Killin Mountains, &c. H, W. 

• nivaUa* Ben Lawers^ on rocks about the lake and near 
the summit ; Killin Mountains ; near the top of Ben More. 
ff. W, 

• aizoides. Road-side in Glen Shee ; side of Loch Do- 
chart ; Ben More ; Ben Lawera^ &c. H. W» 

-— oppoaUifolia. Ben More; Killin Moimtains; Ben 

Lawers. H> W. sp, 
-— > cernua. Near the sununit of Ben Lawers, among the 

loose rocks, where snow often lasts till midsummer. H. W, 

sp. Craigalleach. FL Scot, 

• rivularis, Ben Lawers ; Loch Rannoch. IJ, Scot. 
— — eedgpitoaa. Ben Lawers. (Mr. Arnott» sp.) Winch, 

add. 

- hypnoides* Killin Mountains, ascending to the summits. 
JJ, W, sp, 

Uetevirens, Mountains north of Loch Lomond. Br, 

FL 

Chbtsospleitium aUemifoHum, On the Killin Mountains, not far 

from the summits. H. W, sp, 
Meum Athamanticum, Glen Shee. H, W. About Dunkeld. Fl, 

Scot, 
LiNKJBA boreaUs, Fionlarig Woods, near Killin. H, W, sp, (The 

station is very circumscribed, and the woods might be 

searched many days in vain.) Hill of Kinnoul, near 

Perth. FL Scot, 
CoRNUS suecica, Ben More ; Ben Lawers. H, W* sp. In Athol, 

about Loch Rannoch ; Chealleach *, in Breadalbane. FL 

Scot, 
f Valeriana pyrenaica^ Near Dupplin. FL Scot. 
Galium «accAara<i(m (G. verrucosum). Carse of Gowrie. FL Scot. 

— boreale. In the bed of the Dochart, near ^he bridge at 

Killin ; in Glen Falloch ; and at moderate elevations on the 
adjacent hills. H. W, Breadalbane Woods. FL Scot. 
HiSRAciuM alpinuM. Breadalbane Mountains. H. W, sp, Mael 
Duncrosk, the mountain between Craig Calleach and Mael 
Ghyrdy ; also on rocks to the east of the summit of Mael 
Ghyrdy. Bot, Misc. 
— — HaUeri, Ben Lawers ; Ben More. FL ScoL 

Lawsom, Rocks on Ben Lawers. FL Soot, Rocks at 

Dunkeld. Winch, mss. 

auroMtiacum. Fort near Kenmore. R, Maughan, sp. 



Woods to the eastward of Kenmore. FL Scot, 
 ^'^ prtnanthoides. Glen Lyon. Br. FL 



* I cannot say whether Chealleach, Craigalleach, Craig-na-cailleach, Craig Cal- 
liach, and Craig Chailloch are all the same identical hill, but it seems not unlikely 
to be the &ct. So, also, is Co Malghydy and Mael Ghyrdy ; but not Mad Greada. 



yGooQle 



gL 



PERTHSHIRE. 469 

HiKRACiuH denticulatum. Loch Rannoch; among bushes on the 
banks of the Earn. FL Scot, 

— — — umbdlatutn. King's Seat at Dtinkeld. FL Scot, 

• paludosum. About Loch Tay, and elsewhere. H. W, 

Apa&gia Taraxaci, Craig Calliaoh, and other mountains near it. 
Bat, Misc, 

Lactuca virosa. Near Perth. H, W, About Dunkeld. Br, FL 

Saussu&ea fdpina, Ben Ledi. Hooker, sp. Near the summit of 
Ben Lawers. H. W, sp. Glen Lyon. Fl Scot, Craig 
Calliach ; Schroine ach Lochen. Bot. Misc, 

? CJonyza sqvarrosa. Near Blair, in Athol. FL Scot, 

Gnaphalidm supinuM, Ben More ; Killin Mountains; Ben Lawers. 
H. W, sp, 

Erigbbon alpinus. Ben Lawers. R. Maughan^ sp. Banks of the 
Almond, above the bridge. FL Scot, Blocks by the river 
Almond, seven miles from Perth. Eng, FL By the river 
at Lindock, seven miles from Perth. Wtnck, add, (Pro- 
bably one locality, though differently described.) 

f DoRONXcuM Pardalianches, Den of Dupplln, near Perth. R. 
Maughan, sp. In great plenty at Stobhall, seven mJles from 
Perth. Eng. Bot, Supp, Woods near CulroBs. Fl, Scot. 

— — — plantagineunu Strath-earn. Eng, BoL Stq^, 

LoBBLiA Dortmanna. Loch Clunie. Winch, mss. 

Campakula rapunctdoides. Woods at Blair AthoL Winch, add. 

— — laHfoHia, At Taymouth Henmtage, and by the falls of 
Moness. Fl, Scot, 

• — — Rapunculus, Perthdih'e. Bou^, Inaug, Diss. (Is this 
correct ?) 

Vaccinium yUginosum, Near the lake on Ben Lawers. H, W. sp, 
Craig Calliach, upon the rocks in wet situations. Bot, Misc. 

•^— — VittS'Idcsa. On the mountains, particularly fine near the 
lake on Ben Lawers. H. W, sp. 

Arbutus Uva-Ursi. Falls of the Bruar. (Dr. Wight.) W, H. 
Campbell, sp. Glen Shee. H, W. Mael Ghyrdy, plentiful. 
Bot. Misc, 

f Mbnziesia ctBTulea, « The station is on the Athol Sow, at Dalnaspi- 
dal, half way between Dalnacardoch and Dalwhinnie. The 
hill fronts the Highland road, and runs parallel with it, being 
on the west side of the road, and immediately north of Loch 
Garry. Assuming the road to be 1400 feet, the plant would 
be at 2600 or 2800 feet. I should hardly think it reaches 
3000 feet. It grows among Empetrum nigrum, which takes 
the place of Calluna vulgaris ; the latter becoming stunted, 
and almost disappearing before any of the Menziesia is 
found." W, Brdndi sp,* 

* By such an explicit direction, Mr. Brand has at once ended the mystery in 
which the locality of this species has been so long shrouded. The plant is sam to 
have been nearly all eradicated lately by a nurservman, who found the sale:of spe- 
dmrnis too profitable for many to be left on the hill. Unless it shall be discovered 
elsewhere in Scotland, I ffear we ought to regard the plant as only a doubtful native. 



y Google 



iTO THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Andromeda pclifdUa. Blair Drummond Moss, plentifully. Fl, Scot, 
Azalea procutnbens* Ben Lawers. W, Brands^ sp. Ben More ; 

south-east shoulder of Ben Voirlich; Ben Glow (Ben-y- 

Gloe ?) ; Ben Fenag, by Loch Erricht. Fl Scot. 
Pteola rotundifoUa, Woods at Blair Athol, and heaths about Dun- 

keld (Lightfoot); Callender (Mr. Amott). Fl. Scot. 
— ^— - media. By the road through Glen Shee. ff. W. 
— — — — minor. Woods at Blair Athol. Winch^ add, 
secunda. About Loch Rannock. Fl, Scot, Woods at Blair 

Athol. Winch, add. 
— ^— - uniflora, Methven Woods. W. Christy, sp, 
Gentiana nivaUs. Rocks below the summit of Ben Lawers, to the 

south-west. Bot. Misc. 
Cynoglossum sylvaticum. Carse of Gowrie. FL Scot. 
Mtosotis alpestris. Rocks near the summit, and also near the lake 

on Ben Lawers. H. W. sp,_ Schehallion ; Mael Greadha, 

and'others of the Breadalbane range. FL Scot, 
Bartsia alpina. Rocks to the east of Madghyrdy ; Ben Lawers. 

FL Scot. 
ScROPHULARiA vemdUs, Clunie. fT. Stables, sp. Road-side near 

the hill of Moncrief, in the greatest abundance ; road-side 

by the Inn at Clunie. FL Scot. 
Melamttrum sylvaticum. Woods at Blair. W, Brands, sp. Falls 

of Achame, near Kenmore. H, IF, sp. By the road-dde 

going from Taymouth to the Hermitage. Eng. FL Fion- 

larig, by Loch Tay ; Falls of Moness ; Den of Rechip ; 

sou^ side of Loch Earn ; woods east of Dunkeld. FL Scot, 
Veronica Atr«uto. Hills near Crief. R. Maughan, sp. (There are 

no capsules on this specimen, but in size and foliage it 

corresponds with another specimen, from the Botanic Garden 

of Edinburgh.) 

' saxatilis. Rocks in Glen Tilt. W. Brands, sp. Rocks 

by the lake on Ben Lawers. H. W, sp. Craig Calliach ; 

Mael Duncrofik; Mael Greadha. Bot, Misc. 
? >   fruticulosa, Ben Lawers. FL Scot, 
— ^-. alpina, Ben Lawers. FL Scot, Craig Calliach. Bot, 

Misc. 
Ltcopus europteus, Delvine. FL Scot, 
f Mentha piperita. Glen Targ. Br, FL 

f viridis (and variety « crispa**). Glen Targ. Br. FL 

Teucrium Chamadrys. In Methven Wood. Br, Fl. 
Galeopsis versicolor. Near Callander. W. Brands, sp. 
Tribntaus europaa. In a fir-wood, on the south side of the Dochart, 

about one mile from Killin ; in woods near Finglen, on the 

south side of Loch Tay. H, IF. sp. Duke of AthoFs 



Conceahnent always begets suspicion,'but the character of the nurseryman is said to 
hare been too good to gire any fairground for supposing the station to be artificial. 
Mr. Don*s name is attached to a different locality, by Smith ; and if Mr. Don com- 
municated the station of " Ide of Shiant *' to the author of the English Flora, on 
his personal responsibility, (his must remove all doubts. 



y Google 



PERTHSHIRE. 471 

woods at BlaSr ; woods at Dunkeld, especially Dungarn-hill ; 
Strath-earn ; woods at Dunblane ; Clunie. FL Scot, Ben 
Lawers ; coppice near Auchmore. Bot, Mite, 

Akagallis arvensis (cserulea). Fields on the banks of the Tay, near 
Delvine. FL Scot. 

Statics Armeria. Near the lake on Ben Lawers ; about the summits 
of the Killin Mountains. H. IF, 

Plantago moaitima. Field near the Manse at Killin. H, fF, «p. 

Polygonum viviparum. Road-side near Finglen, and by Loch 
Dochart; and extending up the mountains almost to the 
summits of Ben More and Ben Lawers. H, W, sp. Rum« 
bling Bridge, near Dunkeld. Winch, add, 

OxTRiA reniformis. On the Breadalbane Mountains, and descending, 
along the courses of the mountain-streams, almost to the 
levels of Lochs Dochart and Tay. H. W. 

Mkrcurialis annua. In the parish of Aberfoyle. Fl. Scot, 

Empetrum nigrum. Plentiful on the mountains. H. W. 

QjjRACvs tessilijlora. Edge of Bimam wood, near Dunkeld. Fl Scot, 

BsTDLA nana. Abundant in Corri-y-Callin, north of Glen Lyon, in 
Breadalbane ; Ben Lawers. FL Scot. 

Saux ambiffua. Between Balnagard and Aberfeldie. Br, Fl, 

— — reticulata, Ben Lawers, and Killin Mountains, between 3000 
and 4000 feet up. H, W, sp. 

— Stuartiana. Near the upper end of the bum at Fionlarig ; Ben 

Lawers. Eng, Fl. 
  arenaria. Ben Lawers, abundant. FL Scot. Killin Mountains. 

ff. W. 
— /u»ca(airgentea). Near Clunie. Fl. Scot, 
sphaeelata. Valleys among the Highlands, as at Fionlarig ; at 

the head of Loch Tay ; Ben Lawers. FL Scot. 

— Andersoniana. Breadalbane Mountains. Br, FL 
• Fartteriana. Breadalbane Mountains. Br. FL 

- rupestris. Rocks on the mountains of Craig-Chailloch and 
Mael Ghyrdy, as well as near Aberfoyle. Fl, Scot. 

tenuior. Banks of the Loohy, near Killin. Br, FL 

laxiflora. Killin. Br. FL 

    radicans. Breadalbane Mountains. Br. FL 
— — Borreriana. Breadalbane. Eng. Fl.^ 

phyUcifolia. At Fionlarig, Breadalbane. Eng, FL Bum above 

Fionlarig. Bot. Misc. 
tetrapla. Gathered in Breadalbane. Eng, Fl, 

Wdgdiana, Breadalbane. Br, Fl, 

hieolor. Glen Lyon. Br, FL 

" phyUyreifdUa, Vicinity of Ben Lawers. Eng, Bot. Supp, 
> vaceiniifolia. Breadalbane Mountains. Br. FL 
" - carinata. Breadalbane Mountains. Br, Fl. 
— — — prunifolia. Breadalbane Mountains ; Blair in Athol. FL Scot. 
Craig Calliach. Bot. Misc. 
» ' venuhsa, Breadalbane Mountains. Br. Fl, 
I mffrrimtes. Craigalleach. Br. FL 
''''^',- procumbent. Breadalbane. Br, Fl 



y Google 



472 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Saux kerbaeea. On the mountains, abundant from lOOQ or 1200 

yards of elevation, upwards to the summits. H. W. sp, 
Piif us aylvettrii. North side of Loch Tay, near KiJlin. H, W. sp. 
• Stratiotss abides. Loch of Clunie. Fl. Scot, Probably planted 

there. Br. Fl, Blair Athol. (iBpue.) Winch, add. 
ScHBUCHZBBiA potustHs, Methveu, near Perth. Br. Fl. 
Habbnaria albida. Near Killin, by the road to Loch Dochart ; 

lower part of Ben Lawers, ascending from Killin. Jff, IF. 

sp, 
LisTRBA cordata, Breadalbane Mountains. H. W. sp. Woods of 

Lintrose. Fl. Scot. 
Ma\.axi8 paludosa. A little to the east of Ben Vorlich, and a little 

aboTe the house of Ardvorlich. FL Scot. 
GooDTBRA repens. Den of Dupplin ; woods of Scone. FL Scot. 
? CoRALLORHizA ijinota. Formerly found in the woods of Methven 

Castle. 
Epipactis grandiflora. Woods of Methven Castle. Fl. Seat. 
— ensifoUa, Woods of Methven. FL Scot. 
CoNTALLARiA fMLJoUs, BUuT Athol. (Mr. Stewart.) W. Brands, ip. 

Scotland- Wald, and Methven Wood ; in a small glen called 

the Clough, north of Gask ; Den of Rechip. FL Scot, 
"   verticiUata, Blair Athol. /. Maciuxb, sp. Den of 

Rechip, four miles north of DunkekL Br. FL 
Gaoea bOea. Near Dupplin. Fl. Scot. 
Allium ctrenarium, Dupplin. Fl. Scot, 
TonMLviA. palustis. Killm Mountains. H. W, sp. Glen Tilt. 

W, Brands, mss. Of common'occurrence, in swampy places 

near springs, in the middle r^on of the Breadalbane 

Mountains. Bot. Misc. 
Sparoaniuh natans. By the road from Killin to Lawers. H. W. sp. 
LuzuLA spicata, Breadalbane Mountains. H, W, sp. 
? JuNcus ^yormi*. Ben Lawers. Br, FL 

- castaneus. Near the sununit of Ben Lawers; Fion Glen, 

bdiind Craig Calliach. FL Scot. North side of the Killin 

Mountains, near the summit. Jff, W. sp. Mael Ghyrdy ; 

between Ben Cruachpen and Mael Crreadha. Bot. Misc. 

? • capOatus, The highest parts of Ben Lawers. FL Scot. 

trijidus, Ben.y-Gloe. Wincht add. Rocks to the east of 

the summit of Mael Ghyrdy. Bot. Misc. 
' bifflumis. On Ben Lawers and the Killin Mountains. 

H. W, sp. Mai -ghyrdy and Ben Teskemey, in Breadalbane. 

FL Scot. Not unfrequent in the Breadalbane Mountains. 

Br. FL Most plentiful on the north-west side of Mael 

Greadha ; on the south-east side of Ben Cruachpen ; Schrrane 

ach Lochen. Bot. Misc. 
— — trigltmds. Breadalbane Mountains, plentifully. H. W. sp, 
Elbochabis acicularis. Loch of Clunie, and Stormont Loch. Fl. 

Scot, 
— — pancijlora. Flanks of the Breadalbane Mountains. 

H. W. sp. Bottom of the Athol Low. W, Brands, sp. 

Malghyrdy. FL Scot, 



y Google 



PERTHSHIRE. 473 

Eltna caricina, Ne&r the summit of Schroine ach Lochan, a mountain 

south of Mael Ghyrdy. Bot, Misc* (I gathered it some* 

where on the Breadalbane Moimtains, and incline to suppose 

it was on Ben More. H. W. 
Eriophobum vaginatum, Breadalbane Mountains, in plenty. H. W. 

sp, 
? alpinum, " It is to be feared that there is some mistake 

in regard to its having been found on the Breadalbane 

Mountains." Br. FL 

  capitatum, " Ben Lawers, by the side of a rivulet near 

the limits of perpetual snow." FL Scot. (I should fear 

some mistake about this species also, since there is no per- 
petual snow on Ben Lawers.) 
ffracile. Boggy places in the micaceous soil of Ben 

Lawers. FL Scot. 
Carex pauciflora. North of Blair. FL Scot. 
-^— axillaris. Killin. Br, Fl. Bum near Aucfamor^ a small 

distance above Loch Tay. Bot, Misc. 
capiUaris. Ben-y-Gloe. Hooker, sp. Ben Teskemey ; Craig- 

nu-liet, and Mael Ghyrdy, Breadalbane. FL Scot, Craig 

Calleach ; Ben Lawers. BoL Misc. 
limosa. At TuUybanchar, half a mile west of Comrie ; near 

Crief ; marshes on mountains between Loch Earn and Loch 

Tay. Fl. Scot. 
speirostachya. Hills of Perthshire. Eng. FL Och ill Hills. 

Eng, Bot. Supp. 
— ^— — atrata. Killin Mountains. H, W. sp. Ben Teskerney, 

Mael Ghyrdy, MaeUnan-tarmonach, &c. in Breadalbane. 

FL Scot. Craig Calliach; Mael Greadha; Ben Lawers. 

Bot. Misc. 
— -^ pulla, Craigalleach. Hooker, sp. Ben Lawers; banks of 

the Tilt. FL Scot, Swampy sources of alpine rills, at the 

north side of Ben Cruachpen ; between Ben Cruachpen and 

Mael Greadha; Mael Ghyrdy. Bot, Misc, 

Mtdiehoferi. Rocky places on Craig-na-CbaiUeach. FL Scot, 

— — ustulata. Ben Lawers. FL Scot. 

— ^— - rigida. Abundant on the Breadalbane Mountains, from about 

«00 yards upwards to the summits. H, W. sp. 
Alopecurus aipinus, Ben Lawers. FL Scot. 
Phleum alpinum, Ben Lawers ; Craigneulict, a hill above Killin. 

FL Scot. 
Srslbria ceerulea. Ben Lawers; Killin Mountains. H. W. sp. 

Craig Calliach ; Mael Greadha, &c. Bot. Misc, 
PoA alpincu Ben Lawers ; Killin Mountains. H. W, sp, 

aquatica. About Perth. FL Scot. 

Mblica nutans. Burn above Finlarig. Bot» Misc. 

Festuca Calamaria. Breadalbane ; wooded valley at the foot of Ben 

Lawers. FL Scot. 



y Google 



474? THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 



LXII. FORFARSHIRE. 

Thu is probablj the best botanical county in the Highlands : the 
successful researches of the late Mr. Don, followed up by those of 
Mr. Drummond, Professor Graham, and others, have made the 
** Clova Mountains** one of the most frequently named localities oc- 
curring in our Floras. The range of mountains ^us designated, 
however, includes a tract of countiy many miles in extent, so that, Ibr 
the more local plants, the mere indication of "* Clova Mountains" will 
be a very imperfect guide to their exact stations. This imperfection, 
I r^ret to say, it is not in my own power to remove, in consequence 
of the names of the different hills, streams and glens' being very little 
known to me. But some general points and bearings may be briefly 
mentioned as partial directions. We will suppose the bcrtanist to be 
located at the public-house by the Kirk in Glen Clova. If he pro- 
ceeds up the glen, towards the iarm of Bradooney, contrary to the 
course of the river, for a few miles, the valley is found to divide into 
two branches. That on the right hand (which we may term Glen 
Bradooney) leads up to a shooting cottage ; some distance above which 
is a small lake. Should the traveller turn to the left handy after 
passing the cottage, instead of proceeding onwards to the lake, he will 
cross the high moors which lie between Glm Bradooney and Glen 
Dole. The left hand branch of Glen Clova is Glen Dole, immedi- 
ately on entering which, is a short branch to the left again, which I 
understand to be the Glen Phu or Glen Fee, mentioned by Mr. Brands 
and others, with their specimens. The main branch of Glen D(^ 
runs some miles up the course of the stream, before we arrive at a 
series of small waterfalls where the Sonclius alpinus is found, almost 
under one of the cascades. This station was for several years the 
only one known to living botanists ; and I shall term it the <* old 
Sonchus station." On the left hand side of Glen Dole, befinre reach- 
ing these falls, is a high and pointed cluster of rocks, on the &ce 
of which grows Astragalus alpinus. On the rocks between Glen 
Phu and Glen Dole, is found the Oxytropis campestris ; a consider- 
able mass of debris lying underneath the rocks on which it grows. 
Tlie stations of these very rare plants are thus particularly mentioned, 
to assist the botanist in finding them, and in order that they may serve as 
pcnnts from which to indicate the bearings or stations of other plants. 
The explanation, however, is given from the memory of some years, and 
may not be very accurate, since persons accustomed to flat countries 
often mistake the relative position of places in the mountainous tracts. 
It may not be amiss to remark that Mr. Don appears to speak of <* the 
low parts of the county," and of the " summits of the mountains,** in a 
very general sense. The table-lands and shoulders of the mountains 
would seem to be included under the designation of * summits ; ' and 
perhaps even the higher rocks on the flanks or acclivities of the 
mountains. 



y Google 



FORFARSHIRE. 475 



AUTHORITT. 

Acc. — Account of the Native Plants in the County of Forfar. By 
G. Don. (From Headrick*s Agritultural Survey of the 
County.) 

Thalictrum alpinum. Several parts of the Clova Mountains. 

H. W. sp, 
— — ^— minut. Shore near Montrose ; and in stony places in 

the high lands, as well as by the sea. Ace. 
Ranunculus cdpestris. Sides of rills on the Clova Mountains. FL Scot. 
TaoLLius euTojHBUs, In woods near Forfar. Ace. Glen Clova, 

near the Kirk. H. W. 

* Papaver somniftmm. In newly-trenched ground, by road sides, 

&c. about Delvine House, near Cupar. Eng. FL 
? D&ABA muralis. About For&r. Fl. Scot. 
— — incana. Glen Isla. fT. Brands^ sp. Rocks on the left side 

of Glen Dole. H. W, 
TuLAsn alpestre. Rocks in Glen Isla. W. Brands, sp. (Discovered 

by Professor Graham, in 1832.) 
Lepidium Smithii. Opposite to a mill on the south side of the river 

£sk, near Kinnaird. Ace. Between Brechin and Mon- 
trose. Eng. Fl. 
Teesdalia nudicaulis. On the estate of Pitruchie, about one mile 

south of Forfar. Ace. 
Cochlea RiA officinalis. Clova Mountains. U. W. 
anglica ? Clova Mountains on the left side of Glen Dole. 

H. W,sp. 
. grosnlandica. Mountains of Clova. Eng. Fl. 

* Camelina sativa. Low parts of the county. Ace. 

f Altssum ealycinum. Sandy fields on the coast, between Arbroath 
and the sands of Barry. Excurs. 

Arabis eiliata. Rocks near Loch Lee, in Glen £sk. Fl. Scot, 

f H^sTRKts matronalis. On banks near Airly Castle. Ace. 

Brassica campestris. In a field near the south end of Forfar Loch. 
R. Maughant sp. 

monensis. Between Dundee and Forfar. Eng, FL 

•Reseda lutea. Rocks on the coast, between Arbroath and Montrose. 
Ace, 

Viola hUea. In the low parts of the county. Ace. In Glen Clova, 
. about the Kirk. H. W. On pastures at the upper part of 
Glen Clova, where Glen Dole and the Capcl Munth sepa- 
rate ; also close to the shieling at the foot of Canlochan Glen, 
where it joins Caness Glen ; Hill of Dunbarrow. North 
FL 

DiANTHus Armeria. In fields near the seat of Charles Gray, Esq. of 
Carse. Ace. 

deltoides. North bank of the loch of Forfar ; as also on 

dry ground near the north-west corner of the lake ; and^on 
banks by the sea, to the east of Arbroath. Ace. 



y Google 



476 THE NEW BOTANIST 8 GUIDE. 

SiLEKE acaulis. Many parts of the CloTa Mountains ; and a white 
variety on rocks about half-way up the left side of Glen 
Dole. H. W. if. 

— ^ eonica, Montrose. Excurs, 

angUca. Sandy fields between the coast and sands of Barry, 

very abundant. Excwrs. Between Dundee and St. An- 
drew's. Eng, Fl 

mctoiu. Rocks on the coast betweoi Montrose and AilHroath. 

Ace, 

noetijhra. In sandy com>fidds near the Havens or Hains, by 

the sea-side. Ace. 

Lychkis Viscaria. On dry banks near Airly Castle, and also a 
variety with white flowers. Ace. 

.^..— i— .- alpina Little Kilrannoch, Clova Mountains. /. Macnaby 
8p, (Dr. Graham says that it grows on a stony summit, 
probably between 1000 and 1100 yards of elevation.) 

Sagika maritima. Sands of Barry ; and by the Tay, westward of 
Dundee. Ace, 

Stsllaria nemorum. In the lower parts of the county. Ace. 

Akev AViLkfastigiata. Rocks on the Clova Mountains. Ace. 

.^— — marina. Sea shore. Ace. 

. pepioide*. Seashore. Ace. 

SrEKQJTLA saginoides. Clova Mountains. H.W. sp. 

wbtdata. Near Forfar. FL Scot. 

CsKAsnuM tetrandnan. Roofs of houses in Forfar ; and common on 
the sea coast. Ace. 

^ arvense. Near Forfer. FL Scot. 

— — — .— kUifoMum, Summits of the Clova Mountains. Ace. 

  alpinum. Rocks by Loch Brandy. W. Brands, $p. Sum- 
mits of the Clova Mountains. Ace. 

CHKRi.EaiA sedoides. With Lychnis alpina. Exewrs. 

Ramola nUUegrana. Abundant on the road-side between Forfiu* and 
Brechin, and between the former place and Montrose; fre- 
quent on moors between Montrose and Guthrie; and in 
similar situations between Brechin and Slatefbrd. North FL 

GxRANivM phiBum. Behind the public-house, near the Kirk, in Glen 
Clova. ff. W. sp. With white flowers, at the sands of Barry, 
near Dundee. Br. FL 

' iylvaticum. About the Kirk in Glen Clova, and thenoe 
extending up Glen Bradooney and Glen Dole, probably to 
the subalpine region. H. W. sp. The small-flowered va- 
riety, with sterile anthers, occurs by the river, near the Kirk, 
in Glen Clova. 

— — tangvineum. Lower parts of the county. Aee. 

Ulex nanus. Lower parts of the county. Acc» 

OxTTROPis campestris. Rocks on the left side of Glen Dole (towards 
Glen Phu ?), almost facing a person when turning from 
Glen Qova to Glen Dole. ff. W. sp. 

-^— uralensis. Montrose. Br. FL 

Astragalus alpinus. High rocks, on the left side of Glen Dole, half 
way up the glen, or more. H. W. sp. 



yGooQle 



gL 



FORFARSHIRE. 477 

Astragalus hypoghttU. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 
— — glycyphyUus, Lower parts of the county. Ace. 

* Medic A GO sativa. Near Dundee. Ace. 
Thifolium scabrum. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 

omithopodioides. Near Broughty Castle. Ace. 

Lotus tenuis. Fields near Forfar. Eng. Fi, 

ViciA lutea. Rocks on the coast, between Montrose and Arbroath% 

Aec. 
Lathyrus syhesiris. Rocks near the Red Head Promontory, on the 

coast between Arbroath and Montrose. Ace. 
OaoBus niger. Den of Airly, twelve miles west of Forfar, sparingly. 

Eng, Fl. 

sylvaticus. By the side of the Isla. Ace, 

PauNus Padus. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 

* domestica. Hedges. Ace. 

* SviRMA. salicifolia. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 

Drtas octopetala. On the rocks where .Astragalus alpinus grows. 
H. W. sp, 

RuBus suberectus. Near the Kirk, and in other parts of Glen Cloya. 
H. W. 

— — saxatilis. Lower parts of the county. Ace, Sides of Glen 
Dole and Glen Bradooney. H. W. 

Chamcemorus, On the higher moors about Clova. H. W. 

PoTBNTiLLA tvidentata. Mountains eastward of Clova. Ace. On a 
mountain called Werron, and some other hills in Angus- 
shire, to the westward. Eng. Fl. " The Hill of Werron 
is of great extent ; being composed of a central ridge, with a 
number of branches, it lies very low." G. Macnab, mss. 
' argentea. Very rare on rocks not far from the Loups of 

Kenny, near Airly Castle ; common on rocks on the Sidlaw 
Hills. Ace. 

opaca. Rocks on the Clova Mountains. Ace. 

" alpestris. Widely distributed on the rocks to the south of 

the Fee ; and in Glen Isla. Excurs. High rocks in Glen 
Isla ; Glen Phu ; Glen Keilba ; Loch Brandy. W. Brands, 
sp. Side of Garry Burn, Clova. G. Macnab, mss. • 
- verna. Rocks between Broughty Castle and Dundee. 



Ace, 

CoMABUM palustre. Lower parts of the county. Ace. On the table- 
lands above Glen Dole. H. W. 

SiBBALDiA procumbens. Glen Phu. W, Brands, sp. On the moun- 
tains above the old Sonchus station. H. W. sp. 

Alchemilla alpina. In the bed of the river, a little above the Kirk 
of Clova, and Uience in many places upwards to the tops of 
the mountains; also on the road- side between Cortachy and 
Clova Kirk ; and on the road-side in Glen Shee. H, IV. sp, 
Loch-Lee. W, Brands, sp. 

* Dr. Macnab mentions a burn and rocks, called Garry Burn and Rocks, " on the 
right band side of Glen Clova," and also speaks of Garry Burn Rocks, *' opposite 
the Oxytropis rocks in Glen Phu." 

VOL. U. X 



y Google 



478 THE NEW BOTANISTS GUIDE. 

Rosa tomeniosa (and scabriuseuk). Lower parts of the county. 
Aee. I think to have obsenred this at a considerable eleva* 
tion on the left side of Glen Dole. JJ. IT. ap. 

— &1U1U (Doniana). Mountains of Clova. FL Seat 

oBsia. Lower parts of the county. Jcc. 

systyJa (R. colUna, of Don). Lower parts of the county. Aee, 

Fraus communU. Lower parts of the county. Aee. 

* I pinmatifida. One tree, in a plantaticm by the road-side between 

Kerriemuir and Norfiu*, probably planted there. IT. W, 

Epilobium roteunu Forfarshire. Br. FL 

— ^— alsimfoiium. In a small stream, a few yards to the right 
of the path from Clova Kirk towurds the two fiurm-houses at 
the head of the glen, before reaching the first of them ; and 
on the mountains above the old Sonchus station. H. W. sp. 
Glen Isla. W. Brantb, ip. 

a^tinKm. Glen Isla. W. Brands^ sp. Many parts of the 

Clova Mountains. H. W, sp. 

CiacjBA olpineu Lower parts of the county. Aee. 

CsEATOPHTLLUM demersum- Lakes of Rescobie and Balgavies. Aee. 

ScLSKAMTHUs perenuU. Gravelly banks near Forfar, rare. Fl. Scot. 

* Sedum album. Cottage roofs in Forfar. H. W. sp. House tops 

at Forfiu*, Glammis, &c FL Scot 
    angUewm. On rocks near Dundee ; and near Broughty 

Castle. Aee. 
viOosum. Near Broughty Castle ; not rare in the county. 

Ace. 
Rhodiola rosea. Rocks 00 the Clova Mountains, in many places. 

H. W. 
ISiiaxs peirawm. Woods near Airly Castle, by the river side. Fl. 

Scot. 
Saxifkaga steUaris. Frequent on rocks and in wet places on the 

Clova Mountains. H. W. 
nivalis. Glen Isla. W. Brands, sp. More common in 

Glen Isla, than in Glen Clova. Excurs. In small quan- 
tity below the Oxytropis station ; and on rocks, cm the left 

side of Glen Clova, nearly opposite the first fiu'm-house, 

above the Kirk. H. W. Garry Burn Rocks, Clova. G. 

Maenab, sp. 
•^— - opposiHfolia. Glen Phu. W. Brands, sp. Rocks on the 

sides of Glen Bradobney and Glen Dole, in plenty. H. W. 

sp. Garry Bum Rocks, Clova ; and Loch-Lee. G. Mocnab, 

mss. 
— — aizoides. In the marshes. Ace. On the bed of the 

river, above Clova Kirk, and plentiful in swampy places 

on the left side of Glen Dole, and elsewhere about the Clova 

Mountains. H. W.sp. 

' hypnoides. Left side of Glen Dole. ff. W, q>. Garry 

Bum Rocks. G. Macnab, mss. 
^ platypetala. Summits of the Clova Mountains. Ace. 

- denudata. Highest mountains of Angus. FL ScoL 

Summitsof the Clova Mountains, ^cc. Banks 



y Google 



FORFARSHIRE. 479 

of a rivulet not far from Airly Castle. Fl. Scot, On a 
rock by the river near Lintrathen. Eng. Fl- 

Saxifraoa hetemrent. Moist rocks on elevated situations on the 
mountains. Eng, Fl. 

pedatifida. Rocks near the head of Glen Clova. Fl Scot. 

Summits of the Clova Mountains. Ace. 

Ch&tsospleni(jm alternifolium, Forfarshire. Aec. 

CicoTA virostz. Forfar Loch. W. Stables, sp. Margins of Rescobie 
and Balgavies Lochs. Ace. 

f Carum Carui. The most common umbelliferous plant near Ar- 
broath, and there is no doubt of the species being indigenous 
there. Ace. 

FcBNicuLUM vulgare. On rocks on the foreside of the Sidlaw Hills. 
Ace. 

Mkum aihamanticum. On the banks of the river, above and below 
the Kirk of Clova. H. W. sp. 

f Ch^rofhtllum aureum. By the side of corn-fields, between Ar- 
broath and Montrose. Ace. 

t aromaticum. By the side of the river called Lunan 

and Vennie, not far from Guthrie. Ace. Near Guthrie, 
seven miles east of Forfar, " undoubtedly wild. " ( G. Don. ) 
Eng, Bat. Supp. Near Guthrie, by the road-side leading 
from Forfer to Arbroath. Fl. Scot. (I give these different 
descriptions of the station, to faciliate the quest of botanists, 
though they seem to mean the same place) 

Mtbrhis odorata. Low parts of the county, always near bouses. 
Ace. 

Ertngium maritimum. Shore near Montrose. Ace. 

LiNNAA borealis. Glen Dole, in great plenty amongst the heather on 
the left side, between the station of Oxytropis campestris 
and Astragalus alpinus, but at a lower elevation. H. W, sp, 

CoRNus suecica, Clova Mountains, in several places, particularly on 
the heath to the left of the old Sonchus station. H. W. sp. 

Galium ereetum. Lower parts of the county. Ace, 

cinereum. Near Kinnaird. Fl. Scot. 

aristatum. Angus-shire, but not common. Br. Fl. 

pusillum. Rocks on the south side of Glen Dole, and on the 

west side of Glen Fee ; with Oxytropis campestris, in the 
latter station. North. Fl. 

^ saecharatum. Near Forfar. FL Scot. 

. spurium. Corn-fields near Forfar. FL Scot, 

.. boreale. In the lower parts of the county. Ace, Abundant 
on rocks at the " Burn," near Brecliin ; Loch- Lee. North, 
FL By the river, in Glen Clova, near the Kirk ; and on the 
sides of Glen Dole. H. JT, 

Fedia dentata. Field between Arbroath and Montrose, very abun- 
dant. Exeurs. 

Sonchus alpinus. Water-falls at the head of Glen Dole. H W, sp. 
Glen Isla. W, Brands^ sp. In five new stations in Glen 
Dole and Glen Isla. Exeurs, 18S2. 
B 2 



y Google 



480 THE NEW BOTANISTS GUIDE. 

Apaegia Taraxaci. Frequent on the table-lands in the upper district 
of Clora. Excurg. 

HiERACiuM a^tinum. On the hills between Glen Bradooney and 
Glen Dole : and on rocks along the opposite side of the 
latter. H. W, tp. Loch- Lee. . W. Brands^ tp, 

HalierL Mountains of Clora. Br. Fl. 

. Lawtoni. Clova Mountains. FL Scot, 

nhaticum (maculatum). Fir Wood east of Forfar. 

FL Scot. 

— paludosum. In several woods. Ace. Glen Clova. H. W. 

nuHle. In several woods. Ace Among bushes, in 

meadows north of For&r. FL Scot. King's Seat, north of 
Forfar. Windh aSd. 

cerinthoides. Rocks near the head of Clova. FL Scot. 

' amplexicaule. Rocks on the Clova Moimtains. Ace. 
' derUicvJatum. Summits of the Clova Mountains. Ace. 
prenanthoides. In several woods. Ace Banks of the 

Esk, near the farm called the Cairn, near Forfar. FL Scot. 

Rocks on the left side of Glen Dole. H. W. qh 
  umbdUUum. Valley of Clova. Exeurs. 
Htpoch2BRIs mactdata. Dry woods east of For&r. Ft Scot. 

- glabra. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 
Prekanthes hieraciifcUa. Debris of the hills of Turin and Pitsandly. 

Ace, 
Lapsana pusilla. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 
Saussu&ea alpina. Rocks on the left side of Glen Dole, and other 

parts of the Clova Mountains. H. W. sp. 
Artemisia maritima (and gallica). Rocks on the coast between 

Arbroath and Montrose. Ace. 
Cnicus heterophyUus. Lower parts of the county. Ace. Glen Clova, 

near the Kirk, and in other places. H. W, 
Gkaphalium dioieum. Glens Clova, Bradooney, and Dole ; and on 

the adjacent mountains. H. W. sp, 
— ^— — supinum. Mountains round Glen Dole and Glen Clova. 

H. W. sp. 

.^— gaUicum. Dry banks near Forfar. Fl Scot, 

Erigeron alpinus. Rocks on the left side of Glen Dole, near Astra- 
galus alpinus, and in other places. H. W, sp. At the head 

of Canlochan Glen, with Gentiana nivalis. North. FL 
  acrU. Arbroath Common. Exeurs. Sands near Arbroath ; 

Sands of Barry. Ace. 
TussiLAGo alpina. Rocks on the Clova Mountains. Ace, 
Sekecio saracenicus. Always near houses. Ace. 
Aster TripoUum. Sea-shore near Montrose ; by the Tay, westward 

of Dundee. Aec. 
f DoRONicDM Pardalianches. Near Kinnaird. Ace. 
Pyrethrum maritimum. Sands near Arbroath. Aec, 
• Anthemis tinetoria. Road-side north of Forfar. FL Scot. 
Centa (jrea Jaeea. ** Discovered in a young plantation on New- 

bigging Muir, near Belmont Castle, 1811, by Mr, Young. 

Seen near Newtyle, Angus-shire, by D. Don : but I doubt 



y Google 



FORFARSHIRE. 481 

whether it may not be the same station as the first. Inver- 
carrity, by Kinnordy, Kerriemuir, C. Lyell, Esq." FL Scot. 
Frequent in Angus-shire. Br. Fl. 

Lobelia Dortmanna. Loch Brandy, Clova. J. H. Balfour, sp. ^Loch 
of Lintrathen. Ace. 

Campanula latifolia. Forfarshire. Ace, 

• rapunculoides. Foot of Duninald Den (a wood near the 
sea), at Usan, in the vicinity of Montrose. North. Fl. 

glomerata. Coast between Arbroath and Montrose, par- 
ticularly near Auchmithie, where it occurs with white 
flowers ; rocks in the neighbourhood of Montrose, as at Usan, 
Duninald, and St. Cyrus; near Dysart, three miles from 
Montrose. North. Fl. 

Vaccikium uUginosum* Many places on the Clova Mountains. 
H. W. sp. 

— — ^— — Vitis-' TdiBa. In the low parts of the county. Ace. Plen- 
tiful on the mountains about Clova. H. W, sp. 
' Oxycoccos. Marshes. Ace. On the table-lands above 

the left side of Glen Dole. H. W. sp. 

Arbutus alpina. Hill of the White Haugh. /. Macnah, sp. Near 
the summit of the mountain immediately south of Bra- 
dooney, Clova, apparently very local. W. Brafids, sp. (Pro- 
bably the same station. ) 
'- Uva^Ursi* Glen Clova, Glen Dole, and adjacent hills. 
H. W. Abundant on the road-side near Glen Esk. G. 
Macjuxb, sp. . . 

^ZALEA procundfens. On the hill between Glen Bradooney and Glen 
Dole ; and others of the Clova Mountains. H. W. sp. On 
the top of Cairn Inks, a mountain opposite to the Inn at 
Clova. North. FL 

Ptbola rotundifdia. Woods near Forfar ; and summits of the Clova 
Mountains. Ace. Gonnacha Wood. Br. Fl. On the 
Astragalus alpinus rocks in Glen Dole. H. W. sp. 

— ^— media. Plentiful in Glen Dole, chiefly lower down than the 
Kirk. H. W. sp. Wood near Slateford. W. Brands, sp. 

minor. Woods near Forfar. Ace. 

— secunda, Loch-Lee. W. Brands, sp. Rocks on the left side 
of Glen Dole. H. W. sp, 
' uniflorcu Sunmiits of the Clova Mountains. Ace. (Surely 
not on the summits ?) 

Grntiana nivalis. Glen Isla. Graham, sp. Both sides of Glen 
Isla. Exeurs, At the top of Canlochan Glen, head of 
Glen Isla, upon rocks well marked by the white veins of 
quartz which intersect them in different places, and having 
at their summit a patch of snow, that generally remains 
during the whole year ; also on the north side of Canlochan 
Glen. North. Fl. 
Convolvulus SoidaneUa. Sands near Arbroath. Ace. 
* CuscuTA europ<Ba, On flax. Ace, 

LiTHosPERMUM moritimum. On the beach, near the vDlage of Torens- 
« 3 



y Google 



482 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

haven. Ace, Montrose ; common on the sea-shore towards 
Usan. North. FL 

* AnchijsA sempervirens. Behind the publio-house at Clova. H. W. 
Symphytum tuberosum. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 
AsPE&UGo procumbens. Near the town of Auchmithie, and the village 

of Westhaven. Ace. 

Cynoglossdm syhatieum. West from Dundee, rare. Ace. 

Myosotis repens ( Don). Summits of the Clova Mountains. Ace. 

f Atropa belladonna. Den of Bonnington, near Montrose. Ace. 

•j- ScROPHiTL ARIA »cmaK». Near Lower. Ace. Near Forfar. Br.FL 

Rhinanthus major, Sandy fields on the coast, between Arbroath and 
the sands of Barry. Exeurs. 

Melampyrum sylvaticum. Forfarshire. Ace. 

Veronica saxatilis. Garry Burn, Clova. G. Maenab, msg. I^eft 
side of Glen Dole, on the rocks of Astragalus alpinus, and 
lower down the Glen. H. W, sp. Rocks in Glen Isla. 
W. Brands, sp. North side of Canlochan Glen, with Gen- 
tiana nivalis ; upper part and south side of the same Glen. 
North, Fl. 

-^— — alpina. Rocks on the left side of Glen Dole ; and by se- 
veral streams on the moors above the Glen. H. W. sp. 
Glen Isla. W, Brands^ sp. Glen Fee ; Canlochan Glen ; 
Craigmeskeldie, a mountain at the head of Loch-Lee. 
North. Fl. 

f Mentha sylvestris. Sidlaw Hills, perhaps naturalised. Br. Fl. 

— ^— ^— piperita. Sides of a stream, the origin of the Brothwick, 
near a spring called Nine Wells, about six miles from 
Arbroath, abundant and undoubtedly wild. Exeurs. 

* Tsucrium Chammdrys. Old walls at Balgavies, five miles east of 

Forfar ; and at Kelly, three miles east of Arbroath ; but near 
houses. Fl. Scot. Always near houses. Ace. 

Ajvg A alpina? White Water; Bachnagairn, and Glen Isla. Br.FL 

G Ai.Eorsis versicolor. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 

Lamium indsum. Cultivated fields near Montrose. Ace. 

-T intermedium. Cultivated fields. Ace. 

AciNos vulgaris. Near the village called Welltown, about one mile 
south of Forfar. Ace. Dry pastures eastward of Fprfiir ; 
sandy fields, Arbroath Common, frequent. Exeurs. 

Utricularia intermedia. At the east end of Rescobie Lake, three or 
four miles from Forfar ; also in the Loch of Balgavies, and 
in pools near Guthrie, twelve miles west from Montrose. 
North. FL " In a ditch by the side of Rescalin Lake, four 
miles east of Forfar." Fl. Scot. (Is the last the same lo- 
cality as the first?) 

minor. At the end of the lake of Forfar. Ace. Pool 

by road-side in Glen Clova, three or four miles north-east 
from Kirktown, not far from a small birch wood. North. Fl, 

Primula elatior. Near Glammis. Ace. 

Lysimachia thyrsijlora. Margins of Rescobie and Balgavies Lakes ; 
not uncommon in the county. Ace. Bog at Forfar. Eng, FL 

Trientalis europaa. In several woods in the lower parts of the 



yGoogk 



FORFARSHIRE. 483 

county. Ace On hillocks in Glen Goya ; and ascending 

to the table-lands above Glen Dole. If. W. tp. 
Centunculus minimui. Rare in Forfarshire. Aee. Moor behind 

the Hill of Guthrie. Excwrs. 
Statics Armeria, On the summits of Clova, with Lychnis alpina. 

Excurs, 
Glaux mariHma, Sea-beach between Arbroath and Montrose. Ace. 

Edges of the Montrose basin. North. FL 
LiTTORKLLA lacustris, Marshcs. Ace. 
Plantago maritima. Road.side between Forfar and Kerriemuir. 

H. W. 
Chenopodium muraU. Lower parts of the county. Aee. 

polyspermum. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 
maritimum. The Back Sands, Montrose; sands near 

Arbroath. Ace. 
Salsola Kali. Beach between Arbroath and Montrose. Ace. 
Atbiplex laciniatcL, Beach near Arbroath, Aee. 
Salicokmia Jterbaeea. Covering the muddy beach, to a great extent, 

at Montrose, and plentiful about four miles from the town 

at the head of the basin. North. Fl 
• radicans. Sea-coast near Montrose. FL ScoL 
FoLTQONUM minus. Moist fields near For&r. Fl. Scot. 

1 viviparum. Lower parts of the county. Ace. Glen 

Clova, and on- the neighbouring mountains. H, W. sp. 
RvuRx palustris. Lower parts of the county. Ace. 
OxTUA reniformis* At the upper part of Glen Clova, on the bed of 

the river ; and frequent on the mountains. H. W. Loch* 

Lee. G. Maenab, mas. 
EMPxxauM nigrum. Hill of Werron. G. Macnah, mss. Glen Clova, 

and the mountains. H, W, 
Bbtula nana. Sparingly on the mountain between Glen Dole and 

Glen Bradooney, almost in a line between the old Sonchus 

station and the shooting cottage, mentioned in the preli- 
minary remarks to this county. H. W. sp. 
Saux petiolaris. Marshes. FL Scot. 

angusttfoiia. Clova Mountains. Br. FL 

'fusca (argentea). Sands of Barry. Fl. Scot. 

(parvifolia). Marshes, common. Fl. Scot. 

  (incubacea). Rocks on the Clova Mountains. Aee. 

- anibigua. Bogs near Forfar. Br. FL 

reticvJata. Rocks on the side of Glen Dole. H. W. sp. 

glauea. Rocks on the Clova Mountains. Aee. 

- arenaria. Clova Mountains. FL Scot. 

  eoHnifolia. Banks of the £sk, near Forfar, but rare. jF7. Scot. 
Andersoniana. Rocks on the Clova Mountains. Aee, 

- rupfistris. Rocks on the Clova Mountains. Aee. 

prunifciia. Rocks on the Clova Mountains. Ace, 

herbaeea. On the mountains. H. W. 

hastata. Sands of Barry, Dundee. Br. Fl. 

lanata. Clova Mountains. IK Brands, sp. Head of the Glen 

of Dole, two miles west of Acharne, the uppermost farm- 
E 4 



y Google 



484 THE NEW BOTAKISTS GUIDE. 

house of Clova. Br, FL Glen Isla. Excurs. It is found 
on the rocks between the stations of Astragalus alpinus 
and Oxytropis campestris, in two or three places, I believe. 
H. W. 

Saux purpurea, helix, Lami)ertianay rubra, triandra, lanceolaia fundu- 
lataj, Rtusdiana, pentandrct, nigricans, hicolor, viteOina, ci~ 
nerea, aquatica, dUifoHa, stipularis, and moBisstma fShmithi- 
ana), are enumerated amcHigst the plants of the lower parts 
of the county, by G. Don. 

Vmiis sylvestris. Among the mountains. H. W. 

* Stratiotes aloides. Forfar Loch, introduced by Mr. Don. Ace, 
TaiGLocuiN maritimum. The Bank Sands, near Montrose ; by the 

Tay, westward of Dundee. ' Ace, 
Habenabia albida. Lower parts of the county. Ace, Glen Clova. 

H, W. sp. 
hisTEKA eordata. In several woods. Ace, Clova Mountains. H.W.sp^ 
MAI.AX1S paludosa. Lower parts of the county; and summits (!) of 

the Clova Mountains. Ace, Glen Clova. W, Brands, sp, 

A mile or two above the Kirk of Clova, on the opposite side 

of the river. H. W. 
GooDTEBA repens. For&rshire. Ace. 
CoBALLOKHizA tnnata. Sands of Barrie. Br, FL 

* I&is xiphioides. In a marsh, near Colonel Kinloch's of Logie, 

among earices and junci, in a situation where it had never 

been cultivated. Ace, 
CoNVALLA&iA majoUs. Near Inchewen, parish of Tannadice. Ace, - 
Gaoea lutea. Woods at Cortachy Castle, north of For&r, in abun> 

dance, and truly wild. Fl. Scot. 
Aludm arenarium. Forfershire. Ace. 
— — carineUum. East of Arbroath, and banks of the Isla, below 

Airly Castle. FL Scat. 

dUraceum. Near Montrose. Excurs. 

• ampeloprasum. In dens near the shore, between Arbroath 

and Montrose. Ace. 
ToLl^A sylvestris. Not far from Brechin. Ace. 
ToFiELDiA palustris. Glen Isla. W. Brands, sp. Clova Mountains. 

H. jr. sp, 
Spakganium neUans. Forfar Loch. Ace. 

FoTAMOGETON granUneus, Lochs of Rescobie and Balgavies. Ace, 
zosterasfolius. Forfar Loch; pretty abundant in the 

Lochs of Balgavies and Rescobie. North. FL 
praiUmgus. River Lunan, near the Bay ; and in Res- 
cobie Loch. Excurs. Loch of Balgavies. North. Fl. 
heterophyUus, Near Montrose. North. FL " Lakes 

of Rescalin and Balgowie.** FL Scot, 
lanceciUitus. Loch of Lintrathen. Ace. 



-^— — — rufescens. Ditches and lakes, near Forfar. FL Scot. 

Rescobie Loch. North, Fl, 
RuppiA maritima. Near Montrose. North. FL 
Zoster A marina. Near the Back Sands, near Montrose. Ace. 
Lemna tristdca. Forfarshire lakes. Ace. 
LuiULA Forsteri,^ Fir woods east of Forfar. FL Scot, 



y Google 



FORFARSHIRE. 485 

LtiziTLA ipicata. Bogs near Glen Isla. W. Brands, sp. Clova 

Mountains. H. W, sp. 
JuNcus haUicus. Sands of Barry, near Dundee. FL Scot. 

obtusiflarus. Marshes near Forfar, rare. FL Scot. 

— — - tenuis. Summits of Clova Mountains. Ace, Moist mountains 

of Clova. Fl. Scot. 
— — castaneus. Clova Mountains, in swampy places on the moors 

above the head of Glen Dole. H. W. sp. 
' trifidus. Glen Phu and Glen Isla. W. Brands, sp. Many 

parts of the Clova Mountains. H. W. sp. 
triglumis. Glen Phu. W. Brands, sp. Many other parts of 

the Clova Mountains. H. W. sp. 
^— — — higlumis. Clova Mountains. JF7. Scot. 
? Cladium Mariscus. Formerly found in this county. 
Rhyncospora aU)a. Near Rescobie. North. Fl. 
ScH(£Nns nigricans. Wet ground adjacent to Montrose. North. Fl. 
Bltsmus rufus. Rocks on the coast between Arbroath and Montrose. 

Ace. Shore at Montrose, and near the basin there. North, 

FL 
Eleocha&is paucijlora. Glen Clova, and on the neighbouring moun- 
tains. H. W. sp. 
SciRFus maritimus. The Back Sands, Montrose. Ace. 
£biophobum vaginatum. Marshes in Forfarshire, and on the Clova 

Mountains. Ace. Hills between Clova and North Esk. 

G, Maenab, sp. 

? — alpinum. Extinct in this county. 

gradle. Summitsof the Clova Mountains. Ace. 

Ca&ex paucijlora. Clova Mountains. H. W. sp. 

— — ineurva. Sands of Barry. Ace. 

— ^^— • arenaria. Sea-shore. Ace. 

— — - intermedia. Loch of Forfar. G. Gordon, mss. Marshes in 

Forfarshire. Ace. 
— — divisa. Marsh near Montrose ; and sea-coast of Angus-shire, 

chiefly in marshy places. Fl. Scot. 
—^^ teretiusevla. Marsh of Restenet, near Forfar. Fl. Scot. 

Clova Mountains. Ace. 
Vahlii. Rocks in Glen Phu, ** confined to a space of about 

twenty square yards, and growing with C. rigida and C. 

phaeostachya." W. Brands, sp. 
— ^ teneUa. In a wood by the river Esk, very rare. Eng. FL 
— — depauperata. Woods near Forfar, rare. FL Scot. 
— — — capillaris. On the moors above the left side of Glen Dole. 

H.JF. 

limoscL. Marsh near Forfar. FL Scot. Marshy ground 

between Rescobie and Beguise. Excurs. Clova Mountains. 

Ace. 
— — rarijhra. On the moors above the left side of Glen Dole, iii 

several places. H. W. sp. 
  phBOstachya. Rocks in Glen Phu and Glen Isla. W. Brands, 

sp. 

' atrata. Rocks in Glen Isla, and Glen Phu. W. Brands, sp. 

E 5 



y Google 



486 THE New BOTAmST's GUIDE. 

Abundant on the mcMmtain difis, on the south side of the 

Fee. Excurs, At the head of Canloehan Gkn with Gen- 

tiana niTalis. Norths FL 
Caesx txteusa. On the coast near Usan, about two mfles from 

Montrose, very abundant. Excurs. 
(Ederi. Marshes in Forfivshire. Ace, Glen Ida. W. Bntnds, 

fuhiu Rocks in Glen Isla. W, Brands^ tp. Road-side 
between Montrose and the North Esk Rito-. FL Seat, 

htnervis. Clova Mountains. H. W. tp, 

— ~ Ictmgata, Woods near For£ur. Ace, Marshes in Angus- 
shire. Fl Scot 
— ^ gpdrostachfo. In several stations in Forftrshire. Emg. Bot, 
Supp. 

MieUchoferi. Mountains of Clova. FL Scot. 

puUa, Glen Phu. W. Brandty ip. 

rigida. On the mountains. H. W. tp. 

  aquatiUt. Clova Mountains, by the streams of the high moors 
to the left of the old Sonchus station. H. W, ip. 
•: • — JUiformit. White Mire Marsh. Ace. Restenat Moss. .FZ. 



Scat. Beguise Loch. Excurs. 
  hordeifornds. In a den near Panmure, about nine miles south- 
east of Forfar. Eng. FL Small valley about three mUes 
west of Panmure, among some bushes near a spring. Br* 
FL 

stictocarpa. Lofty mountains of Clova. Eng. FL 

. angvstifdiia. Marshes in Angus-shire. Br. FL 

Alopecu&us alpinut. Near Loch Brandy. W. Brandt, tp. By streams 
on the moors above the old Sonchus station. H. W. tp. 
Beside a stream, which fidls into the west side of Loch 
Whorrol, a lake at a considerable elevation on the mountains 
to the north-east of Kirkton, Clova ; marshy ground between 
Clova and Loch- Lee, about two miles south from the head 
of the IxMsh ; at the top of Garry Bum, Glen Fee, &c 
North. FL 

ftdvut. For&rshire. Br. FL 

Phleom alpinmn. On the banks of streams, on the moors above Glen 
Dole^ and on rocks at the higher part of the Grlen. H. W. 
tp. 

^ MichdiL Summits of the highest mountains of Clova. Ace. 

i- arenarium. Sands of Barry ; sands near Arbroath. Aee. 

At Montrose, near the Academy, and on the Links. North, 
FL 

Ammophila arundinaeea. Near Arbroath. FL Scot. 

Calamageostis ttricta. Near Rescobie, four miles from Forfiir. Br. 
FL Said to be extinct at White Mire Marsh. 

AiRA <dpincu By the sea«side near Dundee. Eng. FL (Is this 
station correct ?) Rocks on the south side of Glen Dole, to 
the east of those on which the Astragalus alpinus grows. 
North. Fl. 



y Google 



KIKCARDIMfiSHIRE. 487 

UicaocRLoi horeaUi, In a narrow mountain vtiXiey, called Kella. 
Fl. Scot. 

M KLicA mOaiu, Rocks on the Clova Mountains. Aee. 

PoA aqwxHea, For&r Loch. Wi Stahles, ap. 

—^^marxHma. Shore near Montrose; by the Tay, westward of 
Dundee. Aec, 

distans. Sea-shore near Montrose. Ace* 

ai^na. By the sides of the rivers Esk and Isla, in the low parts 

of the county. Ace. Corbie Craig, near the river Esk, five 
miles Irom Forfar. Eng. FL Den of Airly; north and 
west sides of Canlochan Glen. North, FL 

Festuca rtibra. Sea-shore near North Water Bridge. Ace^ 

f BaoMUs secaUnus. Low parts of the county. Ace. 
    ratfemosus. Fields. FL Scot. 

— — — arvensis. Low parts of the county. Aec. 

AvBKA strigo9a. Low parts of the county, ^cc. 

alpina. Rocks on the summits of the highest mountains of 

Clova. Aec. Glen Fee. N(yirth. FL 

— ^^ puhescens. Low parts of the county. Ace. 

Elymus arenarius. Near North Water Bridge. Aec. 

HoanEtm maritimum. In Scotland, it has only been fbund in Angus- 
shire. Br. FL 

? Triticdm cristatum. Barry sands. (From the late Mr. Don.) Winch, 
tp. Sea-side between Arbroath and Montrose. FL Scot. 
( Dr. Murray omits this ; and probably the specimens formerly 
found had been carried in ballast, or by the waves of the 
sea.) 
'Junceum. Sea-shore. Ace, 
• loliciceum. Sea-coast. JF7. Scot. 

LoLiuM arvense.- Low parts of the county. Aec. 

— — temtdentum. Low parts of the county. Aec. 



LXXIII. KINCARDINESHIRE. 

Radiola imOe^rana. Moor of Benholm. North. Fl. 

ViciA hitea, Meamshire. Eng. FL 

CtacjBA alpina. At Drumlochty, and in various woods ; Deeside at 
Upper Banchory. North. FL 

Ebythr^ca littoralis. Gathered near Aberdeen, on the sea-coast, in 
the parish of Nigg. North. FL 

LrrHOSPB&MDM maritimum. Bay of Nigg ; on the beach at Stone* 
haven, and a little to the southward ; also in various places 
to the north of Stonehaven, usually among stones, but occa- 
sionally in sand ; abundant and magnificent on the sandy 
edge of a bay immediately to the north of Garron Point ; 
1 6 



y Google 



488 THE }^EW BOTANIST S GUIDE. 

near Johnsfaaven ; at St. Cyrus ; between Berrie Water and 

the Tillage ; Portletben. North, FL 
* Amchusa Mempervirens. Near Stonehaven. North, FL 
Ltcofus emrofHBus. At the Loch of Leys, near Upper Banchory. 

North. FL 
Gi^ux nuxritinuu Sl Cyrus ; Gourdon. North, FL 
Plamtago mariiima. Coast of Eancardine. North, FL 
Saucoknia herbacea. At Brotherton. North. FL 
RoppiA maritimcL. In the neighbourhood of Bervie. North. K. 
EmoPHORUM oo^'iia^ttm. Nigg; Upper Banchory. .North. FL 
SciKPUs- moaitimus. Gourdon in the Meams. North. FL 
Eleochakis mttUieatiKt. Nigg. North. FL 
Blismus mfu». Abundant in many parts of the Kincardineshire 

coast, especially between Stonehavoi and Mucbals; Brother- 
ton ; near Portlethen. North. FL 
? Ca&ex DavallxaHa. Subalpine bogs, Meamshire. (Prof. J. Beattie.) 

FL Scot. 

fulva. Very common in Meamshire. Enff. FL 

Fhleum areiutrium. St. Cyrus. North. FL 

Festuca rubra. Kincardineshire coast. North. Fl. 

* Beomus tecoKnut. Frequent among wheat in Eoncardineshire* 

North. FL 
Eltmus arenariut. St. Cyrus. North. FL 



LXXIV. ABERDEENSHIRE. 



We have hitherto been almost destitute of any account of the botany 
of Northern Scotland, except a few localities of its rarer plants near 
the western coast, in Sutherland and in Orkney. This great desideratum 
in British botany is about to be supplied by Dr. Murray ; the first 
part of whose ** Northern Flora " has already appeared, and I trust it 
will speedily be followed by the other two parts which are promised. 
It has been a subject of regret that we should have been simultaneously 
engaged in reporting localities for a portion of our island, in regard to 
which so little has been hitherto published. Had the materials of 
either of us been sufficiently arranged, they would have furnished con- 
siderable assistance to the other; but the loss to this work is the 
greater. Dr. Murray treating of the fects under his own eye, and being 
aided by several botanists at once liberal and accurate in their commu- 
nications. There is, however, one important diffi:rence between the 
two works, even in the very matters in which they approach nearest to 
each other. The localities particularly sought by Dr. Murray, of 
course, are referrible to those species which are rare within his own 
tract, while the localities named in this work are for species rare with 
respect to Britain at large, though many of them are abundantly 



y Google 



ABl^RDEENSHIRE. 489 

common in the North of Scotland. Several of the localities are given 
from my own personal observation ; and I have experienced consider- 
able difficulty here, as well as in other parts of Britain, from being 
unavoidably ignorant of the local names of hills, streams, &c., which 
might have facilitated others' search of the plants. As a good deal of 
attention was also paid to the altitude at which the species were found, 
some explanations on both these points may be useful. Invercauld 
Castle, in Braemar, is said to be 1070 feet above the sea^level. The 
bed of the Dee is a few feet lower, and Castleton a few feet higher. All 
the plants mentioned to grow about the latter may be considered as at 
least 350 yards above the sea, and, generally speaking, below 500 yards. 
*< Braemar Moors " will intend the low moory hills round Castleton, 
and the plants may be said to grow between 500 and 700 yards of ele- 
vation. ** Mountains above Loch Callater*' will indicate the rocky 
heights which form the boundaries of For&r and Aberdeen shires, 
southward of the loch. They extend from 700 to 900 yards, or up- 
wards. " Avon Hills '* will signify the south or south-eastern declivi- 
ties of Ben-na-muick>dhu, Ben-na-Buird, and other parts of the lofty 
range extending south and east from Cairngorm, and lying several 
miles north of Castleton. The altitudes are from 800 to 1400 yards. 

Mr. Dickie, of Cherry Vale, was kind enough to send me a list of 
plants, observed within thirteen or fourteen miles of Aberdeen. These 
are distinguished as species **near Aberdeen." Some of them may 
belong exclusively to Kincardineshire ; but, if so, I have not the 
means of distinguishing such ; and it is by no means improbable that 
some of the localities taken from the Northern Flora may be thus mis- 
placed. 

AUTHORITY. 

Dickie, cat. — Catalogue of Plants observed within Fourteen Miles 
of Aberdeen. Communicated in April, 1836. 



Thalictrum alpinum. Avon Hills. H. W. 

' minus. Links of Rattrey. Fl. Scot. 
  majtts. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 



Trollius europcBus. About Castleton. H. W. Near Aberdeen. 

Dickie, cat. 
CoRYDALis clavicidata. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
Cakile maritima. East coast from Aberdeen to Fraserburgh. Fl. 

Scot. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
Cochlearia officinalis. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. Avon Hills 

H. W. sp. 
— — daniccu Sands at Peterhead. Fl, Scot. 



- grcenlandica. Loch-na-Garr. Eng. FL 



Lepidium Smithii. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

Teesdalia nudicatdis. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cai. Sandy hills 

at Peterhead. Fl. Scot. 
* Koniga maritima. Near Aberdeen. Eng. Fl. 
Draba rupestris. Rocks on the summit of Cairngorm. Fl. Scot. 
SuBULARiA aquatica. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cctt* Loch Callater. 



yGooQle 



gL 



4<90 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Hooker, sp. In the small lake under the rocks where Carex 

Vahlii grows. H, IF, sp, 
Caedakink amara. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, eat, 
Arabis petr^BO. Avon HiUs ; and brought down, by streams, to the 

moors under Ben-na-Buird. H, W, sp. Banks of the Dee. 

jFV. Scot, 
NASTURTinH sylvcitre. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat, 
Viola lutea, Greystone, In Alford, but in small quantity; much 

more abundant in Towie and Glenbucket; on Deeside, in 

the ^cinity of Pananick; Glenmuick; and all the way 

between Abergaldy and Castleton. North, FL Castleton, 

and Braemar Moors. H, W, 
DroskbI anglica. Near the base of Ben-na-muick-dhu, ascending 

from Castleton. H, W, sp, 
SiLKNE nutans. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
I I •< maritima. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

acaulis, Avon Hills. H, W. sp. 

Saoina maritima. At Aberdeen, on the Old Town Links, between the 

brickwork and the sea ; New Pier ; Inch ; between Craiglug 

and the sea, on the south side of the river ; rocks at Buchan- 

ness ; Ythan mouth, and coast of Buchan. 
Spkroula svbtdata. Near Aberdeen* Dickie, cat. 
SvETA^AKiA cerastoides. Ben-na-Buird. W. Brands, sp. On the rocks 

near the summit of the. hill, and above a small lake. II, W. 
Cerastivm tetrandrum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

arvense. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

.— ~— — — latifolium. Ben Avon, cleft in a rock on the south side of 

Loch More. M. Barry, sp, 
Rai^iola miUegrana, Near Aberdeen, in the vicinity of the coast, oc- 
casionally all the way from the Cove to Belhelvie ; also near 

Park Inn,' upon Deeside; in the neighbourhood of Loch 

Auchlossan, Lumphanan; at Aberdeen, on the Links; 

Heugh of Crimond, and not uncommon in the district of 

Buchan. North, Fl 
Geranium sylvaticum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. Castleton ; 

Braemar Moors ; Avon Hills. H, W, sp, 

'* phiBum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

- sanguineum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
ViciA angustifilia. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat, 
  lathyroides. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
Astragalus hypoglottis. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. Links of 

St. Fergus. FL Scot. 
  glycyphyUos, Boyne Castle. G. Gordon, sp. 
Medicaoo denticulata. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
PauNUS Padus. Castleton. H. W, 

RuBus suJberectus, Highlands of Aberdeenshire. FL Scot, 
I saxatUis. Braemar Moors. H, W. 

  ChamcBmorus. Braemar Moors, and Avon Hills. B. W, Ben- 

na-chie. G. Gordon, mss, 
CoMARUM palusire. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, eat. 



y Google 



ABERDKENSHIRE. 491 

PoTBNTiLLA alpestfis. In a fir-wood above the Castle at Castleton 

and the mountains above Loch Callater. H* W. sp. 
SiBBALDiA procumbens. Mountains above Loch Callater ; Avon Hills. 

H, jr. 

Alchkmilla alpina. At Aberdeen, both above and below the Bridge 
of Dee, and occasionally in small quantity upon the Inch ; 
Deeside above Charlestown, Lochmuick; Loch-na^Garr; 
and abounding in the Alpine tract adjacent to the highest 
parts of Dee ; Gaimside ; Inch More, near the source of the 
Don ; and on the moors adjacent to that river, as low as Can- 
dacraig. North, FL Braemar Moors, and Avon Hills. 
ff. W. sp. 

Rosa spinosissima. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. Near Castleton, 
on the ascent to Ben-na-Buird. JET. W, 

rubeUa, Banks of the Dee about Abergeldy. Ft. Scot. 

— tomen/o«a (mollis £. B. 2459.). Banks of the Dee. Fl Scot. 

Epilobium alpinum. Avon Hills, ff. ff. 

CiECAA alpina. Den of Rubislaw, near Aberdeen ; occationally on 
the banks of the Dee and Don ; woods near Castleton ; 
stony places by the side of Loch-Lee ; Donside, at Glen- 
kindy. North. Fl. 

Sedum viUosum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat, and ep. 

HiBms petr(Bum. Strathdon. North, FL 

Saxifraga nivalis. Mountains above Loch Callater. JET. JF. sp. 

— — — stettaris. Castleton ; Avon Hills ; Mountains above Loch 
Callater. H. W. sp. 

— - aizoides. Castleton ; Braemar Moors. JET. W. 

riwlaris, Loch-na-Garr. Hooker, sp. 

caspitosa. Ben Avon. M. Barry, sp. Ben-na-Buird. 

Anderson's Guide. 

- Usteoirens, Moist rocks in elevated situations on the 

mountains. Eng. Fl. 

Cabuh Carui. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

FoENicuLUM vulgare. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

LiGusTicuM scoticum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

Meuk Athamanticwn. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. On a green 
bank, nearly opposite the front of Invercauld House, by the 
road-side between Castleton and the bridge over the Dee, 
below the village. H. W. sp. 

Hblosciadium repens. Side of the Fergus above the bridge of Ennis.' 
Sr. FL 

Anthkiscus CerefoHium. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

Mtkrhis odorata. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
CoRiANDRUM sotivum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

CoRNUs Buecica. Avon Hills. H. W. sp. Loch-na-Garr, in the de- 
scent towards Invercauld ; Glenbucket, near the Manse, and, 
perhaps, not further down than this in Aberdeenshire; h^ 
about Glen Callader. North. FL 

Iavvmk horealis. First found in an old fir wood at Inglismaldie^ on 
the borders of Mearnshire, in 1792. Eng. Fl. Kingcusie, 
seven miles from Aberdeen. Br. Fl. Crebston, five miles 



y Google 



492 THE NEW BOTANISTS GUIDE. 

from Aberdeen ; at Remnej, sixteen miles Dortb^vest horn 
Aberdeen. Ft SeoL Witfaip tbree miles of Alfiird, at Co- 
reen, about twenty yards west of tbe fiiotpatb leading from 
Colhay to Dobstone, in tbe nortb opening of a deep dingle 
tiiat passes throo^ tbe top of tbe bin, amongst CaUuna, 
Arbittas Uva-Ursi, and Vaocinimn 'Viti»>Idaea. JBoL Misc. 
(PossiUy someof tbese localities may be witbin Kincazdine- 
sbire.) 

Galium boreaU. Castleton and Braemar Moors. H. W. A little 
above die Bridge of Dee, at Aberdeen ; and between tbis 
bridge and Craiglog ; also at Cbarlestown and Ballater ; 
absent or very rare upon Donside. Nortk. FL 

SoKCHCS alpimms. On Lodi-na-Garr. Em^L FL 

ArAmciA TaraxacL Braemar. Hooker^ gp. I bdiere to have seen 
tbis ^>ecies on Locb-na-Garr, and tbe Avon Hills, but am 
unable, satis&ctorily, to distinguisb it frmn A. autnmnalts, 
even with the aid of authentic specimrais from S^ W. J. 
Hooker, and others, ff, W, 

HnmAcivx alfinwm, Avcm HiDs. ZT. W, 

HaBari. On rocks near Lodi Callater. Emg. Fl Corr. 

- jndmonariwm. Near Aberdeen. Didde, cat. 
' amrantiacMM, At Craigstcm, in tbe neighbourhood of 
Turriffi FL Seta, 
' prctnanikindts. Just below Castleton, on die banks of the 



stream flowing towards the Dee. H. W, sp. Banks of the 

Don, in Braemar. Br. FL 
-palmdosum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, caL Castleton. 

H, W. 
Ckiccs heterophyUms. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, eat. Castleton. 

H. W. 
GKArHAUirM diaicum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. Castleton ; 

Braemar Moors ; Avon Hills. H. W. 
supinmm. Avon Hills; Mountains above Lodi Cal]a> 

ter. H. W. 
AsTKR TripoHum, Near Aberdeen. IHckie, eat. 
Sekecio taraeeiueus. Bank of Eningtur, a stream flowing into the 

Don, FL Scot. 
FriiETHaiTX maritimmm. Sea>diore about Aberdeen. FL ScoL 
DoKOKicux PardaHoMeheg. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
ILoBELiA Dortmanna. In Lochs of Drum and Kinnord; Lo^ of 

Skene. Xortk, FL 
Camtanula JatifoHa. Bank of Don, on the north side of the river, 

a little above Breda, in Alford, with white flowers. Nortk. 

FL Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
Vaccimium OxycoecM. Ben-na-Buiid, at about the height of 650 

yards, ascending from Castleton. H. W. 
— — ^— vHffinoswm. Avon Hills. H. W. 
Vitis'ldUea. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. Castleton ; 

Braemar Moors ; Avon Hills. JJ. IF. 
AaBirrns (7iw- Ursi. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. Braemar Moors ; 

Avon Hills. H. W. 



y Google 



ABERDEENSHIRE. 493 

Azalea procumbent. Avon Hills, in many places, from about 700 
to 11 50 yards; Loch-na-Garr. NoHh, FL 

Ptrola rotundifolia. Near Aberdeen. Dicikie, cat. (Is P. media 
intended here ? It is certainly much the commoner species 
in the Highland districts.) 

— -^ media. Castleton and Braemar Moors. H. W, tp. 

— ^— minor. Castleton. H. W. sp. 

* PoLEMONiuM ccsruletan. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 
CuscuTA europaa. Near Aberdeen. Eng. FL 
LxTHosPERMUM maritimum. A single specimen found in the sand at 

Don mouth ; at the Bay of Nigg ; Aberdour, in Buchan ; 
Peterhead ; mouth of the Ugie. North. Fl. 

* Anchdsa sempervirens. At Aberdeen, near the Rubislaw Distil- 

lery ; Deeside; Old Aberdeen; Hilton; Vale of Alibrd, 
in one or tn^o places ; Den of Auchmeddin ; and various 
parts of Buchan. North. FL 

Stmphytitm tuberosum. At Aberdeen, near Powis* Bum, and on the 
Deeside road, &c. ; near Manse of Alford, and in the upper 
part of the same valley, upon the banks of Don ; various 
parts of Buchan. North. FL 

MrosoTis collina. Abundant at Aberdeen, on the bent hillocks, south 
of Don mouth ; coast of Buchan. North. FL 

caspitosa. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat, 

— ^— ^— secunda. Occasionally around Aberdeen ; abundant in a 
marsh near Guise, Tough ; various parts of the Alford dis- 
trict ; Buchan ; Methlick ; • Aberdour, &c. North. FL 
( Dr. Murray adds this, as another species, to an already 
encumbered genus, in regard to which it may safely be said, 
that no botanist could determine the alleged species, by the 
published descriptions, unless aided by figures or authen- 
ticated specimens. Is it not identical with the next ?) 

repens. Common in the district of Alford. Eng. Bott, Supp, 

LiNARiA repens. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

ScROPHULARiA vcmcUis. In the village of Meithlie. FL Scot. 

Melampyrum syhaticum. West of Aberdeenshire. G. Gordon, sp. 
Woods of Black Hall (Kincardineshire). FL Scot. 

VeroiIica alpina. On moist places at the foot of the steep cli£& of 
Loch-na-Garr. North. FL Ben-na-Buird, on the rocks 
above the small lake, in the ascent from Castleton ; and on 
the mountains above Loch Callater. H. W, 

Ltcopos europaus. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

'Mevtha piperita. Alford. Br. FL 

Ajuga alpina ? Mountains of Aberdeenshire. FL Scot. «* The 
Aberdeenshire plant thus named is given up as a mere 
variety of A. reptans." Anderson's Guide. 

Galeopsis versicolor. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat, Premnay. 
G. Gordon, mss. 

L.AMIUM incisum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

Utricularia intermedia. About twelve miles from Aberdeen, at the 
ed^ of an old lake called the Loch of Drum, and in a 
stream which runs into it. North. FL 



y Google 



494? THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Primula elatior. Buchan, at loTerugie ; and at Slains. North. FL 

Akagallis arveiuu (caeruka). Ferry-hill, near Aberdeen. North, 
FL 

Trixntalu wropacu Near Aberdeen. Dickie, eat, Castleton, on 
the roof of a hou9e ; Braemar Moors ; Avon Hills. H. W. sp. 

Statick Armaria, Near Aberdeen. Diekie^ eat. Avon Hills. H, fV. 

Glaux maritinuu At Aberdeen, on the Old Town Links ; near the 
Suspension Bridge ; at the Cove ; Buchan. North, FL 

Plantaoo maritima. Old Aberdeen Links ; coast of Buchan ; occa- 
sionally a few miles from the sea, as in Belhelvic and 
Rathen ; also in the interior, as in the parish of Rayne ; 
Haddo House, upon the wall of the Deer Park ; in the 
Valley of Alford ; road-side near Sowie-foot, Clatt. North. 
FL 

LrrroBSLLA lacustris. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

Saucornia Jierbacea. On the coast, a little to the south of the river 
rthan. North. FL 

Salsola Kali. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

Chkkopodium urbicum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

Atriplex littoralis. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

FoLTGOMUM viviparwn. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. Castleton 
H. W, 

RuMBX maritimtu. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

OxTRiA renifornds. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, eat. 

Ekfxtrum nigrum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat, Braemar Moors, 
AvonHilL ff. W. 

QusRCUs teetiliflora. Vale of Alford. Encyd. Geogr. and Bot. Misc. 

BxTULA nana. On the ascent of Ben-na^Buird, from the Castleton 
side. H. W. ep. 

Salix herbacecu Avon Hills; Mountains above Loch Callater. 
H. W. 9p. 
- reticulata^ Rocks on the mountains above Loch Callater. 
H. W. 

lanata. Mountains above Loch Callater. H. W. 

glanca. Rocks on the north-east side of Loch-na-Garr. J. 

Macndb, sp, 
' rosmarinifoUa ? Loch-na Garr. W. Stables, sp, 

PiNus syhestris. The forests about Castleton, as around the Avon 
Hills, and Loch-na-Garr, are said to be native ; and I think 
that Mr. MacgiUivray somewhere mentions trees of either 
eleven or thirteen feet in girth, in the neighbourhood of 
Castleton. H. W, 

Triolochin maritimum. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

Habxmaria eUbida. On the ascent to Ben-na-muick-dhu, above Lord 
Fife*s shooting cottage. H. W, 

LinxRA eordata. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat Castleton ; Brae- 
mar Moors ; lower part orBen-na-Buird. H. W. sp, 

GooDTKRA repens. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. and sp, Firwood, 
Deeside. IF. Stables, sp. 

CoNVALLARiA multifloro. At Kingusie, seven miles from Aberdeen. 
Br. FL ^ 



y Google 



ABERDEENSHIRE. 495 

ToFiSLDiA palustris. Lower part of Ben-na-muick-dhu, shortly 

above the shooting cottage of Lord Fife. 
Sparoanium natans. Near Aberdeen. Dickicy eat. 
PoTAMOGXTON fufescens. Abundant in the canal at Aberdeen ; occa- 
sionally in the Don, throughout its whole course ; Corby 
Loch, near Old Aberdeen ; in the Gadie, at Premnay, 
North. FL 

• praUmguB, Loch Kinnord, an old lake in Cromar. 
North. Fl. 
-—- lanceoiatus. Near Aberdeen, in the canal, at Kitty- 
brewster ; Corby Loch ; Lochs of Skene, Drum, and Leys ; 
Buchan. North. FL Peterhead. G. Gordon^ ms$. 
» gramineus. Aberdeenshire. North. FL 



Lc zuLA arcuato. Ben-na-muick-dhu, at the summit, ff. W.spm Ben- 
na-Buird. (Hooker and Greville.) Winch, add, 
  spicata. On a stone wall in the wood above Invercauld 
Castle ; at Castleton : Braemar Moors ; Avon Hills, &c. 
ir. W. sp. 

JuNcus castaneus. Mountains above Loch CaUater. ff. IF, sp. 

trifidus. Avon Hills. H. W. sp. 

higlumis. Cairngorm Mountains (and Links of St. Fergus!). 

FL Scot. 

m^.—^ triglumis. I do not find this marked in my lists, but believe 
it occurs in plenty on the hills of this county, as almost 
everywhere else in the Highlands. H, W» 

ScHGBNUs nigricans. Aberdeenshire. Dickie, sp. About seven miles 
from Aberdeen, in a swamp upon the east side of the road to 
Udny^ near the dark serpentine rocks. North. FL 

Bltsmus rufus. At Aberdeen, on the Old Town Links, but in ex- 
tremely small quantity ; upon the coast a little to the south 
of Ythan ; in Buchan, at St. Fergus. North. FL 

Elbocharis mtUticauHs. In a bog at Smithyhill, Alfbrd ; various 
parts of Donside. North. FI. Abundant in a bog behind 
the Invercauld Arms, Castleton. Excurs, 

— . I. I I paudflora. Near Aberdeen, at the Stocket North, FL 

Castleton, Braemar. Anderson's Guide. Avon Hills. H. 
W.sp. 

SciRPUs mariHmm. In the river Ythan, between EUon and the sea ; 
in the marsh at the north end of the Old Town Links, 
Aberdeen. North. FL 

Eriophorum vaginatum. Near Aberdeen, at Nigg, Brediach, Corbie 
Loch, &c Loch of Skene, Lumphanan, Upper Banchcny, 
higher parts of the Dee and Don ; also upon Morven, Ben- 
nachie, and on the Buchan moors. North. FL Braemar 
Moors ; Avon Hills. H. IF. 

Cakex pauciflora. Braemar Moors, towards the lower parts of the 
Avon Hills. H. W. sp. 

~— — incurva. On a sandy flat part of Aberdeen Links, near the 
mouth of the Don. Eng. FL 

— -^— arenaria. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat, 

intermedia. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, eat. 



yGooQle 



gL 



496 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Caekx Vahlii. On die monntains above Loch CalUter. H. W. $p, 
( Unless memory deceives, the following direction will guide 
to the station, which is quite local: — to keep along the 
stream, which fidls into the head of Loch Callater, until 
reaching a small lake in the mountains, on the ri^t hand ; 
and above this lake, in the bed of a stream which pours 
down the rocks towards the lake, the plant is found. The 
ascent up the stream is very steep. ) 

tereiiusctdcu Near Aberdeen. Enp, FL 

Mielichoferu Summit of Cairngorm ; mountains of Aber- 
deenshire. FL Scot 

capiUaris. Braemar Moors ; and on the summit of the little 

bill immediately behind the Invercauld Arms, Castleton. 
ff. W, $p, 

' rariflora. Bogs, head of Glen Callater. W, Brands, sp. 

' fulva. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, eat. 

- — binervis. Very common on the driest moors about Aberdeen. 
Enp.FL 

— — — — Utvigata. Near Aberdeen. Eng. Fl. 

(Ederi, Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat, 

rigida, Avon Hills. II. W. ip. 

— ptuBostachya, Cairngorm ; Ben-na-miiick-dhu. Eng. Bat. 
Supp. 

Alopecubus alpinut, Loch-na-Garr. FL Scot. 

* agrestis. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. Not indigenous. 

North. FL 

PHLStJM alpinum, Ben-na-Buird ; mountains above Loch Callater. 
H. ir. Loch-na-Garr. North. FL ** 

' arenatium. Rattray Links: near Aberdeen. North. FL 

Calamagbostis Epigejoa. In Braemar, several miles below Inver- 
cauld, on the south side of the river, among wood ; and on 
the north bank of the Dee, about ten miles from Aberdeen. 
North. Fl. 

A IRA alpina. Avon Hills, ff. W. 

Ammophila arundinacta. At Aberdeen, on the sand-hills both south 
and north of Don mouth. North. FL 

Melica nutans. In upland stations, but rather rare, as on the hill 
adjacent to Ballater House ; Corrymulie, Braemar. North. 
FL 

PoA alpina. Summit of Loch-na-Garr. W. Stables, sp. Ben-na- 
Buird. H. W. sp. 

* — aquatiea. In a pond at Breda, in Alford ; but probably intro- 

duced. North. FL 
• maritima. At Aberdeen, between Craiglug and the sea ; Old 

Town Links; coast, south of Tthan; coast of Buchan. 

North. Fl. 
FssTUCA rvbrcu On every part of the sandy coast. North. Fl. 
bromoides. At Aberdeen, on walls about the Old Town ; 

banks of Don, Rubislaw, &c. ; Alford ; Methlie ; Buchan. 

North. FL 



y Google 



BANFFSHIRE* 497 

Bromus secalinus. On the iarm of Mondurno, about 4^ miles from 

Aberdeen. North. Fl 

— — racemosus. Near Aberdeen. Dickie^ cat. 

' veluiinus. Mentioned by Mr. Dickie ; but is rejected by 



Dr. Murray, as an indigenous plant. 

AvsNA sirigosiu Deeside, above Mar Lodge. Br, Fl. 

fatua. Near Aberdeen. Dickie^ cat. 

— alpina. Crater of Craignacoynach ; Inch Mamock, on Dee- 
side ; Inch Roryi above the source of the Don. North. FL 

pvbe$cen8. Near Aberdeen. Dickie, cat. 

Eltmus arenarius. Between the south end of Footdee Square and 
the Pier, Aberdeen ; on the north side of Don, not far' 
from the sea; on the bents at Ugie mouth; Peterhead 
Bay. North. Fl. Coast near Peterhead, if. Brands, sp, 

* LouuM temulentum. On the £arm of Blackhouse near Peterhead ; 
in Buchan, at Philorth ; not indigenous. North. Fl. 

TtLiTicvN Junceum. Rather common at Aberdeen, both to the south 
and north of Don mouth ; Buchan. North. FL 



LXXV. BANFFSHIRE. 

* Anemone apennina. Has undoubtedly become wild at Cullen, an 

old family residence of the Earls of Finlatter. G. Gordon, 

mss. 
Thalictrum alpinum. Glen Avon. G. Gordon, mss. 
Trollius europceus. Avon. G. Gordon, mss. 
SiLENE acauKs. Glen Avon. G. Gordon, mss. 
Sagina maritima. Banff parish. North. Fl. 
RuBUS ChamcBJnorus. Belrinnes ; Corryhabbie ; Binhill of Cullen ; 

Knock of Grange. G. Gordon, mss. 
— — saxatilis. Tomantoul, and Boyncastle. G. Gordon, mss. 
SiBBALDiA procumbens. Belrinnes. G. Gordon, mss. 
RosAtomentosa(mo\yis. E. B. 2459.). Strathavon, Banffshire. FL Scot. 
EpiLOBiUM alsinifolium. Delnabo. G. Gordon,'mss. 

> — alpinum. Belrinnes. G. Gordon, mss. 
CiRCiEA alpina. Holly bank at Gordon Castle. G. Gordon, mss. 

Centre of Banffshire. North. FL 
Sedum viUosum. Botriphine. G. Gordon^ mss. 
Saxifraga steUaris. Belrinnes. G. Gordon, mss. 
— — — aizoides. Craig-halkie. G. Gordon, mss. 
LiGUSTicuM scoticum. On the coast. G. Gordon, sp. 
CoRNUS suecica. Belrinnes. G. Gordon, mss 
+ HiERACiuirf aurantiacum. Several woods in Banffshire. FL Scot. 
Gnaphalium supinum. Belrinnes, and Glen Avon. G. Gordon, m&s. 
Pyrethrum maritimum. Rocks at Down, near Banff. Eng. FL 

Near Macduff FL Scot. 



y Google 



498 THB NEW BOTAKI8T8 GUIDE. 

CaxTAvrnMA Jaeta, Enne. G. Gordomj an*. 

LoBCUA Dortmammtu Lodi Bnflg. G. Gcrdom, mn, 

CAMTAjriTLA latifoKa, Milkmood, near Kchh. ^oKft. jFZ (Hiis 

b the 3fonj localitj, alluded to in the Northern Flora.) 
f perndfolia. Woods near CuDen, apparently indigenous. 

FL SeoL 
Vacciviujc itliffimo$tam. Glen A^on. G, Gcrdom, aut. 
Abxotus ITeo- On. Hills of the moorland aooe [median r^ion]. 

G. Gordom, mos. 
Kt.At.mA procumbent. Near Loeh Avon. G. Gcrdom, jp. 
LmuwmMUM wm riiimmm . Coast. G. Gcrdom, jp. At Banff*, 

among the and at the aea-sidetovardsDovn; mouth of the 

Bum of Boyne. NorHu FL 
Sncramnf tidferoomm. In the Tictnitj of Banff North. FL 
f VKKSASCirv jmtoeruUnimau In a den near Cnllen. Ft SeoL 
GAVEonu veriicolor, Drumin. G. Gordom, ana. 
Pi.AnAflO maritima. Coast of Banff: North. FL 
Gi^ux maritima. BanC North. FL 
Bsrin^A aoiui. Glen Atoo. G. Gordon, nus. 
Salix herbaeea, Belrinnes. G. Gordon, nug. 
Habkvaua aUjida, Enzie. G. Gordon, aut. 
LftrcaA eordata, Belrinnes, and Gordon Castle woods. G. Gordon, 

nus. 
GooDTKaA npeju. Gordon Castle woods. G. Gordon, aus. 
PoTAMOGETov rufescens. Near Park. (Ifr. Wilson.) G. Gordon, 

ms$. 
LvzuijL tpieaia. Hills in Glen Avon. G. Gordon, aus. 
Bltsmus rufus. Boyndie Links. North. FL 
Camet rigida. Glen Avon. G. Gordon, aus. 
Phlkum arenarinm. Near Banff North. FL 
MxLiCA itatoM. Head of Banffihire at Loch BuOg. NorA. FL 



LXXVL ELGINSHIRE. 



I AM inddrted to the Rev. G. Gordon for a catalogue of the plants 
found in Moray, a tract of country including the present county, along 
with that of Nairn, and likewise parts of Ross, InTemess, and Banff 
shires. Several specimens have also been communicated to urn as 
having been gathered in Moray; and the Northern Florm frequently 
mentions Moray, as a locality for different plants. Unfortmiately, 
these general indications are of little avail in making eomnty Hsts. Bir. 
. Gordon's Catalogue, however, distinguishes certain species by a mark 
indicating that they are found in the ** lower part of Elginshire^'* lying 
between the Findhom and Spey, and bounded *< on the south by a 
line drawn from CraigeUachie to Belugas. " These are so noticed in 
the following list. In addition, other localities are named as bdong- 



yGooQle 



gL 



ELGINSHIRE. 499 

ing to this county, which may actually be within the limits of adjacent 
counties ; for in this part of Scotland the shires are so much intersected 
by each other, as to render it almost impossible for a stranger to assign 
all the small places to their proper counties. 

AUTHOaiTT. 

Gordon, cat. A Catalogue of Moray Plants ; those found in the lower 
part of Elginshire. By the Rev. G. Gordon. 



Teoluus eurojxBW, Dovie, &c. G. Gordon, m$$. 

NuPHAA pumila. Loch Ballater, near Aviemore. G. Gordon, $p. 
In a loch on the south side of the road leading from Avie- 
more to Inverness, two miles and a half from the former. 
Excurs, 

CoRTDALis clavicuUOa, Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 

* Cbambe orientcdh. Escaped and wild, but not indigenous, at the 
Bridge of Spey, near Fochabers. G. Gordon, imm. 

Cakile maritima. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat, 

CocHLEABiA onglico. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat, 

daniccu Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 



' granlandica. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
• officinalis. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 



Teesdalia nudicaulis. Link wood. G. Gordon, sp. Alves, and 

near Elgin. W. Stables, sp. 
Ca&damins amara. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat* 
f BsLYsmvK cheiranthoides. Elginshire. (Mr. Eraser.) G, Gordon, 

mss, 
f Reseda bUea. Lower part of Elgin, a doubtful native. Gordon, 

cat. 
Droseba angliea. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
SiLENE angliea. Duffus, and Alves. G* Gordon, mss. Lower part 

of Elgin, perhaps introduced. Gordon, eat. 
—  ^— maritima. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
Saoina maritima. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat, 
Spergula s\dndata. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
Stella Ri A nemorum* Slagginnan, Lynemore, and New Mill of Alves. 

G, Gordon, mss. 
Arknaria pephides. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 

- marina. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
Cerastium arvense. Springfield, Elgin. W, Stables, sp. 
-^— — ^ tetrandrum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
Raoiola mUhgrana. Banks of the Spey, between Fochabers and 

Orton. FL Scot, Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
Astraoalus hypoghttis. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
— — — ^ glycyphyUos. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
ViciA lathyroides. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat, 
Prunus Padus. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
Spir^a salieifolia. Lower part of Elgin, perhaps introduced. 

Gordon, cat. 
Rubus saxatUis. Dunphail, &c. G, Gordon, mss. 



y Google 



500 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

PoTENTiLLA orgenteo. Near Ashgrove. G. Gordon, »p, 

CoMABUK palustre. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat* 

Alchsmilla alpina, Dava. G. Gordon, mss. 

Rosa tpinotiuitna. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 

CincMJL alpina. Sluie. G. Gordon, mss, Spey-side. North. Fl. 

RiBES petraum. Banks of the Spey, above Grantown. North. Fl. 

Sedum anglicum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 

— — > vitosum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 

Saxifkaga aizoides. Sluie. Gordon, mss. 

Chbtsosflenium alternifoUum, Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 

LiGUsncuM seoHcum. Covesea, Stotfield, and Cummingstown. G. 

Gordon, mss. 
liivvMA borealis. Knock of Alves, near Elgin ; Gordon Castle 

woods. G. Gordon, sp. 
Galium boreale. Craigellachie. G. Gordon, mss. 
f Fbdia dentata. Fields near Stotfield and Coltfield, Alves ; not in- 
digenous in Moray. North. FL 
HatBACiUM prenanthoides. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 

- dentictdatum, Sluie, on the Findhom. G. Gordon, mss. 

Kellas. Anderson*s Guide, 
'paludosvm. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
^-^— — sylvaticum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
Lapsana pusitta. Near Innes House ; Corn-field five miles south from 

Elgin. G. Gordon^ sp* 
Htpochjbris glabra. Near Elgin. W. Stables, sp, 
Gnaphalium dioicum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
Aster TripoUum, Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
Ptbethruii maritimum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
Lobelia Dortmanna. Loch Baladren ; Lochindorb. Gordon, cat. 
Vaccikium Vitis-IdtBa, Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. 
Arbutus Uva-Ursi. Pluscarden Hill and Altash; abundant on 

most of the hills of the moorland zone [median r^on] in the 

counties of Elgin, Nairn, Banff, and Inverness. G. Gordon, 

mss. 
Ptbola media. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat. Woods near 

Forres, belonging to the Earl of Moray, i^. Scot. 
minor. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. Woods at 

Brodie House. Fl Scot, 
' seeunda, Sluie, Ardclach, and Briggs ; Lossie Mouth, near 

the sea-level ; banks o^ the Findhom. G. Gordon, sp, 
«— - wniflora. In the oak-wood. Knock of Alves. near El^n. 

Br. FL Fir-wood near Brodie House, by Forres. FL 

Scot. 
Ebtthb^a UttoraKs, Burghead. G. Gordon, sp. Sea-coast near 

Brodie House. FL Scot, West from Burghead. North, Fl. 
LiTHOSPERMUM maritimum. Covesea, Burghead, &c. G. Gordon, 

mss. 
? ASTEAVOO proewnbens. Burghead. (Brodie Herbarium.) G, Gor^ 

don, mss, 
Mtosotis eottina. Lady-hill, Elgin. IF. Stables, sp. 



yGooQle 



gL 



BLGIMSHIRB. 50] 

^ Ai^CBtfSA semperviren^. Lower part of Elgin, perhaps introduced. 

Gordon, eat, 
f Atropa Belladonna. Lower part of Elgin, perhaps introduced. 

Gordon, cat, Kinloss Abbey. North, FL 
f Mentha rubra. Lower part of Elgin, perhaps introduced. Gordon, 

cat. 
* — — Pulegium, Near the church of Bimie. W, Brands, sp. 

Wild, but not native. G. Gordon, nus. 
Lamium incisitm. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat, 
Acivoa vulgaris. Coltfield ; Alves. (Mr. Wilson.) W. Stables, sp. 
Gai^opsis Ladanum. Alves. G, Gordon, sp. Milton-Brodie. 

(Mr. Wilson.) W. Stables, sp. 
Utriculakia intermedia. Lock of Spynie. G, Gordon, mss. 
Tbientalis europaa. Oak-wood, Knock of Alves, Logic, Dunphail, 

Urquhart, &c. &c. G. Gordon, mss. 
CftNTUNcuLus minimus. West from Stotfield ; sides of Loch Spynie. 

North. FL Kinloss. Winch, add. 
Statice Armeria. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
Glaux maritima. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat, 
Plantaoo maritima: Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
LiTTORELLA locustris. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
Saucoania herbacea. Shore below Brodie. (Brodie Herbarium.) 

G. Gordon, mss. Lossie mouth. G. Gordon, sp. 
Salsola Kali. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
CuENOPOoiUM maritimum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
Atriplbx laciniata. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
Polygonum viviparum. Dunphail, Botriphnie, &c. &c. G. Gordon, 

mss. 
OxTftXA reniformis. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
Empetkum nigrum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
PiNus sylvestris. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
Triglochin maritimum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, oat. 
Habenaria albida. Pluscarden, Knockando, and Bimie. G. 

Gordon, mss, 
GooDTBRA repens. Milton-Brodie Wood ; Crookit Wood ; Oak- 
wood ; and Altyre. G, Gordon, mss. Gordon Castle 

Woods. FL Scot. 
LiSTERA cordata. Manoch-hiU ; Oak-wood ; Pluscarden, &c. G. 

Gordon, mss. 
CoNVALLARiA majdlis. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, eat, 
SciLLA vema. Cummingston, Elginshire coast. G. Gordon, mss. 
Sparoanium natans. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
PoTAMOGETON prcBlongtis, Lochindorb. North, FL 

, lanceoUttus. In the Lossie, by Elgin. Br. Fl. 

RuppiA maritima. Kinloss, near the School-house. North, FL 
ZosTBRA marina. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat, 
J UNCUS mariiimus. Near Findhorn. W. Stables, sp. Near Kinloss 

Abbey. (Mr. Wilson.) G. Gordon, sp. 
. balHcus. In great abundance along the sho/e of the Moray 

Firth, from the Nairn to the Spey, and inland along the 



yGooQle 



gL 



502 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

banks of the Lossie, extending seven or dght miles from the 

sea. G, Gordon, sp, Stotfidd, six miles from Elgin* Br. 

FL 
Ebiophorum vaginatum. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat 
'EhEOCUAB.is pauctfiom, Culben sands ^ear Findhom. G. Gordon, sp, 
RhyncosIx)ra alba. At Dyke Moss, north of Brodie House. North. 

FL and W. Stables, sp. 
Bltsmus ru/t(«. Loch of Spynie. G. Gordon, ms9. Common along 

the sands on the Moray coast, and in moorish bogs for some 

hundred feet of altitude. North, FL 
Cabex pauciflorcu Aviemore. G. Gordon, m$s, 
incurva. At Speyslaw ; Borghead ; Culben ; near Innes 

House, Urquhart. G. Gordon, sp. 
— teretiuscula. Loch of Spynie. G. Gordon, sp. 

Psettdo- Cyperus. Elginshire. (Mr. Innes.) G, Gordon, mss, 
ffdva. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
- stricta. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 



fliformis. In a bog near Aviemore. Eng. Fl. 

Ammopuila arundinacea. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 

Melica nutans. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 

PoA aqruOica. In a bum east of Findhom ; and in ditches east of 
Birkenhill. North. Fl. 

— maritima. In Moray, not rare. North. Fl. Lower part of 
Elgin. Gordon, cat. 

Festitca bromoides. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 

— — Calamaria, Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 
- rubra. Lower part of Elgin. Gordon, cat. 

BaoBf us secalinus. Lower part of Elgin, perhaps introduced. Gor- 
don, cat. Cora-fields in Drainy, and at Sp'ynie. North. FL 

AvENA pubescens. Knock of Alves ; Logie. G. Gordon, mss. 

LoLiUM temxdentum. Springfield, near Elgin. W. Stables, sp. Com^ 
field, a mile and half south from Elgin. W. Brands, sp^ 
Biraie. North. FL 

Eltmus arenarius. Stotfield, west of Burghead ; but rare in Moray. 
North. FL 

Tkhicvm Junceum. Lower part of Moray. Gordon, cat. 



LXXVII. NAIRNSHIRE. 

CoBTDALis claviculata. Cawdor Wood. W. Stabks, sp. 
Stellaria nemorum, Ardclach and Cawdor. G. Gordon, i 
Cebastium arvense. Viewfield. W. Stables, sp. 
RuBus saxatUis. . Cawdor Wood. W. Stables, sp. 
Saxifaaga stellaris. Dulsie Bridge. G. Gordon, mss. 
HvpocHiEBis glabra. Cawdor. W. Stables, sp. 



y Google 



INVERNESSHIRE, 50S 

Lrf)SEt.iA DortmanTicL Lochlee. G. Gordon, mss. 
Arbutus Uva-ursi. Nairnshire. G, Gordon, mss. 
Pyrola media. Moor near Cawdor. W. Stables, $p, 

- minor. Cawdor Woods. W. Stables, sp. 
— — secHnda. Cawdor Woods. W, Stables, sp. 
Rhimanthus mtyor. Near Boath (Mr. Brichan) ; farm of M * *, 

parish of Auldearn ; Howford. W, Stables, sp. 
Ltcopus europaus. Bog-side of Boath. Wi Stables, sp. Near 

Cawdor. W, Brands, sp, 
Mewtua sylvestris. Nairnshire* (Mr. Brichan.) W. Stables, sp. 
f LxoNURUs Cardiaca. Kuins of Pennick Castle. (Mr. Brichan.) 

Jf, Stables, sp. 
UTEiceLARiA intermedia. Moss of Inshoch. (Mr. Brichan.) W, 

Stables, sp. 
Trienta LIS euro^Mca. Cawdor Woods. W, Stables, sp. Frequent in 

Nairnshire and all the Northern counties. G, Gordon, mss. 
Centunculus minimus. Sea-coast near Lochlee. W. Stables, sp. 
PoLYCU)KiiM vimpartan, Auchindown. G* Gordon, mss. 
Salicornia herhacea. On the Moray coast, east of Nairn Harbour. 

North. Fl. 
OooDYERA ripens. Cawdor Woods. W. Stables, sp. 
Gage A Ititea. Near Black-hills. W, Stables, sp. 
CoNVALLARiA majaUs. Cawdor Woods. W. Stables, sp. 
PoTAMOGETON pToiov^us. Lochlecj Moss of Litie (Mr. Brichan). 

W. Stabks, sp. 
Jvvcvs maritimus. Lochlee. (Mr. Brichan.) W. Stables, sp. 
  balticus. In great abundance along the shore of the Moray 

Firth, from the Nairn to the Spey. G. Gordon, sp. 
Eleocharis multicaulis. Near Auldearn ^ Lochlee. W. Stables, sp. 

Wet moors, west of Inshoch Castle ; Moss of Litie. North. FL 
Bltsmus rufus. South shore of the Moray ^Firth, frequent. G. 

Gordon, mss. 
Carex incurva. Coast east of Nairn. Wi Stables, sp. 
Festuca calamaria. Cawdor Woods. North. Fl. 
AvEKA pubescens. Boath. North. FL 
L-oLiuM temukntvm. East of Nairn. North. FL 



LXXVIII. INVERNESSHIRR 

Thalictrum fdpinum. Craigue. G. Gordon, mss* On the Red 
Cairn *, and the north and west sides of Ben Nevis, in se- 
veral places. H. W, 

 • The Red Calm is the rough granitic (or sienitic) ridge, northward of the snow* 
rocks on Ben Nevis. I ascended it on the declivity fronting Neptune's Staircase, 
«nd descended it by the precipitous slope, on the contrary dde to Ben Nevis. By 
" west »' is meant the side ascended, and by " north " is to be understood the side 
descended, though iX)t exact to the pc^ts of the compass. 

F S 



y Google 



50if THE MEW botanist's GUIDE. 

T&oLLius eurojkBUM, Badenoeh. G. Gordon, him. Nortii side of 

Red Cairn, up to 950 yards. H, W, 
NuPHAR putnUa, Lochs at Kilhuntly, in Badenoeh. G. Gordon, 

m$9. At Farletter, Badenoeh. AndermnCi GuUk* 
Draba incana, Skye. FL Scot. 
Akabis petriEa, Baikeval, in Rum, abundantly; Ben-na-eailleach, 

in Strath, in the Isle of Skye. Fl. ScoL 
CocHLEABiA offictnolU, North side of Red Cairn ; rocks below the 

snow rocks on Ben Nevis, and above the lake on the west 

side of the hill, at 1200 yards. H. W, 
Viola lutea. At Ruthven, in Badenoeh. North, FL 
jyiAVTHvs ddtoides. Cromwell's Mount, Campbelltown. W^ StaUes, sp. 
SiLENE aeavlia, Glenfeshie. G. Gordon, imm. Ben Nevis, in se- 
veral places, and to the summit of Red Cairn. H. W, 
  ntaritima. At about 2000 feet of elevation on Ben Nevis ; 

again at a height probably exceeding SOOO feet ; Red Cairn, 

at 900 to 1200 yards. H. W, 
f -^— angUca. In a field near CuUoden, in great abundance. 

Excurs, 
Sagiv A maritima. Coast of Skye. FL Scot, Summitof Ben Nevis. 

Eng. Fl. (May not the latter locality be referrible to Sper- 

gula saginoides ?) 
Stella Ri A scapigera. About Loch Nevis. FL Scot, 

— cerastoideM. Badenoeh side of Cairngorm. G, Gordon, ap* 

North side of Red Cairn, and on wet granite (or sienite ?) 

rocks below the snow, on the north side of Ben Nevis^ 

H. W. sp, 
Cerastium latifolium. On the north and west sides of Ben Nevis; 

north side of Red Cairn. H, W, sp. 
— — — qlpinum, Ben Nevis. Fl. Scot, 
Cherleria sedoidea. On Baikeval, in Rum. FL Scot, 
Geranium sylvaticvm. Lower Fall of Foyers. H, W, 
— — ganguinewn. About Inverness. FL Scot. 
Htfericum Androscemtan, Arisaig ; Skye. Anderson** Guide. 
? Orobus niger. Craiganain, near Moy House, has been given as a 

locality for this plant, but several late attempts to find it have 

fidled. Anderson** Guide, 
— — > sylvaticum. Baikeval, in Rum. FL ScoL 
Prunus Padus. About Inverness. FL Scot 
RuBus suberectus. Near Loch Ness. FL Scot. 
saxatUis. Badenoeh. G. Gordon, mss. By one of the 

streams from the snow rocks on Ben Nevis. H. W. 
^— - Chamaemorus. Craigue, Badenoeh. G. Gordon, sp, 
Drtas octopetala. On the limestone rocks in Skye. IL Scot, 
SiEHAhDiA procumbens. Badenoeh side of Cairngonn. G. Gordon, 

sp. Nevis Mountains, at 2000 — 4000 feet. H. W. sp. 
Alchemilla alpina. Badenoeh. G. Gordon, mss. Both the Falls 

of Foyers; Ben Nevi»; Red Cairn; &c. H. W. 
Epilobium aJpinum, Red Cairn; Ben Nevis. H, W. sp. Bade* 

nocb. G. Gorcai, mss, 

' aXsinifdium, Ben Nevis. FL ScoL 



y Google 



INVERNESSHIRE. 505 

CiR€iBA afyina. Lochness and Corpach. G, Gordon, nus. Fall of 

Foyers. North. FL 
Rhodiola rosea. Fall of Foyers, and Craigue. G, Gordon, mss. 

Rocks below the snow on Ben Nevis ; Red Caim. H, W. 
Cotyledon Umbilicus, Near Campbell-town« Fl. Scot. 
RiBxs petroBum. Foot of Craignethie, and banks of the Spey, 

Badenoch. G. Gordon, sp, 
Saxifraoa steUaris, Ben Nevis and Red Caim. JET. W, sp. Bade> 

noch. G. Gordon, niss* 

  aizoides. Rocks by the road-side, within a few feet of the 

sea-level, between Fort William and Loch Leven. H, W. 
— ^^ oppositifoUa, Glenfeshie. Gordon, mss* 

' rimUaris, Shortly below the snow on the rocks of Ben Nevis ; 



near the summit of Red Caim. ff, W. sp. Near the summit 
of Ben Nevis, on the east side ; near the lake on the ascent 
to Ben Nevis. FL Scot, (I should doubt the last locality.) 
  ciBspitosa, Among the rocks, near the summit of Ben 



Nevis* Comp. 

' hypnoides. Glen under the snow rocks on Ben Nevis ; and 



above the lake on the west side. H. W, 
(EvAVTUE pimpineUoides. Isleof Tiree. FL Scot, 
? Petroselinum segetum. Grass-field in the Isle of Tiree. • (Dr. 

Walker.) FL Scot, 

• _____ sativum. Rooks by the sea-side, at Dunvegan, in 

Skye, but near M*Leod*s Castle. FL Scot, 
MstTM athamanticum. North side of Loch Ness. Fl, Scot, 
LiGusTicuH scoticum, Skye. Fl. Scot, 

* Akthriscus Cerefolium, Near Granton, escaped. Jf, Brands, sp. 
CoRNus suecica, Ben Nevis, between the lake and snow rocks. 

H. W, sp, Caimeiler. G, Gordon, mss. About Inver- 
ness. Fl, Scot, 
LiKNJBA borealis. In a fir wood, called Drummond, one mile to the 

south-west of Inverness. FL Scot, 
Galium boreale, Badenoch; Fort William; Glen-morrison. G, 

Gordon, mss, 
HiERACiuM alpinum, Craigue. G. Gordon, mss. Cairngorm. 

Hooker, sp. Near the lake on Ben Nevis. H, W, sp, 

Skye. FL Scot, 
— — — — prenanthoides. Near Pitmain. Fl. Scot, 
Aparoia Taraxcun, Badenoch. G, Gordon, mss. Isle of Skye. 

Eng. Fl, 
Saussurba alpina, Skye ; mountains in Rum. FL Scot, 
Gnaphaliuh dioicum. Near Inverness ; near Neptune Inn, at the 

west end of the Caledonian canal; by the lake on Ben 

Nevis. H, W. The variety " hyperboreum," in the Isle of 

Skye. Br, FL 
— — — — supinum. Red Cairn ; in many places on Ben Nevis. 

H, W, sp, Badenoch hills. G* Gordon, mss, 
Lobblla. Dortmanna, Loch Baladren, near Aviemore. W. Stables, sp. 
Vaccivium VitiS'Idaa, Lower Fall of Foyers ; by the lake on Ben 

Nevis, and under the snow rocks. H, W, 



y Google 



506 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Y Accivivu vUgtnoium, Badenocb. G. Gordon, sp. North side of 
Red Cairn ; north and west sides of Ben Nevis. H, W. sp. 

A&BUTus alpina. By the lake on Ben Nevis ; and on the west side 
of Red Cairn, ff, W. sp. Near Garviemore. fVinehy add. 
On Ben-na-grion, in Skye. Fl. Scot. 
'  UvO'Ursi, Plentiful in several places by the high-road from 
Dulnacardoch to Inverness ; west side of Red Cairn ; Ben 
Nevis, as high as the lake. H, W, sp. Abundant on hilla 
in the Mooiiands. G. Gordon, mss. 

Azalea procumbens. By the lake on Ben Nevis. H. JK sp. Ben- 
vochart, near Inverness. FL Scot. Cairngorm. North. FL 

Pyrola rotundifolia. Banks of the dam at King's-mills, near Inver- 
ness. Anderson's Guide, Culloden Woods. FL Scot. 
  secunda. Farletter and Craignuan. G. Gordon, mss» Cul- 
loden Woods. FL Scot. 

Gentiana nivalis. Inverness. Boui^ huLug, Diss. 

LiTHosPEBMUM matitimum. Fort George. G. Gordon, mss. 

Bartsia alpina. Inverness. JSou^, huxug. Diss, 

Veronica alpincu A few feet from the smnmit of Red Cairn, and 
near the springs below the snow rocks on Ben Nevis. H. W. 
sp. Garway Moor. FL Scot, Mountains north firom 
Loch Erricht, in Badenoch. Jfineh, mss. 

Ajvga pyramidaUs. On Ben Nevis. Fl. Scot. Strath £jrric. JBr.FL 

PiNouicuLA lusitanica. Skye. H. Seot. Ben Nevis. Winch, <mUL 

Utricularia nmior. Corryattachan« in Skye. FL Scat. 

Triemtaus europ<Ba. Near Inverness (Craig Phadrick?) M. Wi 
Field of Culloden. Fl. Scot. 

Statice Armeria. Summit of Red Cairn ; rocks below the snow on 
Ben Nevis. H. W. 

Plamtaoo marititna. North-west side of Ben Nevis, at about 450 
yards of elevation. H. W. 

Chbnopodium maritinntm. Near M'Kennon's Castle, Skye. FL Scot. 

PoLVGONUM viviparum. Ben Nevis ; Red Cairn. If. JK 

OxYRiA reniformis, Ben Nevis ; Red Cairn. If. W. 

Empetrubi nigrum. Plentiful round the lake on Ben Nevis, and ad. 
jacent slopes ; Red Cairn, ff. W, 

Betula nana. Near Aviemore. Hooker,, sp. Caimeiler. G^ 
Gordon, mss. 

Saux Russdiana ? Near Inverness, towards Culloden Moor. H» W. 
sp. 

— arenaria. Glen under the snow rocks, on Ben Nevis ; north 

side of Red Cairn, ff. W, 
— — phittgreifoUa. Glen Tarfe, near Fort Augustus. Eng. Bot. 

Supp. 
— ^ Croweana. Glen Nevis. FL Scot. 

Borreriana. Glen Nevis. Eng. Fl. 

procumbens, Brae-Riach, one of the CEumgorm range. Br. FL 

myrsinites,. Brae-Riach. Br. FL 

— herbacecu Ben Nevis» descending as low as the outlet of the 

lake ; Red Cairn^ if. W. sp. Craigue. G. Gordon^ sp^ 



yGooQle 



gL 



IKVERNESSHIRE. 507 

Habiitaria albida. Badenoch. G» Gordon, nus. Near InTemess. 
FL Scot, 

LisTEEA cordata, Badenoch. G. Gordon, m««. Below the lake on 
Ben Nevis. H, W, 

GooDTE&A repent. Forest of Glenmore. Hooker, sp. Castle Grant. 
(?. Gordon, mss. Wood near Moy Hall, on the road to In- 
verness ; wood at Culloden, near Inverness, sparingly. Fl. 
Scot. 

CoKVALLA&iA majaUs, Badenoch birch banks, clearly indigenous. 
G. Gordon, sp. 

TopiELDiA pahutris. Glenfeshie and Cairneiler. G» Gordwi, mss. 

RupriA maritinui. Glen £lg. FL Scot. 

ZosTxaA nuirina. Sands at Fort George. W. Stables, sp. 

LuzuLA spicata. Siunmit of Red Cairn, and in several places on that 
hill and Ben ^Nevis. H. W. sp, Badenoch. G. Gordon, 
mss. 

JoNcus trifidus. Ben Nevis ; Red Cairn. H. W. sp. 

— — higlumis. Ben Nevis. FL Scot. 

Eriocaulon septangvXare. Isle of Skye. W. Stables, sp. In two 
or three small fresh-water lakes, about a mile west of Loch 
Sligachan, in Skye, but particularly in a small lake called 
Lochna-Caiplick, close to the road-side, between Sligachan 
and Drynoch; and in a sm^ lake by the road-side, leading 
from Sconsar to Giesto, iq Skye. FL Scot. Coll, and a 
few of the neighbouring islands. JBr. FL 

Elxocharis multicaulis. Isle of Skye. Fl. Scot. 

Bltsmus rufus. Skye. Winch, add. 

Ekiophorum vaginatum. Ben Nevis. H. W. 

Carxx pauciflora, Merlentugal, the ascent to Ben Nevis. FL 
Scot. 

— — . puBa. North side of Red Cairn. H. W. sp. Mountain 
about Loch Seavig in Skye. Br. Fl. 

pfuBostachya. Upon rocks on the high mountains of Cairn- 
gorm. Enff. FL 

> rigida. Ben Nevis; Red Calm. H. W. sp, 

  fiiiformis. Bog near Aviemore. FL Scot. 

Alopecurus alpinus. Mountains of the Cairngorm range, near Loch 
Ennich. G. Gordon, mss. 

Fhlxum alpinum. Garway Moor. Fl. Scot. 

AiRA aJpina. Red Cairn; Ben Nevis. £[. W. sp. Cairngorm 
range, near Loch Ennich. G. Gordon, mss. 

FoA maritima. Isles of Oronsay and Skye. FL Scot 
alpina. Near the summit of Red Cairn. H. W. sp. 

FxsTucA Calamaria. Fort Augustus. FL Scot. 

AvENA strigosa. Skye. Br. Fl. 

pubescens. Craigue. G. Gordon, mss. 



w4 



y Google 



508 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

LXXIX. ROSSHIRE, 

Induding Cromartyshire, 

AUTHOBITT. 

Gordorif cat, — Catalogue of Plants observed in Ross-shire. Rer. 
G. Gordon. 



Thalictrum afyinum, Auchterchlow, in the Black Isle, along with 

Pinguicula alpina, among corn-fields. W, Stables, sp, Ben 

Wevis. G, Gordon, mss, 

minus, Nigg. (J. B.)* W, Stables, sp. 

TaoLLius europceus, Auchterchlow. G, Gordon, mss. 

CoRTDALis daviculata, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

Dbaba incana, Nigg. (J. B.) W, Stables, sp. 

f Camelina sativa, Ethie, in die Black Isle. W, Stables, sp, 

AnABis petriea, Freevater. Anderson*s Guide. 

D&osERA angUca, Rosshire. Gordon, caL 

SiLEME acaidis, Freevater. Graham, sp. 

I mariHma. Shore at Kessock. H. W. 

DiANTBus deUoides, Rosshire. Br. FL 

Sagina maritima? Near Bonar Bridge. IF, H. Campben, sp, 

/\.RENARiA peploides. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 

Cherleria sedoides. Rosshire. (G. Smith, Esq.) G. Gordoih 

mss, 
Radiola millegrantu Rosshire. Gordon, cat. Near Invergcnrdon. 

Johnston, mss, 
Uy PE&icvyi AndroscBmum, Loch Maree. (G. Anderson, Esq.) G. 

Gordon, mss. 
Geranium sanguineum. Abundant near Avoch. G, Gordon, mss, 

- sylvaticum. Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 
OxYT &OVIS uralensis, Nigg. (Mr. Brichan.) G, Gordon, mss. On 

a rocky soil at Cromarty. Fl. Scot. 
Astragalus hypoghttis, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

glycyphyUos. Rosshire. Gordon, eat. 

ViciA lathyroides. Rosshire. Gordon, cat 

Prunus Padus. Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

* Sn&JEA salicifoHa. Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

Drtas octopetala, Rosshire. Gordon, cat. On a vast limestone 

tract, called Creg-achnocaen, on the confines of Rosshire and 

Sutherland. Fl, Scot. 
RuBus suberectus. In several places by the road-side, between Ding- 
wall and Kessock. ff. W. 

* *' J. B.'* following the localities commonicated by Mr. Stables, I believe refeca 
to Mr. J. Brichan. 



y Google 



 ^^1^ 



ROSSHIRE. 509 

RoBUs ChanuBmona, Ben Werts. G. Gordon, nui, 
— aaxatUit, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, ** 

Rosa tpinosutima, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 
CoMA&uM poZtMtre. Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 
SiBBALDiA procumbeTu, Ben Wevis. G. Gordon, nut, 
Alchemilla alpina, Freevater. JF, H. Campbell, tp, Ben Wevis. 

G, Gordon, m$». 
Epilobxum aJpinum, Rosshire. Gordon^ cat, 
CiBCAA aJpina, Avoch-wood. G, Gordon, mst, 
Rhodipla rosea, Ben Wevis. G, Gordon, nut, 
Saxifbaoa stellaris, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

• atzoidea, Kilmorach and Rosemurkie. G, Gordon, nus. 
Swampy^ ground by the road-side north-west of Kessock, at 
a slight elevation, ff, W, 

• oppoaitifdia, Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 



* Cabum Carui, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

f Mtbrhis odoraixt, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

LiNN^A borealis. Near Brahan Castle. Br, FL 

CdRNUs suecica, Ben Wevis. G, Gordon, sp, Freevater. — ? 
8p. Corriemoulie, Glascamochi Kinlochluchairt, Achna- 
naut, Achnashun. • North, FL About Loch Broom. FL 
Scot, 

Galium boreale. Ben Wevis. G. Gordon, m$s. Highlands of Ross, 
very common. North, FL 

Apabgia Taraxaci. Ben Wevis. G, Gordon, nus, 

HisRACiUM alpinum. Frequent on the highest mountains. Ander- 
son's Guide, 

—————— dentictdatum, Contin. Anderson^s Guide, 

— — — — sylvaticum, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

— ^-^— paludosum, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

Saussubea alpina, Rosshire. (G. Smith, Esq.) G. Gordon, mss. 

Chic us heterophyUus, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

Gnafhalium dioicum, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

— — supinum, Ben Wevis. G, Gordon, mss. 

? SsNECio paludosus. Rosshire. Gordon, cat, (Has this been acci- 
dentally marked, in the Catalogue, instead of S. aquaticus ?) 

Aster Tripolium. Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

PrRETHRVM maritimum, Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 

Lobelia Dorimanna, Loch Luchairt ; Loch CuUen, &c. North. 
FL 

Va'ccinium FitiS'Id4Ba, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

idiginosum, Ben Wevis. G, Gordon, mss. 



— — Oxycoccos, Rosshire. (G. Smith, Esq.) G, Gordon, mss. 
Arbutus alpina, Ben Wevis. G, Gordon, sp, Freevater. G, 

Macnab, sp. Mountains to the south of Little Loch Broom, 

and between Loch Broom and Loch Mari ; Bennaish, and 

hills in Coygach. FL Scot, 
Azk.'LEA. procumbens, Ben Wevis. FL Scot, Hills of Rosshire. 

North, FL 
Ptrola uniflora, Coul. G, Gordon, sp, 

  sewnda, Torecheltie. G, Gordon, mss. Shady birch woods, 

F 5 



Digitized tjy VjOOQIC 



510 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

among moss, about Little Loch Broom and Loeh Mari« 
Fl Scot, 

Ptkola minor, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 

- media, Rosshire. Gordon, cat, ** Pyrola media, minor, 
and secunda occur frequently in the lower heaths and rocky' 
bums of Ross, Inverness, Nairn, and Elgin shires. ** Andent 
son's Guide, 

LiTHOSFBEMUM maritimum, Rosshire. G, Gordon, nu«* 

f Anchusa sempervirens, Rosshire. G, Gordon, mss, 

Babtsia alpina, Rosshire. Gordon, eat. 

MsLAMFTRUM sylvoUcum, Wooded ravine above the village of Auch- 
temeid^ Strathpe£fer. (Mr. Wilson.) W. Stables, mss, 

JjYcorvs europ<Bus, Margin of Loch Aichaltie» at Craigdarroch. 
(Mr. Wilson.) fT. Stables, mss, Strathpefier, between 
Highfield and Contin, opposite Miryford. North, FL 

Ajuoa pyramidalis. Upon Tor Aichaltie, a hill near Brahan Castle. 
FL Scot. *< This plant has disappeared from its old habitation 
Tor Echiltie, but it is said to have been discovered in other 
places in Rosshire. Its being a distinct species is question- 
able.** Anderson's Guide, ("Aichaltie" and «« Echiltie" 
are probably the same place« What is intended by the 
doubt respecting the present plant being a ** distinct species," 
I do not quite understand. If any qpecies of the same genus 
are to be held distinct from each other, surely this and Ajuga 
reptansare so.) 

Galsofsis versicolor. Rosshire. G, Gordon, mss, 

f Lamium maculatum. Rosshire. Gordon, eat. Road-^de between 
Maryburgh and Bridge-end, near a house. H, If, (Seen 
from 'a stage-coach only, but not likely to have been mis- 
taken.) 

Stachts ambiffua. Near Jane Town, Loch Carron. Fl. Scot, 

OaoBANCHE rubra. On a small island, not far from the mainland, 
Gareloch, Rosshire. R. B. Bowman, mss, 

PiKOUxcuLA alpina. Near Loch Avoch. G. Gordon, sp, Raddley. 
(Dr. Nicholson.) JF. H. Campbell, sp. Bogs of Auchter- 
flow and Shannon, on the Rosehaugh property. Br. FL 
Between Munlochy Bay and Invergordon, in the Black 
Isle. Anderson's Guide. (These descriptions appear to refer 
to adjacent localities, if not to a single one. ) 

— -^— — lusitanica. Abundant in the parish of Contin, or Go- 
vernment Church District of Gurdy, or Kinlochlichart, 
from G^rvie to Achnanault, the very interior of Rosshire. 
North. FL Castle Leod, the only station yet discovered in 
the east of Scotland. (Mr. Wilson. ) G, Gordon, mss. 
Trikiitalis europaa. Rosshire. Gordon^ ecu. 
Statics Armeria. Rosshire. Gordon, tat. 
Plant AGO maritima. Dingwall. H, W, 
LiTTOBBLLA locustris. The Black Isle. W. Stables, sp, 
Chenopodium maritimum. Glen-beg and Loch Broom. H, Scot. 
Salicobmia herbacea, Munlocky Bay. North, FL 
Atbiplex laciniata, Rosshire. Gordon, cat* 



y Google 



ROSSRIRE. 511 

PoLTGONUM viviparum, Rosshire. Gordon, eat. (See Carex ca-> 

pillaris.) 
OxTRiA renifarmis, Ben Wevis. G, Gordon, nus» 
Empetrum nigrum. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 
* Ulmus glabra. Rosshire. FL Scot In the British Flora, Sir. W. 

J. Hooker says that Scotland has only one native species of 

elm, the U. montana. The name of U. glabra is introduced 

into the Flora Scotica of this author on the authority of 

Lightfoot*s Flora.) 
Betula. nana. Ben Wevis. G, Gordon, sp. Moors of Loch Glass. 

FL Scot. Abundantly on the higher hills of Rosshire and 

more northern counties. Anderson^s Guide. 
Salix herhaeea. Ben Wevis. G. Gordon, mss. 
TaioLOCHiN maritimum. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 
Habenaria alMda. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 
GooDTSRA repent. In a wood called Cadue at Dundonald, by Little 

Loch Broom. FL Scot. 
LiSTXRA cordata. Ben Wevis. G. Gordon, mss. 
Mkultis paludosa. South side of a stream above Castle Leod, 

Rosshire. (Mr. Wilson.) W. Stables, sp. Near Freevater. 

Excurs. 
CoRALLORHizA tftnoto. Wood near Contin. G. Gordon, mss. Moist 

hanging wood on the south side near the head of Little Loch 

Broom. Fl. Scot. 
ToTiELDiA palustris. Rosshire. (G. Smith, Esq.) G. Gordon, 

mss. 
SrARGAKiuM natans. Rosshire. Gordon, cat, 
JuNcus halticus. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 

— triglumis. Rosshire. (G. Smith, Esq.) G. Gordon, ms§*^ 

— trijidus. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 
Lnzui.A spicata. Ben Wevis. G. Gordon, mss. 
Eriophorum pnbescens. Near Allangrange. G. Gordon, sp. 

- vaginatum. Rosshire. Gordon^ cat. 
SciRPUS maritimus. Dingwall. G. Gordon, mss. Near Bonar Bridge. 

North. Fl. 
Elbocharis muUicauUs. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 
^— — paucijlora. Rosshire, at Kincardine, near Bonar Bridge. 

North. FL 
Rhvncospora alba. Rosshire. G. Gordon, cat. 
ScHCENUs nigricans. Rosshire. G. Gordon, cat. Black Isle. 

North. FL 
BLYSMUs*rM/*iw. In the neighbourhood of Cromarty. North. FL 
Cakkj. paucijlora. Torechelty. G. Gordon, mss. 
' arenaria. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 

' capiQaris. Bog east of Auchterchlow, in the Black Isle, 
among com fields, with Finguicula alpina, Thalictrum alpi- 
num, and Polygonum viviparum. fT. Stables, sp. 
fidva. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 
— — binervis, Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 
' rigida, Ben Wevis. G. Gordon, mss. 

puUa. Rosshire. (G. Smith, Esq.) G. Gordon, mss, 
w 6 



y Google 



512 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

? Carex strigota. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. (Has the name of tbis 
species been marked accidentally in lieu of Carex sylvatica 
in Mr. Gordon's catalogue ?) 

Alopscurus alpinus. North side of Ben Wevis. AndertoiCa Gtddt, 

Meuca ntUana, Rosshire. G, Gordon, sp. 

PoA marUima, Loch Broom. FL Scot. 

Festuca bromoides, Rosshire. Gordon, caL 

Bbomus secoHnut. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 

Triticum Jvncewn. Rosshire. Gordon, cat. 



LXXX. SUTHERLAND. 

Thalictrum minus. Near Farr Kirk. H. W. 

' alpinum. On the shores of Keoldale, a few miles to the 

westward of Loch ErriboU ; and at the mouth of the Naver. 

Excurs. 
Trollius europ<BU8. Farr. H. W. 
CocHLXARiA officinalis. Shore at Farr. H. W. 
Draba incana. Rocks on the coast, near the ferry, below Betty Hill 

Inn, Farr Kirk ; near Hailam Inn, Loch Erriboll, and on 

the rocky shore of the Loch, almost opposite to the Inn. 

H. W. sp. Kirkton. G. Gordon, mss. Rocks near Inch- 

nadamf. G. Johnston, mss. Assynt; heaths on the east 

coast of Sutherland, near Wilkhouse Inn. Fl. Scot. On 

the shore at the mouth of the Naver. Excurs. 
I rupettris, Ben Hope. Excurs. 

Cakile mariUma. Shore near Farr Kirk. H. W. 
SuBULARiA aquaticom Fonniven. Graham, sp. 
Arabis petrcRa, Ben Hope. Graham, sp. Fonniven. Anderson^s 

Guide. 
Dkobrka anglic€L Oikel. Graham, sp. Near Invershin. W. H. 

CampbeS, sp. Moors near Tongue, Farr Kirk, Armidale, 

and Strathy. H. W, sp. Very common. G. Johnston, mss. 
SiLENE acauUs. I think this was observed, in small quantity, on Ben 

Heeall and Ben Hope. H. W. 
  mariHma. Coast at Farr Kirk, Tongue» and Hailam Inn. 

H. W. 
Sagika maritima. Ruined castle, on the cliff behind the manse of 

Farr. Norih. Fl, 
Sfergula subulata, Inchnadamf. G. Johnston, mss, Ben More. 

W, StaUes, sp, (The specimen from Mr. Stables comes very 

near to Sp. saginoides.) 
»— — saginoides. Ben Hope. Grahasn, sp. 
Arenaria peploides. Coast at Farr and Tongue. H. W., 



y Google 



SUTHERLAND. 515 

AftSMARiA rvheUa. In tolerable plenty on the point of one cliff on 

Ben Hope, probably local. Excurt, 
CxRAsnuM kuifolium, Ben Hope. Graham, sp. Ben' More. 

JF. H. CampbeUf tp, Fonniven. G. Macnab, sp, 
' a^num. Ben Hope. Grahamy sp. 
Cherlsbia sedoides. Near Keoldale. Graham, sp. Ben More. 

W. H. Campbell, sp. In some plenty on the higher parts of 

Ben Hope. H. W. sp. Summits of the hilb at Inchnadamf. 

G. Johnston, mss, 
OxTTROPis uraUnsis, On the bank by the road, just below Betty Hill 

Inn, Farr. ff. W. sp, Armidale and Inver Naver. Fl. 

Scot, 
pRUNus Padus. Road-side near Tongue, and by the side of Loch 

Naver. Excurs, 
RuBUs saxatUis. Clifis behind Hailam Inn, on Loch ErriboU, and 

on the opposite side of the water, nearly in front of the inn. 

H, W. 
— « Chamasmorus, Ben Heeal ; Ben Layhal ; Ben Hope. H, W. 
Rosa spinosissima, Hailam Inn ; Farr ; Golspie. H, W. 

tomentosa (*< mollis E. B. 2459."). Near Durness. FL Scot. 

Drtas octopetala. Assynt Graham, sp. Abundant on limestone 

cliffs about Hailam Inn, Loch Erriboll, and sparingly on the 

bank by Betty Hill Inn, at Farr. H. W, sp. Most abim- 

dant about Inchnadamff. G. Johnston, mss. On a vast 

limestone tract called Creg-achnocaen, on the confines of 

Rosshire and Sutherland; Braes of Inver Naver, and 

common along the coast. FL Scot. 
SiBBALDiA procumbens, Ben More. W. U. Campbell, sp. Ben 

Layhal. ff. W. 
Alcbemilla alpina. Ben Heeal ; Ben Layal ; Ben Hope. IT. W. 
Ptrus Aria, Inchnadamf. W, H. Campbell, sp. Rocks in Assynt. 

W. Stables, sp, 
Efilobxum alsinifolium. West side of Ben Layhal, near Tongue. 

H, W. sp. Ben More. G. Johnston, mss, 

• alpinum, Ben Hope. Graham, sp. West side of Ben 

Layhal. H. W. sp. Ben More. G. Johnston, mss. 
CiKcatA alpina. Behind Inchnadamff. Graham, sp. Base of Ben 

More. G, Johnston, mss. Banks of Loch Erriboll. North, 

FL 
Rhodiola rosea. On the hills about Inchnadamff. G. Johnston, mss. 

Ben Layhal. H. W. 
Saxifraga stellaris. Ben Hope. Graham, sp, Ben Heeal ; Ben 

Layhal. H. W, 
i — aizoides. Road-side near Farr Kirk, and at Tongue. 

H. W. 
— ^— opposxHfdia. Moors about Betty Hill Inn, at Farr : clifl& 

of Loch Erriboll, opposite Hailam Inn; Ben Layhal. 

H. ir.sp. 

- hypnoides. Ben Layhal. H. W. 
CoRNus suecica. Ben Heeal ; Ben Layhal ; Ben Hope. H, W. 

Interior of Sutherland. 'NortK Fl, 



y Google 



514 THE NBW botanist's GUIDE. 

^ISKACI17M alpinvm, Ben Hope. H, W. 

• dentiadaium, KnoU behind the Manse at Farr. Excurt. 

• umbeUatum, Cashel Dhu ; knoll bebuid the Manse at 
Farr. Graham, tp, 

Apaegia Taraxaci ? Ben Hope. Graham, sp. 

Saumurka alpina. Ben Hope. Graham, tp. Hills near Inchna- 

damff. G, Johnston, mu. 
Ckicus heterophyUus, Sutherland. G, Johnston, mss. 
Gkaphalium dioicum. Ben Hope ; Ben Layhal | Ben Heeal ; moors 

above Goslpie. JI. W. sp. 
    supinum. Ben Hope. Graham, sp, Ben More. 

W. H, CampbeO, sp, Ben Layhal, &c J7. W, sp. 
SsHxcro JacobuM (rayless variety). About the kirk at Farr. H. W, 

sp, 
LoBXUA Dortmanna, Head of Loch Hope. Graham, sp, Kylestrome. 

W. H, Campbell, sp. Between Farr and Tongue, in pools 

by the road-side ; near Loch ErribolL H. W, 
.Vaccikium uliginosum. Ben Hope. H. W. 
' VUis-Idaa. Ben Layhal; Ben Hope; moors above 

Golspie. H, W. 
Arbutus alpina. Fonniven. Graham, sp, Ben Hope. G. Maenab, 

sp, Ben Layhal ; Ben Heeal ; moors about Loch Hope 

and Looh ErriboU. ff. W. sp. Most abundant on the 

moors about Cape Wrath. FL Scot. 
' Uva^ursi. Plentiful on the moors, both on the east and 

north coast. H. W, 
AZAI.EA procumbens. Fonniven. Graham, sp, Ben Hope; Ben 

HeeaL ff. W. 
Ptrola unifiora. Dunrobin. G. Gordon, mss, 
LrrHOSFSRMUM maritimum. Abundant on the shores. FL Scot, 
Veronica saxat'dis, Ben More in Assynt. Anderaoris Gtddt. 
PiNoaicuLA lusitanica. Invershin. Graham, sp. Oikel. W. H. 

Campbell, sp. Common in Sutherland. G, Johnston, mss. 

By the road near the Ferry-house, at the north end of Loch 

Hope ; north-cast base of Ben Hope ; moors near Tongue, 

towards Ben Heeal. JS, W. sp. Between Sandwood and 

Cape Rath. KoHh. Fl. 
Utricularia intermedia. Common in the lakes and bogs. Excwrs, 

Bog on Ben More, Assynt; small loch two miles east of 

Farr Church. NoHh. FL 
— — «— — - minor. Occasionally in the bogs ; flowering in a small 

pool near the base of SpeecanconicI^ Assynt. Excun. 
Primula scotica. Keoldale. Graham, sp. Durness. G, Maenab, 

sp. Not very far from the Manse at Durness. North, FL 

On the moor behind Betty Hill Inn, some specimens within 

a few yards of the house. H. W. sp. Pastures by Big- 
house and Armidale. FL Scot. 
Statics Armeria. On the hills at Inchnadamff. G. Johnston, mss. 

Shore at Farr, Tongue, and Hailam Inn ; and on Ben Hope. 

H, W, 
Glaux maritima, Farr. H, W, 



y Google 



SUTHERLAND. 515 

pLANTAGO maritima, Golspie; Annidale; Hailam Inn, Loch 

Emboli, ff, W. 
Atriplex laciniata. Shore near Farr Kirk. H. W, sp^ 
PoLTGONUM viviparum. Near Inchnadamff. G^ Mnston^ ms$. 

About Hailam Inn, and on Ben Layhal. ff, W, 
Empetrum nigrum. Abundant in many places on the bills and moorsj 
as about Golspie, Strathy, Armidale, Tongue, and Loch 
ErribolL H. W. 
* Ulmus glabra, Sutherland. (Lightfoot). Fl Scot, 
QuE&cus sessiliflora. All the oaks I observed belonged to this species. 

G. Johnston, mss, 
Salix herbMea. Ben Hope ; Ben Layhal. H. W. 
— - reticulata. Sparingly on Ben Hope. Excurs, 
Tjuglochin maritimum. Coast at Farr and Tongue, ff, W, 
LisTERA cordtxta. Tongue. H, W, 

Malaxis paludosa. Behind Oikel Inn. Graham, sp. Road-side 
above Invershin ; on the hill behind Oikel ; at Ben Loyal. 
Excurs. (Is tbe name Loyal or Ldyhal9) 
SciLLA vema. Braes of Armidale, and Durness coast. FL Scot, 
Sparganiuh natans. Moors near Armidale, and Loch Erriboll. 

H, W, sp. 
ZosTERA marimu Abundant at Invergordon. G. Johnston^ mss, 
LuzuLA spicata, Ben Hope. Graham, sp, 

JuNcus triglumis, Ben More, Assynt. Graham, sp, Cannisbp. 
W, H, Campbell, sp, 

trifidus, Ben Hope. H. W, 

' balticus, Near the shore, behind Keoldale, in the parish of 
Durness. Graham, sp, Farr and Cape Wrath. Br, FL 
LuzuLA arcuata, Ben More. Graham, sp, Fonniven. G, Macnab, 
^, Summit of Fonniven ; on the ridge leading to the top 
of Ben More, Assynt, from Inchnadamff. Excurs, 
Cladium Mariscus, Near Batcall Bay. W. H, Campbell, sp. In 
a marsh about half-way between Kylestrome and Batcall 
Church. ' Excurs, 
ScHCENus nigricans. Moor near Farr. H, W, Banks of Loch 
Shin, and not uncommon on the west side of the county. 
North, Fl, 
Rhtncospora aJba, Near Loch Hope. Graham, sp, Oikel. W, H. 
Campbell, sp. Near Tongue. H, W, Frequent. G, 
Johnston, mss, 
Blvsmus rufus. Shore southward of Tongue. H, W, 
Eriophorum vaginatum, Ben lieeal ; Ben Hope ; Moors about 

Tongue, &c. H, W. 
— ^— — ptibescens. Ben More. Graham, sp. Not uncommon* 

G, Johnston, mss, 
'Eleochatlis muUicaulis, Sutherland. Hi W. sp, (I believe my spe- 
cimen was gathered very near the bridge below the Inn at 
Tongue.) Between Loch Inchard and Arcle. North, Fl, 
paucijlora. Sutherland. North. FL 
Carex incurva. Sands between Brora and Helmsdale rivers. Fl, 



y Google 



516 THE NEW BOTANISTS GUIDE. 

Scot* In deep loose sea-sand at the mouth of the Naver. 

Eng. FL 
Cakkx. arenaria, Keoldale. Graham, tp. 
m ^ panieea (phaBOStacbyta). Keoldale. Graham, sp, Speecan- 

conicky *^ no doubt of its specific identity with C. panieea.** 

Excurs. 
Umoia (rariflora). Marsh near Loch Hope. Graham, tp* Marsh 

between Oikel and Assynt. G. Macnab, sp. By Loch 

Craggan. W, Stables, sp. Near Oikel, by the road oppo- 
site the west side of Ben Hope ; base of Ben Loyal ; Batcal 

Moss, between Riconick and Old Shore. Excurs. 
puBcu At a considerable elevation on the east side of Ben 

More, Assynt. Excurs, 
— — .- rigida, Ben More. W, Stables, sp, Ben Hope ; Ben Layhal ; 

Ben Heeal. H, W, 
fidva? Old Shores. W, H, Campbell, sp. 
. capiUaris, With Primula sootica, near ibe level of the sea, at 

Durness. Graham, sp. how cll£& by Loch Erriboll. 

ff. W. In abundance at the mouth of the river Naver, and 

forming a large portion of the turf on the knoUs at Durness. 

Excurs, 
' " fiUformis, Fonniven. Graham, sp. Assynt W, Stables, sp. 

Marsh near Laxford. G, Macnab, sp, Oikel ; Riconick ; 

Loch Naver ; on the moor south of Aultnaharrow. Excurs, 
AiBA aipina, Ben More. W. Stables, sp, Ben Hope. H. W. 
PoA aipina, Ben More. W, H, CamjieU, sp, 
AstMOPHiLA. arundinaeea. Abundant in the north of Sutherland. 

North. FL 
AvENA strigosa. Between Bonar Bridge and Loch Shinn. North. 

Fl 
Eltmus arenarius, BalnakieL Graham, sp. Sandwood. W. H, 

Campbell, sp, Durness. G, Macnab, sp. Loch Erriboll ; 

Kyles of Tongue, near the Ferry. H. W. sp, 
Triticum junceum, Sandwood. W. H, Campbdl, sp. Shore near 

Farr Kirk. ff. IK sp. 



LXXXI. CAITHNESS. 

Thauctrum minus. On the north coast, between Sandside and Reay. 

ff. W, 
Drtas octapetaku Caithness. Anderson*s Guide, 
Rosa spinosissima. Sandy coast, near Reay. H, W. 
LiousncuM scotteum. Berrydale. G, Gordon, mss. 
Arbutus Uva^ursL Moors along the road-side westward firom Thurso. 

B. IT, 



y Google 



ORKNEY ISLES. 517 

LiTHOSPKiiMUM maritimvm. Abundant on the shores. 17. Scot, 

AjvoApyramidaUs. On the Ord of Caithness. Br, FL (In botani- 
cal works, the ** Ord " is spoken of as if it were a hill, while, 
in other books, the name is applied to a point of lowland 
projecting into the sea.) 

Primula scotica. East coast of Caithness. FL Scot. On the north 
coast, and by the road-side about three miles westwani from 
Thurso. H, JF, tp. 

Plantaoo maritima. On the north coast. H, W. 

Salix ambigua, Caithness. Eng, Bot, Supp, 

SciLLA verruL Duncansby Head. FL Scot, 

PoTAMOGETON rufcscens. Two specimens brought from Caithness- 
shire, by Mr. Tyacke. G. Johnston, nua. 

Cabex incuna. Keiss Bay. FL Scot, 

Elymus aretuirius. Coast near Reay and Sandside. H, W, sp. 



LXXXII. ORKNEY ISLES. 

Dr. Gillies favoured me with a MS. Flora or Catalogue of Orkney 
plants, drawn up from his own observations, those of Mr. Alexander 
Duguid, the list of plants given in Barry's History of Orkney, and 
Mr. Neiirs List of additional plants observed during his tour. For 
the latter, however, I refer to the Tour, instead of taking them from 
Dr. Gillies's Flora. In addition, the Rev. G. Gordon was kind enough 
to obtain a checked catalogue of Orkney plants, by the Rev. Charles 
Clouston, of Sandwick, Stromness; but that of Dr. Gillies is referred 
to in preference, as usually mentioning the stations of the rarer plants. 
The coincidence of some names, belonging to species very unlikely to 
be found here, with those in Barry's list, induces me to presume the 
catalogue of Mr. Clouston to have been also partly made out from 
Barry's list; and, consequently, that we have not any additional autho- 
rity in support of their existence within Orkney. It appears better 
at once to reject the following : — Arabis alpina, Draba hirta, Silene 
nutans, Orobus niger, Pyrus domestica, Saxifraga ciespitosa, Peuce- 
danum Ostruthium, Melampyrum sylvaticum, Veronica spicata, 
Juncus filiformis, Agrostis spica-venti, Panicum crus-galli. 

AUTHORITIKS. 

Tour, — Neill's Tour in Orkney and Shetland. 
GiUies, cat, — MS. Flora of Orkney. Dr. Gillies. 
Clouston, cat, —Checked Catalogue of Orkney plants. Rev. 
C. Clouston. 



y Google 



518 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Tbalicirum (dpinum. Hoy. GiUUs, cat. 

CpCHLKARiA officinalis. Houses, walls, sea-shore, and uncultivated 
fields. GiBies, eat. 
> danica. Sea-shore. GilUeSf cat. 



— ^— — grcenlandica, Orkney. CloustOH, eat. 

Cakilx maritima. Sanda. Gillies, cat. Not common. Towr. 

Cameuna sativa. Among flax in Westra. Tour. 

DiiABA incana. Hammer Hills, Rowsa. GHUes^ cat, 

DaosxEA angUca. Hoy. Gillies, caL 

longifoUa. Hoy; Scalpa; Rowsa; Shapinsha. GiBieg, cat. 

Rare in Orkney. Clouston, cat, 
SiLKirx aeaulis, (Two localities are mentioned by Dr. Gillies, but I 

am unable to decipher the name of either. H. W. 

1 nuiritima. Common. Tour. 
Akknaiua nuirina, Orkney. Tour. 

- pepUndes. Shore. Gillies, eat, 

CsaAsnuM tetrandrum. Shore at Kirkwall. Jbur. 

lattfciium. Hoy Hills. Ttmr. 

— — ^— arvense. Orkney. (Barry.) Gillies, caL 

Radiola miBegrana. In Eda, abundantly. Tour. Shapinsha. GiU 
lies, cat. 

Htfeucum dodes. Rackwick, Hoy, rarely. Tour. 

GERAmjJU sylvaiicum. Orkney. (Barry.) GiBies, caL 

? liATHYKJJs pisifomds. On the shore. (Barry.) Gillies, cat. 

Rosa iSin^'nt (Doniana). Abundant in Orkney. Dr. GiUies. FL Scot. 

' tomentosa. Orkney. GiBies, cat. 

-— viBosa. Trumbland Bum, Itowsa. Tour. 

~—~ spinosissinuu Orkney. GiBies, cat. 

Detas octopetala. Hoy Hill, scarce, douston, cat 

PoxENTiLLA ar^enteo. Orkney. (Barry.) Gillies, cat. Rare. Clous^ 
ton, caL 

CoMARUM palustre, Orkney. Gillies, eat, 

RuBus saxaiiHs. Rare. Cloustm, axt. 

CiacAA alpina. Orkney. Gillies, cat. (Two localities are men- 
tioned, but both names are illegible, the ink being pale.) 

Mt&iophtllum verHdBatum. Lock of Airie, Stronsa. 2bicr. 

Rhodiola rosea. Hoy HilL Clouston, cat. . 

Saxifeaga oppositifolia. Hoy Hill. Clowton, caL 

— — — aizoides. Dwarfy stone, Hoy Hill. Tour. 

— ^— hypnoides. Hoy Hills, plentifully. Tour. 

LiousncuM scoticum. Scalpa. GiBies, eat, 

Gauum horeale. Orkney. GiBies, caL 

Ijactuca virosa. Rare. Clouston, eat, 

GvAVHjLhwvL dioicum. Upland pastures. GiBies, caL 

PraxTHauM maritimum. Not uncommon. Tour. 

Aebutus Uva-ursu Hoy Hill. Clouston, cat. 
  alpina. Wart Hill of Hoy. Tour. 

Axalxa proeumbens. Hoy HilL Clouston, caL 

2 PraoLA rotundifolia. Among the shrubs at Berrydalc* in Hoy. 

Gillies, eat. Is it not more likely to be media or Mtaor ? 
LiTHospxBMUM moritimum. On the shore below the Manse of Wales. 



y Google 



ORKNEY ISLES. 519 

GWieSy cat. Rare. Clouston, cat ** Abundant on the 
shores of Sutherland, Caithness, and Orkney.'* FL Scot, 

Stachts ambigua. £die Manse. Gillies, cat Hoy, Stronsa, and 
other Orkney Islands. FL Scot. 

Galeopsis Ladanum, Orkney. Gillies, cat. 

AjUGA pyramidalis, Orkney. Excurs, 

"PiVGUicxji^A lusitanica? HUls of Waes and Hoy. (Barry.) Tour, 
(Barry mentions Pinguicula alpina, and omits the P. lusita- 
nica ; but the latter appears more likely to be the species.) 

Pkimula scotica, Orkney. Hooker, sp. Between the House of Clet 
and the New Church, in Westra. Tour. Sanda. Gillies, 
cat. (The localities are given for P. farinosa, but doubtless 
P. scotica is intended. ) 

-^— etatior. Rare in Orkney. CUmtton, cat, 

Statice Armeria. Shore. Gillies, cat. 

Plantago maritima (minor). By the house of Skail, Pomona. £r, 
Fl. — P. maritima. Orkney, douston, cat. 

LiTTORELLA lacustris, Orkney. (Plantago uniflora, of Barry.) 
Tour. 

Glaux maritima. Meeting of the salt and fresh water at the Bridge 
of Weath ; Woodwick, &c^. Gillies, cat. 

Atriflbx laciniata. Rare. Tour. 

Beta maritima. On some of the shores. Tour, 

? RuMEX maritimus, Orkney. Gillies, cat, 

OxTBiA reniformis. Hoy. Gillies, cat, 

Empetrum nigrum. Common. Tour. 

Salix prunifoHa, Hoy. Tour. 

arbuscula. Rowsa and Hoy. Tour. (I am unable to say 

what species of the British Flora authors usually intend by 
this name. It appears to have been applied both vaguely 
and variously. S. angustifolia and S. latifolia, of Barry, are 
equally puzzling. JET. W, ) 

— — arenaria. Wart Hill, Shapinsha. Tour, 
' aquatica. Orkney. Tour. 
  fiuca (argentea). Downs of Sanda. Tour. 
' herbacea. Hammer Hills, Rowsa. Gillies, cat. 
- ambigua. Orkney. Eng. Bot. Supp. 

Triglochin maritimum. Deerness. Tour. Rowsa. Gillies, cat, 

Habenaria aUnda. Meadows in the Hills of Hoy. Gillies, cat, 

LisTERA cordata. In a valley in Hoy. GWes, cat. 

SciLLA vema. In many places ; three plants of it on the top of the 
Wart Hills of Hoy, not far from the rock called the Old 
Man of Hoy, at an elevation of 800 or 1000 feet above the 
sea. Gillies, cat. 

3parganium natans. Pond between Berrydale and Rackwick. GiUies, 
cat. (Other localities for it are mentioned by Dr.' Gillies, 
but I am unable to read the manuscript names of the 
places.) 

PoTAMOGXTON gramiueus. Orkney. GiUies, cat. 

Eriophorum vaginatum, Orkney. Gillies, cat, 

Eliocharis paudflora. Hoy Hills, plentifully. Tour, 



yGooQle 



gL 



520 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

? EuocHAEis aeictdarit. Orkney. (Barry.) GUHet, cat. 

Ca&sx arenariti, Orkney. Tour. 

btnervis. Among heath in Hoy. GiUiet, eat. 

ftdva. Orkney. Tomr. 

— ^— extensa. Orkney. Tour, 

  gtricta. Kirkwell. GUHesy cat. 

PoA mariiima. Common. Tour. 

Fbstuca rubrcu Orkney. GUHet, eat. 

? Bromus nuemotus. Near Kirkwall. GiOieM^ cat. 

f AvENA yohco. In fields, along with A. strigosa, which is cultivated. 
Tour, 
pubescens. Giiills of Scalpa. 2bicr. 

Ammovhila arumdvMcea. Common in Orkney. Tour. (It is sug- 
gested, by Neil], that this is the plant called Elymus i 
rius in Barry's History.) 

Eltmus ttrenarius. Shore at Scalpa. GUUea, cat. 

TuTicuM loUaceum. Orkney. (Barry.) GiUies, caL 



LXXXIIL SHETLAND ISLES.* 



CocHLSARiA danica. Western shore of Brassay Island. NeSTs Tour. 

DiANTHUs ddtoides. Island of Vailey, observed by Mr. G. White. 
NeilTs Tour. 

AtxhEA proeumbens. Shetland. (Mr. Hewitson.) R. B. £oumianf8p. 

TuEVTAUs europaa. Shetland. (Mr. Hewitson.) R. B. Bowman^ sp. 

Beta marUinui. In great plenty on the western shore of Brassay Is- 
land. NeHTs Tow. 

SciLLA vtma. Near Lerwick, and in Brassay Island ; in profusion 
on the Knab, a projecting eminence at the entrance of 
Brassay Sound. NeUTa Tour, 

Bltsmus rufua. Brassay. FL Scot. 

Caksz ineurva. Discovered by the late Dr. Hope, at the mouth of 
the water of Naver, and near Skelherry, in Durrsness, 
Shetland. FL ScoL 

• I should feel much hidebted to anybotaniit who would firour me with an ac- 
curate list of the plants of Shetland. H. W. 



y Google 



521 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES, 



AND 



REFERENCE TO THE COUNTIES 



UNDER WHICH THIT ARE MBNTIOKZD. 



* Clematis ViUdba, Edinburgh. 

Thalictrum alpinum, Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, 
Banff, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 

  minus. Kirkcudbright, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Ar- 

gyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Ross, Sutherland, Caithness. 

_— ~— - majus. Kirkcudbright, Ayr, Roxburgh, Berwick, Fife, 
Aberdeen. 

* Anemone apennina, Banff. 

* Adonis autumnalis. Lanark, Edinburgh. 
Ranunculus alpesiris, Forfkr. 

  » Flammula (reptans). Dumfries, Fife. 
Trollius europaus. Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edin. 

burgh, Dumbarton, Perth, ForfiEir, Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, 

Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, 
f Helleborus viridis. Ayr, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh. 

* Delphinium Consolidcu Edinburgh. 

* AcoNiTUM Napellus, Lanark. 
AcTiBA spicata, Fife. * 

* Efimedium alpinum. Edinburgh ? Fife, Stirling, Dumbarton. ^ 
IJ V2HAK pumila. Lanark, Stirling, Argyle, Elgin, Inverness. 

* Papaver somniferunu Forfar. 

f Mecokopsis cambrica, Edinburgh, Fife. 
Chelioonium majus (laciniatum). Dumbarton. 
Glaucxum luteum. Wigton, Roxburgh? Berwick, Haddington, 
Edinburgh, Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle. 

* The reference is to Fifethire, although the station of this plant is within Kin- 
ross-shire, which is joined to Fifeshire, in the county lists. The same occurs with a 
few other species. 



y Google 



522 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CorYdaus tkLvieulatiu Dumfries, Renfirew, Berwick, Edinburgh, 

Dumbarton, Perth, Aberdeen, Elgin, Nairn, Ross. 
FuMARiA parmflorcu Edinburgh. 
' Nasturtium gylvestre, Dumfries, Berwick, Edinburgh, Aberdeen. 
Barbarba iTToecox. Bcrwick, Edinbiu*gh. 
TuRRiTis glabra, Dumbarton. 

Arabis j9e^«ea. Argyle, Perth, Aberdeen, luTemess, Ross, Suther- 
land. 

t Turrita. Fife. 

— — ^ ciliata. Forfar. 

CARnAMiNE amara, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Stirling, Aber- 
deen, Elgin. 
— ^.^— impatiens, Ayr, Lanark. 
DniTARiA buHnfera, Ayr, Edinburgh ? Perth, 
f Altssuh caljfcintim. Haddington, For&r. 
* KoNiOA fHariiima, Aberdeen. 
f Draba muraUs. Edinbiurgh ? Forfar ? 

incana, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Inverness, Ross, Suther- 
land, Orkney. 
»— — — rupestris. Perth, Aberdeen, Sutherland. 
  vema (var.). Perth. 

Cochlearia officinalis, Man, Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, 
Edinburgh, Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aber- 
deen, Elgin, Inverness, Sutherland, Orkney. 

. grcenlandica, Man, Forfer, Aberdeen, Elgin, Orkney. 

• danica, Berwick, Edinburgh, Argyle, Aberdeen, Elgin, 
Orkney, Shetland. 
  anglica, Argyle, Forfer, Elgin. 



Thlaspi aJpestre, Forfar. 
Teesdalia nudicauKs, Ajrr, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwidc, Perth, 
Forfer, Aberdeen, Elgin. 

* Iberis amara, Lanark, Roxburgh, Fife. 

Cakilx maritima. Man, Ajrr, Berwick, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, 

Elgin, Sutherland, Orkney, 
f Hesperis nuarmudi*, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Forfer. 
SiSTUBRiUM Irio, Berwick. 

f Erysimum cheiranthoidea, Man, Linlithgow, Argyle, Elgin, 
f Camxuha saiiva, Ayr, Lanark, Edinburgh, Fi^ Argyk, Forfar, 

Ross, Orkney. 
Lepidium Smithii, Man, Wigton, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, 

Dumbarton, Perth, Forfer, Aberdeen. 

latifdiwnu Lanark? Fife. 
IsATis tinctoria. Argyle. 

f Brassica oleracea. Edinburgh, Fife, Stirling. 
— — campestrit, Edinburgh, Fife, Argyle, Forfer. 
— monetuis. Man, Wigton, Dumfries, Ayr, Argyle, Forfer. 
f SiNAPis tenuifolia, Berwick, Fife. 

• -^— muralts, Fife. 

Crambx nuaritima, Man, Wigton, Kirkcudbright, Berwick, Linlith- 
gow, Argyle. 
• oriaUaKs, Elgin. 



y Google 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 523 

Raphakus maritimus. Wigton, Ayr, Argyle. 

SuBULAKiA oquaHca. Fife? Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Aberdeen, 
Sutherland. 

• KoKiOA mariiima, Aberdeen. 

Reseda lutea, Edinburgh, Fife, Perth, Forfar, Elgin. 

+ " fruticulosa, Man. 

Viola lutea, Man, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fif«^ 

Stirling, Argyle, Perth, For&r, Aberdeen, Invemesi. 
   lactea ? Peebles. 
flavicomis. Edinburgh. 
Dbosera longifdia, Renfrew, Dumbarton, Orkney. 
— — anglica, Kirkcudbright, DumfHes, Berwick, Dumbarton, 

Argyle, Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 
DiANTHUs Armeria, Perth, Forfar. 
— deltoides. Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Forfer, 

Inverness, Ross, Shetland. 

• — — ^ barhaius, Edinburgh. 

SiLENE acaulis. Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banfi^ 

Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 
' maritima, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlith- 

gow, Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle, Aberdeen, Elgin, Inverness, 

Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 
' anglica, Haddington, Fife, Perth, Forfar, Elgin, Inverness. 

— conica. Haddington, Forfar. 
— — nutans. Fife, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

  nociiflora, Haddington, Fife, Forfar. 
Lychnis Viscaria, Edinburgh, Fife, Perth, Forfar. 
— — — alpina^ Forfar. 
Saoina maritima, Man, Ayr, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, 

Fife, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, Inverness, Ross, 

Sutherland. 
Elatinb hexandra, Perth, 
Spkboula subidata. Man, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Perth, Forfar 

Aberdeen, Elgin, Sutherland. 
— • saginoideit, Perth, Forfar, Sutherland. 
Stellabia nemorum, Renfrew, Lanark, Edinburgh, Dumbarton, 

Forfar, Elgin, Nairn. 

  tcapigera. Perth, Inverness. 

— — — ceraatoides, Perth, Aberdeen^ Inverness. 

Akt^vxkia peploides. Man, Berwick, Edinburgh, Dumbarton, Forfar, 

Elgin, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 
  marina. Man, Renfrew, Berwick, Haddington, Fife, 

Dumbarton, Forfer, Elgin, Orkney. 

  vema. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Perth. 



- rubella. Perth, Sutherland. 
'tenuifolia. Edinburgh? Fife? 
'fastigiata. Fife, Forfar. 



Cbrastium arvense. Man, Roxburgh, Berwick, Haddington, Forfar, 
Aberdeen, Elgin, Nairn, Orkney? 

• tetrandrtim. Man, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Fife, 
Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Orkney. 



yGooQle 



gL 



524 THE NSW botanist's guide* 

CcKASTiuM a^num, Stirling, Perth, Forfiur, Inverness, Sutherland* 
»—-«—- laHfoKum, Stirling, Dumbarton, Perth, For&r, Aberdeen, 

Inverness, Sutherland, Orkney. 
Cbxrlxbia sedoides. Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Wbrtar, Inverness, 

Ross, Sutherland. 
LiKUM angustifolium, Man. 
Radiola miOegrantu Man, Ayr, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Fife, 

Dumbarton, Argyle, Porth, For&r, Kincardine, Aberdeen, 

Elgin, Ross, Orkney. 
Lavatera (Chorea, Man, Haddington, Fife. 
f Althjia officinalU. Kirkcudbright, Stirling. 
• TiUA grandifoiia, Berwick, Perth. ^ 

f Htpebicum barbaium. Perth. 

— ^ dubium, Lanark, Perth. 

, elodes. Man, Wigton, Kirdcudbright, Dumbarton, 

Argyle, Orkney. 

• AndrotiBmum. Man, Wigton, Renfrew, Berwick, Dum- 



barton, Argyle, Inverness, Ross. 
Gerakium sanguineum, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Argyle, 

Perth, For&r, Aberdeen, Inverness, Ross. 
f pyrenaicwn, Edinburgh, Argyle, Perth. 
st/lvaticum. Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, £din« 

burgh, Argyle, Perth, For&r, Aberdeen, Inverness, Ross, 

Orkney. 
f -^- pfuBum. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Fife, 

Forfar, Aberdeen. 
EaoDiuM moschatum, Haddington. 
— — maritimum, Man, Wigton. 
f Impatiens NciUme'tangere, Lanark, 
f OxAUs cornicukUa. Lanark, Stirling. 

* Staphtlea pinnata, Lanark, Edinburgh. 
Rhamnus catharticuB, Dumfries. 

— — Frangvia, Ayr. ' 

Ulez nanus. Wigton, Kirkcudbright, Edinburgh ? Forfer. 

Ononis spinosa. Man, Ayr, Edinburgh, Dumbarton. 

f ^— redinata, Wigton. — 

* Medicaoo Mtiva. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, 

Forfar. 

f nuxeukOa, Fife. 

f . denticulata, Aberdeen. 

f Mbulotus hucantha, Man, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh. 

Lotus tenuis. Berwick, Edinburgh, Forfar. 

TairouuM ornithopodioides. Ayr, Edinburgh, Fife, Forfar. 

— — — ^ scabrum. Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Fife, Forfkr. 

Astragalus alpinus. For&r. 

-««-> hypoghUis. Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Fife, 

Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Iloss. 
• glycyphyUos. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, 



Fife, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross. 
OzTTRons campestris. Forfer. 



y Google 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 525 

OxYTaopis uralensis, Wigton, Fife, Argyle, Forfar, Ross, Suther- 
land. 

HiFPOCREPis comosa. Ayr. 

ViciA angusHfotia. Man, Ayr, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Aberdeen. 

lathyroides. Man, Ayr, Berwick, Edinburgh, Dumbarton, 

Perth, Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross. 

lutea. Ayr, Fife, Forfar, Kincardine. 

* Latutrus Aphaca. Edinburgh. 

sj/lvestris. Berwick, Edinburgh, Argyle, Forfar. 

* - latifolius. Kirkcudbright. 
? ^— — — ptsiformis. Orkney ? 

Orobiis sylvaticus. Dumfries, Lanark, Peebles, Berwick, Edin- 
burgh, Fife, Forfar, Inverness. 
— — niger, Forfar, Inverness? 

* PftUNus domestica Man, Lanark, Edinburgh, Forfar. 

^— — >- Padus. Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edin- 
burgh, Stirling, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Inverness, Ross, 
Sutherland. 

* SpiRiBA salicifoUa. Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edin- 

burgh, Linlithgow, Fife, Forfar, Elgin, Ross. 

Dayas octopettUa. Ayr, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Inver- 
ness, Ross, Sutherland, Caithness, Orkney. 

RuBUS 9uberectu8. Dumfries, Renfrew, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, 
Forfar, Aberdeen, Inverness, Ross. 

-^ carpinifolius. Man, Fife. 

Koehleri. Man, Berwick. 
mocrophgllus. Dumfries, Berwick. 

. saxatilis. Man, Kirkcudbright, Lanark, Berwick, Edin- 

burgh, Dumbarton, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, 
Nairn, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 

'- — ChanuBmorus, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh, 

Stirling, Dumbarton, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, In- 
verness, Ross, Sutherland. 

? arcticus. Argyle ? Perth ? 

* Fragaria elatior. Lanark. 

* PoTENTiLLA ./he^icoaa. Lanark. 
— — — tridentata. Forfar. 

argentea. Berwick, Edinburgh, Perth, Forfar, Elgin, 

Orkney. 

verna. Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Forfar. 

alpestfis. Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

opaca. Perth, Forfar. 



CoMARUM palustre. Man, Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, 

Edinburgh, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross, Orkney. 
SiBBALDiA procumbens. Stirling, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, 

Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 
Alchemilla atpina. Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdei.i, 

Elgin, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 
Sanguisorba officinalis. Kirkcudbright, Dumfries, Roxburgh, 

Berwick. 
• Rosa cinnamomea. Ayr. 

VOL. II. G 



yGooQle 



gL 



526 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE, 

Rosa spinotissima. Man, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Fife^ 

Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross, Sutherland, Caithness, Orkney. 
— . rtibeOa, Aberdeen. 

  invchita. Argyle, Perth. 
..— . Sdbini (including R, Doniana)r Edinburgh, Argyle, Perth, 
Forfer, Orkney. 

viOota, Lanark, Orkney. 

tomentoaa. IMan, Renfrew, Berwick, Edinburgh, Dumbarton, 

For&r, Aberdeen, Banff, Sutherland, Orkney. 

inodora. Edinburgh. 

— — — canina. (varieties, sarmentacea, dumetorum, and Forsteri)^ 
Berwick. 

oBsia. Berwick, Argyle, Perth, Forfer. 

sygtyUi. Forfar. 

Ptrus communis, Lanark, Forfar. 

Aria. Lanark, Edinburgh, Sutherland. 
  pinnatifida. Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar^ 

* (Enothera biennis. Reniirew. 

Epilomum alpinum. Stirling, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, In- 
verness, Ross, Sutherland. 

  ahinifclium. Dnmfries, Berwick, Perth, Forfiu, Banff^ 
Inverness, Sutherland. 
roseum. Forfar. 



CiRCiBA afpina. Lanark, Edinburgh ? Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, 
Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, InvemesSy 
Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 

Myriophyllum verticilkaum, Orkney, 

Ceratophtllum demersum. Edinburgh, For&r. 

— — — ^— subniersum ? Edinburgh. 

Sc LE R A NTHUS pevennis. Forfar. 

Seddm anglicum. Man, Renfrew, Berwick, Fife, Stirling, Dumteu'-^ 
ton, Argyle, Forfar, Elgin. 

— dasyphyUum, Edinburgh. 

* album. Perth, Forfar. 

villosum. Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlith- 
gow, Dumbarton, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banfl^ Elgin. 
  rupestre, Wigton. 

Rhodiola rosea, Man, Berwick, Stirling, Argyle, Psrth, Forfar, 
Inverness, Ross, Sutheriand, Orkney. 

Cotyledon Umbilicus, Man, Ayr, Argyle, Inverness* 

f RiBEs nigrum, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Argyle. 

f ndrrum, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Argyle. 

• petrcBum^ Perth, Forfeir, Aberdeen, Elgin, Inverness. 

alpinum. Renfrew, Lanark, Edinburgh. 

Chrysosplekium aUemifdium^ Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edin- 
burgh, Perth, Forfar, Elgin, 

* Saxifraoa umbrosa, Renfrew, Lanark, Edinburgh, Perth. 

" — Geum. Lanark. 
' ateUaris. Berwick, Stirling, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, 

Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, Nairn, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, 
nivalis. Stilling, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen. 



y Google 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 527 

Saxipraga oppoiitifclia. Lanark, Stirling, Perth, Forfar, Inverness, 
Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 
' Hirculus. Berwick, Haddington. 

— — aizoides, Man, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, 
Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, InTerness, Ross, Sutherland, Ork- 
ney. 

riwlaris, Perth, Aberdeen, Inverness. 

— — — — cerntta. Perth. 



— c€Bspito8a. Perth, Aberdeen, Inverness. 

— hyjmoides. Renfrew, Berwick, Edinburgh, Perth, Forfer, 
Inverness, Sutherland, Orkney. 

— latevirens. Stirling, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen. 
->> platypetala. Forfar. 

— dongeUa. Forfar. 
- pedcLtifida. Forfar. 



CicuTA virosa. Dumfries, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh , 
Fife, Stirling, Dumbarton, Forfar. 

Apium graveolens. Wigton. 

? Pktroselinum segetum. Inverness ? 

» sativum. Lanark, Edinburgh, Fife, Inverness. 

Hklosciadium repens. Wigton ? Kirkcudbright, Haddington, Edin- 
burgh, Aberdeen. 

SisoN Amomum. Berwick. 

f Cakum Carui. Man, Lanark, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Argyle, 
Forfar, Aberdeen, Ross. 

verticillatum, Man, Wigton, Kirkcudbright, Dumfries, 

Renfrew, Dumbarton. 

SiuM latifolium. Haddington, Edinburgh, Stirling. 

? (Enanthb peucedarUfolia. Wigton ? Kirkcudbright ? 

pimpineUoides. Man, Kirkcudbright, Renfrew, Hadding- 

ton, Dumbarton, Argyle, Inverness. 
  apiifolia, (Omitted, as being identical with (E. crocata.) 
PheUandrium. Berwick, Edinburgh. 



FcEKicuLUM vtdgare. Man, For&r, Aberdeen. 

LiousTicuM scoticum, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Fife, Aber- 
deen^ Banff, Elgin, Invei-ness, Caithness, Orkney. 

&LAU8 pratensis, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh. 

Mkum athamanticum. Kirkcudbright, Renfrew, Lanark, Linlithgow, 
Dumbarton, Perth, Forfer, Aberdeen, Inverness. 

Cbitbmum maritimttm. Man, Wigton, Kirkcudbright, Ayr, Hadding- 
ton? Edinburgh? 

PxuciDANUM />aZu«^e. Edinburgh, Dumbarton. 

f — ^— — Ostruthium. Lanark, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Fife, 
Dumbarton, Argyle. 

Daucus maritimus. Argyle. 

ToftiLXs infesta, Edinburgh ? Argyle. 

* Anthriscus Cerefolium. Lanark, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Inverness. 

f Chjirophtllum aureum. Edinburgh, Forfar. 
  aronuxticum. Forfar. 

Mtrrhis odorata. Man, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, 
Fife, Dumbarton, Forfar, Aberdeen, Ross, 
o 2 



y Google 



528 THE NEW BOTANIST S GUIDE. 

SmetrkiuB Olusairum, Ayr, Berwick, Haddington, Edinbnrgh,. 

Fife, 
f CoRiAKDRUM sotivum, Lanark, Aberdeen. 
Brfngium marittmum. Kirkcudbright, Ayr, Haddington, Edin- 

burgh, Argyle, Forfar. 
CoaKus suedca, Berwick, Edinburgh? Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, 

Banff, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, 

* LoKicERA CaprifoKum, Renfrew, Edinburgh, Linlithgowr 
Viburnum Lantana, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Haddington^ 

Edinburgh. 
LiNNAA borecdis. Edinburgh, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgiur 

Inverness^ Ross. 
? RvBiA peregrina. Argyle? 
Gauvm erectum. Edinburgh? Forfar. 
_— — cinereum. Forfiw. 
- aristatum, Forfar. 

. ^pusillum, Peebles* Edinburgh, Stirling, Forfar, 

-..^— taccharatwur Perth, Forfar. 

— -- spurium, Forfar. 

boreale, Kirkcudbright, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Duni' 

barton, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Inverness, 

Ross, Orkney. 
Fedia dentata. Wigton, Roxburgh, Haddington, Edinburgh, Fife, 

Forfar, Elgin. 

* Valeriana rubra. Edinburgh. 

# — pyrenaic€k, Renfrew, Lanark, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, 

Fife, Perth. 

* Dipsacus FuOonum. Lanark, Berwick, Fife. 

Tragopooon major. Berwick, Edinburgh. (IdeMtical with T. pra- 

tensis.) 

? — — porrif alius, Lanark ? 

SoNCHUs alpinus. Forfar, Aberdeen. 

? palustris. Edinburgh? 

Lactuca virosa. Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh, Stirling, Perth^ 

Orkney. 
Prenantbbs hieraciifolia. Forfar. 
Apargia Taraxaci. Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Inverness, 

Sutherland. 
Hieracibm alpinum, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Inverness, 

Ross, Sutherland, 

HaUeri. Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

4. . . aurantiacum. Stirling, Dun^barton, Perth^ Aberdeen, 

Banff. 

- Lawsoni. Fife, Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfiu", 

pvlmonarium, Lanark, Roxburgh, Aberdeen. 

— sylvaticum. Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, 

Edinburgh, Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, Elgin, Ross. 
denticulatum, Selkirk, Diunbarton, Perth, Forftr, Elgin, 

Ross, Sutherland. 
^ : — prenanthoides. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlith- 
gow, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Inverness. 



y Google 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 529 

HiiRACinM umbeUatttm. Kirkcudbright, Dumfries,' Berwick, Perth, 

Forfar, Sutherland. 
— — — pcUudotum, Dumfries, Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, 

Berwick, Edinburgh, Dumbarton, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, 

Elgin, Ross. 
• moUe. Berwick, Fife, Dumbarton, Forfar. 



• cerinthoides. Dumfries, Forfar. 

• ampUxieaule, Fife, Forfar. 
Htpoch^bris glabra. Forfar, Elgin, Nairn. 
— — - maculata* Forfar. 
IjAtsavx pusUla. Forfar, Elgin. 

Saussurea alpina. Dumfries, Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Inver- 
ness, Ross, Sutherland. 

Onopordum Acanthium. Man, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick? Had- 
dington, Edinburgh, Fife. 

Ckicus eriophorus. Edinburgh, Dumbarton, Argyle. 

— ^— keterophyUus, Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edin- 
burgh, Stirling, Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, Aberdeen, 
Ro^ Sutherland. 

? prtUentis, Argyle? 

Artxmisia mariHma. Man, Wigton, Kirkcudbright, Berwick, Had-» 
dington, Forfar. 

f Gnaphauum margaritaceum, Man, Selkirk. 

  dioicum* Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, 
Edinburgh, Fife, Stirling, Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, 
Aberdeen, Elgin, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 
- gdUicum, Fife, Forfar. 
• supinum, Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, 



Banff, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 
? CoNTZA tquarrosa. Perth ? 
Erioeron alpinus, Perth, For&r. 

acris, Berwick, Forfar. 

TussiLAGO alpina, For^. 

Sbkecio vUcogus. Kirkcudbright, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edin- 
burgh, Fife, Dumbarton. 

— saracenicua. Kirkcudbright, Ayr, Renfrew, Lanark, Edin- 

burgh, Fife, Stirling, Forfar, Aberdeen. 
? - paludosus, Ross? 

Aster THpoUum, Renfrew, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Fife, 

Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross. 
LiMBAROA crithmoides, Wigton, Kirkcudbright, 
f DoROKicuM />/aiito^'nei(iB. Edinburgh, Fife, Stirling, Pertii. 
t — — — PardaUancnes. Dumfries, Lanark, Edinburgh, Fife, 

Perth, Forfer, Aberdeen. 
Ptrcthrum mariiimum. Man, Wigton, Kirkcudbright, Renfrew, 

Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, 

Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, Ross, Orkney. 
Anthemis nobilis. Berwick, Argyle. 
? - mariiima, Kirkcudbright ? 

* — — — tinctoria, Forfiu'. 
AcHiLLJBA tomentosa, Renfrew, Dumbarton, 
a 3 



y Google 



530 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Ckntaukea Jaeeeu Kirkcudbright, Forfiur, BanSL 

Lobelia Dartmanna. Kirkcudbright, Lanark, Stirling, Dumbarton, 

Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Ban£^ Elgin, Nairn, 

Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 
Campanula hxtifoiia, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh, 

Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfiu-, Aberdeen, Ba^. 

• rapunculoides. Edinburgh, Fik, Perth, Forfiv. 
- TVaeheHum. Lanark, Edinburgh, Fife, Stirling. 

• penieifdlia. Banff. 
> Bapunctdus, Perth. 

• ghmerata. Haddington, Fife, For&r. 

• hedercieea. Man, Renfrew, Lanark. 
hybrida, Haddington. 

Vacciniuii Osycoccos. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife» Forfiur, 

Aberdeen, Ross. 
m VUiS'IdUea. Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinbuigh, 

Stirling, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfiur, Aberdeen^ 

Elgin, Inverness, Ross, SuUieiland. 
ikginosum. Argyle, Perth, Forfiu*, Aberdeen, Banff, 

Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 
Akbutus alpina, Argyle, Forfiv, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, 

Orkney. 

- Uva^urti, Berwick, Aigyle^ Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, 

Banff, Elgm, Nairn, Inverness, Suthedand, Caithness, Ork- 
ney. 
Mekzissia aendea. Perth. 
Androiceda poUfolin. Wigton, Kirkcudbri^t, Dumfines, Renfrew, 

Stirling, Perth. 
Azalea procumbetu, Stirling, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfiu*, 

Aberdeen, Banff, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney, 

Shetland. 
PTaoLA rotundifoUa. Peebles, Berwick, Edinburgh, Perth, Forfiir, 

Aberdeen, Inverness, Orkney? 
— media. Lanark, Berwick, Argyle, Perth, Forfiur, Aberdeen, 

Elgin, Nairn, Ross. 
minor. Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, 

Argyle, Perth, Foriar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Nairn, Ross. 
— *— tecunda. Berwick, Argyle, PerUi, Forfiu*, Elgin, Nairn, 

Inverness, Ross. 
—^ unijhra. Perth, Forfiu*, Elgin, Ross, Sutherland. 
GsNTiANA nivcUis. Perth, Forfiu*, Inverness. 
Ebythkjba UttoraU*. . Berwick, Haddington, Kincardine, Elgin. 

laHfoUa. Argyle. 

f PoLEMOKiuM carvleum, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, 

Aberdeen. 
Convolvulus Soldandla. |ifan, Wigton, Ajt, Argyle, Forfar. 
CuscuTA europ<Ba. Dumfiries, Lanark, Edinburgh, Forfiur, Aberdeen. 
— — .^— epithymum. Kirkcudbright. 
LiTHOSPERMUM monHmum, Ayr, Renfrew, Berwick, Fife, Argyle, 

Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, Invemen, 

Ross, Sutherland, Caithness, Orkney. 



y Google 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 531 

f PotMONARiA officinalis, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh. 
Symphytum tuberosum. Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, 

Fife, Forfer, Aberdeen, Banff. 
AspsRUGo procumbens. Berwick, Haddington, Forfar, Elgin ? 
f Anchusa sempervirena. Lanark, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, 

Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdeen, 

Elgin, Ross. 
? .».——. officinalis. Lanark ? Stirling ? 
Cynoolossum sylvaticum, Perth, Forfar. 
Myosotis aJpestris. Perth. 

  sylwOica. Berwick, Edinburgh. 
oBspitosa, Man, Berwick, Aberdeen. 
. secunda, Aberdeen. 

I repens. Berwick, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

coUina, Man, Edinburgh, Fife, Aberdeen, Elgin. 

Vkrbascum nigrum. Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh. 
— — — — Lydmites. Stirling, Dumbarton. 
•j- — — pulvertdentum. Banff, 
f AxROPA Belladonna. Renfrew, Berwick, Edinburgh, File, Stirling, 

Argyle, Forfer, Elgin. 
SoLANUM nigrum. Wigton. 
LiNARiA repens. Ayr, Edinburgh, Aberdeen. 
f ScROPHULARiA vcrnalis. Dumfries, Ayr, Lanark, Edinburgh, 

Stirling, Perth, Forfer, Aberdeen. 
LiMOSELLA aquaiica. Haddington. 
Bartsia d^na. Perth, Inverness, Roes. 
— viscosa. Wigton, Renfrew, Dumbarton, Argyle. 
Rhinanthus major. Berwick, Forfar, Nairn. 
Mxlamfyrum syhaticum. Kirkcudbright, Ayr, Berwick, Perth, 

Forfer, Aberdeen, Ross. 
. pratense (montanum). Berwick. 

Veronica officinalis (hirsuta). Ayr, Perth. 

alpina. Stirling, Perth, Forfer, Aberdeen, Interness. 

saxatilis, Perth, Forfer, Sutherland. 

? — fruticuhsa. Argyle ? Perth ? 

, serpyUifoUa (hunufrisa). This being the common moun- 

tain form of the species, it has not been deemed worth while 

to mention it under each county of Scotland, although named 
> in the former volume. 

poKta. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Dumbarton. 



• Buxbaumii. Lanark, Berwick, Fife. 



Lycopus europceus. Man, Wigton, Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, 
Fife, Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Kincardine, Aberdeen, Nairn, 
Ross. 

Mentha sglvestris. Berwick, Forfar, Nairn. 

?   rotundifolia. Edinburgh ? 

— viridis. Berwick, Edinburgh, Perth. 

— — viridis (crispa). Berwick, Stirling, Perth. 

piperita. Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh, Dumbarton, 

Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

rubra. Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh, Elgin. 

o 4 



d by Google 



532 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Mentha gentiUs, Dumfries, Berwick, Edinburgb, Argyle. 
- Pulegium. Man, Elgin. 

f TsucBiUM ChanuBdrya, Perth, For&r. 

Ajuga dlpina ? Forfiur, Aberdeen. 

pyramiddUa. Argyle, Inverness, Ross, Caithness, Orkney. 

f LEONuaus CJardiaea, Lanark, Edinbur^, Nairn. 

Galeofsis Ladanum. Edinburgh, Elgin, Orkney. 
— — - versicolor, Dumfries, Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, 
Berwick, Edinburgh, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, For&r, 
Aberdeen, Banff, Ross. 

f Lamium maculatum, Lanark, Edinburgh, Fife, Ross. 

— — — intermedittm, Wigton, Edinburgh, For&r. (Is this dis- 
tinct from L. amplexicaule ?) 

incisum. Man, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, 

Dumbarton, FoHar, Aberdeen, Elgin. 

Stachts ambigucu Man, Wigton, Kirkcudbright, Renfrew, Berwick, 
Edinburgh, Dumbarton, Argyle, Ross, Orkney. 

AciNos vulgarU. Haddington, Edinburgh, Forfar, Elgin. 

Calamintha Nepeta. Man. 

ScuTELLAEiA mtttor. Man, Ayr, Lanark, Dumbarton. 

OaoBANCHE rubra. Fife, Argyle, Ross. 

LATH&iBA squamaria. Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Ar- 
gyle. 

Utucularia minor, Dumfries, Dumbarton, Forfiur, Inverness, Su- 
therland. 

intermedia, Lanark (?), Argyle, Forfer, Aberdeen, 

Elgin, Nairn, Sutherland. 

PiKGUicuLA alpina, Ross. 

htsitanica. Man, Wigton, Ayr, Argyle, Inverness, Ross, 

Sutherland, Orkney. 

PaiMULA vulgaris (elatior). Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Fife, For&r, 
Aberdeen, Orkney. 
farinosa, Peebles, Edinburgh. 
  Bcotica, Sutherland, Caithness, Orkney. 

Trievtalis europcBO. Selkirk, Edinburgh, Fife, Stirling, Argyle, 
Perth, Forfiur, Ab^een, Elgin, Nairn, Inverness, Ross, 
Shetland, 

LrsiMACHf A thyrnflora. Lanark, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Stirling, 
Dumbarton, Forfar. 

Centukculus minimua, Man, Ayr, Lanark, Forfiu, Elgin, Nairn. 

Akagalus arMnns (caerulea). Lanark, Dumbarton, Perth, Aber- 
deen. 

Statics Armeria, Man, Renfrew, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Dum- 
barton, Perth, Forfiur, Aberdeen, Elgin, Inverness, Ross, 
Sutherland, Orkney. 

— Limonium. Kirkcudbright, Berwick. 

— apathtdata, Wigton. 

Glauz maritima, Man, Renfrew, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, 
Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, Elincardine, Aberdeen, 
Banff, Elgin, Sutherland, Orkney. 

PlJiifTAGo maritima, Man, Ayr, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edin* 



yGooQle 



gL 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 533 

burgh, Linlithgow, Dumbarton, Argyle, • Perth, Forfar, 
Kincardine, Aberdeen, Banfi^ Elgin, Inyemess, Ross, Suther-* 
land, Caithness, Orkney. 

LiTTORSLLA locustris. Lanark, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, 
Fife, Stirling, Dumbarton, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross^ 
Orkney. 

Saucornia herbacea. Berwick, Haddington, Fife, Dumbarton, For- 
far, Kincardine, Aberdeen, Elgin, Nairn, Ross. 
- radicans. ^orfar. 

Salsola Kali. Man, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Forfar, Aberdeen^ 
Elgin. 

Chenopodium maritimum, Ayr, Berwick, Haddington, Linlithgow, 
Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, Elgin, Inverness, Ross. 

— ^— — murcUe, Man, Berwick, Forfar. 

• urbicum. Berwick, Edinburgh, Aberdeen. 

• olidum, Edinburgh. 

• hyhridtan, Edinburgh. 



— — polj/spermum, Forfar. 

Atkitlex portulacoides. Wigton, Edinburgh? Dumbarton. 

— — laciniata. Ayr, Edinburgh, Fife, Dumbarton, Forfar, 

Elgin, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 
— — littoralis. Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, 

Fife, Aberdeen. 
Beta maritima. Man, Haddington, Edinbiu*gh, Linlithgow, Fife, 

Orkney, Shetland. 
Polygonum viviparum. Fife, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Nairn, 

Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 

* — — Fagopyrum* Edinburgh. 
— ^-^-^ minus, Forfar. 

-^— — ^ TnaritimuTiu Wigton. 

aviculare (maritime variety). Ayr, Argyle. 

OxTRiA reniformis, Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, El- 
gin, Inverness, Ro^ Orkney. 
Rum EX aqucUicus, Ayr. 
— — - alpinus. Fife, Dumbarton. 
— — puJcher. Lanark. 
— maritimus. Fife, Aberdeen, Orkney. 
  palustris, Forfar. 

* 8cutatu$, Edinburgh. 

f HiPPOPHAE rhamnoides, Haddington, Edinburgh. 

* AsARUM europcBum, Linlithgow. 

Euphorbia Esida. Roxburgh, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, 

Linlithgow. 
f -^— — . Cyparissias. Edinburgh. 

* Lathyris. Ayr, Lanark. 

' ParcUias. Man. 

portlandica, Man, Wigton. 

f Mercurialis annua, Fife, Perth. 

Empbtrum nigrum. Man, Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, 
Edinburgh, Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aber- 
deen, Elgin, Ross, Inverness, Sutherland, Orkney. 
G 5 



y Google 



534 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

* Ulmvs gkAra. Ross, Suth^Iand. 

QuERCUs sessilijhra, Berwick, Edinburgh, Perth, Aberdeen, Suther- 
land. 

* Castanea vtdgarU. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife. 

f Caepinus BeUdus, Renirew, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh. 
BsTULA nana, Lanark, Peebles, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, In- 
verness, Ross. 
Salix /wrpureo. Dumfries, Roxburgh, Forfar. 

Hdix. Lanark, Edinburgh, Forfar. 

— — Lambertiana, Edinburgh, Forfar. 

— ndn^a, Forfar. 
uTtdulata. Forfar. 

. iriandra, Edinburgh, Forfar. 

pentandra. Man, Dumfries, Lanark, Edinburgh, Forfar. 

  decipient. Edinburgh. 

f Russdiana. Lanark, Edinburgh, Forfar, Inverness. 

vitdlina, Lanark, Dumbarton, Forfar. 

" peHolaris. Lanark, Forfiur. 

roamarinifolia. Aberdeen. 

— — angusHfolia, Dumfries, For^. 

fusca (parvifolia, incubacea). Forfar. 

(argentea). Perth, Forfar, Orkney. 

ambigtuL, Perth, Forfer, Caithness, Orkney. 

reticuUxta, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Sutherland. 

glauca. Forfar, Aberdeen. 

arenaria. Edinburgh, Perth, Forfar, Inverness, Orkney. 

  Stuartiana, Perth. 

— stipularis. Forfar. 

— ^ Smithiana. Edinburgh, Forfar. 

ferruginea. Fife. 

cinerea. Renfrew, Lanark, Edinbiurgh, Forfar. 

aquatica, Lanark, Forfar, Orkney. 

  Mfolia. Forfar. 

8phacelata, Perth. 

— — cotinifolia, Wigton, Forfar. 
•^— nigricans. Edinburgh, Forfar. 
— — — Andersonuma, Perth, Forfar. 

Forsteriana. Perth. 

rupestris. Perth, Forfar. 

tenuior. Perth. 

laxijhra. Perth. 



radUcans. Dumfries, Perth. 

— Borreriana. Perth, Inverness. 

— DavaUaniana, Perth (S. phyllicifolia ?). 

— tetrapla. Perth. 

 — Weigdiana. Perth. 
 — Croweana, Inverness. 

— hicolor, Lanark, Perth, Forfar. 

— phyUyreifdlia, Perth", Inverness. 

— vaecmiifolia. Dumfries, Perth. 

— earinata, Perth. 



y Google 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 535 

Salxx prunifoUa, Perth, Forfiur, Orkney. 

venidosa. Perth. 

myrsinitea, Argyle? Perth, Inverness. 

• procunibens, Argyle, Perth, Inverness. 

herbacea. Argyle, Perth, ForfSeu', Aberdeen, Banff, Inverness, 

Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 

^— kastata. Forfar. 

— — — lanata. Forfar, Aberdeen. 

Fisvs aylvestris, Renfrew, Lanark, Edinburgh, Perth, Forfar, Aber- 
deen, Elgin. 

? Htdrocharis Morsua-ranm, Edinburgh ? 

* Stkatiotes aloides, Edinburgh, Perth, Forfar. 
Sagittaria sagittifolia. Renfrew. 

AusMA Tuttafis, Wigton. 

ScHEUCHZERiA paliutris, Perth, 

Triolochin maritimum, Man, Renfrew, Berwick, Haddington, 
Fife, Dumbarton, Foifar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross, Suther- 
land, Orkney. 

Orchis pyramidalis. Wigton, Fife, Argyle. 

Habenaria albida.^ Ayr, Renfrew, Lanark, Fife, Stirling, Dum- 
barton, Argyle, Perth, For&r, Aberdeen, Ban% Elgin, 
Inverness, Ross, Orkney. 

cMoraniha, Wigton, Edinburgh. 

LisTERA cordata, Man, Wigton, Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edin- 
burgh, Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, 
Elgin, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 

GooDTSRA repens, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, Nairn, 
Inverness, Ross. 

Epipactis ensifolia. Argyle ? Perth. 
  grandijhra. Argyle, Perth. 

Malaxis pa2tM2o«a. Wigton, Fife, Perth, Forfar, Ross, Sutherland. 

Co&ALLORHizA innotii, Ayr, Edinburgh, Fife, Perth, Forfar, Ross. 

Iris Pseudacoms (citrina). Ayr. 

t — fxiidisaima, Edinburgh, Fife. 

* — xiphioidet, Forfar. 

f Narcissus PsendO'narcUsus, Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Argyle. 

* — — — hiflorus, Haddington. 

Galakthus nivoKi. Renfrew, Lanark, Roxburgh, Berwick, Edin- 

burgh. 
Ruscus aadeatus, Ajrr, Lanark, 
Convallaria majaUs. Renfrew, Lanark, Edinburgh, Fife, Perth, 

Forfar, Elgin, Nairn, Inverness. 

multijhra, Dumfries, Lanark, Stirling, Aberdeen. 

? Polpgonatum. Berwick? 

verticiUata. Perth. 

? Asparagus officincUis. Haddington ? 

* Ornithogalum wnbellatum, Lanark, Edinbargh, Argyle. 
Gagba luiea. Fife, Perth, Forfw, Nairn. 

<SciLLA vertia. Man, Berwick, Argyle, Elgin, Sutherland, Caithness, 
Orkney, Shetland. 

« 6 



y Google 



536 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Allium arenartum. Berwick, Fife,. Perth, Forfer. 

carinatum, Edinburgh ? Forfar. 

— — - oleracewn. Berwick, Fife, Forfiu*. 

f ^— SchiBnoprasum. Lanark, Berwick, Argyle. 

— ^— ampeloprasum. Forfar. 

* TnuPA sylvestris. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Forfar. 

f CoLCHicuM avtumnale, Fife. 

ToFiELDiA palugtris, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Inverness, Ross. 

Typha angustifolia. Fife. 

Spabganium natana, Kirkcudbright, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, 
Fife, Stirling, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aber- 
deen, Elgin, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 

AcoBUs Calamus, Ayr, Renfrew. 

PoTAMOOBTON lanceoiotus, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin. 

—jrrcdongtu, Berwick, Fife, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, 

Nairn. 
  ' — zosterafoUus. Forfar. 

  heterophyUus. Forfar. (See Preface. ) 
rufescens. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Forfar, 



Aberdeen, Banff, Caithness. 

  gramineus. Lanark, Forfar, Aberdeen, Orkney. 



RuPFiA maritima. Kirkcudbright, Haddington, Forfiir, Kincardine, 

Elgin, Inverness. 
ZosTEBA marina. Renfrew, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Fife, 

Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, Elgin, Inverness, Sutherland. 
Lbmna gibha, Haddington, Edinburgh. 
— trifulca. Berwick, Edinburgh, Forfar. 
Lozula Fosteri. Ayr, Forfar. 
— «• arcuata, Aberdeen, Sutherland. 
spicata. Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, 

Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 
J UNCUS baUictis. Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Nairn, Ross, Sutherland. 

? Jiliformis. Perth ? 

maritimus. Wigton, Ayr, Fife, Elgin, Nairn. 

' obtusiflortLs. Kirkcudbright, Haddington, Linlithgow, Forfar, 
  castaneus. Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

trifidtu. Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 

tenvis. Forfar. 

  biglumis. Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Inverness. 

triglumis. Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Ross, 

Sutherland. 
capitatu8. Perth ? 



Ebiocaulon septangtdare. Inverness. 

ScHCENus nigricans. Fife, Argyle, Forfer, Aberdeen, Ross, Suther- 

land. 
Rhtkchospoba alba. Kirkcudbright, Dumfries, Lanark, Dumbarton, 

Argyle, Forfer, Elgin, Ross, Sutherland. 
Cladium Mariscus. Wigton ? Forfar ? Sutherland. 
SciBPUs Savii. Man, Wigton. 

— - mariHmut. Dumfries, Haddington, Linlithgow, Dumbarton, 
Argyle, Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdeen, R<ws. 



yGooQle 



gL 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 537 

Bltsmus compressus. Edinburgh, Dumbarton, Argyle. 

— — rufus, Man, Kirkcudbright, Haddington, Linlithgow, 
Dumbarton, Argyle, Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdeen, Banff, 
Elgin, Nairn, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, Shetland. 

Eleocharis midticaulis. Edinburgh, Fife, Kincardine, Aberdeen, 
Nairn, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 

  paucijhra. Edinburgh, Fife, Stirling, Dumbarton, 
Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross, Sutherland, 
Orkney. 

  acicularis, Man ? Dumfries, Renfrew, Edinburgh, Fife, 
Stirling, Perth, Orkney? 

? EaioPHORUM cdpinum, Perth ? Forfar ? 
• capitatunu Perth ? 

> vaginatum. Renfrew, Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, 
Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfiir, Kincardine, Aberdeen, 
Elgin, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 
  graciU. Perth, Forfar. 
•> pubescens. Berwick, Ross, Sutherland. 
Carex pauciflora. Lanark? Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, 
Elgin, Inverness, Ross. 

? DavaJOiana, Haddington ? Edinburgh ? Kincardine ? 

incurva. Forfar, Aberdeen, Elgin, Nairn, Sutherland, Caith* 

ness, Shetland. 
arenaria, Man, Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Dum- 
barton, Argyle, Forfar, Aberdeen, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney 

intermedia. Berwick, Haddington, Edinburgh, Forfar, Aber<^ 

deen. 
  divisa. Forfar. 

— — teretiuscula. Lanark, Edinburgh, Fife, Forfar, Aberdeen, 
Elgin. 

Vahlii, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

tenella. Forfar. 

axillaris. Edinburgh, Perth. 

  strigosa. Edinburgh, Ross. 
--^•^^.^ depauperata. Dumbarton, Forfar. 

Mielichoferi. Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

capillaris. Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Ross, Sutherland. 

limosa. Ayr, Berwick, Fife, Dumbarton, Argyle, Perth, Forfar. 

limosa (rariflora). Forfiu*, Aberdeen, Sutherland. 

Pseudo- Cgperus. Argyle, Elgin. 

ustulata. Perth. 

atrata. Perth, Forfar. 

extensa, Man, Wigton, Haddington, Fife, Argyle, Forfar, 

Orkney. 

Oederi. Man, Berwick, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

fidva. Berwick, Edinburgh, Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdeen, 

Elgin, Ross, Sutherland, Orkney. 
speirostachya. Lanark, Berwick, Edinburgh, Stirling, Dum- 
barton, Perth, Forfar. 
-^— binervis, Lanark, Berwick, Forfar, Aberdeen, Ross, Orkney. 
panicea (phaeostachya). Forfar, Aberdeen, Inverness, Suther- 
land. 



y Google 



538 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Caeex puUa. Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfiu', Imremess, Ross, 

Sutherkuid. 
riffidUu Bermek, Stirling, Argyle, Perth, Forfiir, Aberdeen, 

Banfi^ Inverness, Ross, Sutherland. 
— strieUu Mm? Lanark, Edinburgh, Fife, Elgin, Orkney. 
— ^— — aquatUU, Forfiir. 

laevigata, Dumfries, Lanark, Berwick, Fife, Forfar, Aberdeen. 

JUiformit. Ayr, Edinburgh, Forfiir, Elgin, InTemess, Suther- 



land. 

— — hordeiformis, Forfar. 

— ftictocarpa. For&r. 

angtuHfolict, Forfiir. 

Eltna carieina, Perth. 

Ai^PKcirmus o^'iiim; Perth, Forfiw, Aberdeen, InTemesS) Ross. 

agrettu, Haddington, Fifis, Aberdeen. 

Jubmg, Fife, Forfiir. 

Ammophila arvndinaeea. Ayr, Berwick, Edinbmrgh, Linlithgow, 
Fife, Argyle, Forfiv, Aberdeen, Elgin, Sutherkmd, Orkney. 

Phlkum a r em a r iu m. Man, Berwick, HaddiE^gton, FiSt, Forfiur, Kin- 
cardine, Aberdeen, Ban£^ 

Mehdiu Forfiir. 

• alpunmu Perth, Forfiir, Aberdeen, Inverness. 

PoLTPOGOM moHtptliensis. Fife. 

CALAMAoaoms Epigejos. Ayr, Argyle, Aberdeen. 

-^— — ^ ttricta. Forfiir. 

7 AoKOsns Spica-FentL Fklinburgh? 

AiRA alpina, Stirling, Argyle, Forfiur, Aberdeen, Livemess, Suther- 
land. 

Meuca nutan$. Berwick, Edinburgh, Argyle, Perth, Forfiu-, Aber- 
deen, Banff, Elgin, Ross. 

HuROCHLOB borealig. Forfiir. 

Sbslsria ciBrulea. Stirling, Perth. 

PoA aquatiau Lanark, Edinburgh, Fife, Perth, Forfiw, Aberdeen, 
Elgin. 

dUtans, Fife, Forfar. 

maritima, Renfirew, Berwick, Haddington, E^dinburgh, Fife, 

Dumbarton, Forfiw, Aberdeen, Elgin, Inverness, Ross, 
Orkney. 
procunlbetu, Berwick. 

— — alpina, Stirling, Perth, Forfiur, Aberdeen, Inverness, Sutherland. 

laxa, Inverness. 

FasTDCA Ttibra. Kirkcudbright, Berwick, Forfitf, Kincardine, Aber- 
deen, Elgin, Orkney. 

— — ^— calamaria. Lanark, Edinburgh, Dumbarton, Perth, Elgin, 
Nairn, Inverness. 

-— — hromoidn, Berwick, FUlinburgh, Dumbarton, Aberdeen, 
Elgin, Ross. 

? Brachtpodicm jnajurfum. Fife? 

Bromds dUmdnu, Edinburgh, Fifb. 
  erectus, Edinburgh, Fife. 



yGooQle 



gL 



LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 539 

I* Bromus secalinus. Roxburgh, Fife, Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdeen, 
Elgin, Ross. 

-^-— — — vdutinus. Wigton, Edinburgh ? Aberdeen. 

I racemostu, Lanark, Bernrick, Edinburgh, For&r, Aberdeen, 

Orkney. 

— ^-^— carvensis. Renfrew, Lanark, Edinburgh, Forfar.. 

♦ riffidtis. Fife. 

AvEV A fatua. Roxburgh, Berwick, Aberdeen, Orkney. 

strigosa, Edinburgh, Forfar, Aberdeen, Inverness, Suther- 
land. 

— ^ dpina, Forfiir, Aberdeen. 

fianictHmU. Argyle. 

' pubescens. Berwick, Edinburgh, Fife, Forfar, Aberdeen, 

Elgin, Nairn, Inverness, Orkney. (This does not come 
under our test of <* rare plants ; " but having accidentally got 
into the list used for this volume, and its insufficient claim 
escaping notice until some sheets were in type, it has been 
allowed to stand. It is, indeed, a scarce plant in Scotland, 
though less r«re in England.) 

Eltmus arenarius. Ayr, Argyle, Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdeen, 
Elgin, Sutherland, Caithness, Orkney. 

HoRDEUM pratense. Berwick. 
  maritimum, Forfar. 

Triticum loliaceum. Man, Wigton, Edinburgh, Fife, Forfar, Orkney. 
junceum, Ayr, Berwick, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Fife, 
Argyle, For&r, Aberdeen, Elgin, Ross, Sutherland. 

? — cristatum. Forfer? 

RoTTBOLLiA tncurvota (or filiformis). Kirkcudbright, Haddington, 
Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Fife. 

LoLiuM arvense. Berwick, Forfar. 

— • temidentum. Roxburgh, Berwick, Argyle, Forfar, Aberdeen, 

Elgin, Nairn. 

? DionARiA 8anguinali». Lanark ? 



y Google 



INDEX TO THE GENERA 



IN THE LIST OF SCOTTISH SPECIES. 



' 


Page 




Page 


AcHILLiBA, 


- 529 


Bartsia 


- 541 


Acinos, 


- 5S2 


Beta, - - 


- 533 


Aconitum, 


- 521 


Betula, 


- 534 


Acorns, 


- 536 


Blysmus, 


- 537 


Actaea, 


- 521 


Brachypodium, 


- 538 


Adonis, 


- 521 


Brassica, 


- 522 


Agrostis, 


- 538 


Bromus, 


- 538 


Aira, 


- 538 


CakUe, 


- 522 


Ajuga, 


- 532 


Calamagrostis, 


- 538 


Alchemilla, - 


- 525 


Calamintha, 


- 531 


Alisma, 


- 535 


Camelina, 


- 522 


Allium, 


- 536 


Campanula, 


- 530 


Alopecunis, 


- 588 


Cardamine, - 


- 522 


Althsa, 


- 524 


Carex, 


- 537 


Alyssum, 


- 522 


Carpinus, 


- 534 


Ammophila, 


- 538 


Carum, - * - 


- 527 


Anagallis, 


- 532 


Castanea, 


- 534 


Anchusa. - 


- 531 


Centaurea, 


- 530 


Andromeda, 


- 530 


Centunculus, 


- 532 


Anemone, 


- 521 


Cerastium, 


- 523 


Anthemis, 


. 529 


Ceratophyllum, 


- 526 


Anthriscus, 


- 527 


Chaeropbyllum, 


- 527 


Apargia, 


- 528 


Chelidonium, 


- 521 


Apiura, 


. 527 


Cherleria, 


- 524 


Arabis, 


- 522 


Chenopodium, 


- 533 


Arbutus, 


- 530 


Chrysosplenium, 


- 526 


Arenaria, 


- 523 


Cicuta, 


- 527 


Artemisia, 


- 529 


Circsea, 


- 526 


Asarum, 


- 533 


Cladium, . ^ 


- 536 


Asparagus, 


. 535 


Clematis, 


- 521 


Asperugo, - 


- 531 


Cnicus, 


- 529 


Aster, 


- 529 


Cochlearia, 


- 522 


Astragalus, 


- 524 


Colchlcum, 


- 536 


Atriplez, 


- 533 


Comarum, 


- 525 


Atropa, 


- 531 


Convallaria, 


- 535 


Avena, 


- 539 


Convolvulus, - 


- 530 


Azalea, 


. 530 


Conyza, - 


- 529 


Barbarea, 


- 522 


Corallorhiia, - 


- 535 



y Google 



INDEX TO THE GENERA. 



541 





Page 




Page 


Coriandrum, 


- 528 


Helleborus, 


- 521 


Corniis, 


. 528 


Helosciadium, 


- 527 


Corydalis, 


- 522 


Hesperls, 


- 522 


Cotyledon, 


- 526 


Hieracium, 


- 528 


Crambe, 


- 522 


Hierochloe, 


- 538 


Crithmum, 


- 527 


Hippocrepis, 


- 525 


Cuscuta, 


- 530 


Hippophae, 


- 533 


Cynoglossum, 


- 531 


Hordeum, 


- 539 


Daucus, 


- 527 


Hydrocharis, 


- 535 


Delphinium, 


- 521 


Hypericum, 


- 524 


Dentaria, 


- 522 


Hypochaeris, 


- 529 


Dianthus, 


- 523 


Iberis, 


- 522 


Digitaria, 


- 539 


Impatiens, 


- 524 


Dipsacus, 


- 528 


Iris, - ^ 


- 535 


Doronicum, 


- 529 


Isatis, 


- 522 


Draba, 


- 522 


Juncus, 


- 536 


Drosera, 


- 523 


Koniga, 


- 522 


Dryas, 


- 525 


Lactuca, 


- 528 


Elatine, 


- 523 


Lamium, 


- 532 


Eleocharis, 


- 537 


Lapsana, 


- 529 


Elymus, 


. 539 


Lathraea, 


- 532 


Elyna, 


- 538 


Lathyrus, 


- 525 


Empetrum, 


- 533 


Lavatera, 


- 524 


Epilobium, - 


- 526 


Lemna, 


- 536 


Epimedium, 


- 521 


Leonurus, 


- 532 


Epipactis, 


- 535 


Lepidium, 


. 522 


Erigeron, 


- 529 


Ligusticum, 


- 527 


Eriocaulon, 


- 536 


Limbarda, 


- 529 


Eriophorum, 


- 537 


Limosella, 


- 531 


Erodium, 


- 524 


Linaria, 


- 531 


Eryngium, 


- 528 


Linnsea, 


- 528 


Erysimum, 


- 522 


Linum, 


- 524 


Erythraa, 


- 530 


Listera, 


- 535 


Euphorbia, 


- 533 


Lithospermum, 


- 530 


Fedia, 


- 528 


Littorella 


- 533 


Festuca, - 


- 538 


Lobelia, 


- 530 


Foeniculum, 


- 527 


Lolium, 


- 539 


Fragaria, 


- 525 


Lonicera, 


- 528 


Fumaria, 


. 522 


Lotus, 


- 524 


Gagea, 


- 535 


Luzula, 


- 536 


Galanthus, 


- 535 


Lychnis, 


- 523 


Galeopsis, 


- 532 


Lycopus, 


- 531 


Galium, - 


- 528 




- 582 


Gentiana, 


- 530 


Malaxis, 


- 535 


Geranium, 


. 524 


Meconopsis, 


- 521 


Glaucium, 


- 521 


Medicago, 


- 524 


Glaux, 


- 532 


Melampyrum, 


- 531 


Gnaphalium, 


- 529 


Melica, 


- 538 


Goodyera, 


- 535 


Melilotus, 


- 524 


Habenaria, 


' 535 


Mentha, 


- 531 



y Google 



542 



INDEX TO THE GENERA. 





Page 




Page 


Menziesia, 


- 530 


Rosa, 


- 525 


Mercurial is. 


- 533 


RottboUia 


- 539 


Meum, 


- 527 


Rubia, 


- 529 


Myosotis, 


- 531 


Rubus, 


- 525 


Myriophyllum, 


- 52« 


Rumex, 


- 533 


Myrrhis, 


- 527 


Ruppia, 


- 536 


Narcissus, 


- 535 


Ruscus, 


- 535 


Nasturtium, 


- 522 


Sagina, 


- 523 


Nuphar, 


- 521 


Si^ttaria, 


- 535 


(Enanthe, 


- 527 


Salicomia, 


- 533 


(Enothera, 


- 526 


SaUx, 


- 534 


Ononis, 


- 524 


Salsda, 


- 533 


Onopordum, 


- 529 


Sanguisorba, 


- 525 


Orchis, 


- 535 


Saussurea, 


- 529 


Ornithogalum, 


- 535 


Saxifraga, 


- 5^% 


Orobanche, 


- 532 


Scheuchzeria, 


- 535 


Orobus, 


- 535 


Schoenus, 


. 536 


Oxalis, 


. 524 


SciUa, 


- 535 


Oxyria, 


- 583 


Scirpus^ 


- 536 


Oxytropis, 


. 524 


Scleranthus, 


- 525 


Papaver, 


- 521 


Scrophularia, 


- 531 


PetroseHnum, 


- 527 


Scutellaria, 


- 532 


Peucedanum, 


- 527 


Sedura, 


- 526 


Phleum, 


- 538 


Scnecio, 


- 529 


Pinguicula, 


- 532 


Sesleria, 


- 538 


Pinus, J 


- 535 


Sibbaldia, 


- 525 


Plantago, 


- 533 


Silaus, 


- 527 


Poa, - 


- 538 


Silene, 


. 528 


Polemonium, 


- 530 


Sinapis, 


- 522 


Polygonum, 


- 533 


Sison, 


- 527 


Polypogon, 


- 538 


Sisymbriimi, . 


. 522 


Potamogeton, 


- 536 


Sium, 


- 527 


PotentiUa, 


- 525 


Smyrnium, 


- 528 


Prenanthes, 


- 528 


Solanum, 


- 538 


Primula, 


- 532 


Sonchus, 


- 528 


Prunus, 


- 525 


Sparganium, 


- 536 


Pulmonaria, 


- 531 


Spergula, 


.'528 


Pyrethrum, 


- 529 


Spiraea, 


. 525 


Pyrola, 


- 533 


Stacbys, 


- 532 


Pyrus, 


- 526 


StaphyUea, 


- 524 


Quercus, 


- 534 


Statice, 


- 532 


Radiola, 


- 524 


Stellaria, 


- 523 


Ranunculus 


- 521 


Stratiotes, 


- 535 


Raphanus, 


- 523 


Subularia, 


- 523 


Reseda, 


- 523 


Symphytum, 


- 531 


Rhamnus 


- 524 


Teesdalia, 


. 522 


Khinanthus, 


- 531 


Teucrium, 


- 532 


Rhodiola, 


- 526 


Thalictrum, 


- 521 


Rhynocospora, 


- 537 


Thlaspis, 


- 522 


Ribes, 


. 526 


TUia, 


- 524 



y Google 



INDEX TO THE GENERA. 



543 





Page 




Page 


Tofieldia, 


- 536 


Ulex, 


- 524 


Torilis, 


- 527 


Ulmus, 


- 534 


Tragopogon, 


- 528 


Utricularia, 


- 532 


Trientalis, 


- 532 


Vaccinium, 


- 530 


Trifolium, 


- 524 


Valeriana, 


- 528 


Triglochin, 


- 535 


Verbascum, 


- 531 


Triticum, . 


- 539 


Veronica, 


- 531 


TroUius, 


- 521 


Viburnum, 


- 528 


Tulipa, 


- 536 


Vicia, 


- 525 


Turritis, 


- 522 


Viola, 


- 523 


Typha, . 


- 536 


Zostera, 


- 536 



INDEX TO THE SCOTTISH COUNTIES 
AND THE ISLANDS.* 



Aberdeen 


Page 
- 488 


Kinross 


Page 
- 450 


Argyle, &c. 
Ayr 


- 460 
. 415 


Kirkcudbright 
Lrfuiark 


- 412 

- 419 


Banff- 
Berwick - 


- 497 

- 428 


Linlithgow 
Man 


- 449 

- 407 


Caithness 


- 516 


Nairn 


- 502 


Clackmannan 


- 450 


Orkney 


- 517 


Cromarty 


- 508 


Peebles 


- 426 


Dumbarton 


- 457 


Perth 


- 465 


Dumfries 


- 414 


Renfrew 


- 417 


Edinburgh 

Elgin 

Fife 


- 438 
. 498 

- 450 


Ross 

Roxburgh 

Selkirk 


- 508 

- 426 

- 426 


Forfar 


- 474 


Shetland 


- 520 


Haddington 
Inverness 


- 436 

- 503 


Stirling 
Sutherland 


- 455 

- 512 


Kincardine 


- 487 


Wigton - 


- 410 



* Bute, Arran, and most of the other islands near the western coast, are included 
in the counties of Argyle and Inverness. 



y Google 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT 



NEW BOTANIST'S GUIDE. 



fiZrGX.AZrD AZTD WAXrES. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT. 



I. CORNWALL. 



Ranunculus parviflorus. Between MiUbrook and Craflhole ; in the 
Vale of Menachan, near Helston. Tour. 
"   Flammula (reptans). On GoonhiUy Downs. Tour. 

Glaucium luteum. Shore near Crafthole. Tour. 

Cakile maritima. Shore near Crafthole. Tour. 

CoRONOFUS didyma. Between Crafthole and Looe ; at Swan Pool. 
Tour. 

CocHLEARiA officinalis. Near Castle Treryn. Tour. 

Barbarea prcBcox. " Before we reached Parrcombe we noticed Ery- 
simum prcecox growing on the Killas rocks : this was the 
only place in the county we noticed this rare plant. I had 
some doubts respecting it ; but Mr. Anderson was quite sure 
that it was the true plant. We found it in a field near the 
cliflFs between Polcarras and Parrcomb.** Tour. 

RaphanUs maritimuB. About the Lizard. Tour. 

Reseda lulea. Between FoWey and St. Austle ; near Tregony. Tour. 

Drosera anglica. Marazion Marsh. TVmr. (This is probably the 
Marsh between Penzance and Marazion, called Gulval marsh, 
in the former volume. I observed D, longifolia in that 
marsh, but not D. anglica. R. W,) 
  longifciia. Near Castle Treryn ; between St. Michael's 
and Gorse Moor. Tour. 

SiLENS maritima. Shore near Crafthole. Tour. 

• anglica^ Between Mullion and Helstone ; near Pengerswick 
Castle, near Breoch. Tour, 

Arsnaria tenuifolia. Between Fowey and St. Austle. Tour. 

CerastiuM tetrandrum. Between CrafUiole and Looe; on the sands 
at Marazion ; between Zennar and Mawgan ; Gorse Moor 
and Roche. Tour. 

LiNUM augustifolium. Near Fowey. Tour. 

Radiola miUegrana. Between Fowey and St. Austle ; near the Land's 
End; between Zennar and Mawgan; Gorse Moor and 
Roche. Tour. 
Hypericum AndrosuRmum, Between Crafthole and Looe; in the 

vale of Menachan ; at Cotehele, near Callington. Tour. 
i/RODiuM maritimum. Between Crafthole and Looe ; vale of Mena- 
chan ; between Zennar and Mawgan ; at Cotehele. Tour, 



y Google 



SifS THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Geraneom striatum, " Dr. Penneck informed us that he had ob- 
served Acanthus mollis, and Geranium striatum completely 
wild near Penzance." Tour. (In 1831, I observed the 
latter growing vigorously in two places, by road>sides, near 
Penzance ; but they were quite near to gardens. H, W. ) 

Ulex nanus, Goonhilly Downs. Tour. 

Genista pilosa. On the cliflfe above the Devil's Frying Pan, near 
Kedgeworth ; near the Land's End ; between Zennar and 
Mawgan. Toier. 

TaiFOLiuM suffocatum. Shore near Crafthole. Tour. 

ViciA lathyroides. Near Fowey. Tour, 

PauNUS Padus, Near Bodmin. Tour, 

CoMABUM palustre. In a bog near Phillack ; at Swan Pool. Tour. 

Sakguisorba officinalis. At Kedgeworth. Tour. 

EosA viUosa. Between Millbrook and CrafUiole ; near Tregony ; 
between St. Michael's and Gorse Moor. Tour, 

spinosissima. At Kedgeworth ; downs near MuUion. • Tour. 

Ptrus torminalis. Hare Down, near Bodmin. Tour. 

— — — ^^ domestica. Mr. Lees suggests that the preceding species has 
been mistaken for the present one, in this county and else- 
where, except Wyre Forest. 

Illecebeum verticiUatum, Gorse Moor and Roche. Tour, 

Herniaria glabra, Falmouth ; Kedgeworth. Tour. 

Seoum anghcum. Between Millbrook and Crafthole. Tour, 

Smtrnium Olusatrum. Near Pengerswick Castle. Tour, 

Daucus maritimus. Cliffs near Crafthole; Kedgeworth; sea-clifi& 
near Zennar. Tour, 

Phtsospermum comubiense. Two miles north-west of Bodmin, on 
Hare Down, half a mile above Dunmere River. Tour, 

Eryngium campestre. Said to have been found on the shore of 
Mount's Bay, near Penzance. Tour, (I saw only the 
other British species in 1832. H, W,) 

RuBiA peregrina. Near Crafthole. Tour. 

Fedia dentata. Corn-fields near Crafthole. Tour. 

I - Auricula. Lindulph. Br. Fl. 

Valeriana rubra. Fowey ; Kedgeworth ; Marazion. Tour, 

CoNYZA squarrosa, Fowey. Tour, 

Anthemis nobUis, Between Fowey and St. Austle. Tour. 

Aster] TVipo/tum. About the Lizard. Tour, On Asparagus Island, 
and neighbouring rocks. H. W, 

Campanula hederacea. Between Fowey and St. Austle ; Cambreh 
Hill, near Camborne ; between Callington and Tavistock, in 
the road leading to the bridge over the Tamar. Tour. 

Erica vagans. Between Zennar and Mawgan, on the north coast, 

very sparingly. Tour. In Mylor. Br. Fl, 
' ' ' - eUiaris. In dry elevated ground, among fir trees, in Sir C. 
Lemon's Park, at Carclew, near Truro. W, A, Bromjield, sp. 

Erythrjba pulchella. Shore near Crafthole. Tour. 

ExACV^ Jiliforme. In a ditch near the road leading to Bodmin, four 
miles from St. Michael's ; Gorse Moor and Roche. Tour. 

Convolvulus Soldanella. Shore near Crafihole. Tour. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — CORNWAI>L. 549 

CuscuiA Epithymum. Vale of Menachan; between Zeonar and 
Ma^gan. Tour. 

Anchcsa sempervirena. Between Crafthole and Looe ; near Tre- 
gony ; at Falmouth ; near Bodmin. Tour. 

Verbascum nz^tem. Between Crafthole and Looe; Fowey; near 
Tregony. Tour. 

Antirrhinum Orontium. About the Lizard. Tour. 

Bartsia viscosa. In a ditch by the road-side, between Looe and 
Fowey, about two miles from the latter; near Tregony; 
near St. Just ; between Falmouth and Helford ; near the 
Land's End ; about St. Ives ; near Bodmin. Tour. 

Scrophularia Scorodonia. Shores of Falmouth Harbour, at Flush- 
ing. W. A. Bromfield^ mss. In the road leading to Tre> 
genna Cjistle, St. Ives. Tour. 

SiBTHORFiA europcea. Sides of the road, about two miles from Fowey 
towards Looe near Ruan Lanyhorne ; near Bodmin. Tour, 

Mentha rotundifolia. Near BoUeit, near the Land's End. 

splvestris. At St. Michael's. Tour. 

- Pulegium. (The asterisk (*) should have been placed to this 
species, not to M. gentilis, on page 11.) 

CAtAMiNTHA Nepeto. Near St. Austle. Tour. 

Scutellaria minor. Between St. Michael and Corse Moor. Tour. 

Orobanche minor. About the Lizard. Tour. 

PiNGuicuLA lusitanica. In a bog near Phillack ; about St Ives ; 
between St. Michael's and Gorse Moor. Tour. 

Staticb Limonium. Shore near Crafthole. Tour. 

LrrroRELLA lacustris. At Swan Pool, near Falmouth. Tour. 

Chenopodium maritimum. Falmouth. Touy. 

Beta maritima. Shore near Crafthole. Tour. 

Polygonum i?an. (P. maritimum, Ray). Between Marazion and 
Penzance. C C. Babingion, mss. On the sands, on both 
sides of Penzance. H. W. sp* 

Salix Smithiana, Near Fowey. Tour. 

— — -- viteJUna. At Falmouth. Tour. 

• dedpiens. In a bog near Philiack. Tour. 

fuaca (repens). In a bog near Phillack ; vale of Menachan ; 

between Zennar and Mawgan. Tour. 
' (prostrata). Near the Land's End. Tour. 

  (adscendens). Near the Land's End ; Goonhilly Downs. 

Tour. 

— — (parvifolia). About the Lizard. Tour. 

'— (argentea). Goonhilly Downs. Tour. 

AcTiNOCARPUs Damasonium. (The mark of doubt (?) ought to have 
preceded the name of this species, on page 11. The locality 
is likely enough, in itself, but the plant appears not to have 
been found elsewhere in the west of England ; on which ac- 
count it is worth while to draw more particular attention to 
the station. ) 

Iris tuberosa. In Truciffe Lane, near Penzance, on the top of a 
hedge, on the left-hand side, in turning up from Love Lane, 
about fifty yards from the turn ; at Barfie, a small tenement 

VOL. II. H 



y Google 



550 THE NEW BOTANIST'a GUIDE. 

belonging to Ladj Davj, the orchard is oremin with plants 

of it Mag. Nat. Hist ix. 205. 
SciLLA vema. At Kedgewortb. - Tour, 
Ttpha angustifoHcu Between Falmouth and Helford. . Tow. 
RurriA maritifMO, At Swan PooL Tour. 

Rhtncospora aJbii, Between St Michael's and Gotse Moor. Tour, 
Bltshds comprestus. Goonhilly Downs. Tour. 
Sci&pus maritimus. At Swan Pool, Falmouth, Tour. 
— — - Savit, On the heath, between the Lizard Lights and Soap 

Rock, Kynance Cove. JJ. W. sp. 
Eleochabis mvlticauHs, Near the Land's £nd. Tour, 

pauciflorcu At Swan Pool. Tour. 
Cabxx arenaria. Looe Bridge ; between Fowey and St Austle. 

Tour. 
AoaosTis setacea. Goonhillj Downs. Tour. 
Briza minor. Corn-fields near Gulval Church. Tour. 
"PoA procumbent. At Swan Poo4; sands at Marazion. Tour. 
Festuca rubra. Between MuUion and Helstone. Tour. 
Atena gtriffosiu Near St. Just ; between Penzance and St Ives. 

Tour. 
RoTTBOLLiA incurvota* In the vale of Menaehan, Tour. 



11. DEVON. 



Thalicirum minus. Berry Head. (Mrs. Griffiths. ) JT. Bromfidd, mss. 
Glaucium luteum. Frequent along the coast ; Exmouth ; Teign- 

mouth ; Paignton sands ; Brauntoii Burrows. FL Dev. 
CoRONOPUS didyma. At the ferry, Dartmouth, on the side next tha 

town ; a perfect weed in Lockyer Street, Plymouth, and 

elsewhere about that town, at the foot of walls and edges of 

the pavement W. A. Bromjield, nus. 
Sin a PIS tenuifoUa, |In profusion on walls about Plymouth ; Catsdown 

Quarries, on the rubbish heaps. fT. A. Bromfieidy mss. 
KoNiGA maritima. On the shore below Longjoom Point, Plymouth, 

gathered two successive seasons, but hardly wild, and not 

plentiful. W. A. Bromjield, mss. 
DiANTHus Armerta. Kingsteignton. Fl. Dev. 

  - deltoides. Road-side east from the Teign, near Teignmoutb. 

(Rev. J. Poole, ) J. C. CoUinSy ms». 
Sperovla subvlata, (The reference of " H. W," is to be substituted 

for** 5. G^."— Page 15.) 
LiNUM angustifoUum. Staddon Heights, Plymouth. W. A. Brom' 

fiddy mss. 
TiLiA parvifdlia. Entire woods of this species at Buckland, near 

Asliburton. (Mr. ?) W. A. Broa^eldy mss. (The 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — DEVON. 551i 

** woods *• lead to the presumption of the trees being planted, 
not indigenous. I cannot decipher the name of the indi- 
vidual, from whom Dr. firomfitild derived his information. 
H, If,) 

Htpkricum AndroBomum, Plentiful about South Molton. Mis$ 
Grace Enstmant sp. 

RuAMNUs Frangula. Dell at Ivy Bridge, most abundant. W. A. 
Bromjieldf nut. 

^EniCAGo macuiata. Plymouth. W, A. Bromfield, sp, 

CoaoNiLLA varia. Among rocks at the Berry Head ; and at Linton. 
Mag, Nat Hist z. 603. (The addition of this plant to our 
native flora is yet of doubtful propriety. See the explana- 
tions of Dr. Bromfield, in the work referred to. ) 

Rosa, apinosistima. Sentry Field at Morton; Sourton Common, 
near Oakhampton ; Dungeon Cliff, Mary church. Fl. Dev. 

-' tomentosa. Hedges at North Bovey, near the village ; and at 

Chagford. FL Dev, 

Pyrus domesHca,, (Should be erased from the Devpnshire list. IF. A. 
Bromfield.) 

PaLfcA&t*UM tetraphyUum. At the foot of walls, by the* road-side, 
both upper and lower, from Dartmouth to the Paper-mill. 
JF, A. Bromfiddy »p. 

CoRRioioLA littoralis, Slapton Sands. IF, A. Bromfieldi sp, 

Brtonia (Uoica, Powderham Castle, a suspicious locality. (Mr. 
Abraham. ) W, A, Bromjieldj mas. 

BijpLKuauM Odontites. Rocks at Torquay ; Flagstaff Hill ; appear, 
ing periodically only. W. A. Bromjieldj mss. 

AsFERULA cynanchica. Pinhey Cliffs, near Lyme. Fl. Dev, 

FxDiA Auricula, Torquay. (Mr. Borrer.) fT. A. Bromfield, mss. 

Valeriana rubra. Rocks at Longroom Point, and elsewhere at 
Plymouth, not indigenous. W. A. Bromjieldj mss. 

Chrtsocoma Lynosyris, " In plenty on the grassy slopes, near the 
edge of the cliffs at Berryhead, very much to the west of the 
last fortificatiou ; most luxuriant when growing amongst 
bushes at the margin of adjoining fields." W, A, Bromji^, 
mss. 

Lobelia urens. " Quite at the bottom of Kilmington Hill, or Shute 
Common (Axminsterend), on a part of the heath facing the 
George public-bouse, but on the other side of the road, 
growing amongst tufts of short furze or heath, in tolerable 
plenty, 1836. The inhabitants know the plant from the 
frequent visits of the curious. I am told by Mr. Abraham, 
it occurs scattered over Woodbury Hill, and I found one 
specimen at a considerable distance from the general station. '( 
IF. A. Bromjieldt mss, 

Anchusa sempervirens. Truly wild in a retired lane, on a bank 
amongst weeds, a few miles from Plymouth. W. A. Brom- 
fiddf mss, 

Atropa Belladonna, A plant or two on the shore below Longroom 
Point, Plymouth, scarcely wild there. W. H. Bromjield, mss. 

Vkrbascum Blattaria, Dartmouth, near the ferry ; also by the road* 
H 2 



y Google 



S3i THE KEW botanist's GUIDE. 

side (upper one) going to the Paper-mill. W, A. Bromfidd, 

mss, 
VxsBASCUM virgaimm, Dawlish. C. C. BabinffUm^ nus. 
LiKARiA spuria. Tor Abbey grounds, Torquay, amongst potatoesi. 

JF, A, Bromjield, nut, 
MsLmis MeUawphyUum, ,Cann (?) Wood, near Plymouth. W, A. 

Bromfield, sp. (Insert " B, G,*' after «• Hall," on the tenth 

line of page 23. ) 
OaoBANCBE caryophyUaeea, The Devonshire station, in Br. FL 3d 

edition, is in error. CojRp, 
SiATicE spathulaia. Berry Head, in one place only, 1886. fF. A, 

Brcmfiddy mss, 
LrrroRSLLA lacustris. On the margin of the great pool near the sea, 
' between Slapton and Tor-cross. (Mrs. Griffiths.) JF, A, 

Bromjield, mss, Haldon. FL Dev. 
Euphorbia PepUs, Slapton Sands,, locally. IF, A. Bromjield, mu. 
. pordandica. Tor Abbey groimds, Torquay, abundant, 

ff. A. Bron^idd, sp, 
' — - Paralias. I^pton Sands, in the utmost profusion. 

W. A, Bromjidd, mss, 
-pHosal Linton. H, W, sp. The specimen was probably 



gathered in the wooded hollow, under the right-hand side of 
the road descending from Linton to Leeniooth ; but there 
being only the autumnal remains of the flower-stalks, I da 
not feel quite assured of the species. 

Aristolochia C/ema<«<i«. Powderham. (Mr. Abraham.) JF, A. 
Bromfidd, nus. 

Orchis ushdata. Shaugh Vale. Fl Dev, 

Tricuonsma ColunuuB (T. Bulbocodium, page 24.). The exact spot 
is on the left of the old road, from Exeter to Dawlish, before 
ascending the hill to Mount feasant, and almost in front of 
the small cottages there ; it extends, at intervals, to the ferry, 
Mag, Nat, Hist, vii. 272. 

Lemna tristdea. Pond at St. Mary's Clyst Fl, Dev. 

SciRPus Savii, Devon. Br. Fl. 3d edition. 

Briza minor, Torquay. (Miss Griffiths.) W. A. Bromfidd, mss, 

Fkstuca rubra, Teignmouth. Joneses Botanical Tour, 

. uniglumis, Exmouth Sands. Fl. Dev. 

HoRnxuM pratense. Sides of the Terrace-walk, below Barnstable 
Bridge. II. W. sp, 

Spartina stricta. Starcross, Devon. C. C. Babington, nus, Devon, 
(Goodenough, in Smith's Herbarium.) W, A, Bromjidd, 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — SOMERSET* £53 



m. SOMERSET. 

Climatis VitaJJba. Street; and generally through all the lias of the 
County. J. C C(Mins, mss. On Quantock. A. Southby, tnss, 

Thauctbum minus. Still growing plentlfblly on Cheddar Cliffii 
J. C, CoUins, mss. 

Rakukculus parvifiorus. About the Quarry, Wembdon ; not un. 
common around Bridgwater. /. C CoUttu, mss. Generally 
in the district north-east of the Quantock Hills. /. PooUy 
nus,* 

Hkllebobus [viridis, Leigh Woods (Mr. Thomas Clark) ; on the 
Mendip Hills, near Compton Martin ; SideoC /. C. CoUvm, 
nus. 

AcoMiTUM Napellus, « Mr. Clark, who furnished Sir J. Smith with 
the Somersetshire locality of this plant, describes it as grow- 
ing in great plenty on both sides of one of the tributary 
streams of the river Tonc^ between Ford and MilTerton, 
occurring at intervals for four miles along its course ; but 
says that it is erroneoudy stated * as growing in other similar 
situations in that neighbourhood.'** /. C. CoQint, mss, 

Fjhovia coralUna. Steep Hohnes, W, A,.Br<mfield,sp, « In 1884, 
nearly eradicated by destructive visitors.** /. C CoBins, mss. 
A single plant in the centre of a lai^ wood, near the 
** Rocks," Bath. C. C. Babington, mss, 

Pataver hybridum. Abundantly In fields at the moudi of the river 
Parret, at Steart, and Bumham. /. 0. CoUins, m»s» 
• '      somniferum. Spread widely over the sand-hills at Bumham. 
J, C, CoUinSy mss, 

Meconopsis cambrica. At the bottom of the hill, south-east of the 
village of Cutcombe. /. Poole, mss, Cidbone Ciifis. /. C, 
Collins f mss, 

Glaucium luteum, Bumham; Steart; Stotford; Minehead; oeca* 
sionally, indeed, on the whole coast of the Bristol Channel. 
J. C, CoUinSf mss. 

CoETDALis davicvlata. Enmore ; Bromfield ; Seven Wells ; Over- 
stowey. /. Pode, mss, Conygeor Hill, Dunster ; Charlinch. 
/. C. Collins, mss, 
' " ' - lutect. On an old wall at Chilton Polden ; also at Dunster. 

/. C. Collins, mss. 
Nasturtium sylvestre, Burtle Turf-Moor. J. C. Collins, mss, 
Arabis stricta, Cheddar ; rocks on the Quantock Hills, near Mer- 
ridge; Leigh Woods. J. C. CoRins,mss, 

CocHLBARiA angUcQ, Rocks at Brean Down. J, C, CoBins, mss. 

• The localities followed by the name of the Rer. J. Poole were commanicated 
for this work, by the Rev. J. C. Collins. The plants have all been recently observed 
in thi several places mentioned ; and the same remark applies to those followed by 
the name of the latter gentleman. 

H 3 



y Google 



554 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Deaba muraUt. East Haq>tree. J, C. CoUins, m$s. 

HuTCHiNSLA petrtBa. Cheddar. J. C. CoBitu, nuM, 

In&is amara. Very rarely among the sand-hills at Bumham. /. C 

CoBinSy mss, 
Cakile maritima. Berroir; Bumham; Steart; Minehead. /. C * 

Collins, mss. 
CaHeuna sativa. Timber-yard at Bridgwater. (Mr. Clark.) /. C 

CcUifu, mss. 
LiPiDiuM ruderale, Leigh Wood, near Bristol. /. C Collins. 
Brassica olemcea, Berrow ; Brean ; Steep Holmes. /. C. CoBins, 

mss. 
  campestris. Bumham. /. C. Collins, mss. 

SiKAPis muralis. Old walls at Taunton. /. C. CoBinst mss. (The 

plant of the Flora Bathontnaisy under the name of ** S. tenui- 

folia," is to be referred to the present q>ecies. — Page 29. ) 
Crambk maritima. Bumham, on the coast near the Church. /. C 

CoBins, mss. 
Rafhanus mariiimus. At the base of Brean Down, towards Berrow, 

very rare. J. C. CoBins, mss. 
KoNiOA maritima. Bumham Sands. /. C. CoBins, mss. 
RxsiDA Jruiiculosa (or alba f). Very abundant on the sand at Weston- 

supra-mare, between the town and the pier, but certainly an 

escape from gardens only, from which it is easy to thwe it all 

along. W. A. Bromjield, mss. 
Hbliakthsmum ledifoHum. ( The name of this plant may be dismissed 

from the British Floras; the Rev. J. C. Collins having 

searched for it in vain ** nearly every year for the last ten 

years."— Page 29.) 
Viola flavicomis. On the sea banks, on both sides of the mouth 

of the Parret ; very common in Burtle Turf-moor, where 

there is also a milk-white variety of V. canina, if It is not 

another species. /. C. CoQkuy mss. 
DaosKBA hngifolia. Common on Burtle Turf-moor, towards Shap- 

. wick Heath. J. C. CoBins, mss. 
DiAMTHus deltoides. On the lias near Street. /. C. CoBins, mss. 
> arenarius. ♦« Described in Rutter^ North-east Somerset, 

as found at Cheddar, with some remarks on the distinction 
' of this plant and D. caesius.'* J. C. CoBins, mss. 
SiLiNK maritima. South side of Brean Down, plentifully ; Cleredon. 

/. C. CoBins, mss. Coast between Watchett and Minehead ; 

Flat Holmes Island. J. Poole, mss. 
  ' angUca, Near the Horse and Jockey, Kingsdown. . Add. Ft. 

Bath. 
Arknaria peploides. 1 On the sea-coast at Steart, Bumham, and in 
— — — marina. \ I the salt marshes near Bumham and Brean. 

'  tenuifoUa, J J. C. CoBins, mss. 
CsRASTiirM tetrandrum. Common among the sand-hills at bumham 

and Steart /. C. CoBins, mss. 
XiiNUM angustifoHum. Abundant on the lias near the coast at Shurton 

Bars. /. C. CoBins^ mm. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — SOMERSET. 355 

LiKUM perenne* Puriton, «nd on the Polden Hills. /. C, Collins, 

nus, 
Latatkra arborea. Steep Holmes, on the north side. J. C» CoHint, 

mss, 
Althaa officinalis, Commyn at Middlezoy, and in the Sedgmoors. 

J, C. CoVinsy mss. 
HTTtRJcuM ealycinum. Covering a copse at Kilve, being probably as 

wild as in any English station. J, C CoMns, mss, 

'  Andro9€Bmum, Not unfrequent in the lanes to the west- 
* ward of Bridgewater, and in the red soil of Quantock. 

J, C. CoUins, mss, 
— — — monianum. Towards the extremity of Brean Down ; 

hills above Cheddar Rocks. /. C. Collins, mss, 
' elodes. Boggy ground on the Quantock Hills above 

Holford ; Seven WcSs, Coombe. J. C, Collins, mss. 
Gieakium sanguineum. On the rocks below Leigh Wood, on the 

Somerset side of the Avon. E, Lees, mss, 
EftODiuM maritimum. By Berrow Church ; Steep Holmes. J. C 

Collins, mss, 
Impatibns NoU-me-tangere, In the woods at Prior Park. /. C, 

(Rollins, mss, 
Rhamkus Franguliu Woods above Ely Green, Over Stowey. J. 

iPodle, mss. On the Polden Hills. /. C. QdUns, mss. 
   ' cathajrticus. Thicket above Cheddar. Ji C, Collins, mss, 
Ulsx nanus, Quantock Hills. /. C. CoUina, msi, 
— *^^ proviftaaUs, Hills about Bristol ; also on Quantock, by Asholt. 

« The < Savans * at the late meeting dof the British Associ- 
ation, at Bristol, determined that the Ulex growing on the 

hills near that city was not the common U. europanis, but 

U. provincialis. I have since found the same plant in this 

neighbourhood.*' /• C. Collins, mss. 
Ononis spinosa. Common in corn-fields near Quantock. /. Poole, 

mss, 
MsniCAQo sativa. Naturalised in the Burnham sand-hills. J, C. 

Collins, mss, 
TuFouuK subterraneum. On the Quantock^, near Holford. /. C. 

Collins, mss, 
— -»— - mcariiimwn. Abundant about Shurton Bars, Stoke-conrcy. 

/. C, CcUins, mss, 
I ^eUatum, Stated in Rutter*s North-east Somerset as 

growing at Weston^in-Gordano. J. C, Collins, mss, 
" seahrnm* Field opposite the Parsonage House, Char- 

linoh. J, Poole, mss, 

omithopodioides. Field at Milverton. /. C, Collins, mss, 

AsiKAQAhVB gfyegphyUus, Near Charlton MackarelL (Mr. Clark.) 

J. C. CoUins, mss, 
HiPPOCBEPis comosa. Copse at Ford, on the Polden Hills. /. C. 

Collins, mss, 
Onobrtchis sativa. In a very wild station on the cliffs at Little 
Stoke, near Stoke-courcy. /. C. Collins, mss^ 



y Google 



556 Tfl£ NEW botanist's 6UIDE. 

ViciiL dMgtuHfoUa. Menidge on the Qoantodcs, near Hawkridge 

Water. /. C. CoOins, toss. 
~--^-i> latk^oides. Plentifully among the sandy fields at Steart. 

/. C. CoOim, mss, 
.1 r I   hUkyntea. Between Bristol and Pettsf<vd. /. IMe, nUs. 

Bedminster. /. C, CoUins, mss. 

  httea. Still growing on Glastonbury Tott Hill ; but V. hy- 

brida, I fear, is lost there. /. C CoUtm, nus. 
Lathtrus Aphaca. Common on the lias, by the sea, near Stoke- 

coorcy. /. C ColHns, nut. 
^— ' NUsoHa, In some years, frequent around Bridgwater ; 

Wembdon ; Goathurst. J, C» Collins, nus, 

  syhettris. Plentifully in Charlinch Lane, near Bridg- 
water; Stoke-courcy; Wembdon. J, C» CoBins,nu9. 
• latifiUu*, Copse on Polden Hill, near Ford. J. C, Colling, 



YUM. Perhaps the station in FL Bath, may belong to 

L. sylvestris. C. C. Babington, nus. 

paluttris. Burtle Turf-moor, /. C* CoBin$, nus. 

Fkuvvs domegtica. Hedges at Wembdon ; Cannington. J.C^CoUint, 

m$s. 
RuBus rhamnifolius. Common near the Quantock Hills. J. Poole, 

nut. 
PoTKunLLA vema. Frequent round Bridgwater. J. C ColKns, mts. 
f 1   aryentea. Frequent round Bridgwater. J. C. CiSHns, 

mts, 
CoMAftUH paluttre. Abundant in Burtle Turf-moor, and moon ad- 
joining. J. C. Collins, mss. 
Rosa systyla. Common in the neighbourhood of Bridgwater. J. 

C. CcXHnt, mts. Near the Horse and Jockey. Add. Fl. 

Bath. 

micrantha. Conamon in the neighbourhood of Bridgwater. 

J. C CoBins, nus. 
' inodora. South side of Brean Down. J. C. Collins, mss. 

Near the Horse and Jockey. Add. Fl. Bath. 

— eanina (Forsteri). In a lane leading fipom below Prior Park 

Gate to Combe Down ; near Bathampton rocks. Add. Ft. 
Bath. 

— tomentosa. In the lane with R. Forsteri. Add. Fl. Bath. 
Praus communis. On the hill leading to Cothelston ; Spaxton. J. 

C. Collins, nus. 

torminoHs. With P. communis. J. C. Collins, mss. 

Aria. Cheddtf Cliffs. J. C. Collins, mss. Leigh Wood.. 

£. Lees, mss. 
Efilobium roseum. On the Quantocks. J. C. CoBins, mss. 
(Enotheea biennis. Naturalised on the sand hills between Bumham 

and Berrow, for a mile or more. J. C. Collins, mss. 
lilniotErrLLms.fieriiciBatttm. Burtle Turf-moor; Middlesoy Sedg- 

moor. /. C. Collins, mss. 
Bryonia dunca. Cannington Park ; Stoke^courey ; Charlinch. /. 

C. Collins, mss. 
ScnuM album. Walls at Clifton. E. Lees, nus. 



y Google 



a UPPLBMENT — SOMERSET. 557 

SsDOH dasyj^tfUum, Bedminster, on an old wall. (Mr. Clark.) /. 
C ColKns, nut: 

CoTTLBDOK UmbiKcuB, Common on damp walk; rocks and iAd 
thatched roofs in the neighbourhood of Bridgwater and 
around the Quantocks. J, C. CoBinsy tnss. (Erase the 
comma between "Monckton" and ** Farley." — Page 31.) 

Chrtsosflkkium aUemifolium. By the side of the Cannington 
Brook ; Charlinch ; indeed, by all the streams flowing east- 
ward from Qnantock. «/. C Collins^ mss. 

Apium graveoleru. In most of the ditches round Bridgwater, occa- 
sionally flooded by the river; marsh at Highbridge. /. 
C Collins, mss. 

Petrosslikum sativum. Old walls at Bridgwater ; Quarry, Wemb- 
don. J. C, CoOins, mss, 
  segehan. Banks, Wembdon; Stoke-courcy. J. C. 

Collins, mss, 

Hblosciadium repens, Middlezoy Moor. /. C. GoBins, mss, 

SisoN Amomum, Enmore. /. Poole, mss. Wembdon. /. C, Collins, 
mss, 

SiUM latifoUum. Burtle Turf-moor ; ditches in the Sedgmoors, fre- 
quent. J. C. Collins, mss. 

BurtBURUH rotundifolium. Corn-fields on Felden Hills. J. C. 
CdOins, mss, 

CENANTae peueedanifolia. Between Stoke-courcy and Shurton Bars. 
J. C, CoUins, mss^ 

' ptrnpineUMss, Common around Bridgwater. J, C, Collins, 

mss, 

————— PkeBandrium, Ditches at Weston-supra-Mare ; frequent 
in the ditches and ponds about Bridgwater; Wembdon. 
/. C. Collins, mss, 

F(ENicuLUM mUgare. Steart ; Burnham ; Cannington Park ; Mid- 
dlezoy, frequent ; Wembdon. /. C. CoUins,- mss. 

SiLAus pmtensis, • Common in all the neighbourhood of Bridgwater. 
J. C. CoUins, mss. 

Crithhum maritimum. Abundant at Brean Down; Cievedon; 
Burnham. /. C. CoUins, mss. 

Peucbdanum palustre. Frequent in Burtle Turf-moor. J. C. CoUins, 
mss, 

Pastinaca sativa. Common around Bridgwater. /. C. CoUins, 
mss. 

Daucus meariHmns, Near Brean ; Shurton Bars. J, C. CoUins, mss. 

Caucalis latifolia. Corn-fields, Middlecoy, and Westonaoyland. J, 
C. CoUins, mss. 

Anthriscus CerefoUum, Near Bridgwater; Old. Bank, Middlezoy. 
J. C, CoUins, mss, 

Mtrrhis odorata. Hedges by the road-side between West Street, 
Bridgwater, and Enmore. /. Poole, mss, 

Smyrnium Olusatrum. Plentiful on Wembdon Hill, and about Mid- 
dlezoy. /. C, CoUins, mss. 

Ertngium maritimum. Abundant at Steart ; Burnham ; Minehead. 



J. C. CoUins, 1 



u 5 



y Google 



558 THE NEW botanist's guide. 

Eetmgiuh campestre. Given in Eutter's North Somerset as growutg 
at Weston-supra-Mare. /. C CoUins, mss. 

ViBuaKUM Lantana, Frequent in hedges and copses around Bridg- 
water ; Wembdon ; Enmore Wood. J. C. CoBins, mss. 

YiscuM album. Frequent in the orchards, in West Somerset. /. C. 
CoUinsy mss, Taunton. R. C. Alexander, mss, 

AsPKRULA cynanchica. Around Street and Glastonbury, on the lias. 
J. C. Collins, mss, 

RuBiA peregrina. Abundant in the hedges westward of Bridgwater, 
towards Stoke>courcy. J, C. OoUinSf mss, 

Galium income. Abundant in corn-fields by the sea, near Sburton 
Bars. J. a Collins, mss. Polden Hill. /. Poole, mss. 

Feoia dentata. Around Bridgwater; corn-fields near Shurton 
Bars. /. C. Collins, mss. 

YaIiBriana rubra. Rocks at Minehead ; old walls of Glastonbury 
Abbey. J. C. Collins, mss. 

DiPSACus pilosus. Road-side about a quarter of a mile soutli-east of 
Cannington, near Bridgwater. J. C. Collins, mss, 

————— FuUonum. About Mark and Huntqiill ; around Bridg- 
water. J. C, Colins, mss, 

Traoopogon porrifoUus. By the river side^ Bridgwater, towards 
Moorland. /. C. CoUins, mss. 

Prenantues muralis. Cheddar Rocks. /. C. Collins, mss. Hedges 
near Spoxton, in elevated situations on the north-east of 
Quantock. /. Poole, mss. 

HiERACiuM sylvaticum. On the Quantocks, near Cothelston ; Cheddar. 
J. C. CoUins, mss. 

— — -^— umbellatum. On the QuantocLs near Cothelston. J. C 
CoUins, mss. 

ONOPoanuM Acanthium. Near the Church, Berrow. /. C. CoUins, 
thss, 

Cnicus acaulis. On the hill above Cheddar. /. C. Collins, mss. 
Occasionally on Quantock ; common on. Polden Hill. J. 
Poole, mss, 

— — prcUensis, Common in Burtle Turf-moor, and the a4)oining 
moors. J. C. Collins, mss, 

Artemisia maritima. Abundant on both sides the river Panret, to- 
wards the mouth. J. C. CoUins, mss, 

CoKTSA squarrosa. Frequent around Bridgwater. J. C. CoUin$, 
mss. 

Eriobron acris, Bumham ; Street. J. C. CoUins, mss. About the 
limestone quarries at Halse, near Taunton. B, C, Alex- 
ander, mss, 

SsMscio squalidus. In the marsh near Bumham and HuntspiU. J, 
C CoUins, mss. 

» saracenicus. Bumham. J. C. ColHns, mss. 

Aster TripoHum, Common on the banks of the Parret at Bridg- 
water. J. C, CoUins, mss. 

LiMBARnA crithmoides. Steep Holmes. /. C. CoUins, mss. 

Doronicum Pardalianches. By the side "of the brook, near St. Ca- 
therine's. Add. FL Bath, 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — SOMERSET. 559 

Anthkmis nobilis, Radlett Common, Spaxton ; and other moist pas- 
tures in that neighbourhood. J. Poole, nus, 

Camfakula TrticheUum, About Cheddar, and on the Clifis. J. C. 
Cdlins, ms8. 

ghymeratiu About Cheddar, and on the Cliffs. /. C. 
Collins, nus, 

' hyhrxdd. In com«fields, but rarely ; Wembdon. /. C. 

CoOinSi'mss. (Mr. Babington sugg«sts that ** Stantonbury 
Hiir* is intended by *' St. Anthony's Hill; " but says that 
there is no quarry there. The name ** Thompson" is 
given as the authority for the station in my copy of Mr. 
Winch's MSS. Add. — Page 33. ) 

hedercLcea, Plentifully on the Quantock Hills, above 

Holford. /. C. Collins, mss, 

Vaccinium Oxycoccus, At Shapwick, in fruit, 1836. /. C. C6llins,mss, 

VtHs' Tdcea, Leigh Woods, near Bristol, and in that neigh- 
bourhood. J. C Collins, mss, 

MoNOTROPA Hypopitys, Leigh Wood ; near Dunster. J. C, CoUins, 
mss, 

Chlora perfoliata. Abundant at Shurton Bars, Little Stoke, and on 
ail the lias bordering the channel. J, C Collins, mss. 

Ertthrjba pulcheBa, Leigh Woods. /, Poole, mss. Bumham 
Berrow. /. C. CoUins, mss. 
'I Utteralis. Bi'ean Down. /. C. Collins, mss. 

Convolvulus SoldaneUa, Abundant at Steart and Burnham. J. C. 
Collins, mss, 

CuscuTA Epithymum, On furze, &c. in the parish of Broomfield ; and 
other elevated parts of Quantock. /. Poole, mss. 
— ^ europcea. Hills above Minehead ; Quantock. J. C. Collins, 
mss. On the bank of the Avon, opposite to Bath-ford. Add, 
FL Bath, 

LiTHosPKRMUM purpufe-ccernleum. In a copse near the road, between 
Bridgwater and Pawlett ; South Brent, very plentiful on 
the brow of the hill, above the village. (Mr. Clark.) J. C. 
CoUins, mss, 

Anchusa sempervirens. Monkton, near Taunton ; Bridgwater ; 
Goathurst. /. C, Collins, mss. Enmore; Castle Hill, 
Nether Stowey. /. Poole, mss, 

^Symphytum ctsperrimum. Near Bath.. C. C, Babington, sp. 

Atropa Belladonna^ Among the shingles, on the coast near Little 
Stoke. J. C. Collins, mss, (In a different communication, 
with which I was favoured by the Rev. J. C. Collins, a 
locality for this plant is named *< Lilstock ; " a name that 
appears in Gazetteers, which do not mention any ** Little 
Stoke" in this county. Perhaps ** Lilstock" may be a 
local abbreviation of the name ?) 

VsRBAscuM nigrum. Near Milverton. /. C. Collins, mss. 

Antirrhinum Orontium. CorU'fields, Enmore, not uncommon. 
/. Poole, mss, .King's CHff, North Petherton. /. C. Collins, 
mss, . i. 

H 6 



y Google 



560 THB KBW BOTANIST*S GUtDE. 

LiNAftiA Elatine. A oommon weed, in gardens and corn>fields, near 

Quantock. J, Poole, m$s. 
^^ spuria. Edington, on Polden Hill. /. Pook, mu* Wemb- 

don ; Bridgwater. J. C. CoUins, mss, 
Vkeonica qncaia. St. Vincent's Rocks, a little bebw the Hot Wells. 

E, Lees, mss. Rocks by the Hot Wells, in plenty, but of 

difficult access. W. A, BromfifHd, mss. (V. hybrida.) 
Ltcopus europ<Bus. Halse, near Taunton. R, C Alexander, mss, 
Mentha rotundifoUa, Middlezoy. /. C. Collins, mss, 
citraia. Between Bridgwater and Street. J. C, CoOins, 

mss. 
Galbopsis LadoMum. Plentiful in the corn-fields, west of Little 

Stoke. J. C. Ceiains, mss, 
Stachys ambigua. Weston^oyland ; Middlezoy. /. C, Collins, mss. 

In a ditch bounding Miller's Nursery Garden, Bristol. 

(C. C. Babmgton, Esq.) W, A. Bromfield, mss, 
AciNOS vulgaris. Cheddar Cli£&. J. C. CoOins, mss, (Read 

« Stantonbury Hill" for « St. Anthony's Hill ?"— Page 35i) 
Calamimtha officinalis. Not uncommon in the Quantock district 

J, Poole, mss. 
Mkussa officinalis. This plant deserves a place in a British Flora, 

more than many admitted. It is not unfrequently found in 

decidedly wild stations near Bridgwater, particularly at 

Westonzoyland, Over Stowey, Wembdon, Charlinch." J. C. 

Collins, mss. 
ScuTSLLAEiA minor. Common on the Quantocks. /. C Collins, 

mss. 
OaoBANCHB datior. Plentifully on Brean Down. J. C. Collins, 

mss. 
HoTroviA palustris. Common in ditches, in the marshes around 

Bridgwater. J. C. Collins, mss, 
Anagallis arvensis (canulea). A weed ia a garden at Bridgwater. 

/. C. ColUns, mss. In corn-fields at Marshfield, Conkwell, 

Swainswick, and on Barrow Hill. Fl, Bath, 
Statics Armeria. Brean Down. fT. C. Treodyan, sp. Bumham 

salt-marsh ; Bossington Hill. J. C. ColUns, mss. 
— - spathulctta. Steep Holmes. /. C. Collins, mss. 
Limonium. Abundant in the salt marsh between Highbridge 

and Bumham, by the river's mouth. J. C. Collins, mss. 
GtAux mantima. 1 ^,j ,g^^y^, ^^ ^^ ^^^^^ ^f ^1,^ ^ver 

i'LAMTAGO martitma. I «r. . . r„^Ko^ ^^a «*«-,» r n 



SALSoLAlWt. ' f Parret, at Bumham and Steart J. C. 

Chenopodium mantimum, J ^ "**' *"*** 
Ennu 
Chiltoi 
mss. 
"lOn 
.1 Pa 
J J.i 



• urbicum, Enmore, common. J. Poole, i 

• murale. Chilton on Polden. /. Poole, mss. 



J. C. Collins, mss. 
At&iflxx laeiniata. "j On the sea -coast, near the mouth of the 
. porttdacoides. I Parret, Bumham and Steart ; Minehead. 

Beta maritima, J /. C. Collins, ms», 

Saucoemia herbacea. Mouths of the rivers Parret and Axe. /. C. 



Collins, mss. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — SOMERSET. 561 

PoLTGOKUM dmnetorum. Among bushes, on a bank, in a bolloir 

through which the Western Railway passes, about one mile 

from Keynsham towards Bristol. (C. C. Babington, Esq.) 

W. A. Bromfield, mss. 
RuMEZ maritimus. Mouth of the Parret ; Steart Marsh. /. C» 

CdHns, mss. 
" pidcher. Brean Down. /. Poole, mss. Near Minehead. 

/. C, Collins, mss. Common on road-sides. Fl, Bath. 
Thesivu Unophj/Uum, Claverton Down. (Mr. John Kitley.) Add, 

Fl, Bath, 
Euphorbia pUUyphyUa, Edington, on Polden. /. Poole, mss, 
— — - iMthyris, .Apparently indigenous in Warley Wood. Add. 

Fl Bath. 
Paralias, Sandy coast from Bumham to Brean. /. C, 

Collins, mss, 
  Peplis, Sandy coast from Bumham to Brean. J, C. 

Collins, mss, 
— pihsa. ** In plenty in a lane leading from Prior Park 

Lodge to Combe Down, and also in a wood to the east of 

the monument at Prior Park, as it appears. to me, truly 

wild ; kindly pointed out to me by the discoverers, Mr. E. 

Simras and Dr. Heneage Gibbes.** Fl. Bath. (This is 

the E. Epithymoides of Flora Bathonensis, as I am told by 

the Author, to whom I am indebted for a specimen, and who 

further adds, that the Sussex plant is to be referred to K. 

coralloides, not to the present species. H, W,) 
BuTVs sempervirens. Quantock Hills. (Mr. Clark.) /. C CoUins, 

mss, 
Ulmus glabra. Common in the hedges in West Somerset. /. C, 

Collins, mss. 
— suberosa. Common in the hedges in West Somerset J. C. 

Collins^ mss. 
QuKRCUs sessilijlora, Halse, near Taunton. B, C. Alexander, mss, 
Hyorocharis Morsus-ranm, Common in the ditches, in the moors 

around Bridgwater. J. C. CoUins, mss. 
Triolochin maritimum. In wet places, among the sand-hills, Burn- 
ham. J. C. CoUins, mss. 
Orchis pyramidalis. Common in all the lias district. /. C. CoUins, 

mst. 
Ofhrys apifera. Abundant among the sand-hills, at Bumham. 

/. C. CoUins, mss. 
Neottia spiralis. Pastures at Enmore and Goathurst, not uncommon. 

J. Poole, mss. At Steart ; between Pensford and Whitley. 

(Mr. Clark.) J. C. CoUins, mss. • 
Epipactis rubra. One ^eciroen, and only one, I discovered near 

Hawkridge Water, on the Quantocks. /. C. CoUins, mss. 
Narcissus bijlorus. Meadow at Cannington, near Bridgwater. 

J, C. CoUins, mss. 
Galanthus nivalis. Along the course of Durleigh Brook ; banks at 

Spaxton. /. C, Collins, mss. 



y Google 



562 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CoMTALLAEiA fHojaUs, Leigh 'Woods. J, C. CaUins, mss. Barn 
Wood, near the Rocks. (Miss Lonsdde.) Add. Ft Bath. 

mvUiJiora, With C. migalis. Add. FL Bath. 

Gage A lutea. ( Mr Pamplin suggests that Wincanton may be intended 
as the locality of this species. Probably such may be the cor- 
rect reading, but it is printed " Winstaunton " by Turner 
and Dillwyn, who refer to Merrett. I am not aware of any 
place bearing this latter name. ff. W. — Page 37.) 

Allium oUraceum. Middlezoy. /. C. Collins, nus. 

Asparagus officinalis* Sand banks at Steart and Bumham, from 
three to five feet high when in blossom. (Mr. Clark.) 
J. C. CoUins, mss. 

F&XTiLLAEiA MeUagris, Compton Martin, on the Mendips. J. C 
Collins, mss, 

Ttfba angusHfoUa, Ditches at Bumham and Wembdon, not un- 
common. J. C CoOins, mss 

AcoRUS Calamus, Plentifully in King's Sedgemoor. J, C. Collins, 
mss. Supposed to have been introduced at Bath, by Mr. 
Sole. ,€' C. Babington, mss, 

PoTAMOGETON rufuccHS. W^embdon. J. C, Collins, mss. 

RurFiA maritima. Salt marsh at the base of Brean Down. J. C. 
Collins, mss. 

ZosTKRA marina, Burnham. J. PooU, mss. 

LuzuLA Forsteri, Woods and copses, east of Quantock. /. C, Collins, 
mss, 

JuNcus maritimus. Mouth of the Parret, in ditches; not unfrequent 
near the channel. /. C. Collins, mss. 

I aeutns. Shurton Bars. /. C. Collins, mss, 

Ctperus longus. ( Refer to « B. G. *' — Page 37. ) 

SciRFUs maritimus. Plentifully in ditches overflowed by the Parret ; 
near Westonzoyland ; near Bridgwater and Middlezoy ; salt 
marsh, Brean Down. J. C. Collins, mss. 

Carex arenaria, Steart, at the mouth of the Parret J. Poole, mss. 

— — — divvlsa. Enmore. /. PooU^ mss, 

— axillaris. In a bog between Wraxhall and the Horse and 
Jockey. Add. Fl, Bath. 
Pseudo-Cyperus, With C. axillaris. Add. FL Bath. OH 
brick-yard) near Goathurst J. Poole, mss. 

Alopecurus agrestis. Common in the neighbourhood of the Quan- 
tocks, J. C. CoUins, mss, 

Amhophila arundinacea. Abundant at Bumham and Steart, and on 
the sandy coast. /. C. CoUins, mss. 

Agrostis setacea. On the Quantocks, reaching to the highest peak. 
A. Southby* mss. 

PoA maritima. Brean Down, and on the sandy coast. J, C, Collins^ 
mss. 

— — « aquatica. In the canal and river. FL Bath. By the mail- 
road, between Bristol and Taunton, in several places H. W. 
sp, 

AwEVAfatua. Common in corn-fieldS| near Bridgwater. J, C. ColUnst 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — DORSET. 565 



Eltm V8 arenarius. 
HoRDEUM maritimum. 
Taiticum loUcLceum, 



juncevm, 
RoTTBOLUA incurvata. 



All found at Burnham, Berrow, and Stcart. 
/. C. CcUins, mst. 



IV. DORSET. 



HiLLiBo&us viridis. Near Fifebead Neville. W. C. Trevdyant sp. 

Ulex nanus. In profusion between Poole and Christchurch. W. A. 
Bromfiddf mss. 

Trifolictm resupinatum. Shores of Poole Harbour (Eng. Bot. 
Supp. ) ; but I did not find it. W. A, Bromfield, mss. 

CBMTAa&EA Jacea ? Purbeck. W. C Trevelyan, sp. 

Campanula rapunculoides. In a copse near Lulworth. (Mr. Curtis.) 
IF. A. Bromfield, mss. 

Convolvulus ScidaneUa. Erase «* «p."— Page 42. ) 

Staticb Armeria. Chesil Bank, near Portland W. C, Trevdyan, 
sp. 

Chenopodium /ruft'cofum. Chesil Bank, Weymouth. W. A, Bromfield, 
sp. 

Daphne Mezereum. Now apparently almost extirpated in Cranbourne 
Chace, in various alleged stations on which I sought it 
unsuccessfully in 1836, though I was shown the identical 
spots on which it till recently grew. In 1835, some persons 
dug up all they could find in the neighbourhood of Bland- 
ford, as at Langton Copse, Hillwood, &c. W. A. Bromfield, 
mss. 

EuPHdEBiA ParcUias. Near the ferry, on the neck of Portland Isle, 
in plenty. W. A. Bromfield^ mss. ( Erase «* «p. " — Page 43. ) 

Mercurlalis anntia. Common on waste ground about Poole and 
Weymouth. W. A. Bromfidd, mss. 

Ikis foetidissima. Abundant by the road-side from Wimbome to 
Blandford. Mag. Nat. Hist. viii. 

Leucojuh asiivum. Near Kingston Hall, close to the turnpike, hard 
by a stream of water across the road, opposite the Hall. 
(J. C. Dale, Esq.) W. A. Bromfield, mss. 

Rrtncospora /u«ca. Near Warehain, 1836. (Mr. Borrer.) W. A, 
Bromfield, mss. 

Carex extensa. ( Refer to *« Eng. FV not ** B. C." — Page 44.) 



y Google 



564f TUB NEW BOTANI8T*8 GUIDE. 



V. WILTS. 



Clematis Vitalba, Common in the western part of Wilts. S. C. 

Alexander, mss. 
ToRftiTis glabra. In a wood between the Lodge gate of ^ye Park 

and the House. R. C Alexander, irm. 
Reseda Intea, Abundant in n^ected quarries about North Wrax- 

hall, Gistleoombe, and Corsham. R. C Alexander, mss. 
SiLEM E anglica. Near the Horse and Jockey, Kingsdown. C. C. Ba^ 

hinffton, nus, (The stations for this, and some other species 

not repeated here, are mentioned under SoKEassr, as being 

within the limits of the Flora Bathonensis.) 
Rhammus catharticuM, Comnon in hedges about Corsham. R. C. 

Alexander, nus. 
Onokis spinosa. Frequent about Corsham. R. C, Alexander, m$a. 
Astragalus glyeyphyUtu, Slaugbterford, in the lane leading to Bid- 

destone, one plant in 1836. R, C Alexander, nus. 
Hirroc&Eris comosa. Abundant on stony ground ; Box ; Corsham. 

R. C Alexander, nus. 
OKOBaYCHis saiiva. Not unfrequent in the same localities. R. C. 

Alexander, nus. (Some localities as the preceding f) 
ViCLA angustifolia. Near the Mill, Spye Park ; Corsham Park. R, 

C. Alexander, nus. 
Ptrus Aria, Middle Pickwick, near Corsham. R. C. Alexander^ 

mss. 
Brtonla diaica. Very common in the west of Wilts. R. C. Alexander^ 

mss. 
CoTTLEDON umbUicus. Biddestone, Easton ; Monckton Farley, R. C. 

Alexander, mss. 
Sbdum sexangtdare. (Refer to " Eng. FV instead of " B. C" The 

locality is mentioned in both works, but it is copied in the 

words of the English Flora. — Page 45. ) 
SisoN Amomum. Atworth ; Corsham ; Biddestone. R. C. Alex- 

ander, mss. 
Carum Carui. Meadows at Christian Malford. J. Poole, mss. 
SiLAus pratensis. In most of tlie meadows about Corsham. R. C 

Alexander, mss. 
Pastinaca saliva. Frequent about Box, Hartham, Pickwick, and 

along the road-side on the hilly ground near the Monument, 

between Devizes and Pewsey. R. C. Alexander, mss. 
Viburnum Lantana. Abundant about the west of Wilts. R. C. 

Alexander, mss. 
ViscuM album. Box ; in an orchard at Notton House ; near Chip- 

penham. R. C, Alexander, mss. 
AsFBRULA cynanchica. On hilly ground that has been quarried; 

Slaugbterford ; Box ; Lucknam. 
Fedia dentata. Slaugbterford. R. C Alexander, mss. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — WILTS. 565 

Paenantbss tnumlii. Box Quarries; Colerne. E, C. AUxander, 

mas. 
HiKRACiUM sylvaticum. Box Quarries ; among the fir-trees at the top 

of Bowden Hill. R, C. Alexander, mss, 
— — — - umbeUatum, Bovrden Hill, on the heathy ground crossing 

to Nash Hill. R. C. Alexander, nus, 
Ciricus eriophorus. Box Quarries ; Wadswick ; Bide Vale. R. C. 

Alexander, mss. 
pratensis. In the brick-field opposite the inn at • ♦, near 

Devizes. jR. C. Alexander, mss. 
  tuberosus. (Refer to «* Eng, Bot. " not '« B. G." — Page 45. ) 

aoavHs. Common in Wilts. R, C- Alexander, mss. 

CoNYZA squarrosa. By the road-side between Corsham and Lacock, 

and about Colerne, abundantly. jR. C Alexander, mss. 
Erigeron acris. About quarried ground^ Corsham. R. C, Alex- 
ander, mss. 
Campanula Tracfielium. Corsham and Colerne, abundant jR. C. 

Alexander^ mss. 
— — — — fflomerata. In dry fields about Corsham, and on all the 

chalk downs a^)out Pewsey, abundant. jR. C. Alexander, 



— ' hyhrida. Between Biddestone and Slaughterford. R. C 

Alexander, mss. 

PoLBMOKiuM cisndeum. In the water-meadows between Pewsey and 
Manning ford, among the reeds. R, C. Aletander, mss. 

Vebbascum nigrum. North Wraxhall, by the road-side going from 
Chippenham to Marshfield, and in the Tillage, abundant. 
R. C. Alexander, mss, 

Atropa Belladonna, Cloud quar (?) at Slaughterford. B, C. Akx^ 
ander, mss, 

SoLAKUM nigrum. Frequent in gardens, Corsham. jR. C, Alexander, 
mss. 

LiNARiA spuria. Growing with L. Elatine, veiy abundantly in the 
ploughed field above Cloud quar^ Slaughterford. R, C. Alex- 
ander, mss, 

Ltcopus europ<Bus, In a swampy mill-pond at Ford) near • Castle- 
combe; Chippenham, on the London road. R. C. Alex- 
ander, mss. 

Mentha rotundifolia. Slaughterford, in the lane leading to Bidde- 
stone. jR. C. Alexander, mss. 
" Pulegium. By the brook. Ford. R, C. Alexander, mss, 

Galbobdolon luteum. Frequent in woods, Corsham. jR. C. Alex- 
ander, mss. 

Galeopsis Lddanum. North Wraxhall ; Bradford ; Slau^terford; 
Pewsey. R. C. Alexander, mss. 

AciNos vulgaris. About Widnam Mill, near Corsham ; Box quar- 
ries ; Neston Park ; North Wraxhall ; a white variety on 
the top of Oar Hill, between Pewsey and Marlborough. 
R. C. Alexander, mss. 

Calamintha officinalis. Cloud quar, Slaughterford. R, C. Alex- 
ander, mss. 



y Google 



566 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Calamintha Nepeta, On the wall opposite Leeoek Abbej. H, (X 
Alexander, mss. 

Lathkjba Mqmamttria. At the root of a rotten tree in CoUett*s Bot- 
tom, near Corsham. jR. C. Alexander, mm. 

Omuamchk minor. Frequent in old dorer-fieMs. JL C. Alexauderf 
mss. 

PmmvLA datior. Woods at CoUett*s Bottom. R, C. Alexander, mss. 

Anaoallis arvensis (caenilea). Hartham and Pockeridgey near 
Corsham. R. C. Alexander, mss. 

EuFHo&BiA Laihyris. A weed in gardens, Corsham. R. C Alex- 
ander, mss. 
  '• amygdaUndes. Collett*s Bottom, near Corsham. R. C. 
Alexander, mss, 

Saoittaua saffUti/oUa. Near the bridge, Laoock Abbey. R.C. 

Ophbts ttpifera. Middlehill, near Box ; Corsham. R, C AUxander, 

wus. 
Tamos commmmis. Common in the west of Wilts. R. C, Alexander, 

CoMTALLAUA mofaUs. CoIlett*s Bottom Woods. R. C. AUxamder, 

mss, 

- msdHfiora. ** Same woods " [as the preceding ?] ; and 

in woods at Spye Park. R. C. A lexander, wus. 
OftWRBooALim wnbeQatum, In the first meadow behind Gould's tan- 

yard ; and, formerly, in Dove-house dose, Corsham. R. C. 

A le x amdery wus. 

  pyrenaicwm. Very common in woods, Corsham. R. 

C. Alexander, mss. 
CotcmcQU antumnale. About tke north-west of Wilta* abundant. 

R. C. Alexander, nus. 
Ctfkeos lomgus. Jn 1829, Mr. Peete found about a quarter of an 

acreof Cyperus longus, within a quarter of a mUe of Bqyton 

House. W, Pam^^n, nus. 
Carkx axiOaris. Spye Park. R. C. Alexander^ mss. 
Alopkcurus agrettis. '\ 

BaoM us erectus. [^ Common about Corsham. R. C, Alexander, 

Armv A fatwa. 
Hoaosnic pratenu. 



/ 



VI. HANTS. 



Ravvvcvlvs parvijhrus. Gadshill, Isle of Wight; very abundant 
on hedge banks and waste places about Southampton, as in 
Love Lane, Portswood, shore between Southampton and 
Netley, &c. W. A. Bromfidd, sp. 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT— HANTS. 567 

GhAVcwulutewn, Shore between Southampton and iSetjey; South- 
sea beach ; Stokesbay, &c. W. A. Bromfieid, mss. 

CoRTOALis davieulaia. Extremely common about Southampton ; at 
Westwood, near Netley, it covers the ground m some parts 
like a mat. W, A. Bromfield, mss. 

Cakilx nuuritima. Sandown Bay, Isle of Wight. E, Lees, nus, 

Tkesdalia nvdicatdis. Abundant on the sandy heaths about Lip- 
hook, Selbome, Kingsley, &c. W. PampUn, mss, 

Lkpidxum ruderale. A single specimen found near JSouthampton. 

IF, A. Bromfieldj mss, 
  Smithiu Common about Southampton. W, A. Bromjieldf 

tp. 

CocHLKARiA officinalis. By the side of Southampton Water, about a 
mile from the town. J. E, Leefe, mss. 

anglica. Muddy shore at Northam Bridge, Southampton, 

W, A, Bromfield, mss, 

TuBRiTis gUibra, Sparingly near Froxfield; also sparingly near 
Old Alresford. fT. Pamplin, mss, 

HisrsEis matronalis. In the hedge of a private lane belonging to a 
farm-house nearly opposite to the Fox at Bramdean ; near 
the farm-yard of White Wool, West Meon ; hedge bank at 
Selbome. W. Pamplin, mss, 

&NAPIS tenuifolia. Old town walls of Southampton, abundantly. 
W, A. Bromfield, mss. 

Matihiola incamu Cliffs between SteephiU Cove and Ventnor 
Cove, Isle of Wight. Comp, 

RvajQA fruHculosa, Sought unsuocessftilly on the shores of Stokes- 
bay. W, A, Brontjield, mss, 

YioiJ^ butea. New Forest, near Baldre. W. A, Brcmfield, sp, (The 
leaves are cordate, and the plant altogether looks like a pale- 
fiowered variety of V. canina. H. W,) 

Deosb&a hngifolia. Plentifully in the New Forest, between Tatch- 
bury, near Redbridge, and   ? ; in the bogs between 

Oakhanger and Kingsley, near Selbome. W, Pamplin, mss, 
PetersfleW Heath. W, A. Bromfield, mss, 

SxLBHK maritima. Shore at Portsea. E, Lees, mss. 

Arxnaria pepioiies. Shwe at Portsea. E. Lees, mss, 

   marina. Near Southampton. /. E. Leefe, mss, 

MoENCHiA erecta. Abundant on sandy commons. fF, Pamplin, mss. 

Cbea8T10m arvense, Abboston Downs, and elsewhere. W, PtimpUn, 
mss. 

LnrvM angustifoUum. About Cowes, Ryde, &c. IF. A. Bromfield, 
mss. 

Httbricuk Androsismum, Westwood; hedges about Southampton. 
W, A. Bromfield, mss. 

Htpbrxcum dodes, Petersfield Heath. W, A, Bromfield, mss. Bogs 
between Oakhanger and Kingsley. W, Pamplin, mss, 
( Erase " sp, " — Page 47. ) 

Erodium maritimum. Cliffs near Freshwater. E. Lees, mss. 

BuAMNUs Frangvla, Westwood, &c., Southampton. W, A. Brom- 
field, mss. 



yGooQle 



gL 



568 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Rhamnus eathartieus. A hedge of this shrub, just out of St Mary^s 

churchyard towards Richardson's coal-yard, Southampton ; 

swampy wood near the Itchen, above Mand>ridge, along widi 

R. Frangula. W. A, Bromfidd^ nut. 
Ulez nanus. Southampton Common, See. W. A. Brom/ield, mu. 
TaiFouuM omitkopodundes. Shore of Fisher's Pond, near Owlesbory ; 

also on the commons near Kingsley. W. Pamplin, mu, 
— — > tnbterranevM, Very common in dry pastures about South- 

amnton, as between that town and Netley, on the shore. 

JF.^. Bromfield, msa. 
Pnus domegtica. (This does not grow in the Isle of Wight ; P. tor> 

minalis having been so misnamed, fF. A. Bromfield. ) 
  torminalis. Westwood, near Netley, common ; at Binstead, 

Isle of Wi^t, a remarkably fine tree of it. fT. A. Brom- 

field, tnss. 
RiBBs rubnan. Near Selbome Priory. W. A, Bromfidd, mss. 
Apiux^raeeoZnu. Marchwood. fF. A. Bromfidd, mu. 
PsmosKLiNnif segetum. In one of the little planted inclosures, near 

the beach, between Southampton and Netley; near Ryde. 

W. A. Bromfidd, tp. 
Sisoir Amonmm. Common about Ryde. W. A. Bromfidd, sp. 
BuFLKuauM rotuTtdifdium. Com-fidds at Titchbomeand Owlesbury. 

IF. PoMfiUn, mu. 
SiLAUs pratensis. Woods at Cowes and Ryde. W. A. Btomfidd, sp. 
CarrHMUic maritimum. Abundant on the cliffs at Freshwater. E. 

Lees, mu, 
Dauc?s mariiimus. Freshwater (Rev. G. £. Smith); Underdiff. 

JF. A. Bromfidd, mu. 
Ertnoidm maritimMm. Portaea. E» Lees, am. 
AsnainLA eynanchica. In one spot on Southampton Coomion. W. 

A. Bromfidd, mu. 
DiPSAcus pUosus. In the woods between Selbome and Oaldumger, 

as recorded by White. JF. PampKn, mss. 
TaAooroGoN porrifoUus. Meadows near Odiham Churdi, plentifully. 

(Mr. J. Nash.) IF. PampKn, mu. On the shore, at the 

back of a house at Hjrthe, abundant, doubtless the outcast 

of a garden. W. A. Bromfidd, mss. 
Lactdca virosa. Among bushes on the shore between Southampton 

and Netley ; and other places about Southampton. W, A. 

Bron^dd, mu. 
Cnicus pratensis. Common about Southampton ; in very dry places 

on Southampton Common, among the fiirze ; abundant in a 

moist meadow near Netley Abbey. W. A. Bron^eld, mss. 

(Is « Setley " a misprint for " Netley *' in Turner and Dill- 

wyn*s Guide, and copied on page 48 of this work ?) 
' acauHs. Frequent on the Downs. W. PampHn, mu, 
Artemisia maritima. Salt marshes near Millbrook ; below Northam 

Bridge. JF. A. Bromfidd, mss. 
CoNTZA squarrosa. Downs near Freshwater. E. Leu, mss. 
LiMBAaDA crithmaidu. Near the river at East Cowes. (S. Hail* 

stone, Esq.) J¥. A. Bromfidd, msf. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — HANTS. 569 

PuLicABiA vulgaris. In a plasby spot at Marchwood. W. A. Brom* 
Jieldt msst 

Centa u REA /acea? Hursley. W, C Trevelyan, tp. Common in the 
Isle of Wight, as at Ventnor, Carisbrooke, &c. ; at Mans- 
bridge near Southampton. W. A. Bromfieldy msi. (This 
appears to be the C. Jacea of English botanists, and the C. 
nigrescens of Wildenow. It is the plant mentioned on page 
48 of this work, under the name of C. nigra.) 

Campanula patula. Plentifully on a gravelly bank near to Bram^ot 
village, in a lane leading thence towards Hinhead Heath, in 
1835. (Miss Frances Pamplin.) W. Pamplin, mst, 

~— ^ ghmerata. On the chdk about Old Alresford. fF, 
Pamplin, msa, 

hybrida. Corn-fields about Alresford, &c. W. Pamplin^ 



fM8, 

Phtteuha orhictdare. On the chalk about Old Alresford. W, 

Pamplin, mss, 
MoNOTROPA Hypopitya, Near Avington, between Winchester and Al^ 

resford; Sel borne Hanger, as recorded by White. W, 

Pamplin, maa. 
Chlora perfoHata, In a wood to the west of Cowes. /. E, Lerfe, mss. 
Convolvulus Soldanella. Sandy shore at Portsea. E, Lees, mss. 
PuLMONARiA angustifolia. Common on the New Forest about Lym-^ 

ington; in borders of fields and hedges around Boldre 

Bridge ; ** with every gradation of breadth and narrowness 

in the leaves, and equally variable in the presence or absence 

of spots on them." W. A, Bromfield, mss. 

officinalis. Exbury wood. B. G. (It would seem, 

from tlie remarks of Dr. Bromfield, that the present ought 

to be joined with tlie preceding species. ) 
Vkrbascum ptUverulentum. About Old Alresford, but not common. 

W. Pamplin, mss. 
Atrofa Belladonna, For some distance along the shore between 

Southampton and Netley, within, and close under, the 

paling, beginning about a hundred yards from the new Steam 

Ferry over the Itchen ; also on a bank to the left of the last 

stile, in going to Netley by the shore. W, A. Bromjield, 

mss. 
SoLAKUM nigrum. Common about Southampton. fT. A. Bromfield, 

mss. 
LiNARiA spuria. In a corn-field between Twyford and Compton, 

near Winchester. W. A, Bromfield, mss. 

Elatine. With L, spuria. W. A. Bromfield, mss. 

— — — repens. Stokeshay ; Southampton, near Marchwood (W. 

Borrer, Esq. ) ; a little out of West Cowes, in a hedge on the 

left going to Newport. IF, A, Bromfield, mss. At the top 

of the hill near Cowes. /. E, Leefe, mss. 
MiLAMPTRUM arvense. Abundant in corn-fields above St. Lawrence 

Undercliff*, Isle of Wight ; also near Niton. fT. A. Brom' 

field, sp. 
MENTHA rotundifolia. Below Petersfield ; near Selborne ; near the 



y Google 



570 THE NEW BOTANIST*S GUIDE. 

mill between Bishop's Sutton and Old Alresford. (Mr 

Forder.) W. Pamjiin, mu. 
Galeopsis Ladanum. Beach between Southampton and Netley. IT. 

A» Bromfidd^ dim. 
Galeobdolon luteum. Here and there about Southampton. W. A» 

Bromfiddy msM. 
Meuttis MdissophyUum (grandiflora). Westwood, Netley Abbey. 

W, A. Broa^fidd, mst, 
ScuTXLLAMA minoT. Bog on Petersfield Heath. W. A. BromfUld, 

Primula datior. White Wool Farm near West Meon ; also in woods 

near Frozfield. W. PampUn^ m$s. 
Statics Armaria, Cliffs at Freshwater. E. Lws, m»8, 
— »— — JJmonium. On the rocks at ScratchelFs Bay, near the Needles. 

E. Lees, nus. 
Glaux maritima, Sandown Bay, Isle of Wight. E, Lees, m*s, 
pLANTAOo maritimeu Scratchell*s Bay. E, Lees, nus, 
Salsola KalL Sandown Bay, shore at Portsea. E, Lees, mss. 
Chenofodium mariiimttm. Shore at Portsea. E. Lees, nus. 
Ateiplex portidacoides. Salt marshes. W, A, Bromfidd, nus, 
, littoraUs. Shore between Southampton and Netley, abun- 

dant. W, A, Bromfield, nus. 
Polygonum maritimum. At Christchurch, on the sandy shore near 

Muddiford. (Mr. Borrer.) C. C. Bdbingtom,nus. 
Daphne Mezereum. In the beech woods between West Meon and 

Bramdean, quite wild and nxA sparingly. (Mrs. Winkwortli 

Moody. ) JV, Pamplin, nus, 
^VTHOKKA pertlandica, Gosport. W, A, Bromfidd, sp. 
Mercueialis annua, Southampton, W, A. Bromfiddy nus, 
Triglochin maritimum. Muddy shores of the Itchen river. W. A, 

Bromfidd, mss, 
Ophrts apt/era. Culver Cliff. C, C, Bahin^on, mss, 
Epipactis grandiflora. Woods at the Grange near Ringwood. (Mr. 

Ingram. ) W. A, Bromfidd, nus. 
lus fcttida, Netley Abbey; not coomion about Southampton. fT. 

A. Bromfield, mss. Plentiful between Cowes and Fresh- 
water. E. Lees, mss. Common in the Isle of Wight. 

B. G. 

CoNYALLARiA midtiflora. Abundant in Westwood, near Netley 

Abbey ; in a wood, by the side of the Itchen, about half a 

mile above Mansbridge. JF, A, Bromfield, mss, 
RvKvaactdeatus. Not uncommon about Southampton. W, A, Brunt' 

field, nus. 
Narcissus bifiorus. In several meadows about Hensting and Owles- 

bury, apparently wild ; also about West Meon (Mr. £ar- 

waker). W, PampUn, nus. 
ZosTXRA marina. In large quantity, in Southampton Water, near 

Hythe, impeding the boats in shallow places. W, A. Brom^ 

fidd, mss, 
SciRPUS Savii, Knowle, Isle of Wight. Comp. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — SUSSEX. 571 

CAasx ctrenaria, Sandy shore at Portsdown. E, Leet, mIm. 

Gastridium lendigerum. In a fallow field, about a mile from Ryde, on 
the road to Steephill, in great plenty. W. A, Bromfieldt sp. 

Calamao ROSTis 2a»ceo2ato. March wood. (Mr. Borrer.) W. A, Brom* 
field, mss, 

— -— ^— » — Epiffejos. In great plenty at the edge of Shore Copse, 
near Ryde ; in Whitefield Wood ; between Ryde and Brad- 
ing ; seems to be common about Ryde. W. A. Bromfield, 
mss. 

Agrostis setacea. Southampton Common ; the staple grass on the 
heaths about Southampton. W, A. Bromfield, sp, 

Briza minor, Quarr Abbey ; an abundant weed in many corn-fields 
at Marchwood, perhaps introduced with the grain. fT. A. 
Bromfield, sp. 

Poa aquoHca, Near Southampton. fF. A. Bromfield, mss. 

maritima. Near Southampton. /. E. Leefe, mss. 

HoRDXUM mariiimum. By the road-side from C • • • (?) towards 
Marchwood. W. A. Bromfield, mss. 

SrARTiKA stricta. Muddy shores of the Itchen river near its junction 
with Southampton Water. W. A. Bromfield, sp. (Dr. 
Bromfield does not find it between Southampton and Mill- 
brook. ) 
  poiystaehya. Much more abundant than the last, covering 
a vast tract of mud above the Itchen ferry, especially about 
the Belvidere ship-yard, and on the opposite side near Itchen 
village; also with S. stricta, below the ferry. W. A. Brom- 
field, sp. by whom it was first discovered, in 1836. 



VII. SUSSEX. 



GlaCcium luteum. On the shore to the west of Brighton in the 
greatest profusion. W. A, Bromfield, mss, 

Cardamine amara. Marsh at Brambletye Place, near East Grin- 
stead. W, H, Coleman, mss, 

VioLAfiavicomis. Ashdown Forest. W, H. Coleman, mss. 

J!>koskr A longifolia. Bogs on Ashdown Forest. IF. H. Coleman, mss, 

Elativr hexandr€U Sussex. W. H, Coleman, mss. 

McENCHXA erecta. Ashdown Forest, ff. H. Co'eman, mss, 

Sferoula subtdata. On Ashdown Forest, in a wiarren east of the 
quarry above Kidbrook Park. W. H. Coleman, mss, 

RAnroLA miUegrana, Ashdown Forest. Jf^. H. Coleman, mss. 

Alth^ba officinalis. In profusion in the fen ditches bordering the 
roads along the marshes between Hastings and Hythe, 
especially about Brooklands, Rye,&c. W.A, Bromfidd,mss. 

HrpiRicoM Androscemum. Frequent on hedge banks and in wood»» 
near East Grinstead. W, H, Coleman, mss. 



yGooQle 



gL 



57^ THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Htpkucum dodea. Bog on Waldron Down, six iniles from Uckfield, 
with Sibtborpia. JK A. Bromfidd, gp. Ashdown Forest ; 
Gargle Wood, &c., E. Grinstead. W. H. Coleman, mas. 

GxMisTA pilota. Sussex, in St. Leonard's Forest, I believe, gathered 
by Mr. Borrer in 1836. IF. A. Bromfeld, mss. 

IJlex nanus. Ashdown Forest, &c, W, H. Coleman, mas, 

Mkoicago denticuhta, Shoreham. C. C. Babtngton, ap. On a 
shingle bank, close to the river at Shoreham, on the opposite 
side from the town. Map. Nat. Hist. 

TairoLiUM ateUaium. On the same bank with Medicago denticulata, 
at Shoreham. Mag. Nat JStat. 

— — auffocatum. (Add the reference to ** BoL Sus.** — Page 54. ) 

Lotus augustissimus. (During a residence of five years here, Dr. 
Bromfield has not found this species on the Castle Hill.) 

ViciA lutea. On the same bank with Medicago denticulata, at Shore- 
ham. Mag. Nat. Mist. 

— — — angusHfoiia, Standen Bocks, £. Grinstead. W. H. CoUman, 
mss- 

Lathteus Nissolia* In a young fir plantation between Mill Place 
and West Hoathley; above Standen Bocks; and by the 
lane between Busses and Walesbeech Farms, near East 
Grinstead. W. H. Coleman, mss. 

PauNUS domestica. (Befer to " Smith, cat." instead of " Bot. Sus.**— 
Page 54.) 

Fragaria datior. Copse on the hill-side near East Marden. ( Bev. 
G. E. Smith.) W. A. Bromfield. mss. 

BosA tomentosa. Common in hedges near E. Grinstead. W. If. 
Coleman, mss. 

— — inodora. Hedges west of Fenland Ponds, E. Grinstead. W. 
IT. Coleman, mss. 

micrantha. Frequent in hedges near E. Grinstead. W, H. 

Coleman, sp. 

systyla. In the lane through the shaws between Bellman's Town 

and Bidge Hill Farms, near E. Grinstead. W. H. Coleman, sp. 

Mespilus germanica. Two or three trees, apparently wild, in Ore 
Lane, Hastings, on the right, just before coming to the 
descent near Dr. Fearon's house ; woods at the Old Boad, 
Hastings ; hedges at the back of St. Leonard's, between 
Catfield and Ninfield. W. A. Bromfield, mss. 

Efilobium roseum. In the bed of the brook, near Brambletye Place, 
E. Grinstead. W. H. CoUman, sp, 

Callitrichr pedunculata. St. Leonard's Forest, one of the original 
stations, pointed out to me by Mr. Borrer. C. C. Babing- 
ton, sp. 

BiBXs wbrum. Apparently wild in many moist spots about Has- 
tings ; stream-side at the Hop-grounds ; Dell at the Fish- 
ponds, &c. fF. A. Bromfield, sp. 

SisoK Amomwn. About Hastings, as at the Old Boad, &c. W. A. 
Bromfield, mss, E. Grinstead. JF. H. Co'eman, mss, 

BuPLKORVM tenuissimum. Selsea. (Bev. G. E. Smith.) iF. A. Brom" 
fiddj maa. Dr. Bromfield does not find it near Hastings. 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — SUSSEX. 573 

CEnakthe peucedanifoUa 7 In the marshes near Bulverhithe, I find 
a plant agreeing well with Pollich's description and plate of 
(E. peueedanifolia, but which wants the tubers or granular 
masses at the root ; root leaves linear, and general involucre 
wanting. Dr. Bromfield. ( I have specimens, without roots, 
received from different parts of Britain, showing several in- 
termediate steps between QE. peucedanifoUa and CE. pimpi- 
nelloides. H. W,) 

PheUandrium, Fenland Ponds, E. Grinstead. W. H, 

Colemant msa, 

FcENicuLUM vvlgare. About Winchelsea and Rye. W. A, Bromfield, 
m88, 

SjLAus pratensis. E. Grinstead. W. H. Cdeman, mss. 

Daucus maritimus. Shore near Hastings. W. A. Bromfield^ mss, 

ToRiLis infesta. A pest in corn-fields, Hastings. ff. A. Bromfield, 
TIMS. E. Grinstead. W, H. (hhman, mss. 

Smy&nium Olusatrum, Till very lately abundant at Hastings, and 
still not uncommon, though rendered less plentiful by recent 
building ; brow of the hill, near the Windmills, on the bank 
by the road-side ; by the Harpsichord House. fF. A. Brom- 
field, mss. 

Ertngium Tnaritimum. Shore at Little Hampton. (Mr. Pamplin, 
senior. ) W. Pamplin, mss. 

Fedia Auricvla. Growing with the ordinary F. dentata of British 
botanists, in various places amongst corn, around Hastings, 
and in profusion in an old clover-field, near VaLebrook Farm, 
a short mile from that town. Mag. Nat. Hist. ix. 85. On 
the north side of the brook that runs through the hoj)- 
grounds, Hastings. W. A. Bromfield, mss. 

Galium tricome. On the top of the cliff to the westward of St. Leo- 
nard's, in a corn-field. (Dr. W. Harwood.) W. A. Brom- 
fidd, mss. (Does Mr. Winch's locality of " Arkesdene" 
intend Arkesdon, in Essex ?) 

HiERACiUM macidatum. Wood between Tickeridge Farm and Sidles- 
field Common ; and by the road from Hareley Farm to 
Turner's Hill, E. Grinstead. W. H. Coleman, mss. 

Cnicus Forsteri. In the Gargle Wood, and an adjoining pasture 
called the Gargle West Field, on the farm of JVIays, three 
miles south of E. Grinstead. W. H. Coleman, mss. 

— — — pratensis. In a wood near Fenland Ponds, and from thence 
along the brook to Brambletye ; Imberhorne Wood ; Gargle 
Wood and Field ; elsewhere near E. Grinstead : wood 
above the pond, Horstead Keynes. W. H. Coleman, mss. 

I acavlis. Newhaven. Mag. Nat. Hist. viii. 

Anthemis nobilis. Ashdown Forest ; Sidlesfield Common ; E. Grin- 
stead Common. W. H Coleman, mss. 

Campanula hederacea. Bog on Waldron Down. W. A. Bromfield, 
sp, Plaw and Gargle Woods, E. Grinstead ; wood above 
the pond, Horstead Keynes; Ashdown Forest. W. H. 
Coleman, sp. 

Pyrola secunda. Sussex. (Mr. Borrer.) H^. A. Bromfield, mss. ' 

VOL. II. I 



y Google 



574 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

(I should fear some misapprehension respecting this plant 
being found in Sussex. It has hitherto been r^arded 
as exclusively a Highland or mountain plant. H, W, ) 

Vaccinium Oxycoccus. Bogs in Hindlip Warren, Ashdown Forest. 
W.H, Coleman, Tnss. 

CuLOEA perfoliata. In great abundance on the steep chalky banks 
facing the sea, below the Holywell public-house, near East- 
bourne. W. A, Bromfield, sp. 

ViLLARsiA nymphaoides. Lewes LeveL W. A. Bromfidd, sp, 

MrosoTis repens. Sussex. C. C. Babington, mss. 

LiNAUA spuria. Near Newhaven. fF, C. Trevdyan, sp, Ploatiftil 
in corn-fields at Eastbourne. W. A, Bromjield, sp. 
'- Elatine, Corn-fields at Eastbourne; Hastings. W, A. 
Bromfidd, mss, E. Grinstead. W, IT. Coleman, mss. 

JatuosEJ.hA aquatica, (Read " Storrington.*' — Page 59.) 

SiBTHonriA europiBo, Bog on Waldron Down, six miles from Uck- 
field. fF. A. Bromfidd, sp, 

Galeobdolon luteum. Ore Lane, and Fish-pond Dell, Hastings; 
a common plant about that town. JV, A, Bromfidd, mss, 

Galeopsis Ladanum, On the shingle at Eastbourne, in abundance. 
W. A, Bromfidd, mss. 

— — ~-^ versicolor. Not uncommon m hedges near E. Grinstead. 
W. H, Coleman, mss. 

ScuTELLAHiA minor. Boss on Ashdown Forest ; Gargle Wood, near 
E. Grinstead ; Chiddingly Wood, near West Hoathly. fT. 
H., Coleman, mss, 

HoTTONiA palustris. Ditches on Pevensey LeTel, in many places. 
W. A. Bromfidd, wsss, 

Centonculls minimus, Ashdown Forest. W, H. Coleman, mss. 
Harefield Common. C. C, Bahington, mss, 

LiTTORELLA lacustris. Fenland and Furnace Ponds, near East Grin- 
stead ; in the pond, Horstead Keynes. W. H. Coleman, mss. 

Chenopodium didum. At the foot of the houses in Caroline Place, 
Hastings. W. A. Bromfield, sp, ^ 

RuMEX pratensis. Marshes of the Adur, near Henfield; also on the 
Arun, at Amberley. Eng. Bot. Supp. 

Euphorbia coralloides. In hedges adjoining the parsonage at Slin- 
fold, especially abundant on the inner, or field side of a hedge, 
forming one side of a lane leading from the Village into the 
fields, ff. A. Bromfidd, mss. (This is the E. pilosa of vol. L , 
and of the British Flora, which Mr. Babington states to 
be the E. coralloides of Linnsus. ) 

— — — phtyphyUa. Not uncommon in corn-fields about Hast- 
ings. W, A, Bromfidd, mss. In an old clover-field near 
Vfldebrook Farm, a short mile from Hastings. Mag, Nat. 
Hist. ix. Not uncommon in clayey corn-fields near East 
Grinstead. W, H, Coleman, mss. 

amygdaloides, Hastings, abundant. W, A. Bromfidd, 



mss, 
Mercuriaus annua. Uncommon about Hastings. W, A, Bromfield, 
mss. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT— SUSSEX. 575 

Hydrocharis Morsus-raruB, Lewes Level. W. A. Bromfidd, sp, 

Habenaria cJdorantha, Common in Sussex. Comp. 

T &iGLocaiv maritimum. (Refer to ** Smith, cat." instead of ** 5o<. 

5^M«."— Page 61.) 
I&is faetidissima, (Read " Hastings; common.** — Page 62.) 
Narcissus hiflorus. In the Park, and elsewhere, at Saint Hill, E. 

Grinstead. W. H. Coleman, mss. 
— ^— Psetido- Narcissus, Near Hastings. JF. A. Bromfield, sp, 
Ornithogalum pyrenaicum, (Read " Chichester Southgate." — 

Page 62.) 
Ruse us aculeatus. Abundant about Hastings. W. A, Bromfield, mss. 
PoTAMooETON acuttfoKus. Sussex. Hooker, sp, 
— — ^^— ^— ohlongus, Henfield Common. C. C. Bahington, mss. 
LuzuLA Forsteri. More common than L. pilosa about E. Grinstead. 

JV. H. Coleman, mss. 
JuNCUs acutus. In a bog at Emsworth, near a timber-yard. 

(Mr. Borrer.) W, A. Bromfield, mss. 
Rhyncosfora alha, Waterdown Forest. W, PumpUn, mss. 
Eleocharis multicaidis. Bogs on Ashdown Forest ; above the pond, 
Horstead Keynes. IV, H, Coleman, mss, Lewis Level. 
W, A. Bromfield, mss. 
SciRPUS rimritimus. Winchelsea, &c. W. A. Brot^field, mss, 
Eriophorum vaginatum. " I very much doubt whether this plant has 
been found on Broadwater Common, of late years." W. 
Famplin, mss. 
Carez axillaris. In a green lane and old marl-pit, near the lone 
barn on the farm of Hazleden, E. Grinstead. W, H. 
Coleman, sp. 
  strigo'sa. In an old marl-pit between Bellman's Town and 

Crowsfield Farms ; pit, in Rocking Hill Wood ; in a lane 
between Hollybush and Walesbeech Farms, E. Grinstead ; 
above the pond in Chiddingly Wood, W. Hoathly. W. H. 
Coleman, mss, 
  Pseudo-Cyperus. In a pond by the lane between Busses 
Farm and the brook, E. Grinstead ; pit, a mile from Mill 
Place, towards W. Hoathly; pond in Chiddingly Wood, 
W. Hoathly. W, H. Coleman, mss. 
Gastridium lendigerum. In various wet corn-fields, especially that 
between Standen Rocks and the Brook, E. Grinstead. 
W. H. Coleman, sp. Hastings. W. A. Bromfield, sp. 
Agrostis setacea. Ashdown Forest; in a pasture, called Chart 
Hill Field, on the farm of Stone, E. Grinstead. W. H. 
Coleman, mss, 
PoA distans. Shoreham. W. A. Bromfield, mss. 
Festuca rM^ra (glauca). On the sands at Shoreham, on the op- 
posite side from the town. Mag, Nat. Hist. 
' brom^ides. Ashdown Forest ; not uncommon in dry places 
near E. Grinstead. W. H, Coleman, mss. 
Spartiha stricta. Pagham Harbour ; West Wittering ; and elsewhere 
by the Chichester Creek. Bot, Sus, W. Itchener. (Mr. 
Borrer.) W, A, Bromfield, mss, 
I 2 



yGooQle 



gL 



576 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 



VIII. KENT. 

Clexatis ViiaJba. Near Graresend and Nortbfleet G. E, Denme^ 
nus. Frequent in the county. W. Pamplinj mjs. (Intro- 
duce a semicolon after ** Very common. "* — Page 65.) 

Rakl'ncdlus parmflonu. (For " Deptford" read ** Dartford." Mr, 
PampUn. It is printed Deptford, by Turner and Dillwyn ; 
but Hudson, the original authority, h^ it Dartford. — Page 
65.) 

Adokis mftumHoUs. In corn-fields between Cobham and Cuxton, 
near where' Salvia pratensis. Althaea hirsuta, and Anagallis 
csrulea grow. W. A. Bromfidd, sp. About Northfleet, 
Cobham, and Famingham. ff. PampHnj mss. 

Pafayer tamnifentm. Cultivated ground at Northfleet. IF. Paa^n, 
mss. 

hyhridwn. Corn-fields between Gravesend and Cobham, 

plentifully. W. Pamplin, mss, 

Glaccicm luteum, Dover. G. E. Dennes, mss. 

Viola Jlavicorms. Dartford. Eng. Bot. Supp. 

CoaoNOPCs didyma. On the walls of Eltham churchyard, with Vale- 
riana calcitrapa. W. Piimplin, mss. 

Cakile maritima. Sandy shore between Margate and Reculver. G. 
E. Dennesy mss. 

Ckambe maritima. Shore near Whitstable, 1824. W. PampUn^ mss. 

Cardamine amara. ( Read " Riverhead.** — Page 66.) 

Malcokia maritima. Under the cliffs about half-way between St. 
Margaret's Bay and Dover, with Cheiranthus fruticulosus. 
( Miss Hervey. ) James Macnab, sp. ( Doubtless carried 
thither from some garden, by the tides. ) 

SiLENE ittdica. (There appears to be a confusion about this plant, 
which is the S. paradoxa of Smith, rendering it uncertain 
whether some mistake has not been made, as to its existoice 
at Dover.) 

Arenaria marina. Banks of the Thames, a mile beyond Gravesend : 
Margate Cliffs. G. E. Dennes^ mss. 

tenuifdia. (For " Deptford" read ** Dartford." Afr. W. 

Pamplin. — Page 67. ) 

Cerasticx arvense. (For ** Burnham" read *« Barham.** — Page 
67.) 

Geranium robertianum. With white flowers in the spot recorded for 
it in Ray*s Synopsis; namely, between Eitham and ChiaeU 
hurst ; I gathered it about 1 824. If. Pampiin, mss. 

Hyfericum elodes. Very abundant about Bromley, Hayes, and 
Keston. W. Pamplin, mss 

Astragalus glycyphyllus. Darenth Wood. W. Pamplin^ mss. 

ViciA angustifolia. Not uncommon near Tonbridge Wells. Mag. 
Nat. Hist. vi.i. 
- hithynica. jt^Frinsbury, near Rochester ; near the tunnel at Hoo, 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT— KENT. 577 

about three miles further along the river, in copses. (Mr. 
Borrer. ) fF. A. Brotnfield, mss. 

Ptrds Aria. About Feversham, and frequent through the county, 
fr. Pampliny mss. Old chalk-pits at Dartford. B. G. 

Mbspilus germanica. Hedges between Tunbridge Wells and Pens- 
hurst Mag. Nat. Hist. ix. 

CnBTSOSPLENioM^'^ernt/b/ium. Coppice behind the High Rocks, near 
Tunbridge Wells, 1 835. W* Pamplin, mss. 

PiMPiNELLA magna. Copse at Whiting Brooks. W. A. Bromjield, sp. 
Very plentiful about Keston, and by the road-side from 
thence to Westerham, and again between that and Eden- 
bridge. W, Pamplin, mss, 

BuPLEURUM rotundifoUum. About Famingham and Horton Kirby. 
fF. Pamplin, mss. 

falcatum. Betwixt Bromley and Eltham. (Gerarde.) 
Eng. Bot. Supp. 

FcENicuLOM vidgare. Cliffs between Margate and Reculver. G. B. 
Dennes, mss. 

PxucEDAMUM officinale. A few — say three — miles east of Whit- 
stable, in 1824. W. Pamplin, mss. 

Eryngium mnritimum. Shore east of Whitstable. W. Pamplin, mss, 

ViscuM album. On old thorns about Cobham and Bush. • ff. Pamp- 
lin, mss. 

Galium parisiense. Old walls at Farningham. W. Pamplin, mss. 
Sandy ground between Dartford and Northfleet. B,G. 
(The locality ** Cliffs of Dover," &c. given from Turner and 
Dillwyn, is misplaced to this plant : it belongs to Rubia 
peregrina. — Page 72.) 

Valeriana rubra. On the old walls of Canterbury, and varieties 
with white and pale red flowers. W. Pamj^in, mss. 

— — — Calcitrapa. This, and some other plants found near Elt- 
ham, may have originally escaped from Sherard's garden. 
fF, Pamplin, mss. 

Prenakthes muralis. Frequent through the county. W. Pamplin, 
mss. 

Cnicus acaulis. Frequent in the downs, throughout the county. W. 
Pamplin, mss. , 

Centaurea Calcitrapa. Abundant at Northfleet. W. Pamplin, mss. 

Campanula Trachelium, Road-side at Frindsbury, between Graves- 
end and Dover. G* E. Dennes, mss, 

— hybrida. Not uncommon through the county. W. 

Pamplin, mss, 

MoNOTROPA Hypopitys. (Read "Stowting.'* — Page 74.) 

Gentiana Pneumonanthe, Proved in both localities, in 1835. IF. 
Pamplin, mss. — Page 74. 

Chlora perfoliata, Northfleet. G, E, Dennes, mss. Frequent on 
chalk hills throughout the county. W. Pamplin, mss. 

Cdscuta Epythymum. Keston Heath, and frequent through the 
county. W. Pamptin, mss. 

Verbascum Blatiaria. Bank near Cuxton, towards Cobham. W. 
Pamplin, mss. 

I 3 



yGooQle 



gL 



578 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Verbascdm thapaiforme, Bj road-sides in Kent. LindL Syn. 

Atropa Belladonna, (Read ** Grays." — Page 75.) 

LiNA&iA purpurea. Walls at £ltham, Canterbury, and elsewhere, in 

Kent and Surry, frequent. W. Pamplin, nus. 
. — spuria. About Braced ; about Keston ; and not unfirequent 

throughout the county, with L. Elatine. JF. PampUny mss. 
Veronica JSuxbaumii. I have specimens from Mr. Feete, gathered 

near Hayes and Keston, apparently wild, and previous to its 

being adopted as a native plant, in any English Flora. W, 

PampUn, mss. In a clover-field, laid down with foreign seed, 

at Chalk Hole, about two miles from Margate. Eng. Bot, 

Supp. 
Mentha rvbra. On Keston Heath, near the source of the Ravens- 
bourne, pointed out to me by Mr. Peete. W. Pamplin, mss, 
Ajuga Chamtqpitys, Frequent through the county. W. Pamplin, 

mss. (Probably ** Luton," means Luton in Bedfordshire ; 

or it may be Sutton in this county. — Page 75. ) 
Galeopsis Ladanum. One specimen from the road-side at Barham 

Downs. G, E, Dennes, mss. Frequent through the county. 

W, Pamplin, mss. 
AciNOs vulgaris. Road-side between Lydden and Barham Downs. 

G* E. Dennes, mss, ( Erase the words « Waterdown Forest. *' 

substituting << Corn-fields, common.**— Page 76.) 
Calamintha officinaks. Near Sittihgboume. G. E. Dennes, irm. 
Lathraa squamaria. Very abundant in cottage gardens, at Chels- 

field, a village between Famborough and Famingham. 

(Mr. W. Christy.) W. Pamplin, mss. 
Statics Limonium, Salt marshes all through the county. W. Pamp' 

lin, mss. 
Glaux maritima. Frequent through the county. W. Pamplin, mss. 
Plantago maritima. Salt marshes, through the county. W, Pam~ 

pUn, mss. 
Atrifllx Uiciniata, Common along the cli£& between Margate and 

Reculver. G, E, Dennis, mss, 
pedunculata. Between Sandwich and P^weD, frequent. 

S.K, 
Mercuriau% anntia. Gravesend. W. A, Bromfidd, mss. 
Htdrocharis MorsuS''ran<B. Ditch near the sea, between Margate 

and Reculver ; and ditch near the village of Sarre, between 

Canterbury and Margate. G. E. Dennes, mss. 
Orchis hircina, (Grimstead Green is Green Street Green of the 

present day. Mr. W. Pamplin. — Page 79. ) 
Habenaria cAiorontAo. Kent. (Dr. Lindley.) Br. FL 
Ophrys apifera. About Cobham, &c. W. PampKn, mss, 
— — - fucifera. In great pro^bsion in particular spots between 

Walmar and St. Margaret's. Mag. Nat. Hist, vii. 272. 

muscifsra. About Cobham, &c. fF. PampUn, mss, 

A CERA s anthropophora. About Cobham, and several parts of the 

county. W. Pamplin, mss. 
Nxottia spiralis. In the large sand-pit, leading out of the lower road 

between Greenwich and Woolwich. Mag, Nat. Hist. viii. 

(Read « Bexley " for Boxley. — Page 80.) 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT— SURRY. 579 

£fipactis grandiflora. Frequent through the county. If. Pamplin, 

ms8. 
Tamus communis. Frequent. IF, Pamplin, mss. 
£riophorum pubescens. South Kent. Br. FL 
Ca&ej. axillaris. Braboume(?) Kent. (Rev. G. E. Smith.) iV.A. 

^romfield, mss. 
RoTTBOLLiA incurvoto. In the marshes by the Medway, between 

Cuxton and Rochester. (Mr. A. Irving.) W. Pamplin, mss. 
Elthus genictUatus. (The specific name is erroneously written 

"europaeus*' on Page 83.) 



IX. SURRY. 

Clkmatis Vitalba. Frequent in many parts of the county. W. 
Pamplin, mss. It occurs plentifully on the chalk, as about 
Boxhill, &c., but I have observed only a single plant between 
Esher and London, and that one was probably introduced, 
as it was growing with several garden plants. H. W. 

Akemome apennina. A variety, with white flowers, in Wimbledon 
Park woods. W. Pamplin, mss. 

Mtosurus minimus. In my garden, in two places where the soil had 
been dug to a greater depth than usual, a few plants of this 
came up, in 1836 ; but I have not met with it elsewhere in 
the parish of Thames Ditton. H. W. (Correct the 
localities, in vol. i., thus; « Weston Green'* and << Lordship 
Lune, near Dulwich Wood." — Page 84.) 

Delphinium Consolida. Occasionally in corn-fields at Battersea. 
tr. Pamplin, mss. Sparingly on Hersham Green, in 1836. 
H. W. sp. 

CoRYDAUs lutea. On a wall at Wimbledon, plentifully, in 1835. 
fT. PampHn, n^s. 

FuMARiA pctrmfidra. Corn-fields near Burford Bridge. H. W. sp. 

Barb AREA prcecox. Hedge-bank near Tooting. W. Pamplin, mss, 

TuRRiTis glabra. Gravelly banks between Kingston and Wimbledon. 
W. Pamplin, mss. 

Hespeuis matronalis. In a hedge, near a farm at Cheam, towards the 
Lord Nelson. W. Pamplin, mss. 

Ertsihum cheiranthmdes. By the foot-path from Battersea Bridge 
to Lavender Hill. Indig. Sparingly in the road from the 
comer of Ditton Common towards the Copper Mills ; also 
opposite the Copper Mills, under the Railroad. H. W. sp, 

Brassica campestris, A plant, presumed to be this species, grows in 
plenty on the sides of the Thames, for several miles, both 
above and below Ditton. JI. W. sp. 

SiNAPis muralis. (This is the species intended under the name of 
S. tenuifolia in vol. i. page 85. ) 
I 4 



y Google 



580 THE NEW BOTAJIIST's GUIDE. 

Viola canina (flavicomis). Pastures near Mitcbam. Eng. Bot, 

Supp. 
Drosera longifoUcL. Walton>on. Thames Heath. W, PampliHy nus. 

In several places on Esher Common, as between Okeshot 

Hill and Claremont Park. H. W. gp. 
SiLSNE angUea. Hersbam Green ; and by the Railway, near Esber 

Copper MiUs. H, W. sp. 
Elatine hexandra. On the south side of Hedge Court Pond, three 

miles from East Grinstead. W, H, Coleman, gp, 
Akjenaria tenuifolia. In great plenty on Banstead Downs, between 

Epsom and Cheam, 1 833 ; I have never seen it in Battersea. 

fT. PampUn, mss. Mortlake. R, C. Alexander^ nus, 
McENCHiA erecta, Clapham and Wandsworth Commons, and on old 

waUs. Indig. Abundant on sandy commons. W» Pam" 

plin, mss. 
Radiola miUegrana, West Side of Wandsworth Conmion. Indig. 

Sparingly about the middle of Ditton Common, not far from 

Shilton's Cottages; also on Esber Common, in the comer 

lying between Claremont Park and Claygate. H, W. sp, 
TiLiA grandiftora. Box HiJl, rather on the northern side. H, W, 

sp, (Refer to " Eng, FL'* instead of " B. G."— Page 86. 

The same mis-reference' is made in the Flora Metropoli- 

tana.) 
Hypericum edodes. On Esher Common, between Okeshot Hill and 

Claremont Park. H. W. sp. 
montanum. Claygate, among the bushes in the lane 

forming the old horse-road towards the village of Thames 

Ditton. H, W. sp. 

AndroscBmum, With the preceding. H. W, sp. 

Geranium rotundifolium. Bank of the Lavender Hill Nursery ; by 

the road-side near the Prince's Head, Battersea. Indig. 
Erodium moschatum, A single plant near Barnes Common, in 1835. 

W, Pamplin, mss. 
Impatiens fulva, (Mr. Daniel Cooper indicates this to be found on 

the left bank of the Wey, near Guildford ; from which it 

appears highly probable that the plant mentioned on page 

86 of the present work, under name of NoH-me'tangeref was 

the same species. Two specimens came into my hands, 

which had been roughly dried in a pocket-book, and both of 

which appear to have been given away, so that I cannot now 

ascertain the point. ) 
Ox ALis corniculcOa, ( Substitute " H, W. " for " B, G, ") 
Rhamnus Frangvla. Knight's Hill Wood and Common. W,H. 

Coleman, mss. 
catharticus. Still at Dulwicb, as mentioned by Martyn ^> 

single plant on Penge Common, between Beckenham and 

Dulwicb. W. H. Coleman, mss. Hedge between Ditton 

Common and the fields near Ember Grove; also in the 

hedges of several fields between Ditton Common and the 

river Mole. H. W. sp. 
Ulex nanus. Wandsworth Common. Indig, Frequent on the 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT— SURRY. 581 

wastes in Thames Ditton and adjacent parishes. H, W, sp, 
(Near Hook, I found an autumn-flowering bush of Ulex 
europaeusy on which the calyces were quite destitute of 
bracteas ; though the withered remains of the spring-flowers 
showed them as conspicuous as usual. H. W. ) 

Ononis spinosa, Wansworth Common, where the white-flowered 
varieties of both species are found. IF, Pamplin, »»«*• ^^ 
Thames Ditton and adjacent parishes, this is much more 
plentiful than O. arvensis, H. W, sp. 

Mbdicago macvlata. By the towing path, along the Thames, above 
Moulsey Loch. II. W. sp, 

MsLiLOTus leucantha. By the road-side between Mickleham and 
Burford Bridge. fF, Pamplin, mas. (For ««Chipstow," 
read « Chipstead." Mr. PampUn. — Page 87. ) 

ViciA angustifolia, ( Erase ** Epping Forest." — Page 87. ) 

Lathtrus Aphaca, Near the entrance to Battersea Fields, from the 
village, found by Mr. J. Gibbs, about 1812. W. Pamplin, 
mss, 

PoTi:NTiLLA argentea, Wandsworth Common, under the Park pales, 
at the north-east comer. Indig, In a gravelly pasture 
between Clapham and Lavender Hill. (Miss Frances Pam- 
plin.) W, Pamplin, mss. 

Rosa viUosa. Near Coombe Wood, by the high road between King- 
ston and London. R. CastUs, mss. 

— tomentosa. Felcourt, near Lingfield, (" R. villosa of the Rev. 
Mr. Holmes in Relhan.") fT. H. Cdeman, sp. 

— — micrantha. Abundant on Penge Common. W. H. Coleman^ 
sp. 

— — canina ( Forsteri). Esher. R. Castles, mss. 

————— (dumetorum). Near the Thames side, near Ham. R. 
Castles, mss. 

Ptrus communis. A very large tree of it as you enter Wimbledon 
Park from Wandsworth fields. fF. Pamplin, mss. 
  torminalis. Low Cross Wood, Norwood. fF. H. Coleman, sp. 

— ^ Aria. Frequent through the county. W. Pamplin, mss. I 
have not met with it in the neighbourhood of Thames Ditton ; 
but observed it in some plenty al)out Box Hill. H. W. 

Callit&iche pedunculata. Ditton Common, near Shilton's Cottages ; 
and probably on Esher Common, as it came up in a peat 
bed in my garden, the soil of which had been introduced 
from Esher Common. H. W. sp. 

CicuTA virosa. Inserted on the authority of Martyn and others, not 
having seen it myself. Indig. 

SisoN Amomum, Battersea ; Clapham ; Wandsworth. W. Pamplin, 
mss. Rather plentiful in the parish of Thames Ditton, 
chiefly towards Claygate ; also in Hook, Long Ditton, &c. 
H. JF. sp. 

SiUM latifolium. Destroyed in the ditch at Thames Ditton ; but 
occurs in the Thames above Hampton Court Bridge. H. W. 

CBnanthe Phellandrium. On Ditton Common sparingly, in a pond 
immediately in front of the house of Ember Grove ; and 
i 5 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



582 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

also in the ditches by the road leading from Ember Groye 
to Ember Court. H, W. $p. Abundant in marshy ground 
and ditches all about Battersea and Wandsworth. W. Pam- 
piin, nus. 

SiLAUS pratensii. Most abundant on Wandsworth Common, but I 
think not very common elsewhere about London. W, Pan^ 
plin, nus, Ditton Common, between the toll-bars near 
Esher, chiefly on the south-east side of the high road ; also 
elsewhere in Thames Ditton parish, as between the railway 
and Portsmouth road, near to Ditton Green. H. IF. sp. 

Tori LIS infesta. Occadonally in fields between Ditton Common and 
CUygate. H, Wl sp. 

Smyrniuh Ohtsatrum. Dry situations in Letchmere. ItuHg, 

Viburnum Lantana. " Frequent in Surrey " probably has reference 
to the chalk tracts ; it is very uncommon about Thames 
Ditton and the neighbouring parishes, but occurs in small 
quantity in the hedge, by the road between Ember Court 
and the bridge at East M oulsey. H. W. 

Lactuoa Scariola, (Insert ** Between ** before " Mitcham." Mr. 
Pamplin. — Page 89. ) 
' virosa. Hedge banks between Battersea and Clapham. 
W, Pamplin, mss. 

Pkknanthes muralis. Frequent through the county. fT. PampHn, 
mss. It appears to be scarce in Thames Ditton and the 
adjacent parishes, indeed I have not yet seen a plant of it 
within the boimdaries of Thames Ditton. H. W. 

Onopordum Acanthivm. ' In small quantity, by the road-side, between 
the fiirm buildings of Captain White and the rail-road* Long 
Ditton. H. W. sp. In several places. Indig. 

Cnicus acatdis. Frequent on Downs. W. Pamplin, mss. 

prtxtensis. South-east side of Wandsworth Common. Indig. 
Wimbledon Common. W. Pamplin, mss. Scattered in 
several places on Esher Common, as between Okeshot Hill 
and Claremont Park. H. W. sp. About Weir Mill Pond, 
two miles from East Grinstead, on the London road. W. H. 
Coleman, mss. 

Carduus crispus. On the Brighton side of the steep chalk hill on the 
north side of Reigate. Treodycm, in Mag. Nat. Hist. 
viii. 636. (This is probably not an uncommon plant, but 
has hitherto been confounded with C. acanthoides. ) 

CoYiYzx squarrosa. (Refer to *« Winch, cuUL*' instead of ** 5. G." 
— Page 89.) 

Erigbron canadensis. Gardens and way-sides. Indig. 

PuLicARiA vulgaris. Occasionally, on the commons and by the road- 
sides, in Tliames Ditton and Long Ditton parishes : and it 
still comes up in the drained and inclosed parts of Ditton 
Marsh, when the surface soil is removed ; thus affording an 
example of a plant disappearing and re-appearing with 
changes in the state of the ground. II. W. sp. 

Amthemis ncbUis. Streatham Common; Felbridge; Lingfield. 
W. H. Coleman, mss. Frequent on the commons and lane- 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT— SURRY. 583 

Bides in Thames Ditton, and surrounding parishes. H, W. 
sp. 

CxNTAUBBA Colcitrapa, Wandsworth Common. Indig. 

Jacea ? (The Surrey plant thus named seems to be only 

a variety of C. nigra. — Page 90. ) 

Campanula Rapunculus, Very scarce on the Thames Ditton side of 
Esher, but plentifully scattered in the hedges and fields 
between Esher and Hersham; it occurs very sparingly at 
the west comer of Ditton Common, also in the lane leading 
fVom Claremont Lodge to the south comer of the same 
common, but in small quantity. If. W. sp. 

Trackelium. Sparing on the opposite bank of the Mole, 

a quarter of a mile below the Copper Mills, Esher ; also in 
a wet lane leading to the same river, from Hersham Green. 
H. W. sp. 

• hederaeea. Marsh at the upper end of Hedge Court Pond, 
near E. Grinstead. W, H. Coleman^ mss. 
' hyhrida. Corn-fields about Burford Bridge ; and a few 



specimens scattered along the high road, midway between 
Leatherhead and Kingston, growing among broken flints, 
with which the seeds had doubtless been carried from the 
chalk tracts. H. W. sp. 

GcNTiANA Pneumonantke. (Clapham in Yorkshire was the place 
intended as the station of this plant, and the <* Engleton " is 
a misprint for Ingleton, in Turner and Dillwyn*s Guide. 
The loc^ity is recorded by Milne, on the authority of 
Newton, as a Yorkshire one, but Turner and Dillwyn appear 
to have been misled by the same name occurring in Surry. 

Ertthrjba pulchella. In Hedge Court Pond, East Grinstead. W. H. 
Coleman^ sp. 

Chloba perfoliata. Frequent on chalk hills, ff. Pampliny mss. 

ViLLARSiA nympJueoides. Completely naturalised in most of the ponds 
on Wandsworth Common. fF, Pamplin, mss. 

CuscuTA Epitht/mum. Walton and Weybridge Commons, and in 
many parts of the county. W. PampHuf mss, 

Mtosotis OBspitosa. By the margins of shallow pools, on several parts 
of Wandsworth Common. W. Pamplin, mss. 

SoLANUH nigrum. In several parts of Thames Ditton and the neigh- 
bouring parishes, particularly in Moulsey. H. W. sp. 

Antiebhinum Orimtium. Battersea. Indig. Thames Ditton and 
adjoining parishes, pretty frequent. H. W. sp. 

LiNABiA spuria. Rare ; in some newly ploughed land, on Lavender 
Hill, 1826. W. pamplin, mss. In a bean-field near Hook ; 
in corn-fields between Claygate and the railway ; as a weed 
in my garden, the second year ^fter its conversion from a 
wheat-field to a garden, none having been observed during 
the first summer. H. W. sp, 

• Elatine. Frequent in Thames Ditton, and adjacent parishes. 

H. W. sp, 

ScROFHULARiA vemolis. Near Merton, between the rail-road and 
Mitcham, 1836. W. Pamplin, mss. 
I 6 



yGooQle 



gl 



58if THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

LiMosELLA aquatiea. In a large pond, on a stream whidi enters tbe 
Medway between Jakes Bridge and Reed Bridge, Ungfidd. 
W. H. Coleman, sp. At the bottom of a large shallow pond 
on Wandsworth Common, July, 1835, when, by reason of 
the drought, it appeared growing in the dried nuid, but I bad 
never before seen the plant there. W, PixmpUn, nut, 

Veronica BuxbaumU, Naturalised at Wandsworth, and between 
Battersea and Dapbam. W. PampUn, nus. 

Mentha Pulegiam. Hedge Court Pond, £. Grinstead. W. H. 
Colemun, ms». On Ditton Common, it occurs most plenti- 
fully in some wet ground to the north of the railway line, 
near Shilton's Cottages. - H. W. gp. 

Galeobdolon luteunu On the hedge bank, by the hi^ road, very 
near the Inn at Burford Bridge. H. IT. gp. 

Scutellaria minor. Wandsworth Common. Indig, Penge Wood ; 
Knight's Hill Common, Norwood ; Weir Mill Pond, near 
11. Grinstead. W. H. Ccieman, mss. On Esher Common, 
rorth side of Okeshot Hill. H. W. sp. 

Orobanche datior. Parasilical upcm Centaurea Scabiosa, in the great 
chalk-pit at Ashted. W. PampUn, mss. 

liomoviA palustris. In a ditch bordering the north-west side of 
Ditton Common, between Weston Green and Ember Grove. 
H, W. sp. In the principal ditches in Battersea fields; 
plentiful in Letchmere; on the common between Tooting 
and Streatbam. Indig. 

Ln .ORELLA laciutris. Hed je Court Pond, E. Grinstead. W. H. 
Coleman r.^<is. Ponds on Esher Common, n^u* the grounds 
of Cla. emoiU. H. JF. sp. 

Chenoposiitm^ ucam. l*he rarest of tbe metropolitan Chenopodex, 
and has disappeared at Battersea for five years past. fT. 
Parr.pUn, mss. 

olidum. In the road-side at E. Moulsey, very near the 

river Mole ; also near W. Moulsey. H. W. sp. 

• hyhridtan. Every year more or less in the Lavender 



Hill Nursery, and occasionally varies with the stems, pe- 
tioles and veins of the leaves, of a rich purple colour. W. 
Pamplin, mss. (The semicolon after "Chelsea Bridge** 
and ti.e comma after '* gardener's ground," must change 
places; the signification being entirely destroyed by the 
misprirt. — Page 93.) 

-ficifoUtan. Peckbam. W. PampUn, mss. 



PoLTGONCTM dumttorum. In a wood immediately opposite the house 
of Sir C. C. Pepys, fiicing which there is a gate, on enter- 
ing which a few yards within the woods, the plant will be seen 
climbing over some low bushes. Mag. Nat. Hist, ix. 86. 
Running over low bushes, very plentifully, in and near a 
wood, a short distance south-west of Wimbledon, towards 
Kingston, 1835. W. PampUn, mss. A single plant of it, 
in a ditch, by the right side of the road running from the 
west comer of Ditton Common towards the Copper Mills, 
not many yards from the Common, 1836. H. IF. sp. (Very 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — SURRY. 585 

nearly allied to P. Convolvulus, which in damp rich ground 
acquires conspicuous wings, at the angles of the fruit. ) 

RuMsx pulcher. In the footpath from Battersea Bridge to Lavender 
Hill, &c. Indig. 

Mercurialis annua. By the Princess Head, and elsewhere in Batter- 
sea. Indig. 

Urtica pUvlifera, Battersea fields. J. Anderson, 

Carpinus Bettdus, One tree, perhaps self-sown, in the hedge by the 
road leading from the south comer of Ditton Common to 
Claygate and Esher Common, only a short distance down 
the lane. H, W. sp. 

Stratiotes aloides* In the pond opposite the five houses, Wandsworth 
Common ; and in the wide brook at the foot of Lavender 
Hill. Indig. 

AcTiNocARPus Damasonitmu Ponds on Clapham Common ; Hedge 
Court Pond, £. Grinstead. H. W. Colenuin, mu. In a 
pond on Esher Common, between Claremont Park and Clay- 
gate ; in a small pond, on Ditton Common, just in front of 
Ember Grove ; near Shilton's Cottages, on the same Com- 
mon ; also on the opposite side of the Portsmouth road, in 
the bed of the Rye, near to the Turnpike House. H. W. 
sp. (This is probably " Ditton Marsh " of Mr. Borrer, in 
Turner and Dillwyn's Guide, as it formerly formed part of 
a large extent of unclosed and marshy land, to which that 
name was applied. On Smith's Map, it is now called 
" Common,'* while " Marsh " is applied to a portion wholly 
enclosed and drained) on the south-east side of the Rye, near 
Thames Ditton Green. When the initials « JI. fT." follow 
localities, this restricted signification is to be understood.) 

Sagittaria sagittifolia. In the Mole, at Esher Bridge. H. W. 

AcERAs antkropopora. Between Box Hill and Juniper Hill. If. W. 
sp. Old stone-pits east of Guildford, plentifully. W, Pam- 
plint tnss, 

Tamus communis. Wimbledon Wood ; frequent through the county. 
W. Pamplin, mss. 

Scilla atUumnalis. ^For "A G." read " B. G." « Mouldsworth," 
of Ray, and others, doubtless signifies « Moulsey," Mr. 
Pamplin. — Page 95. ) 

TuLiFA sylvestris. Near Kingston (Mr. Baker); near Leatherhead, 
abundantly (Mr. G. Penny). W, Pamplinj mss. 

Ttpha angustifolia. Ponds on Wandsworth Common, and in Letch- 
mere. Indig. 

Lemna gibba. Battersea. IF. Pamplin, mss. 

-^— pdyrkiza. Ditches on Ditton Common. H. W. sp. 

SciRPus trigueter. Thames side between Battersea and Vauxhall. Indig. 

Eleocharis acicularis. Hedge Court and Weir Mill Ponds, E. 
Grinstead. W. H, Coienian, sp, 

Rhtncospora (dba. On Bagshot Heath, between Chobham and 
Shrubs-hill. W. Pamplin, mss. 

Carex divulsa. Frequent in Thames Ditton, and adjoining parishes. 



y Google 



586 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

H, W. sp. (Refer to «« Winch, nus." instead of ** B. C" 

— Page 96.) 

AoKosns Spica-Fenti, By the road-side, Bagsbot Heath; among 

corn in Battersea fields. fT. PampUn, mss. Corn-fields in 

Thames Ditton ; in 1 836, it was abnndant amongst wheat, in 

the field opposite the Lodge of Ditton House. H. W. tp. 
Sbcaria viridis. Wandsworth fields and Battersea, 1835. W. Pcaap' 

tin, mss. Battersea fields, near the Red House, and between 
. the Bridge Road and the Nine Elms, near the footpath. 

Indig, 
verticUlakL Battersea fields. Eng. FL (The specimen from 

Mr. Christy is erroneously referred to the present species, it 

belongs to the preceding. — Page 96.) 
PoA aquatica, Plentifiil in the Thames and Mole, and in ditches 

and marshy ground, about those rivers, ff, W, ip. 
Festuca bromoides. Wimbledon Common, on the high banks by the 

road firom Wandsworth to Kingston. W. H, Coleman, mss. 

Hedge bank, by the fix>tpath firom Ditton Common to the 

Claygate Telegraph. IT. W, sp, 
Bromus eUcmdrus. On a wall at Battersea, near the church, in 1834. 

W, Pampiin, mss, 
— — mcemosus. By the fix>tpath, going firom Ditton Conmion to 

the Telegraph at Claygate^ in the second field. H, W, sp. 
secalinus. Plentiful in a neglected fidlow, above Hogg's Mill, 

near Kingston, 1836. ff. W. sp. 
LoLiuM arvense. With the preceding, near Kingston. H. W. sp. 
temuUntwn, Plentiful in Battersea corn-fields, in 1834, 

among tares which had been left to grow again, after having 

been mown in the preceding spring. W. Pctmptin, mss. 
DiGiTARiA sanguinaUs. (Mr. W. Pamplin intimates that he has un- 

succ^sfully sought for any Digitaria, in Wandsworth fields. 

— Page 96.) 



X. MIDDLESEX AND LONDON. 

In the fi^rmer volume it was remarked that a Flora MetropdtiUina, 
to exhibit the actual vegetation of the vicinity of the Metropolis, would 
be a valuable addition to our local Floras; but that the delecting Box, 
or the fields, not the Library, must supply the materials. Since the re- 
mark was published, a work has appeared bearing this title, but with 
scarcely more legitimate claim to the name of a Metropolitan Flora, 
than the present work has to that of a British Flora. Indeed, the 
work in question is a Botanist's Guide, nearly on the same plan as 
this one, except that in being devoted to a limited tract, its local lists 
are made to refer to very small areas, instead of relating to whole coun- 
ties. Taken as a local guide, it will be of considerable use to botanical 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT MIDDLESEX. 587 

collectors, and may be of much assistance to any one who shall really 
write a Metropolitan Flora. Mr. Cooper would confer an important 
obligation on the botanists of England, by undertaking this task, on a 
plan adequate to effect the object completely and accurately. Whoso- 
ever may undertake the task, however, ought to visit the recorded lo- 
calities, as far as possible, so as to write from actual observation. He 
should request all botanists resident in the neighbourhood, to supply him 
with lists of the plants found in their own vicinities ; including carefully 
sfpecified localities for all the rarer species. An actual inspection of the 
specimens should be made in all instances that may appear doubtful, or 
of suspicious character fur accuracy ; and no localities ought to be ad- 
mitted into the work, on the authority of any person who will not un- 
dertake to show either the station or a specimen from it. In addition 
to special localities for the less common kinds, the area, over which 
each species is extended, ought to be carefully ascertained ; and this 
might be pretty well determined by comparing a number of local lists, 
each relating to a small extent of surface. A good method of forming 
such local lists would be by an enumeration of all the species found 
within a single parish, or other circumscribed area, with a notice of 
their comparative frequency or scarcity within the space, and the further 
addition of the nearest known localities for other species, which are not 
found within the particular tract in question. Book-localities and 
species, not very recently confirmed, might be added as an appendix ; 
but they should find no place in the general list of the flora. In short, 
a Metropolitan Flora, if intended to be worth printing, ought to be a 
picture of the present botanical productions of the London district, and 
not merely a compiled list of names, indicative only of what has been 
written on the subject, during a century or two, as is unavoidably the 
case in a work like this present Guide, or in one constituted on the 
plan of Mr. Cooper's Flora Metropolitana. The latter includes the 
chief part of the metropolitan localities mentioned in the first volume of 
this work (from which they have been copied more frequently than ap- 
pears by the references or authorities named); but it makes numerous 
additions to them, partly copied from older books which I had deemed 
it more advisable to pass over ; but partly, also, from the recent observ- 
ations of Mr. Cooper himself, or' of his botanical friends. Such additions 
I have not deemed it necessary to copy into this present volume ; but, 
instead of doing so, shall recommend to persons disposed to botanise in 
the neighbourhood of London, and desirous of a botanical guide-book, 
that they should give the preference to Mr. Cooper's work ; to which 
the few additional metropolitan localities, contained in this volume, can 
easily be added with the pen. So far as the vicinity of London is con- 
cerned, the work of Mr. Cooper will be found more serviceable, and 
will be only a fourth of the cost. It may be worth while to mention 
here, that where the initials ** H» IF/* follow any localities given in the 
New Botanist's Guide, they are placed in their proper counties ; thus, 
" Thames-side above Hampton Court Bridge," or *' Thames-side oppo- 
site to Sunbury," indicates the Surry side of the Thames, if introduced 
under Ihe head of *< Surry." Mr. Cooper has occasionally transferred 
such indications to the county of Middlesex, thus directing botanists to 
the wrong side of the river, and to places where the plants do not grow. 



y Google 



588 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

But trifling errors of this kind are almost unavoidable. I have fidlen 
into similar ones myself; and Turner and Dillwyn have done the 
same ; an example of which is instanced on page 583, of thb volume. 



Ranunculus parviflonu. (For "London" read " Harefield." — 
Page 97.) 

Adonis autumnaUs. ( I never yet saw this plant near London. Afr. 
PampUn, — Turner and Dillwyn's authority is Curtis. 
— Page 97.) 

Sisymbrium Irio, (Read *< Walham," not « Waltham;** and insert 
the reference to ''Eng. FL " after ** London.**— Pages 97, 98. ) 

SiNAns tenui/olia. On walls east and west of the road by which one 
passes from Kensington, at the church, to Kensington Gravel 
Pits, rather more than midway of the distance. The road is 
called Church Lane, at the Kensington end, and Silver 
Street, at the end by the Pits. Mag. NaL HUt, ix. 90. 

— — muralis. Very sparingly on the gravel-bed of the Thames 
shortly below Hampton Court Bridge. H, W, tp. 

EaYsiMUM cheiranthoidea. With the precedii:g. H. W. sp. 

Brassica campestris ? See this species in " Surry,'* on page 579. 

Ulcz nanus. Hampstead Heath. G. E. Dennes^ m$s. 

Rosa $yttyla. (Erase '< Quendon,** which is in Essex. — Page 98. ) 

gracilis. Near Blackmoor Farm, near Twickenham. R. 

Castles, mss. 

eanina (Forsteri, dumetorum, sarmentacea). Twickenham. R. 

Caskes, mss. 

mierantha. By the Park pales between Ditton Ferry and 

Kingston. R. Ccutles, mss. 

— — spinosissima. Mounslow, and other commons near Twicken- 
ham. R. Castles, mss. (Bir. Castles has &voured me with 
cultivated specimens of the several roses mentioned here, and 
in ** Surry,'* on his authority.) 

Lythrum hyssopifolium. ( Read ** Lalam *' or Laleham. — Page 99. ) 

Myriophyllu m verticiUatum. ( Read ** village ** for " river.** — Page 
99.) 

Callitriche pedunculata. (The plant figured in the Supplement to 
English Botany, 2606, under the name of Cal. autumnalis, 
was referred to, in the second edition of the British Flora, as 
C. pedunculata. This led me to give the localities published 
for C. autumnalis, as if belonging to C. pedunculata, which 
appears to be wrong for the Anglesea station, '* Llyn Me- 
^ogt" but I am disposed still to believe that the London plant 
is r^ly C. pedunculata, and that C. autumnalis of most of 
our Floras, and of three-fourths of the British botanists, is 
also referrible to the same species ; while the true C. autum- 
nalis is a very scarce plant in England, if not in Scotland 
also. Having received specimens of the latter from Mr. C. C. 
Babington, I must confess that it was previously unknown • 
to me, and that the only other specimen in my herbarium, 
out of several sent to me as C. autumnalis, and received as 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT— HERTFORDSHIRE. 589 

such, is one communicated by Mr. Stables, from Loch Clunie. 
C. pedunculata does grow in the vicinity of London, as will 
appear by reference to the list for Surry. — Page 99. ) 

Bryonia dioica. Highgate. G. E. Dennes, mss. 

SiuM latifolium. Thames side between Hampton Court and village. 
H. W, sp. 

F(£NicuLDM vtdgare, Highgate. G, E, Dennes, mss. (Probably 
scattered in seed from some garden. ) 

SoNCHUs palustris ? Among reeds, in the clay -pits of the large brick- 
fields at Shepherd's Bush, 1834. W. Pamplin, mss. 

PuLiCARiA vulgaris. About £aling, towards the Harrow road, plen- 
tifully. Wi, PampHuy mss. 

Verbascum nigrum. By the Thames, under the wall of Hampton 
Court Garden. H. W. sp, 

SoLANUM nigrum. With the preceding. H. W, sp. 

Lycopus europaus. Highgate. G. E. Dennes, mss. 

Mentha Pulegium. Hampstead Heath. G, E. Dennes, mss, 

Galeobdolon luteum. Highgate. G. E, Dennes, mss. 

Scutellaria minor. Hampstead Heath. G. E. Dennes, mss, 

Amaranthus Blitum. (Read ** Walham Green.** — Page 101. ) 

Polygonum mintis. Parson's Green, near Fulham, abundantly. 
W. Pamplin, mss. 

RuMEX pratensis. Road-sides about the northern outskirts of London. 
Br, FL 

Hydrocharis Morsus-rance. Ditches at the Neat-houses, between 
Chelsea and Ranelagh. W, Pamplin, mss. 

Sagittaria sagittifdia. Frequent in the county, W. Pamplin, mss. 
Side of the Thames between Hampton village and Court, 
and between Thames Ditton and Kingston. JI, W, sp, 

Scilla autumnalis. Query, if this has been found at Chelsea, since 
Gerard's time. W. Pamplin, mss. 

Acorus Calamus. Along the Thames, in several places, as by the 
road between the village of Hampton and Hampton Court. 
H, W. sp. 

Cyfrvlvs/Uscus. More or less eveiy year up to 1835. W. Pamplin, 
mss. In a field immediately at the back of the Swan Inn, 
Walham Green, in the ditches or drains which run across 
the field. G. Francis, sp. 



XL HERTFORDSHIRE. 



Anemone Pulsatilla. (Perhaps Ashley Green, in the same neigh- 
bourhood as the localities for the two other species, though 
really within the boundaries of the next county — Bucking- 
hamshire may be intended ; but Mr. W. Pamplin suggests 
" Ashlev, near Stockbridge, Hants."— Page 103.) 



yGooQle 



gL 



590 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

T&iFouuM ochroUvcum. By the road-side between Baldock and 

Royston. W. H, Coleman, mss. 
VsKBASCUH nigrum. Near St. Albans. /. Anderson, mss. 
At&opa Belladonna, Very plentiful in Lord Melbourne's Park, 

Brocket Hall, near Welwyn. W, PampUn, mss. 
Orchis pyramidaHs and militarise ( By some accident these have got 

misplaced, the first belonging to Hants, the second to Buck- 
ingham. — Page 104. ) 
OpHftTS apifera. Chalk-pit between Preston and Gosmore, near the 

Hitchin. W. H. Coleman, mss, 
HsKMiNiuM Monorchism Chalk-pit between Preston and Gosmore. 

W. H. Coleman, mss, 
Caocus vemus. At Totteridge. (Miss C. Garrow.) W. H. Coleman, 

mss. 
FaiTiLLARiA Meleagris, Plentiful in meadows at Totteridge. (Miss 

C. Garrow.) m H. Coleman, mss. 



XIl. ESSEX. 



Clematis Vitalba, Copford. C, C. Babington, mss. 

Anemone apennina, (The British Flora says " Berkbamstead, 
Essex." This seems to be a mistake for Berkbamstead, 
Herts ; or else to mean that the plant is found there and 
also in Essex. The former would appear to be the correct 
reading. — Page 105.) 

MYosuRusmzntmtM. Copford and Mersey Island. C. C. Babington, mss. 

Cabdamine amara, Copford. C, C Babington, mss, 

TuRRiTis glabra, Oliver's Mount, Colchester. C. C, Babington, mss. 

Viola Jlavicomis. Epping Forest. Eng, Bot. Supp. 

M(£NCHiA erecta, Piptree Heath. C. C. Babington, mss. 

Arenaria peploides, Mersey Island. C. C. Babington, mss. 

Htfericum Androscemum. Ditch, in a lane on the left side of the 
road from Brentwood to Ongar, about half a mile from 
Ongar. B. G, (The same locality as the one imperfectly 
given in page 106.) 

MsDicAGo maculata. In the plantation opposite the terrace at South- 
end. Mag. Nat. Hist, 

denticuUxta, Same locality and authority as the preceding. 

Tripolium ochroleucum. Copford. C C, Babington, mss, 

scabrum. Near Southend ; meadows near Safiron Walden. 

B,G, 

'- omithopodioides, Piptree Heath. C. C, Babington^ ihm. 

ViciA angustifoUa, Epping Forest. Eng. Bot, Svpp. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — ESSEX. 591 

ViciA hithynica. Southend C. C. Babington, mss. 

Lathyrus Aphaca. In the hedge, by the road-side, with the Bupleu- 
rura falcatum. Mag, Nat. Hist. 

NissoUa. Also with Bup. falQ^tum. Mag. Nat. Hist. 

hirsutus. Amongst bushes, just below Hadleigh Castle. 

Mag. Nat. Hist. 

Rosa systyla. Quendon. Eng. FL 

Ceratophtllum svbmersum. C. C. Bahington, mss. 

BuTLEVKvyi falcatum.* The exact station for this plant, gathered by 
myself in July, is in hedgerows and borders of fields between 
High Ongar and Chelnisford, beginning to grow exactly at 
the turnpike by the third mile from Ongar, or seventh iVom 
Chelmsford. It is most abundant on the right hand of the 
road towards the latter town, particularly in the hedge bound- 
ing the highway, but is so confined to the field side of the 
hedge, that not a plant is to be seen from the road. The 
Bupleurum is spread over a wide extent of ground, covering 
the banks of the fields, but never mingling with the crops.'* 
Mag. Nat. Hist. ix. 87. 

  rotundifolittm. Amongst barley, about the locality of B. 
falcatum. Mag. Nat. Hist. 

Feoia carinata. On a garden wall at Harden Ash, a short mile from 
Ongar, nearly opposite to where the road branches off to 
Brentwood (Mr. Borrer), very difficult to get at, and I have 
no doubt escaped from cultivation. W, A. Bromfield, mss. 

— — dentaia. In the corn, near the Bupleurum falcatum. Mag. 
Nat. Hist. 

Traqofooon porrifolius. Carwey Island. C. C. Bahington, mss. 

Crxpis biennis. Southend, on the river bank above the town. C. C. 
Babington, mss. 

Gnaphalium gaUicum. ( Read " Hedingham.'* — Page 108.) 

LiMBARDA critkmoides. (Refer to *^ Eng. FL" instead of "5. G.** 
— Page 108.) 

Anchusa sempervirens. Under a wall in Clay Street, Walthamstow, 
plentifully, but most probably the outcast of a garden. fT. 
Pampliny mss. 

LiNARiA spuria, Copford. C. C. Bahington, mss. 

Mentha gracilis. (** Lea" is misprinted '* sea.'* — Page 109. ) 

* 1 give the description of this locality for this plant, exactly in the words of 
Dr. Bromfield, on whose authority it is introduced into the Magazine referred to. 
That gentleman proposes to make the Magazine a medium of communicating *' the 
exact stations of all our rarer " species ; and he adds, — " By following such a course 
these volumes would prove a most useful * Botanist's Guides* and faithful record of 
lost or still existing stations to succeeding times, in place of those vague indications 
which seldom conduct the botanist to the object of his search." The present work 
contains probably 30,000 of these vague indications. Supposing only a tenth part of 
them to come under Dr. Bromfield's ideas of stations of the " rarer " plants, and the 
descriptions to average the same number of lines as the above, they would fill a whole 
volume of the Magazine, to the exclusion of every thing else ; or if taken in fair pro- 
portion to its other subjects, they would be scattered through a score of lusty octavos 
which would prove rather an inconvenient packet for the pocket of a walking 
botanist. I would suggest that condensed descriptions, communicated to a work like 
the present, are likely to become more useful to botanists, than verbose ones scat- 
tered through the miscellaneous matter of periodicals. Dr. Bromfield has himself 
thus made valuable additions to this Supplement. 



yGooQle 



gL 



592 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

HoTTONiA palustris. Marsh ditches between Waltbamstow and the 
Lea river, towards Edmonton. /F. Pcanpliny mss. 

Cuxvoromw. fruHcosunu Mersey Island. C, C Babington, mss, 

RuMXX pratensis* In marshes on the Essex side of the Thames- 
Ejig. Bot. Supp 

EuPHOBBLA phtyphylla. (Insert" Eng. Fl,'* after **Notley.**— Page 
110.) 

Ofhrys muscijfera, (Read *' High Easter." — Page 110.) 

Carex Pseudo- Cyperus. Copford. C. C. Babington^ mss. 

Alofecukus fulvus. Copford. C C. Babington, sp. On the bank 
of a pond, near the Rectory, Copford. Mag. NcU, Hist. 

PoLTPOGON monspeliensis, Canvey Island. C. C. Babington, sp., 
Canvey Island, in a marshy spot, by the road-side, be- 
tween the chapel and some houses on the Thames bank. 
Mag, Nat. Hist, In great abundance, one mile and a half 
from Tilbury Fort, or otherwise near the western end of 
Northfleet, near a cottage and (railroad ?) G. Francis, mss„ 

LouuM arvense, (Refer to **Eng. FL" instead o£'*B. (?.'•— Page 112.) 

Spartina stricta, Walton. W. Christy, sp. 



XIII. SUFFOLK. 



Clematis Vitalba, Common about Bury. W, A. Bromfidd, mss, 

Thalictrum minus. (Erase the semicolon after ** Risby." — Page 1 13. ) 

Anemone ranunculoides. A few plants formerly grew at Hawstead, 
but were eradicated by a gardener. 

Adonis autumnalis. Corn-fields about Bury, (Kev. W. * * •.) W. 
A, Bromfield, mss. 

Hellbborus viridis. About Bury; in a wood near Beighton, &c. 
W. A. Bromfield, sp. Near Stradbrook. B. G, (The lo- 
calities mentioned for this species on page 113 belong to 
H. foetidus.) 

Tbbsdalia nudicaulis. (Read « Belton," not « Belford." — Page 113.) 

TuBRiTis glabra. Near Dimwich. B. G. 

SisTMBMVM polgceratium. Still growing, in the greatest abundance, 
at the foot of walls in Schoolhouse Lane between Garland 
and Northgate Streets ; also in the farther part of Garland 
Street, and thence spreading with equal profusion over the 
Short Bracklands mixed with S. officinale and Coronopus 
Ruellii ; and even cree))ing beyond the precincts of the town, 
towards Fornham, but very sparingly ; but every where as- 
suming the aspect of an indigenous weed. W. A, Brom^- 
field, sp. 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT— SUFFOLK. 593 

SiLENE nocttflora. Fields at Barton. (Lady Blake.) JK A. Bromfield, 

mss. 
Geranium phattm. In woods near Whepstead, four miles from Bury, 
growing there for many years. (Rev. Thomas Image.) 
W, A, Bromfield. mss, 
Rhamnus catharticus. ( Read " Woolpit Wood.'* — Page 114.) 
Trifolium ochroleucum. About Barton, in fields near Sir Henry 

Bunbury's. W. A. Bromfield, msa, 
Meoicago muricata, ( Read *' Orford." — Page 115.) 
Lathyrus Aphaca. Border of a field near Hawstead. W, A, Brom- 
field, sp. 

pi8iformi8. (Refer to " Eng. Fl,'* not "5. C' — The 

latter has the locality " Aldborough, near the lime-kiln.** — 
Page 116.) 
Rosa tomentosa, (Read " Burgh Castle." — Page 116.) 
Sedum dasypkyUum, Old Abbey Walls at Bury. fT. A. Bromfield, 
mss. Walls of the Botanic Garden at Bury. /. E, Leefe, 
mss, 
ScLERAHTHVs perennis. IcklinghanL (W, Borrer, Esq.) C. C. 

Babington, mss, 
Smyrmium Olusatrum. Castle Mound at Eye. A. Bloxam, mss. 

In the Village of Flixton. C. C. Babington, mss. 
SiUM latifolium, Worlingham ; Cove ; marshes between Yarmouth 
and Burgh Castle. B. G. (These stations are misprinted 
on page 1 1 7. )*► - 
DiPSACus pilosus. About Horringer, near Bury. W. A. Bromfield, 

mss. 
Artemisia campestris, Icklingham. (W. Borrer, Esq.) C. C. 

Babington, mss. 
Cemtaurea solstitialis. In several fields about Barton, near Bury 
St. Edmonds ; as also about Rougham, in the same vicinity. 
Mag. Nat. Hist. 
Monotropa Hypopltys. (Refer to " Stock, cat.'' not «^. G.** — 

Page 119.) 
CuscuTA europcea. In a hedge about a hundred yards beyond the 
Gaol, on the same side of the London and Sudbury rood 
from Bury, parasitic on the wild bop, and very abundant. 
W. A. Bromfield, mss. 
Verbascum pvlveruUntum. In old chalk-pits and by road-sides about 
Bury ; abundant out beyond Northgate Street ; also by the 
road-side between Bury and Newmarket, in many places. 
W. A. Bromfield, mss. 
Melampyrum cristatum. Abundant in a wood between Bury and 

Whepstead. W, A. Bromfield, mss. 
Veronica triphyllos. Near Mildenhall. (Mr. Broome.) C, C. Babing- 
ton, mss, 
Scutellaria minor. Tuddenham. fF, A. Bromfield, sp. 
Cyclamen hedercefdium. (Refer to " Eng. F/." not ** B, G." — 

Page 120.) 
Aristolochia Clematitis. By the Church and Parsonage House at 
Hessett, six miles south-west of Bury ; a suspicious station. 



yGooQle 



gL 



594 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

but the plant has been growing there for many years. W. A. 

liromfiddy $p. 
Mercurialis annua. Bury. Wi. A. Bromfiddj m»s. 
Leucojum iBstivum. ( Read ^ Little Stonham." — Page 122. ) 
ORNrruoGALDM umbellatum. Meadow nearly oppoate the chalk-pits, 

Risby^Gate Street, Bury. (Mr. Downes.) C. C, Babinffton, 

mss. 
Rhtncospora alba. Abundant on bogs at Belton and Lound. B. G. 
DiGiTARiA humifusa. Abundant in a 6eld near Bury ; shewn to me 

by Mr. Stock. W. A. Bromfeld, sp. 



XIV. NORFOLK. 



Clematis Vitalba. Dereham; Hockering ; Bath Hills at Bungay.* 
S. P. Woodward, mss. (Add a semicolon after " churchyard." 
It is presumed that " hedges " did not refer exclusively to 
Earlham, which would appear from the misprint. — Page 
125.) 

Adonis autumnalts. Hedges round Norwich, scarcely wild. S. P. 
Woodward, mss. 

Mtosurus minimus. This has not been found, either at Earsham or 
Lakenham, for many years. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

Ranuwcdlus parviflorus. Brundall, near Norwich. S, P. Wood- 
ward, mss. 

HsLLKBORUs viridis. Bath Hills at Bungay. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

Papaver hybridum. Lakenham, near the church. S. P. Woodward, 
mss. Corn-fields at Barton Bendish. B. G. 

TiTRRiTis glabra. Brundall and Thorpe, by Norwich. S. P. Wood- 
ward, Tnss. 

Cardamine amara. Cley. C C, Babington, mss. Bromerton ; 
Lakenham, &c. Lost at King Street Meadows, Norwich. 
A purple variety at Dereham. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

Cochlearia officinalis. Found last year in salt marshes at Caistor, 
by Mr. Manners. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

Teesdalia nudicaulis. Mosswold Heath ; Bath Hills. S. P, Wood- 
ward, mss. 

Erysimum cheiranthoides. Abundant in fields, by Bungay, Dereham, 
Bromerton, Lakenham, &c., truly wild. S. P. Woodward, 
fnss, 

Lepidium latifolium. Cley. C. C. Babington, sp. 

• Mr. Woodward frequently names Bungay ; but as this occurs in a list of Norfolk 
localities, probably the Norfolk side of the river may be intended. I should other- 
wise have transferred them to the list for Suffolk, in conformity with the plan 
followed in other parts of this work, in reference to towns situate on the borders of 
counties. 



y Google 



SUPPLEM ENT — NORFOLK*. 59 5 

Lkfxdium Smiihiu Sandy lanes near Norwich ; Lakenham. iS". P. 

Woodward, mss, 
— ^— rudercUe. Cley. C. C. BaUngton, «p. 
iBsais amara. £a8t Winch, between Lynn and Swaffham. G. 

Cooper, sp, 
Brassica campestris. Old chalk- pits, &c, near Norwich. S, P, 

Woodward, mss, 
Droseba longifolia, Felthorpe ; doubtful whether growing in Elling- 

ham Fen. S, P. Woodward, mss, 

anglica. St. Faith*s ; Felthorpe. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

Frankenia l<Bvis. Cley. C. C. Babington, sp. Lost on the South 

Denes, but found on the banks of the * * * (?)» particularly 

over the swing bridge. 5". P. Woodward, mss. 
Arenaria tenuifoUa. A locality for this, near Norwich, is mentioned 

in Mr. S. Woodward's MSS., but I am unable to read two 

names, which serve to point out the precise spot. H. W. 
Cerastium arvense. Fields near Norwich. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Radiola miUegrana. St. Faith's ; Felthorpe, &c. S. P. Woodward, 

mss. 
Hypericum dodes. Felthorpe ; St Faith's. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Geranium sylvaticum. Holt Wood, in Leziate, near Lynn. B. G. 
pyrenaicum. Lakenham, certainly wild. S, P. Woodward, 

mss. 
Rhamnus cathariicus. Dereham ; and near Bungay. S. P. Wood- 
ward, mss, 
Medicago mactdata, Cley. C, C, Babington, mss. 
Melilotus leucantha. Common in marshes between Thorpe and 

Witlingham. S, P. Woodward, mss. 
Trifolium ochroleucum. Dereham ; and near Norwich. S. P. 

Woodward, mss, 
Onobrtchis sativa. Fields by Bungay, scarcely wild, S. P, Wood- 
ward, mss. 
ViciA lathgroides, Road-side by the Bath Hills. S. P. Woodward, 

mss, 
- angustifolia. Abundant every where about Norwich. S. P. 
Woodward, mss. 
Lathyrus Aphaca. In a gravel-pit near Bungay. S. P. Woodward, 

mss, 
PoTENTiLLA argentea. Abundant near Bungay ; also near Norwich 

and Dereham. .S*. P. Woodward, mss. 
Comarum po/tM/re. Abundant in every bog and many marshes in 

Norfolk; Felthorpe; Horning; Dereham; St, Faith's; 

Eaton; Bungay, &c. S, P. Woodward, mss, 
Rosa tomentosa. Dereham. iS*. P. Woodward, mss. 
Sclera NTH us perennis. Common on all heaths, near Norwich, &c. 

S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Sedum album. Dereham, wild. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
RiBES nigrum. Dereham. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Chrtsosflenium altemifolium. Stoke (query, as to the name). Lost 

at Porii^land. S, P. Woodward, mss. 
SisoN Amomum, lakenham ; Dereham. S. P. Woodward, mss. 



yGooQle 



gL 



596 THE NEW BOTANISTS GUIDE. 

FcEHicoLCM vulgare Scarcely wild at Norwich; has grown in a 

hedge on the Bath Hills, Bungay, for many years. S. P. 
Woodward, nus. 
SiLAus pratensU. Norwich ; Dereham. S, P. Woodward, mss. 
Pastiicaca tativa. Dereham ; abundant near Norwich. S. P. 

Woodward, mss. 
Tori LI 8 infesta, Norwich. S, P. Woodward, mss. 
SxTBVioM Olttsatrum. Very common near Norwich. S. P, Wood* 

ward, mss. 
ViscuM album. Dereham. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
AsPSBULA Cynanchica. Swaffham. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Gauum parisiense. (Read " Walls of Binbam Abbey; Carrow 

Abbey, by Norwich.** — Page 132. ) 
DiPSA c us /n/onM. Dereham. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Tkaoovogov porrifolius. Norwich Castle HilL S. P. WoodwarcL, 

mss. 
Pbenanthes muralis. Common near Bungay. S. P. Woodward^ 

mss. 
HiEBACiUM umbeOatum. Tel^raph * *, near Norwich ; Bath Hills, 

Bungay ; Mosswold. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Htpoch^ekis glabra. In a sandy field,* by the Bath Hills. S. P. 

Woodward, mss. 
Omopokoum Acanthium. Abundant near Norwich. S. P. Woodward, 

mss. 
Ckicus acaulis. Seaming Common. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Ebioeboh acris. Plantation at Lakenham. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
AsTBB Tripolium. Abundant in the salt marshes near Yarmouth. 

S. P. Woodward, mss. (Perhaps inadvertently omitted in 

the * Natural History of Yarmouth.*) 
Centaubba Calcitrapa. Road-side by the Thorpe Asylum. S. P. 

Woodward, mss. (The specimen firom Burnham is C. sol- 

stitialis, but the locality has been accidentally given under 

C. Calcitrapa. — Page 133.) 
Campanula Rapunctdus. Old walls at Earsham ; Dereham. S. P. 

Woodward, mss. 
MoNOTBOFA Hypopitys. Fir plantations near Bungay. S. P. Wood- 
ward, mss. 
Gektiana Pneumonanthe. Felthorpe; St. Faith's. S. P. Woodward, 

mss. 
Chlora perfoUata. Eradicated by botanists, at Ditchingham and 

Bath Hills ; but still growing in a gravel-pit, with Lathynis 
• Aphaca. S. P. Woodward^ mss. 
CuscuTA Epithymum. Stratton Strawless ; St. Faith's ; Felthorpe. 

S. P. Woodward, mfs. 
-^— europma. Clover-fields at Brooke, 1834. S. P. Woodward, 

sp. 
Anchusa sempervirens. Really wild at Lakenham. S. P. Woodward, 

mss. 
Myosotis ccespitosa. Marshes at Thorpe, &c. S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Vbrbascum puherulentum . Near Norwich. W. 4* Bnmfidd, sp. 
-^— ^ Lychnites. Common in hedges, &c.) the outcast of 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — NORFOLK. 59? 

gardens, where it is treated as a weed only. S. P. Wood- 
ward, ms8. 
Verbascum nigrum. Common near Bungay. S, P. Woodward, 

mss. 
Atbopa BelladonKa. Wild at Thorpe, by Norwich. S. P. Woodward, 

mas, 
SoLANUH nigrum. Abundant by Norwich. S. P, Woodward, mas. 
Antirrhinum Orontium. Common in fields by Norwich. S. P. 

Woodward, mss, 
Lycopus europtetM. Common in the marshes of Norfolk, exoeptiiig 

such as ate salt S. P. Woodward, maa, 
Mentha sglveatria. Lakenham marshes. S. P. Woodward, msa. 
Galbofsis Ladanum, Chalk pits near Norwich. S. P. Woodward, 

maa. 
' veraicolor, Hethersett. S* P. Woodward, maa. 

Galeobdolon luteum. Common ; Thorpe ; ArminghalL S. P. 

Woodward, msa^ 
Lamium incisum. Lakenham ; Dereham. S. P. Woodward, maa, 
AciNos vulgaria. EUingham, near Bungay. S. P. Woodward, maa. 
Calamintha offidnaUa. Common near Norwich ; Dereham. S. P. 

Woodward, msa* 
Orobanchb ramoaa. Lakenham. S. P. Woodward, maa. 
HoTTONiA paluatria. Abundant near Norwich. S. P. Woodward, 

maa. 
Primula datior. Lakenham \ Stoke. SI P. Woodward, maa. 
Statics — . All four species at Cley. C. C. Babington, maa., who 

has favoured me with specimens of S. reticulata and spathu^ 

lata, gathered there. H. W. 
Plantaoo maritima. Cley. C. C. Babington, ap. 
CHENOPODiUM/rtt/tcosum. Cley. C C. Babington, ap. 

" oUdum, murale, urbicum. All at Norwich. S. P. 

Woodward, maa. 
Salicornia radicana. (To this species, probably^ ak% to be referred 

the specimens from Titchwell and Burnham. — Page 137.) 
RuMEx alpinus. Blickling churchyard, near Aylsham. (Rev. Mr. 

Small.) A. Bloxam, maa. 
> puleher. Common near Norwich and Bungay. S. P. Wood- 
ward, mas. 
ARistoLocHiA Clematitia. Not wild at Carrow Abbey, it being in the 

Monks* garden ; formerly grew in Tuck's Wood, really wild, 

but was removed by Mr. Mackie. S. P. Woodward, maa, 
SrtKATixyrKS aloidea. Lynn Regis, 1826. G. Howitt, ap. Abundant 

in the peat holes, Royden Fen. A, Bloxam, ap. 
Hydrocharis Morsua-rana, Abundant near Norwich. jS^. P. Wood- 
ward, maa. 
Saoittaria aagittifdia. Abundant near Norwich. S. P. Woodward, 

msa. 
Orchis pyramidaUa. Abundant near Norwich. S. P. Woodward, 

maa. 
Ophrys muaeifera. Gawdy Hall Wood, Norfolk. C. C. Babington, 



yGooQle 



gL 



598 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

NxoTTiA spiralis. Near Bungay and Stoke. S, P, H^oodward, nug. 
Narcissus Pseudo-narcissus* Wild at Dereham ; Lakenham ; &c« 

S. P. Woodward, mss. 
Tamus communis. Common near Norwich, Dereham, &c. S. P. 

Woodward, mss. 
AspAEAOUS officinalis. Sea-shore opposite the Monument. S. P. 

Woodward, mss. 
CoNYALLARiA majolts. Really wild at Thorpe and Tuck's Woods ; 

Dereham. S. P. Woodtoard, mss. 
TuLiPA syhestris. All the plants were removed, by a lady, from the 

chalk pit at Carrow Abbey to her garden, where they soon 

died ; formerly grew at Beacondale. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

Lemna . All common near Norwich. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

JuNcus obtusijlorus. Brome Fen. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

Eleocuaris acicuJaris. Brome Fen. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

C labium Mariscus. Royden Fen. A. Bloxam, mss. 

ScHdNUS nigricans. Dereham ; Ellingham. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

Royden Fen. A. Bloxam, mss. 
Blysmus compressus. Lakenham Marshes. S. P. Woodward, mss, 
Carex intermedia. Lakenham. S. P. Woodward, mss, (Read 

Mautby. — Page 141.) 
— teretiuscula. Surlingbam. S. P. Woodward, mss. 

Pseudo-cyperus, Lakenham. 5". P. Woodward, mss, 

— — — - (Ederi, Brome. S. P. Woodward, mss, 

— - stricta. Bungay. S. P. Woodward, mss. In an old moat 

about half a mile above Royden Fen. A. Bloxam, mss. 
rjiliformis, Surlingbam. 5". P. Woodward, i 



PoLYPoooN . A specimen of each from Mr. Babington. 

Agrostis Spica-Venti. Thorpe. 

Bromus secalinus. Field by Bungay. S. P, Woodward, mss. 

  arvensis, Dereham ; lost at Earsham. S. P, Woodward, 

mss. 
AYBVAfatua. Dereham; Lakenham. S, P, Woodward, mss. 
DiGiTARJA humifusa, Sandy fields by Bungay. S. P. Woodward, 



XV. CAMBRIDGESHIRE.* 

Anemone Pulsatilla, Flam Dyke, near Fulboume ; Westhoe Park, 

near Linton. W. H, Coleman, mss. 
Mtosurus minimus. Not found of late years. C. C, BabingUm^ 

mss. 
Ranunculus parmflorus. Under the hedge of the nursery ground 

near Grantchester church. W. H, Coleman, mss, 

* Hentlow's Catalogue of British Plants inchidei a corrected liit of Cambridce- 
shire planu. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — CAMBRIDGE. 599 

HfiLLEBoaus viridU, In the last close of Great Shel^rd ; by the 

road to Red Cross Turnpike. W* H. Coleman, nus. (Read 

Bigwin Closes. — Page 143.) 
Papatee hyhridum. Between Royston and Melbourne. W, H, CoiU- 

many mss. 
Glaucium violaceum, (Read ** Burwell" and ** probably not wild."— 

Page 144.) 
Ibbris amara. About half a mile to the right of the road from Roys- 
ton to Melbourne. W. H. Coleman, sp, 
£btsimum cheiranthoidee. Coe Fen ;^Teversham. fT. H. Coleman, mss^ 
Nastubtium sylvestre. Banks of the Cam, between Bat's-bight and 

Clayhithe. W, H. Coleman, mse, 
Abenabia tenuifdia. Chippenham Park ; Devil's Ditch, near Stetch- 

worth. W, H, Coleman, mes. 
Gebanium pyrenaicum. Newhham, in a close by the path to Grant- 

chester ; near Red Cross Turnpike. W. H. Coleman, mss, 
lue ATiEVs Noli-me-tangere. (Probably a mistake. Mr, C. C, Babing^ 

ton. — Page 145.) 
Lathybus Aphaca. Ditch a little beyond the Observatory, towards 

Maidingley. /. E. Leefe, mss. 
HiPPOCBEPis comosa. Cherry Hinton. /. E, Leefe, sp, 
Tbifolium ochroleucum. Between Coton and Madingley; about 

Eversden Wood. W. H, Coleman, mss, 
AsTBAOALus glycyphyUus. Long Lane, Grantchester ; between 

Trumpington and Grantchester ; Barton Turnpike ; Tever- 

sham ; Hildersham. W. H. Coleman, mss. 

hypoglottis. Between Newmarket and Chippenham; 

Fleam Dyke. W, H. Coleman, mss. 
Medicago mactdata. Common near Cambridge. C. C, Bahington, mss. 
PotENTiLLA vema, Newmarket Heath. W. H. Coleman, mss. 
Rosa iomentosa. Madingley and Kingston Woods ; Coton ; Grant- 
chester ; Hinton ; Teversham ; Hildersham. W. H. CoU- 

man, mss. 
arvensis (♦* ramis hyspidis"). In a close adjoining Coton 

Cross. W. H. Coleman, mss. 
Sanouisobba officinalis. In a plantation by the great watercourse on 

Fulbourn Moor. W. H. Coleman, mss. 
Mtbiophyi;.lum verticillatum. Quey. FL Cant. 
Caitcaus daucoides. Very scarce, having only been found, of late 

years, near SwaflTham Prior and Burwell. C. C. Bahington, 

mss. (Refer to " Fl Can<."— Page 147.) 
Caeum Carui* Christ College Pieces ; Stourbridge Fair Green ; 

Meadows near the Windmills, Wisbeach. Fl Cant. 
SiUM latifolium. In the brook bteween Barton and Grantchester ; 

not common, as is implied by Relhan. IF. H. Coleman, mss. 
Petboselinum segetum. From Relhan*s station all along the hedge 

to the gate of St. John's grounds ; by a little stream on the 

right of the footpath to Coton ; and in ^veral places in the 

first mile of the Barton Road. IF. H. Coleman, mss. 
LoNiCEEA Caprifolium. By the footpath from Little to Great Evers- 
K 2 



y Google 



600 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

den ; in a hedge near Grantchester Mill. W, ff, Colemath 

mas. 
DiPSACUS pUosus. In a plantation beside the tail-stream of Grant* 

Chester Mill. fT. ff. Coleman, ms$. 
Cnicus ertophorus. Hill near Linton, by the road from Hildersham ; 

about Eversden Wood ; bushy closes by the seventh mile^ 

stone on the road to St. Neot's. fT, H. Coleman, mss. 
CiNEKARiA campestris. Devil's Ditch near Stetchworth. W. H, 

Coleman, mss, 
Ertthr^a pulcheUa, Shelford Common. W. H. Coleman, mss, 
Chlora perfoliata. Chalk pit, Madingley ; about Eversden Wood ; 

balks, pastures, &c. by the roaid to Impington. W. H. 

Coleman, mss. 
Myosotis collina, Linton. C. C Babington, sp, 
SryiTHTivvi tuberosum, (Add the reference "5. G. /* but there is 

perhaps some mistake. — Page 149. ) 
Veronica spicata. This has not been found, for the last year or two. 

C. C. Babington, mss. (Erase the semicolon after " furze," 

and introduce one after " Beacon.*' — Page J 50.) 
Mevtha piperita. Wet hollow in the copse by Coton Turnpike. JT. 

H. Coleman, mss, 
— — — sylvestris. Coe Fen ; Coton Cross ; between Coton and the 

Oxford Road. W. H. Coleman, mss. 
Euphorbia stricta. Brickfield by the Oxford Road, beyond the Ob- 
servatory. W. JT, Coleman, mss. 
Orchis ustulata. Fleam Dyke, abundantly. W. H. Coleman, mss, 
LiPARis Loeselii. Burwell Fen. C. C. Babington, sp, 
AcERAs anthropophora. Furze hills, Hildersham. W, H, Coleman, 

mss. 
Ophrys apifera. Fleam Dyke ; Westhoe Park ; Trumpington Mill 

lane plantation. JF. H. Coleman, mss. (To this species 

belongs a specimen misplaced to O. muscifera. — Page 153.) 
l&is fatidissima. Eversden Wood; Histon; Fellow's Grounds, 

St. John's. JF. H. Coleman, mss, 
Muscari racemosum. Road side between Wort's Causeway and the 

great chalk-pit. Cherry Hinton, near Cambridge. W. H, 

Coleman, sp. 
AcoRus Calamus. Marshy ground at Chesterton, below the Ferry ; 

nearly opposite Fen Ditton ; above BatVbight sluice. W. H. 

Coleman, mss. 
Typha angustifoiia. Pools in the brickfield beyond the Observatory ; 

in a pond nearly opposite the * Cherry- Tree,' on the road to 

Oxford. W. H. Coleman, mss, 
PoTAMOGETox zosterofolius. In great plenty in a ditch at *' Bait's- 

bite," near Cambridge. Mag, Nat, Hist, 
Cladium Mariscus. Pools in the brickfield, beyond the Obsenr- 

atory. IF. H. Coleman, mss, 
ScH(Evvs nigricans. (The generic name of this is omitted, the mis- 
print making it appear as a species of Cladium. — Page 

154.) 



yGooQle 



gl 



SUPPLEMENT BEDFORD. 601 

Caebx Pseudo-cyperus. Kingston Wood, in a swampy place on the 
north side. W, H, Coleman^ mss, 
JUiformis. Teversbam Moor; pools in the brick-field be- 
yond the Observatory. Jf. H. Coleman, nus. 

Phlbum BoehmerL Furze hills, Hildersham. IT, H, Ccieman, ms». 
(The specific name of this is omitted. — Page 154. ) 

Calamagrostis EpiffCfos, Plantations by Fulbourn Moor; Tever- 
sbam Moor ; Hill near Linton, by the back road from Hil- 
dersham. W, H. Coleman, mes. 

-.- lanceolata. £rase the semicolon after ** Wood Dlt- 
ton.** — Page 154.) 



XVIL BEDFORDSHIRE. 

Clematis Vitalba, Between Bedford and Thurleigh. /. E, Leefe, 

m89» 
Geranium sangvineum, Potton. FL Bed, Add, 
Astragalus hypoglottU, ( Refer to ^ B,G, ," not " Fl Bed,'' — Page 

157.) 
Trifolium kyhridum, Caldwell pastures. Fl, Bed. Add. 
ToRiLis infesta. Common. FL Bed, 
Campanula ghmerata. Luton. /. Ander§on, mss. 
— — — latifoUa, Leighton Buzzard, in a wood near the Canal. 

/. Anderson, mss. , 

Verbascum nigrum, Luton, abundant. J, Andenon, mss. 
Antirrhinum OronHum* Leighton Buzzard Heath. J, Anderson^ 

mss, 
Mentha sylvestris. (Refer to " B, G,,'* not to *« FL Bed." — Page 

159.) 
Oa.CHi8 pgramidalis. Common. JF7. Bed, 
Ophrts aranifera, SouthilL FLBed, Add, 
EriPACTis grandifiora, Luton Park, under the beech trees. /. An^ 

derson, mss. 
Ornithogalum nutans. Near Ampthill, scarcely wild. /. E. Leefe, 



XVIII. BUCKINGHAMSHIRE. 

ViscuM album, Ipston. Walk, Oxf, 

Ptrola media. (Read " W. Pamplin, mss,,** as the authority for the 
first locality. Tlie second station is to be referred to Pyrola 
minor, as given on the next page. — Page 162.) 
k3 



y Google 



602 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Ptrola minor. Woods at Loudwater, near High Wycombe, ff. G. 
MoNOTAOPA Hypopiiys. In a wood between Henley and Great Mar- 
low. Winch, odd. (This locality was introduced under 
< Berkshire* in the former volume; but it may be in the 
present county, or in Oxfordshire, so far as can be gathered 
from the description of it ) 
Chloba perfoliata. (Read ** Clifden."— Page 162.) 
OacBis militaris. Between Henley and Fawley ; between High 

Wycombe and Hitchenden. Eng. Bott, Supp. 
Herm INIUM monorchia. Near Great Elimble. Wiodk, Oxf, 
Ophrys fMudfera. In a beech wood near Henley, near the road to 
Fawley, almost opposite Fawley Court. WaJk, Oxf. 



XIX. BERKSHIRE. 



Iberis amara. Corn fields between Streatley and Pangboum, 1833L 
W» Pamplin, mss. 

Teesdalia nudicavKs. Pond bank near Tubney. Walk. Oxf. 

SiNAFis tenuifalia. On the walls of the royal gardens, Windsor. W» 
Hurst, mss. 

DiANTHus Armeria. £nglefie1d^ Walk. Oxf. 

SiLENE quinquevulnera. (Refer to ** Winch, Add.** not ** B. C?."— 
Page 163.) 

Astragalus glycyphyBus. . Between the two Hinkseys ; beyond 
South Hinksey, not uncommon. Walk. Oxf. 

Latuyrus Nissdia. Near the old stone pits about half a mile south- 
west from South Hinksey. Walk. Oxf. 

Pyrus Aria. Streatley. Walk. Oxf. 

BuPLEURUM rotundifoKum. Between Ferry Hinksey and Cumnor 
Hurst. iVidk. Oxf. 

AsPERULA cynanchica. Pangboum. Wialk, Oxf. 

MoNOTROPA Hypopitys. Near Buckland. Walk. Oxf. 

CuscuTA europ(Ba. Road to Hinksey. Walk, Oxf. (Retd '* Tap- 
low."— Page 164.) 

— — — Epithymum. Tilehurst Common. . Walk. Oxf 

Orobancme minor. The reference should be ^ MidL Fl.** -—'Page 
165.) 

Verbascum nigrum. Road between Besselsleigh and Appleton Com- 
mon. Walk. Oxf. 

Atropa Belladonna. Tilehurst Common ; Englefield. Walk, Oxf 

Lin ARIA repens. Pangboum ; in a clay pit near a lane leading offth^ 
Theale road, to Mr. Wilder's, Purley. Walk. Oxf 

Anaqalus carulea. In a com 6eld south-west of South Hinksey 
Walk. Oxf 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — OXFORD. 603 

AsAEUM europaum, (Mr. Hurst sought it in vain, in the locality 

named. W. PampUn, msi, — Page 165.) 
Daphne Mezereum. Appleton Common. Walk, Oxf. 
TaEsivMUnophyUum. Streatley. fValk, Oxf. 
Orchis pyramidalis. Slope of the hill opposite Basildon Grotto; 

old stone pit about half a mile west of S. Hinksey. Walk. 

Oxf. 
" tephrosanthes. Goring, near Reading. Walk. Oxf. 
Ophrys apifera. Near some old stone pits, soutluwest of South 

Hinksey. Walk. Oxf. 
CoNVALLARiA muUiflora. (For « Eng:' read " Midi.'' — Page 165.) 
AvENA /a<ua. Rose Hill. Walk. Oxf. 
Eltmus europcBus. Not rare in Berks^re. Eng. FL 



XX. OXFORDSHIRE. 



Myosurus minimus. Between Bayswater and Stanton St. John's. 

Walk. Oxf. 
Ranunculus parvijhrus. Elsfield ; Abingdon road, near Oxford. 

Walk. Oxf 
Helleborus viridis. In a wood at Mungewell. Walk. Oxf, 
Delphinium Consdida. Banbury. Walk. Oxf. 
Papaver somniferum. Between St. Clement's and Cowley Marsh. 

Walk. Oaf. 
Camelina saliva. Third field past Joe Pullen's tree, to Headington 

HUl. Walk. Oxf. 
Cardamine amara. Side of the Canal, between Oxford and Wolver- 

cot ; side of the towing path between High Bridge and 

Heyfield's Hut ; between St. Clement's and Marston ; banks 

of the Cherwell. Walk. Oxf. 
A REN ARIA tenuifdia. Cheney Lane. Walk.. Oxf. 
Cerastium arvense. Between Elsfield and Noke Lane, at the back 

of the Red Lion in Stow Wood ; road crossing the Hundred 

Acres, BuUingdon. Walk. Oxf. 
Hypericum AndroscBmum. In a ditch on the top of Shotover Hill, a 

little before you come to the gate leading to Mr. Shutz's. 

Walk. Oxf 
Rhamnus catharticus. Magdalen College Walks. Walk. Oxf. 
Medicago maculata. Christchurch Meadow ; between St Clement's 

and Iffley, growing near Salvia verbenaca. Walk. Oxf. 
Hippocrepis comosa. Headington Quarry ; Henley. Walk. Oxf. 
Trifolium scabrum. Side of the road between the Asylum and Shot- 
over Hill ; old stone pits on Bullingdon Green ; Shotover 

Hill, by the old London road. Walk. Oxf. 
K 4 



yGooQle 



gL 



604 THE NEW BOTANIST*S GUIDE. 

TairouDif incamaiuM, The recently introduced Trifolium inear- 
' natum is already growing wild In Oxfordshire. E, Lee», 

nus. 
Lotus tenuis. In the broad green-sward path, leading off the Cowlej: 

road, near the gate, up to the Asylum. Walk, Oxf. 
AsTEAOALOS glyeyphyUus. Side of a ditch round Headington Cops^ 

near Marston Lane; Cuddesdon, near the Palace. WdOt. 

Oxf, 
ViciA angusHfoUa, Hills between Wytham and Ensham Bridge. 

Walk. Oxf. 
Lathtrus Aphaca. Hedge on the dde of Cowley Marsh, between 

the Roman Catholic Chapel and the Asylum ; meadow near 

thelffley. Walk, Oxf 

- Nissolia, Between the old and new road to £nsham, about 
half a mile from the bridge. Walk. Oxf 

  sylvestris. Side of a ditch round Headington Copse, not 

far from Marston Lane. Walk. Oxf 

Rosa tomentosa (sylvestris). Oxfordshire. Lindl. Syn. 

pYRUS torminalis, Bagley Wood. Walk. Oxf 

BuPUEuauM rotundifoHunu Com fields on Bullingdon Green. Wal^, 
Oxf 

CEnanthe peucedanifdia. Bogs under Bullingdon Green. Walk. 
Oxf. 

LoNiCEKA Caprifolium, In a wood near Elsfield, plentifully. Walk. 
Oxf Bagley Wood, near Oxford, 1835, many plants and 
apparently wild. W. T. Bree, mss. 

DiPSACVS pilosut. Near Thame Park. FL Oxon. Ditch near Bays- 
water. Walk, Oxf, 

Feoia dentata. By the road side between Shotover Hill and Bulling, 
don Green. Walk, Oxf 

Galium income. Between Cowley Marsh and Rose Hill ; Wheat- 
ley Road; Headington Quarry; between Tuckley and 
Northbrook. Walk, Oxf, (G. spuriimi of Fl. Oxon. is 
given as a synonym of this species, by Walker. ) 

erectum. Henley. JP7. Oxon. 

Lactuca virosa. Side of the New Road, going from Botley to En- 
sham. Walk, Oaf. 

Prenanthes muralis. Magdalen College ; Long Wall, &c. Walk, 
Oxf 

HiERAciuM «yZrah'c«n». Magdalen Collie Walks. Walk, Oxf 

amplexicavle. Walls in and about Oxford. W, PampUn^ 

mss, 

Cnicus eriophorus. Near Stow Wood ; South Leigh. FL Oxon. 

FuLiCARiA vulgaris. Horton road, leading on to Otmoor. Walk, 
Oxf 

Senecio saracenicus, Shotover plantations. Walk. Oxf, 

Campanula ^Zomera^a. Bullingdon Green. Walk, Oxf. 

Trachdium. MagdUden College Copse, under Shotover 

HiU. Walk. Oxf 

' rapunculoides, (Refer to " Eng,^ FV* not « Fl, Oaron."— 



P^ 1694 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — OXFORD. 605 

Pyrola media. Wood about half a mile from Henley. Walk, Oxf. 
Chlo&a perfoUata. Stone pit near the old road to Ensham. Walk. 

Oxf, 
ViLLARsiA nymphcBoides, Near Medley Lock, abundant; between 

Sandford and Newnham. ^ Walk, Oxf, 
FoLEUomvM caruleum. Sought unGuccessfully in 1833. W, Pamplin, 

mss, 
Anchusa sempervirens, Ronsham. Walk, Oxf. 
Myosotis ciBspitoaa. Sides of old gravel pits, and in wet places near 

St. Clement's, especially on the left hand side of a footpath 

leading from the back of St Clement's, between the Cowley 

and Henley roads to Cowley Marsh. Walk. Oxf, 
Atbopa Belladonna. Woodstock Park, near the Monument. Walk. 

Oxf 
LiNARiA spuria. Between St Clement's and Cowley Marsh ; between 

Bullingdon Green and Shotover Hill. Walk. Oxf, 

— Elatine, Same places as L. spuria. Walk, Oxf, 

LiMosKLLA aquatica. Port Meadow ; Cowley Marsh. Walk. Oxf. 
Verokica Buxbaumii, Plentiftil amongst turnips, in a field adjoining 

the Bird-m-hand Inn, Burford. Walk, Oxf 
Mentha Pulegium. On a common near Ipsdon. Walk. Oxf 
Galeopsis versicolor. Near Bladon. Walk, Oxf, 
Lamium ittcisum. Between Rose Hill and Cowley. Walk. Oxf, 
Calamintha officinalis. Cowley Marsh. Walk. Oxf 
' Nepeta, Bank on the side of the Abingdon road, going 

through Bagley Wood. Walk. Oxf 
Orobakche minor. Woods about Ewelme ; above Headington Wick 

Copse. Walk, Oxf 
Anagallis arvensis (ceendea). Beyond Cowley Marsh, under Bui* 

lingdon Green. Walk. Oxf, 
Chenopodium olidum. Binsey. Fl, Oxon. 
RuMEx mariHmus, Otmoor, on the side of the road to Oddington. 

Walk. Oxf 
Aristolochia Clemaiitis. On the mound south and west of Godstow 

Nunnery, 1832. Walk. Oxf 
Salix Hoffmanniana. ComnK>n almost every where about Oxford. 

Walk, Oxf 

decipiens. Christ Church Meadow. Walk, Oxf, 

Sagittaria sagittifolia. Dorchester. Fl. Oxon. 

Orchis pyramidalis. Road side between Whitney and Burford. Walk, 

Oxf 
— mUitaris, Beech Woods between Fawley Court and Bix- 

gibwen, about a mile and a half from Henley. Walk. Oxf 
  ustulata. Road from Ensham to Abingdon. Walk, Oxf 

Opurts apifera. South side of Shotover Hill. Walk, Oxf 

aranifera. Not found about Wheatley, in 1831. Walk, Oxf 

Narcissus Pseudo-narcissus, North side of Shotover Hill ; Bagley 

Wood. Walk, Oxf 
Orkithogalum nutans, Magdalen College Meadow. Wa'k, Oxf, 
I umbdlatum. Copse near Sandford Tollgate. Walk. 

Oxf 

K 5 



yGooQle 



gL 



606 THE NEW botanist's GUTDE. 

Fmtillaexa MdeagrU. Standlake. Walk, Oxf. 

CoLCHicuM avtumnale. Church Handborough. Walk. Oxf. 

Tv-PHA anguttifoUa. Banks of the Cherwell near King^s Mill, and 
Marston. Walk. Oxf. 

AcoBUS Calamus. Between Iffley and Sandford. Walk, Oxf. 

LnzuLA ForsterL Beech wood about a mile and a half from Henley, 
near the road to High Wycombe. Walk. Oxf. 

Bltsmus compressus. Under BulUngdon. Walk. Oxf, 

£lbocharis acictdarU, Port Meadow, near Medley Lock ; side of 
the Canal, going^from^ Oxford to Wolvercot. Watk. Oxf. 

Eriophobum pubescens. Bog near Stow Wood ; bogs near Heading- 
ton Wick Copse. Walk. Oxf, 

Cakex Pseudo^peruSi Ditch bank at the< foot of the bridge, in 
Binsey Lane. Walk. Oxf. 

Calamagrostis Epigefos. Copse near Horspath, by the foot-path ; 
furze field' near Bullingdon Green. Walk. Oxf 

Agrostis setacea ? Southleigh ; Stanton St. John's. Walk. Oxf. 
(Walker quotes Sibthorpe, for the localities, from whidi it is 
presumed that A. mutabilis of the latter is intended, but 
Smith gires A. mutabilis (Knapp.^ as a synonym of A. 
alba.) 

Festuca bromoide$. Headington. FL Oxon, 

Brohus racemosus. Cowley Fields; Cheney Lane; meadows be- 
tween St. Clement's and Iffley. Walk. Oxf. 

— — erecttu. Ditchley ; not rare in Oxfordshire. Walk. Oxf, 

diandrus. Iffley. FL Oxon. Old walk about Oxford. Walk^ 

Oxf. 

Brachtpodium pinnatum. Shadwell Copse. Walk. Oxf. 

IxiLiuM temulentum. Rare about Oxford. Walk. Oxf. 

Elymus europaus. Not rare in Oxfordshire. Eng, FL 



XXI. NORTHAMTONSHIRE. 

Lotus tenuis. Dudston, near Northampton. /. Anderson^ mss-. 
Astragalus glycyphyUus. ( Read Ringstead. — Page 1 74. ) 
Sedum album. On several walls at Upper Heyford. Walk. Oxf 
SisoN Anumium, Delapre. J. Anderson, mss. 
PiMPiNELLA magna, Haughton,. Northamptonshire. /. Anderson^ 

mss. 
(Enanthe PheUandrium. Haughton. J. Anderson, mss. 
SiLAus pratensis. Meadows near Kingsthorpe. /. Anderson^ mss. 
Pastinaca stUiva. Abington, near Northampton. J. Anderson, mss. 
Ertkoium campestre. No longer to be found at Brockhall ; the last 

i^ecimens were gathered there in 1834. /. Anderson, mss* 



vGooqIc 



gl, 



SUPPLEMENT — LEICESTER. 607 

Galium ereetum. Castle Hill, Northampton. /. Anderson, nus, 
HiKEAciuM wnbeBatum. Heathy ground called the Kippon, and on 

the links near Kettering, very frequently. Hist, 
Crbpis biennis. Dalling^n. J. Anderson, nus. 
Erigeron acris, (Refer to « Hist.*' not " B. G. — Page 175. ) 
Campanula latifcUcu Cransley Wood. WaVu Oxf. 
VxRBAscuM Blattaria. Not found near Northampton. /. Anderson, 

mss, 
Mentha syhestris. Cotton End, near Northampton. /. Anderson, 

nus. 
SAj.yiA pratensis. Has not grown at Kingsthorpe, in the last four 

years ; but S. verbenaca is abundant. J. Anderson, mss. 
RuMEx puteher. Castle Hill, Northampton. J. Anderson, nus. 
Ulmus fflabrch major, carpinifoUa. All near Bugbrook. /. Anderson, 

mss. 
Saliz Hoffmanniana. Kingsthorpe. J. Anderson, nus. 
— decipiens. Kingsthorpe. J. Anderson, mss. 
  - Lambertiana. Near the Paper-mills, Northampton. J, Ander- 
son, nus. 

amygdalina. Cotton End. /. Anderson, mss. 

Cab,ex eUvulsa. Side of the turnpike road at (Kislingbury?) J. 

Anderson, mss. 
Calamaorostis Epigejos, Upton Woods. /. Anderson, mss. 
BftOMus racemosus. Near Dudston Mill. /. Anderson, mss. 
AvENA/a/ua. Upper Heyford, abundant. Walk. Oxf. 
Brachtpodium pinnatum. Between Upper Heyford and Northhrook. 

WdUt. Oxf. 



XXII. RUTLANDSHIRE. 

Anaoallis arvensis (caerulea). About North Luffenham, near Stam- 
ford. Eng. FL 



XXIII. LEICESTERSHIRE. 

Ranunculus parvifiorus. On a small bank in the village of Newton. 

A. Bhxam, mss. Braunston. Churchill Babington, nus. 
Mtosurus minimus. Garden at Sheepshead. Churchill Babington, 

mss. 
CoRTDALis claviculata. Abundant on the Whitwick Rocks, and at 

Bardon HilL Ch. Babington, mss. 
K 6 



y Google 



608^ THB HEW BOTANlST^S GUIDE. 

TxESDAUA nudieaulU. Charnwood Forest, in many places. Ch. Bab^ 

ington, mss. Grooby and Markiield. G, HowiUy nus. 
Altssum ccUycinum. Charnwood Forest, 1836. A, Bloxam, sp. In 

a field near the Thrinkstone Rocks. ' Ch, BabinffUm, <p. 

(The same locality ?) 
Camelina sativa, Thrinkstone, among newly sown grass, in 1833,^ 

but not appearing since. Ck. Bdbingtcny sp. 
Cakdamine amara. Banks of the Sence, near Congerstone. A^ 

Bloxam, mm, Gracedien. Ch. Babingtony mss, 
impatiens. The rev. A. Bloxam and Mr. Churchill 

Babington, have each sought it in the localities mentioned, 

bnt without success. 
Viola Jiavicomis, Charnwood Forest, and road side between Heather 

and Ibstoek. A^ Bloxam, mss, 
DiANTHUs deUotdes, Grooby Knolls. C%. Babington, sp. 
McENCHiA erecta. Reservoir, Charnwood Forest ; also near the new- 
Church. Ch. Babington, mas. 
Rhamnus catharticus. Near the sign post between Congerstone and 

Carlton, near Shakerston. A. Bloxam, mss. Gracedleu. 

Ch. Babington, -mss. 
Ulex names. Charnwood Forest. Ch. Babington, ms3>. 
Ononis spinosa. Not rare ; near Glenfield ; Congerstone. A, Bloxam^ 

mss. '• 

Trifouum scabrHm. (The species at Ayleston is T. striatunL .See. 

A. Bloxam. — Page 178.) 
Lotus tenuis. Near Congerstone. A. Bloxam, sp. Thrinkstone. 

Ch, Babington, sp. Between Evington and Leicester. G, 

Howitt, mss. 
Lathteus syhestris. Between Market Bosworth and Sutton, 

pointed out to me by the rev. Mr. Small. A, Bloxam, mss, 

(Mr. Bloxam says that Stocking Wood, frequently men> 

tioned m the Botanist's Guide, has been long cut down ; the 

ground being now under cultivation. ) 
PoTENTiLLA argcntca, Buddon Wood. Ch, Babington, sp. Grooby 

Lodge. G, Howitt, mss, 
SANauisoRBA officinalis. Meadows about Congerstone. A. Bloxam^ 

mss. Near Ashby de la Zouch, near the Outwoods. Ck. 

Babington, mss. 
Rosa spinosissima. Gracedieu Wood, Ch. Babington, sp. 
— ' — tomentosa. Sibson Iiane, near Congerstone ; also between Mea- 

sham and Ashby de la Zouch. A, Bloxam, mss. 
Ptaus communis. A few trees about Bosworth; one tree in the 

hedge bounding the west side of Bosworth Park. A. 

Bloxam, mss, 
Epilobium roseum. On the railroad below Desford. A. Bloxam, mss. 
Calutricme autumnalis. In ditches between Leicester and Aylston ; 

also in the Soar, near Leicester Abbey. G. Howitt, mss, 

(This is introduced in the chance that Dr. Howitt may in- 
tend the real C. autumnalis. See the remarks on page 588. ) 
Cbratophyllum demersunu Ponds about Bosworth. A. Bloxam^ 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — LEICESTER. 609 

BaroKiA dioiea. Mount SonreL Ch, BabingiUmj mu, 

RiBEs nigrwn, Thrinkstone. C%. Babington, sp, 

Apium graveoUns, In a ditch opposite Mr. Neale's house, in Bilston, 

near Congerstone. A. Bhxam, mss, (Read Turlangton. 

—Page 178.) 
SisoN Amomum. Common about Congerstone. A, Bloxanh mss. 
BuPLBuauM rotundifoUum. Beaumont Lees. G. Howittf mss, 
PiMPiNELLA magna, . Frequent near Leicester. G, Howitt, mss. At 

Newbold Verdun and Congerstone. A. Bhxam, mss, 
CEnanthk PheUandrium, Meadows between Leicester and Ayleston. 

G, Howitt, sp. River Sence, near Congerstone. A. Bhxam, 

mss, 
peueedanifoUa, Sparingly by the Ashby Canal, near Con- 
gerstone ; also found by the rev. Mr. Small, on the bank of 

the same Canal, below Sutton • • Wood. A, Bhxam, mss. 
SiLAUS pratensis. Not uncommon. Ch, BabingUm, sp. Congerstone. 

A, Bloxam, mss, 
Pktrosxlinum sativum. In a hedge near the Aqueduct at Shenton. 

A. Bhxam, mss, 
PxucxDANUM officinale. (Not found in Leicestershire. Rev. A. 

Bloxam — Page 178.) 
PAsnvACA sativa. By the side of the Canal near Congerstone. A. 

Bhxam, mss. 
FxDiA dentata. Braunston, near Leicester. A, Bhxam, mss. 
Lactuca virosa. Between Gopsal Park and the A^by de la Zouch 

Lodge. A» Bhxam, mss, 
Sovcmvs palustris. (The station at Gracedieu is erroneous. Rev. 

A. Bloxam.— Page 178.) 
HixBAciuM syhaticum. Between Twycross and the entrance Lodge 

to Gopsal Park. A. Bloxam, mss, 

paludosum* Gracedieu Wood. Ch. BabingUm, sp. 

umbeUattmu Between Twycross and the entrance Lodge 

to Gopsal Park ; near Congerstone. A. Bhxam, sp. 
Cnicus eriophorus. Road side between Braunston and Kirby Muxloe. 

A. Bhxam, mss, 
pratensis. Meadow below Ulverscroft Cottage in Chamwood 

Forest. A. Bhxam, mss, Bardon Hill ; also near the Out- 
woods. Ch. Babington, mss. 
EaioEROK acris. Breedon Hill ; near Leicester. A. Bloxam, sp. 
DoaoNicuM Pardalianches. In plantations at Gopsal, wild now. A. 

Bhxam, m^s. 
Campanula latifolia. Gracedieu Wood. Ch. Babington, sp. Wood 

near Bosworth Park. (Rev. Mr. Small.) A, Bioxam,m8s. 
» patula. Buddon Wood. CA. Babington, sp, 
Mtosotis casspitosa. Near Ayleston, by the Canal. G. Howitt, sp. 

Gracedieu. CA. Babington, sp, Congerstone. A, Bhxam, 

mss, 
Anchusa officinalis, Sibson hane, near Congerstone. (Miss Ann 

Roby.) A, Bhxam, mss- (I should fear that it must have 

been introduced there. H. W. ) 
SoLANUM nigrum. Frequent in gardens at Leicester. G, Howitt, sp. 



y Google 



610 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Ltcopus europ<Bu$, Banks of die Canal near BdgraTe. G. HomUt, 
mu. Congerstone ; Shakerston ; common in the county. J. 
BJoxam, nus. 

MiMTHA syhestrit. Grooby Lodge. G. Howitt, mu. (Introduce a 
semicolon after Loughborough. — Page 179.) 

Galkopsis Ladanum. Gear Grooby Lodge. G, Howitt, sp, 

Lamiitm incituM, In a yetcfa fidd near Loughborough. Ch. Bab- 
infftOH, sp. Leicester Abbey gardens. G. Howitt, sp. 

HoTTONiA pahutris. Near Cavendish Bridge. A* Bloxam, nus. 

Cbinofodium polytpermwm. Beaumont L^ near Leicester. G. 
Howitt, sp, 

RuMxx maritimus. (This name is to be substituted for " Rumex 
palustris)'* on page 180. Mr. Bloxam has sent me a speci- 
men of Rumex which he is inclined to believe either R. 
aquaticus or R. pratensis. The locality is, « old gravel pits 
in the Pastures, Congerstone.*') 

EupHOEBiA amygddUnde». Gracedieu Wood. Ch, Babington, mu. 

Aeistolochia Clematitis. Leicester Abbey. (Mr. Eddison.) G. 
Howitt, sp. 

Ulmus suberosa and glabra. Congerstone. A. Bloxam, mss. 

QuEBCUS sessiUflora. Not unconmion. Ch. Babington, mu. 

Carpinus Betulus. Between Bosworth and Shenton. A. Bloxam, 
mu. 

Salix triandra and Hdix, Loughborough. Ch. Babington, sps. 

Saoittaria sagittifoluu River Sence, Ashby Canal, and ponds, at 
Congerstone. A. Bloxam, mss. 

Habbnaria chlorantha. Oakley Wood ; Cloud Wood. Ch. Babing- 
ton, mss. 

Narcissus Pseudo-narcissus. Perfectly neutralised near Gracedku 
Abbey. Ch. Babington, sp. 

Galanthus nivalis, Bradgate ruins, 1826. G. Howitt, sp. Grace- 
dieu Wood, very sparingly. Ch. Babington, sp. 

Tahus communis. Not rare ; about Congerstone, &c. A, Bloxam, 
mss. 

CoNVALLARLA nuijalis. Martinshaw Wood, near Grooby. G. Howitt, 
sp. Plantations at GopsaL A. Bloxam, mss, Oakley 
Wood. Ch. Babington, mu. 

multijlora. White-horse Wood. Ch. Babington, mu. 

Fritillaria Mdeagris. The white and red varieties growing toge^ 
then Ch. Babington, sp. 

LiLiuM Martagon. There is a little * * * between Osbaston and 
Market Bosworth, where Lilium Martagon is growing per- 
fectly wild, though it may have been planted originally. A. 
Bloxam, mss, 

AcoRus Calamus. By the Soar, between Zouch MiUs and Lough- 
borough. Ch. Babington, sp. 

PoTAMooBTON zosterofoUus, In the Ashby Canal, at Congerstone ; 
also below Market Bosworth. A. Bloxam, sp. 

Lbmna trisulca. Ponds in the pastures at Congerstone. A. Bloxam^ 
mss. Meadows near Leicester. G. Howitt, mu. Osga.- 
thorpe ; Grool^ ; Leicester. Ch, Babington, sp. 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — WARWICK. 61 1 

LiMKA gibha. Ponds about Congerstone and^Bosworth. A. Bloxam, 
mss, Loughborough. Ch, Babington, mss. 

— — polyrhiza. Ponds at Kirkby Mallory. A. Blexam,' mss. 
Leicester. Ch, Babington, mss, (Read " Enderby." — Page 
180.) 

JuNcirs obtusifiorus. Banks of the Ashby Canal, and ponds, at Con- 
gerstone. A. Bloxam, mss. 

Bltshds compressus. (Not found at Braunston, an early specimen 
of Carex intermedia having been mistaken for it. Rev, A. 
Bloxam, — Page 180.) 

Carex intermedia, M^ows between Leicester and the Abbey. G, 
Howitt, mss. Low pastures, Market Bosworth. A, Bhxamy 
mss, 

Pseudo-cypents* Grrooby. Churchill Babington, sp. Ponds 

near Bosworth and Congerstone. A. Bloxam, mss. 

— binervis. Common on Charnwood Forest. Ch. Babington, sp. 

Alopecurus agrestis, ' Frequent near Leicester. G. Howitt, sp. • 

Calabiagrostis Epigejos, Cloud Wood. Ch, Babington, sp. Abun- 
dant in the Park at Bosworth; also in Sutton Ambien 
Wood, the site of the Battle of Bosworth Field. A. 
Bloxam, mss, 

Festuca bromoides. Walls in Charnwood Forest. A. Bloxam, mss. 

Bromus secalinus. Near Leicester ; com fields on the foot road 
between Glenfield and Braunston. A. Bloxam, sp, 
- rcKemosus 9 ^Zouch MiUs. Ch. Babington, sp. 

erectiis, Zouch Mills. Ch. Babington, sp. 



XXIV. WARWICKSHIRE. 



Perry's Plantce Varvicensis Selected, which had not been obtained 
when the former volume was printed, is mainly a compilation from the 
same authorities as have been consulted for the list given in that 
volume, together with others of less credit. I prefer not to copy the 
latter, and have here added only those localities which are introduced 
on the authority of Mr. Perry's own observation. 



Clematis Vitcdba. Hedges on high ground between Norbrooke and 

Norton Lindsay. Far, 
Mtosurus minimus. In a field near the cross, between Norton 

Lindsey and Warwick. Far. 
Ranunculus parmflorus. Top of Oversley Hill ; hedge banks near 

Alcester Mill, on the Worcester road. Far, 
Hellbborus viridis, ( Read «* Dadley*a Wood. " — Page 1-8 1 . 



yGooQle 



gL 



612 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CoEYOALis lutea. On waUs in Mellos Lane, and St. Mary's Church- 
yard, Warwick; under a wall opposite Mr. Fenrice*s, 

Abbot's Salford. Far. 

- ctaviculata. On Gravel Hill, near Erding^n. Far, 
Tebsdalia nwUcaulis. Sparingly on the lower HiU Morton road, 

about a mile and a half from Rugby. A. Bloxam, mss. 

Lost on the spot mentioned by the Coleshill and Castle 

Bromwich road. JF. T. Breey nus. Sand rock near Mil- 

▼erton. Far* 
Cabdaminb amara. Banks of the Avon near Rugby. A. Bhxam, 

m$8, 
Barbarea pracox. Near Rugby, on rubbish, probably brought from 

a garden. A, Bloxam, sp, 
Bbassiga campestris. Hedge on the Bilton road, going down the 

hill. A. Bloxam, m$s. 
DiANTHUs Armeria, By the side of the road from Warwick to Norton 

« Lindsey, a short distance beyond the cross. Far. 
M(ENCHiA erecta, Corby Moor, and other like places. fF. T, Bree, 

mss, 
Arknaria tenuifdUa, On a heap of gravel, on the lower Hill 

Morton road. A, Bloxam, mss. 
Htpbeicum dubium. Lower Hill Morton road. A, Bloxam, mas^ 

Between Leek Wootton field and Stonleigh. Far. 
Rhamnds eatharticua. At Langley in the parish of Claverdon, and 

other places besides those mentioned. JF, T. Bree, m88. In 

several places about Rugby ; in a hedge near the bridge over 

the Avon. A. Bloxam, mss. Radford. Far. 
— — Frangida. Woods at Hatton. Far. 
Ononis spinosa. Lawford (?) road. A. Bloxam, mss. 
Ulex nanus. Meriden Heath ; Corby Moor ; abundantly on Shrewley 

Common, and other commons, before they were inclosed, 

and still occurring there on hedge banks, &c. JF. T. Bree, 

mss. 
Medicago maculata. Stone quarry in the Pigwells, and near the gate 

of Godfrey's Lammas, Warwick. Far. 
Loras tenuis. Dunchurch road, ascending the first hill on the left. 

A, Bloxam^ mss. 
Astragalus glyeyphyUus. ' Billingborough Hill, near Alcester. A. 

Bloxam, mss. 
PoTENTiLLA argentea. On a sand rock near the Woodloes, Warwick. 

Far. 
Sanguisorba officinalis. Meadows near the Avon, Rugby. A. 

Bloxam, mss. Meadows near the race course, Warwick, 

plentiful. Far. 
Rosa tomentosa. Dunchurch road, on the top of the second hill from 

Rugby ; also near Binley. A. Bloxam^ mss, 
— micrantha. In the lane between Bilton and Lawford. A. 

Bloxam, mss. Not uncommon in Warwickshire. W, TV 

Bree, mss. ( Read <* Between Bidford and Bidford Grange, 

the latter being a single house, a mile from the village. Rev,. 

W. T. ^r«e."— Page 182.) 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — WARWICK. 613 

"Rosa inodora ? (R. dumetorum. Plant. Var.^ Common. Var, 

— — spinoHssima, On hilly ground near Warwick. Var, Mr. 
Bree says that the red-flowered variety is extinct at Guy's 
Cliff. 

Fraoaria datior. Grounds round Coton House. WaVt. Oxf. 

Pyrus communis, Hampton-on-the-hill. Var. 

Cotyledon Umblicus, On the walls of the area of Guy's Cliff House ; 
in the Old Pound, Coton End, Warwick. Var. 

SzsoN Amomum, Newbold upon Avon, near Mr. Walker's. A. 
Bloxamt mss, 

PiMFiNELLA magna. Rugby. A. Bloxam, mss. 

CEnanthe PheUandrium. The Avon at Rugby Mill, and other 
places. A, Bloxam, mss, 

SiLAus pratensis. Meadows of the Avon, Rugby. A. Bloxam, ms8. 

Pastznaca saliva. By the side of the Canal, near Rugby Wharf. 
A, Bloxam, mss, 

ToRius infesta. Corn fields near Alcester. A, Bloxam, mss. 

Caucalis daucoides. Fields about Drayton Bushes. Midi. FL 

Viburnum Lantana. In a hedge to the right, entering' into Little 
Lawford from Rugby; abundant in the road between 
Southam and Banbury. A. Bloxam, mss. 

ViscuM aUmm, Norbrooke ; scarce in the neighbourhood of War- 
wick. Far, 

Galium erectum. (Erase « Coleshill Heath."— Page 183.) 

Fedia dentaia. Corn fields about Rugby. A, Bloxam, mss. 

DipsAcus pHosus, Besides the places mentioned, it occurs at Berks- 
well, where the roads cross in the village ; also near Binley. 
W. T, Bree, mss. Emscote, on the road to Lillington. Var. 

Lactuca virosa. Road side between Dunchurch and Willoughby ; 
on the Dunchurch aiid Southam road. A. Bloxam^ mss. • 

Prenanthes muraUs. Very common ; Allesley ; Meriden, &c. W. T. 
Bree, mss. On walls in Mellos Lane and Vineyard Lane, 
Warwick. Var, (Refer to *'MidL FL" not " B, C."— 
Page 184.) 

HiERACiUM umbellatum. On the Rugby and Dunchurch road, near 
the Tollgate. A. Bloxam, mss. On the Castle Garden wall. 
Vineyard Lane, at the back of the green house, Warwick. 
Var, 

- sylvaiicum. On the Rugby and Dunchurch road, near 
the Tollgate. A. Bloxam, mss. Walls in Warwick, plenti- 
ful. Var. 

Onopordum Acanthium, Near the Old Pound, Coton End, War- 
wick. Var. 

Cnicus acatdis. Longcompton Hill. Var. 

— pratensis. Near Wroxall. W, T. Bree, mss. 

— — — erioj)horus. On the Newbold road, by the side of the river, 
below Mr. Walker's, Rugby. A. Bloxam, mss. On the 
road from Warwick to Stratford, at the turn to Snitterfield; 
between Warwick and Hatton ; on the road from Harbury 
to Tachbrooke ; Binton ; Oversley Hill, Sec. Var. 

CoNYZA squarrosa, Kenilworth Castle. A. Bloxam, mss. Road 



y Google 



614? THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

side between Warwick and Myton ; hilly field on the foot 

road from Emscote to Leamington. Far. 
EuGiRON acris. On the road side between Allesley and Meriden, 

near the Royal Oak public house. JF. T. Bree, nui, 
Anthxmis nobiHs, Corby Moor ; Shrewley Pool, parish of Hatton. 

IF. T. Bree, m»$. 
Campanula pahda. By the side of Lord Craven's woods, on the 

road leading from Brinklow to Coventry. A. Bloxamy mti. 

Borders of Hatton Wood, and by the foot path leading into 

the Hockley road, plentiful Far. ( Read « Well's Green, 

near Elmdon." Rev. W. T. Bret. — P.ige 184.) 
— — ^— Bxxfunculu*. Near Guy's CliflF; by the road side in 

front of the house of M. Wise, Esq., L^mington. Far, 
'latifoHa, Plantations at Coton House, by the side of 



the Lutterworth road, near a tumulus. A. Bloxam, tms*. 
(Read "a shivery sand-rock." — Page 184.) 
' ghmeratcL, Communicated to me from the neighbour- 



hood of Pillerton. Far. 
Vaccimium FiHs'IcUBCL Boggy heaths between Middleton and Sutton. 

Midl.Iil 
Chlora perfoiiata. Billingborough Hill, near Alcester. A. Bloxam, 

tnts, 
Anchdsa 8emperviren8. By the road side between Coventry and 

Kenilworth, probably an escape. JF. T. Bree, mss, 
Mtosotis c(Bspito8a. Common near Rugby, about the Avon and 

Oxford CanaL A. Bloxam, msi. 

coUintu Hedge-bank near Hill Morton. A. Bloxam, mss. 

  VxRBAscDM nigrum. Near the cross, on the road from Ashow to 

Stonleigh, plentifiiL Far. 
Datura Stramonium. On a newly formed bank of earth in the 

Saltisford Brick-yard. Far. 
LiNARiA Elatine. (Possibly Prior's Cleeve, in Worcestershire, may 

have been intended by Purton's station of " Cleve." — Page 

185.) 
LiMosBLLA aquaiica. We never could find it at.Coleshill Pool, 

though the late Lady Aylesford did ; it grows abundantly 

in Shrewley Pool, parish of Hatton. JF. T. Bree, mss. 
Mbntha viridis, Bilton, near Rugby. Walk. Oxf. 

  • gracilis. To this species Mr. Perry refers M. gentilis of the 

Midland Flora. 
  Ptdegium. Corby Moor : Shrewley Pool. W. T. Bres, mss. 

Pool one mile fit>m Smockington. J. Anderson, mss. 
Ltcofus europaus. By the Avon and the Canal, Rugby. A. 

Bloxam, mss. 
Galeoboolon luteum. Very common at Allesley, and in many other 

places in this county. W. T. Bree, mss. Lane between 

Dun's Pits and Crackley Wood, near Kenilworth ; War- 
wick Castle Park. Far. 
Galbopsis versicolor. In a potato field, near the late Mr. Purton's, 

at Alcester. A. Bloxam, mss, 

  Ladanum, Bed Hill, near Alcester. A. Bloxam, mss^ 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — WARWICK. 615 

AciNos vulgaris, Grafton and Rolls' Wood fields. MidL Fl. 
Calahxntha officinalis. Warwick Castle Mount ; Hatton ; side of 

the road opposite the Nunnery at Abbot's Salford; near 

Leamington, on the Warwick road. Vdr. 
Anaoallis ccBrvha, (Erase *^ N. Luffenham." — Page 185.) 
Chenopodium polyspermum. In a newly made garden, near the Saltis- 

ford Brick-yard, Warwick. Var. 
hyhridum. Amongst rubbish on the road firom Hamp- 

ton-on-the-hill to Warwick. Var. 
Emfetrum nigrum, Sutton Coldfield. MidL Fl. 
Ulmus suberosa. Common about Rugby. A. Bloxam, tnss, 

* glabra. Common about Rugby. A, Bloxam, mss, 
Salix nigricans. (The Cherwell in Oxfordshire is intended. — Page 

186.) 
  Hoffmanniana. Frequent about Rugby. WaJk. Oxf. 

Saqittaria sagittifolia. Common in almost all our Warwickshire 

rivers. fT, T. Bree, mss. Common in the Avon, and the 

Canal, near Rugby. A, Bloxam, mss, Avon, Nicholas* 

meadow, Warwick; in the old Canal, Longford; Canal, 

Birmingham Heath. Var. 
Orcbis pgramidalis. Brought to me from Walton Hall, and the 

road side leading to Pillerton. Var. 
Ophrts apifera. Lately found near Anstey by Mrs. F. Skipwith. 

IV. T, Bree, mss. 
Nbottia spiralis. Among Ulex europaeus in. a field crossed by the 

foot-road from Warwick, to Hampton-on-the-Hill. Var. 
Caocus vemus. (Change the specific name to ** speciosus.*^ Purton 

and PeiTy have it ** nudiflorus." Mr. Bree says << speciosus." 

—Page 186.) 
Lejucojum tisstivum. Once found above Rugby Mill, on the banks of 

the Avon. A. Bloxam, mss. 
Narcissus Pseudo-narcissus, Abundantly in several places at AUes- 

ley, Meriden, Honiley, Balsall Temple, &c. &c. ; banks of 

the Bourne, Fillongley. W. T. Bree, mss. (Mr. Bree 

mentions that he has a white of this species, from the parish 

of Meriden, and that he deems it to be really a native spe- 
cies; but suggests that the double variety, mentioned on 

page 186, may belong to the common garden daffodil, — 

N. Major?) 
^ — poeticus, A field in the parish of Fillongley is /u22 of it, 

some of the flowers are single, others semidouble ; probably 

not truly native. W, T. Bree, mss. 
— — hiflorus. Lammas Fields, Warwick. Var. 

moschatus. In the parish of Meriden. Mag. Nat, Hist. 

viii. 118. (Communicated to that journal by the rev. 

W. T. Bree.) 
Tamus communis. Common about Rugby. A. Bloxam, mss. 
Ornithogalum umbellatum. Near a Pond in Godfrey's Lammas, 

Warwick. JV, T. Bree, mss. 
Allium deraceum. Side of the foot path between Emscote and Lea« 

mington. Var. 



yGooQle 



gL 



616 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CoLCHicuM autumnale. Very abundant in many places in Allesley 
parish ; Meriden, &c. truly wild, I should say. JF. T. Bree, 
MM, Meadow between Brinklow and Shilton. A, Bloxam, 
mss, 

Lemna gibba. Ponds near Lawford Mill, and at Newnham. A. 
Bloxamj mss. Mill pond near St. Nicholas* Church, and in 
a brook in Baly's Lammas, Warwick. Var. 

PoTAMOGKTON zosterofdius. Abundant in the old Oxford Canal 
opposite Mr. Walker's, Newbold upon Avon. A. Bloxam, 

VMS, 

Cladium Mariscus. (It would appear, by the Plants Varvicenses, 
that Ray has given the same locality for this species and 
Schoenus nigricans, in different works. Perhaps, only one 
of them may have been found ? — Page 1 87. ) 

Rhtncospora eUba, Bog below Colesbill Pool. JF. T, Bree, mss. 

Gastridium lendifferum. Corn field near Alcester. A. Bloxam, nus, 

Calamaorostis Epige^i, Dunnington ; Salford ; Wetheley. Vcar. 
(Arundo C^damagrostis of Purton, according to Perry.) 

Bromus racemosus. On the new embankment of the Oxford CauaU 
near Brownsover. A, Bloxam, mss. 



XXV. GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 

Mr. Lees takes me to task for the confusion introduced into tbc 
lists of Somerset and Gloucester plants, through referring nearly all 
plants to the Gloucestershire list, which have been said to grow about 
Bristol, while their recorded stations have not usually been given in a 
sufficiently explicit manner to enable a stranger to assign them to their 
proper counties with certainty. The difficulty experienced on this 
score has been already several times alluded to ; chiefly in the hope of 
inducing some of our botanical writers and collectors to specify their 
stations more explicitly. The names of many houses, woods, hills, 
bridges, &c. are not to be found in our Gazetteers ; and in several in- 
stances the omissions extend to hamlets and small villages. Neither can 
such places be included in the general maps of England. To a person 
who is familiarly acquainted with the names and local positions of all 
the small places, in any particular part of the country where he resides 
or visits, it appears strange that others should be ignorant of them, if he 
does not call to mind how many thousand places, in other parts of 
Britain, are alike unknown to himself; or, if their names be known, 
how little he may still be aware of their exact positions. Thus it 
happens, in too many instances, that a botanist will fancy he has 
given a very good direction to a botanical station, when it is found by 
others to be quite insufficient If the intention be only to guide a 
person to the spot, in order that he may collect specimens, a clear 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — GLOUCESTER. 617 

description may, indeed, be made by the use of local names, the collector 
being supposed at the place and able to inquire his way from others. 
But if one at a distance is desirous of forming county or parochial 
lists, of drawing a botanical map, or of tracing the connections between 
the vegetation and physical features of the country, in such cases he 
will often feel perplexed by the want of indications sufficiently 
explanatory. In event of not obtaining these, he is compelled 
either to omit the incomplete descriptions, or to introduce them in 
such general (which means vague) terms as will comprehend the 
whole space, within some part of which the localities must lie. On 
this account, it has been several times intimated, that while the 
botanical stations in this work were nominally arranged into county 
lists, such lists might include stations really beyond the proper bound- 
aries. After all, it is of no consequence whatever, whether botanical 
lists refer to spaces exactly agreeing with the political divisions of 
Britain, or to some other definite areas, provided the circumstance be 
stated so as to prevent mistakes from the names of the counties respect- 
ively heading each list. For example, the including of a small portion 
of Somersetshire along with Gloucestershire, under the general head of 
** Gloucestershire and Bristol," makes no confusion of those stations 
which are specified with exactness, while it allows of the introduction 
of others which could not with certainty have been referred to either 
county taken singly, such as ** banks of the Avon," ** meadows near 
Bristol," &c. &c. 



Clematis Vttalba, On Brockeridge Common near Twining ; hedges 
between Tewkesbury and Deerhurst. E. Lees, m$s. Hedges 
near Gloucester. G. S. Winde, m*8, 

Adonis autitmnaUs, Com fields near Gloucester. G* S, WinUe, 
mss, 

Helleborus viridis. Near the head of the St. Catherine valley, near 
Bath, but on the Gloucestershire side of the brook : the 
place is incorrectly described in the Fiora Bathonensit, C. C 
Babington, mss. Cranham Wood, near Gloucester. G. S, 
Wintle, mss. 

Cardamine impatiens, Stapleton Quarries, near Bristol. J. Ander- 
son, mss. 

I amara. Side of the Ledden river near Pauntley. E, 
Lees, mss, 

TuRRms glabra. Waste places near Gloucester. G. S. Wintle, mss. 

Nasturtium sylvesire. Banks of the Avon at Tewkesbury. E. Lees, 
mss, 

Brassica campestris. Banks of ditches ne^r Gloucester. G, S, Win- 
tie, mss. 

Viola suavis. King John's Walk, near Tewkesbury. E, Lees, mss. 

TiLiA grandifdia, Bromsberrow. E. Lees, mss. 

parvtfolia. At the Brownsend near Bromsberrow. E. Leer, 

mss. 

Ononis spinosa. Banks of the Berkeley Canal, Gloucester. G. S. 
Wintle, mss. 



y Google 



618 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Lathteus kaifoUus. (Instead of « apparently,'* I think it might 
with safety be put « undoubtedly wild,** in Stapleton Quar- 
ries. J. Andersofif mss. — Page 189.) 

Lotus tenuis. (Add ** Eng. FV* after " St. Vincent's Rocks." — Page 
190., first line.) 

Medicago macviata, Stapleton Quarries, near BristoL J. Ander^ 
son, mss, 

Sanguisoeba officinalis. Banks of the Berkeley Canal, and Robin's 
Wood Hill, Gloucester. G. S. Winile, mss. In great plenty 
in meadows by the western side of the Severn, below Tewkes- 
bury. 

Rosa inodera. On Shutonger Common, near Twining, two miles 
north of Tewkesbury. E. Lees, mss, 

— tomentosa. Shutonger Common. E, Lees, mss, 

Pteus communis. Hedges near Gloucester. G. S, Winile, mss, 

Betonia dioica. Hedges near Gloucester. G, S, Wintle, mss, 

RiBEs rvbrum. Woody spot beyond the Gander-lane bridge over the 
river Swilgate, Tewkesbury. E, Lees, mss, 

Sedvm dasyphyUum, Clifton. G, Rogers, sp. 

Apium gravedens. Side of the Cheltenham road, near Coomb HOL 
E, Lees, mss. In the ditch by the road side at Saint's 
Bridge. G. S. Wintle, mss. 

SiLAUS pratensis, Avon Ham, Tewkesbury. E. Lees, mss, 

Pastinaca saliva. Frequent about Gloucester. G, S, Wintle, 
mss, 

ViBUENUM Lantana. Hedges near Gloucester. G, S. Wintle, thss. 

ViscuM album. On Hawthorns, &c. near Gloucester. G, S, Wintle, 
mss, 

RuBiA peregrincu (Erase <* Watchett and Dunster." — Page 190.) 

DiPSAcus FuUonum, At the foot of Robin's Wood Hill, near the 
Stroud Road, Gloucester, being cultivated in the neighbour- 
hood. G, S. Wintle, mss, 

Valeeiana rubra. Old walls near Gloucester. G, S, Wintle, mss, 

Cnicus acaulis. Robin's Wood Hill, near Gloucester. G, S. Wintle, 
mss, 

Onopoedum Acanthium, Between Rockeridge Common and Ripple, 
near Twining. E, Lees, mss. 

Campanula /Kx^tc/a. Side of a lane near Bromsberrow. E, Lees, 



Trachelium, Old lane under King John's Walk, Mithe, 

near Tewkesbury, and lower Lode Lane. E, Lees, mss, 
Cranham Wood, near (Chosen?) Hill, Gloucester. G,S. 
Wintle, mss, 

ghmerata, ^ills above Cheltenham. W, H, Darby, 



mss, Robin's "^ood Hill, near Gloucester. G, S, Wintle, 

mss, 
Pyeola rotundifolia, Slade and Randwick Woods. Walk, Oxf, 
MoNOTEOPA Hypopitys, Slade Woods. Wdk, Oxf, 
CuscuTA europ6Ba, (Goosey?) Lane, Gloucester. G, S, Wintle, mss, 
Ctnoolossum sylvaticmn, Deerhurst Lane, Tewkesbury. E, Lees 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — GLOUCESTER . 619 

Atkopa Belladonna, In an old stone-pit, close by the Painswick 

road, near Cranham Wood. G, S. Wintle, ms$. 
Datvaa Stramonium. Near Beecham, Gloucester. G. S. Winik, 
mss. 

Solan UM nigrum. Near Gloucester. G, S. Wintie, mti, 

LiNARiA Elatine, Near Gloucester. G. S. Wintle, mss. 

Melamfyrum arvense. Com fields near Gloucester. G. S, Wintie, 
mss, 

Veronica spicata. Hedge bank by the road at Saint's Bridge, 
Gloucester. G, S. Wintle, mss, (These two plants are 
rare, and not very likely to occur . here. They should be 
verified by comparison with specimens from some other 
place.) 

Mentha piperita. Rills under Bredon Hill, about Kimmerton. E, 
Lees, mss, 

sylvestris. Banks of the Twiver or Poplar River, near 
Gloucester. G, S. Wintle, mss. 

Calamintha officinalis. Lane under King John's Walk, near 
Tewkesbury. E. Lees, mss. 

Galeobdolon luteum, Robin's Wood Hill, and lanes at Upton, near 
Gloucester. G. S. Wintle, mss. 

Lamium mactdatum, (The plant so named, is merely a variety of 
L. album, and very different from L. roaculatum of the 
gardens. Mr. J. Anderson. — Page 191.) 

Orobanche minor, ( Erase " sp, " — Page 191.) 

Primula elatior. At Forthampton west, of Tewkesbury. E, Lees, 
mss. Highnam Wood, near Saint's Bridge, Gloucester. G. 
S, Wintle, mss. 

ExjPHORBiA amygdaloides. Highnam Wood. G, S. Wintle, mss, 

Mercurialis annua, A noxious weed about BristoL W, A. Brom- 
field, mss, 

PoPULUs canescens. Near Moreton in the Marsh ; about Bourton ; 
Lower Lode Lane leading to the Severn, below Tewkes- 
bury. E. Lees, mss, 

Salix triandra. Willow- bed close to the Severn, below King John's 
Walk, Tewkesbury. E, Lees, «p. 

Sagittaria sagittifolia. In the river Avon, between Tewkesbury and 
Twining's Fleet. E, Lees, mss. Ditches near Gloucester. 
G. S. Wintle, mss, 

HxRMiNiuM Monorchis, Bank near Rodborough Common. Walk. 
Oxf, 

Ophrts apifera. On the bank of the Berkeley Canal ; also at Cran- 
ham Wood, in a blue clay. G, S. Wintle, mss. 

Narcissus Pseudo^narcissus. Covering the whole declivity of a hilly 
meadow in the forest of Dean, closeto the mail road from 
Gloucester to Ross. E. Lees, mss. In an orchard near 
Saint's Bridge. G, S, Wintle, mss. 

biflorus. In an old orchard at Pill.- /. Anderson, mss. 

Tamus communis. Deerhurst Lane, Tewkesbury. E, Lees, mss, 

CoLCBicuM auiumnale. Covering numerous fields between Tewkes- 
bury -and Cheltenham. E, Lees, mss. In the meadows by 



y Google 



620 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

the Seyern, near Gloucester, abundantly. G, S. WiniUt 
mss. 
LzicKA trisulca and pofyrhiza. Near Gloucester. G, S. Wint/e, 
nu8. 



XXVI. WORCESTERSHIRE. 

HcLLEBORUS virtdis. In a retired lane near Cotheridge. E. Leet^ 
mss, ( Read « Glasshampton. **— Page 1 94. ) 

AcoKiTUM NapeUus. Eastham Hill, several plants at the root of an 
alder, in marshy ground at the elevation of 500 or 60O feet, 
in a truly wild spot. E. Leet, sp. 

Tkesdalia nudicaulis, Hartlebury Conunon. E. Lees, sp, ( Read 
«« Giant's Grave." — Page 195.) 

Lepidium Smithii. On the summit of Helbury Hill, behind Dryad- 
viUe Cottage. E. Lees, mss, (Dryadville Cottage is the 
residence of Mr. Lees, and near Worcester.) 

Cardamiks impatiens. ( Read " Dudley " for « Duley. " — Page 1 95. ) 

. amara. At Redmarley, on the banks of the Ledden 

Brook. E, LeeSi mss. . 

T u KB.ms gUibra, Hartlebury. E,Lee8,sp. Chester Lane, and in 
a lane near Crane's of Abberley, Kidderminster ; also on the 
road side between Kidderminster and Caddesley Corbet. 

Viola suavis. In an orchard at Warndon, about a mile from my 
house; also near Bransford, in a coppice. E, Lees, m$s. 
(Mr. Lees says, ** Though at Wamdon my specimens grow- 
ing together were all * suavis i* yet finding *odorata* mixed 
therewith at Bransford, I have doubts as to any permanent 
difference between them. I think odorata has sometimes 
beardless petals.'*) 

TiLiA parvifolia. Various old trees on the sides of Old Storage HilL 
E. Lees, sp. (Mr. Lees objects to any sign of doubtfhl 
nativity being affixed to the name of this species, and says 
that ** in a natural wood at Shrawley, of 500 acres in extent, 
a great part of the underwood periodically felled, and the 
stumps of which are mossy with age, consists of this species.**) 

— — ~ grandifolia. In a wood on the banks of the Severn, between 
Hawford and Ombersley. E. Lees, mss, 

Htpericum Androsamum. In a wood by Picket Rock, near Kidder- 
minster. Mag. Nat. Hist. iv. • 

  " morUanum, In a wood on Abberley Hill, west of Ab«> 
berley Church ; also at Picket Rock, near Kidderminster. 
Mag, Nat, Hist. 

* A series of botanical stations for this county were published in the Maxanne 
of Natural History, by Mr. Perry, but were overlooked in compiling the rormer 
volume of tbii Work. Most of them relate to the commoner plants of England. 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — WORCESTER. 621 

Eeooium mariHmum. On the heath at Picket Rock, near Kidder- 

minster. Map, Nat, HUt. 
GiNisTA pUosa, (This must be expunged, it having been inserted on 

the authority of Scott*s Stourbridge, and probably G. anglica 

being intended. Mr. Lees. — Page 196.) 
Onobrychis sativa. Near a wood on Abberley Hill, west of Abberley 

Church. Mag. Nat. Hist. 
ViciA angustifdia. In a swamp on the north side of Falling Sands 

Common, Kidderminster ; and in a field between Kidder- 
minster and Picket Rock. Mag. Nat. Hist. 
RuBus svberectus. Bog on Hartlebury Common. E. Lees, mss. 
PoTENTiLLA orgetUea. On the top of the rock at Foxholes, and on a 

rock by the road-side at Wolverley, near Kidderminster ; 

also on rocks by the road-side between Kidderminster and 

Bewdley. Mag. Nat. Hist. 
CoMARUM palustre. Oldfield, near Ombersley. Mag. Nat. Hist. 
Rosa spinosissima. Very common in Worcestershire; about Helbury 

and Lepard Hills ; Cruck barrow Hill ; Brediot Common ; 

Battenhall; side of Cracombe Hill, near Evesham. E. 

Lees, sp. 

Sabini. (Read «* Crookbarrow Hill."--Page 198.) 

Ptrus torminalis. Summit of Blackstone Rock, a mass of sandstone 

overhanging the Severn, near Bewdley. E. Lees, sp. 
Epilobium roseum. In a garden before a house in Church Street, 

Kidderminster, 1816 ; and in Mr. John Lea's drying-ground. 

Mill- Street, Kidderminster, 1829. Mag. Nat. Hist. 
SiDUM dasyphyllum. Blackstone Rock, near Bewdley. /. Ander- 
son, mss. On a wall by the side of the Kiddermiaster road, 

Bewdley. Mag. Nat. Hist, 
CoTTLEDON UmbUicus. On Picket Rock, and about Foxholes, near 

Kidderminster. Mag. Nat. Hist. 
(Enanthx apiifoUa. In ditches of a field near the Teme at Stanford. 

E. Lees, mss. 
DiFSACDs pilosus. Blackstone Rock, near Bewdley. Mag. Nat. 

Hist. 
Prknanthes muraUs. Blackstone Rock, and Rock Wood, near 

Bewdley ; in a wood by Picket Rock, and Summer Hill, 

near Kidderminster ; Rock Hill, one mile and a half from 

Broomsgrove on the road to Alcester. Mag. NcU. Hist. 
Hikracium sylvaticum. Summer HiU, near Kidderminster; in at 

lane leading from Foxholes towards Kidderminster ; Rock 

Wood, Burnt Wood, and Wassel Wood» near Bewdley. 

Mag. Nat. Hist. 
Okopordum Acanthium. A ^ne forest of this magnificent thistle at 

Claines, two miles north of Worcester, in 1836- E. Lees, 

mss. 
Cnicus acaulis. In fields between Kidderminster and Picket Rock. 

Mag. Nat, Hist, 
pratensis. (This I have never met with in Worcestershire; 

and the locality given for it, at Upton Snodsbury, is a mis. 

take. Mr, Lees.-^Vag^ 201.) 
VOL. u. I. 



y Google 



622 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CovmA M^uarrosiu In a lane near Haitkbuiy ; and about Chaddes- 

ley CorfoeC Mag, NaL HUL 
Campamul* T^rackduam. Common in efery part of this county. ^. 

Xeet, m$u Blackstone Rock» near Bewdley; banks ci the 

Serem, near Stourport ; on a steep bank about four mOes 

on the Hereford road from Stourport. iSag, NaL HmbL 
— *— pahiku Dolphin Lane» and in hedges, Chaddesley Cor- 

bet. Mag, NaL Hist, 
AsPEKUGo procumbens. (Exclude this, which I never meant to insert. 

Mr. I,ees. — Page 202.) 
MrosoTis coOina, Near Habberley. E, LtUy jp. 

ctBspiiota, In Burnt Wood, near Bewdley, with white 

flowers. Mag, NaL Hist, 
Ve&bascum virgahtm. Near Worcester, on the road to Ombersley, 

1813. Mag, NaL Hist, (It would appear to be extinct 

near Worcester. See page 202.) 
' Blattaria, Lanes about Foxholes, near Kidderminster. 

Mag, Nat, Hist, 
LiNABiA spuria. In a hilly fidd at Hampton Magna, near Evesham. 

Mag, Nat. Hist, 
Vebokica triphyUos, (I fear this must be struck out. Mr, Lees. — 

Page 202.) 
Calabuntha offidnalis. Hampton Magna, near Evesham. Mag. 

Nat, Hist. 
Melissa officinalis. Grows wild in various spots in Worcestershire ; 

principally near fium-houses, having escaped from gardens. 

E, LeeSf sp. 
Scutellaria imaor. In Rock Wood, near Bewdley. Mag. Nat. 

Hist. 
LATHKiBA squanuuria, Alfiick, at the roots of the White Poplar. 

E. Lees, sp, 
Akagallis c€Brulea. In a field near Tibbeiton, in profusion. E, 

Lees, VMS, 
RuHEX maritimus. On the banks of the Lodge-pools, Kidderminster, 

Mag. NaL Hist. 
Nbottla sjnralis, Cnickbarrow HilL E. Lees, sp. 
Epipactis ensifolia. Wyre Forest. E. Lees, sp. 
CoNTALLARiA majoUs. Bewdlcy Forest E. Lets% sp. 
OaviTHOGALUM wnbeUotum. (Tlie meadow at Cotheridge is only a 

few fields distant from an old residence called Cotheridge 

Court Mr, Lees. — Page 205.) 
Sparganium natans. Muddy pools at Cotheridge. E, Lees, sp. 
LuzuLA Forsteri, Near Worcester. E, LeeSf sp. 
MiLicA naiaTU* Wyre Forest E, Lees, sp. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — STAFFORD. 623 



XXVII. STAFFORDSfflRE. 

Clkmatis Vitalba, Hedges between Dudley and Wolverhampton. 
E. Lee8, m»8. 

Ranunculus parviflorus. Tutbury Castle Hill. G. Hounttt mss. 

CoaTDALis daviculata, Bramshall Park) near Uttoxeter. G, Howitt, 
mt8* 

CoRONOPUS didyma, Yoxall Lodge. Churchill JBabingUnh mss. 
(Surely introduced there?) 

TiLiA parvifolia. Truly indigenous in Needwood Forest. C. C. 
Babington, mss. 

Htpbricum dubium. Barton under Needwood. C. C. Bdbinginn, mss. 

————— dodes. Formerly found in bogs on Needwood Forest. 
ChurchiU Babington, mss, 

GxKANiuM ph<Bum, Yoxall Lodge, naturalised. Ch. Babington, mss. 

Ebodium moschatum. Grounds about Dudley Castle. Ch. Babing- 
ton, mss. 

Peunus Padus. ( Read " Penderford. "—Page 207. ) 

Rosa viSosa. Near Dudley. E. Lees, mss. 

Ptrus torminalis. Uttoxeter. G. Howitt, mss. 

domestica. (The tree referred to in the Philosophical Trans- 
actions, English Flora, &c. is in Wyre Forest, Worcester- 
shire ; and there is no other in England that can be posi- 
tively referred to» as reputedly wild. Mr. Lees. « Plot," 
not Mr. Pitts, is the authority referred to by Turner and 
Dillwyn, as also by Ray. *' Mr. Pitts" is named in Eng- 
lish Flora, only as the authority for the tree in Wyre Forest. 
Turner and EKllwyn should have written " moorlands," in- 
stead of ''woodlands." It would seem that all the notices 
respecting the existence of the species in this county, are to 
be referred to Dr. Plot's statement of it being frequent in 
the moorlands, which is not the case noW) if it ever were so. 
— Page 208.) 

Mtkiophtllum verticillaium. Aqualate Mere. W. H. Darby , mss. 

Chrtsospleniuh aUemifolium. Near Yoxall Lodge. Ch. Babing- 
ton, mss. 

Cabum Carui. Newcastle. G. Howitt, mss. 

(Enanthx PheUandrium. Near Walton. Ch. Babington, mss. 

PiMPiMXLLA magna, (« Ham" is the name given by Turner, but it 
would seem tiiat " Ham" was intended. — Page 208.) 

ViscuM album. Apple trees at Upper Arley. E. Lees, mss. 

DiPSACUS pilosus. Near Alton. G. Howitt, mss. 

Pesnanthxs muraUs, Near Yoxall Lodge. Ch. Babington, 

Cnicus eriophorus. Among the limestone rocks on Dudley Castle 
Hill. E, Lees, mss. 

CoNTKA squarrosa. Dudley Castle HiU. E. Lees, mss. 

EaiaxRON aeris. Among the lime-rocks near Dudley. E. Lees, mss, 
L 2 



y Google 



624 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Campanula patvlcL Barton, under Needwood. C%. BabingUmf aims. 
Andromeda poUfolia. Chartley Moss. G, Howittj mat, 
Chlora perfcUfOa. Dudley Castle. E, Lee»y nut. 
Utricularia wJgarit, Near Uttozeter. G. Howittf nut. 
Euphorbia Charaeiat. (Not to be found in either of the localities 

given for it, in this county ; and probably it ought to be 

wholly expunged from the lists of British plants. — Page 

208.) 
Empetrum nigrum. Chartley Moss. G. Howitt, tp. 
QamAcvs aettiUflora. (Refer to ** Midi. FV* not «i?. G." — Page 

208.) 
Saux einerea. (Refer to ** Engl FL" not «* B. G." — Page 208.) 
Orchis uthdata. ( Refer to « Midi. II.'' — Page 208. ) 
Nbottia tpiraUt. ( Refer to « Midi Fl. " — Page 208. ) 
Ophrys apifera. Yoxall Lodge, very rare. Ch. BabingUm, nut, 
Fritillaria Mdeagrit, Meadows near Uttoxeter. G. Howittf mtt. 
Cladium Maritcut. Chartley Moss, G. Howitt, nut. 
Rhyncospora alba. Chartley Moss. G. Howittf tp. 
Bltsmus eomprettut. In a field opposite Yoxall Lodge. C. C Bab- 

ington, nut. 



XXVIII. SHROPSHIRE. 

Clematis Vttalba. Lincoln Hill, near Colebrookdale. H. Darby, 

nut. 
Trollius europaut. Westfelton; Aston; Maesbury. W. A. Leighttm^ 

mtt. 
Delphinium ContoUda. Davenport Woods. W. A. Leigktxm^ mtt. 
CoRTDALis davicuhaa. Pirn Hill. W. A. LeighiOHt mtt. South 

side of the Wrekin ? H. Darby, nut. 
Cardaminb amara. Windmill Farm, Madeley. J. Poole, nut. 

Banks of the Severn, near Shrewsbury. W. A. Ldghtgrn, 

nut. 
TsESDALiA nudxcavlit. Haughmond HilL W. A. LtighUm, mtt. 
Sartvktivh tylvettre. Top dttheWrekin. J. Anderton, nut. Banks 

of the Severn, near Shrewsbury. IF. A. Leightom, mtt. 

Coalbrookdale. J. Anderton, nut. 
Reseda alba. Road-side, Brosdey Hill, near Colebrookdale. H. 

Darby, sim. 
Drosera longifolia. Shomere Moss; Vownog, near Westfelton. 

W. A. Leighton, nut. 
— angUca. Vownog. W. A. Leighton, nut. 
DiANTHUS CaryophyBut. Haughmond Abbey. W. A. Leighton, mtt. 
M(XMCHiA erecta. Rare ^Haughmond HilL IF. A. Leighton, mm. 



yGooQle 



gL 



ll 



SUPPLEMENT — SALOP. 625 

TiLiA parvifdUa, Cox Wood. J. Andenon, mss. 

Htpiricum Andros(mnum, Pontesford HiU. W, A, Leighton, nug. 
Cox Wood, near Coalbrookdale. J. Andersony nut, 

— »— dubium. Sufficiently common about Shrewsbury. W. A. 
LeightoH, nus, 

' elodet. Margins of most of the pools about Shrewsbury. 

W, A. LeightoHi him. Bomere PooL J. Anderson, nus. 

Geranium pyrenaicum. In a lane near ShiffnalL /. Anderaon, mss, 

Rhamnus Frangyila, Foot of the Wrekin. /. Anderson, mss, 

Ulsx nanus. Common; Haughmond Hill; Westfelton. W. A. 
Leighton, mss, 

Onobrtcbis sativa. Tinker*s Hill, near Ludlow. A, Bloxam, mss. 

Lathtrus syhestris, Cawes Castle, near Westbury. H, Darby^ mss, 

pRUNus Padus, Near Westfelton. W, A, Leighton, mss, 

RuBns svbereetus. Foot of the Wrekin. J, Poole, mss. 

saxatilis, Stiperstones. W, A, Leighton, mss. 

PoTBNTiLLA orgsntea. Road-side near Quatford. H, Darby, mss. 

Rosa tomentosa, Westfelton ; Pirn Hill. W, A, Leighton, mss. 

Ptrus Aria. Wood near the Stiperstones. J. Anderson, mss. 

(Enothbra biennis. Cinder Hill, Coalbrookdale. H, Darby, mss. 

Mtriofhtlldm verticiBatum, Forton Moors, near Newport. /. 
Anderson, mss, 

RiBBS finnan. Near Aqualate Mere. H. Darby, mss, 

CoTTLEDON UmbUicus, Common on most of the hills near Shrews- 
bury. JF, A, Leighton, mss. Old stone walls by the road 
between Shrewsbury and EUesmere. A, Bloxam, mss. 
Wet rocks on Caer Carradock. H, Darby, mss, (Read 
" Quatford and Rowton» on walls by the turnpike road." — 
Page 211.) 

Sedum Forsterianum. Haughmond Hill. W. A, Leighton, mss. 

Chrtsosplenidm altemifoUwn, Shelton Wood. IF, A, Leighton, mss. 
Snowdon Pool, near Beckbury. J, Anderson, mss, 

Cicuta virosa, (Mr. Darby says that. « Staney*' was a misprint for 
« Slaney," in Bot. Guide. — Page 211.) 

CBnanthe PheUandrium, Mare Pool. W, A, Leighton, mss. 

FcENicuLiTM vulgare. Limestone quarries on Lincoln's Hill, Coal- 
brookdale. J. Anderson, mss. 

Myrrhis odorata. On Benthall Edge, near Coalbrookdale. H. 
Darby, mss. 

Smyrnidm Olusairvm, Shrewsbury Castle mound. R. C. Alex- 
ander, mss, 

ViscuM album, Loton Park. W. A. Leighton, mss, 

DiPSACus pilosus, 0* Littleshall *' of the Botanist's Guide, intends 
" Lilleshall," according to Mr. Darby. — Page 21 1. ) 

Fedia dentata. Com fields near Shrewsbury. W, A, Leighton, mss. 
Com fields between Coalbrookdale and Little Wenlock. H. 
Darby, mss, 

HiERACiaM tamhelkaum, Brickley Coppice. W, A, Leighton, mss. 

Erioeron acris. Benthall Edge. W, A, Leighton, mss, Lincoln's 
Hill, near Coalbrookdale. J, Anderson, mss, 

CoHTZA squarrota, Benthall Edge. W, A. Leighton, mss. HiUs 

L 3 



y Google 



6^ THE NEW botanist's GtTIDE. 

opposite Bridgenorth. A, JBloxctm, mss, LmC(dn*s Hill, 

near Coalbrookdale. J, Anderson, nus* 
Campanula pattUa, Mountford Bridge. /. E. Bowman, sp. Com- 
mon around Shrewsbury. W, A, Leighton, nus, 
Trachdium. The Terrace, Apsley House, near Bridge- 
north. A, Bloxam, 

latifdia. Bradley, near Wenlock. H, Darby, nus. 

Vaccikium Oxycoccos. Bomere Pool. C C. Babington, m$$. 
Andromeda polifdUa, Whixall Moss. A, Bloxam, nus. 
Chlora perfoliatcu Benthall Edge. W. A, Leighton, nus. 
PoLEMONiuM ciBTuleum. Near Bridgenorth. W. A. Leighton, nus. 
Anchusa sempervirens. Near Oswestry. A. Bloxam, nus. 
PuLMoNARiA officinalis. Near Loamhall Pool, Coalbrookdale. H, 

Darby, nus. 
AsPERUoo procumbens. Gathered by Dr. Joseph Babington, in the 

locality mentioned on page 212. C. C. Babington, nus. 
VEKBAScvm Blattaria. (Refer to ««^. G."— Page 212.) 
Atrofa Belladonna. Lilleshall Abbey, and north-west base of the 

Wrekin. H. Darby, nus. 
Mentha Pulegivm. (Erase the words << abundantly ; Ceynham Camp> 

Ludlow."— Page 212.) 
Galeopsis versicolor. In a corn field at Little Calcott, near Shrews- 
bury. Mag. Nat. Hist. Near Baschurch, and JAany- 

menech, abundantly ; Ceynham Camp, Ludlow. B. G. 
Calamintha officinalis. Near Shrewsbury. W. A. Leighton, mss. 
AciNos vtdgaris. Wall at Wenlock. /. Anderson, nus. 
Scutellaria minor, Oxon PooL W. A. Leighton, nus. 
Utricularia minor. Bomere Pool. W. A. Leighton, mss. 
HoTTONiA palustris. Bog near Bomere Pool. H, Darby, mss. 
Anagallis aerulea. Shotton. W. A. Leighton, mss. 
Primula datior. Near Preston Wood. W. A. Leighton, mss. 
LiTTORELLA locustris. Bomcre Pool. H. Darby, mss. Colemere 

and Ellesmere more.. A. Bloxam, mss. 
Euphorbia Lathyris. Cultivated ground. W. A. Leighton, mss. 

amygdaloides. Farley Woods, near Much Wenlock. H. 

Darby, mss. Most of the woods about Shrewsbury. 

W. A. Leighton, mss. 
QuEttcus sessUiflora. Pim Hill. W. A. Leighton, mss. 
Sagittaria sagittifoRa. Canal near Shrewsbury. W. A. Leighfym, 

mss. Belton Pool ; near Acton Burnell. H. Darby, mss. 
ScHEucHZERiA pcUustris. Shomere Moss. W. A. Leighton, mss. 

Discovered by Mr. C. C. Babington, at Bomere, in 1832. 
Orchis pyramidalis. Benthall Edge. /. Anderson, mss. 
Habenaria chlorantha. Bomere Wood. W. A. Leighton, mss. 
LisTERA cordata. Among rocks on the Stiperstones Hill. H. Darby, 

mss. 
Narcissus I^eudo- Narcissus. Near Uffington. W. A* Leighton, mss. 

Field in which Buildwas Abbey stands. H. Darby, mss., 
CoNVALLARiA majcdis. Pim Hill. W. A. Leighton, mss. Old BltK^ 

Wood, near Buildwas. J. Anderson, mss. 
Ornithooalum umbellattim. Fields near Buildwas. H. Darby, m$s. 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — HEREFORD. 627 

CoLCHicuM mUumnale, Hord's Park, Bridgenortb. A, Bloxam, m$8. 

TypHA angustifoUa, Berrington Pool. W, A, LeigkUm, mss. Bo- 
mere Pool. H, Darby, nus, 

Sparoanium natant. Bomere PooL W, A. Leighton, nus, 

LzMNA poiyrhiza. Canal at iShrewsbury. C. C Babington, nus. 
Ditches adjoining the Mere at £lle8mere. A. Bloxam, mss. 
Near Newport, by the Canal. /. Artdersofh mss. 

FoTAiioanov JluUans. (Read « Lilleshall.'* — Page 21S. ) 

RHTKcospoaA/iMca. Bomere Pool. (Rev. E. Williams.) W. A. 

Leighton, mss, 
  0^60. Bomere Pool ; Twyford Vownog, near West- 

felton. Mag, Nat, Hist. 

IElrochakis paucijhra, Bomere Pool. (Rev. E. Williams.) W. A. 
Leighton, mss. Foot of the Wrekin. J. Anderson, mss. 

Ekiopho&um vaginatum, Bomere Pool. IF, A. Leighton mss 

I " pubescens. Foot of the Wrekin. J, Anderson, mss. 

Cabbx elongata. EUesmere. A. Bloxam, sp, 

PseudO'Cgperus, Canal at Shrewsbury. W, A. Leighton, mss, 

Anoot Pool, near Shrewsbury. /. Anderson, mss, 
fi dva, Whixal Moss. A. Bloxam, mss, 

Bromus erectus. Lime quarries near Buildwas. J, Anderson, mss. 



XXIX. HEREFORDSHIRE. 

Climatis VitaJba, In abundance about Jjedbury. E, Less, mss. 
TiLiA parvifoUa. Cradley. E. Lees, mss, 
Htpericum dubium. Cowleigh Park. E, Lees, mss, 

  Androsamum. Between Ledbury and Bromsfoerrow. E. 

Lees, mss. 
Astragalus glgeyphgUos. Woods on limestone at Cradley. E. Lees, 

mss, 
Onobrtchis saiiva. Western base of Lime Woods at Cradley. S. 

Lees, mss, 
Lathtros latifdUus. In a hedge^ five miles from Hereford on the 

road to Shrewsbury. R. C. Alexander, mss. 
Prunus domestiea. Common in hedges. J. Lloyd, mss. 
— — — Padus. Brook-side near Gaines. J. JUoyd, mss, 
Rosa mOosa. Two miles from Hereford, on the * * * road. E. Lees, 

mss. 
nderaniha. On limestone rocks near Colwall, Ledbury. E. 

Lees, mss. 

Forsteri. Between Ledbury and Broomsberrow. E.Lees, mss. 

Ptrus communis. Hedgerows and woods. J. Lloyd, mss, 
— — - torminaUs, Commoii in woods. /. Lloyd, mss. 
L 4 



yGooQle 



gL 



628 THE MEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CoTTLKDOv UmbSiemt. Old damp wall, Whitbcinie cfaorcbyard. </. 

Uoyd, wus. 
PiMPiNCLLA magna. Near CnuUey. R, C. Alexander, mm. 
CicuTA virosa, Hereford, on the riTerbanks, in tbe walks. R. C* Aiear- 

ander, nus, 
ViBuaNUM Lantana, Woods near Ledbury and Eastnor Castle. £. 

Lees, nus. 
LoNiccKA Xylosteum, Brook-side near Gaines. J. Uoyd, mss, 
ViscoM album. Near Ross. /. Macnab, sp. So common that some 

old apple trees are evergreen. J. Uoyd, mss, 
Tkagotogov parrifoUus. In several places about Whitbome. J. 

Uoyd, mss. 
HicaACiUM sylvaiicum. In a lane between Ledbury and Bitmis- 

berrow. E. Lees, mss. 
Campanula patnla. Plentiful near Ledbury. E. Lees, mss. Old 

red sand-stone rocks, in various places about Ross, Ledbury, 

&c. J. Lloyd, mss. 
— — ^ TracheUtan. Side of the road near the Pye's nest, Led- 
bury. E. Lees, mss. 
Chlora perfoliata. Cradley lime-rocks. E. Lees, mss. 
PuLMOVAKiA officinalis. Wood called <Cap Hill,' at Gaines. /. 

Lloyd, mss. (It is not quite clear whether the ms. is Cat 

or Cap.) 
Mentha rotundifoiia. Side of the brook at Tedstone-de-la-mere. 

E. Lees, mss. 
^— — — piperita. Wet lane near Cradley. E, Lees, mss. 
Galzobdolon luUum. Hedges about Cradley and Eastnor. E. Lees, 

mss. 
Primula elatior. High grounds about Cradley. E. Lees, mss. 
Daphne Mezereum. Fox-holes Wood, Gaines, but only a single bush. 

J. Lloyd, mss. 
PoPULUS canescens. Road side between Ledbury and Redmarley. B. 

Lees, mss. Near Sapley Bridge, Whitbome. J. Lloyd, 

mss. 
Orchis pyramidaUs. Wood between Mathon and Cradley. E. Lees, 

mss. Marele Hill, near Ledbury. /. Uoyd, mss. 
Ophrts apifera. Near Arnold's Mill, and near Poswick, Whit- 
bome. J. L'oyd, mss. 
— muscifera. Common in meadows and pastures. J. Uoyd, 

mss. 
Galanthus nivalis. In an orchard at the Oak's Farm, in the 

parish of Whitbome, so plentiful that it may be seen at two 

miles distance. J. Lhyd, mss. (Mr. Lloyd also mentions 

Narcissus Pseudo-cyperus, and poetlcus, double and single 

flowered, and Ornlthogalura urobellatum, in and near tbe 

same orchard. Doubtless all have been there planted.) 
Narcissus PseudO' Narcissus. A great profusion of it occurs on the 

virgin-iurf of & hill between Malvern and Cradley. E. Lees, 

mss. 
CoNVALLARiA mofalis. Edvin Wood, near Bromyard. J. Uoyd, nm. 
  muUiflora. Fox-holes Wood, Gaines. /. Uoyd, mss. 



yGooQle 



gi, 



SUPPLEMENT — MONMOUTH. 



629 



XXX. MONMOUTHSHIRE. 

Ma. CoKWAT obliged me with a list of plants observed by himself in 
the neighbourhood of Pontnewydd Works, in this county. Since the 
same general indication of place and autiiority must apply to all of 
them, it seems scarcely worth whUe to repeat it after the name of each 
plant ; but the list itsdf may be subjoined, so far as the species named 
will come under our test of the rarer plants ; half a dozen other local- 
ities being first enumerated* 

CoTTLXDOK umbiUeus, On the walls in many places between Tintem 

Abbey and Monmouth. R, C, Alexander, mts. 
Savgjjisokba offidnaUs, Near PontypooL (Rev. J. Poole.) J. C. 

Coflins, nu». 
IhnACjjs pilonu. Near Tintem abbey. (Rev. J. Poole.) /. C. CoU 

tins, me», 
MwTHA rotundifolia. Road side between Tintem Abbey and Mon> 

mouth. R. C. Alexander, mss. 
Narcissus Pseudo- Narcissus. Near Abergavenny. E. Lees, mss. 



Plants observed near Pontnewydd 

Gematis Vitalba. 
Ranunculus parviflonis. 
TroUius europseus. 
Aconitum Napellus. 
Glaucium luteum. 
Cochlearia officinalis. 

  anglica. 
Brassica campestris. 
Reseda lutea. 
Viola lutea. 
Hypericiun Androsiemum. 



Silene maritima. 
Stellaria nemorum. 
Ulez nanus, 
Ononis spinosa. 
Vicia angustifolia. 
Iiathyrus sylvestris. 
Potentilla vema. 
Rosa tomentosa. 
— systyla. 
Sanguisorba officinalis. 
Ribes mbram. 
Cotyledon Umbilicus. 
CEnothera biennis. ' 
Bryonia dioica. 



Works. C Chnway^s Ms, List. 

Foeniculum vulgare. 
Apium graveolens. 
Myrrhis odorata. 
Viscum album. 
Rubia peregrina. 
Valeriana rubra. 
Fedia dentata. 
Hieracium sylvaticum. 
Prenanthes muralis. 
Cnicus pratensis. 
Anthemis nobilis. 
Campanula hederacea. 
— — — patula. 
Polemonium caendeum. 
Chlora perfoliata. 
Myosotis sylvatica. 
Linaria Elatine. 



• repens. 



Lycopus europeus. 
Mentha sylvestris. 
II rotundifolia. 

— — piperita. 
Leonurus cardiaca. 
Stachys ambigua. 
Galeobdolon luteum. 
Galeopsis Ladanum. 



L 5 



y Google 



630 



TBt NEW BOTANIST 8 0U1D£. 



Galeopsis versicolor 
Lamium incisum. 
Calamintha officinalis. 
Scutellaria minor. 
Primula elador. 
Glaux maritima. 
Plantago maritima. 
Chenopodium polyspermum. 
Beta maritima. 
Euphorbia amygdaloides. 
Mercurialis annua. 
Empetrum nigrum. 
Ulmus glabra. 
Salix triandria. 
— >—• lanceolata. 
Neottia spiralis. 



Galanthus mvalis. 

Narcissus Pseudo- Narcissus. * 

- biflorus. 
— — poeticus. 
Convallaria majaUs. 
Tamus communis. 
Potamogeton rufescens. 
Scirpus maritimus. 
Eriophorum yaginatum. 
Carex fiilva. 
Poa aquatioa. 
Festuca bromoides. 
Bromus secalinus. 
Triticum repens. 
Lolium temulentum. 



XXXL GLAMORGAN. 



Glaucium luteum. Near Cardi£f. /. C Collins, mss. Swansea Bur-* 
rows. E, Lees, mss, 

SiNAFis tenuifolia. Near Cardiff. J, C Collins, mss. Swansea, near 
the Copper Works. R, C Alexander, mss. (Turner and 
Dillwyn mention S. muralis at Swansea; are both found 
there ?) 

Hesferis matronalis. Among rubbish near the mouth of the Tarve, 
1836. E. Lees, mss. 

Reseda lutea. Near Cardiff. /. C. CoUins, mss. On a bank be- 
tween Swansea and Oystermouth. E.Lees, mss. 

Arenaria peploides. Swansea Bay. E. Lees, mss. 

Hypericum elodes, Cromlyn Bog, three miles east of Swansea. E. 
Lees, mss. 

Geranium pt/renaicum. Between Swansea and Cromlyn. E. Lees, 
mss. 

CoMARUM palustre. Common iti Cromlyn Bog. E, Lees, tnsa 

Rosa spinosissima. Abundant on Swansea Burrows, and adjacent 
sandy meadows. E. Lees, mss. 

Verbascum virgatum, " 



LiNARiA repens. 
Melissa officinalis, 
Salsola Kali. 
Mercuriaus annua. 



^Near Cardiff. /. C. CoOins, mss. 



• Mr. Conway deems the three ipecies of Narcissus to be indigenous, and also 
the three Mints, Ribes rubrum and^ Galanthus nivalis are regarded as doubtfliL on 
his head. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — MERIONETH. 631 



XXXIV. CARDIGANSHIRE. 



Convolvulus ScHdaneBa Near Aberystwith. W, H, Darby, mss. 
Plantaoo maritima* Rocks about Aberystwith. W. H, Darby, 

nus. 
Salsola Kali, Near Aberystwith. W, H. Darby^ nus 
EuPHOABiA ParaUat. Borth Sands, near Aberystwith. W. H. 

Darby i nus. 



XXXVI. BRECON. 



Vaccimium Vttis-Idaa, Summit of Black Mountains, « 2,500 feel. 

E, Lees, sp, 
Lima'bia repens. By the river side, a little below Brecon. W. H. 

Darby, nus, 
Empetrum nigrum. Summit of the Black Mountains. E. Lees, sp. 



XXXVIL MONTGOMERYSHIRE. 



SxnuM Forsterieamm, Brieddon Mountains. A, Bloxam, nus, (May 
not this be the species mentioned by Turner and Dillwyn, 
on the authority of Aiken ?) 
Acivos* vulgaris, Breiddon Mountain. A. Bloxam, sp, 
Ajuoa Chanuepitys. Appeared « in considerable abundance^ in a 
gravelly field on the banks of the Severn, near Welch- 
pool,** in 1832. It had not been observed there previously ; 
could not be found in any other place for ten miles ; and had 
disappeared by 1834. Mag, Nat. Hut. viu. 117. 



XXXVin. MERIONETHSHIRE. 

Tkoi,uvs europ<Bus, Cader Idris. (Rev. J. Poole.) J. C Collins* 
mss. Wood and pastures near the water-fidl called the Black 
Cataract, near Maentwrog. /. Anderson, nus, 

L 6 



y Google 



632 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

SiNAPis tenuifaiia, Harlech Castle. J. Anderson, mss, 

Hypericum docks. Tan-y-Bwlch. (Rev. J. Poole.) /. C CotUnt, 
mss, 

Orobus sylvaHcus. Near the water-fall of Pistyll Cain, above Pont-ar- 
garfiu (Rev. J. Poole.) J*. C. CcUinSt tnss. Near the water- 
fall called the Black Cataract, near Maentwrog. <7. Ander- 
Sony mss. 

HiERACiuM paludosum. Near the Black Cataract. /. Andersony mat. 

Gnaphalium dioicum. Near the Black Cataract. J. Anderson, mss. 

Alisma nutans. (This is the plant intended by ** Actinocarpus Dama- 
sonium," on page 226. ) 

SciRPus maritimus. Marshes between Harlech and Barmouth. /. 
Anderson, mss. 

Phleum arenarium, Barmouth sands. /. Anderson, mss. 



XXXIX. ANGLESEA. 



CocHLZARiA anglica. Tlie station <<near Llanbadrick Church*' be- 
longs to C. danica. — Page 227. 

WiGLKflavicomis, and Cwtisii, On the sands near Llyn Coron. C. 
C. Babington, mss, 

Heliamthemum guUahim, On the right side of a little hollow run- 
ning up into Holyhead Mountain, at about fifty yards 
before reaching the descent to the South Stack Light-house. 
Mag. Nat. JfRst. 

Elatikz hexandra. In a stream flowing from Uyn Mealog, just 
above the mill. . Mag. Nat, Hist, 

Callitriche pedunctdata. Near Mona Inn. C. C, Babington, mss. 
Just below the mill, mentioned under Elatine hexandra, is 
found C. autumnalis, die only recorded Welsh station. 
Mag. Nat. HisL (See the remarks to Calliti'iche pedun- 
culata, page 588, and change <* pedunc^lata " to ** atUuM- 
nalis," on page 229.) 

LiMBARDA cinthmoides. Llandwyn. C. C, Babington, mss. 

Polygonum Baii, Between Abermenai and Llanddwyn. C, C 
Babington, mss. 

RuMEx pratensis. In a lane leading from Newborough to a small 
lake. Mag, Nat. Hist. 

SciRPUs Savii, Carreg Onnen (not Ormen); Llyn Mealog, &c. 
C, C. Babington, sp. Just below the mill on the stream 
flowing from Llyn Mealog ; in a wet place between New- 
borough and Llandwyn Abbey ; in almost every wet place 
in Holyhead Isle. Mag, Nat. Hist, 

Carex punctata. At Beaumaris, gathered many years ago by Mr. 
Dawson Turner, but mistaken for C distans. Comp. 
No. IS. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — CAERKARVOK. 633 



XL. CAERNARVONSHIRE. 

** The name of the lake mentioned in the note on page 239. i^ 
Llyn ddii'r Arddu ; the rock above it is Clc^wyn ddA'r Arddu ; the 
part which overhangs, farthest from the I'oad up, is called Clogwyn 
dda." C. C, BubingUmy Esq, 

Thauctrum alpinum. Snowdon. G. Howitt, tp, 
  minus, Ormeshead. G. Howiit, sp, 
MxcoNOPsis cambrica. Fall of the Monach, at the Devil^s Bridge, 

or Pont y Monach. JDr, Farre, 
Glaucium luteum. Conway Bay. G. Howittt sp* 
SuBULARiA aquaticcu In plenty in Llyn Idwel. Mag. Nat, Hist, 

In tlie lake by the Inn at Capel Curig. J. E. Leefet mss, 
Arabis petr<Ba, Clogwyn ddu'r Arddu, Snowdon. C. C, Babington, 

sp. On the lower part of that precipice. Mag, Nat, Hist. 
Saoina maritima. Coast at Llanfaglan. C. C, Babington, mss, 
Arena&ia vema, TwU ddu. G, Howiit, sp* 
Radiola miflegrana. On the common near the railway at Caer* 

narvon. C, C. Babingtott, mss. 
Hypericum dubium. (Read " Beddegelert." — Page 238.) 

montanum, ( Erase «* sp. " — Page 238. ) 

Lathtrus palusti'is. Wet field near Little Ormeshead. G. Howitt, sp, 
Rosa rubella. (The plant mentioned under this name in the Mag. 

Nat. Hist. ii. 280, and on page 238 of the present work, is 

R. Wilsoni, as I learn from Mr. Winch.) 
-~» WUsoni, On a sloping bank close to the Menai, between two 

stone^quaiTies, not half a mile north from the bridge, on the 

Caernarvonshire side, one bush being only a few yards from 

the edge of the quarry nearest the bridge. Mag, Nat. 

Hist, ix. 
Callitriche peduncvlata. The sessile-fruited variety is eommon in 

Caernarvonshire, and is usually taken for C. autunmalis ; 

Llyn Llydau, Snowdon. C, C. Babington, sp, 
Carum verticilkUum, In the locality mentioned (page 240), but is 

often destroyed by the bay being cut ; in plenty on the slope 

of Dinas Emrys, a remarkable rock adjoining the above 

locality, on the side farthest from the lake. C, C, Bab- 

ir^tony mss, 
Smtrkium Olusatrum, Topmost tower of Conway Castle. /. E. 

L^efe, mss, 
Galium 5orea/e. By the river.side at the foot of a rock half a mile 

above Llanben*is Church ; rocks near TwU ddu. C, C* 

Babington, mss, 
HiERACiUM sglvaticum (pictum.) By the side of the fall of the 

Ogwen. C* C. Babington, mss* 



y Google 



634* THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

HiKRACiuH paludotum^ (« Near Bedd^dert," not " Llanberris. " -« 

Page 240.) 
Lobelia Dortmanna. In the lake by the Inn at Capel Curig. /. E. 

Leefe, nus, 
Camfantjla hederacea. I have seen it in the second, third, and 

fourth stations mentioned on page 241. C. C. BabingUm, 

mss. 
CoNTOLVULiTS SoktoHeUa. Conway Bay. G» Howitt, qt, 
LiTHosFBRMUM moritimum. Between the Great and Little Onns- 

heads. G. Howitt, 9* 
Vkrovica spicata. Great Ormshead. G», Howitt, tp, 
Statice apathtdata, Llandudno, near Orntthead. G. Howitt, sp. 
Polygonum viviparunu Rocks above Ffinnon Vrech, between Crib 

Coch and Crib y Ddescil. - C C. Babington, tnti, 
OrraiA retUforvm. Clogwyn y Gamedd, &c. Snowdon. C. C. 

Babington, mss. 
Salix herbacea. Glydyr. W, Brand, sp. Above TwU Ddu. J. E, 

Leefe, mss. In plenty at the top of Snowdon. C. C Bab- 

ington, mss. 
AxisMA natans. In Llanberris Lakes, particularly just above the 

bridge between them. C. C, Babington, mss. 
Sparoanium natans. Llyn Idwel ; in plenty in the lakes near Snow- 
don. C. C. Babington, mss. 
JuHCus iriglumis. Between Llyn y Cwn and TwU Ddu, on Glyder 

Fawr. C. C. Babington, qt. 
Rhtncosfoba alba. Plentiful in the lower bog in Llanberris Vale. 

C. C. Babington, mss. 
Eeiopho&um graeile. In a bog on the top of Dinas Emrys. Mag. 

Nat, Hist. 
SciBFtrs Savii, Mr. Babington gathered this at Caernarvon, in 1830, 

but then passed it over as S. setaceus. Mag. Nat. Hist 
Cakkx airata. On Clogwyn y Garnedd. C. C. Babington, mss. 
— — — extensa. Caernarvon. C. C. Babington, mss. 
I hinervis. On a dry spot near Llanberris. C. C. Babington, 

mss. 
PoA alpina. On the higher rocks of Snowdon, very fine at the foot 

of Crib y Ddescil ; near TwU Ddu, on Cwm IdweU. C C. 

Babington, mss. 
FxsTucA bromoides. (Common in waste places << round Bangor." 

B. G. — Page 244.) 



XLI. DENBIGHSHIRE. 



Tboluus europaus. Under the aqueduct over the Dee, LUmgollln. 

J, E* Leefe, mss, 
Viola liOea. Rood-side between Llangollin and Corwen, about a 

mUe from the former. /. E. Lerfe, mss. 



yGooQle 



gl 



SUPPLEMENT — CHESHIRE. 635 

ViciA angutHfoHa, Banks of the Dee among furze, near Corwen. 

/. E. LeefSf mt8» 
Seoum angUemn, Common by the Dee, near Llangollin. /. E. 

Leefe, nui. 
CoiTLEDON UmbiUeua, On every wall near Wynnstay. /. E, Leefe, 

Cakduus criqnu. Near Denbigh. Con^ 

GaleobDolon luteum. Woods near Wynnstay. /. E. Leefey nui, 

RuMEx praietuis. Llangollin, on the Canal bank. C. C. Babington. 

mss. 
PoTAMOGBTON oblongus. Marsh upon the upper part of the Eagle 

Crags at Llangollin. C C. Babingtony nun. 
AvEM A fatuou (Erase « sp. '* — Page 251.) 



XLII. FLINTSHIRE. 



Thalictrum minus. Talagoch Mountain. /. E. Botoman, sp. 
F.BODXUM mariHmum. Hedge-banks about Rhyddlan and Rhyl, near 

the sea. /. E. Boimnan, sp. 
Rosa spinosissima. Near Caernrys. (Rev. J. Poole.) J.C. CdOins, 

mss. 
Saxif&aga sUUaris, (For «* moist" read " most" — Page 252. 



XLIII. CHESHIRE. 



Ma. Rylakds kindly communicated a list of several of the rarer 
plants, said to have been found about Warrington, in Lancashire ; 
the stations of some of them being on the Cheshire side of the 
river. But I fear to copy from the list, for the plants of either 
county, as it professes to have been partly drawn firom a source the 
accuracy of which there is too much ground for doubting. The 
doubts arise from the introduction of several plants which are very 
unlikely to occur in this part of England ; and I am imable to say to 
idiat extent the including of others may have depended on the same 
authority. 

SANauiso&BA offidnalis, (Insert " H. W*" after » Whal^y Bridge." 
— Page 255.) 



y Google 



636 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CoTTLEDOH UmbUicMS. Near Knntsford, but not oommoD. (Mr. 
Wilson.) T. J. Eylands, mM. 

Saxifbaoa umbroia, Taxall Wood, in one place only, and there 
abundant. (F. D. P. A8tley,£sq.) ChmrdtiU Babimfftoit, 
mn. (I think the Woods at Taxall are entirely reoe&t 
plantations, and if so^ the station cannot be regarded as a 
natural one, however plentiful may be the plants. H> W.) 

Mterhis odoraUu Very common by the banks of the river Goyt. 
(F. Astley, Esq.) Ck. Babingtom^ nus. 

Vaccikium ViHb Idasa. Windgather Rocks. (F. Astley, Esq.) 
0%. BabingUm, nus, 

StATicE gpathukUeu Hilbury Island. (J. Forbes, Esq.) IT. 
Brands, mss. 

LisTEKA eordata. ( Read « Longside Hill.'* — ^ Page 258. ) 

G A6XA bOea, ( Read <« at Bellow Hfll. '* — Page 25& ) 

HoRDEUM prcBtense. (Erase <* «f).** — Page 259. ) 



XLIV. DERBYSHIRE. 



<* A VERT long, but incorrect list of Derbyshire plants b given in 
the first volume of Glover's History of Derbyshire, a work still in 
course of publication.** Bev. A. Bloxam. 



Trollius europoMs, Buxton. CkurcMIl Babington, mss, 
Helleborus mn(fi«. (Dr. Hewitt refers the plants at << Matlock ** 

and Codnor to H. foetidus. - Page 259.) 
CoRTDALis lutea, Matlock and Duffield, perhaps introduced. Howitt, 

cat, 
HuTCHiKsiA petrtea, Monsall Dale. Howittj cat. Chee Tor. Ch, 

Babington, mss. 
Teesdalia nudicatdis, Derbyshire. Howittj cat. 
CocHLEARiA officinoHs, Stony Middleton. Howitt, cat. 
Camelika sativa, Heanor. Howitt, cat. 
Draba muralis. High Tor, rare. Ch, Babington, mM. 
Cardamine amara. Shipley. Howitt, cat. 

> impaiiens. Langley Mill, Howitt, cat. 
Nasturtium sylvestre. Shipley. Howitt, cat, 
TuRRTTis glabra. Bretby. Ch* Babington, sp. 
Reseda lutea. Bull Bridge. G, Howitt, sp, 
Viola lutea, Cromford Moor, near Matlock Bath. Howitt, cat, 
SiLEKE nutans. Buxton rocks. Ch, Babington, sp. Biggin Dalei 

near Hartington. Howitt, cat, 
Stellaria nenunrum. Eyam Dale. G. Howitt, sp. 
Cerastium arvense. Derbyshire. Howitt, cat. 
TiLiA parvtfoKa. Matlock. Ch, Babington, mss* 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — DERBY. 637 

Htpbeicum numtanum. Critch. Howitt, cat, 

— ^— dubium, Matlock. Ch. BabingUm, msa, 

Rham Nus catharticiu, Buxton rocks. Ch. Babinptonf fiui. Fre- 
quent. Howitt, eat, 

Frangula, Coxbench. Sowitt, cat. 

Ononis spinosa. Near Calke. A. Bloxamy tiut. 

Lathybus NUiolia, Breason. (Dr. Davidson.) G. Howittt q>, 
(Dr. Howitt questions the existence of Lathyrus birsutus, 
palustris, Aphaca, and Vlcia lutea, in this county. See 
page 261.) 

HipPOCREPis comosa, Monsall Dale. Howitt, cat, 

Prunus domestica, Heanor. Howitt, cat. 

" Padus. Chapel en le Frith. G, Howitt, sp. Via Gellia. 

Ch. Babington, tom. (Erase « Bath."— Page 261.) 

RuBus saxatilis. Fin Hill, near Brushfield. Howitt, cat. 
- Chanuemorus, Holme Moss. Ch. Babington, nus. 

CoMABUM paluttre. Derbyshire. Howitt, cat. 

Sanouisorba officinalis. ( For «* Dove Dale" read " Buxton. "— Page 
261.) 

Rosa viUosa. Heanor. Howitt, cat. 

tomentosa. Between Ticknall and Foremark. A. Bloxam, mss. 

— !— spinosissima. High Tor; Monsale Dale. (F. Astley, iSsq.) 
Ch. Babington, mss. 

Epxlobium roseum. Heanor, frequent. Howitt, cat. At the bottom 
of a pond, the second year after it had been let dry, and the 
mud cleared out to the depth of three feet, several plants 
came up, on the right of the road between Calke Abbey and 
Melbourne. A. Bloxam, nus, 

CiBCiBA alpina. Matlock. Howitt, cat. 

Ltthbuu hyssopifofium. A single plant found with Epilobium 
roseum (as above). A. Bloxam, mss. 

Bbyonia dtoica. Rare in Derbyshire. Howitt, cat. In a plantation 
near the Stables at Calke Abbey. A. Bloxam, mss. 

Cotyledon Umbilicus. Anchor Church. Ch. Babington,^. Dove 
Dale and Hew-gill. Howitt, cat. (In Mr. Bablngton's 
specimen, which is much stunted, all the flowers are nearly 
upright.) 

Sedum dasyphyUum. Dethicke. Ch. Babington, mss. 

album, Ashford in the Water, near Bakwell. G, Howitt, qt. 

Saxifraga caspiiosa. I have a variety of this, the S. decipiens of 
Smith, from Derbyshire. G. Howitt, mss. (Is not the 
S. decipiens of Smith merely a variety of S. hypnoides? He 
first joined it, if I mistake not, with S. hirta, which is held to 
be a variety of S. hypnoides, by Hooker, Wilson, and 
others. H.^W.) 

Chrysosplekium aliemifolium. Coxbench Bogs. G. Howitt, sp, 

PiMPiNELLA magna. Frequent in the coal district. Howitt, cat. 

CEnanthe Phellandrium. Ponds adjoining Swarkeston Bridge. A. 
Bloxam, mss, 

SiLAUS pratensis. Frequent. Howitt, cat. Meadows adjoining 
Swarkeston Bridge. A. Bloxam, mss. 



y Google 



€38 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

To&iLis infetia, Shipley. Howitt, cat. 

MTRaHis odorata. By the Derwent near Duffield ; Codnor Breach. 
Hotoitt, cat, Wirksworth. Ch, Bdbington, mas. 

ViscuM (dbum. Langley, on Pjrrus domestica. G. Howitt, sp. (Is 
P. communis intended?) 

Galium erecium, Heanor. Howitt, cat, 
  " pusiOum, (Erase «« Castleton. " — Page 262. ) 

Vauimana rubra, Saxton's Bath. Ch, Babingiton, sp, Matlock, 
perhaps introduced. Howitt, cat. This and several other 
garden plants are found about Matlock, haying been intro- 
duced on the rocks and banks near the Hotel for ornament. 
H, W, 

Fedia dentata. Near Calke Abbey ; in com fields between Calke 
Park and Ticknall. A, Bloxam, sp, Shipley. Howitt, cat. 
Hopwell Hall. Ch. Babington, mss, 

— — eriocarpa. Dove Dale. Ch, Babington, mss. 

Lactuca virosa. Near Swarkeston Bridge. Ch, Babington, mss. 

P&EKANTHXs muraUs, Heanor. G, Howitt, sp. Near Foremark 
Park. A, Bloxam, mss, Matlock. Howitt, cat, 

HiERACiuM sylvaticum. Near Calke. A» Bloxam, mss. 
,   umbeUaimm. Heanor. Howitt, cat, 

  paludosum, Cozbench. Howitt, cat. 
Cnicus eriophorus. Cromford. Howitt, cat* 

' heterophyUus, Buxton rocks, and in a com field near (^mb*s 
Moss. (F. D. P. Astley, Esq.) Ch, Babington, mss. (For 
«<^. (?.'• read «' /. E. Bowman, mss." — Page 262.) 

GxAPHALiuM dioicum, Finn Hill, near Brushfield. G, Howitt, sp. 
Buxton. (Rev. T. Gisbome.) Ch. Babington, mss, 

SxNxcio viscosus Cotmanhay. Howitt, cat. 

Campanula latifoUtu By a brook near Hopwell Hall, very abundant. 
Ch. Babington, mss* 

    Trachelium. Pleasley Park. Howitt, eaU 
mglomerata, Buxton. Ch, Babington, mss, 

PoLEMOKiUM ctBrvkMm, Frequent near Bakewell and Buxton. 

Howitt, cat. Near Haddon Hall. Ch. Babington, sp, 
Vaccinium Vttis^IdxBa, Cromford Moor; Combe's Moss; Holme 

Moss. (F. D. P. Astley, Esq.) Ch, Babington, mss, 
  Oaeycoccus. Combe*s Moss. Ch, Babington, sp, 
A&BUTus Uva» Ursi, Fox House, on the moors, 1835. (Mr. B<rfiler.) 

Howitt, cat. 
Ahdromeoa polifbUa. Combe's Moss. Ch, Babington, sp, 
Mtosotis caspitosa. In the Park, Calke Abbey. A, Bloxam, mss. 

> syhatica, Matlock. Ch, Babington, q>. 
' ooBina. Frequent. Howitt, cat, 

Datuea Stramonium, Amongst rubbish. Howitt, cat, 
Atropa Belladonna, Ruins of Hardwicke Hall and Hoarstan Castle. 

Howitt, cat, 
SoLANUK nigrum, Egginton Heath. Howitt, cat, 
LiNARiA Elaine. Derbyshire. Howitt, cat, 
LiMosELLA aquaiiea. Banks of Shipley Reservoir, abundantly, in 

1835. Howitt, sp. 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — DERBY. 639 

Ltcopus europ(BU8, Ponds in Calke Park. A, Bloxanif mi». Fre- 
quent. Howitt, cat. 
MsNTHA syhestru, Derbyshire. Howitt, eat, 

' viridu, Derwent, near Breadsall. Howitt, eat. 

>  Pvlegium. (This does not grow at Piniton or Lan^ey. 

Dr. Howitt.) 
Galeobdolon Iwteum. Common. Howitt, cat. Near Calke and 

Foremark. A. Bhxam, nut. 
Galeofsis Ladanum. LathkiU Dale, on the banks of the Lathkill, 

near One Ash. Howitt, tp. 
— — versicolor. Frequent. Howitt, cat, 
Lamium macidatum. Darley in the Dale. Ch, Babington, nus. 
AciNos vulffaris. By the side of a gravel pit, leading from Repton 

Park to the Old Hays. A, Bloxam, mss. 
LATHKiBA squamaria. Near Calke Abbey. A. Bloxam, mas, Pleasley 

Park. (Mr. S. Hurt.) G. Howitt, sp. 
Primula daiUyr. Coal district. Howitt, eat. 
HoTTONiA palugtris. Swarkeston Bridge. Ch, Babington, sp. Near 

Derby. Howitt, cat. 
CaKVoromuv. polyspermum. Heanor. G, Howitt, sp. 
oUdum. A garden weed at Calke Abbey. A, Bloxam, 

sp. 
Daphne Mezereum, Matlock. Howitt, cat. 
Saoittaria sagittifoUa. Ponds at Swarkston Bridge A, Bloxam, 

mss, 
Ofhrts muteifera. Heights of Abraham. Ch. Babington, mss, 
LisTXRA cordata. Moors, Chatsworth. (Mr* Valentine.) Howitt, 

cat* 
Crocus scUivus. Dr. Howitt attaches a query (?) to this plant. 

" Breadfidl," of Turner and Dillwyn, is probably a misprint 

for « Breadsall."— Page 264.) 
Narcissus Pseudo- Narcissus. Wild in Calke Park, near the Chinese 

Pond. A. Bloxam, mss, Hathersley Woods. Howitt, 

cat. 
- bijlorus, Heanor. Howitt, cat, 
Tamus communis. Heanor. G. Howitt, sp. Hedges near Calke. 

A. Bloxam, mss, Whaley. Ch, Babington, mss. Common 

in the coal district. Howitt, eat, 
Gagea lutea. Banks of the Erewash, near Brinsley. Howitt, sp. 
CoNVALLARiA mojalis. Lathkill Dale. Howitt, eat. 
— — ^— muUiJlora. Pleasley Park. Howitt, eat, 
TuLiPA sylvestris. Banks of the Derwent. (Rev. J. Hey.) 

Howitt, cat. 
CoLCHicuM autumnale, Ingleby. Ch. Babington, sp. Meadows 

above Swarkeston Bridge. A. Bloxam, mss. Meadows 

near Derby. Howitt, eat, (Possibly these descriptions 

intend the same spot, or adjacent localities.) 
AcoRUS Calamus. Derbyshire. Howitt, cat, 
Ttpha angustifoUa. Pond between Repton Shrubs and Milton. A, 

Bloxamf mss. 



y Google 



640 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

ScHGBNus nigricans, Derbyshire. Howitt, cat, 

Eriophorum vaginatum. Near Pleasley. Howitt, cat. Combe's 
Moss. (Mr. Astley.) Ch, Babington, mss. 

Carez diwUa, Common in Calke Park. A, Bhxam, msf. 

— strigom. Near Calke Abbey. A. Bloxam, tp. 

-—^ Picudo-Cypenu, In a pond on the outside of Calke Park, 
on the south side. A. Bloxamy mss, 

Carbz binervis. One Ash. Howitt, cat, 

AxoFicuRUS agrettii. Frequent. Howitt, cat. 

PoA tiqnatica. Ponds in Calke Park. A, Bloxam, nut, 

Baouus tecaUnns. Near Hopwell Hall. Ch, Babington, mu. Fre- 
quent in com fields. Howitt, cat. 

AvvsfAfatua, Heanor. Howitt, cat, 

Elymus europ(BU8. Pleasley Park. Howitt, cat. 

Bbachtfodiitm pinnatwn. Derbyshire. Howitt, cat. 



XLV. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE. 



With a liberality which would not find many imitators, and could 
not reasonably be expected to do so, Dr. Howitt several months ago 
forwarded to me the earlier sheets of his Flora of Nottinghamshire ; 
giving fiill permission to make any use of their contents in this Supple- 
ment. Yet I must confess that some reluctance is felt to the copjring of 
so much from an unpublished, or simultaneously published, work; even 
though it is little likely that the present volume can materially interfere 
with Dr. Howitt*s Flora, though to some extent it may do so, a 
principal foundation of such a compilation being the selection, from 
local Floras, of those portions which are most interesting or useful to 
strangers in the districts. In my former volume, the list of Notts' 
plants was mainly drawn up from a printed catalogue, checked for this 
county by Mr. Cooper, and a large supply of specimens. It was also 
mentioned in the << Corrections, etc." that a MS. Flora, which Mr. 
Cooper had been so kind to lend me, had come too late for use. I am 
sorry to say that there have been some awkward mistakes about these 
data, the specimens having been given to Mr. Cooper's care, by Dr. 
Howitt, who intended them for my use. This I was not informed of, 
as it seems that Mr. Cooper erroneously conceived Dr. Howitt to be 
unwilling to have his name mentioned as the authority for them. The 
checked catalogue and the MS. Flora had also been both made or 
drawn up partly from the MSS. of Dr. Howitt ; a circumstance of 
which I was equally ignorant at that time. Had I been then aware 
that Mr. Cooper was dmost a stranger in the county, and had enjoyed 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — NOTTS. 641 

few opportunities of botanizing there, it would certainly have been 
stated that the plants were not introduced into the list on the personal 
authority of that gentleman, although it was mentioned in the Intro- 
ductory Observations, page 5, that "sp," only indicated a specimen to 
have been received from the person to whose name it was added, and 
not that the specimen had been in every case gathered by the individual 
named. Still, throughout the volumes, as often as the donor intimated 
that his specimens had been received from another party, the name of 
the latter has almost invariably been mentioned, and usually distin- 
guished by being printed (parenthetically) in the ordinary Roman 
letters instead of ttcdtc8t and the same course was taken with the ** m$s.** 
notes. My impression was that Mr. Cooper sent the specimens tq be 
exchanged for those of other species which were denderata to him. 
In so iar as the first volume of this work is concerned, the correction 
is to be made by a memorandum indicating that Mr. Cooper derived 
his specimens of the plants of the county, chiefly from Dr. Howitt. 
Here, however, the list is almost entirely recopied from Dr. Howitt*8 
Flora (^Nott.)i that in the former volume being scarcely of any 
assistance to collectors, from the want of specified stations. Such 
stations as have not been recently verified, within the knowledge of 
Dr. Howitt, are distinguished by having the authority (Ordoyno or 
Deering) added. There is yet another circumstance connected with 
Mr. Cooper's Catalogue to which it is requisite particularly to allude, 
because it has caused the introduction of plants into the Nottingham- 
shire list, in my former volume, which appear to have an uncertain 
claim to be named as natives of the county, being wholly unnoticed by 
Dr. Howitt. They are the following : — Stellaria nemorum, Aren- 
aria vema, Cerastium tetrandrum. Althaea officinalis, Geranium 
rotundifolium, Trifolium ochroleucum, T. subterraneum, Lotus an- 
gustissimus, Scleranthus perennis, Lonicera Caprifiolium, Galium 
pusillum, G. erectum, Senecio viscosus, Mentha viridis, M. dtrata, 
M. gentilis, Teucrium Chanuedrys, Salix arenaria, and Potampgeton 
rufescens. Several of these are such plants as we might have expected 
to find in this part of England; others are unlikely. In Mr. 
Cooper's MSS. Flora, before mentioned, these are all omitted, except 
Althaea officinalis, Mentha viridis, M. citrata, Salix arenaria, and 
Potamogeton rufescens. 



Clxmatm Vxtdlba, Here and there in hedges (Deering). Nott. 
Mtosurus minimtu. On the bank of a field between Radford and 

Wollaton ; Coddington, and Upton, near Southwell ; Nor- 

manton. Nott. 
Ranunculus parviflortu. Colwick Wood; Clifton Lane, by the 

road side. Nott, 
HxLLBBoaus viridis. Grives Wood. Nott. 
Delphinium Contdida. Nottingham Park ; Trent-side near Wilford. 

Nott. 



y Google 



64f2 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CpETDAUs btdboscu In an old quarry at Mansfield ; near Annesley 
Church. Nott. 

Nastu&tium aylvestre. Very common on the banks of the Trent, and 
not unfirequent elsewhere. Nott. 

TuaKins glabra. Field between Radford and Lenton; Lenton; 
Bestwood Park ; near Bulwell and Cuckney. Nott. 

Cardamins impatiens. Banks of the Cromford Canal> near Brinsley 
and Langley Mill. NoU. 

amara. Hop grounds on the Grete, Southwell; near 
Mansfield ; in many places on the Trent, from the junction 
of the Erewash down to Nottingham. Nott. 

CocHLEAKiA officinalis. Walls at WoUaton (Deering); Kirkby 
(Ordoyno). Nott. 

TzESDALiA nudtcaidis. Very common throughout the sand district 
Nott. 

Hesperis tnatronalis, Colwick Park ; Wilderness at Colwick ; CUf* 
ton Hill. NoU. 

Camslika sativa. Banks of the Trent opposite Colwick. Nott. 

Lepidium Smithii. West Leake. Nott. 

Reseda lutea. Bulwell; near Pleasley; Nottingham Meadows; 
near Wilford Boat Nott. 
fruticulosof (or alba.) Nottingham Castle. Ch. Babirngton, 
sp. (Probably planted or so^m there, as not being men- 
tionpd by Howitt. The same remark will apply to Hype- 
ricum Androssemum. Botanists should be cautious of sending 
specimens from doubtful places, without explanation^ as if 
really wild ones.) 

Drosera hngifdlia. Stapleford Moor. Nott. 

Viola Ivtea. Bramcote. Nott. 

DiANTHus dekoides. Beeston Lane ; Nottingham Park, and Forest, 
in several places. Nott. 

Caryophyttus. Rufford. Nott. 

SiLBNs anglica. Frequent near Mansfield ; Farnsfield and Oxton 
Forests. Nott. 
' nutans. Nottingham Castle. Ch. Bdbington, sp. Bocks in 

Nottingham Park; rock at Sneinton Hermitage. NotL 
'< Since the burning of Nottingham Castle, the Catchfly has 
spread itself nearly over the whole of the ruins.** 

— noctijlora. Between Mansfield and Sutton-in-Ashfield; fields 

near Bilborougb. Nott. 
McEMCHiA erecta. Abundant in the neighbourhood of Nottingham. 

Nott. 
Cerastium arvense. Radford; Farnsfield; Nottingham Park and 

Forest; Bulwell; Mansfield. Nott. 
Radiola miUegrana. Stapleford Moor ; about Farnsfield and OUer- 

ton. Nott. 
TiLiA parvifolia. Frequent. Nott. 

Htpsricum AndroscBtnum. Nottingham Castle. Ch. Babington, «p. 
  montanum. Between Bulwell and Nuthall, in seTeral 

places ; Mapperley Hills. Nott. 



yGooQle 



gL 



SiUPPLEMENT — NOTTS. S^S 

Hypericum dubium. On the road-side from Nottingham to £dwaltoQ« 

near West Bridgford. Nott. 
Geraniuk p?uBum, The Rev. G. Crabbe, in B. G., is the only au- 
thority for this species in Nottinghamshire. Probably a 
stray plant from some garden might hare been seen by 

him. 

sanguineum, Creswell Crags. NotL 

Erodium maritimum. Near Sherwood Hall, on the margin of the 

Forest, where it covers a bank of sand for more than a mile. 

G. Howiit, sp. Near the Rock Houses, Mansfield. Nott. 

  moschcUum, Nottingham Lamma^ Fidds. Noti. 
Rhamnus catharticus. Frequent. Nott. 
— — Frangula, Frequent in the magnesian limestone district. 

NoU. 
Ulex nanus. Mansfield Forest, near Fountain Dale; Wollaton 

Old Pits (Deering) ; Potter's Hill, and fields near Thurlby 

Moors (Ordoyno). Nott, 
Ononis spinosa. Frequent. Nott. 
Astragalus glycyphylhs. Woods near Colwick, and Clifton ; Beeston 

Lane, and Shaw's Lane, near Nottingham; in several places 

near Newark ( Ordoyno). Nott. 
Lotus tenuis. In fields between Gotham and West Leake. NotL 
Medicago saHva. Mansfield and Hoveringham ( Ordoyno) ; in plant- 

ations on Sutton Forest^ Nott. 
— — — maculata. Common in the neighbourhood of Nottingham. 

Nott. 
ViciA anffustifoUa. In many parts of Nottingham Park, and on the 

Race Course. Nott. 
lathyroides. Nottingham Park and in several parts of the Bow- 
ling Alley Fields. Nott. 
LtATHYJLVS sylvestris. Col wick Park pales (Deering); near the Toll 

Bar onDebdon Hill, between Kelham and Caunton ; between 

Clifton and Barton, by the road-side ; on Mapperly Hills. 

Nott. 
— — Nissolia. Fields on the Beacon Hill, Newai-k (Ordoyno). 

Nott. 
HiPFocREFis comosa. In several parts of Nottingham Park ( Deering). 

Nott. 
Onobrycbis sativa. Beacon Hill Fields, Newark ; Kirkby Hard- 
wick ; Bulwell Lime Quarries, near the Wood HaU. Nott. 
Prunus Pcuius. Norwood Park ; Colwick Woods. Nott. 
Fragaria elaiior. Woods near Pleasley. Nott, 
PoTENTiLLA ar^en/ea. Quonce Close, Newark; Famtfield; Bram- 

oote ; Chilwell ; Nottingham Park ; and Larkdale. Nott. 
CoaiAKVU palustre. Rather frequenu Nott. 
Sanouisorba officinalis. Frequent. Nott. 
Rosa spinosissima. In many places. Nott. 

viUosa. Bramcote Moor ; near Wollaton and Aq>ley. Nott. 

— — tomentosa, (and scabriuscula). Frequent. Nott. 

Rosa micrantha. In an old stone quarry, near Bulwell Wood HaU. Nott. 



yGooQle 



gL 



64?1f THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Rosa inodora (Borreri). Common. Nott. 

canina (Forsteri and sarmentacea). Common. Nott, 
Pyrus communis. Observed by Ordoyno alone. iVbtt. 

torminalis, Colwick Park ; near Mapperley Hills. NotL 

Epilobium roseum. Frequent in the vicinity of Nottingham ; and in 

many places in die Trent Vale. NotL 
MraiOPHTLLUM verticiUatum, Trent below Colwick (Deering) ; in 

a pool in Nottingham Meadows; plentifiiUy. NotL 
Ceratophtllum demersum. Nottingham Meadows. Nott, 
Ltthrum hyssopifdlium. Not now found in the station given in B. G. 

from Deering. 
Bryonia dioica. Common. Nott, 
HsRNiARiA glabra, Quonce Close, near Newark ; and sandy doses 

thence toward Hawton. (Ordoyno). Nott, 
SsnuH dasyphyUum. Walls of Kirkby Church (Ordoyno). NotL 

glaucum. Near Nottingham (Deering). Nott. 
RiBES rubrum. Not frequent. Nott. 
— «-^ cdpinum. Felley Mill, near Annesley. Nott, 

- nigrum. By the Leen side at Basford, and Radford (Deering) ; 

Papplewick Bridge, on the road to Linby (Ordoyno); 

Drury's Dam ; Carbanks Wood, and in other places near 

Mansfield. Nott 
Chrysosplenium aUemifolium. Bottom of Epperstone Wood ; Neiur 

Carbanks Field ; Fountain Dale, and bogs near Famsfield. 

NotL 
ToRiLis infesta. Gamston Moor ; between Gotham and West Leake» 

on the lias limestone. NotL 
Pastinaca sativa, Morton, near Southwell. G» Howitt, sp. ** Prin- 
cipally in the clay and lias limestone districts. I have not 

observed it in the sand or magnesian limestone district ; and 

in only one station in the coal formation." Nott, 
Peuceoakum pidustre. By the side of a small stream between Mans- 
field Wood House and Park Hall. NotL 
A.VGZhicA Archangelica, **Wellow Park, undoubtedly indigenous.** 

NotL (The words are quoted from Mr. Jowett.) 
SiLAVS pratensit. Rather frequent. Nott. 
F(ENicuLUM mdgare, Nottingham Castle rock. NoU. and Ch. Bab- 

ington^ sp. 
(Enanthe pimpinelloides, Bulwell and Morton ; Famsfield Car, and 

Clifton Cow-pasture. Nott. 
petusedanifolia. Halam Bottoms and Southwell. Nott, 

(Erase *<«p.** The specimen probably belongs to (£. pirn- 

pinelloides. — Page 266.) 
— — ^— Phellandrium. In many parts of the Trent Vale ; banks 

of the Erewash, below Eastwood. Nott. 
BuPLsuRUM rotundifdium. Corn fields near Creswell Crags. NotL 
PiMPiKELLA magna. Frequent in the coal and red clay districts ; 

rather rare elsewhere. NotL 
SiuH latifilium. Old Trent ditches, near Averham Meadows (Or- 

doyno) ; banks of the Grete, near Southwell. Nott, 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — NOTTS. 645 

Cabum Carta, Newark Meadows (Ordoyno); field between Huck- 
nall-under-Huthwaite and Whiteborough, by the foot road ; 
Nottingham Meadows, and near the Toll Bar, on the Forest. 
Nott. 
SisoK Amomum. Newark and Southwell; Green Hill, Colwick; 
between Gedling and Bulcote ; near East Leake and Bunny. 
Nott. 
Petboseunum 8(xHvum, On the rocks in Nottingham Park. Nott. 
Avivn graveoUns. Costock (Deering); Lenton ; Kirklington Toll 
Bar; Halam Cross; Thurgarton; Lowdham; banks of the 
Leen, near Nottingham ; near the Mill in the Hole, Basford. 
Nott. 
CicuTA virosa. Formerly found in the Fish Pond, Nottingham Park, 
the site of which is now occupied by gardens, and the plant 
eradicated ; also in the Leen, opposite the Rock Holes, but 
sought in vain for ten or twelve years past. Nott, 
Anthbiscus Cerefolium. Trent side near Clifton ; Nuthall. Nott. 
Myrrhis odorata. Near Bramcote. Nott, (Erase << «p." — Page 

267.) 
Smybnium Olusatrum, Nottingham Castle Rock. Nott. 
VlBUBNUM Lantana, Colwick. Nott, 
ViscuM aSmm, Frequent on the apple and pear, in many parts of the 

county. Nott. 
Galium tricome. In a com field between Gotham and West Leake. 
Nott. (This is G. saccharatum of Dr. Howitt's Flora; 
and Mr. Cooper's specimen of G. saccharatum, mentioned 
on page 267 of the present work, also proves to be G. tri- 
come.) 
Fedia dentata. Mansfield; Cinder Hill, Bulwdl and OUerton. 

Nott, 
DirsACVs pilosut. Pleasley Forge; Flintham Wood, Epperstone 

Wood ; Thurgarton ; Beauvale Abbey. Nott. 
HrrocncEKis glabra, Oxton Forest (Ordoyno.) Nott, 
HiEBACiUM syhaticum. Frequent. Nott. 
^1 umbeHatum, Frequent. Nott, 

paludosum. In a boggy field between Annesley and 
Annesley Woodhouse. Nott. 
Cbspis biennis. Halam Hill, and Oxton Hill. (Ordoyno.) Nott. 
Pbenahthbs muralis. Basford Church ; Southwell ; Coddington : 
between Blyth and Bawtry ; Mansfield ; Edingley ; Felley 
Mill ; Nuthall. Nott. 
Lactuca saligna. In the hollow way at Carleton. (Pultency. 
Nott. (It appears that neither this station, nor the one 
mentioned on page 267, has been verified by the- present 
botanists of the county.) 
——— virom. By the Trent at Cliflon, and Colwick Saw-yard ; 
Southwell, Coddington, and between Bl^th and Bawtry. 
Nott. 
SoNCHUs palusiris, Eddingley Moor ; Edingley Mill Dam. Nott. 
Cnicus acaulis. . On Sherwood Forest, between Budby and Ollerton ; 
between Darlton and Great Markham. Nott, 

VOL. IL M 



y Google 



64f6 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Csicus pratetuis. In the Moon Meadows, near Clifton Cow-pas* 
tures. Nott, 

eriophorus, Normanton, Kirklington, Debdon Hill Toll 

Bar, Caunton, and High-cross HUl, near Thurgarton ; be- 
tween Bulwell and Nuthall, and Broxtowe. Nott. 

Onopobdum Acanthium. Frequent in the vicinity of Nottingham. Nott. 

Gnaphalium dioicum. On Mansfield Forest, near the gate leading 
off the forest to Blidworth. Nott. 

CoNTZA squarroscu Pleasley (Deering); in a lane leading from 
Mansfield Woodhouse to Mansfield Forest. Nott, 

£bi6e&on (icris* Frequent in the magnesian limestone and sand dis- 
trict. Nott, 

Sevecio MtrocentciM. Banks of Greasley Resenroir. Nott. (See 
Convallaria multiflora.) 

Akthemis nobzUs, Bestwood Park ; in several places near Notting- 
ham. Nott. 

Campanula patula, Wellow Park, near OUerton. Nott. 

«— -^^- Rapunculus. Plantation at Coddington. ( Ordoyno. ) iVbtt. 

— I kUifolia. Rather frequent in the coal and red-clay dis- 

tricts, rare elsewhere. Nott. 

— ^— — rapunculoides. A troublesome weed in several places 
near Nottingham. Nott. 

-*— — — Trtzchelitan. Pleasley Wood, on the magnesian lime- 
stone, and woods near West Leake. Nott. 
' glomercOa. Mansfield; Newark Meadows; Trowell 



Moor ; near Annesley. Nott. 

Vaccinium Fitis-Idaa. In bogs on the Rainworth ; particularly 
abundant near Fountain Dale ; Papplewick Forest. Nott. 

-^— Oxycoceus, Oxton Bottoms. Nott.' 

Pyrola minor. In a wood near the Welbeck Toll Bar. NatL 

MovoTROPA Hypopityi. Oak plantations near OUerton. Nott. 

Gentiana Pneumonanthe. Langford and Su^leford Moors ; Hough- 
ton Park, near Tuxford. Nott. 

CHLoaA perfdiata. Most frequent in the magnesian limestone dis- 
trict. Nott. 

ViLLARSiA nymphteoides. In the Lake at Welbeck. Nott. 

CuscuTA Epithymum. About Southwell. Nott. 

Anchusa sempervirens. Near OUerton ; Mansfield Quarries, and in 
an old quarry at Colwick. Nott, 

Mtosotis repens. Pleasly, Rainworth, and Oxton bogs. Nott^ 

  sylvatica. Clifton Grove, abundantly. Nott. 

— — cottina. Frequent in the sand district. Nott. 

Verbascum Lychnitvt, (Not verified in the locality of Clifton. ) 

^. - pulverulentum. (Not verified at Wollaton HaU and Not- 

tingham. ) 

-m.m, nigrum. Ruff>rd, Wollaton, Mansfield, and near CHpstone 

Water; Annesley; OUerton. Nott. 

SoLANuH nigrum. Common in the vicinity of Nottingham. Nott. 

Atbopa Belladonna. Gypsum Cliff, at Clifton ; stone quarries at 
Mansfield, and one or two other stations in the neighbour- 
hood of Cuckney Church-yard Close. Nott. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — NOTTS. 647 

Rhinanthus major. Lane leading to Stapleford Moor. Nott. 

LiNARiA spuria. Clifton Hill, (Deering) ; West Leake. Nott. 

— — Elatine* Rather frequent. Nott, 

LiMoSELLA aquoHca. In gravel pits near Kirklington Mill. Nott. 

Lycopus europretM. Rather frequent. Nott, 

Leonurus Cardmea, Basford ; Lenton ; Broxtowe ; Mansfield ; near 
Newark ; Greasley, near the Toll Bar. Nott. 

Mentha sylvestris, Radford ; Grete Bridge, Southwell ; Trent 
Ditches, Newark ; Mansfield Bath ; Thurgarton ; Beau- 
vale Abbey. Nott, 

— rotundifoUa, Mansfield Bath (Deering); Beauvale Abbev. 
Nott. 

piperita. Banks of the Grete, near the Water Mill, South- 
well; Bleasby. Nott, 

— — rubra. Bleasby. Nott, 

gracilis. Rather common. Nott, 



' Pulegium. Gunthorpe; Wellow Green; Kirklington Water 

Mill. Nott, 
Galeobdolon luteum. Very common. Nott, 
Galeofsis Ladanum, West Leake, on the lias limestone. Nott, 
viUosa, Newark; Farnsfield ; Balderton; Barnby; Cod- 

dington ; near Annesley ; Oxton Forest. Nott. 

• versicdor. Rather frequent. Nott. 
AciNOS vulgaris. Common, on the magnesian limestone. Nott. 
Calamintha officinalis. Basford ; Nottingham Park ; North Col- 

lingham ; between Nor^ and South Muskham ; Morton ; 

Papplewick ; Harlow Wood. Nott 

Nepeta, In fields about Coddington. Nott. 

Lathrjba squamaria, Newstead ; Epperstone ; Bulwell ; Harlow 

Wood, near Mansfield. Nott. 
Utricularia minor. Edingley Moor. (Ordoyno.) Nott, 
Cyclamen JiedercBfoUum? (The station mentioned on page 269 does 

not appear to be confirmed by present botanists. ) 
Primula datior. Oxton Toll Bar ; Epperstof .8 Wood ; Bulwell ; 

near Eastwood ; Greasley. Nott. 
HoTTONLA palustris. Frequent in the Trent Vale. Nott. 
Anagallis c€Brulea, Clifton. Nott 
Littorella lacustris. Oxton bogs; banks i Greasley Reservoir. 

Nott. 
Chsnopodium murale. Common in the vicinity of Nottingham ; not 

frequent in other parts of the count/. Nott. 
- olidum, Halam ; Nottingham Lammas Fields ; between 

Radford Forest and the Church. Nott. 
—————— polyspermum, Radford ; Eastwood and Langley Mill. 

Nott. 
Beta maritima. About Nottingham, according to the older bota- 
nists, but not found there now. 
Polygonum minus. Ditches in the meadows, between Nottingham 

and Lenton, frequent. Nott, 
— — — Fagopyrum, Sherwood Forest, &c &c. Nott, (Doubt- 
less introduced.) 

M 8 



y Google 



648 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

RuBfKX maritimus. Clifton Cow-pastures. NoU, 

puleher, Nottingham Park. G, Howitt, tp. Near Radford 

Church. Nott. 
EuPHOEBiA amygdaloides, Colwick Wood. (Deering.) NotL 
Mbrcuaialis annua, Southwell ; Newark ; I mammas Fields, near 

Shaw*s Lane, Nottingham. Nott, 
Buxus sempervirens. No station is given by Dr. Howitt, and the 

plant appears to be introduced on the sole authority of 

Ordoyno. 
Empitbum nigrwn, Sherwood Forest, near Mansfield ; in a fir 

plantation two miles from Mansfield; Fountain Dale; 

Ozton Bogs. Nott, Nottingham Meadows. G, Howitt, 

sp, 
Ulmus suberosa. Frequent near Nottingham. Nott, 
— carpinifcUa, Red HiD ; near Famsfield. Nott. 
»— — « gkinra. Bramcote. Nott, 
Castanxa vulgaris. Very common. Nott. 
Q0ERCUS sesHHJhra, Clifton Grove. G, HowOt, tp, Hentiftil near 

Clifton. Nott. 
Carpinus Betulus, Frequent. Nott, 
PopuLus cattescens. Frequent. Nott, 
Saux HeKx, Frequent. Nott, 

  lAirnbertiana, Oxton Bogs. Nott, 

rubra. Frequent at Wilford, and Clifton. Nott. 

iriandra. Frequent. Nott, 

amygdaUna, Clifton. Nott, 

pentandra. Frequent. Nott, 

^_ decipiens. Near Nottingham. Nott, 

RuaseHana, Common. Nott. 

"- vitdUna. Common. Nott, 

petiolaris. Saw-yard in Colwick Park. Nott. 

glauca, Basford Scottum ; Bui well Bogs. Nott. ( Is there 

not some mistake about this?) 
— ^ Smiihiana, Frequent. Nott, 

cinerea. Rather common. Nott. 

• aquatica, Ozton Bogs ; not uncommon in many parts of the 

county. Nott. 

okifolia. Oxton Bogs. Nott. 

. tphacdata, Bulwell Bog. ( Is this correct ?) 

— — cotinifolia. Near Clipstone and Mansfield Woodhouae. 

Nott, 
PiNUS gglvestris. Naturalised on Mansfield Forest Nott, 
Htdbocharis Morgw-ramB. Beeston ; Lenton ; Gamston ; near 

Kelham Bridge (Ordoyno) ; Nottingham Meadows, plenti- 
ful : — all in the Trent Vale. Nott, 
SiRATioTEs abides. Clay-pits, Stoke Park, near Newton (Ordoyno) ; 

in the moat at Strelley. Nott, 
SAorrTARiA sagittifoUa, Common Nott, 
Orchis ttf^tiZota. Near Bulwell; fields between Sutton^in-Ashfield 

and Kirkby Hardwick. Nott, (Other places are men- 
tioned by Ordoyno. ) 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — NOTTS. 649 

Orchis hircina. (Not to be found in the places mentioned on page 
270.) 

• pyramidaUi, Frequent in the magnesian limestone and red- 

clay districts. Nott, 

Ophrvs apifera. In the magnesian and lias limestone districts, rare ; 
Bulwell and Mansfield lime-quarries ; Kirkby Hardwick ; 
quarry near Bulwell Wood Hall; plantations near West 
Leake. Nott. 

Neottia «ptraH«. Colwick (Pultney); recently found in the north 
of the county. Nott, 

Epipactis grandijUmu Woods between Newstead and Linby. Nott, 

— ^— ermfoUa. Near Welbeck, Nott, 

Ceocus vemus. Near the Larkdale Fields ; Nottingham Meadows. 
Nott. 

— ntuUJhrus. Nottingham Meadows ; fields near St. Ann's Well ; 
Nottingham Park ; in several fields between Fox Lane and 
Mapperley HiUs. Nott, 

Galanthus mvalis. Hoveringham ; first field below Wilford Boat. 
NoU. 

Narcissus Pseudo-Naroissus, Thicket near Oxton Toll Bar. (Or- 
doyno.) Nott, 

Tamus commtmtf. Frequent. Nott. 

Rnscns aculeatus. Between Nottingham and Radford. Nott, 

CoKVAiLARiA mojoKs, ** lu the great wood about a mile on the right 
from Potter's Hill, going from Newark on the Lincoln 
Road ; and in a valley at Cockglade, near Ollerton, plenti- 
fuUy." Nott, 

~ mtdtyhn. Pleasley Park. Nott, I have heard a few 

days ago, from Mr. Eddison, that Convallaria multiflora 
and Senecio saracenicus both grow at CressweU Crags, in 
the north of the county. Dr. Howitt, Ire. 

Aluum dUraeum, Sheep-wash Lane near Mansfield; Mansfield 
Woodhouse; Wood between Bulwell and Nuthall; near 
Bobber's Mill ; in Nottingham Park. Nott, 

Gaoea hUea. Pleasley Wood ; banks of the Erewash, near Brinsley 
LimekOns. Nott, 

Orkithogalum MnAeBatum. Between Kirkby and Kirkby Hard- 
wick ; Nottingham Meadows ; fields near Larkdale. Nott, 

— . nutanB. Nottingham Meadows. Nott. 

Tulipa sylvestris, Nottingham Meadows. Nott. 

CoLCHicuM auiumnale. Newark ; Holme Meadows, beyond Win- 
thorpe, near the river ; Winkbum ; Mansfield ; near Sand- 
beck. Nott. 

Typha angtutifdia. Wollaton ; Bulwell ; between Bulwell and 
Papplewick ; near Eastwood ; King's Meadows, near Not- 
tingham. Nott, 

Sparganium natans. Ponds at Kirkby Hardwick.' Nott, 

AcoRUS Calamus, In many places on the banks of the Trent, from 
Barton to Colwick ; banks of the Erewash, near Eastwood ; 
Papplewick Forest. Nott. 

PoTAMOGETON zosterofoUus. Ditch in Lenton Lane. Nott. 
M 3 



yGooQle 



S^^ 



650 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Lemna tristUea, Frequent. Nott. 

— gibba. Frequent. Nott. 

pdyrhiza^ Very common. Nott, 

J UNCUS obtusiflorua. Common. Nott, 

Bltsmus compressiis,. Southwell ; Bulwell Bogs ; Sutton-in-Asb* 
field; Kirkby Hardwick ; Fountain Dale Bogs. Nott. 

ScH(£Nus nigricans, Basford Soottum ; Edingley Moor ; Bulwell 
and Papplewick Forests ; Pleasley and Fountain Dale Bogs. 
Nott, 

'EhEocaxKis mtdticaidis. Bogs near Kirkby Hardwick. Nott, 

Eriofhorum vaginaJtunu Common. Nott, 

pubescens. Between Newstead and Linby; Sti^leford 

Moor. Nott, 

Carex intermedia. Frequent. Nott, 

tereiiusctda. Near the Bleak Hills, Mansfield. Nott, 

digitata, Pleasley Wood, on the magnesian limestone. Nott. 

Psevdo- Cyperus, Banks of the Erewash, near Toton. Noit. 

stricta. Rather frequent. Nott, 

LoLiuM temtdentum. Near SouthweU. Nott, (The specimen, from 
Mr. Cooper, belongs to L. aryense» if worth while to make 
a distinction between them. — Page 271.) 

HoRDEUM pratense, Nottingham Meadows. G, Howitt, jp. Fre- 
quent. Nott, 

Elymus europcBus, Pleasley Park and Wood; woods near Felky 
Mill. Nott. 

Brachtpodium pinnatum. Rather frequent on the magnesian lime- 
stone. Nott, 

Alopecurus agrestia. Frequent. Nott, 

Calamagrostis Epigefos, Between Bulwell and Nuthall. Nott, 

lanceoUxta. By the side of the bridle road, leading 

from Radky to Epperstone Woods (Ordoyno); in a cop- 
pice between Bulwell and Bulwell Hall. Nott, 

Agrostis Spica-venti. About Nottingham. (Ray.) Nott. 

Me Lie a nutans. Pleasley Wood. Nott, 

AiRA canescens. Near Nottingham. (Deering.) Nott, 

AvEt! A fatua. Near Southwell. Nott, 

strigosa. Near West Leake. Nott, 

B ROM us secalinus, Southwell ; West Leake. Nott. 

racemostis. Frequent in the Trent Vale. Nott. 

arvensis. Fields above Mapperley Place. Nott. 

Festuca bromoides. Common. Nott. 

PoA aquatica. Very common. Nott* 

distans. Frequent on the' banks of the Leen from Nottingham 

to Bulwell. Nott. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — LINCOLN. 



651 



XL VI. LINCOLNSHIRE. 



Dr. Howitt has favoured me with the following short list of plants 
** observed near Friestone, in 1826." The " fp." indicates a specimen 
from Dr. Howitt. 



Arenaria peploides, «p. 
— marina, ap. 
Althaea officinalis, sp, 
Comarum palustre. 
Apium graveolens. 
Sium latifolium, sp. 
CEnanthe Phellandrium. 
Artemisia maritima, «p. 
— — gallica. 
Aster Tripolium, sp, 
Chlora perfoHata, sp. 



Galeopsis versicolor. 
Statice Limonium *, sp. 
Salicomia herbacea, sp. 
Salsola Kali, sp. 
Chenopodium maritimum, sp. 
Atriplex portulacoides, sp. 
— — littoralis, sp. 
Sparganium natans. 
Hordeum maritimum, sp. 
RottboUia incurvata, «p. 
Spartina stricta, sp. 



XLVII. YORKSHIRE. 



Thalictrum minus. Malham Cove. Ch. Bahington, sp. On Ingle- 
borough. /. E. Leefet mss. 

Trollius europ<Bus, Leeds. H, Denny, mss, 

Helleborus viridis. Near Brompton. /. Ward, sp, Marske, near 
Richmond. /. E. Leefe, sp. In a meadow near Wharfe ; 
in a plantation near Little Bank, two miles from Settle. 
/. Tatham, mss. Abundantly in the locality for Cypripe- 
dium, near Helmsley. Comp. 

AcTJRA spicata. Ingleborough Hill. (T. Howson.) J, Taiham, sp. 
I foimd it twenty years ago in Liley Wood, on the road to 
Barnsley (not Barnsby) from Halifax. R. Leyland, mss, 

Epimemum alpinum. (« This never did grow in Bingley Woods. I 
have seen it somewhere asserted that a plant was introduced 
there, for the purpose of imposing on the late Dr. Richard- 
son. " Mr, Leyland, — Page 275. ) 

Meconopsis cambrica. Near the vSlage of Feizor, four miles from 
Settle. /. Tatham, sp, 

* Statice reticulata sought without tuccess, by Dr. Howitt 

M 4 



y Google 



652 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

CoRTDALis daviculata. In the lane from Richmond to Skeeby. J. 
Wardf ms8. 

Draba incana. Very abundant close to Settle, and on all the adja- 
cent hills of limestone. /. Tathanh mss, 

muraJii. Malham Cove. /. Tathamj sp, Kilnsay Crag. J. 

Ward, sp. 

HuTCHiNsiA petrasa. Near Thoralby, Wensleydale. /. Ward, sp. 

Teesdalia midicatdis. Leeds. H. Denny, mss, 

Iberis amara. (Probably an outcast from a garden, and washed 
down by the river. Mr. John Tatham. — Page 277.) 

Thlaspi alpestre. Malham, near the Cove. /. fFard, sp. 

• perfoliatum. (Never found at the place mentioned, which 
should be written Giggleswick, not Grislewick. M-. Jokn 
Tatham. — Page 276.) 

Cakils mariiima. Sand hiUs at Redcar. /. E. Leefe, mss. 

Cakdamine amarcu In a copse by the Ouse, at Nunmonckton Ferry. 
/. E. Leefe, mss. 

impatiens. Crow-nest Wood, near Settle. /. Tatham^ sp. 

Nasturtium sylvestre. Leeds. H. Denny, mss. 

Brassica campestris. Banks of Gilling Beck, Richmond. J. Ward, 
mss. 

Viola Itdea. Training Ground and Race Ground, Richmond. J. 
Ward, mss. {Not in the Black Plantation. Attermire is 
intended by Attermine. — Page 277. ) 

Drosera anglica. Lakeby Car, near Topclifie ; the station at Thirsk 
is the same. /. E. Leefe, mss. ( Erase ." sp. " — Page 277. ) 
longifolia (The locsdity "on the red marl near Rich- 
mond" is to be expunged. — Page 277.) 

DiANTHus CaryophyUus. Walls of Fountains Abbey, near Ripon. J. 
Ward, mss. 

SiLENE maritima. (Not in Wensleydale. Mr. Ward. — Page 277.) 

noctiflora. The station at Thirsk is in com fields between 

Sowerby and Thirkleby. /. E, Leefe, mss. 

Spergula sttbtdatal Leeds. £r. Denny, mss, 

Stellaria nemorum. Whitfell Gill, Askrigg. /. Ward, mss. 

ALTHiBA officinalis. Leeds. H. Denny, mss. 

TiLiA grandifdia. Near Burton in Bishop-dale. R. B. Bowman, sp. 
Clink Bank, Richmond, truly wild. /. Ward, sp. 

Geranium nodosum. Leeds. H. Denny, mss. (** Certainly not a 
native of this, nor do I know any such place as Waterham.*' 
Mr. Leyland. The specimen mentioned is a small fragment 
of the plant, but I entertain scarcely any doubt as to the 
species ; and the name on the ticket appears to be " Water- 
ham," though written rather indistinctly. — Page 278.) 

pyrenaicum. Fields behind the village of Sowerby, near 

Thirsk. /. E. Leefe, sp. 

sanffuineum. Kelcoe Wood, near Settle. /. Tatham, sp. 

Ulex namis. Gatherby Moor, near Richmond. /. Ward, mss. 

Ononis spinosa. Skeeby, near Richmond; also near Halnaby Hall. 
J. Ward, mss. 

Astragalus glycyphyUos. By the Ure at Tanfield. J. E. Leefe, mss. 



yGooQle 



gl 



SUPPLEMENT — YORK. 653 

HiPfocRKPis comosa. Rocks above Settle. /. Tathamf sp. Cronkley 
Fell. Comp, Gordale Scar; Kilnsay Crag. /. Ward, 
mss. 

Orobus sylvaHcus, (O. tuberosus vas the name intended to have 
been marked by Mr. Ward. — Page 280.) 

Prunus Padus, Leeds. H, Denny, mss, 

PoTENTiLLA vema. Kilnsay Crag; Gordale Scar. J, Ward, sp. 

alpestris. Rocks near the Calamine Mine, above Settle. 

/. Tatham, sp. 

CoMARUM palustre, Cockit Moss, Austwick Moss, near Settle. /. 
Tatham^ sp, 

Alchbiixlla alpina, (Ray will be the only authority for this 
plant, in York^ire, the station mentioned being in West- 
moreland. — Page 281.) 

RosA spinosissima. Common on the road-side between Burlington 
and Scarborough. A, Bloxam, mss. Crow-nest Wood, near 
Settle. /. Ta^m, sp, Leeds. H, Denny, mss. Road- 
side between Thirsk and the Tontine. /. E. Leefe, mss. 

Sabini (Doniana). Helk's Wood, near Ingleton. /. Tatham, 

•p. At the top of a woody bank, a little above Croft, on 
Uie Yorkshire side of the ravine. Ccmp. 

— — tomentosa. Very common about Settle. /. Tatham, sp. Sand- 
beck, near Richmond (the variety scabriuscula. ) J. Ward, 
mss. 

• viUosa. Everywhere about Settle. /. TcUham, sp. Leeds. H. 

Denny, mss, 

mierantha. Leeds. H, Denny, mss. 

^>» dumetorum. Between Settle Bridge and Stackhouse, in the 

hedge. /. Tatham, sp, 
sarmentacea. The commonest rose we have. /. Tatham, sp. 

• Forsteri. Road -side between Settle and Giggleswick. J. 

Tatham, sp. 
Pyrus Aria. Malham Cove. /. Ward, mss. 
(Enothbra biennis. (Ought to be expunged from the Yorkshire list. 

Mr. Leyland. -- Page 281.) 
CiRCdSA alpina. Leeds. H, Denny, mss, 
Mtriophtllum verticiBatum. Near Langton, ten nk.^es from Rich- 

' mond. J. E, Leefe, mss, 
Bryonia dioica. Near HaJnaby Hall. /. Ward, mss, 
Sedum viUosum, Near Cowside, about three miles north of Settle. 

/. Tatham, sp, ( Read « Longpreston. '* — Page 282. ) 
Rhodiola rosea. Ingleborough, 183S. J. E. Leefe, mss. 
Cotyledon Umbilicus. Wall near East Witton. (Miss E. Otter. ) 

/. E. Leefe, mss. 
Rises (dpinum. Stainforth Wood, near Settle. /. Tainam, sp. 

Clink Bank, Richmond. /. Ward, mss. In a springy 

piece of ground near Rievaulx Abbey. Comp. 
— petrcBum, Rocks above Gordale Scar ; in a field called Brakery 

Brow, about two miles from Settle. /• Tatham, mss. Not 

far from Egglestone Bridge. Comp, 
-— > spicatum. Near Richmond. /. Ward, sp, 
M 5 



yGooQle 



gL 



654 THE NEW BOTaIJIST's CttBGi 

Saxifraga ttm5rMa. Hesletine Gill, near Settle, »* truly ^d.** J. 
Tatham, sp. 

aizoides. By the brook at the foot of Ingleborough, in Chapel- 

le-Dale. /. E. Leefe, m$s. 

— hirta, Leeds. H. Denny, tnss. 

Chrtsosflenium altemifolium. Common about Settle. J. TcOkam, 
mss. 

Apium graveoUns. Marshy ground near Marske Church. J, E. 
Leefe, mss. 

PiMFiNELLA magna. In the Park at NunmoncktoA. /. E, Leefe, 
mss, 

SiuM latifoUum. Leeds. H. Denny, mss. 

SiLAus pratensis. Field between Killerby and Kirby. J. E, Leefe, 
m^s. 

Myrrhis odorata. Rose-tree Bank Wood, near Settle ; certainly wild 
and abundant about Settle. /. Tatham, mss. Abundant 
in Yorkshire, certainly wild. J. Ward, mss. By the Swale 
under Whitcliffe Scars near Richmond. /. E. Leefe, mss. 

Peucedanum Ostruthium. Near Thoralby. /• Ward, mss. 

Eryngium campestre. (MelUng is within Lancashire. Mr. Tatham. 
The station of a plant near Melling might still be within 
Yorkshire, but the word «< below " would seem to direct to 
Lancashire, if Mdling near Hornby is the place intended ; 
yet Hudson says " Melling in Yorkshire.*') 

Galium pusiUum. On most of the limestone rocks about Settle. J. 
Tatham, sp. 

— boreale. Gordale rocks, near Settle. /. Tatham, mss. Kiln- 

say Crag. /. Ward, mss. Under the Abbey Bridge, near 
Egglestone. J. E. Leefe, mss. 

Fedia eriocarpa. Marrick Park, near Richmond. /. Ward, sp. 

HiERAciuM pidmonarium. Near West Burton, Bi^op-dale. J. 
Ward, sp. 

sylvaticum. Stackhouse Borriens, near Settle. J. Tatham, 

sp. 

dentictdatum. (This should have been H. subaudum, in 

the Richmond catalogue. Mr. Ward. — Page 285. ) 

Ci^icus heterophyUus. In all moist meadows above Settle. /. Taihami, 
sp. 

Senecio saracenicus. Erroneously stated, in English Flora, to be 
found near Halifax. Mr. Leyland. (Turner and Dillwyn 
appear to have miscopied the stations, in their Yorkshire 
list, combining into one place the supposed station *<near 
Hali&x" and also the « fields about Salkeld," the latter 
really meaning Salkeld in Cumberland. Mr. Tatham con- 
firms the Settle station, in a catalogue of plants found about 
that town. — Page 286.) 

Campanula latifdia. On the margin of the brook below Giggles 
wick, near Settle, and in various other places near. /. 
Tatham, mss. In a little bank of wood, rising from the 
Ure, near a gravel pit, on the left of the road from Top- 
cliffe to Lakeby Car. Camp* 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — YORK 655 

Campakula ghmerata, Crallow Field, Richmond. J. Ward, sp, 

M hederacea. Top of Cob Clough, a quarter of a mile 
above Ripponden Church, in profusion, our only locality near 
Halifax. i2. Leyland, mss, 

Vaccinium ttliginosum, (Not found near Leeds. V. Myrtillus 

common in this part of the county. Mr, Leyland, — Page 
286.) 

— — Oxycoccos, (Not on the red marl. Mr, Ward, — Page 
287.) 

Arbutus Uva-Ursi, (Is no longer found near Heptonstall, one of 
the medical gentlemen of that neighbourhood having made 
root-and-branch work of it. Mr. Leyland, — Page 287.) 

Ptrola rotundifolia. Near Halnaby, on the Yorkshire side of the 
river, in (or near?) a strip of boggy ground, mostly covered 
with brushwood, on the leift hand of the road from Croft ; in 
Castle Eden Dean, chiefly in the northern branch. Comp, 

Monotropa Hypopitys, In the woods about Tadcaster, where it was 
gathered with Epipactis ensifolia and Omithogalum nutans, 
within a few yards of one another » • » ? mss, (Everton, 
in Nottinghamshire, may be the place intended by Turner 
and Dillwyn. Mr, Tatham. Everton being near the bor- 
ders of Yorkshire, it may be intended that the "wood" is 
within this county. — Page 287. ) 

Gentiana Pneumonanthe, The specimens, sent to Mr. Macnab, were 
not collected on Tilmire by myself; it is, however, plentiful 
in that situation, and in many other places near York. B. 
Leyland, mss. Limestone tract near Leeds. H, Denny, vms. 

Chlora petfoliata. Near Sheffield. B. G, 

PoLEMONiuM cccrtdeum. Rocks above Kidstones Bank, near Kettle- 
well ; Marrick Park, near Richmond. /. Ward, sp. Malham 
Cove. Ch, BaMngton, sp. On the open pasture near the 
summit of the hUl between Malham Cove and Settle. J. 
Tatham, q>. 

Anchusa sempervirens. No doubt indigenous in the neighbourhood 
of Settle, and very oonmion. /. Tatham, mss, 

Mtosotis sylvatica. Clink Bank Wood, Richmond. /. E. Leefe, mss. 
One of our conmionest plants. /. Ward, mss. 

— ^— — oBspitosa, Pond near Nunmonckton. J. E. Leefe, mss. 

Atropa Belladonna. Near Burton in Bishop-dale. /. Ward, sp. In 
a field called the Hall Pasture, near Kirby Fleetham. /. E, 
Leefe, mss. 

SoLAKUM nigrum, Leeds. H, Denny, mss, 

Rhinanthus major. Hudswell Moor, near Richmond. /. Ward, 
mss. At Stockton, a village four miles from York, and 
many other parts of the county. Eng. Bot, Supp. The 
habitat near Thirsk is a com field near Sutton, under 
Whistone Cliffe. /. E, Leefe, mss. 

Lycopus europanis, Nunmonckton Lane. /. E, Leefe, mss. 

Mentha rotundifolia. Bank of the Ribble, near Settle. J. Tatham, sp 

<— — — — piperita. In the lane between Giggleswick and Beggarwife 
Bridge. /. Tatham, sp. 

M 6 



y Google 



656 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE* 

Mentha viridis. On the WUlow Island, below Settle. /. Taihamf 

sp. 
» — — (crispa). In the lane between Settle and Cam- 
mock. /. Tatham, q), 

" rubra. Banks of the Ribble, on the Willow Island, \xiow 

Settle. J. TathoMy sp. (Read « Brayshaw Island.** — 
Page 289.) 

' gentilis. In the lane between Giggleswick and B^arwife 
Bridge. /. Tathanif sp, 
Galeofsis villosoL, It is now twenty years since I fonnd a good patdi 
of this growing on Beacon Hill, near this town. It hadf I 
suppose, been introduced with com, as it gradually dwindled 
away, and has long since disappeared. R. Leyland^ mss. 
OaoBANCHE rubra, (Mr. Ward intimates that his Orobanche is re- 
ferrible to the present species. In this case, the figure in 
English Botany is a wonderful unlikeness of the plant in* 
tended to have been represented. — Page 290. ) 
Lathrjea squamaria. Love Lane Wood, Richmond; Rokeby, near 

Greta Bridge. J. E, Leefe^ mss. 
Primula datior. Winskill Wood, near Settle. J, Tatham, mss. 

' " farinosa. Hills north-east of Settle; and in all our moist 
pastures on the limestone. /. Tatham, sp, Malbam Cove. 
Ch. Babington, sp. Near (below ?) the locality of the Cypri- 
pedium, near Helmsley; frequent about the Tees, near 
Egglestone Bridge. Compi 
Trientalis europ<Ba, This is not found in woods near Hali^, but 
on the top of Swill Hill, 1300 feet of elevation, four miles 
from Halifax, on the road to Keighley, and where, I be* 
Heve, it has attained its southern limit in Great Britain. R* 
Leyland, mss. A station for it is mentioned in No. 10. of 
the Companion to the Botanical Magazine, but the descrip- 
tion is not clear; probably, on the west of the road from 
Carleton Bank, in the Black Hambledon Hills, to Helmsley. 
HoTTONiA palustris. Ditch in the Foss, near York ; also near Lang* 

ton, ten miles from Richmond. /. E. LeefCf mss. 
LvsiMACHiA thyrsiflora. Lakeby Car is the habitat near Thirsk. / 
E, Leefe, mss. In a ditch at the lowest part of a moist 
meadow, by the road from Topcliffe to Lakeby Car, near to 
the latter ; also sparingly in a little pond near the entrance 
of the Car, and more plentiful in a ditch, which crosses the 
bog, near where, at the southern extremity, it curves a little 
to the west ; and on the margin of the bog ; also at Gor-> 
mire Pool, between Helmesley and Thirsk. Comp, 
Plaktago maritima. Car End, Wensleydale. J. Ward, mss. 
Chenopodium maritimum. Salt marshes at the Tees-mouth. J. E. 

Leefe, mss. 
Atriplex littoralis. North sands, Scarborough. A. Bloxam, mst. 
RuMEx aqtuUictts. Thornton Bridge, near Lakeby Car. Comp. 
AsARUM europcsum. Plentiful in Broadbottom Wood, near Mytholm* 
royd, the only situation in which we find it, with the ex- 
ception of a small quantity in Harper-royd Clough, and I 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT— YORK. 657 

have some doubt of its being truly indigenous in either situ- 
ation. R. Leylandt nus. 

Euphorbia Cyparitsias, Leeds. H, Dennyy mss, 

Empbteuh nigrum* Abundant on the hills south-east of Settle. J. 
Tatham, sp. 

QuERCus sessUi/lora. Leeds. H. Denny, mss. 

Saux pentandra. Brook at Beggarwife Bridge, near Settle. /. 
Tatham, sp, 

Croweana, Near Appl^arth. /. Ward, mss. 

tenuifolia. Applegarth, Richmond. J. Ward, mss, 

SAGiTTAaiA sagitHfciia, The Northallerton habitat is Wiske, near 
Yafforth. /. E. Leefe, mss. 

Orchis ustulata, Aysgarth Force, Wensleydale. /. Ward^ mss. 

Herminium Monorchis. (Mr. Winch intimates that he has a York- 
shire specimen, receired from Mr. Bicheno. — Page 293. ) 

Ophrys apifera, Aysgarth* Force; Biurton in Bishopdale. /. 
Ward, mss. On the terrace above Rievaulx Abbey, where 
the plants are carefully preserved. Comp. 
' muscifera. Near West Burton, Bishopdale. /. Ward, ip. 

In the locality for the Cypripedium, near Helmesley ; and 
other places. Comp, 

LisTERA cordata. Ryeloaf Hill, above Settle. J. Tatham, sp, 

Epipactis ensifoUa, Woods near Rievaulx Abbey. Comp, (Hdk's 
Wood is near Ingleton, being eleven miles from Settle, and 
one mile from Ingleton. Mr, Tatham, — Page 293. ) 

— — — rtibra ? Abundant on loose stones below Giggleswick Scar ; 
also in Stackhouse Borriens; flowering about six weeks 
before £. latifolia, and being called « Redshanks," by the 
farmers and others. /. Tatham, sp. 

Cypripedium Calceolus, Is still found in the woods about Kilnsay, 
Kettlewell, and Arncliffe, but is very scarce. The country 
people sell it at 2s, 6d, a root I saw it at Amdifie two 
years since, and some found last year (1835). /. Tatham, 
mss. On a limestone bank, near the head of the western 
branch of the little valley which penetrates the hills just be- 
hind Helmesley ; but all the roots had been dug up by a 
gardener, when the locality was visited by Mr. Woods, in 
1835. Comp, 
Crocus nudiflorus. In many fields near Halifax, naturalised, and not 

distinct from C. speciosus. R. Leyland, mss. 
Narcissus hiflorus. Found in few situations about Halifax, but 
merely as the outcast of gardens, soon becoming natural* 
ised in a light soil, and is then not very easily eradicated. 
R, Leyland, mss, 
Galanthus nivalis, Billy Bank Wood, Richmond. J, B4 Leefe, 
mss. Leeds. H, Denny, mss. Near Thoralby, Wensley- 
dale. J. Ward, mss, 
Gaoea lutea. St. Martin's, Richmond. /. Ward, sp. Near Kirby 

Hall. (Mr. Favell.) /. E, Leefe, mss. 
Allium deracum. On Castleberg, a high rock rising immediately 
above Settle. /. Tatham, sp. 



yGooQle 



gL 



658 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Aluum arenarium. Lodge Gill, near Settle. /. Tathanh sp, 
CoNTALLABiA Pclygonotum, In great abundance^ in a rocky meadow 

between Feizor and SetUe. J, Tatham, tp. 
CoLCHicuM autumncLle, Near Nunmonckton. J, E, Leefe, mss. 
Typha angusHfdia. Seamer, (not Learner) Mere, Scarborough, the 

plant intended under the name of T. minor. H. Bloxam, 

nus, (See page 295, where T. minor is to' be erased.) 
Pot AWOQETov lanceokUus 7 Gormire Pool, between Helmesley and 

Thlrsk. C(ymp, (Mr. Ward's specimen should be named 

P. heterophyllus. — Page 295. ) 
Lemna polyrhiza. Fish-pond in the Park at Nunmonckton. J, E. 

Leefcj mss, 
Eleochabis acicularis. (Giggleswick Tarn has long been drained, 

and is now pasture land. Mr, Leyland, — Page 296.) 
' pauc\fiora. Frequent about the Tees, near Cotherstone, 

&c. Comp, 
Rhtkcospora alba, (Not on the red marl. Mr. Ward, — Page 

296.) 
Bltsmus compressus. In, a springy piece of ground near Rievaulx 

Abbey ; frequent about the Tees, near Egglestone Bridge. 

Comp. 
Eriophobum pubescens. Near (below ?) the locality of the Cypri- 

pedium, near Helmesley. Comp. 
— — -^— — gracile? Near Halnaby, in a little pool near the Pyrola 

rotundifolia. Comp, 
Eltna caricina, (Read " R. B. Bowman,'' — Page 296.) 
Cabkx intermedia, Leeds. H. Denny, mss. 
~ extensa. (To be expunged from the Yorkshire list, unless a 

native of the coast. Mr. Leyland, — Page 297.) 
  tomentosa, (Should be expunged from the Yorkshire list. 

Mr. Leyland. — Page 297.) 
— — ItBvigata, Leeds. IT, Denny, mss. 
-   JUiformis, Lakeby Car. Comp. 
Phleum arenarium. Sand-hills at Redcar. J, E. Leefe, mss. 
Calamaobostis lanceolata, Lakeby Car. Comp. 
Ammophila arundinacea. Sand-hills at Redcar. J, E. Leefe, 

mss, 
Seslebia aendea. Rocks at Aysgarth Force. J. E, Leefe, mss. 

On all the limestone hiUs above Settle. /. Tatham, sp, 
Mblica nutans. Lord's Wood, above Settle. /. Tatham, sp. 

Round Howe, Richmond. J. Ward, mss, 
PoA maritima. Tees Mouth. J, E, Leefe, mss, 
— »- procumbens. On the north sands at Scarborough, where a small 

brook runs into the sea. A, Bloxam, mss, 
— — aquaiiai, Leeds, ff, Denny, mss, 
Festuca rubra. Sand-hills at Redcar. /. E. Leefe, mss. 
—.-—.- bromoides. Near Colburn Warth, Richmond. J. Ward, 

mss. 
Hobdbum pratense. Near Redcar. /. E. Leefe, mss. 
> " maritimum. Near Redcar. /. E, Leefe, nus. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT— LANCASHIRE. 659 

LoLiuu temuUnhm, Corn fields near Middleton Tyas. J. Ward, 
" arvense. Com fields near Richmond. J. Ward, mss. 



XLVIIL LANCASHIRE. 



<< You may safely expunge from the list of Southport plants (page 
303. ) every species marked < ? * and < f ' and, perhaps, some others." 
Mr. Leyland, The Southport plants followed by tiie name of Mr. 
Churchill Babington, that gentleman received from Mr. B. H. AUen. 
A short list of localities was sent to me by Mr. Atkinson, extracted 
from the Antiquities of Fumessj but I prefer not to introduce any 
more stations from non-botanical works, and the list is mainly the 
same as that given by Turner and Dillwyn, and already copied into 
my first volume. For a notice respecting some stations near War- 
rington, see p. 635. 



Cakile maritima. Southport. Ch. Babington, sp, 

CocHLEARiA officinalis* Southport. C%. Babingtony sp, 

C ABDAMiNE impottens. ( Certainly not common, if found at all in this 
county. Mr. Leyland. — Page 300.) 

CBnothera biennis. It has escaped from gardens at Southport. R. 
LeyUmd, mss, 

Eryngium campestre. Below Melling, plentifully. B. G. (Placed 
in the Yorkshire list by Turner and Dillwyn, as alluded to 
on page 654. ) 

Saussubea (dpina. (Brearcliffe is a most unlikely situation for such 
a plant, being merely a long and moderate declivity from 
the confines of Yorkshire to the verge of the township of 
Burnley, and mostly under cultivation. It was diligently 
sought by an old man well acquainted with plants, but with- 
out success. Mr, Leyland, — Page 301.) 

CoNTZA squarrosa. Near Silverdale. /. E, Leefe, mss, 

Vaccinium Oxycoccos, Southport. Ch, Babington, sp. 

Arbutus Uva-Ursi, (To be expunged from the Lancashire list, as 
far as regards ** the great stone by the river Gorlp, near 
Widdop,** — Ray*s original Lancashire locality. Tliere is 
no such river as Gorlp, nor is the plant now to be found in 
Widdop. Mr, Leyland, — Page 301 . ) 

Gentiana Pneuinonanthe. Southport* Ch. Babington, sp, 

Chlora petfoliata. Southport. Ch. Babington, sp. 

Ertthr^ba littoraUs, Southport. Ch, Babington, sp. 

Bartsia viscosa, Southport Ch, Babington, sp. 



yGooQle 



gL 



660 THE NEW BOTANISTS GUIDE. 

tJTRtcuLAaxA intermedia. (Probably this should be U. minor; as I 
am informed by Mr. T. G. Rylands, that only jthe latter 
species b found on Woolston Moss, by Mr. W. Wflson. — 
Page 302.) 

SfATiCB Armeria, Southport. Ck, Babington, tp. 

Chbhofodium maritimMm, Southport. Ot, BabingUmf tp. 

Salsola KaH, Southport. CA. BabingUm^ tp* 

Crocus gpedotui* In a meadow near Paddmgton, a village near 
Warrington. T. J. Rylandt, m$8, 

Ammophila aruniHnaeea. Southport. C%. BainnyUm, sp. 



XLIX. WESTMORELAND. 



Thauctrum alpinum. On Helvelljrn, in descending towards Grise- 

dale. Comp. 
CoRfDAUs davicuUxUL, Hallen Fell, Ulswater. J, E. Leefty mss. 
CocHLEARiA offictnoUt. Hallcu Fell. /. E. Leefe, tius, 
Teesdalia nudicauHt, Hallen FelL /. E, Leefe, mas, 
SiLBNE odxtfdis. On Hdvellyn, descending towards Grisedide. 

Comp* 
Aremaria vefna. On some craggy ground about half-way between 

Birkdale and Dufeon. Comp. (Is Dufeon a misprint for 

Dufton?) 
Cerastium alpinum, Striden Edge, Helvellyn. Comp, 
Gerahium phiBum. In a lane at the comer of a field near Kirkby 

Lonsdale, scarcely wild. J. E, Leefe, mu, 
RcBus Chanuanorua* In several places on the moors between Birk> 

dale and Appleby. Comp, 
Alchemilla alpina. Barton Fell, Ulswater. /. E. Leefe, mss. 

About the water-falls in Longsleddale, not &r from Buck-> 

barrow WelL Winch, add, 
Epilobxum alsinifoHium. Abundant about the head of Kentmer, and 

of Lone Heddale. Comp. (Heddale is perhaps a misprint 

for SlecUale.) 
RuoDioLA rosea^ Striden Edge, Helvellyn. Comp. 
RiBEB petraum. Between Appleby and Dufton, on the road-side, 

and in a bog near a water-mill. (Rev. E. A. Holmes. ) C. 

C, Babington, mss, 
Saxipraga aizoides. Over Kirkston. B, G. 
.. — hypnoides. On some craggy ground half-way between 

Birkdale and Du&on. Comp, Barton Fell. /. E. Lfefe, 



     , (platypetala). Striden Edge, Helvellyn. Comp. 

(t have a specimen, from Mr. Bowman, possibly referrible 
to S. platypetala, ticketed «near Birkdale.** H, fF,) 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — CUMBERLAND. 661 

Galium borecde. Margin of Ulswater. J, E. Leefe, mss. 
HiERAciuM pcUudosum, (Put a semicolon after " lakes." — Page 307.) 
Gkviiav A Pneunumanthe. (Put a semicolon after <<Milburn." — 

Page 307.)— 
OxTRiA reniformis. Striden Edge, Helvellyn. Comp, 
Allium olerdceum. In ah island ccdled House Holm, near the head 
of Ulsi^ater. /. E, Leefs, mss. 



L. CUMBERLAND. 



The localities followed by " Otietff Herb." were taken from Mr. 
Otley's Herbarium, in 1833, but were overlooked at the time of 
writing the Cumberland list in my former volume. Those copied 
from the Companion to the Botanical Magazine, are mentioned in 
Mr. Joseph Woods' Notes of a Tour in the North of England, in 
1835. 



Lefidium Snuthii. Crow Park, Keswick. OUey, Herb, 

Draba incana. With Epilobium alsinifolium, on the rocks of Cross 
Fell. Camp, 

Brassica monensis* Flimsby. OUey, Herb, 

Hypericum AndrostBmum, Barrow Cascade. Odey, Herb. 

elodes. Ditch by Ullock Moss, near Keswick. Otiey, 

Herb. 

Geranium sanguineum. Between Flimsby and Maryport, on a rabbit 
warren. Ccmp. (G. striatum is said to have been found be- 
tween Flimsby and. Workington, ''opposite the first gate after 
the road has turned from the vtdley of the Derwent to follow 
the coast towards Maryport ;" but as I draw an entirely 
different inference than Mr. Woods does, from the circum- 
stances reported by him, this plant is here rejected. See 
Companion to the Botanical Magazine, vol. i. p. 296.) 

Rosa viUosa, Occasionally near Kirkland, '' in the form of R. mollis 
of English Botany." Comp, 

— — gracilis. About four and a half miles from Keswick. Comp. 
(Mr. Winch has it three and a half miles from Keswick. — 
See page SIS.) 

cinruimomea. Two or three bushes in a hedge dividing two 

meadows in the flat ground on the border of the Derwent 
[river?]. Comp, (I think Mr. Otley showed me a specimen 
gathered near Keswick, possibly in the same placel H. W.) 

spinosissima. (Read "Wallow Crags, not " Wtdton Cross." — 

Page SIS.) 



y Google 



662 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Epilobium alsinifolimn. On Cross Fell, in small quantity on some 
limestone rocks at the head of the little gill which separates 
Cross Fell from Dun Fell, and Cumberland from West- 
moreland. Comp. 

Sedum mUosum, About Blencam. Comp* 

Rhodiola rosea. With Epilobium alsinifoliiun on Cross FelL 
Comp, 

Saxifraqx steUarts. Cross Fell; Patterdale; Swarth Fell; Place 
Fell ; Kirkstone ; Ashness Gill ; Styehead, between Borro- 
dale and Wasdale ; Mell Fell ; Alston Moor. Conir. 
• oppoaitifoUa, In several places in Wasdale Screes. 

Comp. 

— — — hypnoides. Ravine of Wasdale Screes. Comp. 

Meum athamafiticum. Gathered in the meadows behind the Vicarage, 
Keswick, by Mr. Otley. Comp. 

G AUTJM pusillum. With Epilobium alsinifolium, on Cross Fell. 
Comp. 

Senecio saracenicus. By the Greta, below Keswick. Otiey, Herb. 

Eryth^ba latifdUa. Ravenglass. Comp. 

Pyrola media. Near Keswick, at the upper part of the woods, but 
below the precipitous part of Wallow Crag. Comp* 

— secunda. Near Keswick, at the upper part of the woods, but 
below the precipitous part of Wallow Crag ; Fisher Place 
Gill, on the ascent to HelveUyn, from Keswick. Comp. 
(The latter is probably the locality mentioned on page 316.) 

LiTHOsPERMUM maritimum. Near Flimsby, on the outside of a little 
patch of cultivated land between tiie road and sea. Comp. 

Myosotis ccMpitosa. ** Is the common Scorpion Grass about Kirk- 
land." Comp. 

Scutellaria minor. ( Erase « sp. " — Page 316.) 

Primula yanno«a. Kirkland, in wettish ground, frequent; near 
Aspatria, where a white variety is also found; common in 
mountainous pastures. Contr, It is scarce or wanting on 
the hills round Keswick. H. W. 

Cbntunculus minimus. Ravenglass. Comp. 

Statice Armeria. On rocks near the upper end of the Vale of New- 
lands, and between that vale and Borrodale. ^H. W. sp. 

Euphorbia Paralias. Flimby. Otiey, Herb. 

LisTERA cordata. By Fisher Place Gill, above the station of Pyrola 
secunda. Comp. 

JuNcus triglumis. By Fisher Place Gill, above the station of Pyrola 
secunda. Comp. 

Rhyncospora dUba. Ullock Moss. 0<&y, Herb. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — DURHAM. 663 



LI. DURHAM. 

Troluus europaus. Castle Eden Dean. Coi^i. 

Lepidium SmUhii. Near Swalwall and Ryton; sides of the railway 
about half a mile above Ryton. N. D* Add, 

Tu&RiTis glabra. Near Starley Bourn. N, D. Add. 

Sin APIS tenuifdia. Near Gat^ead. (Miss Clarkson.) /. E, Leefe, 
ms8. 

Htpericum duUum, Between Prudhoe and Crawcrook. N. D, 
Add. 

RuBus suberectus. Hedges near Bensham. N. 2). Add, 
I ChanuBmonu, Hudoope-head. Camp. 

Sanguisorba officinalis. In meadows by the Tees, between Middle- 
ton and Winch Bridge. Comp, 

Rosa spinosUsima. Shore near South Shields. R, B. Bowman, sp. 

— — oBsku Northumberland and Durham. Br, FL 

soabriuscula. Castle Eden Dean. N, D, Add, 

involuta. ( For « country " read «« county. ** — Page 324. ) 

Bryonia dioica. Near Hartlepool and Dinsdale. N. D, Add, 
Sedum viUosum, Maze-beck, near Cauldron Snout, Teesdale. ( Rev. 

E. A. Holmes. ) C, C, Babington, mm. In plenty a little 
above West Briscoe, near Cotherstone. Comp, 
RiBES peir<Bum. Howns Wood. N, D. Add, 

nigrum. Howns Wood. N. D, Add. 

Chrtsosplenium aUemifclium, Cawsey Dean. R. B. Bowman, sp. 

Plentiful about Croft. Comp, 
Mtrrhis odorata. Banks of the Tees, near Egglestone Abbey. 

Comp. 
ViscuM aUmm. Woods at Bradley, originally fix>m gardens. N, D. 

Add. 
Fedia dentaUu Com fields near Stockton ; near Whitburn ; between 

Prudhoe and Crawcrook. N. D, Add, 
Hieracium Lawsoni. Falcon Clint Scars. N. D, Add, 
— — — oerinthoides, A single plant found on the bank of the 

Tees, near Middleton. Comp. 
Cnicus heterophyllus. In the glen of the Greta. Comp, 
Cavivavula gUmerata. Near Middleton-one-row. (Miss Hancock.) 

R. B. Bowman, sp, 
Vaccinium VUis-Idaa. On rocks at Cauldron Snout. N. D, Add. 
Atropa Bdladonna, Near Low Team. N. D. Add. 
Rhinanthus nuyor. It is mentioned in English Botany, that Stock- 
ton in Yorkshire was intended ; if so, the words << other parts 

of the county " will also apply to Yorkshire. — Page 329. 
Veronica Buxbaumii. On rubbish behind the Nursery Grounds, at 

the head of Gateshead, and on the Windmill Hills. N. Z). 

Add. 



y Google 



66^ THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Galzopsis vWoicu Near Stephen's Hall, between Crawcrook and 

Winlaton. N, D, Add. 
Calamintha NepeUu On old ballast hills at Friar's Goose, below 

Gateshead. iST. D. Add, 
FtiiuvLAfarinoia, In a bog near Hilton Castle. B. B, Bowman, 

tp, 
SvATiCE Armeria, Coast. R. B. Bowman, sp» 
PoLTOONUM viv^rum. Cauldron Snout. (Rev. £. A. Holmes.) 

C. C BaSnngton, mss. Abundant in the meadows between 

Middleton and Winch Bridge. Comp, 
RuMsx aquaUem 9 Bamardcastle) and other parts of Teesdale. 

Comp, (Mr. Woods appears to have been scarcely certain 

of this species ; but it is adopted by Winch, without any 

mark of doubt, in his Addenda to the Flora of Noith- 

umberland and Durham, with a proof of which I am kindly 

supplied by its author, to complete this Supplement. ) 
Saux pentandra. In hedges at the foot of the hill between the 

Tyne and Wickham. N, D. Add, 
-^— ambigwju On barren moors. N. D, Add. « Probably a 

starved variety of Salix aquatica." 
— ^^ UnuifoUa. Limestone rocks by the Tees, near Egglestone 

AU)ey. Comp. « Or, perhaps, rather S. Weigeliana, if the 

species be indeed different." 
OacHzs utttdata. About Dinsdale and Middleton-one-row. ^. D. 

Add. . 
iiABZVAUA aWida. Widdy Bank, and on the basaltic rocks at 

Winch Bridge. Qmip. 
Ophrts apifera. About Byers Quarry, near Whitburn, and in the 

vicinity. N. D. Add. (Add « N. 2>." after « Baydales.*' — 

Page 333.) 
Scilla vema. Naturalised in the old avenue at Butterby Hall ; not 

at Bum HalL N. D. Add. 
Aluum arenarium. Hessddon Dean, Durham. (Rev. £. A. 

Hoknes.) C. C. Bqbington, mss. 
Topieldia pahutrii. On Teesdale Forest, near the Weal, and the 

Cauldron Snout N. D. Add. 
JuNCUs obtusiflorui. Hell Kettles, near Croft, 1832. /. E. Leefi, 

mas. 
Bltsmu^ compressua. Banks of the river, near Middleton-in- Tees- 
dale. R.B. Boumuin, tp. Banks of the Tees near Barnard- 

cast? rf. N. D. Add. 
Cabbx fvbxu Castle Eden Dean, in springy gpround towards the sea 

shore. Comp. 
Festuca rubra. In the sand on the sea shore below Castle EUlen 

Dean. Comp. 
Eltmus europ<BU9. Banks of the Tees near Egglestone Abbey 

Comp. 



y Google 



SUPPLEMENT — NORTHUMBERLAND. 665 



LII. NORTHUMBERLAND. 



Mr. Winch is printing several pages of Addenda to the Flora of 
Northumberland and Durham, and has favoured me with copies of 
the proofe, which are below referred to as ** ^. D, Add,"" 



Trollius ewropmus, Henhole, Cheviot. N, D, Add. 

Papaver somniferum. Stray specimens about Alnwick, where it was 

formerly cultivated. N, D. Add, 
CoRTDALis lutea. On a wall at Dunstan Steads. N. D. Add, 
claviculata. On rocks near Redpath ; near New Berwick. 

N. D, Add. 
Lbpidium Smithii. Near Bamborough. N, D, Add, 
CocHLEARiA offictnoUs, Hcnhole, Cheviot N. D, Add. 
Iberis amara. . Bed of the Tweed, above Coldstream. N^ D» Add. 
Cardamine amara. On the banks of Fallowlees Bourn, near Wal- 

lington. N. D. Add, 
Reseda lutea. Near Bamborough ; on the banks of Tyne, betweeil 

Newbum and Wylam. N, D, Add. 
Viola lutea. Near Great Bavington ; near Alnwick. N, D. Add, 
DiANTHUs deltoides. On Nenthom HilL N, D. Add. 
SiLENE nocHflora, In fields near Hartley and Preston. N. D. Add. 
Stellaria nemorum. By the side of the Tweed, to the west of Wark, 

and on an island between Comhill and Lees. N, D. Add. 
Cerastium tetrandrum. Near Craster. N, D, Add. 
TiLiA grandifdia. In woods at Belford. N. D. Add. 
Hypericum calycinum. Naturalised near Comhill. N. D, Add. 
Geranium mnguinmm. On the sea banks near Embleton. N. D. 

Add. 
ViciA lathyrcides. On Ratcheugh Crag, near Alnwick. N. D. Add. 
Astragalus gfycpphyUus. On the sea banks near Banborough^ in a 

wood near Earl, in the vicinity of Wooler ; on the banks of 

Wooler Water, above Coldgate MilL N. D. Add. 
— hypoglottis. On Alemouth Links. N. D. Add. 
Prunus Padus, Hulne Woods, near Alnwick. N. D. Add. 
Spiraea aalieifolia. Woods near Alnwick. N. D. Add, 
Fraoaria adycina. This is the wood strawberry in a luxuriant state. 

N. D. Add. 
Rosa spinoHssima. Sea banks near Alemouth. N. D, Add. 

tomentosa. Near Alnwick, and Spindlestone. N. D. Add. 

Borreri, At the base of Yevering Bell, one of the Cheviots. 

N. D. Add. 

. villosa. Near Newcastle. N. J. Winch, ap. 

— - Sabini. (<< Rosa Sabini and gracilis, from Heaton Dene, are one 



y Google 



666 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

and the same, the Ouse Bourn being the rivulet running 
through Heaton Dene : gracilis is the oldest and best name. 
The figure in the Supplement to English Botany was taken 
from the plant sent by me ; but cultivated in the garden of 
the Horticultural Society." Mr. Winch, — Page 342. ) 

Pr&us Aria, Hulne Woods, near Alnwick. N. D, Add. 

— — — torminaUs, Hulne Woods, no doubt planted. N, D, Add, 

Epilobium aJl^num. On the sides of College Water, Henhole* 
Cheviot. iV. D. Add, (Mr. Winch intimates that he has 
not seen any specimen from this locality, but has gathered 
E. alsinifolium on Cheviot. ) 

Rhodiola rotca, Henhole, Cheviot. iV. D, Add, 

RiBEs j9e<r<eicm. In Hulne and Rugley Woods. iV. 2>. Add, 

-»-— aljginum. Woods at Wallington. N, D, Add. 

Saxip&aga stellaris. By the sides of streams at Hethpocd, lAnhope, 
and Alnham Moor. N. D. Add, 

— — -^— — — hypnoides. On Dunsdale and Henhole Hopes, among 
the Cheviots. N. D, Add, 

Chbtsosplenium altemifoUum. In Ru^ey Woods, near Alnwick ; 
near the mineral well at ComhiU. N, D. Add, 

CicuTA virosa. In a bog at Learmoutb, near ComhiU. N. D, Add. 

CEnanthk pimpinettoides. At the mouth of Warren Water. N, D, 
Add. 

— — — — peucedanifolia. In the bog at Embleton, near Newton- 
fay- the- Sea, and Swinhoe. N. D, Add, 

  I PheUandrium, In a pond near Walker. N. D. Add, 

Vise DM album. On an apple tree in a garden at Alnwick. N. D, 
Add, (Introduced by design ?) 

Galium boreaU. On rocks by Tweed Mill, near Comhlll ; near 
Coldstream and Anton's (?) Hill. N. D. Add. 

HiEBACZDM umbeUatum. Near Shaftoe and Rothley Mill; on the 
Roman road near Walltown ; Henhole, Cheviot N. D. 
Add, 

Cnicus futerophyUiu, In the dean at Twizell House, near the mill- 
dam; in Rugley Dean. N, D. Add. (Possibly the £. pra- 
tensis of Mr. Dodd, in Turner and Dillwynls Guide.) 

Artemisia maritima. On rocks at Embleton. N. D, Add. 

SzNECio visctmu. On Alnwick Moor. N, D. Add, 

Campanula ghmerata. Near Mylam. R. B, Bowman, sp. Hulne 
Woods. N, D. Add. 

. Traehdium. Hulne Woods. N. D, Add, (Hulne 

Woods are said to form part of the pleasure grounds of 
Alnwick Castle, and must be a doubtfbl locality for orna- 
mental plants.) 

Ptbola rohmdifiia. Learmouth and Newham Bogs. AT. D. Add. 

media, Rugley Wood. N. D. Add. 

minor. Rugley Wood. N. D. Add, 

Ebythraa latifblia. On the sea shore near Hartley Bates. ^. 2>. 
Add. 

Polzmonium aendeum. By the ndes of the Aln, frequent, probaUy 
the outcast of gardens. N. D. Add. 



yGooQle 



gL 



SUPPLEMENT — NORTHUMBERLAND. 667 

MVosoTis C€B8pito8a. Ditches near Alnwick. N, D, Add, 
— —  ^— repens. On bogs near Chillingham. N, D, Add, Not 

uncommon. Mag. Nat. Hist. 
Datura Stramonium. About Alnwick. N. D. Add. 
Veronica Buxbattmii, In neglected gardens in Heaton Dean. N.D, 

Add, 
Rhinanthus major. On the borders of Scotland, near West Newton, 

in Northumberland. Eng.^Bot. Supp. 
Teucriqm Chamcedrys. On the wsdls of Hulne Abbey, near Alnwick. 

N. D. Add. 
Mentha crispa. By the side of Wooler Water, near Coldgate Mill, 
and about one mile and a half above Langley Ford, on the 
borders of a rivulet flowing down from Cheviot, and near 
its junction with the Wooler Water. N, D, Add, 
Galeopsis Ladanum. Near Embleton. N. D, Add. 
— ^-^— versicolor. Near Alnwick. N, D, Add, 
Stachys ambigua. Near Embleton ; near Lipwood ; com fields near 

Gilsland. N. D, Add, 
AciNOS vulgaris. Near Eglinham. N. D. Add. 
Primula /artnoM. Near Nether Witton. N. D. Add. 
Trientalis europaa. Abundant in a moorish pasture above Twizell 
House ; Rugley Dean ; on high grounds near Ross Castle, 
Chillingham. N.D. Add, 
Chenopodium urhicum. By the turnpike road, three miles south of 

Alnwick. N. D. Add. 
AsARUM europ<Bum. Naturalised in the woods at Wallington. N. D. 

Add. 
Betula nana. In moss holes on Wooler Common. N. D. Add. 
Salix pentandra. At the foot of Yexering Bell ; near the Routing 

Linn, in the vicinity of Doddington. N. D. Add. 
— • ambigua. On barren moors. N. D, Add, 
LisTERA cordata. On moors above Twizell House ; near Ross Cattle, 
Chillingham; Holy Island Links. N. D. Add. (The last 
is a station that would scarcely have been anticipated.) 
Narcissus bijlorus. In great abundance in a field, a mile east of 

Ahiwick. N.D. Add. 
CoNVALLARiA muUiflora. Near Stannington, in a dark wood. R. B. 

Bcwmotty sp. 
Allium oleraceum. On Ratcheugh Crag, a basaltic eminence near 

Alnwick. N.D. Add. 
— ^ Schcenophrasum. On a basaltic rock a short distance north 

from Great Bavington village. N. D, Add. 
SciLLA vema. Between Dunstanborough Castle and Craster, eon- 
fined to a small place, but there abundant. N, D, Add. 
Lemna trisuka. Pools near Wolsington. N. D. Add, 
ZosTERA marina. On the shore at Newton by the Sea. N. D. Add. 
ScHCENUS nigricans. On Learmouth Bog. N. D. Add, 
Rhtncospora oUm, On the Muckle Moss. N. D. Add. 
Eleocharis paucijlora. Near Embleton. N, D. Add. 
acictdaris. Near Alnwick. N, D. Add. 



yGooQle 



gL 



668 THE NEW botanist's GUIDE. 

Carex lamgata. In the brushwood at the base of Yevering BelL 

N. D. Add, 
Calamagkostis Epig^os, la a moss near the Routing Linn, in the 

vicinity of Doddington. N, 27. Add, 
PoA procumbens. Sea coast near Cullercoats; on the Fern Islands. 

N.D, 
Bbomus aecalinus. In a wheat field near SpittaL N, D, Add, 
Eltmus arenarius. On the sea shore at Embleton. N. D, Add. 



y Google 



TABLE 



THE NUMBER OF SPECIES IN EACH COUNTY LIST, 
INCLUDING THOSE OF THE SUPPLEMENT. 



CornwaU 


- 192 




- 


Devon 


- 319 


Brecon 


- 18 


Somenet and Bath - 


- 386 


Montgomeryshire - 


- 37 


Dorset 


- 143 


Merionethshire 


- 73 


Wilts 


- 94 


Anglesea 


. 225 


Hants - 


- 206 


Caernarvonshire 


- 177 


Sussex 


- 397 


Denbighshire 


- 193 


Kent and Tonbridge 


- 415 


Flintshire 


- 56 


Surrey 


- 295 


Cheshire 


. 149 


Middlesex 


- 161 


Derbyshire 


. 191 


Herts - 


. 55 


Nottinghamshire 


- 293 


Essex 


- 203 


Lincolnshire 


' 76 


Suffolk and Bungay - 


. 312 


Yorkshire 


- 456 


Norfolk and Yarmouth 


- 405 


Lancashire 


- 127 


Cambridgeshire, &e. 


- 318 


Westmoreland 


- 66 


Huntingdonshire 


- 19 


Cumberland 


- 195 


Bedfordshire 


. 189 


Durham 


- 400 


Buckinghamshire 


- 78 


Northumberland 


- 368 


Berkshire 


- 96 


Isle of Man 


- 81 


Oxfordshire 


- 227 


Wigtonshire - 


- 45 


Northamptonshire 


- 94 


Kirkcudbrightshire 


- 39 


RutUndshire 


- 3 




- 34 


Leicestershire 


- 150 


Ayrshire 


- 53 


Warwickshire 


- 216 


Renfrewshire 


- 71 




Lanarkshire 


- 141 


Worcestershire' 


- 316 


Peeblesshire 


- 6 


Staffordshire 


- 75 


Selkirkshire - 


3 


Shropshire 


- 157 


Roxburgshire 


- 39 




- 69 


Berwickshire, &c. 


. 187 


Monmouthshure 


- 90 


Haddingtonshire 


- 60 


Glamorganshire 


- 98 


Edinburghshire 


- 241 




- 11 


Linlithgowshire 


- 33 


Pembrokeshire 


- 36 


Fife, &c. 


- 144 


Cardiganshire 


- 21 


1 Stirlingshire 


. 66 



y Google 



670 


NUMBER OF SPECIES. 


Dumbartonshire 


- 95 


Nairnshire - ^ 32 


Argyleshire 


- 139 


Inverness-shire - - 114 


Perthshire 


- 203 


Ross and Cromarty shires - 124 


Forfarshire - 


- 346 


Sutherland - - - 105 




- 21 


Caithness - - - 14 


Aberdeenshire 


- 197 


Orkney Isles - - 88 


Banfishire 


- 44 


Shetland Isles - 8 


Elginshire - 


- 122 





y Google 



LIST OF WORKS REFERRED TO, 



THE NUMBER OF REFERENCES TO EACH. 



Abbott, Flora Bedfordlensis, {FL Bed,) - - 174 
Anderson, Guide to the Highlands and Isles of Scotland, 

{Anderson* 8 Guide,) - - - 26 

Babington, Flora Bathonensis, (^Fl. Bath,) - • -150 

Boue, Inaugural Dissertation, {BouSy Inaug, Diss,) - 16 

Cooper, Botany of Sussex, {Bot. Sus.) - > - 220 

Davies, Welsh Botanology, {JF, B.) - - - 192 

Don, Account of the Native Plants of Forfarshire, (Ace,) - 162 
Embleton, and others. Proceedings of the Berwickshire 

Naturalists' Club, 1832 and 1835, ( Gub,) - - 16 

Forster, Flora Tonbrigensis, (Fl Ton,) - - - 165 
Graham, Account of Botanical Excursions, in Edinburgh 

New PhilosophicalJoumal, (Excurs.) - - 113 
Hastings, Illustrations of the Natural History of Worces- 
tershire, (lUust,) - - - - - 142 
Hogg, Natural History of Stockton on Tees, (Hist. Stock,) - 26 
Hooker, Botanical Miscellany ; chiefly quoted for Mr. Wilson's 

Breadalbane stations, {Bot, Misc) - - 28 

British Flora, (Br, Fl) - - - 376 

— ^— ^ Companion to The Botanical Magazine; various 

contributors, (Comp,) - - - - 76 

Flora Scotica, (Fl. Scot.) - - - - 451 

Hopkirk, Flora Glottiana, (Glot.) - - - 116 
Howitt, A Flora of Nottinghamshire, but the title-page 

not seen as yet, (Nott,) - - - _ 254 

Johnston* Flora of Berwick on Tweed, (Bene.) - - 164 

Jones, A Botanical Tour in Cornwall and Devon, ( Tour.) - 91 

Kingston and Jones, Flora Devoniensis, (FL Dev. ) - - 278 

Lindley, Synopsis of the British Flora, (I/tW/. S'yn.) - - 10 
Loudon, Magazine of Natural History; various contributors, 

(A%. Nai. Hist,) - . - - -no 
N 2 



yGooQle 



gL 



672 LIST OF WORKS REFERRED TO. 

Morton, Natural History of Northamptonshire, (Hist.) - 57 

Murray, The Northern Flora, Part I. {North. FL) - - 138 

Neill, Tour in Orkney and Shetland, (2bi(r.) - - 39 

Nicholson, Annals of Kendal, (AnnaU.) - - - 63 

Otley, Guide to the Lakes, {OiUy's Guide.) - - 22 

Paget, Natural History of Yarmouth, (1Zm<. JTor.) - - 223 
Pamplin, A Catalogue of Plants indigenous in Batte r sea, 

(Indig.) 19 

Patrick, Description of the Indigenous Plants of Lanark- 
shire, iLan,) - - - - 88 
Perry, PUmtie Varvicenses, (Far.) - - - - - 40 
Purton, Midland Flora, {Midi. FL) - - - 290 
Relhan, Flora Cantabrigiensis, (FL Cant.) ... 314 
l^bthorp, Flora Oxoniensis, {FL Oxon,) - - 188 
Smith, Catalogue of Plants in South Kent, (S*. JT.) - - 126 
Smith, English Flora, (Eng. FL) - - - 722 
Sowert>y, Supplement to English Botany, (Eng, Bot, Stq>p.) 46 
Turner and Dillwyn, The Botanist's Guide, (B. G.) - - 2845 
Walker, Flora of Oxfordshire, and neighbouring counties, 

(Wa]k.Oxf.) - - . - 112 

Winch, Contributions to the Flora of Cumberland, ( Conir. ) 151 

, Flora of Northumberland and Durham, {N. D.) - 850 

Woodforde, Catalogue of Plants in the neighbourhood of 

Edinburgh, (Edin.) - - - - 276 



yGooQle 



LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS, 



THE NUMBER OF REFERENCES TO EACH. 



Mr. John Anderson - 


- 61 


Mr. J. S. Montgomery 


- 64 


C. C. Babington 


- 113 


Jonathan Otley - 


- 7 


Churchill Babington 


- 95 


James Paget - 


- 64 


J. E. Bowman - 


- 353 


William Pamplin - 


- 301 




- 144 


George Rogers - 


- 4 


WiUiam Brands - 


- 97 


T. J. Rylands - 


- 8 


W. H. Campbell 


- 33 


T. S. Scholes - 


- 4 


Robert Castle - 


- 7 


William Stables - 


- 57 


William Christy - 


- 69 


Daniel Stock - 


- 109 


W. H, Coleman - 


- 102 


J. Tatham - 


- 52 


C. Conway - 


- 83 


W. C. Trevelyan 


. 68 


George Cooper - 


- 24 


Walter Twynam - 


- 2 


T. H. Cooper - 


- 219 


James Ward - 


- 206 


H. Darby - 


- 27 


H. C. Watson - 


1106 


G. £. Dennes 


- 19 


James Wilson - 


- 3 


Henry Denny - 


.117 


N.J. Winch . 


- 565 


G. Dickie 


- 73 


G. S. Wintle - 


- 33 


Robert Embleton 


- 42 


S. P. Woodward - 


- 104 


Edward Forbes - 


- 59 


Dr. R. C. Alexander 


- 76 


G. Francis 


- 2 


J. H. Balfour - 


- 37 


R. Graves 


4 


Martin Barry 


- 4 


Joseph Hooker - 


- 147 


W. A. Bromfield 


- 170 


William Hurst - 


- 32 


Farre 


- 1 


J. E. Leefe 
Edwin Lees - - 


- 93 


John Gillies 


- 44 


- 296 


Robert Graham - 


- 34 


W. A. Leighton - 


- 48 


Godfrey Howitt - 


- 135 


R. Leyland 


- 22 


George Johnston 


- 20 


G. N. Lloyd - 


- 43 


A. D. Maclagan - 


- 1 


.T. Lloyd - 


- 18 


Gilbert Macnab - 


. 62 


James Macnab - - 


- 29 


A. Southby (Gapper) - 131 


Robert Maughan - 


- 22 


Rey. A. Bloxam 


. 381 



y Google 



DY* LIST 


OF CONTRIBUTORS. 




Rev.W. T. Bree 


- 74 Mr8.HiU 


- 5 


Charles Clouston - 


- 13 


Turner 


- 1 


J. C. CoUins - 


- 202 


Wakefield 


- 2 


James Duncan - 


- 32 


Miss Beck . 


- 1 


George Gordon - 


- 278 


BeU - 


- 119 


J. Pode 


- 31 


£astman - 


- 1 


G. £. Smith - 


- 277 


Potter 


- 2 


E.Wood - - 


. 65 


Pringle - 


- 5 


Sir W. J. Hooker 


- 52 


Worsley 


- 118 



11*41 The two preceding lists are drawn up chiefly to shew the 
sources from whence the detaib in these volumes have been obtained 
The number of references, of course, is much below the actual number 
of localities or stations indicated ; a single reference often sufficing far 
two or more expressed stations. These numbers have been hastily 
reckoned up from the proofs, and may not be quite exact, but tfaej 
will indicate^ in a general way, my obligations to the different persons 
and works mentioned, in so far as this can be shewn by numbers 
alone. But the real value of the communications often depends oo 
other circumstances than the mere number of localities, sudi as the 
exactness of the descriptions, the confirmation by specimens, or the 
rarity of the plants communicated ; so that no invidious distincdoo 
can be drawn by comparison of the figures following any names. 



THE END. 



London : 

Printed by A. ^HrrnswooDB, 

New-Street-Squara 



y Google 



WORKS 

LATELY PUBLISHED FOR H. C. WATSON, 



LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND 
LONGMAN. 



REMARKS ON THE GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBU- 
TION OF BRITISH PLANTS, chiefly in Connection with 
Latitude, Elevation, and Climate. Price 68. 6d. ' 



THE NEW BOTANIST'S GUIDE to the Localities of the 
Rarer Plants of Britain. Complete in 2 Volumes. Price 168. 6d. 



STATISTICS OF PHRENOLOGY; being a Sketch of the 
Progress and present State of that Science, in the British Islands. 
Price 5s. 



Notice. — The above works are calculated to be useful to persons devoting 
attention to the departments of science to which they relate ; but being works not 
at all of general interest, they will seldom be found in public libraries, and thus 
cannot be consulted by persons not in possession of copies. The consideration of 
this drcumstance induces the Author to express his willingness to present copies 
to any individuals really interested in the subjects to which the works relate, but 
who may not find it convenient to purchase them from the booksellers. His only 
stipulation is, that anyone desirous of procuring copies in this way shall be known to 
himself, or to some of the correspondents mentioned as having supplied information 
to the Author, connected with the contents of the works. 



Also hy the same Author. 



AN EXAMINATION OF MR. SCOTT'S ATTACK ON 
MR. COMBE'S « CONSTITUTION OF MAN." Price 6d. 



y Google 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



y Google 



3!), Paternoster Row, London, 
January y 1838. 



NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS. 



LATELY PUBLISHED BY 



SOUTHEyS POETICAL WORKS, 

COLLECTED BY HIMSELF. 

Vols. I. II. and III. 

Vol. 3 contains, amongst other New Poems not before published, the entire 

DEVIL'S WALK, (of which not more than one third part has hitherto found its 

way into print,) with a Preface, giving the true Account of its Ori<;in. 

Foolscap 8vo. price (each) 5s. cloth lettered. 



. THE RURAL LIFE OF ENGLAND. 

By William Howitt, 
Author of " The Book of the Seasons," &e. &c. 

CONTENTS :, 

Life of the Aristocracy ; Life of the^AgricuItural Population ; 

Picturesque and Moral. Features of the Country; 

Causes of the strong Attachment of the English to Country Life ; 

The Forests of England ; Habits, Amusements, and Condition of the People. 

In 2 vols, post 8vo. beautifully illustrated with woodcuts, by S. Williams. 

Price 24s. in cloth lettered. 



MRS. BRAY'S NEW NOVEL. 

TRELAWNY OF TRELAWNK ; or, The Prophecy: 

A Legend of Cornwall. 

3 vols, post 8vo. price ll. lis. 6d. 

** We will not break in upon the mjfsterf of a $tory whoie intere$t it wellkept up to the lait ; 

but u/hrther for narrative or character we cannot but consider • Trelavnp of Trelawne^' 

the verjf bett of tin. Bray'$ numerou* and ttandard vork$."—lAX. Gai. Dec. 9, 1887. 

J 



yGooQle 



gL 



MESSRS. LONGMAN AND CO. S LIST OF 



VOYAGES, TRAVELS, GEOGRAPHY, 8fc. 



THE AMERICANS, 

IN THEIR SOCIAL, MORAL, AMU POLITICAL RELATIONS. 

By Francis J. Grdnd. 

2 vols. 8vo. price 'i4a. in clotli. 

" One 0/ the mo$t ahljfwritten books we have had in our hatid$ /or a long time. Tke 

energjf of language, strength of reasoning, and force and originalitg of rentarkf km lehith it 

is disilngnished, entitle it to be ranked among thejirst literary prodmtlions of its efuss of tke 

present tfajr."— ScoUman. 



EGYPT AND MOHAMMED ALI; 

Or, Travels in the Valley of the Nile. 

By James Augustus St. John, Esq. 2 vols. 8vo. 308. bds. 

" A highly interesting and minutelf drawn picture of the country and its peonle." 

New Month 17 Mayaiiae. 



GREECE AND THE LEVANT; 

Or, Diary of a Summer's Excursion in 1834. 

By the Rev. Richard Burobss, B.D.of St. John's College, Caaibridge, 

aathor of ** The Topography and Aniiqaities of Rome.'' 

2 vols. fcap. 8vo. 14s. bds. 



JOURNAL OF A RESIDENCE IN NORWAY. 

By Samuel Laing, Esq. 1 vol. Second edition, 8vo. price 14s. cloth lettered. 
*' A booh which everpbodjf should rratf."— Dublin Review, Not. lat, 1887. 



SIR EDWARD SEAWARDS NARRATIVE OF HIS 
SHIPWRECK, 

And Consequent Discovery of certain Islands in the Caribbean Sea. 

With a Detail of many Extraordinary Events in his Life, from 1733 to 1749, 

as written in his own Diary. 

Edited by Miss J. Porter. Second edition. 3 vols, small 8vo. 31s. cloih. 

** The most curious and instructive work that has appeared since tke Jtrst dawn efditeowerpt 
and in tke historp of navigation.**— SptcUtor. 



SKETCH OF ANCIENT AND MODERN GEOGRAPHY, 

For the use of Schools. 

By Samuel Butler, D.D. Lord Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, 

late Head Master of Shrewsbury Royal Free Grammar School. 

8vo. new edition, corrected, 9«. bds. 

An Abridgment of the same, 12mo. price 3«. cloth. 

By the same Author. 



Q- 



Atlas of Modern Geography, 

Consisting of 23 Coloured Maps, from 
a new set of Plates, 

corrected to 1835, with an Index of all 
the Names. 

8vo. 12s. half-bound. 



Atlas of Ancient Geography, 

22 cold. Maps, and Accentuated Index. 

8vo. 12s. half-boond. 

General Atlas of Ancient and 

Modern Geography, 

45 cold. Maps, and two Indexes. 

4to. 24s. half-bound. 



*•* The latitude and longitude are given in the Indexes to these Atlases. 



a 



y Google 



NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS. 



O 



Voj/ageSf ^c, — continued. 

MALTE BRUNS SYSTEM OF GEOGRAPHY; 

With an Index of 44,000 Names. Complete in 9 vols. 8vo. price £7. boards. 

By the same Author. 
Principles of Mathematical, Physical, and Political Geography. 2d Edit. 8vo. 15s. 

SKETCHES IN THE PYRENEES. 

WITH 80MB REMARKS ON LANGUBDOC, PROVENCB, AND THE CORNICE. 

By the author of " Slight Reminiscences of the Rhine/' & " The Gossip's Week." 
2 vols, post 8vo. price 24s. cloth lettered. 

The leriter. 
Examiner. 



** TMi it the mo$t brUUant look of it$ elau we can remember to have read. 
whoever the <<, majr at once claim the highest place in thit clatt of literature."— 



ENCYCLOPiEDIA OF GEOGRAPHY; 

Comprising a complete Description of the Earth ; exhibiting its relation to the 

Heavenly Bodies, its Physical Structure, the Natural History of each Country, 

and the Industry, Commerce, Political Institutions, and Civil and Social 

State of all Nations. 

By Hugh Murray, F.R.S.E. 

Assisted in 

AsTRONOitr, &c. by Prof. Wallace, I Botany, &c. by Sir W. J. Hooker, 

Geology, &c. by Prof. Jameson, | Zoology, &c. by W. Swainson, Esq. 

With 82 Maps, drawn by Sidney Hall, anti upwards of 1000 other Engravings on 

Wood, from Drawings by Swainson, T. Landseer, Sowerby, &c. representing 

the most remarkable objects of Nature and Art in every region of the Globe. 

1 vol. 8vo. pp. 1570, price 3/. half bound vellum. 

.*« It it without a rfva/."— Asiatic Joamal.—'* The mott perfect hooh on itt •Mft/^ef."— AtUi. 



NEW GENERAL ATLAS OF FIFTY-THREE MAPS, 

On Colombier Paper, 

With the Divisions and Boundaries carefully coloured. 

Constructed entirely fh>m New Drawings, and engraved by Sidney Hall. 

Folded in half, and bound in canvas £8 18 6 

Ditto,ha1f bound in Russia 900 

In the full extended size of the Maps, half-bound in Russia .10 

Alphabetical Index of all the Names contained in the above Atlas, 

With references to the Number of the Maps, and to the Latitude and Longitude In 

which the Places are to be found. Royal 8vo. 21s. cloth. 

ORIGINAL PICTURE OF LONDON, 

Corrected to the present time; with a Description of its Environs. 

Re-edited, and mostly written, by J. Britton,F.S.A., &c. 

18mo. with upwards of 100 Views of Public Buildings, Plan of the Streets, 

and 2 Maps, 9s. neatly boand ; with the Maps only, Os. 



EDINBURGH GAZETTEER, 

Containing a Description of the various Countries, Slates, Cities, Towns, 

Mountains, Seas, Rivers, Harbours, &c. of the World. 

2d Edit. 8vo. with an Abstract of the last Population Return, and Maps, 18s. 

As an Accompaniment to the above Work, 

NEW GENERAL ATLAS, BY A. ARROWSMITH. 

Comprehended in 54 Maps, including Two New Maps, with recent Discoveries. 

Royal 4to. half-bound, \l. 16s. plain ; coloured, 22. 128. 6d. 



y Google 



MESSns. LONGMAN AND CO. S LIST OF 



Q 



HISTORY AND BIOGRAPHY. 



A VIEW OF THE REIGN OF JAMES II. 

From bis Accession to tlie Enterprise of tlie Prince of Orange. 

By tlie late Riglit Hon. Sir James Mackintosh. 

In 4to., witli a Portrait, 31 s. 6d. clotli. 

** fFe lunte no %e$itation in pronoimeinf thia fragment deeidedljf the best kUtorp now estant 
of the reign of Jamet the Second. It contain$ much nev and eurloui information, of viklch 
erteltent use has been made. The accuracy of the narrative i$ deserving of high admiration." 

Edinburgh Review. 

Also, tlie above Completed to the SETTLEMENT of tbe GROWN, 
by the Editor. 

To which is prefixed, 

A Notice of the Life, Writings, and Speeches of Sir James Maclcintosh. 

4to. 3/. 3s. 



LIFE AND TIMES OF WILLIAM III. 

King of England and Stadtholder of HolIaDd. 

By the Honourable A. Trbtor, M.P. F.A.S. &c. 

2 vols. 8vo. with Portrait, &c. price 24s. 



LIFE OF FREDERICK IL KING OF PRUSSIA. 

By Lord Dover. 

2 vols. 8vp. with Portrait, Second Edition, 288. 

* A most delightful and comprehensive worh.— Judicious in seleetioUfintelfigent in arrange- 
ment, and graceful in stifle.**— lAttrmtf Gazette. 



MEMOIRS OF SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE. 

By the Right Hon. Thomas Peregrine Gourtbnat. 
2 vols. 8vo., with Portrait, 28s. 



LIFE OF SIR HUMPHRY DAVY, BART. 

By his Brother, Dr. John Davy. 
2 vols. 8vo. with Portrait, 288. 



LIFE OF EDWARD THE BLACK PRINCE. 

By 6. P. R. Jambs, Esq. 

Author of •* Attila," " The Gipsy," &c. &c. 

2 vols. 8vo. 1/. lis. 6d. 



HISTORY OF THUCYDIDES; 

Newly translated into English, and illnstf ated with very copious Annotations, &c. 
By the Rev. S.T. Qloomfield, D.D. &c. Editor of the Greek Testament. 

3 vols. 8vo. with Maps, 2/. 5s. bds. 
** A version a* literal and as perspicuous as erudition and industrp combined can render it." 

Eclectic Revieir. 



y Google 



NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS. 



History and Biography^— continued. 



GIBBON'S HISTORY OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE : 

For the Use of Families and Yonng Persons. 

Reprinted from the Original Text, with the careful Omission of all Passages of 

an irreligioas or immoral tendency. 

By Thomas Bowdler, Esq. P.R.S. &c. 

5 vols. 8vo. 3/. 3s. bds. 



MEMOIRS OF JOHN DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH; 

With his Original Correspondence. 
By the Rev. Arohdsaoon Coxk. 6 vols. 8vo. with an Atlas, 5<. 5s. 
By the same Author. 
Memoirs of the Kinos of Spain | History of the House of 
FROM 1700 TO 1788. I Austria. 

5 vols. 8vo. 82. bds. | ff vols. 8vo. 3<. 13s. 6d. bds. 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

From the Earliest Period to the Death of Elizabeth. 
By Sharon Turner, Esq. F.A.S. R.A.S.L. 13 vols. 8vo. 82. Ss. bds. 

The above may be had in th« following separate portions : — 
History of the Anglo-Saxons. 3 vols. 8vo. 5th Edit. 22. 5s. bds. 
England during the Middle Aobs« 5 vols. 8vo. 3d Edit. 3/. bds. 
The Reign of Henry Yill 2 vols. 8vo. 3d Edit. U. 6s. bds. 

Edward YI., Mary, and Elizabeth. 2 vols. 8vo. 2d Edit. XL I2s.bds. 



THE COURT AND CHARACTER OF CHARLES I. 

By Lucy Aikin. 

2 vols. 8vo. with Portrait, 2d. Edit. 28s. bds. 

'•JIf ii* Aihin'i present work, and her prepiomt Memoirs of the Courts of EUnmbeth and 
James I. are very aeeeptable additions to our Uterature.*'—EiXv\tuxpk Review. 

By the same Authoress. 

Memoirs of the Court of Queen Elizabeth. 0th Edit. 2 vols. 258. 

Memoirs of the Court op Kino James I. 8d Edit. 2 vols. 24s. . 



A COMPLETE LATIN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY; 

Compiled from the best Sources, chiefly German, and adapted to the Use of 

Colleges and Schools. 

By the Rev. J. E. Riddle, M.A. Translator and Editor of 

Scheller's Latin Lexicon for the Oxford University Press. 8vo. 2Is. cloth. 

*•* The English-Latin will form a separate Volume. 

YOUNG SCHOLAR'S LATIN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY; 

Being an Abridgment of ihe above. 

Square i2mo. price 7s. bound and lettered. 

In these Dictionaries especial attention has been paid to etymology, including 

the Greek derivations ; also to the number and order of meanings, constmclion of 

wurds, and quantities. In the smaller work all words of low style, or such as 

are otherwise useless to beginners, have been omitted. 



G 



y Google 



MESSRS. LONGMAN AND CO. S LIST OP 



BOTANY, GARDENING, ^c. 



BY SIR JAMES EDWARD SMITH, M.D. F.R.S. 

LATE PRKSIDBNT OF THE LINN^AN SOCIETY, &C. 

THE ENGLISH FLORA. 
Thb Flowering Plants, and thb Fkrns. New Edit, in 4 vols. 8vo.2l. 8«. 

Vol. V. Part 1, 128.— Cryptooamia: comprising the Mosses, Hepaticae^ 

Lichens, Characese, and Algae. 

By Sir W. J. Hooker, LL.D. F.R.A. and L.S., &c. &c. 

Vol. V. Part 2, 128.— The Fungi— (completing the Work), by Sir W.J. Hooker, 
and the Rev. M. J. Berkeley, F.L.S,, &c. 

Compendium of the English Flora. 

Second Edition, wiih Additions and Corrections. 
By Sir W. J. Hooker, LL.D., &c. 12mo. 7s. 6d. 

The Same in Latin. 5lh Edition, 12mo. Ts. 6d. 



INTRODUCTION to thb STUDY OF PHYSIOLOGICAL. 
AND SYSTEMATICAL BOTANY. 

New Edition, with Illustrations of the Natural Orders (combining the object of 

Sir James Smith's *' Grammar" with ihat of his ** Introduction.") 

Edited by Sir W. J. Hooker, LL.D. &c. 8vo. 36 Plates, 16s. cloth. 



BY SIR WILLIAM JACKSON HOOKER, K.B.LL.D. 

REGIUS PROFESSOR OF BOTANY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW, &C. 

THE BRITISH FLORA. 

The Flowering Plants, and the Fekns. 8vo. 3d Edition, 12s. 

Vol. II. Part 1 of the above, (Cryptogamia) 8vo. 12^ 

Vol. II. Part 2 (Fungi) completing the work, by Sir W. J. Hooker, and the 

Rev. M. J. Berkeley. 8vo. 12s. 



MUSCOLOGIA BRITANNICA. 

Containing the Mosses of Great Britain and Ireland, systematically arranged 

and described : with Plates. 

By Sir W. J. Hooker, LL.D. F.L.S. &c. and T. Taylor, M.D. F.L.S. &c. 

8vo. 2d Edit, enlarged, 31s. 6d. plain ; 32. 3s. coloured. 

ICONES PLANTARUM; 

Or, FIGURES, with brief Descriptive Characters and Remarks, of NEW or 

RARE PLANTS, from the Author's Herbarium. 

2 vols. 8vo. with 200 Plates, price 22. lOs. cloth lettered. 



Q 



y Google 



9= 



NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS. 



Botany y ^c. — continued. 



BY J. C. LOUDON, F.L.S. &c. &c. 



ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PLANTS. 

Comprising ttie Description, Specific Character, Culture, History, Application in 
tbe Arts, and every other desirable Particular, respecting all the Plants 

Indigenous to. Cultivated in, or introduced into Britain. 

With nearly 10,000 Engravings on Wood. Second edition, corrected. 

1 large vol. 8vo. 3l. 13s. 6d. boards. 

** The moat u$eful and popular botanical work that ha$ ewer appeared in the Engliah 

language. **-~i»mnon*t Pbiloaophical Journal. 

HORTUS BRITANNICUS; 

A Catalogue of all the Plants Indigenous to, or Cultivated in Britain. 

Part 1. — The Linnaean Arrangement, in which nearly 30,000 Species are 

enumerated, &c. : preceded by an Introduction to the Linnaean System. 
Part 2.— The Jussienean Arrangement of nearly 4000 Genera; with an Intro- 
duction to the Natural System, and a description of each Order. 
8vo. 23s. 6d. in cloih. 



AN ENCYCLOPEDIA OF GARDENING; 

Comprising the Theory and Practice of Horticulture, Floriculture, Arboriculture, 

and Landscape Gardening. 
New Edit, greatly enlarged ; with nearly 1000 Engravings on Wood. 8vo. 2i. JOs 



ENCYCLOPiEDIA OF AGRICULTURE ; 

Comprising the Theory and Practice of the valuation. Transfer, Laying out. 

Improvement, and Management of Landed Property, &c. &c. 
3d Edit. With nearly 1300 Engravings on Wood. 1 large vol. 8vo. 22. 10s. 



THE CULTIVATION OF THE VINE ON OPEN WALLS. 

By Cleubnt Hoare. 

8vo. new Edition, with Additions, price 7s. 6d. 

** Mr. Hoare ha$ thrown more light on the tubject of vine culture than any Britiih gardener 

who ha$ written on the $ubJeet.'—JA}udon*» Ga<dener'B Magasiue. 

** One of the be*t productions upon ang horticultural Bubject which hat been publithed for 

tome pear$.*'—Athevmixm. 



FIRST STEPS TO BOTANY, ~ 
By J. L. Drummond, M.D. 12mo. 100 Woodcuts. 3d. Edition, 9s. 



ELEMENTS OF PRACTICAL AGRICULTURE ; 

Comprehending the Cultivation of Plants, the Husbandry of Domestic Animals, 

and the Economy of the Farm. 

By David Low, Esq. F.R.S.E. 

Profesfor of Agriculture in the University of Edinburgh. 

1 vol. 8vo. second edition, with Alterations and Additions, ISs. cloth lettered- 

** Onght to be in everp farmer'$ hand»."—ficw Farmer'i Joarnal, Dec. 4, 1837. 



ELEMENTS OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTRY. 

By Sir Humphry Davy, Bart., LL.D. F.R.S., &c. 

Fifth edition, with Notes by his brother. Dr. John Davy, 8vo. 15s. 



4 



yGoOgk 



MESSRS. LONGMAN AND CO. S LIST OP 



€3 



Botany, ^c^— coniintied, 

BY JOHN LINDLEY, Ph.D. F.R.S. L.S. &c. 

PROFESSOR OF BOTANY IN THE LONDON tJNIVBBSITT COLLEGE AND IK 
THE ROTAL INSTITUTION. 

INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY. 

Second Ediiiun, with Corrections and considerable Additions. 
1 large vol. 8vo. with nameroos Plates and Woodcats, 18s. cloth. 
«* W* hav0-no heritatton In pronouncing thl$ Introduction to Botany, bw Dr. Undlef, to be 
the mo$t valuable and perfect in ang language we are acquainted wifA.**— Medical Gawtte. 



A NATURAL SYSTEM OF BOTANY; 

Or, a Systematic View of the Organization, Nataral Affinities, and Geographical 

Distribution of the whole Vegetable Kingdom, together with the Uses of 

the most important Species in Medicine, the Arts, &c. 

2d Edition, with numerous Additions and Corrections, and a complete List 

of Genera, with their Synonyms, 1 vol. 8vo. ISs. cloth. 



SYNOPSIS OF THE BRITISH FLORA, 

Arranged according to the Natural Orders. 

2d. edition, with numerous Additions, Corrections, and Improvements. 

12mo. 10s. Od. boards. 



A KEY TO STRUCTURAL, PHYSIOLOGICAL, AND 
Systematic Botany. 
For the use of Classes. 8vo. 48. Od. 



FIRST PRINCIPLES OF HORTICULTURE. 
28. sewed. 



GUIDE TO the orchard and KITCHEN GARDEN. 

By G. LiNULkY, C.M.H.S. Edited by J. LiNDLiiY, Ph. D. F.R.S. &c. 

1 large volume, 8vo. Ids. boards. 



CONVERSATIONS ON BOTANY. 

With Twenty-two Engravings. 
I2mo:, 8th Edition, enlarged, 7s. 6d. plain; 12s. coloured. 

CONVERSATIONS ON VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGY; 

Comprehending the Elements of Botany, with their Application to Agricnlture. 
By Jan B Marcst. 2 vols. 12mo., with Plates, 2d Edit. 129. 



THE NEW BOTANIST'S GUIDE TO THE LOCALITIES 

Of. THE Rarer Plants of Great Britain. 

By Hbwktt Cottrell Watson, F.L.S. 

2 vols. I2in#. price Ids. 6d. 

Vol. 1, contains England and Wales, price 10s. 6d. 

Vol. 2, Scotland and the adjacent Isles, price 6s. 

With a Copious Sdpplbxent to England and Wales. 

By the same Anthor. 

Rkmarrs on the Geographical Distribution op British Plants. 

Timo. 6s. 6d. 



E?= 



8 



=© 



I 

I 



y Google 



p= 



NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS. 



O 



POETRY, §-c. 



THOMAS MOORE'S WORKS. 

Lalla Roukh. 

New Edit, with 4 Engravings. 

Fcp. 8vo. lOs. 6d. 

Demy 8vo. without jplatee* 148. 



The Epicubkan. A Tale. 

Foolscap Svo. 5th Edit. 98. bds. 

Thb Lotes of the Angels. 

5th Edit. 8v6. 98. bds. 
Westai«l's illnstrations. Ss. 



JAMES MONTGOMERY'S POETICAL WORKS. 

A complete collected Edition, 3 vols, small Svo. ISs. 



THE MORAL OF FLOWERS. 

With 24^ beautifully colonred Plates, royal Svo. 3d Edition. 36«. half-bound. 
*< Full of esquiMite />e«(ry. — Blackvrood's Magazlo^e. 

By the same Author. 
THE SI^IRIT OF THE WOODS. 

1 vol. royal Svo. with 26 beautifiilly-coloured Engravings, price 36s. half-bound. 

« These trees shall be my books, and in their barks my thoughts I '11 character." 

'* The two elegant volutnet vith which Mrt. lyUliam Hew htu favoured th§ publie, are 
welt Jilted to lend grace and ornament to that which i$ aolid and tuff/tir."— Med. Gazette. 



REMAINS OF HENRY KIRKE WHITE, 

Selected, with prefatory Remarks, by Robert Southet, Esq. 

The only complete Editions. 2 vols. Svo. 12.48.; and in 1 vol. 24mo. 5s. 

N.B. The property of the Family having been invaded, it is necessary to 

state that these are the only Editions which contain the Life by Mr, 

Southey, and the whole of the contents of the Third Volume. 



FAMILY SHAKSPEARE; 

In which nothing is added to the Original Text; but those Words and Expressions 

are omitted, which cannot with propriety be read aloud in a Family. 

By T. BowDLBR, Esq. F.R.S. 

New Edition. 1 vol. Svo. with 36 Illustrations. 30s. cloth ; gilt edges, 31s. 6d. 

The same work, in larger type, without Illustrations, in S vols. Svo. 4/. I4s. 6d. 



AIKIN'S SELECT WORKS OF THE BRITISH POETS, 

From JONSON to Beattie. With Biographical and Critical Prefaces. 

1 vol. Svo. ISs. in cloth ; or neatly done up, gilt edges, 20s. 



SOUTHEY'S SELECT WORKS of the BRITISH POETS, 

From Chaucer to Withers. With Biographical Sketches. 
1 vol. Svo. uniform with " Aikin's Poets," 308. cloth; or gilt edges, IL lis. 6d. 



JOANNA BAILLIE'S POEMS, &c. 

New Dramas, 3 vols. Svo 36s. 
Pi.AYs on the Passions, 3 vols. Svo. II, lis. 6d. 

MiSCKI.LANROUS Pl.AYS, SvO. 9s. METRICAL LEGENDS, SvO. 149. 



vGoosle 



,gi 



UES8RS. LONGMAN AND CO. S LIST OF 



GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY. 



1 



BAKEWELL'S INTRODUCTION TO GEOLOGY. 

New edition. In the Pre$t. 



GEOLOGY OF THE SOUTH-EAST OF ENGLAND; 

With Figures and Descriptions of the Fossils of the South Downs, and of the 

Extraordinary Fossil Reptiles of Tileate Forest. 

By GiDiON Mamtrll, LL D. F.R.S., Fellow of the Geological Society, &c. 

8vo. with 75 Plates, coloured Map, and Woodcuts, 21s. 



A TREATISE ON PRIMARY GEOLOGY: 

Being an Examination, both Practical and Theoretical, of the Older Formations. 

Bv Hknry S. Boasb, M.D. 

Secretary of the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall, &c. 

Second Edition, 8vo. with Woodcuts, 12s. 



NEW SYSTEM OF GEOLOGY; 

In which the great Revolutions of the Earth and Animated Nature are 

reconciled to Modern Science and to Sacred History. 

By A. Ure, M.D. F.R.S, 

8vo. with 7 Plates, and 51 Woodcuts, 2l8. 

GUIDE TO GEOLOGY. 

By John Phillips, F.R.S. 6.S., Professor of Geology in King's College, Ac- 
8d Edition, with Plates, 12mo. 5s. cloth. 

CONVERSATIONS ON MINERALOGY. 

Third Edition enlarged, 2 vols. l2mo. with Plates by Mr. and Miss Lowry. 
Price 14s. cloth, lettered. 



CONCHOLOGY. 



MANUAL OF THE LAND and FRESH- WATER SHELLS 
OF THE BRITISH ISLANDS. 

By W. TuRTON, M.D. 
Foolscap 8vo. 150 colonred Figures, lOs. 6d. 



INTRODUCTION TO LAMARCK'S CONCHOLOGY. 

By E. A. Crouch, F.L.S. 
4to. 22 Plates, Sis. 6d. plain; 3/. 3s. coloured. 

AN EPITOME OF LAMARCK'S TESTACEA. 
By C. Dubois, F.L.S. and F.H.S. 8vo. 14s. 



LINNiEAN SYSTEM OF CONCHOLOGY. 
By J. Mawb. 8vo. Thirty seven Plates, 21s. plain ; 2i. 12s. 6d. colonred. 



10 ^ 



yGoogk 



NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS. 



NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, ^c, 

DR. ARNOTT'S 
ELEMENTS OF PHYSICS, Oa NATURAL PHILOSOPHY; 

Written for aniversal use, in plain or non-technical language. 

Vol. I. 8vo. 5th edition, Enlarged, price 2l8. 

Contains Treatises on Mechanics, Hydrostatics (with an account of the Floating 

Bed, lately contrived by Dr. Arnott for the relief of the bed-ridden), 

Pneamatics, Acoustics, Animal Mechanics, &c. 

Vol. II. Part 1, price 10s. 6d. contains Treatises on Heat, Optics, &c. ; and 

Vol. II. Part 2 (to complete the work) will contain Electricity, Magnetism, 

and Astronomy. 

** A uteful and egcellent wor A.''— Sir J. Herachel. 



TREATISE ON THE STEAM ENGINE; 

Historical, Practical, and Descriptive. 

By John Farey, Engineer. 

4to. illustrated by numerous Woodcuts, and 25 Copper plates, 5^. fls. bds. 

Vol. II. is in the press. 



PHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATIONS; 

In which the Causes of Daily-occurring Phenomena are familiarly Explained. 
By F. C. Bakbwell. 1 vol. l2mo. 5s. 6d. 

CONVERSATIONS ON NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 

By Jane Makcet. 
7th Edition, iOs. 6d. boards. With 22 Engravings by Lowry. 

By the same Author. 
CoNYBRSATioNs ON CHEMISTRY, 2 vols. 12mo. i2th Edit. Plates. I4s. 



ENTOMOLOGY, ORNITHOLOGY, 8fc. 

INTRODUCTION TQ ENTOMOLOGY; 

Or, Elements of the Natural History of Insects. 

By W. KiRBY, M.A.F.R.S. & L.S. and William Spenck, Esq.F.L.S. 

4 vols. 8vo. with Plates, and Portraits of the Authors, price 4/. 

AN OUTLINE OF THE SMALLER BRITISH BIRDS. 

By R. A. Slanby^ Esq. Foolscap 8vo. Cuts, 4s. 6d. 



LETTERS TO A YOUNG NATURALIST, 

On the Study of Nature and Natural Theology. 
By J. L. Drumuond, M.D. 12mo. Cuts, 78. «d. 

BOOK OF NATURE ; 

A Popular Illustration of the General Laws and Phenomena of Creation. 
By J. Mason Good, M.D. F.R.S. 3 vols. 3d Edit. 248. 



TAXIDERMY; 



Or, The Art of Collecting and Preparing Objects of Natural History. 
12mo. Plates, 4ih Edition, 7s. 6d. 

Q — a 

II 



y Google 



MESSRS. LONGMAN AND CO. S LIST OF 



RELIGION, THEOLOGY, §-c. 

COLLEGE AND SCHOOL GREEK TESTAMENT, 

With English Notes. 

1 thick y*l. 12mo. price 12s. cloth lettered. 

By the Rev. 8. T. Bluompiild, D.I). F.S.A., Yicarof Bisbrooke, Rotlaod. 

By the same Editor. The Grbbk Trstambmt. 
With English Notes, Critical, Philological, and Exegetical, partly selected and 
arranged from the be«t Commentators, Ancient and Modern, but chiefly Original. 
Second Edition, greatly enlarged, in 2 thick vols. 8to. price 22. 



GRBEK & ENGLISH LEXICON op the NEW TESTAMENT. 

By E. Robinson, D.D. 
Professor of Biblical Literature in the Theological Seminary, New York. 
Edited, with carefnl revision, corrections, occasional additions, and a Preface. 

By the Rev. S. T. Bloomfield, D.D. F.SJl. 
** ThU U • booh uMeh ought to be in the hands qfeverp theological ttudent.- 

Congregational M agadne. 
1 vol. 8vo. price 28s. in cloth, lettered. 



THE SUNDAY LIBRARY; 

A Selection of Sermons tvom Eminent Divines of the Church of England. 

With Notes, &c. by the Rev. T. F. Die din, D.D. 

Complete in vols, small 8vo. with 6 Portraits of distinguished Prelates, SOs. cloth. 



THE SACRED HISTORY OF THE WORLD; 

By Sharon Turnbr, Esq. F.S.A. and R.A.S.L. ffth Edit. 2 vols. Svo. SSs. 
llie Third and concluding Volume is just published, price 14b. 



PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHY. 

By John Burns, M.D. 

Regius Professor of Surgery in the University of Glasgow, &c. 

12mo. 4th Edition, 7s. bds. 

LETTERS FROM AN ABSENT GODFATHER: 

OR, A COMPENDIUM OF RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION FOR TOUNO PERSONS. 

By the Rev. J. E. Riddle, M.A., Curate of Harrow. 

Author of ** First Sundays at Church," &c. &c. 

Foolscap 8vo. 68. cloth lettered. 

«* An admirable manual of ChrUtian dutiee.'*— St. James' Chronicle. 

NATURAL EVIDENCE OF A FUTURE LIFE, 

Derived from the Properties and Actions of Animate and Inanimate Matter* 
By F. C. Bakbwbll. In 1 vol, Svo. 12s. 



DISCOURSES ON THE SOCINIAN CONTROVERSY. 

By Ralph Wardlaw, D.D. Glasgow. 8vo. fifth Edition, ISs. cloth lettered. 
By the same Author. Sermons. Svo. 128. 



ORIENTAL CUSTOMS: 

Applied to the Illustration of the Sacred Scriptures. 

By Samuel Burder, 'A.M. &c. 

New Edition, 12mo. Ss. 6d. cloth lettered. 

fi= =  . == = . 6 



y Google 



NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS. 
□ P 



SPORTING. 



INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG SPORTSMEN. 

By Lient.-Gol. P. Hawker. 
7th Edition, enlarged (30 Plates and Cats), ISs. cloth, 
* Col. Hawker {$ one of the bett tkoU in Bngland^ and ki$ ' In$truetiona to Sporttmen ' 
ry be$t book we have on the $ubJeet.*'—Blajckwood'a MitgnXoe. 



TROUT AND SALMON FISHING IN WALES. 
By Gborgb Agar Hansard. 
Fcap. 8vo. 6s. 6d. cloth. 
* A delightful companion to the lovert of the rod and lintf."— Gentleman's May aslne. 



THE GUN; 
Or, a Treatise on the Nature, Principle, and Mannfactare of the varions 
descriptions of small Fire-Arms. 
By William Grbbmbr. 1 vol. 8vo. price 15s. 
** I have no hentation in Baying that I consider it hy far the beat vfork ever 
written on the eubject, and I should recommend the perusal of it to every gun- 
maker in the United Kingdom.'*— Extnct of a Letter from Col. Hawker. 



POLITICAL ECONOMY, COMMERCE, 8fc. 

MCCULLOCH'S COMMERCIAL DICTIONARY. 

* Illnstrated with Maps and Plans. 
New Edit, corrected and improved. With a new and enlarged Sopplement. 
1 vol. 8vo. pp. 1350. 2/. lOs. bds. 
*•* The Supplement may be had separately, price 7s. 6d. 



TABLES OF INTEREST; 

Calcnlated at Fits pbr Cbnt. for any sum, advancing by single pounds, fh>ro 

I to 365, without the trouble of adding several sums together; thence, by 

Hundreds and by Thousands, to £ 10,000, from Omk Day to Thirtbbm Ybars. 

By Joseph Kino, Liverpooh 

Twelfth EdiUon, a thick vol. Sro. Sis. 



PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY, 

Deduced from the Natural Laws of Social Welfare, and applied to the present 

State of Britain. 

By G. PouLBTT ScROPB, M.P. F.R.S. &c. Small Svo. 7s. in cloth. 

*' Full of egeellent matter and$agaelou$ rea$onlHg.''—lAtenrf Gaxette. 



STEEL'S SHIP-MASTER'S ASSISTANT AND OWNER'S 

MANUAL; 

Containing General and Legal Information necessary for Owners and Masters of 

Ships, Ship-Brokers, Pilots, and other persons connected with the Merchant 

Service. New Edition, newly arraneed, and corrected to 1836 (containing the 

New Customs Laws, &c.), by J. Stikbman, Cnstom-Honse Agent. 

With Tables of Weights, Aleasures, Monies, &c., by Dr. Kbllt. 

1 large and closely-printed vol. 2l8. bds. ; 238. 6d. bd. 



CONVERSATIONS ON POLITICAL ECONOMY. 

By Janb Marcbt, 12mo. 6th Edition, Os. bds. 

By the same Authoress. 

JuHif Hopkins' Notions on Political Economy. l2mo. 4s. 6d. 

d = ' Q 



y Google 



MESSRS. LONGMAN AND CO. S LIST OF 



NOVELS, WORKS of FICTION, Sfc. 



EUREKA : A PROPHECY OF THE FUTURE. 
A Romance : by the Antbor of ** Mephistophiles in Engluid." 3 vols, post 8to. 



ATTILA: A ROMANCE. 8 rols. post 8to. 
By G. P. R. Jambs, Esq. anihor of " The Gipsy," ** Darnley," tec. &c. 

••/  tkU •r*AM«JM, wkteh dhplmjft tm gremt m^wmutmge mil tk« escetteuelea of tht wrtttr, 
W€ hm»0 U* Tttmnk, kit dtteriptimt p»»en, kit ttfU, kit idmti/iemHou vi elmrmetert kit 
ptirjft Ut UttTiemt meemrmcf, Mtd kit meSuml pre»eutmti»m ^f rtmttt timut, mingled witk 
mil the imttrett •/ m weU-eomcthttd mmdjtmelg tMtcmted ttorf.^—litenrj Gaiette. 

By the same Anthor. 

The Gipsy, 3 vols. I Livs amd Adtkvtures op John 

Mast op Busgcmdt. 3 v(^ | Mabstoh Hall. 3 vols. 

One in a Thousand; or, the Days of Henri Qnatre. 3 vols. 



GLENLONELY. 3 vols. 



** Full of imeUeui worked mp with great efeet-of detcrimtiont fretk and glomimgr. 
itTf hetMmtt ertremelf imterettimg^ mnd tklt tuterett it kept up uudimimitked #• the el 



el—e." 
San. 



THE CURATE OF STEINHOLLT. 
A Tale of Iceland. 2 vols, post 8vo. Price 18s. 

THE DOCTOR, &c. 

Vol. IV. post 8vo. 10s. 6d. 

Vols. 1 to 3 may be had, price 1/. Us. 6<l. 

tott anu other of the timet in the kett hmowledge^ «» 
ut\ful literature »-Qn»xX»tl3 Review, No. 104, p. U». 



kefond almoitamf other of the^time, in_tke kettkuowledgej and im the matt 



THE BROKEN FONT; 

A Story of the Civil War. 

By the anthor of *' Tales of the Wars of our Times," " Recollections of the 

Peninsula," &c. 2 vols, post 8vo. Sis. 

*< Read with pleature, and oarted from with regret.**— Mbkenttmn. 

*' The author of * Talet of our Timet' it not a man to proceed far without itimuUttiug 
our euriotitjft and frratifving our taste for adventure.— The eharactert are ttriiimflm 
painted^ and several of the teenet are wrought out with comtiderakle dramatic power.*^ 

Court JoamaL 



THE PIRATE, AND THE THREE CUTTERS. 

By Captain Marryat. 

With Twenty Plates by Clarkson Stanfield, R.A. 

In 1 vol. royal Svo. price 1/. I Is. 6d. ; imp. 8vo. with India proof pUtes, 2/. 12s. 6d. 

Being the first of a Series of lllastrated Works by the best authors, executed 

under the snperintendence of Mr. Charles Heath. 

•♦ Captain Marryat never produced anything better than * The Pirate."* 

MftropolitMi MafAxine. 

Q = ^ 



y Google 



NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS. 



D= 



=C 



ARCHITECTURE, THE FINE ARTS, S^c. 



DICTIONARY OF THE ARCHITECTURE 
AND ARCHEOLOGY OF THE MIDDLE AGES; 

Including the Words ased by Old and Modern Authors. 

By John Britton, F.S.A. &c. 

Part 1. with 12 Engravings by J. Lb Kbux ; Part II. with 10 Engravings; 

and Part III. with 13 Engravings. 

The Volume will contain at least 40 Engravings, and be completed in 4 Parts, 

royal 8vo. 12s. each; medium 4to. 21s.; imperial 4to. 3Is. 6d. 

Part IV. will be published shortly. 



T. F. HUNT'S ARCHITECTURAL WrORKS. 



Hints on Picturesqub Domestic 

Architecture ; 
In a Series of Designs fur Gate-Lodges, 

Gamekeepers' Cottages, &c. 

4to. New Edition, with Additions^ 

and a new set of Plates. 

21s. bds. ; India Proofs, 31s. 6d. 

Designs for Lodges, 

Gardeners' Houses, & other Buildings, 

in the Modern or Italian style ; 

In a Series of 12 Plates, 

with Letter-press. 

Royal 4to. 21s. bds.; India Proofs, 

3l8. 6d. 



Designs for Parsonage-Houses, 

AlMS-HOUSES, &C.&C. 

In a Series of Twenty-one Plates, 

with Letter-press. 

Royal 4to. 21s. ; India Proofs, 31s. 6d. 

Exemplars of 

Tudor Architecture, 

Adapted to Modern Habitations. 

With illustrative Details, selected 

from Ancient Edifices ; 

and Observations on the Furniture of 

the Tudor Period. 

Royal 4to. with 37 Plates, 2/. 2s. ; 

India Proofs, S^3s. 



LECTURES 
ON THE HISTORY AND PRINCIPLES OF PAINTING. 

By Thomas Phillips, E?q. R.A. F.R.S. and FS.A. late Professor of 
Painting in the Royal Academy. 8vo. 13s. in cloth. 

<* There it not a postage in them with which a liberallv-educated geHtleman ihould not be 
acquaitited."-~'Litertiry Gazette. 



ELEMENTS OF MUSICAL COMPOSITION; 

Comprehending the Rules of Thorough Bass, and the Theory of Tuning. 
By William Crotch, Mus. Doc, Professor of Music in the University of 
Oxford. 
2d Edition, small 4to. with Plates, 12s. in cloth. 

By the same Author. 
Substance of Several Courses of Lectures on Music. 7s. 6d. 



□= 



ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF COTTAGE. FARM, AND VILLA 
ARCHITECTURE AND FURNITURE. 

By J. C. Louuon, F.L.S. &c. 

New Edition. 1 large vol. 8vo. With above 11,000 pages of Letter-press, 

and illustrated with upwards of 2000 Engravings, price 3/. in bds. 

— 



tt 



y Google 



0= 



MESSRS.. LONGMAN AND CO. S LIST OF NEW WORKS. 



MISCELLANEOUS. 



HINTS TO MOTHERS FOR THE MANAGEMENT 
OF HEALTH 

DURING THE PERIOD OF PREGNANCY AND IN THE LTING-IN ROOM ; 

With an Exposare of Popular Errors in connexion with those subjects.' 

By Thomas Bull. M.D. 

Physician Acconchenr to the Finsbnry Midwifrry Institution, &c. 

I vol. foolscap 8vo. 5s. cloth lettered. 



DOMESTIC DUTIES; 

Or, Instructions to Young Married Indies on the Management of their 

Households, and the Regulation of their Conduct. 

By Mrs. W. Parkks. 12nio. 4th Edit. lOs.ed. cloth lettered. 

** T3U 9otume be/ere m$ U a per/eet Vade Mecum for the foimr married ladp^ wAo majr 

re$ort to it on atl fuatiom ^f household eeouomf and etiquette."— "Scyi. MoBthlj M«g 



PLAIN DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING WILLS, 

SCCORDINO TO THE NEW ACT, 

Which came into force on the 1st of January, I83S, and the strictest confonnity 

with which is necessary In all Wills made subsequently to that date. 

By J. C. Hudson* of the Legacy Duty Office, Somerset House. 

Foolscap 8to. Ss. 6d., cloth lettered, gilt edges. 



INSTRUCTIONS to EXECUTORS & ADMINISTRATORa 

By J. H. Brady, late of the Legacy Duty Office, Somerset House. 

8vo. Fifth Edition, enlarged, 8s. 

*«* The New Act does not affect the Duties of Executors. 



On valuation of PROPERTY for the POOR'S RATE. 

By J. S. Bayldon. 8vo. new Edit, enlarged, 7s. Od. 

By the same Author. 

Art op Yaluiiio Rents and Tillages, &c. New Edition, 78. bds. 



LACON ; or. Many Things in Few Words. 
By the Rev. C. C. Golton. New Edition, 8vo. 12s. 



SELECTIONS FROM THE EDINBURGH REVIEW ; 

With a preliminary Dissertation, and Notes. 
Edited by Maurice Cross, Esq. 4 large vols. 3/. 3s. bds. 



ON FEMALE IMPROVEMENT. 

By Mrs. John Sandpord. 2 vols. I2mo. price 12s. in cloth. 

By tlie same Authoress. 

Woman in her Social and Domestic Character. Sth Edit. 13mo. 6s. 

^ivES OP Lady Jane Grey and Mrs. Col. Hutchinson. Fcap. 8vo. 6s. 6d. 



MAUNDER»S TREASURY OF KNOWLEDGE. 

Ninth Edition. ISmo. 88. 6d. cloth ; lOs. 6d. embossed and gilt. 



HINTS ON ETIQUETTE & THE USAGES OF SOCIETY. 

By Ar^U)r/09, 
Sixteenth Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6d. gilt edges. 

SHORT WHIST; Its Rise, Progress, & Laws. 

With Maxims for Beginners, and Observations to make any one a Whist Player. 

By Major A»»«»». 

Fifth Edition, fcap. 8vo. with Frontispiece, 33. in fancy cloth, gilt edges, 



fi 



16 

London : printed by Manning and Smiihson, Ivylanc, St. Paol's. 



yGooQle 



gl 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



i 



y Google 



y Google 




