?^ ENGLISH LAKES. | 



.*^Vj^f'€5'^^^^' 




MAP OF THE LAKE DISTRICT 




HAND-BOOK 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



WITH MAP AND ENGRAVINGS. 



KENDAL : 

PUBLISHED BY T. ATKINSON. 

LONDON : HAMILTON, ADAMS, AND CO. 

1847. 



PREFACE. 



That a small Guide, or Hand-Book. pointing out, 
and briefly describing all the places of interest in 
the Lake District, and reduced to a more portable 
and convenient size than any hitherto published, 
has long been a desideratum, it is almost needless 
to mention ; and, now that railway conununica- 
tion enables parties to approach in a cheap, easy, 
and expeditious manner, additional numbers will 
avail themselves of the opportunity of visiting a 
country iHich in scenery, in historic and poetic as- 
sociations, and the want of a Guide not so cumber- 
some or expensive as those at present in use must 
have been deeply felt. The present Work is in- 
tended to supply this deficiency. The Compiler 
has indicated the best routes to be taken, and has 
given, in a concise form, an account of those objects 
worthy of being visited, placing them in that order 
in which the tourist will find them ; and where 
more routes than one can be taken they are pointed 
out, leaving the visiter to select at his option, and 
adopt those most suiting his time and convenience. 
Being well acquainted with the district, the Com- 
piler can pledge himself to the general accuracy of 
E 2 



IV PREFACE. 

the work, and to the correctness of the distances 
given. 

The Map which accompanies this Hand-Book 
will be found a valuable acquisition — exhibiting 
distinctly the different roads, lakes, mountains, &c., 
and not crowded with names of unimportant places, 
calculated only to bewilder and confuse. The co- 
pious Index at the end will enable the visiter to 
refer at once to any place mentioned in the book. 

The List of Plants, with their habitats, has been 
revised by Mr. Gough, of Kendal, who has kindly 
made some additions to the lists heretofore pub- 
lished. 

Kendal, May, 1847. 



HAND-BOOK 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



There are two points which have long engaged the 
attention of \-isiters to the lake and mountain scenery 
of Cumberland, Westmorland, and Lancashire, viz., 
the route by which the country may be viewed most 
advantageously, and the season of the year when 
the landscape presents the greatest beauty and 
variety. The recent construction of railways to 
the lake district has afforded great facilities to the 
tourist ; and the formation of a branch, joining the 
Lancaster and Carlisle line near Kendal, and ter- 
minating near to the village of Bowniess, a short 
distance from Lake Windermere, will now render 
the route by way of Lancaster and Kendal most 
preferable to visiters fi'om the south. Hitherto it 
has been regarded by wTiters well acquainted with 
this locality the best, at least for those whose time 
was somewhat limited, and with the above ad- 
ditional advantages the point may now be con- 
sidered decided. The precise period of the year for 
visiting the country is a matter which must be fixed 
on according to the taste of the visiter. Some pre- 
fer the spring, but by far the greatest influx takes 
place during the autumn months. In May and 
June the landscape presents a lively appearance ; 
the meadows and mountain sides are clothed in 
verdure; tlte timber trees and coppice woods exhibit 

B 



^ HAND-BOOK TO 

every variety of green ; and while the eye feasts on 
the beauty of the varied prospect, the music of the 
woodland choi'isters falls deliciously on the ear. In 
August and September the scenery has undergone a 
considerable change — the rich gi'een of spring has 
given place to the golden and manifold hues of 
autumn, Tlie foliage of the woods and forest trees 
displays a pleasing diversity of tints, and here and 
there is seen a field of yellow gi'ain, waving in the 
breeze, or enlivened by a host of busy harvest 
labourei-s. Tlie heavy showers of rain Avhich occa- 
sionally fall at this period may be looked on as un- 
favourable to the progress of the tourist ; but the 
slight disadvantages they occasion are perhaps more 
than compensated by the freshness they impart to 
the landscape, and by their swelling the waterfalls, 
giving a highly picturesque appearance to some that 
would otherAvase be scarcely worth at siting. 

Passing from Lancaster to Kendal (a distance of 
upwards of twenty miles by the Lancaster and Car- 
lisle Railway), the scenery presenting itself to the 
eye of the spectator is of a character which indi- 
cates his approach to the lake district. "\Mien about 
half way the passenger leaves at a little to the right 
the small town of Burton-in-Kendal, and a few 
miles further, at a greater distance in the same 
direction, the town of Kirkby Lonsdale, situated on 
the western banks of the river Lune, in one of the 
most beautiful valleys in the kingdom. Though at 
some distance from the direct road to the lakes, this 
place is frequently visited by strangers, and the 
richness of the surrounding scenery amply repays 
the trouble of the devnation. Kirkby Lonsdale con- 
tains a population of nearly 1 700 ; has a fine church, 
which, however, has lost its antique appearance 
through modern innovation ; and a lofty bridge of 
three arches over the Lune. In the vicinage are 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. ^ 

a number of gentlemen's seats, and about a mile to 
the north-east the village of Casterton, whei-e resides 
the Rev. Carus AVilson, editor of several religious 
periodicals, and superintendent of two laudable insti- 
tutions — one a school for educating the daughters 
of the clerg)', and the other for the training of female 
servants, both which, -with an exceedingly neat 
chapel, are in the ^^llage. In the neighbourhood 
are also several caves, all of which may be con- 
veniently visited fi'om the towm. "WTien seven miles 
from Kendal, the line leaves, at a mile to the west, 
the salubrious little town of Milnthoi-pe, where, pre- 
\'ious to the railway communication being opened, 
tourists were in the habit of making a temporary 
stay ; and a little further, on the same side, the 
rural village of Heversham, famed^ for its school, 
where sevei*al eminent charactei-s have received 
their education, amongst whom are named the late 
Bishop Watson, Professor "Wliewell, and others. 
Further still is Levens Hall, the seat of Lady 
Howard, with its splendid park adjoining the banks 
of the river Kent. The gardens here were planned 
by IVIr. Beaumont, gardener to King James U., 
after the old French style, of which they are the 
finest specimen in the kingdom, and, together with 
the richly carved oak in the library and hall, will be 
found rare and interesting objects. About three 
miles from Kendal the traveller catches a glimpse 
of Sizergh Hall, to the west, an ancient building 
that has long been in possession of the Stricklands, 
surrounded by a park and woodland scenery. It is 
recorded that Mary, Queen of Scots, was once an 
inmate here, and the room she occupied still bears 
her name. Queen Catherine Parr also resided here 
a short time after the demise of the king, and prior 
to her second marriage. Arrived at the junction of 
the Kendal and Windermere Railway, one of the 
B 2 



4 HAND-BOOK TO 

best views is obtained of the town of Kendal. Partly 
situated at the base of a hill, Avhich commands the 
river Kent and the vale for some distance, its irre- 
gular streets and scattered houses, when viewed 
from this elevated position, have a very pleasing 
appearance. Between the junction and the town, 
on the summit of a conical hill, stand the ruins of 
the Castle, once the seat of the barons of Kendal, 
and the birth-place of Catherine Parr, the sixth and 
only surviving wife of " bluff King Hal." It has 
evidently once been encircled by a deep fosse, and 
the only remains of its former stability are a tower, 
part of a keep, and portions of a circular wall. 

Should the toui'ist reach Kendal in the early part 
of the day he might spend the remainder profitably 
in looking about the town and neighbourhood. The 
principal inns are the King's Ai'ms and Commercial, 
besides which comfortable accommodation may be 
found at the Crown and other respectable houses. 
The town has two main streets running nearly 
direct fi-om north to south, fi-om which others 
of inferior note branch oiF, and contains a popula- 
tion of nearly 13,000 inhabitants. Its pi-incipal 
manufactures are those of wooUen, which have 
flourished ever since the commencement of the 
fourteenth century, when they were introduced by 
John Kemp, a manufacturer from Flanders. There 
are three churches, two of modern erection, and 
one of ancient Gothic architecture, situated at the 
southern end of the town, which contains, among 
other things worthy of notice, three chapels, belong- 
ing to the Parrs, Stricklands, and Bellinghams, 
with monuments of the respective families. Besides 
these there are a number of other places of worsliip 
belonging to the nonconformists. Kendal also boasts 
a Museum containing a good collection of objects of 
natural history, minerals, &c. ; a Book Club, patron- 



THE ENGLISJI LAKES. ^ 

ised by the principal gentry in the neighl>ourhoo<l ; 
a good Library; Mechanics' Institute, and two 
News Rooms. 

Having surveyed the town, and visited some of tlie 
places already referred to, the traveller will do well 
to make an excursion to Scout Scar, a bold preci- 
pice about two mil(;s to the west, from whence the 
surrounding country may be advantageously seen. 
To the right is a somewhat undulating tract of 
country, ap]);irently closed in by the lake moun- 
tains; in front a champaign of turf ground, bounded 
on the ojjposite side by a ridge similar to the scar 
itself; wiiile Uj the left may be seen portions of 
Morecambe Bay, fringed wtli woods and green fields 
— altogether forming a scene of great beauty and 
attraction ; and more particularly so if viewed in 
the softening light of evening, when visiters will 
frequently stay until the last notes of the blackbird 
have died away in the wood beneath, and the shades 
of evening are fast closing around, before they with- 
draw their gaze and wend their way back to their 
adopted quarters. Here, too, the geologist will 
meet with fine specimens of fossil shells, which are 
exceedingly abundant on this and the neighbouring 
fells. 

The antiquarian would pro)j;iljly prefer a walk to 
AYater Crook, a mile to the south, following the 
river Kent, where are the remains of a Roman 
station, supposed to be the Concangium. Several 
antique relics have been found here, of which two 
altars, a broken statue, and a sepulchral stone are 
yet preserved 

From Kenrlal an agreeable excursion might be 
made to Hawes Water, somewhere about twenty 
miles, either through the vale of Kentmere or Long 
Sleddale. Tlie lake is situated in the narrow vale 
of iNIanlale, has steeji craggy hills overlooking its 
p. 3 



6 



HAND-BOOK TO 



head, and on its southern side a mountainous ridge 
known by the name of Naddle Forest. Or a visit 
might be made to Shap Wells (sixteen miles) taking 
the Lancaster and Carlisle Railway, which passes 
close to the place. The spa being considered highly 
efficacious in many disorders, great numbers resort 
to it in summer, and the commodious hotel on the 
spot affords every accommodation both for the in- 
valid and pleasure seeker. 

From the railway station at Kendal to the ter- 
minus at Birthwaite, near Bowness, is nearly nine 
miles. Near to the town the line crosses the Kent 
by a viaduct, shortly after leaves the village of 
Burneside and Burneside Hall on the right, and 
Tolson Hall, formerly the seat of the Batemans, 
on the left ; thence proceeding up the valley by 
Cowan Head, and passing close to the village of 
Staveley. At the terminus a spacious hotel has 
just been erected, where conveyances may be pro- 
cured, and other facilities received. And here is 
first obtained a \'iew of 

" Wooded Winandermere, the river lake," 

Perchance its scarcely rippled surface, glittering with 
silvery sheen, dotted here and there with boats, a 
few with unfurled sails of snowy whiteness scudding 
slowly before the breeze; its scattered islands clad 
with shady trees ; and its banks exhibiting field, 
wood, hill, and dale, in pleasing disorder, adorned 
with stately mansions, neat villas, oixlerly-looking 
farm houses, and whitewashed cottages, peeping 
from beneath some overhanging wood, or sheltered 
by ancestral trees, appearing like the abodes of 
peace, comfort, and industry, and so sweetly re- 
tired, one 

" Deeply feels 
That innocence her shrine might there preserve 
For ever." 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 7 

The h^till pellucid lake, the majestic and beautiful 
scenery Avhich sui'rounds it, reposing graceful and 
serene, bursting at once upon the sight, leaves an 
impression on the mind which the hand of time can 
never erase — an impression which, amid all the 
changes of life, -will remain indelible, and, if possible, 
only become more and more delightful as that mo- 
ment recedes into the past, and is viewed by the 
retrospective eye in the moonlight of memory. 
Alluding to this enchanting prospect, Professor 
Wilson MTites, " You feel that there is loveliness on 
this earth more exquisite and perfect than ever 
visited your slumbers even in the glimpses of a 
ch'eam. The first sight of such a scene viih be 
unforgotten to your dying day — for such passive 
impressions are deeper than we can explain — our 
whole spiritual being is suddenly awakened to re- 
ceive them — and associations swift as light, are 
gathered into one emotion of Beauty, which shall 
be imperishable, and which often as memory recalls 
that moment, grows into genius, and vents itself in 
appropriate expressions, each in itself a picture." 

From the terminus the tourist naturally directs 
his coui'se to the village of Bovvness, the great resort 
of all the lake visiters. It stands on the edge of 
a fine bay which frequeiitly presents a most ani- 
mated appearance. Boats of various descriptions 
are riding at anchor, while others are perpetually 
enteiing or departing, loaded with many a pleasure- 
seeking party. The village contains two excellent 
inns (the Royal Hotel and the Crown), where tour- 
ists meet with every attention, and where all requi- 
site information may be gained. The church is an 
ancient edifice, with a square tower and leaden roof, 
and one of its windows contains some of the painted 
glass taken fi-om the east window of Furness Abbey. 
In the yard, at the eastern end of the church, is a 
B 4 



8 



HAND-BOOK TO 



plain monument to the memory of Bishop Watson, 
who was bui-iecl here, inscribed " Ricardi Watson, 
Episcopi Landavensis cineribus sacrum, obiit Julii 1, 
A.D. 1816, ^tatis 79." Overlooking the village is 
a school, built by the late Col. Bolton, of Storrs 
Hall, from whence the upper portion of the lake is 
seen to advantage. Here is also a hydropathic 
establishment, superintended by Dr. Paisley, who 
has a number of patients undergoing the treatment. 
A variety of excursions may be made from 
Bowness, some of which, in addition to the charm- 
ing landscapes they unfold, to the lover of literature 
produce other delights, from being associated with 
names of high standing in the literary world. A 
pleasing walk of two miles to the south brings you 
to Storrs Hall, the residence of Mrs. Bolton, situated 
on the margin of the lake, amid fine pleasure 
grounds. Here Mr. Canning was in the habit of 
paying frequent visits, to gain a little respite from 
public cares, and was occasionally honoui'ed by the 
company of some of the most illustrious characters 
, of the age, amongst whom are numbered Sir Walter 
Scott, Wordsworth, Southey, Professor Wilson, and 
others. By taking the opposite direction along the 
Ambleside road, Rayrigg, Elleray (the property of 
Professor Wilson, and recently inhabited by Thos. 
Hamilton, Esq., the author of " Cyril Thornton," 
" Men and Manners in America," and other popular 
works), The Wood, and other seats ai-e passed, and 
at different points fine views open to the sight, 
some extending almost to both extremities of the 
lake. Near to the lake is seen Calgarth Park, 
where resided the late Bishop AVatson, who here 
composed his well known Apology for the Bible. 
At the distance of little more than a mile tlie road 
joins that from Kendal, by crossing which tliis 
excursion may be extended into the vale of Trout- 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. ^ 

beck. Still more extensive vieAvs are gained by 
climbing those hills overlooking the village, either 
by Bowness Bank to Orrest Head, or pursuing a 
road by the Crown Hotel and the cold water estab- 
lishment to Brantfell. 

From Bowness a boat may be procured to Belle 
Isle, or, as it is locally termed. The Island, from 
being the largest on the lake. Its surface, measur- 
ing about thirty acres, is covered with trees, and 
intersected with gravel walks. There is also a 
marginal one, running entirely round the island, in 
perambulating which the eye rests at various points 
on scenes of dignified and softened beauty. In the 
words of a native author, " there is not perhaps a 
spot about the lake can equal a walk round this 
island in a summer evening, when the long level 
shadows of the west are seen in the boldest contrast 
with the glowing gold of the hills to the north- 
east." Partly on the eastern side is the mansion of 
Mr. Curwen, to whom the island belongs. " The 
building is a perfect circle, fifty four feet in dia- 
meter, and its roof is a dome covered with fine blue 
slate, found in the neighbourhood." Belle Isle 
formerly belonged to the ancient Westmorland 
family of Philipsons, and in the time of the civil 
wars was inhabited by two brothers of that name, 
the elder a colonel, and the younger a major, in the 
royal army. The latter Avas a person possessing a 
bold, adventurous spirit, and from his valorous and 
daring exploits received the cognomen of " Robin 
the Devil." It is reported that he here, with a 
small band of trusty friends, withstood a siege of 
eight months from Colonel Briggs, an officer in the 
republican service stationed at Kendal, at the end 
of which period, his brother coming to his assist- 
ance, the colonel was repulsed. Aftenvards, in 
order to retaliate, the major, with a small company 



10 



HAND-BOOK TO 



of horse, went to Kendal, one Sunday morning, 
where, being informed the colonel was at prayers, 
he proceeded to the church, stationed his men at the 
entrance, and rode down the principal aisle. Briggs 
however not being present, the major was frus- 
trated in his design, and in making good his retreat 
his head came violently in contact with the arch of 
the door-way, by which casualty his helmet was 
struck off, and his saddle girth broken. The con- 
gregation, recovering from their surprise, attempted 
to seize him ; but, although much stunned, he suc- 
ceeded, by the aid of his followers, to effect his 
escape. This incident has been taken advantage 
of by Scott in the poem of Rokeby, whose similar 
description in canto six was founded on it, as 
appears from a note appended to that passage. 

One day's sojourn at least ought to be passed on 
and about the lake. To those who wish to go its 
full length in a short time the steam yacht, whicli 
plies during the day between Ambleside and Newby 
Bridge, is to be preferred ; but others who are de- 
sirous of strolling over the islands which dot its 
surface, and gliding within its pebbly bays and 
around its wood-clad pi-omontories, should retain a 
small boat as evidently best adapted for that pur- 
pose. By thus taking a leisurely survey novel 
prospects and unlooked for beauties are continually 
unfolding themselves to view. We will now pro- 
ceed to give a brief sketch of the lake itself. 

"Windermere, the largest of the English lakes, is 
about twelve miles in length, and in some places 
measures a mile in breadth. Its depth varies con- 
siderably, the greatest being stated to be eighty 
yards, or two hundred and forty feet. Its waters 
supply char, trout, perch, and pike, the privilege 
for jishing which is invested in different land- 
owners, who let their respective fisheries to persons 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



11 



who follow that art as their calling. At the proper 
season these hsherraen dispose of their char to be 
potted, after which they are despatched to the 
south and other parts of the kingdom. The liead 
of the lake is commanded by toAvering moun- 
tains, but the hills on each side are of a tamer 
character, and are, for the most part, covered with 
wood. The principal feeder falls into the lake, at 
its upper end, being the united streams of the 
Rothay and Brathay (the former running from 
Rydal "Water, and the latter from Elterwater), 
besides which Esthwaite Lake empties itself at 
Cunsey, Blelham Tarn, near to Brathay, and the 
diiferent vallies pour forth their tributary streams. 
The only outlet is at Newby Bridge, where the 
river takes the name of Leven, and after passing 
through Backbarrow, where it puts in motion the 
machinery of a large cotton manufactory, and Low 
Wood, where are some extensive powder-woi'ks, it 
mingles  with the channel in Morecambe Bay. 

One of the most attractive features of the lake 
are its islands. South of the Ferry Inn, com- 
mencing with the most southerly, are Blake Holm, 
Grass Holm, Ling Holm, and Ramps Holm, or 
Berkshire Island (the property of Lady Howard, of 
Levens Hall) ; thence proceeding northward are 
Crow Holm, Belle Isle (already mentioned), two 
Lily-of-the -Valley Holms (so called from pro- 
ducing that favourite flower), Thompson's Holm, 
House Holm, Hen Holm (belonging to Mr. Clay, 
of Croft Lodge), Lady Holm (on which once stood 
a chapel, or oratory, dedicated to the Virgin, and 
now the property of Mrs. Watson, of Calgarth), 
and, lastly. Rough Holm, belonging to Mr. Fleming 
of Rayrigg. These islands, shaded Avith trees, and 
scattered like beauty spots over the surface of the 
lake, are in summer resorted to by many a gay and 



12 



HAND-BOOK TO 



blithesome pic-nic party, who here, separated from 
the noise and turmoil of tlie world, and surrounded 
by scenes of grandeur and loveliness, can pass the 
delightful hour in pleasant converse, with 

" Sport that wrinkled care derides , 
And laughter holding both his sides." 

The aquatic excursionist in sailing over the lake 
may feast his eyes on scenes of varied and in- 
describable richness. Towards the head the tower- 
ing mountains of Langdale and Rydal may be seen 
from various positions, each altering their appear- 
ance. Green, who was himself a landscape painter, 
points out " a fascinating course by skirting the 
deeply-indented coast at Brathay into Pull Wyke, 
a pretty bay, surrounded by rich woods, over which 
peep the Loughrigg and other elevated summits, 
and from Pull Wyke by the grounds at Low Wray 
to the craggy and wooded promontory a little 
southward." The promontory here spoken of is 
nearly opposite the Low Wood Inn, and in passing 
between these places the hills at the head of the 
lake are seen to great advantage. Further south- 
ward the views lose some of their grandeur, but 
from many places in the vicinity of the islands 
they are perhaps even more beautiful and enchant- 
ing. 

As regards the views which may be obtained 
from the shores, we will briefly advert to them in 
mentioning those places which the tourist would 
come in contact with in making a circuit of the 
lake. Making Ambleside the starting place, and 
proceeding on the western side, the traveller passes, 
to the right, about three quarters of a mile from 
the town. Croft Lodge, the property of Mr. Clay, 
from the steep wooded hills behind which, inter- 
sected by paths, the lake may be seen as far as 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



13 



Bowness ; thence passing through Clappersgate he 
crosses Brathay Biidge, and shortly after leaves 
Brathay Hall, the seat of G. Redmayne, Esq., to 
the left, and Brathay Chapel, a neat edifice lately 
erected by the last-named gentleman, to the right. 
Pull Wyke, a bay stretching some distance inland, 
is then passed, where a fine view of the opposite 
shore is obtained, and shortly after the road to 
Hawkshead is left to the right, and Wray Castle 
is seen at some distance before him. Standing on 
the summit of a pleasant eminence this magnificent 
building forms a conspicuous object in many of the 
views from the upper portion of the lake. Its style' 
of architecture is apt to remind one of the feudal 
times, when every wealthy gentleman acted the 
part of a petty prince, having a number of stalwart 
retainers to defend his pretensions from loop-hole, 
battlement, and tower. It has been lately built by 
J. Dawson, Esq., physician ; and from the tasteful 
manner in which the grounds are laid out, and the 
extensive prospects it commands, is likely to be- 
come one of the most desirable places in the district. 
A mile further is the village of High Wray, where 
is the residence of W. Wilson, Esq., from which 
place to the Ferry Inn, a distance of three miles, 
the road winds through exuberant woods, about 
half-way passing close to Belle Grange, the seat of 
Edward Curwen, Esq. 

Arrived at the Ferry Inn, a well-conducted 
establishment, the Station House should not be 
overlooked. It is situated on the brow of the wood- 
clad hill above the inn, and admirable views of the 
lake and its islands are obtained from it. The inn 
itself is placed on the point of a woody promontory, 
overshaded by large trees, and diametrically oppo- 
site to a strait " nab," or promontory, on the other 
side, between which places passengers, horses, carts, 



14 HAND-BOOK TO 

carriages, &c. are regularly lei-rieJ over. Proceed- 
ing onward the roa d runs through Cunsey (one and 
a half miles from the inn), crossing Cunsey Beck, 
which issues from Esthwaite Lake and enters Win- 
dermere at this place. 

Two miles further, a somewhat uneasy road, 
through coppice woods, from which, however, may 
be had some excellent retrospects, brings the tourist 
to Graythwaite Hall, the property of and inhabited 
by Myies Sandys, Esq., the descendant of an ancient 
family of that name. The mansion has lately been 
enlarged, and the alterations have greatly improved 
its appearance. An intervening hill completely 
hides it from the lake, and the prospect from the 
front is only limited. Near to this place is also 
the residence of J. J. Rawlinson, Esq., situated so 
as to overlook the lake for a considerable distance. 
From Graythwaite to Newby Bridge the road 
passes through Stott Park, leaving the sylvan vale 
of Finsthwaite to the right, and to the left, nearly 
at the foot of the lake, a neat retired villa called 
The Landing, which, with the adjoining groimds, 
is now the property of Myles Harrison, Esq. At 
Newby Bridge, which may be considered the foot 
of the lake, the Swan Hotel affords every con- 
venience for visiters, having always in readiness 
conveyances, boats, &c., and also suitable apart- 
ments for those who wish to make a temporary 
stay. By this route the distance is from Ambleside 
to Ferry Inn eight miles, and from Ferry Inn to 
Newby Bridge seven miles. 

Tourists staying at NcAvby Bridge may procure 
a fine view of the surrounding country by visiting 
the " Tower," built by the late Mr. King, on the 
highest part of an adjacent hill to the west, the 
foot-path to which winds its Avay through stunted 
coppice, having around the music of the woodland 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



15 



songsters, and below the never-ceasing murmur of 
the Leven. 

From Newby Bridge to Bowness is somewhere 
about nine miles. Crossing the river Leven the 
residence of James Machell, Esq., is seen fronting 
up the lake. Immediately afterwards, leaving the 
main road to Milnthorpe, Lancaster, &c., and in- 
clining to the lake, the village of Staveley is left at 
the foot of the hill to the right. The road taking 
a nortlnvard direction at Fell Foot (a fine building 
belonging to j\Ir. Ashley, from the grounds in front 
of which a considerable portion of the lake may be 
seen) passes close to Town Head (W. Townley, 
Esq.), and skirts along the base of Gummershow, 
Should the visiter ascend this hiU, which is clad 
with firs to its very summit, on some fine clear 
day, his eyes will rest upon a diversified prospect of 
great extent. To the soutli and south-west are the 
vale and town of Cartmel (in which the ancient 
church or priory is easily distinguished), and the 
bay of ]Morecanibe, with the adjacent coast of Low 
Furness ; while to the north outstretches the lake 
with its group of islands, and the hills rising at its 
head, and extending far back, Avith swelling outlines 
that seem to hold communion with the skies. The 
road from here runs principally through woods, 
never wandering far from the sinuous margin of the 
lake, and passes near to Gill Head, Storrs Hall, 
Bellfield, and other villas more in the vicinity of 
Bowness. 

From Bowness to Ambleside is a distance of six 
miles — rich in its scenery, and interesting in its 
associations. Not far from the village the road 
enters the woods of Rayrigg, and Rayrigg House is 
seen at the edge of the lake. Here AYm. Wilber- 
force, whose exertions for the cause of humanity 
have made his name familiar to his countrymen, 



16 



HAND-BOOK TO 



resided for several summers. Between this place 
and where the Kendal and Ambleside road is 
joined, are had those splendid views already spoken 
of in a preceding page. A mile from this junction 
is Troutbeck Bridge, near to which is Calgarth 
Park, an old building once inhabited by the Philip- 
sons.* Two miles further is Low Wood Inn, a 
place where a number of tourists take up their 
quarters, and from its situation is admirably adapted 
for those who wish to make excursions in the neigh- 
bourhood. Regattas, wrestling, &c., once so cele- 
brated, still continued to take place here and at the 
Ferry Inn, but they are not so well supported as 
formerly, and are perhaps infei'ior in point of at- 
traction. Across the lake, Wray Castle, previously 
referred to, is a prominent object. A little above 
the inn is Dove's Nest, the chosen abode, in the 
summer of 1830, of IVIrs. Hemans, the poetess, who 
here, with her three sons, 

" Sought from the gazing throng to hide," 

and not a few of the visiters direct their steps ta 
the spot, which the most delightful of all our Eng- 
lish poetesses selected for her habitation. Proceed- 
ino- ouAvard several elegant mansions are passed 
about the head of the lake, about a mile after which 

• Not long ago in a window of this hall were deposited two 
human skulls, which were always looked on by the inhabitants 
of the neighbourhood as being indestructible. They had, according 
to report, teen often removed to a distance, or burnt to powder, and 
never failed to make their re-appearance, unharmed, in the same 
window. The country people attributed their presence to various 
causes, the most popular being that some diabolical act had been 
committed here, and that these were the imperishable remnants of 
some murdered persons. On that account they were viewed with a 
strange kind of awe. and were visited by young and old for several 
miles round. This credulity, however, has now vanished, and the 
jnouldering hand of time has done what it once was believed human 
efforts were unable to accomplish. 



TUK KNULISH LAKK6. 



17 



Ambleside, the reputed emporium of the district, is 
entered. 

To pedestrians or horsemen an excursion through 
the vale of Troutbeck would be found to be highly 
interesting. The valley may be entered from Bow- 
ness at Cook's House, where the road crosses that 
to Kendal, or from Ambleside by a road branching off 
near to the Low "Wood Inn, either of which enables 
the tourist to procure perhaps finer prospects of 
Windermere and its islands than are to be had from 
any other quarter. The road from Bowness along 
the eastern banks of the river passes St. Catharine's 
(the Earl of Bradford) and The Howe (Captain. 
Wilson, R.N.), and is connected with that on the 
western side at the chapel, about two miles up the 
valley. The latter road, however, is generally 
preferred, as it passes through the long village, with 
its picturesque houses, so much admired by the 
artist. Half a mile from the chapel is an inn, 
called the " Mortal Man," where the traveller can 
rest and regale himself. The celebrated Canning, 
while on a visit here, is known to have sat on 
horseback at the door of this inn (while his friends 
were inside) for upwards of half an hour, wTapt in 
profound contemplation, and apparently unconscious 
of what was passing around him. The road from 
here northward leads to Patterdale and Ullswater, 
leaving on the right High Street, Hill Bell, and 
other mountains, and passing close to Brothers 
Water. The river, which rises in High Street, is 
enriched by deep sylvan banks, and near to Trout- 
beck Bridge, "meeting many rough impediments, 
rolls furiously down a deep ravine." The inhabi 
tants of Troutbeck retain many of those customs 
which may be said to be indigenous, and their un- 
affected manners and genuine hospitality bear some 
resemblance to that displayed by their progenitors, 



18 



HAND-BOOK TO 



the ancient yeomanry ol this country. Troutbeck 
is the birth-place of the father of Hogarth, the 
painter. 

Should the tourist have an opportunity he would 
be highly delighted by a sail on the lake by moon- 
light. On such an occasion he seems suspended be- 
tween two skies, moon and stars shining as bril- 
liantly in the firmament below as in that above, and 
the natural beauties by which he is surrounded ai'e 
reflected in the translucent depths beneath. And 
not unfrequently at such times does the sound of 
music — artless perhaps, but not less thrilling — 
fall upon the ear; perchance some mild vocal strain 
from the shore, echoing through the exuberant 
woods which deck the hills on each side, or the 
more sonorous tones of instruments from the bosom 
of the lake, rebounding from one mountain top to 
another, until they die away in the distance. By 
listening to music in such a situation, and gazing 
awhile on the enchanting scenery, the mind becomes 
imbued with something like that holy calm Avhich 
pervades all aroimd, and the soul is led to yearn 
for something higher and purer than exists in 
worldly appetites and cravings. It leaves the mean 
and sordid, and soars aloft amid images of beauty, 
purity, and perfection. 

The tourist desirous of visiting Cartmel, Ulver- 
ston, Furness Abbey, &c. might do so from Newby 
Bridge, first going to Cartmel, then crossing the 
sands to Ulverston, and then returning to Amble- 
side by way of Coniston. We will here give a 
concise description of this route. 

The distance from Newby Bridge to Cartmel is 
about five miles. The town is only remarkable for 
its church or priory, a noble edifice, founded by 
William Mareschall, the elder, Earl of Pembroke, 
in 1188, and displacing the parish church which 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 19 

Stood here before the conquest. Formerly it be- 
longed to a priory of the regular canons of St. 
Augustine. It is constructed in the pointed style 
of architecture, and is of a cruciform shape. The 
interior is supported by four clustered pilasters, 
and the choir has a number of stalls, beautifully 
carved, and exhibiting at the top the instruments 
of our Sa^•iours passion. There are some ancient 
monuments also in the interior, and the library 
possesses a few antique tomes, amongst the rest 
a fine copy of the interesting letters of King 
Charles I. At the general suppression of the 
monastic institutions by Henry VlIL. being a 
parochial as well as conventual church, it was pur- 
chased by the inhabitants for a trilling consideration, 
and hence was preserved fi-om the general wreck, 
and remains an honour and ornament to the place. 

From Cartmel to Ulverston, over the sands, is 
somewhere about six miles, the road passing near 
to Holker Hall, the seat of the Earl of Burlington. 
Ulverston contains a population of about 5,000; 
has a short canal which, at ebb-tide, enables vessels 
of small burden to approach close to the town ; 
possesses two episcopal churches, with other places of 
worship; a Theatre, Assembly Eoom, Savings' Bank, 
and other public buildings ; and has several inns 
noted for their hospitality and attention to strangers, 
the principal of which are the Sun and Braddyll's 
Arms. Being situated in the centre of a fertile 
country, its market, which is held on a Thursday, 
is considerable, and it may in every respect be re- 
garded as the capital of Furness. Two miles south of 
the town is Conishead Priory (T. R. G. Braddyll, 
Esq.). decidedly one of the prettiest places in the 
country. A little further is the village of Bardsea, 
to which place steamers from Fleetwood ply daily 
during the summer months, 
c 2 



20 



HAND-BOOK TO 



From Ulverston to Furness Abbey, by way of 
Dalton* (the ancient emporium of Furness), is up- 
wards of six miles, passing on the way some exten- 
sive iron ore mines. The Abbey is situated in the 
narrow and secluded " Glen of Deadly Nightshade," 
and the extent of the magnificent ruins bear ample 
testimony of the vast size it has once been. It was 
founded in 1127 by Stephen, Earl of Mortaign and 
Boulogne, and afterwards King of England, and is 
said to have been second in point of magnitude among 
the monastic establishments belonging to the Cister- 
cians. At the dissolution of monasteries it shared 
the fate of others, and fell a sacrifice to the avarice of 
the king. The walls of some portions of the building 
yet remain, attesting the richness of the gothic archi- 
tecture and the stability of the workmanship. A fine 
view of these sublime ruins may be had from an 
eminence on the eastern side, and equally captivating 
is that which is seen on first entering the grounds, 
where, "having passed some modern buildings which 
are not much in harmony with the character of the 
scene, we obtain an affecting view of the venerable 
ruins, having in their front a grassy area, ornamented 
with an antique dial stand, and enclosed on every 
side by fine groves of every species of trees. In 
advancing we gaze with transport upon the great 
northern window ; upon broken arches and stately 
walls beyond, glimpses of which are caught through 
the gaping casements ; and, finally, upon the belfry, 
standing in lonely and gloomy magnificence in 
a nook of the wood-covered hills that close the 
scene towards the west." f A railway is now open 



* Romney, the distinguished painter, whose works grace many of 
the gentlemen's seats in this part, was born near to this place, and 
for some time followed the profession of his father, who was a 
cabinet-maker. 

t Evans's Furness and Furnp«s Abbey. 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



21 



from Daltou to Barrow, at the southern extremity 
of Furness, and a hotel has been erected at the 
Abbey Station for the convenience of visiters, 
where they meet with every requisite. 

The tourist may return to Ulverston by way of 
Urs^vick, in the xdcinage of which are some Druidi- 
cal vestiges, afterwards passing Swartmoor Hall, 
once the residence of George Fox, the first of the 
Quakers, who built a Friends' meeting-house at 
this place, which bears the date 1688, and was 
probably the first of the kind. From Ulverston 
the road passes through Greenodd, thence proceeds 
up the left bank of the river Crake to Lo^^^ck, 
from whence it pursues the right bank to its source, 
Coniston Water, which will shortly be described. 

From BoA\Tiess to Coniston, by way of Hawks- 
head, is a distance of nearly ten miles. After 
crossing the Ferry the tourist passes through the 
hamlets of Far and Near Sa-\vi-ey, the latter being a 
picturesque object at the foot of Esthwaite Lake, 
fi-om whence the tom-ist may, at his option, pursue 
his course either on the eastern or western side. 
The length of the lake is about two miles, and its 
breadth never exceeds half a mile. There are two 
circular peninsulas, one on each side, which, to a 
distant observer, have the appearance of islands, 
and are in fact only connected to the shore by a 
very narrow neck or strip of land. On the eastern 
side is Lake Field (Mr. Ogden), and Lake Bank 
(Mr. Badley); on the western side is Esthwaite 
Hall, once the family seat of the Sandys, and now 
a farm-house, and Esthwaite Lodge, the residence 
of JVIrs. Beck (widow of the late T. A. Beck, Esq., 
author of a splendidly-illustrated work entitled 
" Annales Fumesienses," and also an eminent me- 
teorologist) ; and not far from the upper end the 
village of Colthouse. Still nearer the head is a 
c 3 



22 



HAND-BOOK TO 



tarn, whereon a small island, in high winds floats 
from one side to the other. 

The town of Hawkshead contains about 800 in- 
habitants. It has a Free Grammar School, founded 
by EdAvyne Sandys, Archbishop of York, a native 
of this part, in the year 1585, and was till within 
half a century back resorted to by students from 
various parts of the kingdom, and boasts of having 
educated, while under the superintendence of Mr. 
Bowman, the poet Wordsworth, his brother, and 
other eminent characters. In addition to the cele- 
brity which it gained from its excellent school, and 
the benefits which accrued from the influx of so 
many scholars, Hawkshead formerly had a con- 
siderable market for the sale of woollen yarns, and 
its fairs were remarkable for the immense number 
of servants regularly hired at them — masters and 
servants flocking in from a gi-eat distance for that 
purpose. At that period (which is well remembered 
by aged persons still living in the neighbourhood) 
in North Lancashire and Westmorland every family 
were in the habit of carding and spinning the wool 
obtained from their own flock, some of which was, 
in the first place, taken to supply their own neces- 
sities, and the remainder sold to purchasers in the 
Hawkshead market. But modern inventions have 
annihilated the old spinning wheel, and those 
changes which have had such an influence over 
society, and conduced principally to the rise and 
progress of other places, have been the means of 
depriving Hawkshead of its popularity and im- 
portance. The church, a fine old building, dedi- 
cated to St. IVIichael, stands on an eminence on the 
southern side, from whence may be had a pleasant 
view of the adjacent valley and the Lake of Es- 
thwaite. Conveyances may be procured at the Red 
Lion, and comfortable accommodations may be 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 23 

found at that and the other inns. The distance 
from Hawkshead to Ambleside is five miles, to 
Coniston Waterhead three miles, to Newby Bridge 
eight miles, and to Ulverston sixteen miles. 

About half a mile from Hawkshead the road to 
Coniston diverges from that to Ambleside at Hawks- 
head HaU, an ancient building, where, during the 
existence of Furness Abbey, the abbot's baililF exer- 
cised temjjoral jurisdiction, in a room still to be 
seen above the gateway ; and a few clerical monks, 
whose duty it was to perform divine service in the 
church and attend to the spiritual necessities of the 
neighbourhood, were also located here. At a little 
distance to the right is Bellemont (Dr. Whittaker), 
commanding a good view of the vale and lake of 
Esthwaite, and the country in that direction, as far 
as Gummershow, at the foot of Windermere. In 
ascending the hill between this place and Coniston 
are seen the mountains at the head of Windermere 
— Loughrigg, Rydal Fell, Fairfield, Kirkstone, and 
still further southward Wansfell, and Hill Bell. On 
descending, the vale, lake, and village of Coniston 
meet the eye, closed in by the Old Man and other 
abrupt hills to the west. Before reaching the level, 
Waterhead House (the property of J. Marshall, 
Esq.) is passed on the left, and soon afterwards is 
reached Waterhead Inn, at the head of the lake, 
where tourists can be supplied with boats, convey- 
ances, guides, &c. A little further is the village of 
Church Coniston, where are also two inns (the 
Crown and Black Bull), where visiters may also 
meet with comfortable quarters and other requisites. 
The Waterhead Inn is upwards of seven miles from 
Ambleside, and nearly sixteen from Ulverston. 

Coniston, or Thurston AVater, is six miles in 
length, and in some places measures three quarters 
of a mile in breadth. Its margin is regular, and 
c 4 



24 



HAND-BOOK TO 



not SO diversified as that of Windermere, while its 
surface is only adorned by two small islands (near 
to the eastern shore), whose appearance are not cal- 
culated to add much to the beauty of the lake. Its 
waters supply trout, char, &c., the last-named being 
considered larger and of a finer quality than any 
to be found in the kingdom. A stream running 
from Yewdale, and another from Tilberthwaite, are 
its principal feeders, but it has also some smaller 
tributai-ies flowing from the tarns — Levers Water, 
Lows Water, and Goats Water — on the sides of 
the Old Man mountain. The outlet is called the 
Crake, which after passing through Lowick, Spark 
Bridge, and Penny Bridge, where its waters are 
turned to account, it unites with the Leven, from 
Windermere, on the sands at Greenodd. 

Like Windermere, it has a carriage road running 
entirely round its margin. Looking from towards 
the foot on this road the scenery surpasses any thing 
in the lake district for grandeur and sublimity, 
particularly if viewed from the eastern shore. 
Commencing at the southern end on this side we 
pass through the hamlet of Nibthwaite, near which 
is Water Park (R. Town, Esq.), and then succes- 
sively by Brentwood Cottage, Coniston Bank, and 
Tent Lodge, once the abode of Elizabeth Smith, 
the eminent Hebrew scholar and poetess. The 
high hills of Coniston, and the steep craggy heights 
of Yewdale, are conspicuous objects on this side, 
and near to the head may be had a good view of 
the village of Coniston, and Coniston Hall, the an- 
cient seat of the Flemings, now at Rydal. On the 
western side are the hamlets of Blawith and Tor- 
ver. 

Fine views may also be obtained from the surface 
of the lake. West speaks of a place about two miles 
from the head, where, "looking towards the moun- 



THE ENGLISH 1<AKE!?. 25 

tains, the lake spreads itself into a noble expanse of 
transparent water, and bursts into a bay on each 
side, bordered \\'ith verdant meadows, and inclosed 
with a variety of grounds, rising in an exceedingly 
bold manner. The objects are beautifully diversi- 
fied amongst themselves, and contrasted by the 
finest exhibition of rural elegance (cultivation and 
pasturage, waving woods and sloping inclosures, 
adorned by nature and improved by art), under the 
bold sides of stupendous mountains, whose airy 
summits the elevated eye cannot now reach, and 
which almost deny access to the human kind." 

Several highly interesting rambles may be made 
from Coniston. To the northward lie the vales of 
Yewdale and Tilberthwaite, the former remarkable 
for its crags and venerable tree, and the latter 
having extensive slate quarries amongst its woods 
and wild sceneiy. 

The ascent to the Old Man (probably so called 
from the pile of stones on its summit) is a somewhat 
difficult and fatiguing task, but when once achieved 
the labour is soon forgotten, and the attention 
rivetted to the varied and far-extending prospects 
which present themselves to the eye of the specta- 
tor. To the northward are rocky and majestic 
mountains of different altitudes, while in the oppo- 
site direction, there being no interposing obstacles, 
the eye can range along the bays and promontories 
of the Lancashire and part of the Cumberland coast 
— can see the small islands at the southern ex- 
tremity of Fiu-ness, with the Isle of Man, and, on a 
fine clear day, the dim outlines of Snowdon and 
other "Welch mountains. On the eastern side are 
seen the vale and lake of Coniston, ^\'ith a portion 
of Windermere. The estimated height is 2,477 
feet. The easiest ascent is by way of Torver, but 
the nearest from Coniston is past the copper mines 



26 



HAND-BOOK TO 



and slate quarries, the former of which have been 
worked from time immemorial, with the exception 
of a brief period during the time of the civil wars, 
and at present employ a large number of workmen. 
Veins of the same mineral run in opposite direc- 
tions, one portion extending towards Seathwaite, 
and the other towards Hawkshead, but this is the 
only place where any profitable attempts have been 
made to work them. 

Another exceedingly pleasant trip might be made 
into the vales of Seathwaite and Dunnerdale, on the 
banks of the river Duddon, a distance of five milesj 
by way of Walna Scar. The last-named valley 
is embosomed amid rude and sublime mountain 
scenery ; and not one of its least interesting objects 
is its small chapel, where the " wonderful Walker"* 

» The Rev. Robert Walker, the excellent person'here alluded to, 
was born at Under Crag, in Seathwaite, in 1709. He was the 
youngest of twelve children, and, being of a weak constitution 
his parents contrived to give him a limited education. This 
done he became master of a school at Lowes Water, where, by 
the assistance of some neighbouring gentlemen, he gained such a 
knowledge of the classics as enabled him to take holy orders. 
These obtained, he was installed in the curacy of Seathwaite, 
which at that time yielded him five pounds per annum. Having 
received forty pounds with his wife he furnished the parsonage 
with it, and entered upon his duties. In addition to his meagre 
salary, he received a trifle for teaching a school, which he did 
within the rails of the altar, at the same time attending to his 
spinning-wheel. By a life of unexampled industry and frugality 
he succeeded in bringing up a large family, and setting them 
forward in the world, and at his death, in 1802, was possessed of 
two thousand pound in money, besides a number of webs of linen 
and woollen of his own spinning. This was not the fruit of 
avarice ; for his hand was ever ready to assist the poor and 
nect'ssitous, and even what he received for teaching school was 
given voluntarily, no charge being made. He was universally 
revered, and his opinion on matters of importance sought after 
for a considerable di.stance. His disinterested and self-denying 
qualities may be traced in tlie following answer to the Bishop of 
Chester, when offered the curacy of Ulplia in addition to his own. 
—"The chapel of Seathwaite and Ulpha annexed together would 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. -' 

(a name familiar to the readers of Wordsworth) per- 
formed the duties of his callina: : — 

" Whose good works formed an endless retinue ; 
A pastor such as Chaucer's verse pourtrays ; 
Such as the heaven-taught skill of Herbert drew ; 
And tender Goldsmith crowned with deathless praise." 

The Duddon has its rise on Bowfell, and after 
meandering through a picturesque and romantic 
tract of country enters the Duddon Sands near 
Broughton-in-Furness. Wordsworth has composed 
several sonnets on this river, the following of which, 
representing its peaceful and troubled character, we 
fiave been tempted to transcribe : — 

" The old inventive poets had they seen. 
Or rather felt the entrancement that detains 
Thy waters, Duddon ! 'mid these flowery plains, 
The still repose, the liquid lapse serene. 
Transferred to bowers imperishably green. 
Had beautified Elysium ! But these chains 
Will soon be broken ; — a rough course remains. 
Rough as the past ; where. Thou of placid mien, 
Innocuous as the firstling of the flock, 
And countenanced like a soft cerulean sky, 
Shalt change thy temper, and with many a shock 
Given and received in mutual jeopardy. 
Dance, like a Bacchanal, from rock to rock. 
Tossing her frantic thyrsus wide and high." 

From Coniston the next move is generally to 
Ambleside (eight mUes), portions of which road 
have already been spoken of. Ambleside is an an- 
cient chartered town, and contains a population of 
upwards of one thousand. Its streets have a cou- 
fiised and iiTegular appearance, but, being built on 
an elevated ground, command good prospects of the 
adjoining country. The leading inns are the Salu- 

be apt to cause a general discontent among the inhabitants of 
both places ; by either thinking themselves slighted, being only 
served alternately, or neglected in the duty, or attributing it to 
covetousness in me ; all which occasions of murmuring I would 
willingly avoid." 



28 



HAND-BOOK TO 



tation and Commercial, besides which there are 
others where travellers can be accommodated, as 
well as at a number of private houses, specially 
fitted up for lake visiters. Boats of various kinds 
are kept by the dilFerent inns for the convenience 
of tourists. The vicinage in every direction is 
adorned by a number of pretty villas, and the 
various little walks in the neighbourhood abound 
with rich and enchanting scenery. A very in- 
teresting ceremony, called the Rush-bearing, takes 
place at Ambleside annually, on the eve of the 
last Sunday in July, being probably the relic o^ 
some ancient custom which has now, with one or 
two exceptions, fallen into desuetude. On the day 
in question the girls of the town and its neighbour- 
hood, preceded by music, carry garlands of flowers 
to the church, whei'e they are tastefully deposited 
until the following day, when a sermon is preached 
befitting the occasion. On a fine bright day this 
exhibition has a very lively and picturesque ap- 
pearance. 

From Ambleside numerous excursions may be 
made in different directions, which for variety and 
interest are not to be excelled in the lake district. 
We will first speak of that through the Langdales 
by way of Skelwith Bridge, a road, however, it 
should be remembered, that is only passable for 
light conveyances. After passing through Clap- 
persgate the tourist may either proceed on the right 
or left bank of the river Brathay to Skelwnth Bridge 
(three miles), where there is an inn, and a little 
further up the river, Skelwith Force, a cascade of 
moderate height, but always having a plentiful sup- 
ply of water, and encompassed by splendid scenery. 
A mile further there is a tine view of Eltei-water, 
shortly after which the road passes through Col- 
with Bridge, and near to Cohvith Force, another 



THE ENliLISH LAKES. 



29 



cascade with a fall of nearly seventy feet. Instead 
of taking the road to Elterwater at this place it is 
usual to proceed by Little Langdale Tarn to Blea 
Tarn (five miles from Skehvith Bridge), situated in 

" A little lowly vale — 
A lowly vale, and yet uplifted high 
Among the mountains." 

This place has been faithfully depicted by Words- 
worth, in his " Excursion," 

" A spot that lies 
Among yon mountain fastnesses concealed," 

and is the abode of his " Solitary." Leaving this tarn 
to the left, the road shortly begins to descend steeply 
into Great Langdale, which from this position, is a 
beautiful object, and the Langdale Pikes present 
themselves in towering magnificence These pecu- 
liarly-formed mountains are named the Pike of 
Stickle and Harrison Stickle, the latter being 2,400 
feet above the level of the sea, and commanding 
some good pro.spects towards Rydal and the head of 
Windermere, Avhile from the summit of its neigh 
hour may be seen Bassenthwaite Lake, ^^^th Skid- 
daw and other hills in that direction. Between 
these two hills flows a stream, which at one place 
falls through a deep chasm a height of sixty feet, 
having over it a natural arch. This is called Dun- 
geon Gill, and is the scene of Wordsworth's " Idle 
Shepherd Boys," where 

" Into a chasm a mighty block 
Hath fallen and made a bridge of rock. 
The gulph is deep below, 
And in a basin black and small, 
Receives a lofty waterfall." 

Returning down Great Langdale the road passes 
the extensive slate quarries at Thrang Crag, and 
shortly afterwards the chapel, where the lamented 
Owen Lloyd officiated for twelve years. In the 
chapel-yard there is a poetical epitaph, composed 



30 HAND-BOOK TO 

by Wordsworth, to his memory. The distance 
from here to Ambleside is somewhere about five 
miles. The road generally preferred branches from 
that to Loughrigg to the left at a short distance 
from the chapel, and in ascending the hill views 
of Langdale, Elterwater, Loughrigg Tarn, and a 
portion of Windermere are obtained. When the 
summit is gained the vale of Grasmere, 

 ' Tranquil and shut out 
From all the strife that shakes a jarring world," 

is presented to the eye ; but the road leaves the 
valley to the left, and passes Rydal Water on the 
same side, near to which it joins the turnpike, and 
a mile further brings you once more to Ambleside. 
The other road, which is the only one practicable 
for carriages, passes by the powder mills near to 
Elterwater, thence close to Loughrigg Tarn, and 
afterwards by the river Brathay and through Clap- 
persgate, a distance about equal to the route men- 
tioned above, but inferior in the extent and variety 
of its prospects. 

The short walks in the neighbourhood of Amble- 
side are of an exceedingly attractive character. A 
few hundred yards from the town is vStock Gill 
Force, a cascade, or rather a succession of four 
cascades, which together fall seventy feet. Stock 
Gill Beck rises not far from Kirkstone, and in its 
passage, till it unites with the Rothay, has a num- 
ber of pretty falls, meandering through rich pic- 
turesque scenery. " Sometimes," says Green, " con- 
fined to a narrow channel, the water, impatient of 
resistance, dashes impetuously down the steep crag 
to a momentary rest ; but oftener spanning the 
little channel, in soothing and gentle motion, slips 
over the smooth rocks, thereby softening into beauty 
all their original tints by its transparency. The 
margin of this gill is sometimes low, sometimes 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



31 



swelling, but oftener in steep and grassy banks, or 
bold projecting rocks rising to a vast height; the 
native woods in a wild intricacy, impend from the 
rocks, which are additionally clothed with fern, 
moss, and other vegetation." 

The pedestrian desirous of taking an extensive 
view of the country may climb to the summit of 
Fail-field, nearly three thousand feet above the level 
of the sea, the way to which passes by Rydal 
Mount ; or he may ascend Wansfell Pike,* which, 
although only rising fifteen hundred feet above 
Windermere, possesses prospects equal to those of its 
more lofty neighbours. From its summit may be 
seen Windermere, Grasmere, and Rydal Lakes, the 
towns of Ambleside and Hawkshead, and at a 
greater distance portions of Morecambe Bay and 
the towering hills of Langdale and Coniston ; or a 
still easier trip might be taken to Loughrigg Fell 
(1000 feet above Windermere) by way of Clappers- 
gate, a route which would amply repay the slight 
difficulties experienced in accomplishing it. 

Those who love to linger among the relics of by- 
gone ages, and roam in imagination 

" Through the dark backward and abysm of time." 

• Wordsworth has dedicated the following sonnet to this moun- 
tain : — 

" Wansfell ! this Household has a favoured lot. 
Living with liberty on thee to gaze, 
To watch while morn first crowns thee with her rays, 
Or when along thy breast serenely float 
Evening's angelic clouds. Yet ne'er a note 
Hath sounded (shame upon the Bard !) thy praise, 
For all that thou, as if from heaven, hadst brought 
Of glory lavished on our quiet days. 
Bountiful Son of Earth ! when we are gone 
From every object dear to mortal sight. 
As soon we shall be, may these words attest 
How oft, to elevate our spirits, shone 
Thy visionary majesties of light. 
How in thy pensive glooms our hearts found rest." 



32 



HAND-BOOK TO 



should visit the Roman station at the head of Win- 
dermere, some slight traces of which are yet to be 
discerned. This fort has been ascertained to be the 
Dictis of the Notitia, and, according to West, was 
erected for the purpose of protecting some works 
established here for the refinement of the copper 
ore procured in High Furness, as well as to super- 
intend the difiereiit roads on which the metals of 
this part were conveyed to York. From this place 
there were undoubtedly roads to Dalton-in-Furness; 
to the Concangium at Water Crook, near Kendal ; 
and to Arbeia at Moresby, in Cumberland. The 
length of the building is stated to have been 396 
feet, and the breadth 240 feet, being an exact 
parallelogram, and the shorter side being nearest 
the lake. Several antique articles have been found 
at different times, attesting it to have been a Roman 
foi't, and a small collection of coins found here are 
now deposited in the library of the University of 
Oxford. 

From Ambleside the tourist can cross the pass of 
Kirkstone, 

" Where, save the rugged road, we find 
No appanage of human kind," 

and proceed by the inn at Patterdale (ten miles) to 
Ullswater ; but as that lake, as well as the vale, 
may be best viewed from the other end, we will 
notice it after describing the route by way of Rydal 
and Grasmere to Keswick, 

The distance from Ambleside to Rydal, on the 
Keswick road, is one and a half miles ; but the 
pedestrian might proceed along the banks of the 
Rothay, entering the fields at Rothay bridge, a 
more circuitous route, but one that winds among 
scenery of a richer and more diversified character. 
This road passes Fox Ghyll (Hornby Roughsedge, 
Esq.), Fox Howe (jVIi-s. Arnold), and other tasteful 



THE ENGLISH hAKES. ^^ 

villas, and enters the highway a few hundred yards 
from Rydal. A fine retrospective view may be had 
of Ambleside, and at dilierent points on this road 
may be seen Fairfield rising before, and Kirkstone 
on the right of the traveller, while, still nearer, 
Rydal Hull and Rydal Mount are attractive objects. 

The pretty village of Rydal is situated at the 
foot of Rydal Water, in a confined yet exceedingly 
beautiful valley. The neat chapel which is seen 
on first entering was built at the sole expense of 
Lady le Fleming, to Avhom "W^ords worth addressed 
a poem, on seeing the foundation prepared for its 
erection. Near to the village, in a splendid park, 
is Rydal Ilall, the patrimonial seat of the above- 
named lady. The road leading to the hall passes 
near to Rydal IMount, the residence of Wordsworth, 
a correct representation of which will be found in 
the accompanying engraving. 

The house of the laureate is an unpretending cot- 
tage-Uke building, partially covered by ivy, and sur- 
rounded by scenery of incomparable beauty. From 
the grounds, which have been laid out, and prin- 
cipally planted, in a tasteful manner, by Words- 
worth himself, may be had glimpses of AVindermere, 
and fine views of other parts of the district. In 
short, the spot is just what the reader of Words- 
worth might anticipate from his writings, over 
which no doubt it has shed its genial influence. 
IMi-s. Sigourney's lines on the occasion of her \-isit 
to this place bear testimony to the beauty of the 
country without, and the domestic harmony Avhich 
prevailed within, the dwelling of the poet : — 

" Thee, too, I found witliin thy sylvan dell. 
Whose music thrilled my heart when life was new, 
Wordsworth ! mid cliff and stream and cultured rose> 
In love with Nature's self, and she with thee. 
Thy ready hand, that from the landscape culled 
Its long familiar charms, rock, tree, and spire, 
D 



M HAND-BOOK TO 

Willi kindness half paternal, leading on 

My stranger footsteps through the garden walk. 

Mid shrubs ard flowers that from thy planting grew ; 

The group of dear ones gathering round thy board — 

She, the first friend, still as in youth beloved, 

The daughter, sweet companion, sons mature, 

And favourite grandchild, with his treasured phrase — 

The evening lamp, that o'er thy silver locks 

And ample brow fell fitfully, and touched 

Thy lifted eye with earnestness of thought. 

Are with me as a picture, ne'er to fade. 

Till death shall darken all material things." 

Here, then, in liis rural retreat, surrounded hj 
exquisite beauty and sublimity, enjoying domestic 
happiness, peace, and leisure, endowed with rare 
abilities, and favoured by fortune with the means 
of pursuing his high avocation, does Wordsworth 
compose and give to the world those productions 
which are universally admired and applauded. With 
a genius to discern what ordinary minds have no 
conception of, his most touching themes are drawn 
from common life : he has left the beaten track, and 
has linked the lowliest and humblest of Nature's pro- 
ductions to imperishable verse. An eminent writer 
observes, "the grand truth which pervades his 
poetry is, that the beautiful is not confined to the 
rare, the new, the distant, to scenery and modes of 
life open only to the few ; but that it is poured 
forth profusely on the common eai'th and sky, that 
it gleams from the lowliest flower, that it lights up 
the humblest sphere, that the sweetest affections 
lodge in holy hearts, that there is sacredness, dig- 
nity, and loveliness in lives which few eyes rest on, 
that even in the absence of all intellectual culture, 
the domestic relations can nourish that disinterested- 
ness which is the element of all true gi'eatness, and 
vsdthout which intellectual power is a splendid de- 
formity, Wordsworth is the poet of humanity ; 
he teaches reverence for our universal nature ; he 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



35 



breaks down the factitious barriers between human 
hearts." 

To view the two Avaterfalls at Rydal it is neces- 
sary to take a conductor from tlie village. The 
higher is a considerable fall, rolling do-\\ni a perpen- 
dicular rock, at first much contracted, and afterwards 
spreading into a broader sheet, and dashing into the 
dark basin at its foot. The lower fall is viewed 
from the window of a summer-house, and presents a 
scene of indescribable beauty. This pretty cascade 
is thus described by Wordsworth in a juvenile poem 
entitled " An Evening Walk : " — 

" Then while I wandered wliere the huddling rill 
Brightens with water-breaks the hollow ghyll 
As by enchantment, an obscure retreat 
Opened at once, and stayed my devious feet. 
While thick about the rill tlie branches close. 
In rocky basin its wild waves repose, 
Inverted shrubs, and moss of gloomy green. 
Cling from the rocks, with pale wood-weeds between ; 
And its o^vn twilight softens the whole scene. 
Save where aloft the subtle sunbeams shine 
On withered briars that o'er the crags recline ; 
Save where with sparkling foam a small cascade, 
Illumines, from within, the leafy shade ; 
Beyond, along the vista of the brook. 
Where antique roots its bustling course o'erlook, 
The eye reposes on a secret bridge 
Half grey, half shagged with ivy to its ridge." 

Mr Gilpin also describes this spot as an excellent 
subject for the pencil. "The dark colour of the 
stone, taking still a deeper tinge from the wood 
which hangs over it, sets off* to wonderful advantage, 
the sparkling lustre of the stream, and produces an 
uncommon effect of light. It is this effect, indeed, 
from which the chief beauty of this little exhibition 
arises. In every representation truly picturesque, 
the shade should gi-eatly overbalance the light. The 
face of nature under the glow of noon, has rarely this 
beautiful appearance. The artist therefore generally 
D 2 



36 HAND-BOOK TO 

courts her cliarms in a morning or an evening hour, 
when the shadows are deep and extended, and when 
the sloping sun-beam affords rather a catching, than 
a glaring light. Here we have an admirable idea of 
the magical effect of light picturesquely distributed." 

Rydal Water is only about half a mile in length, 
and its breadth probably not more than four or five 
hundred yards. Its surface is graced by two small 
islands, and its banks are adorned by woods and 
green fields, surmounted by Nab vScar on the North, 
and Loughrigg Fell on the South. The lake cannot 
be viewed to advantage from the main road, but 
better vieAvs may be had by following the foot path 
to Grasmere, under Nab Scar, or the road under 
Loughrigg Fell, already spoken of. 

From Rydal to Grasmere (one mile and half on 
the main road) the tourist passes White Moss Quarry, 
near to which two old roads branch off" to the right, 
which the person on foot would find to possess two 
advantages, being both shorter, and passing over 
more elevated gi'ound, commanding better prospects 
of the surrounding scenery. On the lower of these 
roads is the Wishing Gate, so called from its being 
believed in the neighbourhood that every thing here 
wished for is sure to be realised. Wordsworth has 
written a poem on this gate, from which we extract 
the following verses : — 

" Yea 1 even the stranger from afar 
Reclining on the moss grown bar, 

Unknowing and unknown. 
The infection of the ground partakes. 
Longing for his beloved, who makes 

All happiness her own. 
Then why should conscious spirits fear 
The mystic stirrings that are here. 

The ancient faith disclaim ? 
The local genius ne'er befriends 
Designs whose course in folly ends. 

Whose just reward is shame. 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. ^^ 

Smile, if thou wilt, but not in scorn, 
If some by ceaseless pains outworn, 

Here crave an easier lot ; 
If some have thirsted to renew 
A broken vow, or bind a true 

With firmer, holier knot. 
And not in vain when thoughts are cast 
Upon the irrevocable past, — 

Some penitent sincere 
May for a worthier future sigh 
While trickles from his downcast eye 

No unavailing tear. 
The worldling pining to be freed 
From turmoil, who would turn or speed 

The current of Iiis fate, 
Might stop before this favour'd scene 
At nature's call, nor blush to lean 

Upon the Wishing Gate." 

The new road skirts along the margin of Gras^ 
mere lake, which is somewhat larger than Rydal 
Mere. Being entirely encircled by mountains, it may 
be viewed with good effect from almost any position, 
and in this respect differs from most of the other 
lakes, which are generally seen to the best advan- 
tage when the spectator is looking from towards 
the foot. A verdant island of about four acres in 
extent, rises boldly from the surface, and is used for 
pasturage. Near to the head of the lake ai*e a few 
houses, bearing the name of ToAvn End, one of 
which was inhabited by Wordsworth for eight years, 
who here composed several of those pieces, which 
have rendered his name so familiar. That the 
laiu'eate was greatly attached to this spot may be 
iirfen-ed from his " Farewell," -written while about 
to leave for a sliort time, in which he speaks of the 

" Happy garden ! whose seclusion deep 
Had been so friendly to industrious hours ;" 

but indeed there is scarcely an object of interest in 

the vale but has found a place in his works. One 

of these houses was also once occupied by INIi'. De 

D 3 



38 HAND-BOOK TO 

Quincey. At Town End the road, deviating to the 
left, leads to the village of Grasmere, v^here there 
is an inn, the " Red Lion," which supplies post 
horses and light conveyances, and a temporary stay 
can either be made there or at "The Swan," on 
the Keswick road. A liydropathic establishment 
flourishes here, under the superintendence of Dr. 
L. Stummes. The parish church is dedicated to 
St. Oswald. Overlooking the village, in a pleasant 
situation, is Allan Bank, a neat villa, occupied by 
Thomas Dawson, Esq., also once the residence of 
the poet Wordsworth. 

The beauties of Grasmere have been noticed by 
several eminent writers, who have at diiferent times 
visited here. Mr. Gray, in 1769, mentions the 
" peace, rusticity, and happy poverty " of the vale ; 
and Housman, West, Gilpin, and Hutchinson have 
ef»di desci'ibed it according to his peculiar taste and 
style. Mrs. Hemans speaks of it as a 

" Fair scene 
Most loved by evening and her dewy star ! 
Oh ! ne'er may man, with touch unliallowed, jar 
The perfect music of the cliarm serene." 

Mrs. Sigourney has also recorded her visit to 
Grasmere in her "Pleasant Memories of Pleasant 
Lands :" — 

" And thy pure lake. 
Spreading its waveless breast of azure out 
'Tween thee and us, pencil, nor lip of man 
May fitly show its lovliness. The soul 
Doth hoard it as a gem, and fancy-led 
Explore its curving shores, its lovely isle, 
That, like an emerald clasped in crystal, sleeps." 

The tourist stationed at Grasmere might make 
an excursion to the vale and tarn of Eskdale, the 
latter being engulphed in the hills between Silver 
How and Helm Ci'ag. The stream issuing from 
this tarn flows into Gra.sniere Lake, and not far 
from its source makes a frotliy waterfall, called 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 39 

Sour Milk Gill. Some hardy pedestrians are in the 
habit of ascending the Langdale Pikes fi-om this 
valley, by way of Stickle Tarn, and others j)refer 
reaching Borrowdale and Keswick either by passing 
over Codale Fell, or by crossing the Stake Pass. 

Visits might be made fi-om Grasmere into the 
Langdales, or, by a mountain path of eight miles, 
to Patterdale and Ullswater. The short Avalks in 
the immediate vicinity would also be found z'ife in 
interest. The proximate mountains are Helm Crag, 
rising to the north, with an exceedingly singular 
and fantastic apex, which Wordsworth imagines 
represents an 

" Ancient Woman, 
Cowering besides her rifted Cell ;" 

Silver How to the West ; and Nab Scar to the east ; 
while a few miles distant to the north towers Hel- 
vellyn and Fail-field to the north-east. 

Helvellyn may be ascended on its western side 
from three places, Grasmere, Wythburn, and Leg- 
berthwaite ; and, on its eastern side, from Patter- 
dale. From the first and last named places a por- 
tion of the way may be traversed on horseback ; 
but the shortest ascent and the one most frequently 
made is from Wythburn, and can only be made by 
persons on foot Helvellyn has been found to be 
3,055 feet above the level of the sea, and commands 
better arranged and more extensive prospects than 
any other mountain in the district, overlooking the 
principal lakes and mountains for a large circuit, 
and from some positions having views of the ocean 
between the hills to the south-west. There are 
three tarns on Helvellyn — the Red Tarn, one of the 
highest of the mountain tarns, being upwards of 
2000 feet above the sea, and covering a space of 
twenty acres ; Keppel Cove Tarn, situated on the 
opposite side of S\A'irrel Edge, the stream from which 
D 4 



40 



HAND-BOOK TO 



unites with that from Red Tarn at the foot of the 
peak called Catchedecam, together forming the brook 
of Glenridding ; and Grisedale Tarn, placed at the 
foot of Helvellyn, Seatsandal, and Fairfield. Trout 
of superior quality are found in all these Tarns. 
The pedestrian making the ascent from Patterdale, 
sometimes passes along Striding Edge, a narrow 
path, with steep, frightful precipices on each side. 
It was here that Mr. Charles Gough, of Manchestei-, 
(one of those lovers of Nature Avho study her in all 
her forms), met with his death in the spring of 1805. 
He was attempting to cross over from Patterdale, 
after a fall of snow, and whether some accident be- 
fell him, or in this lonely place he fell a victim to 
hunger, is unknown ; but when found, three months 
after his loss, a faithful dog that attended him, was 
keeping watch by the side of his remains, having 
done so without any apparent sustenance for the 
whole time. This incident, strikingly exemplifying 
tlie enduring patience and fidelity of the canine 
species, has formed the subject of two beautiful 
poems, one by Scott, and the other by Wordsworth, 
from the former of Avhich we have extracted the two 
following verses : — 

" Dark-green was the spot, mid the brown mountain heather, 
Wliere the Pilgrim of Nature lay stretched in decay. 

Like tlie corpse of an outcast, abandoned to weather, 
Till the mountain winds wasted tlie tenantless clay, 

Nor yet quite deserted, though lonely extended, 

For, faithful in death, his mute favourite attended. 

The much loved remains of his master defended. 
And chased the hill fox and tlie raven away. 

*' How long didst thou tliink that his silence was slumber. 

When the wind waved his garments, how oft didst thou start. 
How many long days and long nights didst thou number. 

Ere he faded before thee, the friend of thy heart. 
And oh ! was it meet, that — no requiem rea<l o'er him. 
No mother to weep, and no friend to deplore liim. 
And thou, little guardian, alone stretched before him,— 
Unhonourcd the Pilgrim from life should depart." 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 41 

Pursuing the Kes^vick road from Grasmere, the 
tourist has to ascend Dunmail Raise, a pass of con- 
siderable elevation, but the lowest in a Ions; chain 
of mountains, extending from Black Comb in Cum- 
berland into the county of Durham. From the 
highest part may be had a fine retrospect of the vale 
of Grasmere, and the country in that dii-ection for a 
considerable distance, while in front may be seen 
the upper portion of Skiddaw. A wall here sepa- 
rates Cumberland from "Westmorland ; and a larire 
pile ot stones is supposed to be the cairn of Dunmail, 
'' last King of rocky Cumberland," who Avas here 
discomfited by Edmund, the Saxon monarch, about 
the middle of the tenth century. Shortly after de- 
scending, the traveller comes in view of Thirlmere 
or Leathes Water (so called from being the property 
of T. S. Leathes, Esq., of Dalehead House), before 
reaching which the road passes between the small 
humble chapel of "NYythburn and the Horse Head Inn, 
Avhere a temporary stay is frequently made. From 
here to Grasmere is upwards of three miles, to Am- 
bleside a little more than eight miles, and to Keswick 
about the same distance. Heh'ellyn rises steeply close 
to the right, and the ascent trom here, being shorter 
than from any other place, is generally adopted. 

Thirlmere is situated higher than any of the 
other lakes, being about 500 feet above the sea, 
and its depth in some places exceeds 100 feet. 
About the middle the shores ai-e so contracted that 
a wooden bridge spans from one side to the other, 
giving it the appearance of two lakes. On the 
northern part is an island, covei-ed vnth. Avood, of 
about half an acre extent. Its banks are irregular, 
and some of the rocky promontories are considered 
as fine objects. 

Pedestrians sometimes are induced to de\iate 
from the direct road at this place, and reach Kcs- 



42 HAND-BOOK TO 

wick by crossing Ai'mboth Fells to Watendlath, 
and along the banks of Derwent Lake ; but al- 
though Skiddaw and Helvellyn are seen to ad- 
vantage, and the mountain scenery is exceedingly 
grand on this route, yet, as the path is scarcely 
distinguishable, Avithout a guide, the stranger would 
be apt to get out of the proper direction, and subject 
himself to considerable inconvenience. 

Leaving Wythburn, the road passes along the 
margin of Thirlmere, and shortly after ascending 
a steep hill, the Vale of St. John is seen before, 
with Saddleback in the distance. At Legber- 
thwaite (six miles from Kesmck) there is another 
inn, where the main road takes a turn to the left, 
that to the right passing through St. John's Vale 
to Threlkeld. From the summit of Castlerigg, on 
the KesAvick road, fine views are obtained of Der- 
went, and part of Bassenthwaite Lakes, A\ath the 
town and vale of Keswick, and the surrounding 
mountains. 

There is another approach to Keswick from Am- 
Ideside, sometimes made by visiters, viz., over Wry- 
nose and Hardknott to Wast Water, thence over 
the Sty Head Pass, a distance of upwards of forty 
miles. This road passes through Clappersgate, 
Skelwith, and Colwith Bridges, already noticed, 
thence past Fell Foot, and over Wrynose, on the 
summit of which the counties of Cumberland, West- 
morland, and Lancashire unite, at a place called 
the Three Shire Stones. Hence it passes Cockley 
Beck, crossing the vale of Seathwaite, and ascends 
Hardknott, from whence there is a longer descent 
into Eskdalc, about half way down which it passes 
close to the remains of Hardknott Castle. Views 
of some of the highest of the lake mountains are 
had fi-om this neighbourhood, and altogether the 
mountain .^coner)- is of surpassing grandeur. In 










View of Kesiivick. 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



43 



Eskdale there are, at no great distance from the 
road, tAvo noted Water-falls, Birker Force and 
Stanley Gill, the fonner " being a stream of water 
emitted between lofty rocks, and pouring from a 
great elevation down the hill side in a stripe of 
foam," and the latter falling " in successive cascades, 
over granite rocks, which rise on each side to a 
stupendous height, and are finely ornamented -^vith 
trees, and fringed wath a profusion of bilbeny, and 
other plants, rooted in the crevices." * From 
Eskdale the road proceeds to Santon Bridge, at 
which place, turning to the right, it passes the 
Strand, nearly at the foot of AVast AVater, Avhere 
are two inns aiFording refreshment for the tourist. 
The distance from Ambleside to this place is twenty 
two miles. AVast AVater is three miles in length, 
and upwards of half a mile in breadth. Its depth 
has never been rightly ascertained, but it is said in 
some places to exceed five hundred feet. Probably 
the reason of its never freezing over is on account 
of its immense depth. The mountains by which 
it is encircled — the Screes, Scawfell, Seatallan, 
&c., are majestic and prominent objects. From 
Wast AVater the road is over Sty Head Pass, the 
highest in the district, and thence through Sea- 
thwaite and Bori'owdale to KesA^dck, a distance of 
somewhere about twenty miles. 

The toA\Ti of Keswick is situated in a large and 
beautiful valley, a mile from Derwent, and about 
three miles from Bassenthwaite Lake. It contains 
about 2,400 inhabitants, and its manufactures are 
linsey-woolsey stuffs, and black-lead pencils, made 
from the plumbago procured in the mines of Bor- 
rowdale. The principal inns are the Royal Oak, 
Queen's Head, and King's Anns, besides which 
there are a number of pi-ivate houses where lodg- 

* Otley. 



44 HAND-BOOK TO 

ings may be had. Tavo museums, kept by Messrs. 
Hutton and Crosthwaite, are well worth attention, 
containing many curiosities, local and general, and 
an assortment of minerals, which are kept on sale. 
There are also other mineral dealers in the toAvn. 
A Model of the Lake District, executed by Mr. 
Flintoff, is an interesting object. Its dimensions 
are twelve feet nine inches by nine feet three inches, 
on a scale of three inches to a mile ; and it repre- 
sents the district with great accuracy and minute- 
ness, each object being coloured according to nature. 
In the centre of the town is the Town Hall, the 
clock-bell in which (brought from Lord's Island) 
bears the date of 1001. A new church, of a taste- 
ful construction, was erected here, not long ago, by 
the late John Marshall, Esq., since which the family 
of that gentleman has added a school and parsonage 
house. The parish, or Crosthwaite church, is three 
quarters of a mile from the town, in a north-west- 
erly direction, and is dedicated to St. Kentigern. 
In the interior is a recumbent effigy, in Avhite mar- 
ble, of the late Dr. Southey, and beneath the fol- 
lowing inscription by Wordsworth : — 
" Ye vales and hills whose beauty hither drew 
The poet's steps, and fixed him here, on you 
His eyes have closed ! And ye, loved books, no more 
Shall Southey feed upon your precious lore. 
To works that ne'er shall forfeit their renown 
Adding immortal labours of his own — 
Whether he traced historic truth, with zeal 
For the State's guidance, or the Church's weal, 
Or Fancy, disciplined by studious art. 
Informed his pen, or wisdom of the heart, 
Or judgments sanctioned in the Patriot's miud 
By reverence for the rights of all mankind. 
Wide were his aims, yet in no human breast 
Could private feelings meet for holier rest. 
His joys, his griefs, have vanished like a cloud 
From Skiddaw's top; but he to heaven has vowed 
Tlirough his industrious life, and Christian faith 
Calmed in his soul the fear of change and death.' 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



i^i 



Keswick may be regarded as a centre from whence 
exciu'sionary lines branch off in all directions. In 
the immediate neighbourhood of the town are several 
neat villas, and the short walks are of an exceedingly 
delightful chai'acter. Greta Hall, the residence of 
the late Dr. Southey, is in a pretty situation at the 
northern end of the town, and near to the Greta river. 

Denvent Water is upwards of three miles in 
length, and in some places exceeds a mile and a 
half in breadth. It is beautified by several islands, 
well wooded, and disposed at agreeable distances. 
Loi'd's Lsle, the lai'gest, situated under Wallow Ci'ag, 
contains about six acres, and was, previous to the 
rebellion in 1715, the selected abode of the family 
of Derwent water ; but James, the third Eai'l, having 
engaged in the rebellion, he was in consequence at- 
tainted and beheaded on Tower Hill, and this island, 
with the small one now named Rampsholm, as "well 
as the rest of his estates, w^ere forfeited, and vested 
in trustees for the support of Gx*eenwich Hospital, 
from whom they were pm'chased by the late John 
Marshall, Esq., of Leeds. Vicar's Isle, the residence 
of James Henry, Esq., is nearly of equal dimensions 
vnih Lord's Isle, and is adorned with tasteful plea- 
sure grounds. Herbert's Isle, neai'ly in the middle 
of the lake, is stated to have been inhabited by St. 
Herbert (friend and contemporaiy of St. Cuthbert), 
who died in 687. Some remains of his cell are still 
to be recognised. What is termed the Floating 
Island is a phenomenon which it is difficult to ac- 
count for, as it only comes to the surface at varying 
periods — sometimes being observable for some por- 
tion of each successive year, and at others not ap- 
pearing for two, three, or four years. It is situated 
about 150 yards fi-om the shore near to Lowdore. 
It is composed of earthy matter, covered -with vege- 
tation, and contains a considerable quantity of air, 



46 



HAND-BOOK TO 



which undoubtedly causes its buoyancy. " The 
most probable conclusion seems to be, that air or 
gas is generated in the body of the island by decom- 
position of the vegetable matter of which it is formed; 
and thus gas being pi'oduced most copiously, as 
well as being more rarified in hot weather, the 
earth at length becomes so much distended there- 
with, as to render the mass of less weight than an 
equal bulk of water. The water then insinuating 
itself between the substratum of clay and the peat 
earth forming the island, bears it to the surface, 
where it continues for a time ; till, partly by the 
escape of tlie gas, partly by its absorption, and partly 
by its condensation, consequent on a decrease of 
heat, the volume is reduced ; and the earth gradually 
sinks to its former level, where it remains till a 
sufficient accumulation of gas again renders it buoy- 
ant."* The lake is 228 feet above the level of the 
sea, and its depth is never more than between eighty 
and ninety feet. Its principal feeder flows from 
Borrowdale, but it is also supplied from the moun- 
tains on each side, and after a continuation of heavy 
rain sometimes rises to seven or eight feet above its 
ordinary level. Its waters produce trout, pike, 
perch, and eel, the right of fishing and navigating 
on the eastern side belonging to the Derwentwater 
estate, and on the western side to the Earl of Egre- 
mont. 

The circuit of Derwent Water, by way of Borrow- 
dale, is not more than twelve or thirteen miles, and 
forms a most interesting and attractive excursion. 
Passing Castle Head, Wallow Crag, and Falcon 
Crag, Barrow House, amid fine old trees, is reached 
(about two miles from Keswick), where is a fine per- 
pendicular waterfall, 124 feet in height. Shortly 
before reaching this place a road branches off to the 

• Otlcy's Guide. 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



47 



left into the secluded vale of Watendlatli, at tlie head 
of which is a tarn, covering about a dozen acres. 
Pursuing the main road one mile from Barrow is the 
Lowdore Inn, behind which is the noted cascade, 
falling among large blocks of stone, a height of 360 
feet, and presenting, Avith its picturesque accom- 
paniments, the finest scene of the kind in the lake 
district. Immediately on the left of this fall Gowder 
Crag rises five hundi-ed feet, and Shepherd Crag, 
on the opposite side, of less ele%'ation, is decked with 
various kinds of trees. A spot at the head of the 
fall is pointed out, from whence between these two 
crags may be had an enchanting view of a portion of 
Denvent Water and its islands, the vale of Keswick, 
part of Bassenthwaite, and the towei'ing Skiddaw 
overlooking the whole. The stream forming this 
cataract issues from Watendlatli and Blea Tarns. 
Two miles further is the celebrated Bowder Stone, 
an immense block, which has undoubtedly at some 
distant period rolled from the adjacent heights. It 
measures sixty feet in length, is thirty-six feet high, 
and eighty-four in circumference, and has been com- 
puted to weigh nearly 1,800 tons. Its position is 
extremely singular, representing 

" A stranded ship, with keel upturned, that rests 
Careless of winds and waves." 

A good view is obtained of the upper part of Bor- 
rowdale from this point, having the wooded eleva- 
tion of Castle Crag, (once the site of a Roman forti- 
fication), on the right, and Eagle Crag, Glaramara, 
and Scawfell Pike in front. From here the tourist 
begins to return, crosses Grange Bridge, and passes 
on the western side of the lake, through the hamlet 
of Manesty, where is a small medicinal spring, 
thence under the hiU called Cat Bells, and through 
the village of Portinscales, which is only distant one 
mile and a half from Keswick. 



48 



HAND-BOOK TO 



To the west and soutli-west of Keswick are the 
lakes of Lowes Water, Crummock, Buttermere, and 
Ennerdale, which are sometimes visited by tourists 
who have sufficient time at their disposaL We will 
liere Ijriefiy advert to them, and point out the road 
by Avhicli they are generally approached. 

The best route from Keswick to Buttermere is 
through Borrowdale, Avhich has already been spoken 
of as far as the Bowder Stone (five miles). From 
that place the tourist passes thi'ough Rosthwaite to 
Seatoller (three miles further), not far from which 
are the celebi-ated black-lead mines, and in the 
vicinity four yew trees of extraordinary dimensions, 
which, according to Wordsworth, are 

" Joined in one solemn and capacious grove ; 
Huge trunks ! — and each particular trunk a growth 
Of intertwisted fibres, serpentine, 
Upcoiliug and inveterately convolved, 
Nor uninformed with phantasy, and looks 
That threaten the profane." 

The ascent of a high pass, called Buttermere Haws, 
commences here, and on descending on the opposite 
side, the steep height of Honister Crag, rising 1,500 
feet, is a conspicuous object ; and two hills, called 
Great Gable and The Pillar, are seen on the left. 
At Gatescarth, a farm-house, one mile further, a 
mountain path to the left crosses Scai-f Gap to the 
river Liza, afterwards following its course to Enner- 
dale Lake. This lake possesses but few attractions 
for the visiter. Its length is about two miles and a 
half, and its breadth three quarters of a mile. At 
Ennerdale Bridge, about a mile from the foot of 
the lake, is an inn, and the chapel-yard at that 
place is the scene of Wordsworth's " Brothers," 
where 

" Is neither epitaph nor monument, 
Tombstone nor name — only the turf we tread. 
And a few natural graves." 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 49 

From Gatescartli is only one mile to Buttermere. 
This lake, which is a mile and a quarter in length, 
and scarcely half a mile in breadth, is nearly en- 
compassed by superb rocky mountains. A stream 
issuing from between the hills High Stile and Red 
Pike, on the western side, makes the cascade of 
Sour Milk Gill. The village of Buttermere, distant 
fourteen miles from Keswick, stands near the foot of 
the lake. At the inn here dwelt Mary Robinson, the 
Beauty of Buttermere, whose tale is well known. 

From Buttermere to Crummock Water the dis- 
tance is something short of a mile. A footpath 
from the former place, crossing the river which 
connects the lakes, leads to Scale Force, the highest 
cascade in the lake district. The water falls at 
once 150 feet, between two rocks, into a deep 
chasm, the sides being clothed ^vith trees and plants. 
Crummock Water is situated amid magnificent 
mountain scenery, having on the eastern side the 
lofty Grasmoor, and on the western Melbreak. Its 
length is nearly three miles, its breadth nearly 
three quarters of a mile, and its head is graced by 
three small islands. There is a decent inn at Scale 
Hill, on the foot of the lake, where the tourist can 
be supplied with a boat. Lowes Water may be 
easily visited from here. It is not a mile in length, 
and, unlike most other lakes, the scenery at its 
foot is of a sublime description, while that at its 
head is comparatively tame. 

From Lowes Water the visiter can return to 
Scale Hill, and proceed to Keswick through the 
vale of Lorton, a distance of twelve miles. Where 
the Cockermouth and Keswick road is entered (four 
miles from Scale Hill) is the famous yew tree, 

" Wliich to this day stands single in the midst 
Of its own darkness, as it stood of yore. 
Not loth to furnish weapons for the bands 
f )f irmfraville or Percy." 

! ; 



50 HAND-BOOK TO 

From here the road occasionally affords pleasing 
prospects of the surrounding country. 

The lake of Bassenthwaite is almost invariably 
visited from Keswick, from which place it is dis- 
tant nearly four miles. To pass on the western 
side the Cockermouth road must be left at the vil- 
lage of Braithwaite, 'from whence to Peel Wyke 
(eight miles), the road passes thi'ough Thornthwaite, 
and beneath the hills Lord's Seat and Barf, ascend- 
ing and descending on soinewhat elevated ground, 
and affording pleasant views of the adjacent vallies, 
and of the lake, vnth Skiddaw on the opposite side. 
A mile from Peel Wyke, Ouse Bridge, spanning 
the river Derwent, is crossed. . Near to this place 
is Armathwaite Hall (Lady Vane), and a mile fur- 
ther Castle Inn, where the traveller may rest and 
refresh himself. From here the road passes on the 
eastern side, at some distance from the margin, and 
eight miles again brings the tourist to Keswick. 
Bassenthwaite Lake is four miles in length, and in 
some places nearly a mile in breadth, but it has no 
islands, and in every respect is greatly inferior to 
its neighbour, Derwent Lake. 

A circuit including Cockermouth, Wliitehaven, 
St. Bees, and Egremont is sometimes taken by 
tourists stationed at Keswick, who can, from the 
last-named place, return by the ruins of Calder 
Abbey (once belonging to a colony of Cistercians 
detached from Furncss Abbey), and by way of 
Wast Water and the small lakes already noticed. 

The mountains of Skiddaw and Blencathara or 
Saddleback (so named for its peculiar shape), are 
generally visited from Keswick. The former is 
8,022 feet above the level of the sea, and the dis- 
tance from Keswick to the summit is six miles, and 
the latter rises 2,787 feet above the sea, both of 
which command prospects of great extent. 



THE ENliLISn LAKES. 51 

The approaoli to the lake of Ullswater from Kes- 
wick is generally made by pursuing the Penrith 
road, along the banks of the Greta, through the 
village of Threlkeld, and, taking a road to the right 
about a mile from ]\Ioor End (nine from Keswick), 
thence passing under Mell Fell, through the village 
of Matterdale, and descending to the margin of the 
lake at GowbaiTow Park. Airey Force, a fine 
waterfall dashing between two rocks with great 
violence, a little to the left before making this de- 
scent, is entirely hidden from the sight by ancient 
trees. 

The pedestrian or horseman, however, might take 
a much shorter and a more interesting route by 
leaving the Penrith road about three miles from 
Keswick, and proceeding through the Vale of St. 
Jolm, pass over Wanthwaite Fell, and join the 
above road at Dockray, about a mile from Ulls- 
water. On this road, about a mile and a half from 
Kesmck, is a Druidical Circle, 100 feet in diameter, 
formed by rough stones of different dimensions, the 
largest being upwards of seven feet in height, and 
weighing seven or eight tons. Within this circle is 
a still smaller one formed by ten stones. The nar- 
row vale of St. John is situated between high moun- 
tains, having Naddle Fell on the west and Great 
Dodd on the east. The small chapel is placed on a 
hill to the right. About the middle of this valley 
the Castle Rock, a massive pile, unconnected with 
the neighbouring hill, bears such an exact resem- 
blance to a ruined castle that strangers frequently 
believe it such till a near approach undecives them. 
This is the scene of Sir Walter Scott's " Bridal of 
Triermain." 

Ullswater is considered the second, in point of 
size and interest, of the English lakes. Its length is 
nine miles, but its breadth is rather disproportionate, 
E 2 



52 



HAND-BOOK TO 



never exceeding three quarters of a mile. Its depth 
in some places is upwards of 140 feet. On the up- 
per portion are four small rocky islands, bearing the 
names of Cherry Holm, Wall Holm, House Holm, 
and Moss Holm. The scenery at the head is of a 
grand description, and is seen to the best advantage 
from towards the foot. The roads we have already 
pointed out from Keswick are the nearest fi-om that 
place, but to see the lake, and its concomitant 
beauties, in the most favourable point of view, it is 
necessary to commence at Pooley Bridge. 

The only carriage road is on the north-western 
side, in passing which the scenery will be found to 
gradually increase in richness and grandeur. Seve- 
ral viUas are situated on the borders of the lake to- 
wards the foot, and near the middle Halsteads 
(the seat of the late J. Marshall, Esq.) is placed on 
a delightful promontory, amid fine pleasure grounds. 
Between this place and Patterdale, Gowbarrow Park, 
with its herds of deer, Lyulph's Tower, and Airey 
Force, call for especial notice. The hotel at Patter- 
dale, as well as that at Pooley Bridge, suppUes boats, 
conveyances, &c., with other accommodations, and 
the tourist making a temporary stay here Avould find 
many pleasant walks and excursions. 

From Pooley Bridge to Penrith is nearly six 
miles. The town contains a population of upwards 
of 5,000, and, with the country around, abounds in 
antiquarian curiosities. The ruins of a castle over- 
look the town, and in the church-yard is a curious 
antique monument, supposed to point out the burial 
place of Owen C^esarius, King of Cumberland in 
the time of the Saxons. Besides these, the ruins of 
Brougham Castle, King Arthur's Round Table, a 
Druidical circle, called Long Meg and her Daughters, 
with many other vestiges of past ages, all at no 
great distance from the town, would amply repay a 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



53 



visit. Brougham Hall (Lord Brougham) and Low- 
ther Castle (the Earl of Lonsdale) are also in the 
immediate neighbourhood. 

And now, ha\'ing feasted his eyes on the natural 
beauties unth vrhich the lake district is luxuriously 
endowed, the tourist can, if he chooses, take the 
Lancaster and Carlisle Railway at Penrith, and 
probably in a few hoiu's be transported to his home 
and friends, perhaps impressed with the idea that 
this earth of ours possesses charms of which num- 
bers have no conception. 



LIST OF SOME OF THE RARER PLANTS OF THE LAKE 
DISTRICT, WITH THEIR PRINCIPAL HABITATS. 



Atropa Belladonna 

Alchemilla alpina 

Anchusa semper virens 
Asarum Europoeum 
Asplenium viride 
Arbutus uva-ursi 
Bartramia arcuata . 
Circaea alpina 
Cicuta virosa 
Cerastium alpinum 
Cochlearia officinalis 

Convallaria majalis 

Convallaria multiflora 
Drosera rotundifolia 
Drosera longifolia . 

Empetrnm nigrum . 

Epilobiura alpinum 
Epilobium alsinifolium 
Galium boreale . 
Geranium sanguineum 

Gnaphalium dioieum 

Helianthemum canum 
Hymenophyllum Tunbrid 



;ense 
E 



Fui'ness Abbey. 
C Longsleddale — Head of But- 
! termere Dale — Screes — 
I Black Sail. 

Longsleddale — Bowness. 

Keswick. 

Scout Scar. 

West-side of Grasmoor. 

Lowdore. 

Margin of Derwenwater. 

Keswick. 

Helvellyn. 

Helvellyn — Longsleddale. 
/Holm Island, Windermere, 
\ and near Kendal. 

Keswick. 

In most bogs. 

Borrowdale. 

{Helvellyn — Skiddaw — 
Benson Knot. 

Keswick — Gowbarrow Park 

Longsleddale. 

Helvellyn — Shap. 

Scout Scar. 
J Buttermere — Screes— Long- 
( sleddale — Kendal Fell. 

Scout Scar. 

Screes. 



54 



HAND-BOOK TO 



Hymenophyllum Wilsoni 
Hypericum androsfemum 
Isoetes lacustris 
Impatiens noli me tangere 

Juncus filiformis 

Juncus triglumis 
Juniperus communis 
Lysimachia thyrsiflora 
Lobelia Dortmanna 
Lycopodium alpinum 
Meum athamanticum 

Mecanopsis cambrica 

Oxyria reniformis 

Parnassia palustiis 
Peucedanum Ostruthium , 

Pingnicula vulgaris 

Polypodium calcareum 
Potentilla fruticosa 
Primula veris 
Primula farinosa 

Pteris crispa 

Pyrola media 
Pyrola minor 
Rhodiola rosea . 

Rubus cham£emorus , 

Salix herbacea 

Satyrium albidum 

Saxifraga stellaris , 
Saxifraga hypnoides 
Saxifraga aizoides . 
Saxifraga granulata 
Saxifraga trydactilytes 
Saxifraga nivalis 
Saxifraga oppositifolia 
Serratula alpina 
Serratula tinctoria 
Silene acaulis 
Trientalis Europcea 

Thalictrum majus 

ThalictruQ) alpinum 



Ambleside. 
(Ambleside — Ferry, Winder- 
\ mere. 

In most of the lakes. 

{Stock Gill Force, Ambleside 
— Scale Hill. 
f On the margin of Derv^ent- 
\ water and Crummock Lake 

Lowes Water. 

Plentiful upon many fells. 

Keswick. 

In most of the lakes. 

Helvellyn. 

Keswick. 
( Longsleddale — Ferry, Win- 
( dermere. 

f Helvellyn — Scawfell — Long- 
( sleddale— Great End. 

Abundant. 

Legberthwaite. 

{Wansfell, and in moist ele- 
vated places — Abundant. 

Kendal Fell. 

Screes. 

Occurs rarely. 

In several moist situations. 
( Borrowdale — Abundant in 
( the lake district. 

Stock Gill Force. 

Dunmallet. 

Screes — Helvellyn — Scawfell 

{Crossfell — Goat Scar, Long- 
sleddale. 
y Helvellyn— Skiddaw—Scaw 
( fell— Saddleback. 
/ Mountainous pastures above 
* (. Borrowdale. 

, > On most of the mountains. 

Keswick — Kendal. 

Abundant. 

Helvellyn. 

Great End. 

Helvellyn. 

Newby Bridge. 

Helvellyn — Great End. 

Keswick. 
J Screes — margin of Enner- 
( dale Lake. 

Helvellvn — Great End. 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



Of) 



Thalictrum minus 
Utricularia minor 
Vaccinium vitis-idea 

Vaccinium oxycoccos 

Vaccinium myitillus 
Viola lutea . 



Great End. 
Near Ennerdale Lake. 
Great Gable — Skiddaw. 
Abundant in most moist 



( places. 
In rough woods 
Skiddaw. 



SYNOPTICAL VIEW OF LAKES. 








Length 


Brdth. 


Depth 


Height in 


Name. 


County 


m 


in 


in 


ft. above 






miles. 


miles. 


feet. 


the sea. 


Windermere 


West. & Lane. 


10 


1 


240 




UUswater 


Cum. & West. 


9 


1 


210 


380 


Coniston Water 


Lancashire 


6 


^ 


160 




Bassenthwaite Wtr. 


Cumberland 


4 


1 


68 


210 


Derwent Water 


Cumberland 


3 


U 


72 


222 


Crummock Water . 


Cumberland 


3 


f 


132 


240 


Wast Water . . 


Cumberland 


3 




270 


160 


Hawes Water 


Westmorland 


3 


X 




443 


Thirlemere . 


Cumberland 


2| 


h 


108 


473 


Ennerdale Water . 


Cumberland 


n 


i 


80 




Esthwaite Water . 


Lancashire 


2 


i 


80 


198 


Buttermere 


Cumberland 


u 


i 




247 


Grasmere 


Westmorland 


u 


^ 


180 


180 


Lowes Water . 


Cumberland 


I 


i 






Brother's Water 


Westmorland 


i 


i 






Eydal Water . . 


Westmorland 


i 


h 




156 



SYNOPTICAL VIEW OF WATERFALLS. 





Height 






Name. 


m 
feet. 


J^ituation. 


County. 


Scale Force . 


1.56 


South-w. side of Crum- 








mock Lake 


Cumberland. 


Barrow Cascade 


124 


East side of Derwent 








Water . . . 


Cumberland. 


Lowdore Cascade . 


100 


East side of Derwent 








Water . 


Cumberland. 


Colwith Force 


90 


Little Langdale 


Westmorland. 


Airey Force 


80 


West side of UUswater. 


Cumberland. 


Dxmgeon Gill Force 


80 


South-east side of Lang- 








dale Pikes 


Westmorland. 


Stock Gill Force . 


70 


Ambleside . 


AYestmorland. 


Birker Force 


60 


South side of Eskdale . 


Cumberland. 


Stanley Gill Force . 


60 


South side of Eskdale . 


Cumberland. 


Sour Milk Force . 


60 


South side ofButtermere 


Cumberland. 


Upper Fall, Kydal . 


50 


Eydal Park 


Westmorland. 


Skelwith Force 


20 


On the stream flowing 








from Elterwater . 


Westmorland. 



.")(j 



HAND-BOOK TO 



SYNOPTICAL VIEW OF THE MOUNTAINS OF THE 
LAKE DISTRICT. 



Name Of Mountains. jinFlet.i 


County. 


Scawfell Pike . . • ! 3166 


Cumberland 


Scawfell 3100 


Cumberland 


Ilelvellyn . .   , 3055 


Cumb. & Westm. 


Skiddaw 3022 


Cumberland 


Fairfield .... 2950 


Westmorland 


Great Gavel . . .   2925 


Cumbei-land 


Bowfell .... 2914 


Westmorland 


Rydal Head . . •   
Pillar . .... 


2910 


Westmorland 


2893 


Cumberland 


Saddleback . . . • 


2787 


Cumberland 


Grasmoor .... 


2756 


Cumberland 


Red Pike . . - . - 


2750 


Cumberland 


High Street .... 


2700 


Westmorland 


Grizedale Pike . . •   


2680 


Cumberland 


Coniston Old Man . 


2577 


Lancashire 


Hill Bell 


2500 


Westmorland 


PfkTo-StS!^'}^-g'^-i^i'''^- 


2400 
2300 


1 Westmorland 


Carrock Fell .... 


2110 


Cumberland 


High Pike, Caldbeck Fells . . 


2101 


Cumberland 


Causey Pike .... 


2030 


Cumberland 


Black Combe . . . . 


1919 


Cumberland 


Lord's Seat .... 


1728 


Cumberland 


Wansfell . .... 


1.590 


Westmorland 


Whinfell Beacon, near Kendal 


1500 


Westmorland 


Cat Bell .... 


1448 


Cumberland 


Latrigg 

Dent Hill .... 


1160 


Cumberland 


1110 


Cumberland 


Benson Knott, near Kendal 


1098 


Westmorland 


Loughrigg Fell 


1108 


Westmorland 


Penrith Beacon . . . 


1020 


Cumberland 


Mell Fell .... 


1000 


Cumberland 


Kendal Fell . . . . 


648 


Westmorland 


Scilly Bank, near Whitehaven 


500 


Cumberland 


Passes. 






Sty Head . . . . 


1250 


Cumberland 


Haws, between Buttermere 






dale and Newlands • . 


UGO 


Cumberland 


Haws, between Buttermere 






and Borrowdale . 


1100 


Cumberland 


Dunmail Raise . 


720 


Cumb. & Westm. 




Height 


Highest English Mountain, Scawfell Pike, Cumb. 


in Feet. 


3,166 


Highest WeLsli Mountain, Snowdon, Caernarvonshire 


3,.57t 


Highest Irisii Mountain, Gurrane Tual, Kerry 


3,404 


Highest Scottish Mountain, lieu Mucdui, Aberdeen . 


4,418 


Higliest European Mountain, Jlont 151aiic. 


1.5,781 


' Highest Mouutain in the World, Dliawalagiri, Asia . / 26,802 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



57 



INDEX. 



Abbey, Calder, 50. 
^bbey, Furness, 20. 
Airey Force, 51, 52. 
Allan Bank, 38. 
Ambleside, 27 and 28. 
Armathwaite Hall, 50. 
Arbeia, Roman Station, 32. 
Armboth Fells, 42. 

Bardsea, Village of, 19. 
Barrow House, 46. 

Cascade, 46. 

Barrow (Furness), 21. 
Bassenthwaite Lake, 50. 
Beauty of Buttermere, 49. 
Belle "isle, Windermere, 9. 
Bellfield, 15. 
Belle Grange, 13. 
Bellemont, 23 
Berkshire Island, 11. 
Birker Force, 43. 
Birthwaite, terminus and 

Hotel at, a. 
Black-lead Mines, Borrow- 

daie, 48 
Blake Holm, Windermtre, 11. 
Blawith, 24. 
Blea Tarn, 29. 47. 
Blelham Tarn, 11. 
Borrowdale, 47, 48, 
Bowder Stone, 47. 
Bowness, 7. 
Bowfell,27. 
Brantfell, 9. 
Brathay Bridge, 13. 

Chapel, 13. 

Hall, 13. 

Brathay, River, 11. 
Brentwood Cottage, 24. 



Bridal of Triermain, Scene of 

51. 
Brothers "Water, 17. 
Broughton-in-Furness, 27. 
Brougham Castle, 52. 
Brougham Hall, 53. 
Burneside Hall, 6. 
Burton-in-Kendal, 2. 
Butteimere Haws, 48. 
Buttermere Lake, 49. 
Buttermere Village, 49. 

Calder Abbey, 50. 
Cdlgarth Park, 8. 16. 
Canning, Mr., 8. 17. 
Cartmel, 18, 

Church, 18. 

Casterton, 3. 

Castle Crag, Borrowdale, 47. 

, Roman Station at, 47. 

Castle Inn, Bassenthwaite, 50 
Castle Rock, Vale of St. John, 

.51. 
Cat Bells, 47. 

Cherry Holm, Ullswater, 52- 
Clappersgate, 13. 
Cockley Beck, 42. 
Codale Fell, 39. 
Colwith Bridge and Force, 28 
Concangium, Roman Station, 

5. 
Conishead Priory, 19. 
Coniston Bank, 24. 
Coniston, 23. 

Hall, 24 

Old Man, 25, 26. 

Water, 23, 24, 2',. 

Cook's House, 17. 
Cowan Head, 6. 



58 



HAND-BOOK TO 



Crake, 21. 
Croft Lodge, 12. 
Crosthwaite Church, 44. 
Crow Holm, Windermere, 11. 
Crummock Water, 49. 
Cunsey, 11. 14. 

Dalehead House, 41. 

Dalton, 20. 

Derwent Water, 45. 47. 

Derwentwater, Earl of, 46. 

Dictis, Roman Station, 32. 

Dove's Nest, 16. 

Druidical Circle, Keswick, 51. 

Duddon, 26, 27. 

Dungeon Ghyll, 29. 

Dunmail Raise, 41. 

Dunnerdale, 26. 

Eagle Crag, 47. 

Easdale, Vale and Tarn of, 

38, 39. 
Elleray, 8. 
Elterwater, 30. 
Ennerdale Bridge, 48. 

Lake, 48. 

Eskdale, 43. 
Esthwaite, 21. 
Esthwaite Hall, 21. 
Esthwaite Lodge, 21. 

Fairfield, 31. 

Fell Foot, 15. 

Ferry Inn, 13 

Finsthwaite, 14. 

Floating Island, Derwent 

Water, 45. 
Fox, George, 21. 
Fox Ghyll, 32. 

How, 32. 

Furness Abbey, 20. 

Gatescarth, 48. 

Gilpin, Mr., Extract from, 35. 

Glaramara, 47. 

Glen of Deadly Nightshade, 

20. 
Gowbarrow Park, 51, 52. 
Gowder Crag, 47. 
Gough, Mr. Charles, Account 

of, 40. 



Grasraere, 37, 38. 

Lake, 37. 

Grass Holm, Windermere, 11. 

Graythwaite Hall, 14. 

Great Gable, 48. 

Great Langdale, 29. 

Greenodd, 21. 

Green, Quotation from, 39. 

Greta Hall, 45. 

River, 45. 

Grisedale Tarn, 40. 
Gummershow, 15. 

Halsteads, 52. 

Hamilton, Thomas, Esq., 8. 

Hardknott, 42. 

Castle, 42. 

Harrison Stickle, 29. 
Hawkshead, 22. 

Hall, 23. 

Hawes Water, 5. 
Helm Crag, 39. 
Helvellyn, 39, 40. 
Hemans, Mrs., 16. 
Heman's, Mrs., Extract from, 

38. 
Hen Holm, 11. 
Herberts' Isle, 45. 
Hevershani, 3. 
Heversham Grammar School, 

3. 
High Street, 17. 
High Wray, 13. 
Hill Bell, 17. 
Holker Hall, 19. 
House Holm, 11. 
House Holm, UUswater, 52. 

Islands, Windermere, 11, 12. 

Kendal, 4. 

Kendal and Windermere Rail- 
way, Viaduct on, 6. 

Kentmere, 5. 

Keppel Cove Tarn, 39. 

Keswick, 43, 44. 45. 

King Arthur's Round Table, 
52. 

Kirkby Lonsdale, 2. 

Kirkstone, 32. 



THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



59 



Lady Holm, 11. 
Lake Field, 21. 

Bank, 21. 

Landing, The, 14. 
Langdale, 29. 
Langdale Pikes, 29. 
Leathes Water, 41. 
Legberthwaite, 42. 
Leven, 11. 15. 
Levens Hall, 3. 
Lily-of-the-Valley Holm, 11. 
Ling Holm, 11. 
Liza, River, 48. 
Lloyd, Owen, 29. 
Long Sleddale, 5. 
Lowther Castle, 53. 
Low Wood Inn, 12. 16. 
Lowdore Cascade, 47. 
Lowes Water, 49. 
Lowick, 21. 
Loughrigg Tarn, 30. 
Loughrigg Fell, 36. 
Lune, 2. 
Lyulph's Tower, 52. 

Manesty, 47. 

Mardale, 5. 

Mary, Queen of Scots, 3. 

Matterdale, 51. 

Milnthorpe, 3. 

Mortal Man, Troutbeck, 17. 

Moss Holme, UUswater, 52. 

Museums, Keswick, 44. 

Nab Scar, 36. 
Near Sawrey, 21. 
Newby Bridge, 14. 
Nibthwaite, 24. 

Orrest Head. 9. 
Owen Caesarius, Burial Place 
of, 52. 

Parr, Queen Catherine, 3, 4. 

Penrith, 52. 

Philipson, Jlajor, Anecdote 

of, 9. 
Pike of Stickle, 29. 
Pooley Bridge, 52. 
Portinscales. 47. 
Pull Wyke, 12. 



Ramps Holm, 11. 

Rayrigg, 8. 15. 

Red Tarn, 39. 

Roman Fort, Ambleside, 32. 

Rosthwaite, 48. 

Rothay, 11. 

Rough Holm, 11. 

Route, 1. 

Rush-bearing, Ambleside, 28. 

Rydal Village, 33. 

Chapel, 33. 

Mount, 33. 

AVaterfalls, 35. 

Water, 36, 

Saddleback, 50. 

Sawrey, Far and Near, 21. 

Scale Force, 49. 

Scawfell, 43. 

Screes, 43. 

Scout Scar, 5. 

Scott, Extract from, 40. 

Seatoller, 48. 

Seatsandal, 40. 

Seathwaite, 26. 

Seatallan, 43. 

Season, 1, 2. 

Shap Spa, 6. 

Shepherd Crag, 47. 

Sigourney, Mrs., Extracti 

from, 33. 38. 
Silver How, 39. 
Sizergh Hall, 3. 
Skelwith Bridge, 28. 

Force, 28. 

Skiddaw, 50. 

Sour Milk Gill, Grasmere, 39 

Sour Milk'Gill, Buttermere, 49 

Southey, Dr., 44. 

St. Herbert's Cell, Derwen- 

water, 45. 
St. John's Vale, 42. 
Stanley Gill, 43. 
Station House, Ferry Inn, 13. 
Stanley Gill, 43. 
Staveley, Village of, 6. 
Steam Yachts, Windermere, 

10. 
Stock Gill Force, 30. 

Beck, 30. 

Storrs Hall. 8. 15. 



60 



HAND-BOOK TO THE ENGLISH LAKES. 



Stott Park, 14. 
Striding Edge, Helvelljn, 40. 
Sty Head Pass, 42. 
Swartmoor Hall, 21. 

Tent Lodge, Coniston, 24. 
The Pillar, 48. 
Thirlmere, 41. 
Thompson's Holm, 11. 
Thrang Crag, 29; 
Three Shire Stones, 42. 
Thurston Water, 23, 24. 
Tilberthwaite, 25. 
Tolson Hall, 6. 
Torver, 24. 

Tower, Newby Bridge, 14. 
Town End, Grasraere, 37. 
Town Head, 15. 
Troutbeck, 17. 
Bridge, 16. 

TJUswater, 51, 52. 
Ulverston, 19. 
Urswick, 21. 

Walker, Rev. Robert (Note), 
26. 



Wall Holm, TJUswater, 52. 
Wallow Crag, 46. 
Walna Scar, 26. 
Wansfell Pike, 31. 
Watendlath, 42. 47. 
Water Crook, 5. 
Waterhead House, Coniston, 

23. 

Inn, Coniston, 23. 

Water Park, Coniston, 24. 
Watson, Bishop, 8. 
Wast Water, 43- 
White Moss Quarry, 36. 
Wilson, Professor, Quotation 

from, 7. 
Wilson, Rev. Cams, 3. 
Windermere, 6 — 17. 
Wishing Gate, 36. 
Wordsworth, 33, 34. 
Extracts from, 27. 29. 

31. 35, 36. 44. 48. 
Wray Castle, 13. 
Wrynose, 42. 
Wy'thburn, 41. 

Yewdale, 24, 25. 



List of some of the rarer Plants of the Lake District, with 

their principal Habitats, 53 55. 
Synoptical View of Lakes, 55. 

View of Waterfalls, 55. 

View of the Mountains of the Lake District, 56. 

Index, 57—70. 



Kendal : 

Printed liy I'. Atkinson, 

Stricklandgatc. 



A 000 020 874 



«i 




