>- 

3 




5 





fe &Sb 






a 

)" % 

diivD-jo^ ^aojn 

.j.OF-CAHFOftfc, .^.OF-CAi 

^^ ^->vt ^.i x 




^ > 
I I 





I * 






^ 

i 





3 = 
5? % 




s I 

c: < 





i 
^>^i i 

*owm\n^ 



^\\E-UNIVER%. 





1 1 

S & 



I I 

I 







1 1 




s I 
i 5 

5 S 













a ^ 






g ^ 




. 



^folMNV-SOV^ "%3AINn-J\\N? 



5tfE-UNIVER% vvlOS-ANCElfT, 

f . ^-1 ^ ^ "2 





^JHDNYSOl^ ^JAINniV^ 
^\\EUMIVER% ,A;lOSANCElfj> 

r 'n ^ -^m^ -^ 



^UIBRARYQr ^-LIBRARYQr 

,S * 4 ~-> '&. ^ 




^ojnvjjo 




^OJI1V3-JO V 



^OFCALIFOfi^ ^.OFCAIIFO/?^ 

* \ /CT\ s ^ 




^~ NOTICE. 

THE Council having experienced serious inconvenience 
in consequence of the non-payment of some of the Annual 
Subscriptions, beg respectfully to remind the Members 
that they have no other funds at their disposal for con- 
ducting the business than the Annual Subscriptions paid 
in advance, and that an early payment will greatly facili- 
tate the issue of the works of the Society. 



THE 



-RAY SOCIETY, 



INSTITUTED MDCCCXLIV. 



I 




LONDON. 



MDCCCXLVIII. 



THE 



CORRESPONDENCE 



JOHN RAY 



CONSISTING OP 



SELECTIONS FROM THE PHILOSOPHICAL LETTERS 
PUBLISHED BY DR. DERHAM, 



ORIGINAL LETTERS OE JOHN RAY, 

IN THE COLLECTION OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM. 



EDITED BY 

EDWIN LANKESTER, M.D. F.R.S. F.L.S., 

SECRETARY TO THE RAY SOCIETY. 



LONDON: ^ 
PRINTED FOR THE RAY SOCIETY. 

MDCCCXLVIII. 



PRINTED BY C. AND J. ADLARI), 



PREFACE, BY THE EDITOR. 






THIS volume consists of those letters of John Ray and 
his Correspondents which were published shortly after 
his death, by Dr. Derham ; also of a series of his letters 
addressed to Sir Hans Sloane, and still existing in the 
library of the British Museum. These last letters were 
rendered available by the kindness of Sir Henry Ellis, 
Librarian to the British Museum, through whose means 
their existence was first made known to the Council of 
the Ray Society. 

Only that part of the correspondence published in 
the ' Philosophical Letters' which was written by Ray, 
or addressed to him, has been included in the present 
volume. The Preface of Dr. Derham to that work, which 
it has been thought desirable to reprint, alludes to some 
of the correspondence which has been omitted, on account 
of its not relating immediately to John Ray. 

In preparing these letters for the press, T have been 
materially assisted by my friend C. C. Babington, Esq., 
M.A., of St. John's College, Cambridge, who has looked 
over the proof sheets, given the modern names of the 
plants referred to in the correspondence, and added many 



9457?! 



VI EDITOR S PREFACE. 

valuable notes. I am also indebted to William Yarrell, 
Esq., for the identification and modern names of the 
animals mentioned in the letters. 

The copperplate Portrait of Ray is from a drawing, by 
Ince, of the bust by Roubiliac, now in the library of 
Trinity College, Cambridge, and was originally published 
in the ' Cambridge Portfolio,' edited by the Rev. J. J. 
Smith, of Caius College, through whose liberality impres- 
sions have been permitted to be taken from the original 
plate. The engraving of Dewlands, the residence of 
John Ray, and the house in which he died, has been 
kindly presented to the Society by Jacob H. Pattisson, 
Esq., LL.B., of Witham House, the present proprietor of 
Dewlands. 

It is hoped that this work will not only be another 
memorial of the great man after whom the Society by 
which it is published has been named, but that it may 
serve as an additional source of information to some 
future biographer of John Ray. 

E. L. 



PREFACE 

TO 

THE PHILOSOPHICAL LETTERS 

BY DR. DERHAM. 



To Tfte- READER, 

After the death of the late justly famed Mr. Ray, 
his papers were intrusted with me, that if I thought any 
of them might be of use to the learned world, I might 
publish them, When I undertook the labour of perusing 
and putting them in order, I confess I thought there 
might have been some tracts designed and fitted up for 
the public by an author so considerable as Mr. Ray was, 
who had published so many good things as he had done ; 
but all that I met with was his ' Observations of Insects' 
(which he lived not to perfect, and which are already 
printed), and the Diaries of his Travels about Great Britain 
and in foreign parts, and his Letters to and from learned 
men. His 'Foreign Travels' he published himself; but 
for brevity, I find he hath omitted many very good 
observations that well deserve to see the light. And as 
for his ' Travels about England, Scotland, and Wales,' I 
have fitted them up for the press, with an intent to 
have published them with his ' Life,' which I began to 
write at the instance of my late much honoured and 
right reverend diocesan Henry, Lord Bishop of London, 
and some other very considerable friends, whose impor- 



Vlll DR. DERHAM S PREFACE. 

tunities I could not with civility withstand. But, not- 
withstanding the Itineraries are in a great forwardness, 
and I have made a considerable progress in his Life, yet 
I fear I shall scarce be able to accomplish what I in- 
tended, having much less leisure now than when I 
undertook that work. 

As to his letters, he had treasured up many, or most 
of those which he had received from his learned corre- 
spondents, which occasioned me a great deal of trouble 
in perusing them, and selecting such as might be of use 
to the curious ; and after I had selected them, I thought 
it necessary to leave out all that might be of little use, 
such as private business, compliments, &c., except now 
and then a clause, that may be of use to Mr. Ray's, or 
some other learned man's character, or that may show 
their learned projects, or give some account of their 
labours. 

So that the reader hath in this collection the marrow 
and most valuable part of Mr. Ray's correspondences 
with his learned and ingenious friends. And although 
there may probably be now and then a few passages of 
lesser consideration that might have been omitted, and a 
letter or two that might have been shortened (as it was 
my mind to have done had I had health and time), yet I 
hope the reader will find so entertaining and profitable a 
variety of curious learning, as will sufficiently compensate 
for defects, and cause him to think that neither I have 
cast away my time and pains, nor he his cost. 

Besides these, there were letters of other learned men 
at home and abroad, particularly divers from Dr. Hotton, 
the learned botanic professor of Ley den. But the Doctor's 
relations (soon after his death, which was not long after 
Mr. Ray's) strictly forbad the publication of any of 



DR. DERHAM S PREFACE. IX 

them. And as for the letters of other great men to 
Mr. Ray, which I have not published, they being matters 
of thanks and compliment chiefly, would have been of 
no other use than to have shown what eminent men 
Mr. Ray corresponded with, and how well they approved 
of his excellent labours ; which, being things sufficiently 
known, or that may be presumed, I thought it needless 
to stuff the volume, and enhance its price by so frivolous 
a means. 

And, as I have thus taken care to reject papers of little 
or no consequence, and to omit in others matters of small 
consequence, so the learned authors may think I have 
been too bold with them : but, in answer hereto, I say 
that I have endeavoured to do, as near as I could, what I 
thought they would have done themselves. I have omitted 
for the most part (or inadvertently published) what Mr. 
Ray or others had published before, unless in some cases, 
as when it is joined with some other considerable matter 
unpublished, or serves to explain, illustrate, or render 
what is published more complete. And I have published 
what I thought might be instructive or entertaining to 
the curious, so far as to make a commodious volume. 
And as for such valuable papers as are omitted, they may 
make another volume, if this be kindly received. 

As to the chasms that may be observed between the 
dates of some of the letters, and the want of answers to 
some, it was not from any carelessness or omission in me, 
but from a defect among the letters themselves, which 
I conceive were either not preserved, or else the corre- 
spondence might be intermitted. 

As for the method, I was in doubt whether it was best 
to put every man's letters by themselves, or according 
to the order of their dates. But the latter being best 



X DR. DERHAM S PREFACE. 

approved of by some of the authors themselves, and that 
which indeed I had good reasons to esteem best, 1 
accordingly did it as well as I could, abating for a mis- 
take or two, where the papers happened to be mislaid. 

Having given an account of what I have done as pub- 
lisher, it is time to recognise the assistance I had from 
my friends. Sir Hans Sloane and Dr. Tankred Robinson 
(two of the principal and most learned friends of Mr. Ray) 
very readily furnished me with what papers they had of 
Mr. Ray's; and the latter procured also for me those 
which Dr. Lister had carefully laid up as Cimelia. Mr. 
Dale, of Braintree (Mr. Ray's neighbour and industrious 
friend), who had taken care to preserve many of Mr. Ray's 
papers after his death, very readily imparted them, and 
gave me his assistance ; as also the Reverend and worthy 
Mr. Pyke, rector of Mr. Ray's parish, gave me what 
assistance he could ; but none more ready than Mrs. Ray 
herself, and her daughters, who not only intrusted me to 
search Mr. Ray's papers, but to carry away what I 
pleased. 

And as for the papers in the Appendix, they are owing 
to the favour of the surviving remains of Mr. Ray's best 
friend and patron, the great Mr. Willughby ; namely, the 
Right Honorable the Lord Middleton, and his noble 
sister the Countess of Carnarvon, who, knowing of my 
design, with all readiness procured for and sent me Mr. 
Ray's, and some other learned men's letters to their most 
ingenious father ; which, coming too late to be ranked in 
their order in the body of the book, I was forced to cast 
into an Appendix. 



CONTENTS. 



-^ PAGE 

Mr. Raylo FT. Willughby, Esq. . . ..;. . 1,3,4 

Mr. Fr. Willughby to Mr. Wray, about the year 1662 . . .5 

Dr. Cornell from Naples, to Mr. Wray at Rome ... .6 

Mr. Fr. Willughby to Mr. Wray . . . . .7 

Mr. Barnham to Mr. Wray . . . . . .9 

Mr. Lister to Mr. Wray . . . . *. .11 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister, Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge . 13 

Mr. Lister to Mr. Wray . . . . . .15 

Mr. Dent; o Mr. Wray . . . . . ib. 

Mr. Lister to Mr. Wray . . . . . .17 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister . . . . .17, 19, 20 

Sir Phil. Skippon to Mr. Wray . . . . 22, 23 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister . . . . . 24, 25, 29 

Mr. Lister to Mr. Ray . . . . . . 31 

Mr. Jessop to Mr. Wray . . .^ . . . .33 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister '. . ' .'* . ' . .34 

Mr. Lister to Mr. Wray . . . . , : . . .36 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister, at St. John's . , . .38 

Mr. Lister in answer to Mr. Wray . . '. ' . .39 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister . . '..,.' r '/ . ib. 

Sir Philip Skippon to Mr. Wray .... . : ... .42 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister . '...'.' . ,. 43, 47 

Mr. Lister to Mr. Wray '.;..'.. .48 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister V" . I . ' ~ V . .52 

Mr. Lister, at Craven, to Mr. Wray, at Riddletou Hall . 53 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister I . . ' . . 54,55 

Mr. Lister to Mr. Wray . . ; , . .57 

Dr. Hulse to Mr. Wray . . ib. 

Mr. Wray to Mr. Lister . 00, 61 



xii CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Mr. Willughby to Mr. Wray, from Ludlow . . 63 

Mr. Willughby's observations . . ib. 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Lister . 64 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Wray ... .65 

Mr. Jessop to Mr. Wray . 67, 70 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Wray . . 73 

Dr. Hulse to Mr. Ray . . 74 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Eay . 76, 78 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Lister ; .80 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Ray 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Lister . . 83 

Sir Philip Skippon to Mr. Ray 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Lister . .86 

Sir Philip Skippon to Mr. Ray . . . .87 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Ray . . .... .88 

Sir Philip Skippon to Mr. Ray . 90 

Mr. Jessop to Mr. Ray . ... .91 

Sir Philip Skippon to Mr. Ray . . . . .93 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Lister . . . . . .94 

Mr. Johnson to Mr. Ray . . . . .95 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Ray -....'. . . .96 

Mr. Oldenburgh's letter . . . . . .97 

Mr. Johnson to Mr. Ray . . . . .99 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Ray ' . . . . ib. 

Mr. Jessop to Mr. Ray . . . . . .101 

Mr. Jessop's paper . ... . ib. 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Ray . . . . .103 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Lister " . . . .104 

Mr. Johnson to Mr. Ray . ' . . . . . 105 

Mr. Oldenburgh to Mr. Ray . . . . . .106 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Lister . . . . . .107 

Mr. Oldenburgh to Mr. Ray . .... '..... .108 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Ray . ." . . . 110,111 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Lister . . . . . .112 

Mr. Oldenburgh to Mr. Ray . ... . .114 

Dr. Towne's letter about the shark to Mr. Dent, and by him communi- 
cated to Mr. Ray . . . . . .115 

Dr. Lister to Mr. Ray at Coleshill, in Warwickshire . : . . 116 

Mr. Dent, of Cambridge, to Mr. Ray . . . 118, 119 

Sir Philip Skippon, from Wrentham, to Mr. Ray . - , . . 120 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Lister . . . .' . 121,123 

Dr. Lister's answer to Mr. Ray . . . , , . . 124 

Mr. Ray's answer to Dr. Lister . . . . . 125 



CONTENTS. X1U 

PAGE 

Mr. Johnson to Mr. Ray . . . 127 

Mr. John Aubrey to Mr. Ray . 128, 129 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . 130 
Mr. Ray's queries to Dr. Tankred Robinson .... 131 

Dr. Tankred Robinson's answer to Mr. Ray's queries . . . 132 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . . . . .134 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray, from Montpellier . . . .135 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . ... 138 

Dr. T. Robinson to Mr. Ray . . . . 141, 143 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . . . . .145 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray ...... 147 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . 148 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray . . ... 151 

Mr. Raj^tp Dr. Robinson . . . . . . ib. 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray .... 156,158,159 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . . . .160 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray . .... 161 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray . . .162 
Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson ..... 163, 165 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray . . .167 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . 168 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray . .170 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . .171 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray ... .172 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . .173 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray . . .174 

Mr. Ray'to Dr. Robinson .... .176 

Dr. Hans' Sloane to Mr. Ray . . 177 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . 179 

Mr. Cole to Mr. Ray . 181 

Mr. Johnson to Mr. Ray . 183 

Mr. Johnson's Descriptions 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray . 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray . -187 

Mr. Johnson to Mr. Ray ib. 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray . . 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray . . 189 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . 190, 191 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray . . 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray . . 194 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . ib. 

Rich. Waller, Esq. to Mr. Ray 195, 196 



XIV CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Mr. Tho. Lawson to Mr. Ray . . . . .197 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane .... . 210, 211 

Mr. LhwydtoMr. Ray . .. . . . .212 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson .-. ",* ; . .213 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray . . .. . . .214 

Dr. Plukenet's Observations on Mr. Ray's Synopsis Stirp. Britan. . ib. 

Mr. Lhwyd to Mr. Ray 224, 226 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . . - . . 229, 230 

Dr. Plukenet to Mr. Ray . . . -, . .232 

Mr. J. Aubrey to Mr. Ray . . . .. '. . 237,238 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray ... . . v- ' . -239 

Mr. Lhwyd to Mr. Ray . . . . V . 240 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . . . 245, 247 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray . . . . . . 249 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . . -. . . . ib. 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . .,:.;' . 251, 252 

Mr. Lhwyd to Mr. Ray ... . . , _'.... . 253 

Captain Hatton to Mr. Ray . . . . t . 255 

Mr. Aubrey to Mr. Ray ... . . . . 257 

Mr. Lhwyd to Mr. Ray ... . . . , ib. 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane .... . . 258 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray . . . . . . 260 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . - . 261, 262, 264, 267, 268 

Mr. Lhwyd to Mr. Ray . . . . . . 270 

The Rev. Mr. Paschall to Mr. Ray . . .;;.; ' . . . 271 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . . '.-.. } : .. . ' . 273 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . ." , . 275 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson . . . ; . . . 276 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . - ; * . 277, 278 

Mr. Paschall to Mr. Ray . . . . . 279, 280 

Mr. Lhwyd to Mr. Ray . . . ... . . 281 

Mr. Paschall to Mr. Ray . . . . . . . . 282 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Robinson .... . . . 283 

Dr. Robinson to Mr. Ray :. . . . . . ib. 

Mr. Burrell to Mr. Ray . . . . . .284 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . . 285, 286, 287, 289 

Mr. Lhwyd to Mr. Ray . . . . . 290, 291 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . 293, 294, 295, 296, 298, 299, 301 

Dr. Vaughan and Dr. Wood to Mr. Ray .... 304 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray ... . . . . 306 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . , . . 306, 307 

Dr. Connor to Mr. Ray - . . . , . 308 



CONTENTS. XV 

PAGE 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . 311, 312, 313, 316, 317 

Dr. Vaughan and Dr. Wood to Mr. Ray . . . .319 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . . , .321 

Mr. Doody to Mr. Ray . . . . . .322 

Tentzelius to Mr. Ray . . . . . . ib. 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane 324, 325, 327, 328; 329, 330, 331, 332, 
333, 334, 335, 336; 338, 339, 340, 341, 

342, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348 

Paradisus Batavus, continens plus Centum Plantes, &c. . 349 

Museo di Plante rare della Sicilia, Malta, Corsica, Italia, Piemonte 

e Germania, &c. di Don Paolo Boccone, &c. . . 352 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . . . .358 

Mr. Lhwyd to Mr. Ray . . . .359 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray . . . . . .360 

Mr. Ray*WDr. Hans Sloane . . 360, 362, 363, 364, 366, 367, 368 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray . . . . . .369 

Mr. J. Morton to Mr. Ray . . . . . .369 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . 370, 371 

Dr. Wood to Mr. Ray . . . . . . 372 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane ..... 373, 375 

Father Camel to Mr. Ray 377 

Mr. Ray to Father Camel . ' % . . .378 

Mr. J. Morton to Mr. Ray . . . . .379 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . . . ib. 

Dr. Preston to Mr. Ray . . . . .380 

Mr. Ray to Mr. James Petiver . . 388, 389, 393, 394, 395 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane ... . 396, 398 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Derham . . . . .399 

Dr. Sherard to Mr. Ray . . . .400 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Derham . . . 401 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Petiver . . . . . .403 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . 404, 405, 406 

Dr. Hans Sloane to Mr. Ray . ... 407 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane ... . 408, 410 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Petiver > . . . . .411 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Samuel Smith . . . . .412 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . . . .412 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Derham . . . . .414 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . .. . .415, 416 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Petiver .... . . .417 

Mr. Thoresby to Mr. Ray 418 

List of Local Words . 419 



Xvi CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane .... - -430 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Petiver . . $ Ijj 432, 433, 434 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . 436, 437 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Mott - . -438 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Petiver . .' . . 439,440 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . - 441, 442 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Petiver . . .443 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . 444, 446 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Petiver ... 447 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . . - 448 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Petiver . , . . . , 450, 451 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . - . . . . 452, 453 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Derham . .'.-. .455 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . 456, 457, 458 

Mr. Ray's last letter to Dr. Hans Sloane . . 459 

Mr. Dale to Dr. Hans Sloane . . ib. 

LETTERS WITHOUT DATE. 

Mr. Ray to Mr. Petiver 460, 461 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . . 462, 463, 464 

Preface to Dr. Hans Sloane's Catalogue of Plants . . .465 

Mr. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane .... 468, 471, 473, 474 

Mrs. Ray to Dr. Hans Sloane . . 476, 477, 478 479, 480 

APPENDIX. 

A Notice of George Scott, by Edw. Forster, Esq., Vice -President of 

the Liunaean Society . ' . ' . ' .' . .481 

B Notice of Edward Lkwyd . . . . . .482 

C Commemoration of the Second Centenary of the Birthday of Ray . 484 

INDEX. . 495 



CORRESPONDENCE OF JOHN RAY. 



Mr. RAY to FB,. WILLUGHBY, Esq.* 

have herewithal sent you one of my books, 
which you had received a week sooner had not the book- 
binder deceived me. I need say nothing either to com- 
mend or disparage it; you know what it is as well as 
myself. Since I fully dispatched it, one or two other 
designs came into my head, which, you being concerned 
in (I mean in my intentions), I shall communicate to 
you, and desire first your sentence and opinion concern- 
ing the whole; and then, in case of approbation, your 
particular directions as to the management and carrying 
on. You remember that we lately, out of 'Gerard,' 'Par- 
kinson/ and ' Phytologia Britannica,' made a collection 
of rare plants, whose places are therein mentioned, and 
ranked them under the several counties. My intention 
now is to carry on and perfect that design ; to which 
purpose I am now writing to all my friends and acquaint- 
ance who are skillful in Herbary, to request them this 
next summer each to search diligently his country for 
plants, and to send me a catalogue of such as they find, 
together with the places where they grow. In divers 
counties I have such as are skillful and industrious : for 
Warwickshire and Nottinghamshire I must beg your 
assistance, which I hope, and am confident, you will be 
willing to contribute. After that, partly by my own 

* Memorials, page 13. 



2 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

search, partly by the mentioned assistance, I shall have 
got as much information and knowledge of the plants of 
each country as I can (which will require some years), I 
do design to put forth a complete P. B., which I hope to 
bring into as narrow a compass as this book. First, I 
shall give the names of all plants that are or shall then 
be found growing in England in an alphabetical order, 
together, with their synonyma, excepting such as are men- 
tioned in this catalogue^ whose synonyma I shall omit, 
setting down only one name, and referring for the rest to 
' Cat. Cant.' I shall also put a full Index Anglicolatinus 
after the manner of '-that -in this catalogue : then I shall 
put in -the counties, .with the several rare plants in them 
marshalled alphabetically. Instead of putting the par- 
ticular places to each plant in the first catalogue, I shall 
only refer to this : as suppose at Sedum tridactylites 
alpinum, after I have given the several synonyma, and 
the English name; instead of adding the place, I will 
say, vide Carnarvonshire, &c. My second design is to 
make another catalogue, which I will call ' Horti Angliee/ 
I intend to write to all the noted gardens, to procure a 
catalogue of each ; Oxford garden and Tradescants I 
have already. Then I shall out of my own garden, and 
all these, make up one catalogue. Herein I shall give 
the synonyma of each plant ; and those that are not in 
my garden, I shall name in what places they are ; as 
suppose Olea sativa, after I have put down his synonyma 
and English name, I shall add Tradescants garden, and 
so of the rest. Into this catalogue I shall not admit any 
that grow wild in England, lest it swell too big. To this 
also I shall add a complete Index Anglicolatinus. You 
have my designs, and I desire your judgment of them. 
I would not be nattered, I am not so fond of my own 
conceits : if prudent men think they will be of no use to 
the public, I am not so foolish to trouble myself and 
friends to no end but to trouble others. I shall be very 
glad, sir, to hear from you; and, as I have heretofore 
received abundance of pleasure and contentment from 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 3 

your friendship and society, so would it still be some 
comfort to me to know that I retain a place in your 
thoughts and esteem, though the meanest. I am, &c. 

Coll. Trin., Feb. 25, 1659. 



Mr. RAY to Mr. WILLUGHBY. 

SIR, On Saturday night last, the 7th instant, Mr. 
Skippon and myself arrived at. Cambridge from a long 
northern expedition, wherein fop the 'most part 'we fol- 
lowed your footsteps, proceeding just so far as Sterling 
and remfning by Glasgow. I gave you in a former letter 
an account of our design and intention, which whether 
you received or not I know not. In all this journey I met 
with but four plants which I had not formerly observed, 
and in Scotland not one. Those are Pneumonanthe 
[Gentiana Pneumonanthe, Linn.], which hath a beautiful 
blue flower, and is perpetual : it grows plentifully in many 
heathy and moist grounds in Lincolnshire, and the eastern 
side of Yorkshire, and flowers about the latter end of 
August. Sedi alpini parva species [S. aizoides, Linn.], 
which I have not yet searched out : it hath a yellow flower, 
and flowers about the beginning of August. This I found 
only in one small spot of ground about Shap in West- 
morland. Chrysanthemum majus folio valde laciniato, 
fore croceo, J. B. [Anthemis tinctoria, Linn.], as I judge. 
This I found in a bank near to the river Tees, in the 
bishopric of Durham. Lapathum folio acuto fore aureo, 
C. B. \Eumex maritimus, Linn.], which I had before 
taken some notice of, when I was less careful and curious 
in distinguishing of plants. I found likewise, near 
Huntingdon, a plant which the last year I observed, not 
far from St. Neots, coming to wait upon you, which 
puzzles me sore : it is between a Grass and a Caryo- 
phyllus, I know not what to call it unless it be Poly- 
gono angustissimo folio affinis, C. B., but I cannot find 
that described anywhere. I have sent you a little branch 



4 CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 

of it, for your judgment about it. The seed-vessel 
is large and perfectly to be seen : the flower is a very 
small yellowish one. You mention a box, which you 
intend for ah 1 sorts of fruits and seeds. It must have 
almost infinite cells and divisions to contain all the varie- 
ties of seeds and fruits. Concerning the order and me- 
thod of it you need not my advice, for I can give you 
none but what is very obvious, viz., to put those of the 
same tribe near together. As for instance, to have a 
drawer with several cells or boxes for nuts, another for 
cones, &c., for the rest of fruits which may be reduced to 
several heads ; and then one for exotics, which cannot be 
conveniently referred. In like manner for herbs, to have 
a drawer with several boxes or divisions for Legumina, 
another the like for Cerealia, &c., only those boxes must 
be more numerous than those of fruits. By a drawer 
with several boxes, I mean such a thing as the printers 
put their letters in. There hath been, and still continues 
to be here, an epidemical sickness in the nature of a fever, 
which cuts off many old persons and children ; but those 
of middle age it spares. Some of my small company 
are grievously affected with it. In the north of England, 
and hi Scotland, we heard of no such thing. 

Coll.Trin., Sept, 14, 1661. 



Mr. RAY to Mr. WILLUGHBT. 
D. Francisco Willughby J. Wray, S.D. 

DE mira plantarum e semine enatarum metamorphosi, 
et evariatione a nativa matrum figura, ne dicam specie, 
turn Bobertus, junior, turn D. Brown experiments aliquot 
a se facta mihi retulerunt ; adeo ut jam pene persuasus 
sim plantas degenerare posse et intra latitudinem generis 
seu tribus suse speciein mutare. De Nymplued alba 
et luted minoribus, jam plane despero, nihil ejusmodi a se 
unquam visum in fluviis circa aut prope Oxonium affirmat 
D. Brown. Semina nulla collegi, nee enim prseter Croci 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 5 

ulla turn maturuerunt. Croci semen in hortulo, D. Brown 
non antea a me conspectum copiosum vidi, sed nescio 
qua incogitantia illud omisi et neglexi. Die Lunas Caw- 
shamum vicum uno circiter milliari Readinga remotum 
perrexi, illinc non longe in colle cretaceo qui Thames! 
imminet Orckin anthropophoron [Aceras anthropophora, 
11. Br.] ex instinctu D. Brown inveni, non tamen copiose. 
Eandemmet pridem circa Genevam invenerain ; /. Eau- 
hino Orchis gated et alis fere cinereis dicitur. Et hie, 
quod ad plantas spontaneas attinet, solus hujus itineris 
fructus erat. Die Martis hue veni ubi brevi unius die! 
quiete interposita ut Morgani hortum lustrarem. Die 
Jovis pedes in Cantium progressus sum usque ad collem 
Rougfttfill dictum, a Darfordia non longe, ut ibi inve- 
nirem Helleborinen albam \Cephalantliera grandiflora^ et 
Florem Adonidis [Adonis autumnalis, Linn.J, quas se illic 
loci invenisse T. Willisellus asseruit. Sed quamvis non 
indiligens scrutinium adhibuerim, neutra mihi conspecta 
est. At neque quicquam de More Adonidis in arvis illis 
crescente, a rustica turba quam sciscitabar, inaudire potui. 
Inveni quidem Chamapityn \Ajuga Chamapitys, Srn.] et 
Perfoliatam \J3upleurum rotundifolium , Linn.] copiose, et 
prasterea novam Geranij Columbini foliis magis dissectis 
speciem [Geranium columbinum, Linn.], quam a se in 
agris collcctam cum Oxonii essem mihi raonstravit Jacobus 
Bobertus films. 



Mr. Fn. WILLTJGHBY to Mr. WRAY, about the year 1662. 

SIR, I met with several adventures in the remaining 
part of my journey after I left you ; and amongst the 
rest, with one very lucky one, of a new discovery of me- 
dals. You may remember the day we parted I had in- 
tended to have gone to Cirencester, but hearing by the 
way of a great deal of treasure that was found in a field, 
I presently conjectured it might be Roman coin, and 
diverted my course thither. The field was near Dursly 
(a town we left about a mile of the left hand as we rode 



6 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

from Gloucester), where I found above forty people digging 
and scraping, and bought a great many silver medals 
of them ; and one incomparable fair one of gold, that had 
been found a little before. The whole history how these 
came to be discovered, T shall reserve till 1 see you. I 
thought to have made strict inquiry after the Snap-apple 
bird [the common Cross-bill, Loxia curvirostrd], but 
falling very sick at Malverne, I was forced to give 
over all. 



Dr. CORNELI from Naples, to Mr. WHAT at Rome, 3 Kal. Dec. 1663. 

Yiro Eruditissimo Johanni Wray. 

Thomas Cornelius S. 

EGO interea quid de Manna compertum habeam, 
paucis indicabo. Mannse triplex genus provenit. Unum 
trunci Ornorum per rimas sponte exsudant, diciturque 
vulgo Manna Corporis ; alterum quod ex eadem arbore 
incisionibus arte factis extillat, et Mannam forsatettam 
vocant. Tertium tandem in TYaxini frondibus colligitur, 
Manna frondis nuncupatur. Hanc plerique ex acre in 
frondes nocturne tempore roris instar decidere arbi- 
trantur; sed ego autopsia edoctus sum illam ex ipsis 
arborum foliis exhalari. Hanc Virgilius roscidi mellis 
nomine significavit, cum dixit, 

Et dura quercus sudabunt roscida mella. 

Causa vero quamobrem ego ita sentiam non debeo 
reticere. Linteo circa vesperam fraxini frondes velave- 
ram, ut dignoscerem num Manna frondibus extrinsecus 
adveniret ; sed mane inventa sunt folia roscido melle im- 
buta, nee interea Linteo quicquam inerat, nisi quod ex 
frondibus illi adhasserat. Perperam igitur Matthiolus 
commentario in cap. 70, lib. i. Dioscor. reprehendit Al- 
timarum, qui Mannam ex fraxini foliis extillare docuerat. 
Tu vir sapientissime nostras has disquisitiones rcquo am- 
mo accipe. Meque ut facis amare perge. Vale Neapoli iii. 
Kal. Dec. MDCLXIII. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 7 

Mr. Fn. WILLUGHBY to Mr. WBAY. 

SIR, The first thing I saw considerable after I left 
Montpellier, was a spring of Oleum petroleum at Gabian; 
at the same place there is a kind of a black pumice stone 
and a medicinal well. From thence we went to Nar- 
bonne, where there is some antiquities; there having a 
very sore leg, and not being able to endure riding, I re- 
solved to go forward by sea, and went in a little vessel 
down the river to the sea shore, where we expected good 
weather almost a week, in which time the plaister of 
diapalma cured my leg ; and, the mariners being out of 
hopes of a good wind, we bought a pair of mules for 
about nve pistoles apiece, and set forwards to Perpintan, 
Colliver, and Capo de Creux. Between Colliver and Capo 
de Creux, we passed the frontiers without any danger, 
searching, or trouble at all, only at the expense of an 
escus for a guide. At Capo de Creux is the principal 
place for the coral fishing, and though the wind hindered 
us from seeing the fishing, I saw the instruments and 
understood as much about it as if I had seen it taken out 
of the sea. Thence to Viet, where there is a mine of 
amethysts, which they call ' violet stones ;' by what I saw 
there, and learned afterwards, I make no question but 
diamonds, rubies, iacinths, and almost all precious stones, 
grow just in the same manner as the Bristol diamonds, 
hexangular and pointed, except agate and corneole, which 
may be reckoned among pebbles. Thence to Cardona, 
where there is a mountain of Sal Fossilis, which serves 
all the country thereabouts ; the best is hard and trans- 
parent like crystal, so as they make beads of it and sell 
them very cheap at the town. About the mountain some 
sea-plants. And now I would advise you by all means 
to make a little tour in Spain, and see the Oleum petrol., 
the coral, the amethysts, and the salt mountain ; but to 
go no farther than Cardona, unless you resolve upon the 
Canary voyage, or have a mind to an Andalusian whore. 
But from Cardona to Xvesca, a great town between 



8 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Saragossa and Toulouse, where I heard Seignor La Stan- 
nosa has a very famous Museum; the bookseller that 
told me of it, said it would take up several days to see 
all the rarities ; but very likely it is much lesser than the 
fame. From Xvesca to Toulouse, where they say there is 
a cave that hardens bodies into a mummy. In this 
journey, before you come to Viet, as I remember, you 
will pass by Aulot, where in divers caves there is spira- 
culums of air, caused, as they imagine there, by the fall- 
ing of water. From Cardona I went to Portosa, where I 
saw a mine of marble, which they call jasper. From 
Portosa to Valentia ; Gandia, where I saw the sugar canes 
and sugar mills ; Chativer, where there is an aqueduct 
made by the Moors ; Caravac, where there is a cross that 
came down from Heaven; Granada, where there is a 
palace of the Moors that well deserves a journey of a 
dozen leagues. Thence to Seville, where I attempted in 
vain to get a passport for Portugal. I thought then to 
have gone to Gales, from thence to Tangier, and from 
Tangier to Lisbon, which was the best way to get into 
Portugal; but being discouraged by my mule's ill fortune, 
and the time of the year, I faced about, and returning by 
land * * * * Toledo, Madrid, Burgos, Vittoria, St. Se- 
bastian, Bayonne, Bourdeaux, Blais, Sainctes, Poictiers, 
Amboise, Blois, Orleans, and got hither almost a fortnight 
since. This journey of almost a thousand miles I came 
all alone, having agreed with my merchant to leave him 
either at Seville or Lisbon ; and, I thank God, escaped 
very well all along : but at Vittoria and the passage near 
St. Sebastian was basely troubled with searchers. If you 
come that way you must manifest your money, at least 
all your silver, and take a pass. Between Bayonne and 
Bourdeaux I got a great many notions about the making 
of turpentine, rosin, pitch, and Yonderone, which I think 
is tar, the country being full of pines. About Bayonne 
and St. Sebastian they catch a great many whales every 
winter; I got there some uncertain notions about the 
Sperma Ceti. The buying of horses and mules is an excel- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 9 

lent way ; and you will find it will turn to very good 
account, and save a great deal of money, if you do not go 
higher than five or six pistoles a horse. At Seville I 
found a letter of Dr. Wilkins's, who very importunately 
persuaded either you or me to make a voyage to the Peak 
of Teneriffe, and that if * * * * home, and you would 
undertake it, the Royal Society would defray all your 
charges, and send you to Gales all necessary instruments 
and a catalogue of the observations they desired to have 
made. The Peak is only to be ascended in June and 
July. When you come to Orleans I hope you will take 
exact notice of Joan of Aries and Charles VII., statues 
on the bridge ; I saw them as I passed by, but took them 
for some* superstitious foppery, and did not at all regard 
them. I hope you will all along get the exact govern- 
ment of all the towns. 



Mr. BAENHAM to Mr. WHAT. 

SIR, Yours from Montpellier, Jan. the 10th, S. V., 
came to my hands on Feb. the 6th following, and was 
answered on the 9th, wherein you give me so great en- 
couragement to employ you by way of information, that 
I cannot forbear the annexing of this to the other inquiries 
I gave you in my last ; and indeed, though last in order, 
yet I could wish it may be the first in execution. The 
thing is this: there is a certain woman in the world, 
whose name I am obliged to conceal (although possibly 
you would guess it if your were in England), that hath 
for this two years laboured under the affliction of a belly 
that hath grown bigger and bigger, and is now much 
bigger than ever she was when she was with child (for 
she hath had two children) ; she went up this last week 
to London to try all the advice that place can afford, 
having failed of a cure in the country. The concern I 
have for her, which indeed is exceeding surpassingly great, 



10 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

hath made me transgress the bounds of modesty so far as 
to desire of her in writing her own observations of her 
malady, together with the alterations she hath found in 
her pudendis; which, not without much difficulty, she did 
send me yesterday after many importunities. I hope God 
will forgive me my curiosity, being chiefly led thereunto 
by an opinion, or secret impulse, that you, with the advice 
and information of what you may meet withal abroad, 
may be the author of her recovery. She says, in her own 
letter, to me thus : that she hath grown bigger and bigger 
this two years, as I told you before, and that her belly is 
constantly very hard ; she did ywaiKodrjvai hoc est per 
menstrua purgare more debito, until the beginning of last 
summer, when she was advised to drink Epsom waters ; 
which she did for some time, until she found great incon- 
veniences by them, for ever since she hath had suppres- 
sionem mensium; and, moreover, presently after her coming 
from Epsom, she felt a thing come down just like a blad- 
der, and bigger than her fist, and hath lain upon the neck 
of her womb ever since ; and upon the least walking or 
straining comes out fuller, and when she lies down goes 
in further than a woman's reach ; so are her own words. 
She saith she is free from any pain in those parts, only 
she hath a great weakness, so that she cannot stand much, 
especially after purging. Her navel is puffed up bigger 
than a little egg clear above the skin. She says that the 
doctors and midwives cannot determine what it is that 
comes down so; some say it is the mother. She saith, 
moreover, that she feels no pain either in her belly or 
back, only stitches fly up and down that are ready to take 
away her breath. She seldom or never breaks wind 
downward. This is all she tells me in her letter, and I 
do believe you have a larger account of her disease than 
her own physicians ; her bashfulness is so much, that it 
will not suffer her to discourse with her own sex in this 
matter freely. I have most exactly, according to the 
meaning of her letter, transcribed her sense, and chiefly 
her words, where modesty will give me leave, I know I 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 11 

need not provoke your diligence and industry in this 
matter to make all inquiries where you come after any- 
thing that may do her good. The compassion of your 
nature will prompt you to so charitable a work ; she is a 
person of some quality, and I am sure will have a due 
sense of her obligations to you. The sickness last week 
at London was but 28, God be praised. 

March 13th, 166. 



Mr. LISTER* to Mr. WEAT, 
M. Lister D. Wray suo, S. D. 

DE Historia naturali Aristotelis ita censeo, eum homi- 
nem Philosophum praeclare agere; sed egregius vir 
minime satisfacit tantis facultatibus atque adjumentis, 
quorum meminit Plinius ei prasstita fuisse ab Alexandro. 
Certe in his praecipue rebus, quibus me quotidie exerceo, 
turpissime ilium errare deprehendo, neque sane id mirum 
cum pra3clarissimus author summum suum ingenium con- 
sulere maluit, quam res ipsas. Illud manifestum, eum 
paucissimis experimentis fuisse contentum ut immensam 
structuram exsedificaret. De Plinio tu mihi abunde satis- 
fecisti superioribus tuis literis ; adeoque tuum judicium a 
diligentissima lectione vehementer complector approbo- 
que. Ad nostros homines venio, quorum, in primis inge- 
niosissimus juxta ac diligentissimus scriptor Aldrovandus 
(nam Albertum, Cardanum creterosque id genus homines 
stomachor valde, quod me plane operam perdidisse sentio, 
quam iis evolvendis dederim; nisi quod id profecerim, 
quam licere homines doctissimos ineptire, qui ultra appa- 
ratum velint Philosophari). Sed ad Aldrovandum redeo, 
virum sane mirificum, cui tamen segre fero istos locos 
suos communes; mallem equidem substituisset corollas 
de suo seque dignas, sed id moris est hominum, im- 
mciisam lectionem et industriam ostentare malumus, quam 

* Memorials, p. 17. 



12 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

accuratissime in paucis eisdemque nostris sapere : a quo 
tamen major fructus aliquando sperandus est in aiixilium 
vitas, ne dicam, nostrae laudis. Ante eum pro ratione 
temporum oportuit me dixisse de Whottono nostro, 
nisi quod ab eo primo didici talem authorem extitisse. 
Elegantissimum suum opus tandem comparavi evolvique, 
is mirabili plane industria summoque ingenio usus est in 
extricandis veterum sententiis. Tabulas nostras ante 
confeci, quam eum nactus sum ; at mireris, quantam vo- 
luptatem conceperim, cum eas contulerim cum differentiis 
Whottoni. Hunc excipiat Moufetus item noster, a quo 
omnia praeclara et consummata quis non expectet, cui 
tanta adjumenta, tantaque nomina contribuerunt, Whot- 
tonus, Gesnerus, C. Clusius, Pennus, Knivettus, Bruas- 
rus, fee. ? Profecto universum Theatrum suum adeo 
confuse et sine ordine condidit, ut qua3 ei materies ab 
aliis, turpissime collocator et minime in laudem tantorum 
virorum. At non solum ipsam rem fere ignoravit, verum 
etiam barbare omnino exponit. Sed ea homini imperito 
et bene volenti condonare possimus, nisi alia plane res 
contra suaderet, cui equidem in legendis autoribns mul- 
tum tribuo studeoque, ut sc. intelligerem, qui sit eorum 
animus honestusne et probus. At ex ejus scriptis aliud 
aperte cognovi, quod satis mirari nequeo, arrogantiam sc. 
hominis, ne quid gravius dicam, qui cum infinita pene, 
praBsertim de natura istomm minutorum animalium toti- 
dem fere verbis transtulit ab Aldrovando, tamen nusquam 
ejus ingeniosissimi viri (si quis alius nostri seculi) mentio- 
nem facit. Ediderat autem Aldrovandus opus suum ante 
triginta annos quam ha3c in lucem prolata sunt. Pauca 
ea, quae de his rebus scripsere F. Imperatus, F. Columna 
tantis veris plane digna sunt, Moufeto ****** neminem 
legi praster Geodartium Batavum, cujus certe industria 
summe laudanda est. Nam prater elegantissimas figuras, 
quas appingi curavit, singulorum animalium cibatum, 
transmutationumque tempera, accuratissime notat ; ut 
tantum apud eum desideretur eorum exacta descriptio ; 
is autem praster nuda familias nomina ne verbum quidem 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 13 

addit. Me olini judicium tuum elicuisse memini de 
Kerchero : is in tractatu, mundus subterraneus nominato, 
inter alia, de horum animalium productione spontanea 
pluribus verbis agit ; quee tamen res omnino an fiat in 
universa rerum natura, dubito vehementer. Testimonia 
Aldrovandi, &c., nihili sunt. Ego plura expertus, quae 
contrarium vel evincant, vel erroris certe causas declarent j 
qua3 tu alio tempore, a me expectabis. In extremis ea 
accepi, qua; in actis illustrissimae societatis vestrae lego. 
Ubi in primis praeclarissimum specimen ingenii sui edidit 
D. King de Formica. Habes quae scire potui de scripto- 
ribus minutorum animalium, ea judicii libertate, quae 
nostra3 amicitiae sit. Si qui sint qui nostram cognitionem 
admKT^krteant, fac me de iis certiorem. Et velim ut 
tuum judicium interponas turn de his quorum supra 
memini turn de iis quae restant. Item rogo digneris 
quam plurimis verbis mihi perscribere, quum, commodo 
tuo fiat, quid tu existimes de optimo genere harum rerum 
turn observandarum, turn tractandarum. Nam fere 
totus sum in his novis nostris delectationibus. Vale et 
nos ama. 

Burvelae agri Lincoliiiensis, viii Cal. Aprilis. 



Mr. WHAT to Mr. LISTER, Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. 

SIR, Arrived here (viz. Cambridge) I found a letter 
from you, the reading whereof gave me no small content, 
it containing expressions so significant, and full of heat 
and irdOog, as certainly nothing but sincere love could 
dictate. Sure they must needs be a true copy of your 
mind, and not words of course and compliment, only I 
could wish you had been more sparing in what refers to 
my commendation; for though I would not refuse the 
testimony and praise of persons who are themselves 
praise- worthy, where there is just ground and reason for 
it, yet not when it exceeds the merit of any thing I dare 



14 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

own, nor for such qualities as I am not conscious to 
myself of, which gross self-flattery must needs much 
blind me if I did not quickly discern to proceed rather 
from affection than judgment. I rejoice much that you 
still pursue the study of nature, not only because of the 
propensity I myself have to it, and consequently to love 
such as agree with me, but also because I judge you to 
be a person, to speak modestly, as well qualified as any 
I know in England for such an undertaking, and so 
likely to make the greatest advance and improvement, 
you having taken the right course and method ; that is, 
to see with your own eyes, not relying lazily on the dic- 
tates of any master but yourself, comparing things with 
books, and so learning as much as can be known of 
them. I do not wonder a man so inquisitive should 
make some additions to the Cambridge Catalogue. 
Hieradum rectum rigidum* it is not unlikely you might 
find about Burweh 1 ; but it seems somewhat strange you 
should there meet with Alchimitta vulgaris, I having not 
to my remembrance ever met with it in England else- 
where than in mountainous places, as Westmoreland, 
Wales, Derby, York, Staffordshire, &c. 

Those remarks you mention you would oblige me 
much to communicate, I being very fond of seeing any 
of your productions. 

I was much pleased to understand that you do not 
confine your studies and inquiries to Phytology only, 
but take in Zoology, and the whole latitude of natural 
history. Lincolnshire, for fish and fowl, affords you a 
large field, yet it is very much that in one winter you 
should meet with upwards of fifty species ; and I wish 
I had the sight of your descriptions, which I doubt not 
to be very exact; but because they cannot easily be 
transmitted, I shall only desire a catalogue of their 
names, that so I may know what there are I have not 
yet met with. 
Middleton, June 18, 1667. 

* It is probably Hieradum umbellatum, Linn. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 15 

. Mr. LISTEB to Mr. WEAY. 
M. Lister D. Wray S. 

PRIDIE vesperi insectum animal admodum lucens in 
acre vidi, cepi, notavi, scripsi. Ratione lucis Cicindela 
merito appellanda est : sin autem propius et claro sole 
aniinalculum perspexeris, Scarabaeorum tribu familiaque 
esse diceres. Corpore erat parvo, longiusculo, tenui, 
aequaliter lato ; quoad superficiem, laevi planoque ; quoad 
colorem, alas, alarumque thecas, caput, fusco aut pullo. 
Tegumentum capitis clypeum inversum lepide imitabatur. 
Caput subter, ratione et operculi sui, et corporis, mini- 
mum ^rat (atque hinc tegumentum ejus ad latera sua 
perspicuum), a duobus nigerrimis splendentibusque oculis 
dispartitum. Caput duse brevissimae tenuissimaeque An- 
tennae ornabant. Humeri nulli : nam supra, tegumento 
tantum, alarumque thecis, destinguebatur animalculi cor- 
pus : subter, aliter res se habet. Tres pedum tenuissi- 
morum ordines, ad fabricam et similitudinem vulgaris 
muscae nigrae facti : quorum duo mox infra caput rubenti 
collo inserebantur. Tumet thorax, rotundus, laBvis, 
splendens; cujus basi alterum pedum par adhaerent. 
Denique venter sex annulis imbricatim venustissime dis- 
positis constabat : quorum ultimis iste liquor bipartitus 
ad instar aquae marinae lucens micansque inerat. De die 
caput sursum tollere gaudet : lente et raro se loco movet : 
Utrumque more Bufonis. Vale. 

Col. Divi Jolmnnis, 6 Cal. Julii, 1667. 



Mr. DENT to Mr. WBAY. 

SIR, Mr. Mayfeild could not procure any dried 
Mayds or TJwrnback at the mart. He helped me to a 
fresh TkornbacJc, which he said was full grown : its weight 
was ten pounds. It was female, and had very many 



16 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

eggs in it, all exactly round, of different bigness; the 
largest as big as a little May cherry, paler coloured than 
a hen's egg, of that bigness, otherwise not different to 
the eye. I have dried the fish a little with salt, &c., yet 
not so much but that it will recover its form if soaked in 
hot water. The tail (a foot long) was cut off (as usually) 
when caught, which, they say, was full of pricks, both 
above and below, to the very end. Maydes* they say, 
are of two sorts, the larger sort (much smaller than 
T/iornbacks] properly called Flayre Maydes^ smooth as 
flayre, pale coloured, not dappled or waived ; the less 
called Thornback Maydes, full of pricks, dappled, but 
paler coloured than the Thornback. It seems a full-grown 
Flayre is a very large fish. Mr. Mayfeild told me he 
sold one to the cook of St. John's College of two hun- 
dred weight and upwards, and that it served all the 
scholars of the college at that time, being thirty mess for 
Commons ; which was likewise confirmed to me by the 
cook of the same college. There are male and female of 
all these four sorts. I cannot understand that these four 
do differ at all in shape of body, but only in proportion, 
colour, and smoothness of skin or prickles. With the 
fish I have put up in a box some water-fowl, viz., a 
Pocker \Fuligula ferind], a Smew [Mergus albellus], 
three Sheldins [Tadorna vulpanser], a Widgeon and a 
Whewer \_Anas penelope\ ; which last two are male and 
female of the same kind. Widgeon is never applied to 
the female sex. It is usual to call a silly fellow a wise 
widgeon ; or to say, he is as wise as a widgeon ; and a 
drunkard's song saith that 

" Mahomet was no divine, but a senseless widgeon, 
To forbid the use of wine unto those of his religion." 

It is usual to say of one of a large size, "Sure the dam of 
that was a Whewer." We could not meet as yet with a 
Pintayle [Anas acutd\. My cousin tells me it is sorne- 

* [Young females of the Thornback Ray (Raia clavata) are so called.] 
f [The females of the Fire Flayre, or Sting Ray (Trygon pastinaca). ] 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 17 

what less than a Whewer, of lighter gray colour, the 
wings and tail longer and sharper pointed, the bill longer 
and narrower. I have put up some hollow bones which 
are annexed to the windpipe of each male ; for in females 
I can find none otherwise than you will find in the paper 
writ upon Whewer. The difference of shape of these 
bones, doubtless, causes their different tones. If you 
steep one of the Sheldin's windpipes a while in warm 
water to make it lax, you may observe the pretty motion 
to be found in the middle protuberance, and pick out a 
little philosophy from it. Whenever I find any farther 
opportunities of serving you, I will approve myself, &c. 

Cambridge, Feb. 15, 1674. 



Mr. LISTER to Mr. WHAT. 
M. Lister D. Wray, suo S. 

DE Valetudine tua incommoda vehementer movebar. 
Etenim cum summam tuam temperantiam atque absti- 
nentiam tarn probe scirem, omnia de te pejora metui. 
Idque ea de causa loquor, quod mihi non parum errare de 
victus ratione videbaris. Is quantum meminerim (teque 
in ea re, cum Monspelii ad eandem mensam diu hospites 
una fuerimus religiose observavi) parcissimus, scrupulo- 
sissimus. Accedit illud tibi, jejunia frequentia, longis- 
sima: et ut pauci cibi es, ita et rarissimi corporis ha- 
bitus. 

x. Cal. October, 1667. 



Mr. WRAY to Mr. LISTER, in answer to the preceding Letter. 
J. Wray D. Martino Lister, suo S. D. 

SYMPTOM A illud de quo non ita pridem apud te con- 
questus sum (Deo gratias) non ingravescit sed remittit 
potiiis : me tamen ab eo penitus liberatum iri vix est ut 
sperem, adeo teneri sunt (ut nosti) et putredini obnoxii 

2 



18 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

pulmones, ut siquam semel labem contraxerint, difficulter 
admodum in integrum restitui et percurari possint. Quod 
me in victus ratione (quam justo tenuiorem instituere 
putas) errare, eique rei partem aliquam mali quocum 
conflictor imputandam censere videris, ignoscas si sen- 
tentiae tuae non accedam. Absit ergo ut ego temperantiee 
laudem, quas mihi nulla debetur, affectem, aut delatam 
ultro ainplectar. Reliqua quidem animalia rationis (ut 
vulgo creditur) expertia, qua3 secundum naturae prasscrip- 
tum et instinctum degunt, et alimenta nulla arte proapa- 
rata, qualia natura iis subministrat accipiunt, in cibo 
capiendo nee legem observant, nee modum tenent, nee 
statis temporibus vescuntur. Verum cibus quo ilia utun- 
tur, et excrementi multi est, et succi pauci, unde et ilium 
sine errore aliquo aut noxa insigni copiosius ingerere 
possunt. Deinde quoniam parca manu, sponte sua, nullo 
cultural mangonio stuprata ilium suppeditat alma tellus, 
multum se exerceant oportet, multumque temporis im- 
pendant in illo conquirendo ; uride nee si velint in ex- 
cessu facile peccare possunt. Hinc feras et sylvestres 
animantes raro ultra modum pinguescunt, nee admodum 
libidine turgent, sed statis duntaxat temporibus, semel 
ut plurimum in anno ad Venerem incitaritur ; suntque 
admodum vivaces, et morborum plerunque expertes. 
Nos certe (me judice) valetudini nostras melius consulere- 
mus, si illorum exemplo, victu simpliciori et viliori ute- 
remur, iisque cibis quibus ventriculum implere modiee- 
que distendere fas esset. Quod Gesnerum et Aldrovandum 
consulueris, et eorum descriptiones cum tuis diligenter 
contuleris, recte et ex ordine mihi fecisse videris ; paucis- 
simas certe Aves invenies quas illorum diligentiam effuge- 
rint. 
Dabam Notleise Cal., Octob., 1667. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 19 

Mr. WRAT to Mr. LISTEK. 
Joannes Wray D. Martino Lister, suo S. P. D. 

QUOD Veteres Latinos Medicos pervolvere in animo tibi 
esse scribis, mihi admodum probatur; namque siquid ego 
judicio valeo, iis legendis plurimum proficies, magn unique 
operse-praetium facies. Cornelium Celsum et ipse legi. 
Est ille optimus Latinitatis autor et Medicinae veteris 
satis gnarus, quainvis ipse (ni male memini) professione 
et usu medicus non fuerit. Scribonius mihi nunquam 
lectus est, Plinium secundum summi ingenii virum tibi 
commcndare (quern nemo sc. vituperat) superfluum et 
ineptum foret. Est autem ipsius opus nihil aliud quam 
PandectS6, in quas congessit quicquid uspiam apud Ve- 
teres seu Graecos, seu Latinos exterosve legenti occurre- 
bant argumento suo convenientia, temere et sine delectu, 
nulloque judicio adhibito. Plurimuin certe illius indus- 
triae debemus, qui e monumentis Antiquorum plurima ad 
historiam naturalem pertinentia commentariis suis inse- 
rendo ad nos derivavit, quas aliter injuria temporum cum 
Autoribus suis penitus intercidissent. Nee tamen merito 
vituperandus est, quod nullo discrimine vera falsis ad- 
miscet ; liberum enim unicuique judicium relinquit ; finem 
suum assecutus, quod omnia quaecunque a Graecis aliisve 
literis prodita invenerit sine invidia Romanis suis com- 
municarit. Video te Romanarum Antiquitatum scrip- 
tores et vindices pra3 manibus habere : Plurimos ejus 
generis Autores vidi : quern cui prasferam non video. 
Inter alios J. Lipsius praecipuam laudem meretur, qui de 
militia Romana, de gladiatoribus, de Amphitheatris, etc. 
fuse tractavit, additis etiam ad majorem illustrationein 
figuris aeneis. Est et Casalius quidam Romanus qui de 
profanis Gentilium ritibus copiose egit, adhibitis etiam 
iconibus. In hoc libro quae ad sacrificia pertinent, vasa, 
instrumenta, et reliquus omnis apparatus, traduntur. 
Est et Tomasinus quidam Italus qui de annulis antiquis, 
de Tesseris Hospitalitatis aliisque quibusdam tractatus 
edidit. Lazarus Bayfius olim de re Vestiaria et Navali 



20 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

scripsit, at breviter. Urbis antique situm et monumenta, 
quorum partes aliquse vel rudera etiamnum supersunt, 
nimirum templa, porticus, amphitheatra, balnea, obe- 
liscos, columnas, aquaeductus, circos, etc.; delinearunt et 
descripserunt plurimi, at Italice plerique. Quo ego usus 
sum liber 2bus parvis octavi folii tomis comprehensus, 
Roma antica e moderna titulum habet : quern quia viliori 
pretio parabilis est, tibi etiam commendo, ut qui linguam 
Italicam probe calleas. Figuras quamvis in minori forma 
non inelegantes rerum praecipuarum de quibus tractat 
inibi reperies. Sed manum de tabula, de his aliisque si 
opus sit plura cum Londini fuero; interim vale et me 
ama. 

Dabam Notleise iv Idus Sbris, 1667. 



Mr. WRAY to Mr. LISTEK, at St. John's, Cambridge. 
J. Wray, D. Martino Lister, S. D. 

LITER AS tuas iv Id. Novemb. ad me datas non sine 
tacita quadam admiratione legi ; adeo eruditae mihi visae 
sunt, adeo eleganter et ad amussim scriptse. Felicem me 
qui talem amicum habeam et studiorum aemulum, maximo 
mihi adjumento futurum, et Reip. literarise ornainento. 
Quid enim de te sperare nefas? qui tantos jamjam in 
bonis artibus et literis progress us feceris, atque in id 
fastigium evaseris, sive rara quadam ingenii felicitate, 
sive studio et industria, quo studiosorum vulgus maxima 
contentione nequicquam anhelat. Rem sane difficillimam 
plane consecutus es, ornate dicendi scribendique faculta- 
tem ; adeo ut de Latini sermonis puritate, deque stylo 
expoliendo tibi amplius laborandum non sit, cum in his 
tantopere excellas aliisque asqualibus tuis palmam facile 
praeripias. Hanc mihi confessionem res ipsa extorquet ; 
hanc tibi debitam laudem ni tribuam, invidus censeri de- 
beam et amici titulo indignus. Dominum Willughby non 
est cur tibi conciliare studeam, cum bonos omnes et em- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 21 

ditos tuique similes sponte sua amplectatur, omnibusque 
officiis demereri sibique devincire gestiat. Scribonimn 
ut legere aveam commendatio tua effecit. Verum liber 
ille non ubique est obvius, aut paratu facilis. Cum 
primum mihi ejus copia facta fuerit, lectionem aggrediar. 
Dubia ilia quse tibi occurrunt, et legentem morantur, nae 
erras vehementer, si me posse solvere tibique eximere 
putas. Quid sibi velit autor ille cum Hypocistidem de- 
finit Rosas sylvestris succum, etc., divinare non possum. 
Bauhinus noster aliique Botanici datum fmticem ob floris 
cognationem juxta Rosam collocant ; nemo tamen Rosam 
caninam appellat ; ni forte pro canind, marina substitui 
debeat. Nam Caesalpinus, ut citatur a J. Bauhino, datum 
quondarS Rosam marinam appellari scribit. At ne sic 
quidem rem expedieinus, cum Hypocistis non ipsius Cisti 
succus sit, sed plantulse cisti radicibus adnatae, quse Hy- 
pocistis dicitur. Pro Oxytriphyllo Scribonii aliam longe 
diversam plantam nobis exhibent Lobelius et Clusius, 
magna nomina, nimirum Lotum pentaphytton siliquosum 
vittosum, C. B. [Lotus hirsutus, Linn.], ut apud eum in 
Pinace videre est : utcunque ego judicio tuo plurimum 
tribuo, tuamque sententiam probabilem existimo, quo- 
niam illud facultate aliqua insigni pollere vel bitumi- 
nosus odor satis arguit, quum in hoc nee odorem nee 
saporem aliquem excellentem observaverim. Opium 
quin prasstantissimum sit medicamentum, prsesertim 
extrinsecus adhibitum, nullus dubito, in eo tamen intus 
sumendo summopere cavendum est ne erres, aut mo- 
dum excedas ; nam ex frequentiori Opii usu, quan- 
tumvis optime prseparati, funesta tandem symptomata 
consecuta esse tristi multorum experimento satis con- 
stat. Quod in omni sanguinis eruptione artus con- 
stringi verat, utris similitudine deceptus errare videtur. 
Quod vero per venam, animalis arteriam intelligat, veri- 
simile est, quoniam Romani turn Venas turn Arterias 
communi nomine Venas dixerunt : nee in vasis hisce dis- 
tinguendis curiosi fuere, tantum abest ut circuitum san- 
guinis illos vel per neoularu vidisse concesserim. De 



22 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Fungis cum te, Deo dante, videro, pluribus agemus. 
Quod in studiis rei naturalis tarn constanter perseveres, 
et institutum pertinaciter urgeas, te pluriraum laudo. 
Hem sane curiosissimam te nuper observasse narras, ni- 
mirum Cochleam cujus spirse in diversam partem flectan- 
tur, cum inter doctos constans opinio sit, a septentrionali 
sequatoris parte cochleas omnes (motum sc. solis obser- 
varido) a sinistra dextram versus torqueri. Nee ego un- 
quam inveni qualem tu describis. Sive ergo alia? sint 
hujus generis, sive hsec sola exceptio sit, et diligenter 
servari, et exacte describi, depingique meretur. Ni mora 
in hac urbe mea incerta fuisset a te illam petiissem, ut 
Regali Societati (cujus nuper particeps factus sum) mon- 
strarem. Die Lunas proximo (favente numine) Sussexiam 
petam Londino relicto, ubi vanis pollicitationibus nimis 
diu detentus fui. 
Londini ix Cal. Decembr., 1667. 



Sir PHIL. SKIPPON to Mr. WRAY. 

SIR, The dean (Wilkins) says he is confident no man 
can translate his book, ' Real Character/ better than 
yourself. Yesterday the transfusion of blood was expe- 
rimented upon the same body they hired at first : they 
let out eight or ten ounces of his own, and then trans- 
fused of the sheep's arterial blood about fourteen or six- 
teen ounces. There was a great company present. The 
sweet- smelling earth found in Captain Massey's garden 
in Hogston, you have heard of already ; an oil has been 
extracted which smells sweet. The ' Journal des Scavans' 
relates, that Cassini hath discovered and described the 
motions of Venus about her own axis. 
Dec. 13, 1667. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 23 

Sir PHIL. SKIPPON to Mr. WBA.Y. 

SIR, The effects of the transfusion are not seen, the 
coffee-houses having endeavoured to debauch the fellow, 
and so consequently discredit the Royal Society, and 
make the experiment ridiculous. 



Sir PHIL. SKIPPON to Mr. WRAY. 

SIR, Yesterday there was a letter read from Dr. 
Sampson (who is at Leyden) to Dr. King, giving some 
notable>ebservations in the anatomy of a . . 
near the Bodensee. Dr. Lower showed the cause of 
blindness in horses, which is a spongy excrescency that 
grows in one, sometimes in two or three places of the 
uvea; which, being overgrown, covers the pupil when 
the horse is brought into the light, but in a dark stable 
it dilates again. A trial was made, whether a piece of 
iron touched by a magnet would weigh more than it did 
before it was touched : this succeeded not. A present 
was sent from Mr. Colpresse, I think, who lives in the 
West, being a box full of the several mineral stones, 
clays, &c., observed there. Mr. Hooke has improved the 
pendulum watch, by making the simple vibrations pro- 
mote the circular motion. It is hoped the college they 
have designed below Arundel House, towards the water- 
side, will be finished by next Michaelmas. Dr. Moulin 
translates the ' History of the Royal Society' into French. 
London, Jan. 24, 1667. 



Sir PHIL. SKIPPON to Mr. WKAY. 



SIR, It is somewhat difficult for me to explain in 
writing the new way of pendulum. There is the common 
vibration that Hugenius invented in watches, and Mr. 



24 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Hooke hath to that added a circular motion ; the weight 
at the end of one vibration is turned off by a kind of a 
spring, which makes the motion circular. The most 
considerable experiment yesterday, was the weighing of 
1st, tin ; 2d, copper ; 3d, tin and copper equally mixed 
together : these three severally were of the same weight 
in the air, but in water the mixed metal weighed much 
lighter than the other two. A new book of Dr. H. Moor 
is come out, which he calls ' Enchiridion Ethicum.' 
Feb. 21, 16G7. 



Mr. WKAY to Mr. LISTER, at Burwell in Lincolnsliire. 
Jo. Wray D. Martino Lister, suo S. D. 

SENTENTIAM tuam de autoribus iis qui de Insectis 
commentati sunt, in plerisque probo. Aristoteles quam- 
vis egregius autor, confusus esse videtur aliquando et 
obscurus, et in quamplurimis a scopo aberrat. Qui tamcn 
supersunt historic animalium libri non sunt integruin 
Aristotelis de hac materia opus. Cum Plinius (ni male 
memini) quinquaginta voluminum meminit. De Aldro- 
vando, Alberto, Cardano, juxta tecuni sentio. In Wot- 
toni opere non admodum versatus sum; video tamen 
ilium ex antiquorum scriptis hausisse quicquid fere in 
illud volumen contulerit. In Mouffetum nimis iniquus 
videris: nam et ille, me judice, non male meruit de 
repub. literaria, et pleriq. viri docti mihi suffragantur. 
Goedartium mihi nondum videre contigit. Kircheri ju- 
dicium nihih facio ; an vero Insecta quasdam sponte 
oriantur necne, determinare nequeo. Prseter hos qui de 
insectis scripserunt, alicujus nominis aut pretii nullos 
novi: vidi ahquando in Sicilia opus manuscriptum D. 
Castelli Romani in duos tomos divisum. Volumen satis 
spissum et grande cum figuris propria ipsius manu deli- 
neatis, quod nescio an unquam lucem publicain visurum 
sit. 

Londiiii. xiii Kal. Mali, 1668. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 25 

Mr. WEAY to Mr. LISTEE at Cambridge. 
J. Wray D. Martino Lister, suo S. D. 

PROXIMA static fuit Sheffeldia in comitatu Eboracensi. 
Ibi a vetere amico D. Jessop perbenevole exceptus sum, 
in cujus ajdibus etiamnum diversor. Quid tibi inquies 
illic negotii. Dicam quod res est. Scis me Phytologise 
studio deditum esse, et catalogum Anglias indigenarum 
stirpium jamdudum meditari, quern ut tandem absolutum 
et omnibus suis numeris perfectum reddam, nullis labori- 
bus parco, quin quotannis aestivis mensibus profectiones 
longinquas, etiam in remotissimas hujus regni provincias 
suscipje-, quatenus facilitates suppetunt, ad plantas inda- 
gandas. Hac restate Australes Eboracensis provincise 
tractus et Westmorlandiam mihi lustrandas proposui, 
quod et jam feci, duabus in eo itinere consumptis septi- 
manis. Nondum tamen, quod dolet, incidi in quasdum 
stirpes, quas in iis regionibus sponte provenire certa fides 
uiihi facta est. Ea sunt, Bistorta minor \Polygonum vivi- 
parum, Linu.], Christophoriana [Actcea spicata, Linn.], 
pyrola [Trientalis europcea, Linn.], Alsines flore euro- 
pa3a, Calceolus Maiia3 \Cypripedium Cakeolus, Linn.], 
Thlaspi Globularias folio, J. B. \Th. alpestre, Linn], 
alliseq. unde nee milii adhuc penitus satisfactum est. 
Hinc ego in Sheffeldia, ubi ad ajquinoctium usq. manere 
in animo habeo. 

Dabara Sheffeldia; ex a;d. D. Jessopp Broornliall 
dictis 7 Kal. Augusti, 1668, i. e. 26 Jul. 



Mr. WRAY to Mr. LTSTEE. 
J. Wray D. Martino Lister, suo S. D. 

EGO, ex quo hue veni, partim Physicis, partim Mathe- 
maticis studiis memet exercui ; siquidem D. Jessop ma- 
thematicis imprimis delectatur, in quibus non con tern - 
nendos sane progressus fecit. Quo consilio hoc iter 



26 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

susceperim tibi (ni male memini) antea aperui; et res 
sane ex voto cecidit, quamvis nondum penitus institutum 
absolverim, aut invenerim omnes quas quaesiverim plantas, 
quasque in septentrionalibus hisce regionibus provenire 
certa fides mini facta est. Quaenam inquies sunt illae? 
Androsace altera Matthioli minor, Valeriana graeca 
[Polemonium c&ruleum, Linn.], Thlaspi Globularise folio, 
J. B. [Th. alpestre, Linn.]. Pyrola Alsines flore europaea 
[Trientalis europtea, Linn.], Polygonatum bacca nigra sim- 
plici, flore unico fimbriato viridi, D. Merret \_Convallaria 
Polygonatum, Linn.]. Bistorta minor \Polygonum vivipa- 
rum, Linn.], a sort of Nasturtiam folio termiter dissecto, &c. 
Cum vero tot adhuc species exquirendae supersint, ne me 
nihil omnino egisse, aut nequicquam hoc itinere profecisse 
suspiceris ; adjiciam earum nomina quae mihi noviter hac 
primum aestate observatae sunt. Sedum ericoides, J. B. 
\Saxifraga oppositifolia, Linn.], in summitate montis 
Ingleborough. Bursae pastoris loculo oblongo afnnis, 
pulchra planta, J. B. \Tldaspi alpestre, Linn.], in Montosis 
circa Settle et Ingleborough et alibi in regiuncula Ebora- 
censi Craven dicta. Gallium cruciatum, J. B. \G. crucia- 
tum, Linn.], in Westmorlandia prope Orton et alibi. 
Filix pumila saxatilis 2 a Clus* ibidem in muris et locis 
ruderatis : Crataeogono Euphrosynes facie similis n. d. 
quod sciam, prope Orton. Sedi aut Cotyledonis nova 
species in rupibus Wrenose. Descripsi praeterea accu- 
ratius alias aliquam multas quas olim inveneram, nimirum 
Filiceni quandam Petraeam crispam elegantem, sive Adi- 
anthum alburn floridum mihi dictum \Pteris crispa, Sw.] ; 
Sedum alpinum angustifolium luteum \8axifraga aizoi- 
des, Linn.]; Sideritidem hirsutam arvensem \Galeopsis 
ochroleuca, Lam.] ; Geranium Batrachoides alterum fusco 
simile [G. sylvaticum, Linn.] ; Rosam pomiferam fructu 
spinoso majorem [probably Eosa villosa, Linn.]. Os- 
tensa insuper mihi sunt ab aliis, Meum vulgare \_Meum 
athamanticum, Linn.] in Westmorlandia, via inter Sed- 
berg et Orton, magna in copia ; Christophoriana 

* See Sm. Eng. Fl. iv. 293. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 27 

spicata, Linn.], in Sylvis Haselwood Eboracens. Pyrola 
vulgaris [P. rotundifolia, Linn.] ibidem. Helleborine 
flore atro-rubente \JEpipactis ovalis, Bab.] variis in locis. 
Bistorta major vulgaris \Polygonum Bistorta, Linn.] hie 
passim provenit in pascuis : Omitto Padum Theo- 
phrasti [Prunus Padus, Linn.J ; Paralysin Alpinam Birds- 
eyn dictam [Primula farinosa, Linn.] ; Salicem folio 
laureo sive lato glabro odorato [Saliuc pentandra, Linn.] ; 
Vaccinia nubis [Eubus Chamcemorus, Linn.] quae copiose 
collegi in monte Hincklehaugh prope Settle; Pneu- 
monanthen \Gentiana Pneumonanthe, Linn.], quae in 
agro etiam Lincolniensi abundat : Quatuor Musci cla- 
vati varietates, scil. Lycopodium, Sabinam sylvestrem 
Tragi/*SCu Museum clavatum foliis cupressis; Chama- 
peucen Turneri, seu Museum clavatum abietiformem, 
Museum forte terrestrem erectum, J. B., et tandem 
Museum partim erectum, partim repentem : Cirsium 
Britannicum repens Clus, J. B. \Carduus heterophyllus, 
Linn.]. Ranunculum globosum [Trottius europ&us, 
Linn.] : Sedum minimum \Sedum anglicum, Huds.] flore 
albo : Mercurialem sylv. noli-me-tangere dictam [Im- 
patiens noli-me-tangere, Linn.]; Trachelium majus Bel- 
garum [Campanula latifolia, Linn.], aliasq. quaa in his 
partibus satis frequentes sunt, alibi quod sciam in Anglia 
nusquam proveniunt. Quamvis vero plantis indagandis 
hoc iter praecipue destinaverim, alias tamen historiae na- 
turalis partes non omnino neglexi. In historia quidem 
Piscium nihil promovi : Avium vero 4 aut 5 species mihi 
oblatae sunt non antea visae, nimirum Grygallus major 
Gesneri, quern Francolinum Itali vocant, in montibus 
ericosis frequens, Red Moregame Venatores et Rustici 
vocant. Non me latet Gesnerum Francolinum Italorum 
Gallinam corylorum dictam existimare. Ego avem hanc 
eandem esse puto ei quam D. Thomas Crew Monspelii 
pictam nobis ostendebat, cujus appellationem Gallicam 
oblitus sum. Merula saxatilis seu montana, a Torquata 
dicta (ut mihi videtur), omnino diversa ; Merula aquatica 
et Caprimulgus ; Avicularum quoq. dua3 aut tres species, 



28 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

quae nescio an, aut quibus nominibus descriptae sunt. 
Vin' ut observationes meas de Insectis tibi communicem ; 
quasi vero eae diligentiam tuam effugissent. Age, ne me 
in hac inculta, foecundissima tamen Philosophise naturalis 
parte nihil studii aut operas collocasse existimes, non 
pigebit eas adscribere quamvis tibi fortasse notissimas : 
In summitate montis oppido Settle imminentis, Apem 
sylvestrem observavi, cujus alas cinereae ductu nigro 
transverse insignes fuere. Aliam prseterea Apem syl- 
vestrem ex Eula in lasano seu latrina generatam aculeo 
carentem, alias api domesticae non absimilem. Est autem 
Eula haec (seu Vermiculum mavis dicere) sordide alba, 
oblonga, cauda tenui producta : duas insuper Apum syl- 
vestrium species, quae in parietibus antiquis ex luto com- 
positis nidificant, in agro praecipue Northamptoniensi. 
Verum antequam apes dimittam, de Fucis tibi respondebo. 
Mihi equidem nullo meo experimento constat Mares eos 
esse. Verum quoniam Butlerus aliiq. qui Apum histo- 
riam summa cum diligentia tradiderunt, id asserant, nos 
quoq. receptse sententiae tantisper adhaerendum censui- 
mus, donee falsitatis convinceretur. Formicas si eas irri- 
taveris (de majoribus Horse Ants dictis intellige), earum 
cumulos baculo agitando, liquorem quendam acetosum 
ejicient in baculum, qui naribus admotus eas vehementius 
ferit quam acetum. Si iratam Formicam cuti admoveas 
earn rostello primum perforat, deinde cauda obversa li- 
quorem hunc orificio instillat, qui pruritum et dolorem 
excitat. Hujus rei experimentum ego nonduin feci, ab 
amico tamen fide dignissimo accepi, nee de ea dubito, 

praesertim cum liquorem dictum adeo acrem senserim. 

* * * * 

Vale iv Idus Septemb. 1668, i. c. Sept. 10. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 29 

Mr. WRAY to Mr. LISTER. 
Joannes Wray D. Martino Lister, S. D. 

LITERAS tuas et novissimas et superiores accepi, qui- 
bus Araneorum 30 & te nuper observatorum nomencla- 
turas inseruisti. Miror sane qua, arte et industria usus, 
tarn brevi temporis spatio, tarn angustis loci limitibus tot 
distinctas species investigare potueris. At vero satis 
mirari nequeo, unde tibi tantum otii tam alieno tempore 
cum curis et solicitudinibus variis perturbatus hue illuc 
fluctuaret animus, nee sui juris esset, ut possit cuiquam 
studio se totum impendere. Ego equidem (ut verum 
fatear)^**! Araneis inquirendis et contemplandis minus 
diligens et industrius fui, partim quod aliis studiis et 
negotiis impeditus iis attendere non vacaret ; partim 
quoniam ob veneni suspicionem vix tractabiles sint hse 
bestiolae, raihi praesertim, qui ab ineunte aetate vulgari 
praejudicio abreptus, ab iis nonnihil etiamnum abhorream. 
Ast quamvis Araneorum historiae parum peritus sim, duo 
tamen habeo, de quibus te consulendum censeo. Alte- 
rum occurrit (ni male memini, nam liber ad manum non 
est) in Micrographia dicta D. Hook, estque historiola per- 
quam lepida de arenea venatrice et insidiatrice, quam a 
se visam autori communicavit D. Evelyn, vide sis librum 
ipsum, ego enim memoriae meae non satis fido, ut earn 
rcferre ausim. Nunquid simile & te unquam observatum 
fuerit scire aveo ; nam et tu quoque in titulis ad me 
transmissis Araneae saltatricis unius et alterius meministi. 
Alterum ab amico fide dignisstmo rnihi communicatum 
fuit, a se saepius spectatum. Nimirum quod Aranei non- 
nulli telas suas non extrahant tantum et eliciant ut moris 
est, sed protrudant et quasi projiciant ad distantiam no- 
tabilem, projiciunt ihquam, i. e. prorsum ejaculantur 
oblique, et ad latus, et non tantum demittunt recta de- 
orsum, nam et hoc ab aliis observatum nobis antea inno- 
tuit. Quomodo illud fieri possit, quum filum non rigidum 



30 CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 

sit baculi ad instar sed tenuissimum et ut puto molle, 
non satis perspicio. At ille nullus dvibitavit se rem ipsain 
mihi brevi monstraturum, ut oculis saltern nieis si minus 
ipsius sermoni crederem, quod et effecisset, ni mihi oc- 
cupato res memoria excidisset. Superest jam ut tu rem 
penitus conficias, et omnem mihi scrupulum eximas. Alia 
Insectorum genera non omnino neglexi Kov\toTrTtpa et 
aVAvrpa* at vero cum Ds. Willughby iis conquirendis, 
examinandis, describendis, conferendis sedulam a multis 
retro annis navavit operam, ego obiter tantum et animi 
causa hac in parte versatus sum. Age tu, procedas bonis 
avibus, habes quern aemuleris. Non deerit utrique ves- 
trum materia in qua ingenia exerceatis. Latissimus patet 
campus a nemine antea occupatus, nullius pede tritus. 
Naturae divitiae plane sunt inexhaustae, nee cuiquam post 
mille secula nato deerit quod scrutetur, et in quo se cum 
laude exerceat. Hippocrati viro summo qui jamdudum 
in medicina principatuin tenuit, detractum nollem, quern 
Spagyrici etiam mirantur, in primis Helmontius tuus, 
dum rarissimi doni virum et Adeptorum participem eum 
appellat. Libros vTriSri/uuwv nunquam legi, nee alios 
quam aphorismorum, in quibus ego nonnulla observavi 
quae mihi aut falsa aut cum ratione minus conjuncta visa 
sunt. Verum de his fortasse alia vice. D. Wilkins in 
episcopalem cathedram evectum, et sui-ipsius, et mei, et 
praecipue ecclesiae causa vehementer gaudeo. Me tamen 
per eum ecclesiae restitutum iri, stante sententia, plane 
est impossibile, nee enim unquam adduci me posse puto 
ut declarationi subscribam quam lex non ita pridem lata 
presbyteris aliisque ecclesiae ministris injungit, nee tamen 
tanti est jactura mei qui nulli fere usui ecclesia? futurus 
essem, utut (quod dici solet) rectus in curia starem.**** 

Prid. Kal. ixbris Dabam Notleiae, i. e. Oct. 31. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 31 



Mr. LISTER to Mr. Ray. 
M. L. D. Johanni Wray, suo S. D. 

QUOD tibi otium nostrum probavimus, veheraenter 
gaudeo. At quid in me quaeris praecipuam artem, cujus 
tu non et author et praemonstrator fueris ! Aranearum 
nudi Tituli tibi arrisere : neque dubito, quin integra3 
earum historic magis placuissent, ita res plane novas 
observavimus. Sed librum mutilare nolui, in quo nomen 
tuum amicitiae nostrae ergo inscripseram, neque in praesen- 
tia alia transcribam, quam quae a me quaeris. Itaque scito 
in Micrographia D. Hook duas Araneas nostras perstringi, 
quarifer noniina habes, nimirum unam Araneum rufam 
non cristatam, etc., alteramque de qua quaeris, saltatri- 
cem cineream, etc., atque hac etiam in nostra insula fre- 
quentissima est, apertoque marte venatur solertissima 
bestiola, ejusque venationis modum elegantissimis verissi- 
misque verbis enarravit D. Evelyn noster. Quod autem 
ego istam ejaculationem fili non ignoraveram, tibi abunde 
testetur Aranea volucris nostra, imo vero fere omnes, 
quibus est materia ad fila remittenda, idem plane facti- 
tant ; sed ea praecipue delectari videtur, quam ideo volu- 
crem appellavi an quod in ea hanc rem primum notavi. 
Ast ipsam rem a principio audi j profecto si mecum 
fuisses mense Septembri jucundissimo spectaculo te be- 
assem. Nam possis meminisse turn plures serenissimos 
dies continenter illuxisse, quales tu et ego toties admirati 
sumus in ilia felici Gallia Narbonensi. Ego, inquam, 
turn teinporis Araneas conquirendo, mirificas illas telas 
coslitus delapsas propius considerare volui, in quibus per- 
tractandis forte incidi in hanc Araneam, mihi nunquam 
antea visam. Hac ego novitate mire commotus, alias 
illico telas intercipio, aliasque easdem Araneas itidem 
notavi. Atqui ne adhuc quidem suspicari potui, earn 
tot tantarurnque telarum authorem fuisse. Forte in die- 
bus paucis dum attendo artificio aliarum mihi notissima- 
rum Aranearum, subito ab institute destitit ea quam 



32 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

contemplates sum, atque resupinata anum in ventum de- 
dit, filumque ejaculata est quo plane modo robustissimus 
juvenis e distentissima vesica urinam. Miror inusitatum 
morem bestiolae, videoque jam filum in plures ulnas re- 
missum fluctuansque in acre ; mox vero insiluit ipsa bes- 
tiola, eoque rapiebatur, quo ducebat filurn ano etiamnum 
firmiter adhasrens, supraque non nimium hurniles arbores 
evecta est. Ego laetus alias qurero, eandemque rem mihi 
postea confirmarunt infinita pene experimenta. Atque 
illud quoque ab assidua observation e hue accedit, quod 
pene incredibile est, rem tamen plane conficit, nimirum 
dum ita volant, prioribus pedibus celerrime circumactis, 
id omne longissimum filum ad se retrahunt, inque glome- 
rem aut floccos implicant, subinde nova ob vecturam fila 
sufficiendo remittendoque. Tantam ego nee jam copiam 
miror hujusmodi telarum, cum tot earum authores sint ; 
nee modum fiendi, quern tibi satis, ut puto, exposui ; nee 
materiam cum has telap, plane ea3dem sint qua? eastern 
domesticaB. Unum illud est de quo dubites, has telas 
paulo teneriores esse, at tu cogites velim calorem solis, et 
si ita minus credas, fac experimentum ad ignem an recens 
tela aut fortasse vetus macerata non in eandem plane al- 
bedinem teneritudinemque coquatur. Sed de his hacte- 
nus; alia plura hue pertinentia, si rem fortasse jam 
minus illustraverim, tuque ea desideres, libenter expediam 
communicaboque. Cochlea?, quas superiori anno observa- 
veram, spiris e dextra in sinistram tortis tibi visae sunt 
res dignae notitia vestri amplissimi collegii. Certe scio 
non parvi facies originem harum telarum, de quibus 
quantas nugas apud scriptores etiam recentissimos ! ut 
aliquando homines etiam naturas liberae, cum earn satis 
jam vexent, diligenter attendant. Nam video somnia 
vulgo philosophantium jam diu plane exolescere. De 
Formicarum aculeo, " nihil mihi rescribis, cujus tamen, 
quod scio, nemo hactenus vel levissimam mentionem 
fecit. **** 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 33 



Mr. JESSOP to Mr. WBAY. 

SIR, I have done the most part of that you enjoined 
me. I have stuffed the skins of a Moor-cock and Moor- 
hen [Tetrao tetrix]. I have gotten a black-legged Lin- 
net \Linota cannabind] ; and gathered a few of the Vac- 
cinia rubra \_Vaccinium vitis-idfsa, Linn.], but cannot 
separate the seeds as you directed. As they are, I shall 
send them you. I have procured the skin of a great 
bird, which he that gave it me called a Scarfe [Green 
Cormorant and Shag, C. Phalacrocorax graculus\ ; but I 
believe it will prove a Bernicle [Anser leucopsis]. The 
description of it I sent to Mr. Willughby. I have 
gathered some words and proverbs which I believe you 
have not yet met with ; and received from Mr. Fisher an 
account of the Hauke Butterfly. I shah 1 send you all 
when I know which way I may do it safely. Richard 
Wright is come from London, and hath done little there ; 
only the judge hath advised him to indite the man and 
the maid, if Stephen trouble him any more. This only is 
observable, which I was not acquainted with when you 
was with us, that Kurlew, the foreman of the jury, who, 
the spirit saith, was bribed by Stones, died raving mad 
within three days after he had passed his verdict, crying 
out that he saw the devil, and such-like expressions. 
This is very true, for I had it from one who was at his 
burial. The coroner also hath lingered away ever since 
the assizes, and died about the time that Wright went to 
London. The maid at Overhaddon still liveth, and 
eateth nothing. She hath been watched twice for fear 
of imposture ; once by the directions of a physician who 
lives thereabouts, and for about a fortnight since by my 
Lord Devonshire's order, who sent his own servants by 
turns. 

Having lately perused, amongst the Philosophical 
Transactions, my Lord Brounker's quadrature of the hy- 
perbole, which pretends to have done it only as near as 

3 



34 CORRESPONDENCE OF 11AY. 

you please, and reflecting upon some things that I had 
formerly considered, I grew almost confident that it 
might be done truly and geometrically by one that would 
go to work with it the right way. I am not so foolish as 
to think that I, who pretend not to be skilled so much as 
in the elements of Conies, can add any thing unto what 
they have done in their own way, in which they have 
been so long conversant. Yet, in my first entrance, 
there was one thing came into my mind, which all those 
who have written upon this subject have either not taken 
notice of, or neglected, which will go a great way in the 
business, and that is this. 

Si dati sint duo coni Isosceles ejusdem altitudinis, 
axem habentes communem, et secentur hi coni a piano 
axi parallelo, possibile est exhibere quadratum, quod 
eandem habebit rationem ad spatium interceptum inter 
lineam hyperbolicam, qua3 est in superficie majoris coni, 
et lineam hyperbolicam qua3 est in superficie minoris coni 
ita secti, quam habeat linea hyperbolica minoris ad lineam 
hyperbolicam majoris coni, addita linea hyperbolica mi- 
noris coni. 

If you think this worth your consideration, I shall send 
you the demonstration at a more convenient time. 

I am, your affectionate friend and servant, 

FRA. JESSOP. 

Broomhall, Nov. 25, 1668. 



Mr. WRAY to Mr. LISTER. 
Joannes Wray D. Martiuo Lister, suo S. D. 

QUOD partem aliquam lucubrationum tuarum mihi 
inscribere destinaveris, plurimum me tibi debere agnosco, 
proque tarn insigni tua voluiitate et propenso in me aninio 
gratias quas possum maximas refero lubens merito. In- 
terim tamen monendus es, ne dum affectui nimium in- 
dulgeas minus prudenter agas. Quin potius, dum 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 35 

Integra adhuc res est, deligas tibi patronum aliquem ex 
antesignanis illis, magriis literatum luminibus, unde et 
operi tuo aliquid dignitatis et tibi ipsi fructus accedere 
possit. Ego enim ut qui tenuitatis meae nimis conscius 
sum, baud equidera tali me dignor honore. Quod ad 
quaesita mea tarn cumulate et perspicue respondisti, 
addito insuper corollario, de filis illis longissimis in aere 
volitantibus, quae tantopere stupet philosopbantium vul- 
gus, quorumque ineptas nescio quas et ridiculas causas 
fingit, pergratum habeo. Ego vero de hisce quoque te 
consuluissem superiore epistola ni e memoria excidisset, 
quamvis et ipse Araneorum ea opus esse nunquam dubi- 
taverim. Sane omnia haec tibi explorata et prospecta 
fuisse^eY ipsismet specierum titulis antea conjectabam. 
Et has et superiores tuas observationes dignissimas cen- 
seo quse Soc. Reg. communicentur, quod et faciam tuo 
nomine tuisque verbis si tibi ita visum fuerit. Quamvis, 
ut nihil dissimulem, ex quo hue veni, dum philosophicas 
trarisactiones, quas vocant, lectito mense octobri editas, 
literis ex insula Bermudensi ad societatem scriptis simile 
quiddam observatum animadverto .; quod tamen in tanta 
telarum et Aranearum magnitudine nemini non obvium 
et factu facillimum fuit. Scribit enim Bermudensis ille 
telas eas adeo crassas et validas esse, ut vel turdis irre- 
tiendis sufficiant. Superest ut tibi aperiam, me jam in 
sylloge proverbiorum Anglicanoram (quam olim medita- 
tus adagia undique turn ex familiarium colloquiis et ore 
vulgi, turn ex libris editis conquisiveram) ordinanda et 
adornanda totum esse ; eamque brevi cum commentariolis 
in lucem emittere ni quid vetas, cogitare. Tu vero oran- 
dus es ut symbolum tuum conferas, et siqua minus vul- 
garia et non invenusta adagia observaveris, aliquando ea 
nobis communicare non graveris. Formicaruin nulla a 
me facta mentio, quoniam nihil certi haberem quod scri- 
berem. An aculeuin habeant nee ne, fateor mihi non- 
dum experientia constare : nee enim periculum feci deses 
et negligens cum mihi promptissimum fuit. Tu cum id 
mihi persuadere conaris argumentis potius contendis 



36 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

quam ad avroi//mv provocas. Ds. Willughby affirmat 
in minoribus formicis (nam majores in hac vicinia nulla?) 
sibi quaesitum, non visum tamen Aculeum an forte ocu- 
lorum vitio? Nam famulus, cujus ministerio usus est, 
adesse asserit. Ego vero expertus sum Formicas illas 
majusculas quas nostrates Horse-ants vocant, si illarum 
cumulos baculo aliquandiu agitaveris liquorem quendam 
acerrimum in baculum excernere aceto destillato non 
longe dissimilem, nisi quod nares vehementius feriat. 
Cujus experimenti Dr. Fisher me primum commonefecit 
cum Sheffeldia essem, qui et asseruit e formicis illis in 
cucurbitam conjectis se liquorem ejusmodi destillando 
elicuisse. Episcopum Cestriensem hie propediem expec- 
tamus, namque nos in transitu se invisurum promisit. 
Verum illius adventus hoc temporis articulo mihi non 
usque quaque gratus, quoniam subvereor ne Yersionem 
libri sui vehementius urgeat, ego autem alias occupatissi- 
mus, tot simul negotiis vix sufficio. **** 

Dabam Mediae villae viii. Id. Decerab. 1668. i. e. Decemb. 6. 



Mr. LISTEII to Mr. WRAY, in Answer to the foregoing Letter. 
M. L. D. J. Wray, suo S. D. 

NON est quod tibi pergam amplius molestum esse de 
Araneis ; nisi quod ipse jam proxime perlegeram episto- 
lam illius Bermudensis, ubi factum quidem enarrat, sed 
fiendi modum ridiculum exposuit; nimirum fila ab iis 
exspui, ac si ex ore Aranearum et non ex ipso ano ejacu- 
larentur: deinde istam ejaculationem, quod observavi, 
Araneis minime usui esse in Reticulis pertexendis, non 
autem ad funes eorum suspensorios adfigendos. Sed de 
his alias plura et exactius ; interim unum addam, quod 
superioribus literis omisi, me compertum habere Araneas 
volatum exercere, non solum ob oblectationem, sed etiam 
ut Culices aliasque bestiolas capiant, quorum incredibili 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 37 

vi aer circa autumnum repletiir. Istam quidem vena- 
tionein inirincani esse oporteat, sed ea adhuc non satis 
niihi innotescit : hujus tantum bene memini in istis 
telis longissimis me membra Culicum, alas puta pedesque 
etc. decerptos saepius animadvertisse, non aliter quam in 
carum cubilibus et plagis. Quod ad Formicarum aculeos 
pertinet, oculis meis certam fidem habeo, eos quoties- 
cunque id tentare libuit (tentavi autem saepe) visos fuisse, 
nee nimium breves in minoribus, turn runs, turn nigrican- 
tibus non alatis. Nam majores ITTTTO ^vp^/cec, in nostra 
insula adhuc non observavi, in quibus tamen ii poterint 
esse magis conspicui. Sed jam suspicor ex proxima in- 
quisitione D. Willughby, eos posse deesse in aliquibus, si 
ut delstTht alse, atque in his fortasse sexus discrimen alias 
videbimus. Cum vero sermonem facinuis de Aculeis, 
ego pene persuasum habeo, eos non deesse etiam Bufoni- 
bus et Lacertis nostris, imo vero in singulis tuberculis 
(quae quot sint bene nosti in rugosis cuticulis harum be- 
stiolarum) singulos aut plures aculeos abscondi, et pro 
arbitrio exeri. Sed hsec tantum mea conjectura, cum 
experimenta quae de iis meditor jam commode exequi 
non potero. Illud verissimum est, turn Bufones turn 
Lacertas vexatas lactei cujusdam liquoris guttulas undique 
emittere ; nee cur ita id faciant video, nisi subsint stimuli 
ad vulnus infligendum, quo tantum eas nocere arbitror. 
Hue accedit ob similem rationem, quod nee te nee D. 
Willughby latet, inter Vermiculos e quibusproxima fce- 
tura fiurit Scarabsei, unum genus reperiri passim in sylvis 
admodum virosi atque ingrati odoris depascens folia 
Populi albae ; hunc, inquam, Vermiculum, si lacessiveris, 
statim exerit duplicem ordinem stimulorum insignium, 
qui antea aut ex piano erant cum superiore parte corporis, 
aut certe velut parva tubercula paululum eminentes; in 
summis autem apicibus stimulorum stant singulae gut- 
tula3 Iactea3 : si bestiolam vexare paulisper mittas, proti- 
nus subsidunt et giittulae ct stimuli, idque toties experiri 
licet, quoties animalculum vexaveris. Plura possem ad- 
jicere in hanc rem, estque turn copiosissima turn jucun- 



38 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

dissima contemplatio de telis, quibus animalia et infe- 
runt et propellunt injurias : sed amplius nee pagina nee 
epistola3 modus patitur. Vale xiv Calend. Januarias. 
[1664, utopinor.] 



Mr. WHAT to Mr. LISTEB, at St. John's. 
J. Wray D. Martino Lister, S. D. 

Nos hie nuper Arbores nonnullas, Betularn v. g. acer 
inajus sycomorum vulgo dictum, alnum, fraxinum, cory- 
lum et castaneam vulneravimus, ut inde succos collige- 
remus In aliis expectationi nostrae eventus non re- 
spondit, at in betula et acere majore etiam superavit, 
siquidem medio Februario, incisione facta liquor nutritius 
ubertim extillabat, diu noctuque absque ulla intermissione, 
non obstante frigoris post subsecuti vehementia ; etiam 
cum succus statim post egressuni suum e vulnere in stirias 
concresceret, antequam in vas ei excipiendo subjectum 
defluere posset, donee tandem in ipsis pororum osculis 
congelascens ea penitus obstrueret. Sed et tune quoque 
arbor interdiu denuo lacrymare ccepit quamprimum sol 
glaciem dissolverat, et occlusos pororum meatus reserarat. 
Absque intermissione dico, non tamen omnino sine re- 
missione; frigus enim fluxum inhibebat, quamvis non 
omnino sisteret, unde tempestate calida copiosius quam 
frigida, et interdiu quam internoctu ob eandem rationem 
destillabat. Tu si modo otium, animus, et facultas fuerit, 
eadem et his similia experiaris rogo, non tantum in modo 
memoratis, sed in aliis quibuscunque arboribus, ut collatis 
postea experimentis, vel novis a te factis erudiamur, vel 
concurrentibus confirmemur, vel contrariis convincamur. 
Nee enim verisimile est pariter utrisque successurum, aut 
utrosque eadem observaturos, quin alteri inter experien- 
dum obvenient vel succurrent plurima, qua3 alteri vel 
nunquam contigerint, vel in mentem nunquam venerint. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 39 

Veriim alias de his pkira, cum reliqua qua? nobismetipsis 
experienda proponimus absolverimus. Superest ut tibi 
gratias agamus (Ego et D. Willughby), quod nos insigni 
errore liberasti. Cum enim olim Gallinagines minores 
snipes vulgo dictas, et minimas tibi gids, nobis jack-snipes 
titulo cognitas pro una et eadem specie habuerimus, et 
sexu tantum diiferre credidimus, partim vulgari praeju- 
dicio abrepti, partim quod forte fortuna nobis oblati sunt 
in hoc genere duo aut tres mares, in illo totidem fceminae ; 
occasione tuarum literarum exactiore scrutinio facto, in 
utroque genere turn mares turn foeminas observavimus. 

Debam Media; Villa 3 Non. Mart. 1668, i. e. 13 Mar. 



Mr. LISTER hi auswer to Mr. WHAT. 
M.L. D. J.Wray,snoS.D. 

DE Bufonibus hoc addo, mihi compertum esse, non 
sine insigni periculo, eos lacessitos posse longe ejaculari 
istum liquorem lacteum, de quo ad te antea scripsi, et 
praecipue, de dorso, cervice etc. minime de ore, aut ano. 
Rem tamen summa cautione urgeo, earumque bestiolarum 
genus in species aliquot diduxi. **** 

IdibusMartiisl668. 



Mr. WRAY to Mr. LISTER. 
Jo. Wray D. Martino Lister, suo S. D. 

DUM Cestrias haesimus, forte fortuna allatus est ad 
urbem Delphinus antiquorum, nostratibus Porpesse dic- 
tus, a piscatore quodam in vado captus, a quo eum 
modico pretio emimus. Erat autem piscis mediocris, 
longitudine unius lunae, non squamosus. In fronte 
fistulam habuit, qua et respirare potuit et aquam rejec- 



40 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

tare : tres duntaxat pinnas, in medio dorso imam, in 
ventre geminas, non procul a branchiarum loco, nam 
branchiis caret. Singulare est, in hoc pisce cauda ad 
cprporis planum transversa, i. e. horizonti parallela et non 
perpendicularis, ut in aliis omnibus quos mihi hactenus 
videre contigit : nam e genere Cetaceo nullus antea mihi 
conspectus. Cerebrum ei et Cerebellum amplissima, pia 
et dura matre instructa, cranio osseo inclusa, et quadru- 
peduni cerebris dempta figura externa (quae in hoc latior 
erat nee adeo producta quam in illis), persimilia. Quin 
et asperam arteriam et pulmones habuit quadrupedum 
more, qui folle inflati intumescebant, coloremque et spe- 
ciem Bovinorum Caninorumve omnino exhibebant. Cor 
gemino ventriculo instructum, cum eodem valvularum 
tricuspidum et semilunarium apparatu. Diaphragma 
musculosum. Hepar vel non omnino vel modice in duos 
lobos divisum. Ventriculus membranosus duplex. In- 
testina Mesenterio annexa longissima 48 pedum mensu- 
ram implebant. Tenuium et crassorum distinctio nulla, 
nullum intestinum ca3cum, nullum omentum, nulla cystis 
fellea. Pancreas ampluni manifesto ductu intestinum 
perforat. Renes magni ad bovinos accedentes, ex plu- 
rimis granulis seu glandibus conglomerati, plani et non 
gibbosi, aut interiore parte concavi, ureteres ab inferiore 
extremitate egrediuntur. Vesica urinaria pro piscis mole 
exigua. Penis longus, tenuis, in vaginam reductus latitat 
ut bovinus : testes intra cavitatem abdominis, longiusculi, 
suis vasis prasparantibus et deferentibus" instructi. In 
summa, partium omnium interiorum structura ad quadru- 
pedes proxime accedit : nee puto eum sine respiratione 
per quadrantem unius horas durare posse. Coit, generat, 
et educat foetus ut quadrupeda. Quin et cerebri moles 
(quse pro corporis ratione huic major est quam plerisque 
quadrupedibus) sagacissimum esse arguit hoc animal, 
unde fortasse fabulosa non fuerint quse a veteribus de 
ejus ingenio et mansuetudine literis prodita sunt. Astan- 
tium turba, curiose omnia rimari et accuratam anatomen 
instituere, nos non permisit. Alia tamen plura observa- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 41 

vimus, quae ne epistolae modum nimis excedam, praetereo. 
Unum adjiciam. Totum corpus copiosa et densa pin- 
guedine (piscatores blubber vocant), duorum plus minus 
digitorum crassitie undique integebatur, immediate sub 
cute et supra carnem musculosam sita ut in porcis ; 6b 
quani rationem, et quod porcorum grunnitum quadante- 
nus imitetur, Porpesse ; i. e. Porcum piscem dictum eum 
existimo. Sed de DelpMno hac vice plus satis. Vidimus 
insuper Cestriae fceniinam cornigeram, cujus ad te famam 
jampridem pervenisse puto. Si masculum cornutum ibi 
vidissemus, res non adeo mira fuisset. Praeterea Encra- 
sicholos pisces, sen Anchovas non procul inde in mari 
captos vidimus. Superest ut tibi aperiam, et in sinum 
tuum ^Mundam quod ne non leviter pupugit. Pudet 
pigetque tabularum istarum botanicarum, in quibus con- 
ficiendis se opera mea usum" esse prodidit episcopus ces- 
triensis. Plurimum interfuisset famae meae eas aut nun- 
quam fuisse editas, aut saltern suppresso nomine ; sunt 
enim confusae et errorum plenissimae. Tu quia nondum 
penitius eas introspexeris ideo non damnas. Dr. Mori- 
son in opusculo nuper edito, cui Prseludia Botanica titu- 
lum fecit, illas, illarumque tacito nomine autorem, an pro 
meritis an indignis modis excepit, aliorum judicium esto. 
Nee tamen mirum tabulas confusas erroneas et imper- 
fectas esse, cum trium tantum hebdomadum opus fuerint, 
ego vero nihil antea ejusmodi destinaveram, nee de eo 
unquam cogitaveram. Prseterea in iis ordinandis coactus 
sum non natufa3 ductum sequi, sed ad autoris methodum 
pra3scriptam plantas accommodare, quae exegit ut herbas 
in tres turmas seu tria genera quamproxime aequalia dis- 
tribuerem, singulas deinde turmas in novem differentias 
illi dictas h. e. genera subalterna dividerem, ita tamen 
ut singulis differentiis subordinata? plantae certum nume- 
rum non excederent : tandem ut plantas una binas copu- 
larem seu in paria disponerem. Quae jam spes est me- 
thodum hanc absolutam fore et non potius imperfectissi- 
n mm et absurdam? qualem earn ipse libenter et ingenue 



42 CORRESPONDENCE OE RAY. 

agnosco, non tarn existimationi meaa quam veritati stu- 
dens. Utcunque tamen autorem ilium merito contemno, 
qui quam vis adeo in sons sit, ut nee latine scribere norit, 
tarn putide tamen sibi adulatur, et stolide superbit, ut 
viros nrillecuplo se doctiores contenmat, et inique secum 
actum putet, quod non jampridem in cathedram professo- 
riam evectus sit. Dum vero Societatem Regiam ineptis- 
sime sugillat, seipsum sanis omnibus et cordatis viris 
deridendum propinat. Sed haec mitto. De Bufonibus 
mira narras, et quae ego alio autore vix credidissem. 
Observationes tuae in tuto sunt, et societati jampridem 
communicatse, quse earum autori ignoto quamvis gratias 
agi jussit. Vale. 

Dabam Middletoni Nonis Mali ] 669, i. e. Maii 7. 



In a Latin Letter of Sir PHILIP SKIPPON'S to Mr. WRAY, of June 1669, 
I find this, viz. 

AD Luddi portam nuper erat effossum antiquum mo- 
numentuin hac inscriptione. 

D M 

VIVIO MARCi 

ANO 7 LEG. 

AVG IANVARIA 

MARINA CONIVNX 

PIENTISIMA POSV 

IT ME MORIAM 

In eodern lapide est figura Militis. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 43 



Mr. WHAT to Mr. LISTER, at Nottingham. 

DEAR SIR, Having now received a second letter from 
you in English, I look upon myself as licensed to answer 
you in your own language. I am extremely obliged to 
you for the catalogue of plants you sent inclosed, they 
coming very opportunely, now that I am (chiefly by your 
instigation and encouragement) revising and preparing 
for the press my general catalogue of English plants, 
which I hope to finish and get published by the next 
spring. I shall go over all yours, and give you an account 
which are to me unknown, and which I have not yet met 
withal m^ngland. 

Muscus dcnticulatus major, Park. \_Lycopodium helveti- 
cum, Linn.*], which you say grows plentifully in springs, 
it was never yet nry fortune to find in England. 

Muscus corniculatus,^ Park., is frequent with us here- 
abouts, and with the like scarlet tops. 

Muscus clavatus, sive lycopodium \_Lycopodium clavatum, 
Linn.], grows, as you well observe, on all the moors in 
Yorkshire, Derbyshire, &c. plentifully, and on Hanip- 
stead-heath, near London. 

Muscus clavatus cupressiformis, Park., or Sabina syl- 
vestris Tray. \Lycopodium alpinum, Linn.], I have observed 
plentifully on Ingleborough-hill, and also on Cader Idris 
and Snowdon Hills, in Wales. 

Your moss, like the pine-tree, I suppose is the same 
which I call Muscus erectus abietiformis \Lycopodium se- 
, Linn.], and have found on many of the moors. 

Tilia foemina is a tree very common in Essex, and 
many other counties of England ; 1 mean the Fcemina 
minor of Park. [T. parvifolia, Ehrh.], for the major [T. 
europaa, Linn.], I have not as yet seen anywhere with us 
spontaneous. I know not what to make of the Tilia 
mas, but suspect it to be all one with the Carpinm, or 
hornbeam. 

* [Not found iu Britain.] 

f [ Usually referred to CUtdotM frcata, Hoffm.] 



44 CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 



sive fraxinus sylv., Park. [Pyrus aucuparia, 
Gaertn.],is common also hereabouts, though inaptly so 
called. 

Erica baccifera nigra, Park. \_Empetrum nigrum, 
Linn.], I have also, with you, observed plentifully on all 
the moors. It grows also on a heath within a mile of 
this place. 

The other two sorts of Erica you mention are frequent 
on all the heaths of England. 

Scorodonia \_Teucrium Scorodonia, Linn.] also is a 
plant most common in the woods in almost all parts of 
England, excepting Cambridgeshire. 

Sonckus Icevis alter parvis Jtoribus [Lactuca muralis, 
De Cand.] is no rare one ; and two years since I found 
it within a mile of Cambridge. 

Hieracium rectum rigidum, quibusdam sabaudum, J. B., 
et Hieracium fruticosum- angustifolium majus, Park. [Hie- 
racium umbellatum, Linn.], I do not distinguish, but 
make the same, and therefore desire you to tell wherein 
you put the difference. The plant I have observed in 
many sandy and some rocky grounds. 

Your Thlaspi fruticosum leucoii an globular ia folio la- 
tissimo is, for aught I know, a nondescript. I desire, if 
you have any of it dried, to send me a branch. I look 
upon it as a great discovery, if it be not Camelina Ger. 

Pyrola vulgaris nostras [P. rotundifolia, Linn.] I have 
found in many places in the north. 

I am much to seek what your Lcucoium, or Hesperis, 
with a very broad leaf, should be, unless perchance 
'BursaR pasloris locido oblongo qffinis pulchra planta, J. B. 
\_Draba muralis, Linn.], which I have found in Craven. 

Lychnis sylvestris flore purpureo \Lyclmis diurna, 
Sibth.] is a plant everywhere very common, and doubt- 
less may be found in Cambridgeshire, though omitted in 
the catalogue. 

The Knoutberry I have found on all those hills you 
mention, but with the fruit only on Hinckell-hoe. 

Raspberry is also frequent on the mountains both in 
Wales and in the north. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 45 

Mentastrum, 8fc., Park., I have seen growing wild in 
one or two places. 

Capilli veneris veri similes I desire to see a leaf of, if 
you have it dried. I guess it to be that which I have 
styled Filix saxatilis caule tenuifragili \Cystopterisfra- 
gilis, Bernh.] 

Iraclielium majm Belgarum \_Campanula latifolia, 
Linn.] in the mountainous parts of Derbyshire and 
Yorkshire, &c., is very common in the hedges and 
thickets. 

Digitalis purpurea is everywhere to be found in sandy 
and rocky grounds. 

Anatmttis lutea nemorum \_Lysimachia nemorum, Linn.] 
is no leslTcommon in the woods. 

Alchimilla vulgaris grows not only in all mountainous 
meadows and pastures, but also plentifully in the 
meadows hereabouts. 

Turritis vulgatior [T. glabra, Linn.] is, notwithstand- 
ing its name, no ordinary plant with us 

Ehamnus primus Diosc. \Hippophae rkamnoides, Linn.] 
I myself have not seen in England ; but by Dr. Maple- 
toft was infonned that it grew wild on the sea-coast of 
Lincolnshire, which you now confirm. 

The low sort of Salix you mention I take to be the 
Salix angustifolia repens of Park. \_Salix repens y Linn.], 
which I have seen wild in many places, but not in Cam- 
bridgeshire. 

You have been more fortunate than I in finding Va- 
leriana graca [Polemonium caruleum, Linn.], which I 
have sought in vain among Fournesse Fells, where I was 
informed by T. Willisell that it grew wild. 

Solanum lignosumflo. albo \Solanum dulcamara, Linn.*] 
may, for ought I see, be a new species. 

Lathyrus sylvestris lignosior, Park. \_L. sylvestris, Linn. ?] 
is to be found in the woods in most counties of England, 
except those midland clay grounds in Cambridgeshire, 
Bedfordshire, &c. 

* [With white flowers.] 



46 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Your small Lathyms, with a pale yellowish flower, is 
to me unknown, and I believe a nondescript. 

Vaccinia nigra vnlgaria \Vaccinium Myrtillus, Linn.] 
few counties of England want. The Palustria Thymi 
foliis \Vaccinium oxycoccos, Linn.] are more rare, though 
hereabouts we have them in great plenty. 

The rose with the large prickly fruit I take to be the 
Rosa sylvestris pomifera major * Park., which I have 
observed in many places in Yorkshire. 

Alsine aqualica folio oblongo \Stellaria uliginosa, Linn.] 
is a stranger to few places. 

PJtalangium nescio cujus, is it not Pseudoasphodelus 
Lancastrensis ? \Nartliecium ossifragum, Huds.] which is 
common in boggy places in the north and west of 
England. 

Geranium museum olens [Erodium moschatum, Sin.] I 
have found, yet never but once, wild in England that I 
remember. 

Bistorta, 8fc. \Polygonum Bistorta, Linn.], I have seen 
in the meadows about us here. 

Crocus autumnalis pratensis, unless you mean Colclii- 
cum (which in the west parts of England I have observed 
plentifully growing wild), I know not. 

Raphanus rusticanus \_Cocldearia Armoracea, Linn.] 
I never met with in the fields or meadows, where I could 
be assured it came spontaneously. 

So, sir, I have despatched your catalogue, and you 
may well wish that my letter too were despatched ; but 
I have from Mr. Willughby a business of private concern- 
ment. I could wish you would take pains to revise my 
Catalogue of Plants before it goes to the press : if you 
will do me that kindness, I will send the copy over to 
you the next opportunity. 

Sir, 

Your very affectionate friend, and humble servant, 

JOHN WRAY. 

Middleton, Novemb. 15, 1669. 

* [Probably R. villosa, Linn.] 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 47 

Mr. WRAY to Mr. LISTER. 

SIR, I have perused the dried plants you sent me, 
and, according to niy best judgment, added names to 
such as wanted, and do now with thanks return you them 
back again. The plant you judged to be a Thlaspi, is 
nothing else but Glastum [Isatis tinctoria, Linn.] ; and 
that which you titled Lotus, is Fumaria alba claviculata 
[F. claviculata, Linn.] Your Hesperis is to me alto- 
gether new, never before seen in England or elsewhere : 
whether it be by me rightly referred, you are better able 
to judge who have seen the plant growing, and its flower 
in perfection. The Mentastrum 1 have found growing 
wild plentifully about Florence, but never in England. 
That which you style Capillo veneris vero similis, I make 
to be a sort of Adiantlmm aureum. I have often in moist 
places found straggling branches of such leaves at the 
roots of Adianthum aureum minus, but never growing 
so many and thick together from the same root, all of the 
same kind, but once, and in such a place as yours was 
now found. That you may be convinced that the Muscus 
you styled denticulatus major, is not that so named by 
herbarists, I have, out of Mr. Willughby's store, sent you 
two branches of the Muscus denticulatus major, which I 
must entreat you to return again, at least one of them. 
We have made bold to take part of such of your plants 
as we wanted, where you might well spare it. If you 
have any sorts of Mushrooms specifically distinct from 
those I have inserted, and of whose names you are sure, 
I should be glad of them, and willingly afford them room. 
Such of your grasses as I have not put names to I am as 
yet doubtful of. The Roses you mention I am well 
acquainted with ; the lesser being the Pimpernel rose of 
Gerard [Rosa spinosissima, Linn.], you will find some- 
thing of in my Catalogue, which I herewithal send you, 
entreating you to read it over so soon as your leisure will 
permit, to correct, as you shall see cause, and to send me 
your animadversions and remarks upon it, and such 



48 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

additional observations of your own as I have omitted. 
I should be glad to know whether you have observed 
and considered the small Caryophyllm \I)iantlius del- 
toides, Linn.] growing near Nottingham (as I take it 
about the gallows), because Th. Willisell would persuade 
me that it is distinct from- that found about sandy,* and 
several other places in England. I once saw it but did 
not take exact' notice of it ; and whether you have heeded 
the Polemonium Petrceum Gesneri \Silene nutans, Linn.], 
which he brought us from Nottingham Castle walls. 
Many things there are in this Catalogue which I have 
not sufficiently cleared ; however, I am resolved now to 
huddle it out and get my hands rid of it. One thing I 
must not omit to tell you, that I have robbed you of the 
credit those observations you communicated to the 
Society have gained in foreign parts, by letting my 
name stand before them and suffering yours to be sup- 
pressed ; for I hear they are attributed to me : whereas 
I never had either the wit to find out, or the good fortune 
to hit upon any so considerable and unobvious experi- 
ments. Proceed in your ingenious studies and inquiries, 
for methinks Providence doth seem remarkably to succeed 
your endeavours, and communicate somewhat of your 
discoveries from time to time to, 

Sir, 

Your very affectionate friend, and humble servant, 

JOHN WRAY. 

Middleton, Decemb. 10, 1669. 



Mr. LISTER to Mr. WRAY. 



MY DEAR FRIEND, I am glad to hear you commend 
Salmasius ; I never yet read the preface, but you speak 
judiciously of the work : I remember you once took away 
the prejudice I had against Pliny, and I have ever since 

* SANDY is the name of a place in Bedfordshire, not an adjective. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 49 

looked upon him as a great treasure of learning. I could 
wish that you would give us your thoughts, too, of both 
the ancient and modern historians, and add this to your 
preface. I remember my Lord Bacon rashly censures all, 
and rejects the whole design as supervacaneous ; but yet, 
methinks, not without some contradiction to his own 
principles ; for if a particular nature or phenomenon may 
be in some particular body more bare and obvious, with- 
out doubt the greater number we have of particular 
histories, the plentifuller and clearer light we may ex- 
pect from them. For my part, I think it absolutely 
necessary that an exact and minute distinction of things 
precede our learning by particular experiments, what dif- 
ferent palts each body or thing may consist of; likewise 
concerning the best and most convenient ways of sepa- 
ration of those parts, and their virtues and force upon 
human bodies as to the uses of life ; all these, besides 
the different textures, are things subsequent to natural 
history, unless you make the last assistant, as indeed all 
the rest are, were they truly known ; but I am too bold 
to venture thus much, before my master, and I hope you 
will now soon let the world know they have too long 
neglected what you can teach them to prize. Another 
time we will, if you please, talk of the advantage England 
has in being an island, to set a copy of this nature to the 
rest of the world, and to set forth exactly what she has 
of her own. I am but a learner, and a very young one 
in minerals, but I am pretty confident that it is yellow 
Amber they find not unplentifully after great storms on 
Lindsey coast. I have near lib. i. by me that I bought 
of the poor fishermen's wives at Thedle Thorpe ; some 
pieces of it are transparent and of a dark yellow ; others 
alike transparent, but of a brighter yellow ; others again 
are of a pale yellow and troubled, as though they were 
fattish : likewise of the jet, i. e. the great pieces and 
grove, i. e. the small dust, I have of both by me, and I 
do think them not channel, because they burn with much 
difficulty and are not kindled but on wind-hearths, as I 

4 



50 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

may call them, being the country people that make use 
of it have fire-hearths, made on purpose for that fuel, that 
have holes under them, which are pierced through the 
foundation of their houses ; whence an unmannerly pro- 
verb is used among them, " Neighbour, is the wind in 
your hole this morning?" That is, have you the conve- 
niency of keeping in fire to-day ; else it grimes not, is 
light, and many pieces if rubbed will draw straws : if I 
have an opportunity I will send you of the one and of 
the other, and also the legs of the Buzzard [Buteo vul- 
garis] , for that is all I have of it by me ; but upon com- 
paring them with the Kite [Milvus vulgaris], the Bald 
Buzzard,* and Wood Buzzard, f you will find them ex- 
ceedingly different : but Mr. Willughby did almost per- 
suade me it was the Milvus ceruginosus, Aldr. ; j for, 
indeed, it is of a self colour, that is, all over of one rusty 
colour, just like the rust of iron, as you may guess by 
what feathers yet stick to the knees. You will be pleased, 
at your best leisure, to send me an account of the authors 
that have written on minerals and fossils, for I am, as I 
said, but a beginner, in this part of natural history, and 
I have great encouragement, besides my profession, not 
to be ignorant in this part especially, having great hopes 
of considerable mines in my own lordship in Craven ; 
therefore I would furnish myself with the best authors. 

I had written almost hitherto when Mr. Willughby's 
keeper brought me the happy piece I so long desired to 
see ; I read it over forthwith greedily, and am extremely 
pleased that you have added the particular uses to the 
titles. I have no additions to make you an offer of, only 
I read it not without pen, ink, and paper by me, on which 
I now and then scrawled something, and have taken the 
boldness to send it you. 

Mr. Willughby was, as it were, desirous to know some- 

* [A name for the Osprey, Pandion TiaU<zetusI\ 
f [Which of the three.] 

\ [Milvus seruginosus of Aldr. is a Harrier, and now called the Marsh 
Harrier, Circus (eruginosus.~\ 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 51 

thing further of me concerning my ' History of Spiders/ 
The whole is yet imperfect ; but, however, I have tran- 
scribed the tables, that he may for the future join with 
me, and assist me in the prosecution of my design, as to 
this part of the ' History of Insects : ' for, for the other 
parts, I must neglect them in a manner ; but this will 
still be my particular ambition, to look after with care. 
He may freely command my papers at any time ; and, 
when you have corrected the style (for there must be 
faults in it), if you think fit, make him a present of it in 
my name ; or otherwise, make use of it as to your tables 
now in hand. 

I thajik you for the pains you took to note my plants, 
and to name them ; it is a great satisfaction to me : I 
have, in acknowledgment, sent you the things mentioned 
in this letter, viz. of our amber and jet. One thing I 
must add, that you may not think that this is casually 
cast upon the shore, for it is the constant effect, more or 
less, of winter storms ; and the poor drive a kind of a 
small trade with it, the apothecaries and others buying it 
of them at about 3d. an ounce. Also I send a leg of the 
Buzzard, a preserved medler : to these I add, by way of 
present, a couple of pastiles, or small cakes of the juices 
dried in the sun, of our English store of plants ; they are 
unmixed and purely natural, as they were taken from the 
plants by incision. The one was in the drawing or issuing 
out of the plant a purple juice, the other of a gold-colour. 
The one burns freely with a flame, and is of no offensive 
or ungrateful smell; the other burns not at all with a 
flame, at least continues it not, and is intoxicating : they 
are both bitter. Guess me the plants that afford them, 
et eris mihi, ut revera es, magnus Apollo. I have a score 
of different juices besides by me in cakes, but these are 
(if I mistake not, at least to the best of my knowledge), 
nowhere made mention of by any author, although the 
plants be common in England. They are the juices of 
no fruit, but of the body of the plant. 
Dec. 22, 1669. 



52 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Mr. WKAY to Mr. LISTEK. 

DEAR SIR, I return you most hearty thanks for the 
pains you took in perusing my Catalogue, and for your 
animadversions and observations thereupon. Your opinion 
grounded upon experience, that Opium, and all opiates 
are highly venereal, if taken moderately, I willingly em- 
brace. The reason which induced me to subscribe to the 
common opinion, was not because I imagined them to be 
cold, as the former physicians fondly conceited, but be- 
cause they do in a large dose fix the spirits and inhibit 
their motion, as appears in that they are anodynous and 
soporiferous ; and the sperm being a spirituous body, I 
was thence induced to think that they might hinder its 
turgescency. But, upon further consideration and inquiry, 
I find the effects of Opium to be something analogous to 
those of wine and other generous liquors, which, mode- 
rately drunk, incite to venery, but to excess, become 
soporiferous and narcotic, extinguishing that appetite. 
Whence it is supposed to proceed, that the Germans are 
of all nations most continent and least addicted to women. 
I thank you, likewise, for your note out of ' Olearius' 
concerning Hemp, which I have now entered. I intend 
to follow your advice in adding something to my preface 
concerning the usefulness of being particular and exact 
in natural history ; but much I have not to say concern- 
ing that point, and I am fearful of enlarging my book 
and swelling it to a greater bulk than may commodiously 
be carried about in one's pocket, for that will make it 
unuseful, and consequently less saleable ; besides that, it 
is not proper to set a great porch before a small house. 
I must not forget to thank you for the present you sent 
me. I agree with you, that what you sent in small 
pieces and consequently the rest of the same nature cast 
up on your coast of Lindsey, is yellow amber. The like 
variety of colours is observed in it wherever it is found ; 
and the other great piece is truly jet and not cannell. 
By the leg of the Buzzard, and the description you for- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 53 

merly sent me, I am confidently persuaded it is the 
Milvus teruginosus, Aldrov.* As for the authors who 
have written of minerals and fossils, I have not been so 
conversant in that part of learning as to be able to give 
any judgment concerning them. Georgius Agricola, De re 
Metallica et re Naturd Fossilium, is of all men approved, 
though I must confess myself never to have read him ; 
and I suppose Lazarus Erker, a German, is a good writer 
on that subject. I have run over Kircher's ' Mundus 
Subterraneus/ though I must needs say I was not much 
improved by it ; yet some use may be made of it. Some 
help it hath been to me to have seen various collections 
of minerals with their several titles in cabinets beyond 
the seaSr I am not so cunning as to tell, or give any 
probable guess, what those plants should be whose juices 
you sent ; indeed I do not pretend to a critical palate, 
but I must desire to be informed by you. Of your table 
of spiders I shall at present add nothing : I doubt not 
but it will be of great use to me when I shall have leisure 
to prosecute that inquiry. Since I received my Catalogue 
from your hands, I have procured some considerable ex- 
periments and observations, medical, from Dr. Needham 
and some other ingenious physicians of my acquaintance, 
so that I have not yet sent it to be printed. 
Middleton, Feb. 13, 1669. 



Mr. LISTEH, at Craven, to Mr. WKAY at Middleton Hall. 

MY DEAR SIR, I have been adding this last year's 
notes to the former, and I have found enough to cause 
me to make considerable alterations and amendments 
everywhere, and especially in the table (of spiders) I sent 
you ; so that I could wish it in my hands again, and, if 
you think it worth the while, another of yours in exchange. 
I am sorry that your Catalogue is not yet in the press ; 

* [See Note, page 50.] 



54 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

and yet, methinks, those experiments that you tell me 
you have received from Dr. Needham and your other 
friends, will be mighty enrichments : I long to see what 
they are. As for the juices I sent you, the one is drawn 
from Centaur eum luteum \Chlora perfoliata, Linn.], the 
other from Lactuca sylvestris \Lactuca virosa, Linn.] 
My notes of this nature being, for the most part, but of 
one year's standing, I am loth to venture raw conjectures 
even before so kind a judge as you are of my papers, 
otherwise I assure you, there is nothing I have observed 
or tried but I would willingly impart. I know you have 
not been unemployed about prosecuting your experiments 
upon trees, and I should be glad to know the success, 
both as to the motion of the sap in them, and likewise 
the texture about which last I am confident Mr. Wil- 
lughby is very thoughtful and diligent, and I hope 
fortunate. 



1 



Mr. WEAT to Mr. LISTER. 

DEAR SIR, I have sent you inclosed two papers, the 
one containing descriptions of birds, which you commu- 
nicated to Mr. Will at his last being at Wollarton, to 
which we have added the Latin names of Aldrov. Only 
the third I take to be a fowl distinct from the common 
Widgeon, which is not unknown to you. Indeed I do not 
remember that ever I saw any bird of the duck kind 
which hath a circle of white feathers round about the 
setting on of the bill.* Your descriptions of the rest that 
I have seen are very exact. The other paper being a 
table of our English spiders I have sent, not that I can 
discover any error or defect in it, but because you desire 
it. In prosecuting the experiments about the ascent and 
motion of the sap in trees, I was interrupted by a few fits 

* [The duck with a broad baud of white feathers at the base of the bill is 
an old female of the Scaup Duck, F.uligula niarila.~] 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 55 

of a tertian ague, which, I thank God, I have been now 
a good while rid of. Something I have since done, of 
the success I will give you an account when the season of 
bleeding is quite over. Some experiments I have made 
this spring, which seem not well to agree with those I 
made the last. My Catalogue I believe is not yet begun, 
the undertaker, Mr. Martin, staying for a new letter ; he 
promiseth me to take special care both of the -letter and 
paper, and correcting, that it may in all respects be well 
done. My Collection of Proverbs I have given to Mr. 
Morden of Cambridge, who desired it of me, and promises 
to get it well printed. We do now shortly expect the 
Bishopof Chester here, for whom principally 1 stay at 
presenl^niy private affairs calling me into Essex. When 
I have had conference with him, and settled and stated 
things concerning his universal character, I intend to set 
afresh upon and despatch the translation, that so I may 
be free to prosecute my own inclinations and studies. 
Having but little time, I can add no more than my best 
wishes and prayers for you, and for your lady's good 
success, remaining as always. 



J 



Mr. WRAY to Mr. LISTER. 

DEAR SIR, This next week we expect the Bishop of 
Chester at Middleton, who desires our assistance in alter- 
ing and amending his tables of natural history. To 
make exact philosophical tables, you know, is a matter 
very difficult, not to say impossible ; to make such as are 
tolerable requires much diligence and experience, and is 
work enough for one man's whole life, and therefore we 
had need call in all the assistance we can from our friends, 
especially being not free to follow nature, but forced to 
bow and strain things to serve a design according to the 
exigency of the character. To what purpose you will say 
is all this ? To make excuse for this importunity in beg- 



56 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

ging your table of spiders, which I earnestly desire you 
would send us to Middleton as soon as possibly you can; 
though not so perfect as you intend it, yet as it is ; for 
this work hath stuck long upon our hands, and we do 
now resolve to despatch and get quit of it. My general 
Catalogue I have lately heard nothing of; I am afraid 
they have not yet begun it. Some weeks since the book- 
seller wrote to me to know whether I would be willing 
to respite the printing of it for a fortnight, till he might 
get a new letter cast for it. I returned him an answer 
that I was willing, if he thought it for his own interest, 
because I thought it would be for the advantage of the 
book. My Collection of English Proverbs I have also 
despatched away to Mr. Morden, who desires the printing 
of it. Being ere long to take a journey into Essex, I 
accompanied Mr. Willughby hither, partly to take a view 
of these parts at this season of the year, partly out of 
some hopes (though I confess very little) of finding you 
here. I have here observed growing about Nottingham- 
castle walls the Lychnis \Silene nutans, Linn.], called by 
Gesner Polemonium pctraum, which I remember to have 
sometimes mentioned to you, brought us first from thence 
by Willisell. And, on the sandy grounds, a sort of small 
Vetch, now in flower, which I have not before observed, 
though it is likely it may elsewhere be found. Also Au- 
ricula murispulchrojlore, J. B. [Cerastium arvense, Linn.], 
and Nasturtium petraeum \Teesdalia nudicaulis, R. Br.], 
by some called Bursa pastor is minor, are frequent in the 
sandy grounds hereabout, now in flower ; else, I have 
discovered nothing to me absolutely new, though it is a 
little too early in the year for simpling, especially the 
spring being very backward. 

Wollarton, April 28, 1670. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 57 



Mr. LISTER'S Answer to the foregoing Letter of Mr. WHAT. 

MY DEAR FRIEND, The beginning of May I returned 
an answer to both your last letters to me, and likewise 
inclosed the table of spiders you desired of me. They 
were sent by the post to London, and I hope did not 
miscarry ; however, I cannot be satisfied concerning them 
until I hear from you, and therefore I have sent you this 
billet by Wollarton gardener from Nottingham. 

I cannot tell what to add, but that 1 intend you an 
account of my simpling here before or about autumn. 
Yet, because some plants in your catalogue now in print- 
ing staiid upon my parole, concerning the one of them I 
was abundantly satisfied, having found it in that plenty 
above Skipton, and in the beck from thence. And as for 
Valeriana gr&ca [Polemonium caruleum, Linn.], I have 
found that also in an unquestionable place this last week, 
both with a white flower, and also a blue one, viz. under 
Maulam Coze,* a place so remarkable that it is one of the 
wonders of Craven. It grows there on both sides the 
spring in great tufts, and if the Catalogue be not yet 
printed off, I could wish that this place might be added 
to the former. I have found many plants near to me 
which I will reserve to another opportunity, not willing 
to make this more than a billet. 

Carlcton, June 4, 1670. 



Dr. HULSE to Mr. WRAY. 



SIR, As to my observations of spiders projecting 
their threads, take them thus. I have seen them shoot 
their webs three yards long before they begin to sail, 
and then they will (as it were) fly away incredibly swift ; 
which phenomenon doth somewhat puzzle me, seeing 
oftentimes the air doth not move a quarter so fast as they 

* [This plant still grows at Malham Cove iu the spot mentioned by 
Lister. C. C. B.J 



58 CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 

seem to fly. Mostly they project their threads single, 
without any dividing or forking at all to be seen in them. 
Sometimes they will shoot their threads upward, and will 
mount up with them in a line almost perpendicular; and 
at other times they project them in a line parallel to the 
plane of the horizon, as you may often see by their 
threads that run from one tree to another, and likewise 
in chambers from one wall to another. I confess this 
observation at first made me think they could fly, because 
I could not conceive how a thread should be drawn pa- 
rallel between walls, as above-said, unless the spider flew 
through the air in a straight line. The way of forking 
/ their threads may be expressed by 
/ the following figure. What reason 
should be given of this dividing I 
know not, except that their threads, 
being thus winged, become able to sustain them in the 
air. They will often fasten their threads in several places 
to the things they creep up : the manner is by beating 
their bums, or tails, against them as they creep along. 
This line will express the way : 



\ 



By this frequent beating in of their thread among the 
asperities of the place where they creep, they either secure 
it against the wind, that it is not so easily blown away, 
or else whilst they hang by it, if one stitch break, another 
holds fast ; so that they do not fall to the ground. There 
is another thing 1 have to deliver about these webs, but 
as yet I am in some doubts about it ; and therefore at 
present I shall remain. 
June 28, 70. 

NOTE .Notwithstanding this letter of Dr. Hulse was 
published by Mr. Oldenburgh from Mr. Wray, in Phil. 
Trans., No. 65, yet I think fit to reprint it, that the 
reader may have all the original letters relating to the 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 59 

first discoverer of that curious phenomenon of the flight 
of spiders, which I have spoken of in ray Physico-Theol., 
book 8, chap, 4, note 5. 

The true history of the invention I take to be this : 
Some time after Mr. Wray's return from his foreign 
travels (which was in March, 166f), Dr. Hulsetold him 
of spiders darting their threads, i. e. transversely, with 
force, parallel to the horizon. Mr. Wray consults Dr. 
Lister about this, he being the best acquainted with this 
tribe of animals of any man. His letter to this purpose 
you have, page 29 [which, unfortunately, is without the 
date of the year, but was, I guess, in 1668]. Dr. Lis- 
ter, in his answer, page 31 [without any other date also 
than TtFKal. Dec.], acquaints him that spiders not only 
shoot out their threads, but fly also upon them, and 
shows the manner how he came to discover it. After 
this Dr. Hulse wrote this very letter to Mr. Wray, which, 
being curious, and particularly in relation to spiders, Mr. 
Wray sent an account of it to the Royal Society ; and 
finding it questioned which of his two friends, Dr. Lister 
or Dr. Hulse, first made the discovery, Mr. Wray writes 
the letter of excuse following of July 17, 1670, and after 
that the other of April 13, 1671, which, no doubt, gives 
the true state of the discovery, viz. that although Mr. 
Wray had the first hint from Dr. Hulse of spiders shoot- 
ing their threads, yet the discovery of their flight was 
first told him by Dr. Lister ; and in all probability these 
two ingenious gentlemen, bending at the same time their 
inquiries about the same animals, might hit upon the 
same discoveries, as I well remember that, when I my- 
self was first prying into this matter, I soon saw the 
spiders take their flight, as well as dart their webs from 
the tops of thistles, &c. W. D[ERHAM.] 



60 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. WBAY to Mr. LISTER. 

SIR, For my own part, I have made few discoveries 
in plants this summer; only I have observed Gramen 
agrorum venti spied, Lob. \_Agrosiisspicd-venti., Linn.], to 
grow very plentifully among the corn in the sandy 
grounds in this country, and have now seen the Polemo- 
nium petrceum, Gesn. [Silene nutans, Linn.], in flower and 
seed all about Nottingham Castle, on the walls and rocks. 
The Pink [Dianthus deltoides, Linn.] which grows by the 
highway sides of the sandy hill you descend going from 
Nottingham to Lenton, I find to be the same with that 
which grows on the hills about Sandy, in Bedfordshire, 
near Juniper Hill, in Cambridgeshire, Bridgenorth, in 
Shropshire, and in many places of Berkshire. Thomas 
Willisell sent me Alsinefoliis kederaceis rutce modo divisis 
\Veronica triphyllos, Linn.] (if I mistake not I use Bau- 
hine's name), which he found somewhere in Norfolk, and 
a sort of Willow [Salix amygdalina, Linn. ?] growing 
about Darking, which, as he saith, casts its bark, and 
stands bare some part of the year. Mistletoe growing 
on the Hazel I took notice of this spring near Braintree, 
in Essex, but that is a thing scarce worth the mentioning. 
Your experiments concerning the motion of the sap of 
trees do marvellously agree with those we have this year 
made, as you may perceive by a letter of Mr. Willughby's, 
inserted in the Philosophical Transactions, wherein there 
is a bad mistake, which perverts the sense, of the word 
morning instead of noon, Mr. Willughby presents his 
service to you, and wonders you should stick so to the 
number of thirty-one species of spiders ; whereas, either 
he deceives himself, or he hath found out many more, 
and believes there may be, at the least, double that num- 
ber in England. In your table of spiders, I do not well 
understand the term scutulata, whether it be to be un- 
derstood of the texture and meshes, or the figure of the 
webs. Pardon this confused jumbling of things to- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. Gl 

gether, for I have not leisure enough to consider what I 
write, nor to add more. 

Wollarton, June 29, 1670. 



Mr. WBAY to Mr. LISTER. 

DEAR FRIEND, In iny last I committed a mistake, 
and therefore it is requisite I make haste to mend it. It 
was in the name of the Alsine, which I told you Thomas 
Willisell found in Norfolk, and sent to me. I should 
have titled it Alsine folio profunde secto,flore purpureo 
aut violaceo, J. B. Triphyllos c&rulea, C. B. \Veronica 
tripliyllos, Linn.] The name I sent you in my last is 
Lobels. Tho. Willisell hath been lately here in his re- 
turn out of the north, and brought with him several rare, 
and some nondescript, plants, viz. Pyrola alsines flore 
europaa [Trientalis europtea, Linn.] in flower, which he 
found in Northumberland, near the Pict's Wall, five miles 
from Hexham. Salix pumila folio rotundo, J. B. \_S. re- 
ticulata, Linn.*], on the top of Ingleborough Hill, 
Echium marinum, P. B. \Litliospermum maritimum\, near 
a water-mill between the Saltpans and Berwick. Orobus 
sylvaticm, n. d. \_0. sylvaticus, Linn.], at Bigglesby, five 
miles from Pereth, in Cumberland. Chamte-periclyme- 
num dictum sed male \Cornus suecica, Linn.], on the 
north-west of the highest of the Cheviot Hills. Penta- 
phylloidesfruticosum sive arborescens [Potentillafruticosa, 

* [As that plant has not been found on Ingleborough since Ray's time, and 
S. herbacea (not included in the two editions of his Synopsis, published by 
Ray himself, but added by Dillenius in the third edition) is found there, I 
am led to think that Ray may have misapplied J. Bauhin's name, calling 
S. herbacea by the name really belonging to S. reticulata. Whernside, in 
Yorkshire, and " North Wales, on the tops of most high mountains," are 
given in the Synopsis as other stations for S.pumila folio rotunda, J. B.; 
but the plant found on Whernside, and frequently on the Welsh mountains 
is S. herbacea. S. reticulata has not been found in Wales. The report of its 
growing there rests solely upon Ray's authority.] 



62 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Liim.J, an elegant plant (and, as I think, not described), 
on the banks of the river Tees. Vitis idaa magna qui- 
busdam, sive Myrtillus grandis, J. B. \Vaccinium uliyino- 
sum, Linn.], in Cumberland, at a place called Orton, in 
the midway between Hexham and Pereth. These I have 
inserted in the Appendix of my Catalogue, which now 
goes on apace, I having received six sheets more since I 
wrote to you, which reach as far as the beginning of M. 
The Appendix is now grown, I think, as great as one 
fourth part of the book, I having gained several new 
medical observations, which I hope may be of good use. 
This summer we found here the same horned Eruca, 
which you and I observed about Montpelier, feeding 
on Fceniculum tortuosum [SeseZi tortuosum, Linn.] Here 
it was found on common Fennel. It hath already under- 
gone the first change into a chrysalis, and we hope it 
will come out a butterfly before winter. I must depre- 
cate your displeasure for publishing to the world (in case 
Mr. Oldenbergh print my note, as I believe he will), that 
Dr. Hulse was the man from whom I had the first notice 
of spiders projecting their threads. The observation is 
yours as well as his, and neither beholden to other (that 
T know of) for any hint of it, only he had the hap to 
make it first ; and being questioned about it, I could do 
no less than own the first discovery of it, to me, to be 
from him, who indeed communicated it to me so soon as 
I saw him, immediately after my return from beyond sea. 
I long for an account of the fruit of your summer's sim- 
pling. I believe few things thereabout will escape your 
notice ; and yet you are in one of the best quarters of 
England for variety of choice simples. I would not have 
you think of buying my Catalogue, for I design you one 
so soon as it is printed, if I may know how to convey it 
to you. Let me not lose your love and friendship, which 
1 do very highly prize ; and therefore should be loth to 
do or say anything which might give you any displeasure, 
or alienate your mind from me, or in any measure abate 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 63 

and cool that affection and goodwill which you have pro- 
fessed to me. 

Middlcton, July 17, 1670. 



Mr. WILLUGHBY to Mr. WRAY, from Ludlow, 13 Kal. Augusti. 
F. W. Johanni W., S. P. D. 

NUNC scribo ut te certiorem faciam, quod episcopus 
noster in reditu e Fonte Spadano prope Banburiam (ubi 
aquas nunc bibit) Middletoni cupit tabulas suas perficere 
et em^jidare. Obnixe igitur rogo ut sine mora illuc fes- 
tinares ; ut si fieri potest ibi sis ante Idus Augusti. 
Sine te enim frustra erit aliquid ejusmodi aggredi. 



Mr. WILLUGHBY'S Observations. 

OP ENAMELLING. 

MOST of the pastes come from . They first en- 
grave the rings to receive the enamel, then lay on the 
enamel, and put it either in a furnace (or for a single 
ring, lay it on a charcoal), and melt it with the blast of 
a lamp, blown upon it with a crooked pipe ; then they 
rub it smooth with a whetstone, and melt it again, and 
at last restore a gloss, by boiling it in water where there 
is aqua fortis, &c. ; and at last rub it over again with a 
smooth steel. 

OF SODDEBING. 

To sodder gold, they always use the coarser to sodder 
the finer. They dip a thin plate of gold in borax, and, 
laying it in the chink to be soddered, then they melt it 
with the flame of a lamp. 

A. ring may be stretched to any bigness, by driving 



64 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

cone, or the segment of a cone, into it. Fishes are made 
biggest before, that they may always move easiest for- 
wards, it having been found out by 
Sir William Petty that a triangular 
piece of wood, ABC, will always 
move in water with the great end, 
A c, forwards though it receive the 
impulse upon the sides A B, c B. 



Mr. RAT to Dr. LISTER. 
D. Martino Lister Jo. Raius, S. D. 

AMICE CHARISSIME, Catalogum meum plantarum 
Anglise ad te tandem mitto ; mole quidem non ita mag- 
num, at pretio minorem. Nescio an aliis placiturus sit, 
mihi certe minime placet ; nee enim in iis quae scribo mi- 
himet ipsi unquam satisfacio : in hoc ego affectum erga 
me tuum agnosco, at judicium desiderare cogor, quod 
autor mihi fueris ut eum emitterem. Prseter ilia quae ad 
calcem libelli emendata invenies, alia inter legendum 
errata observavi, operariorum incuria admissa. quorum 
graviora, in exemplari quod inisi, calamo emendavi; 
leviora illis ignoscas, tibique ipsi emendes rogo. Valeriana 
graces locus quern inserendum bibliopola? mandavi, 
typographi negligentia nescio quomodo omissus est, 
magno meo dolore. De scriptoribus botanicis antiquis 
et recentioribus quse sentiam in medium proferre, deque 
eorum scriptis censurana exercere, non sum ausus, ne 
crabrones irritem. Cum enim aliquid necessario dicen- 
dum foret de nonnullis qui adhuc in vivis sunt, cuinque 
librum si malus est nequeam laudare et poscere, eorumque 
diatribas et rhapsodias vituperio potius quam laude dig- 
nas judicarem ; ne eorum offensionem incurrerem, et ut 
quieti rneae consulerem, consultius duxi locum hunc de 
botanicis omiiino intactum relinquere, deque eorum operi- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 65 

bus altiun silere, si ita loqui liceat. Quod tibi commu- 
nicem a me noviter inventum, aut observatum, nihil aliud 
habeo quam quod in Philosophicis Transactionibus dictis 
invenies, de Ape quddam sylvestri quae mira arte nidificat 
(ut ita dicam) aut cellas fabricat foetui suo e particulis 
foliorum rosae decisis; quarum locum, magnitudinem, 
figuram, usum ibidem descriptos invenies. 

Videbis me in titulo catalogi et dedicatione literam 
nominis mei initialem W abjecisse, quod ne mireris, 
fateor tibi, me earn olim, antiqua et patria scriptione 
immutata, citra idoneam rationem adscivisse. Restat 
jam ut consilium a te petam, nuperrime enim amplissima 
mihi conditio oblata est, si velim tres adolescentes celebri 
loco nafeer, in exteras regiones peregrinaturos aut ducere 
aut comitari, consilioque meo et opera juvare. Ego certe 
meipsum tali negotio imparem et minus idoneum judico ; 
nee si idoneus essem puto me tantam mercedem aut sti- 
pendium mereri posse. Centum librae annuatim offerun- 
tur, necessariis omnibus expensis etiam persolutis. Tu 
quid de hac re sentias ocyus rescribas. 
Mediae Villas xi Kal. (Aug. 22) Septemb. 1670. 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. WRAY, from York, in Answer to the foregoing Letter. 

DEAR SIR, I will not omit, that having bored deep 
into a fair and aged sycamore the latter end of May, it 
did not run at all, neither what remained of that month, 
nor the month following that I observed ; but the bark 
put out a lip, or wreath, and seemed to heal. The 
beginning of July I cut out an inch, or more, square of 
the bark, at about my height, in the body of the same 
tree. This wound ran the next morning so as to drop, 
and yet always towards noon it dried ; and the same 
wound, for twenty-one days after (which was as long as 
I stayed to observe it), never failed to drop in the 

5 



66 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

morning, and to dry before eleven. This experiment I 
repeated upon a much less tree, and for five days it suc- 
ceeded in like manner, but then gave over. The deep- 
bored wound in the first large tree was not altogether 
dry (although it seemingly was healed) at running hours. 

I have added this summer three sorts of spiders to 
my thirty-one. You may explain Reticula scutulata, by 
adding in pland circuit figurd ; and so scutulata will be 
limited to the meshes. 

This letter was writ, as you may see, before I re- 
ceived yours, and had been sent, but that I deliberated a 
post, whether it was not safer to send it by Nottingham. 
I thank you for my very welcome present, viz. Catalogus 
Plantarum. I am still of the same mind, and rejoice 
that it is public ; and T am confident considerate men 
will think themselves highly obliged to you, both for 
your new discovered plants, and for the pains you took 
in correcting the faults and mistakes of others ; that is, 
you took pains to save it us, most writers of this subject 
having been more vain than diligent and cautious. I 
was pleased with the derivation of your name whilst U 
was at it, it agreed so well with a virtue so eminent in 
you, and which, I am confident, you will never lay aside, 
however you please to alter the writing of your name. 
You well know what Vray in French means. I have 
not seen the last Philosophical Transactions yet ; but I 
observed a bee much like the hive-bee in colour, yet 
somewhat broader and flatter. The manner of housing 
of her young with leaves I showed to many of our fel- 
lows when 1 was at the college. They make use of all 
sort of leaves indifferently for this purpose, as the sallow 
and thorn ; and they were mightily pleased with the soft 
leaves of certain blue-pipe trees, or lilax, which grew in 
our walks. The long pieces are scaled one upon another, 
and the round ones do stop up both ends. There was a 
single bee-worm in each cell, and provision of meat. 
They were rammed one upon another in holes deep 
bored into the body of a willow, &c. ; but I shall give all 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 67 

the history in Philosophical Transactions. I joy you of 
the condition offered you. If you accept it, I wish you 
all the satisfaction and comfort in the world of it ; and I 
pray God of his infinite mercy to preserve you in your 
travels, and to send me home again my dear friend well. 
Fix not long with them in any place, for the gentry of 
France are very proud, and will soon (when acquainted) 
learn them to despise their tutors, however well deserv- 
ing. I pray take special care how I may entertain a 
correspondence with you abroad. 

From my House without Michel-gate Bar, in York, Oct. 8, 70. 



Mr. JESSOP to Mr. WRAY. 

SIR, In answer to your last, I give you this following 
account of those things you inquired after, from Mr. 
Fisher's own mouth. A weak spirit of pismires turned 
borage flowers red in an instant. Vinegar did the same 
a little heated. This I saw. 

Generally spirit of vitriol, spirit of salt, and all acid 
spirits, turn the leaves of herbs, flowers, and berries, of 
what colour soever they be, into red. Any alkali will 
restore them into their former colour, as was shown me 
in several experiments. 

Pismires distilled by themselves, or with water, yield a 
spirit like spirit of vinegar, or rather like the spirit of 
viride teris. 

Of this they have distilled great quantities, and given 
it inwardly and outwardly in consumptions, with good 
success. 

Lead put into the spirit, or fair water, together with 
the animals themselves, being alive, makes a good sac- 
charum saturni. Iron put into the spirit affords an 
astringent tincture, and, by repetition, a crocus martis. 

Take saccharum saturni thus made, and distil it, and 



68 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

it will afford the same acid spirit again, which the sac- 
cliarum saturni made with vinegar will not do, but 
returns an inflammable oil with water, but nothing that 
is acid. And saccharum saturni, made with spirit of viride 
eeris, doth the same in this respect with spirit of pismires, 
which no other acid spirit made of vegetables doth that 
he knows of. 

But, in this particular, spirit of pismires conies nearer 
vinegar and spirit of nitre than oil of vitriol, spirit of salt, 
or the acid spirit of sal armoniac, in that it makes an 
astringent tincture of iron, and the others an aperient. 

When you put the animals into water, you must stir 
them about to make them angry, and then they will spirt 
out their acid juice. 

No animal that ever they distilled, except this, yields 
an acid spirit, but constantly urinous, viz. an oil and a 
saline spirit ; and they have distilled many, viz. as flesh, 
fish, and insects. 

They desire you to inquire whether any other animal 
distilled did ever yield any acid spirit. 

They have made of pismires divers salts, of which you 
may hear more hereafter if you desire it ; but at present 
they had not leisure to consult their notes. 

As for what concerns plants, they preserve their ex- 
pressed juices with some few drops of spirit of sulphur, 
so little as communicates no sensible taste to the juices. 
They also perfume the bottles with smoke of sulphur. 
They desire that, if you make this public, you would be 
pleased to suppress their names, lest the apothecaries 
hereabouts should know that this is the way they use. 

Make a strong decoction of Carduus benedictus ; into a 
quart of it put six or seven drops of spirit of sulphur, 
and in a few days the decoction will lose most part of its 
bitterness. They cannot find that the spirit of sulphur 
hath the same effect upon other bitter herbs. I tasted 
of the decoctions of wormwood, germander, feverfue, in 
which they said they had dropped spirit of sulphur, which 
were extremely bitter ; but a decoction of carduus, into 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 09 

which they had put the same quantity of the spirit, was 
almost insipid. 

They have observed something in the juices of herbs 
as an indication of their virtues, analogous to what they 
have observed in urines as an indication of the diseases ; 
and this in three particulars the colour, the consistence, 
and the froth. 

The colour of the juices will be of a deeper or a paler 
red, as hath been formerly observed. 

As to the consistence, they have observed a strange 
variety of differences. Some will let fall their dregs very 
soon; others not under many weeks or months. In 
some the liquor that swims above will be more crass ; in 
others liJCre tenuious. The particulars are very many, of 
which you may have an account, if you think it for your 
purpose. 

As to the froth they have observed in some herbs 
proper for the breast (namely, such as they used to give 
the juice of), that being shaken, there arises a great 
froth, which stays in some many days, in some many 
months, before it turn to water. They named the juices 
of daisies, expressed from the flower and herb together, 
which they said frothed most of any, being a little shaken; 
as also ground-ivy, and others, which they held for 
secrets. 

In one or two proper for the head, they observed little 
froth ; they named betony. 

They desire this experiment may be thoroughly tried, 
if you, or any of your friends, will take so much pains, 
because they think it may be of advantage. 

They observe that some herbs, which, singly taken, do 
not purge, yet, mixed together, will purge strongly. 

Centaury, lavender, hyssop, coltsfoot, fennel-roots, 
of each a like quantity, boiled together in water, and 
sweetened with a little honey, did violently purge two 
several persons, who took three spoonfuls of this decoction 
at morning and night, and gave them ease in a short- 
ness of breath proceeding from a scorbutic distemper. 



70 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

He desires that it may be tried, to see whether it will do 
the like with others. It worked not until the second 
day. 

Mr. Fisher thinks that the small quantity of spirit of 
sulphur, added for the keeping of the juices, may contri- 
bute to the increase of their redness, but not altogether 
cause it ; for he observes, that the same juices, unmixed, 
will grow red with standing. 

October 24, 1670. 



Mr. JESSOP'S Letter to Mr. RAY (without date). 

SIR, In answer to your last, I say, that although it 
pass for a general rule, that acid spirits change the juices 
of herbs, flowers, and berries into red, or a colour some- 
thing inclining to red (for you will find a variety almost 
in every experiment you shall make), yet I intend not 
thereby that the rule should be so general as to admit of 
no exceptions ; and yet I believe that, if the experiment 
be made with care, there will be found fewer exceptions 
than you will be apt at first to imagine. I believe Dr. 
Hulse's experiment upon chicory flowers might have the 
success you relate ; for the juices of all flowers are in- 
cluded in a membrane, which some spirits, although they 
seem very acid, yet may not pierce, and so not work the 
effect upon the included juice. To confirm this, I re- 
member that once we put either borage or chicory 
flowers, I cannot well tell which, into cold vinegar, and 
we could not perceive the colour to alter, although we 
let it stand for a considerable time ; but, heating the 
same vinegar, and putting other flowers in, they imme- 
diately changed, the heat, as I suppose, softening the 
membrane, and so opening a passage for the vinegar into 
the juice. Mr. Boyl's experiments were made upon ex- 
pressed juices, either in glass phials, which questionless is 
the best way, or by bruising the flower, and staining a 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 71 

white paper with the juice. Those trials he made by the 
infusion of the flowers themselves, sometimes succeeded, 
and sometimes not ; but I do not value any exception 
made against the rule, if it be grounded upon either of 
these two latter ways of examination ; for if in a great 
glass full of juice of betony you can perceive but a very 
light vestigium of redness, although you hold it so that 
the rays of light are refracted through the whole mass, 
what can we then expect to see in a paper slightly 
moistened with that juice, or a thin leaf of a flower? 
You may satisfy yourself that spirit of salt hath turned 
blue juices red, if you please to consult Mr. Boyl's Book 
of Colours, Part 3, Experiments 20 and 2] . There you 
will setiit hath changed syrup of violets and juice of 
blue-bottles, and I doubt not but it will change also 
chicory flowers, though perhaps with some variety, if the 
trial be made as it was there. 

The only general exception that Mr. Fisher knows of 
is, that acid spirits do not work upon juices of plants or 
fruits that are very acid. Juice of lemons, they say, will 
not change by the infusion of any acid spirit they know 
of, no, not by standing long, and corruption, which 
wih 1 change the juices of many other fruits or plants, 
although they be acid. They have also made trial of 
white currants, but cannot perceive that acid spirits alter 
them. The reason, I suppose, why juices turn red by 
standing is, that in time, by a long fermentation, the 
acid spirit loosens itself from the other parts, and then 
works the same effect upon them which an infused spirit 
doth at first. I infused wallflowers in spirit of salt, as 
Mr. Boyl somewhere saith he did leaves of yellow roses, 
but could observe no change ; and yet I am not satisfied 
fully, until I make trial of a considerable quantity of the 
juice. I told you that alkalies restored juices to their 
natural colours again, but I must recant ; for although it 
happened to fall out so in some trials I saw made, yet 
they say generally they turn them into green, or at least 
some colour that hath some tincture of green ; but yet 



72 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

this rule is far from being general, as they confess, as 
also you may observe in reading Mr. Boyl. 

As for what concerns their experiments about pismires, 
they give you leave to dispose of them as you think 
good, and do not refuse to own them. They have dis- 
tilled beetles, and many sorts of erucas, but not bees, or 
any of that kind ; as also fish and flesh. They desire 
that somebody would endeavour to rectify this spirit as 
highly as it is capable, by impregnating calcined viride 
ceris with it several times, or some such like fixed salt, 
which may retain the spirit until the phlegm be raised by 
a gentle heat ; for, unless there be some such retinacufam, 
the spirit and phlegm w r ill rise together. If it be thus pre- 
pared, they think it will prove a very strong dissolvent. 
They think the best way of getting this spirit pure is by 
putting the insects into water, for so you have nothing 
but the acid juice : if you distil the animals themselves, 
there may perhaps something arise from the other parts 
of their bodies of an heterogeneous nature ; but the best 
of all will be to try both ways, and observe the difference, 
if there be any. 

As to what concerns the preservation of juices, they 
do not tie themselves strictly to spirit of sulphur, although 
they use it more than any other. Other acid spirits will 
do the same, and sometimes better for some particular 
herbs ; and therefore they use them indifferently, accord- 
ing as they find, upon trial, any convenience or prejudice ; 
and sometimes they perfume their vessels with smoke of 
sulphur, and sometimes not. 

NOTE. Although some of these observations and ex- 
periments of the two Fishers of Sheffield, and those that 
follow of Dr. Hulse's, are in the Philosophical Transac- 
tions, yet these letters, containing some other considerable 
observations beside these, I thought it convenient to pre- 
sent the reader with the letters as 1 found them, without 
mangling of them. W. D [ERHAM] . 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 73 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. WRAY. 

DEAR FRIEND, I am very glad Mr. Willughby is 
near well again, and I thank God for his recovery, and 
do heartily pray a continuance of good health to him. 
Methinks he is very valetudinary, and you have often 
alarmed me with his illness. My humble service to him. 
I thank you for the Book of Proverbs you design me. 
I cannot, methinks, exclude these hair-tailed insects 
from the family or genus of wasps, although all of them 
that I know are, in a strict sense, neither favicous nor 
gregarious, nor have artificial meat stored up for them ; 
yet havV they the shape and parts of wasps exactly, as 
well in the worm and chrysalis as when they are in per- 
fection. Besides, I have observed a peculiar note belong- 
ing to the bee-kind which is not wanting in these, and 
that is three balls in a triangle in the forehead of them 
all, which nobody hitherto, that I know of, has taken 
notice of. But I much like the making of genuses and 
tribes ex moribus et vita, though I would not, as near as 
may be, have the form excluded. I have now seen the 
November book ; and I find in my adversaria that I 
have formerly dug out of the ground at Burn ell, in Lin- 
colnshire, many just such-like cases, made of thin wafers, 
or membranes, one sticking in a direct line to another, 
&c. In the same place I very frequently met with little 
hollow balls, of the shape and size of pistol bullets, of 
yellow wax, wherein was one small white maggot, with- 
out any meat at all. Indeed, these balls were much 
tenderer than wax, and of a very fragrant smell, and 
perhaps might serve them as well for food as housing. 
If I had the table of spiders I now could make some 
small alterations and additions to it. I have, this last 
month, writ over a new copy of my History of Spi- 
ders (which is the fourth since I put my notes into any 
order), and inserted therein all the last summer's ob- 
servations and experiments. I find only two or three 



74 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

new spiders, and one to be removed into another tribe, 
to which it more properly belongs. When you please 
to send me an account of the acid liquor of pismires, I 
will return something concerning the gilding of a chry- 
salis, which is a pretty phenomenon. 

I know not what to think of the uncertainty of the 
experiments we make concerning the bleeding of the 
sycamore. I have observed, almost daily, two trees, 
which I pierced in several places the first of November ; 
but to this day no signs of the stirring of any juice, 
which indeed surprises me, we having had two or three 
pretty hard frosts already ; yet neither at their coming, 
nor going away, made they any sensible alteration as to 
this particular. In my last year's journal I find that, 
particularly the 17th of December, there was a very 
copious bleeding ; and onwards I find this memorandum, 
that in some great bleedings there was still to be ob- 
served a mighty reek or steam arising from the ground ; 
and, indeed, this kind of thaw has not yet happened at 
York this year. I desire to know what success you have 
met with this year in such-like experiments. 

I am glad to hear you have spared your person in not 
exposing yourself to I know not what inconveniences. 
As for the searching of the Alps once again, it would 
have, no doubt, been very beneficial to the commonwealth 
of learning, but that is enough obliged to you already. 

York, December 22, 70. 



Dr. HULSE to Mr. RAY. 



SIR, Yours came safe to my hand. I thank you for 
the experiments contained in your letter. I had thought 
to have tried some other experiments with pismires ; but 
now I must stay till next spring. The juice of these 
insects will ferment with the powders of chalk, pearl, &c., 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 75 

as other acids do, Any blue flowers, being a little 
bruised, and a drop of spirit of salt, vitriol, &c. dropped 
upon them, do instantly turn red ; but if you drop these 
spirits upon the surface of the flowers, whilst they remain 
whole and unbruised, they change not at ah 1 ; and I sup- 
pose that spirit of vinegar dropped cold upon them 
would make no alteration, but if you heat it, then the 
warmth of it opens the pores of your flowers, whereby the 
spirit doth easily commix itself with the contained juice, 
and thereby presently changeth their colour; and it is 
probable any other acid liquor would effect the like 
change, if it were heated beforehand. It is probable to 
rne, at present, the juice contained in the body of the 
pismire^ all of it acid, and of the same nature with that 
included in their stings, which may appear from the 
spirit that is distilled from them, which surely does not 
all come from their stings ; as likewise, if you bruise a 
pismire upon any blue flower, the expressed juice will 
tinge the flower. Now, though it be likely enough that 
the liquor which comes from the stings of bees, wasps, 
&c. being corrosive, may discolour flowers, yet I believe 
the juice expressed from their bodies will not do the 
same, though as yet I have not made trial. It may be 
a query whether the liquor of pismires be not stronger, 
and more penetrating, than any of the above-mentioned 
acids. If so be that the liquor dropped upon the surface 
of the flowers, whilst they are whole and unbruised, do 
turn them red, then it is manifest it is ; but if the liquor 
be conveyed through the sting, which (the ants being 
angered from stirring of their hill) they thrust into the 
body of the flower, then the doubt will remain, because 
then the liquor does immediately mix itself with the 
juice of the flower. If so be that the weak spirit of 
pismires you mentioned, that immediately turned the 
borage flowers red, were not heated, it seems to evince 
that their spirit is stronger than any of the rest ; but 
these things will be best cleared when the season of the 
year will permit, Your note upon Mr. Fisher's assert- 



76 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

ing that any flowers turned red will be restored to the 
former colour by any alkali is most certainly true ; and 
he is mistaken, as I have more than once tried. 

Mr. Paschal, of Queen's College, was lately at Hack- 
ney, and has left several moulds, wherein coins have been 
cast, in Dr. Worthington's hand, and desired him to 
deliver them to you when you came to London. The 
Doctor desired me to acquaint you concerning them. 
They were digged up in Somersetshire. In my mind they 
are a greater rarity than the coins themselves. If you 
think it worth your labour, you may communicate what 
I have communicated to you to the Royal Society. I 
shall be glad to hear from you; and so, in haste, I 
remain. 

Jan. 6, ft. 



Dr. LISTEK to Mr. RAY. 

DEAR SIR, I thank you for the account of the acid 
liquor of pismires, with the which I am much pleased. 
It is strange they should light upon no other animal that 
will afford an acid spirit, especially amongst insects. I 
had verily thought there were many such, and I yet 
think so, but I have not had the leisure to examine many 
to this end. There is a separation of an acid juice, or 
spirit, to be made in the analysis of vegetables mentioned 
by Mr. Boyle, and in Glazer : this I guess to be very 
much akin to the acid liquor of pismires. Quasre, whether 
a saccharum saturni, made with the acid spirit of box, 
or oak (ex. gr. after Mr. Boyle's way), will not give us 
back the same spirit again ? It seemeth probable it will, 
since the pearls seem to have separated its oiliness or 
soapy part. The like effect copper may have upon the 
rape and wine in making of verdet. To this purpose 
Mr. Boyle, in his last piece lately extant, tells us that 
spirit of vinegar, which has been fully satiated with pearls, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 77 

will cause a violet to strike a green, which is the same 
effect that an urinous spirit, or an alkali, works. 

I will subjoin the experiment I promised you of the 
gilding of a chrysalis. To a strong and clear decoction 
of nettles put a small piece of a black gall, in time there 
will emerge a thin scum; if you then pass the liquor 
through a cap-paper, the scum left behind will exquisitely 
gild it. The like I have effected by other methods, and 
with other plants : if the experiment be well done, it will 
in all points look like the gilding of the stiff-haired, or 
prickly-nettle-feeding caterpillar's chrysalis. 

I have not yet seen Redi's book, neither can I get it, 
though I much desire it. It is true that spiders, espe- 
cially fTfe" young ones, are not very shy to shoot their 
threads, even in one's hand ; and different kinds have 
many different particularities in this surprising action. 
As to the height they are able to mount, it is much be- 
yond that of trees, or even the highest steeples hi England. 
This last October the sky here upon a day was very calm 
and serene, and I took notice that the air was very full 
of webs ; I forthwith mounted to the top of the highest 
steeple in the Minster, and could thence discern them 
yet exceeding high above me : some that fell, and were 
entangled upon the pinnacles, I took and found them to 
be lupi, which kind seldom or never enter houses, and 
cannot be supposed to have taken their flight from the 
steeples. 

To tell you the truth, I begun to be at a great loss 
when I found that my experiments concerning the bleed- 
ing of the sycamore did not succeed this year as they did 
the last ; for I assure you, that to this day the two trees I 
wounded the 1st of November have not shown the least 
signs of the stirring of any juice, whereas the Notting- 
hamshire trees had several times bled ere thus late. 

You will be pleased to remember me with a Book of 
Proverbs, for I long to peruse it. 

York, Jan. 20, 1670. 



78 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Dr. LISTEK to Mr. EAT. 

DEAR SIR, Looking over my boxes of insects, I find 
a row of about a dozen of these bees, and some cases 
out of which they were hatched. These I find ah 1 pierced 
at the sides; and for the bees themselves, they differ 
much in bigness, as though that was not true, that insects 
of this kind are at their full growth when born ; but it 
may well be, according to your observation, that these 
boisterous and hasty elder brothers dwarf the younger 
by spoiling their food. 

I do not say that I ever found cases of other leaves 
than roses, but I have found leaves of many other trees 
bit out by them, as willow, thorn, and especially a lilac 
tree, at the upper end of St. John's Walks, had scarce a 
whole leaf in it ; and some of those leaves, too, were well 
husbanded, as having two or three side pieces, and as 
many round bits, taken off" of them. This I snowed to 
many of our fellows, who may well remember it, as Mr. 
Gower, &c. And I know I have yet some of those pipe- 
tree leaves in some of my books, which are yet most of 
them at Cambridge. 1 sometimes use my notes and 
sometimes I trust to my memory, when I write to you 
according to leisure, which may well cause some differ- 
ence in circumstances, but I assure you I am as circum- 
spect and careful not to impose upon myself and others 
as I can, and you have well lessoned me to this purpose ; 
and, amongst other things, I am extremely obliged to 
you for it. 

As for the forking of spider threads, far be it from me 
that I should slight any phenomenon of nature, for I am 
the gladdest man that can be to hear of any ; but I am 
very cautious not too forwardly to entertain such upon 
trust ; neither would I have any man take them from me 
otherwise than as they themselves shall find them. And 
this is a thing that I neither formerly, nor since, have 
been able to observe ; but if it shall be found to be done 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 79 

on purpose by the animal to facilitate his flight, and not 
accidental (which I am the more apt to believe, because 
very rare), I shall be forward to return Dr. Hulse my 
particular thanks ; but, as I writ to Mr. Oldenburgh, he 
might very well mistake many threads shot at a time (as 
is usual with many spiders, more or less), for one thread 
divided and forked, or, as Blancanus in Redi says, ramose, 
woolly, or from which many small filaments proceed; 
which conceit of Blancanus, I am apt to suspect, gave 
occasion to the Doctor to be of the same belief; but yet 
for the main, or mostly, as he says, he could not himself 
find it to be true. I have purposely omitted to insert 
any inquiries concerning this matter, and the poison of 
spidersT^rillingly reserving those two particulars for other 
papers; yet I am most glad to hear what others may 
more happily and more ingeniously observe and expe- 
rience. 

In my letter of August, which was unhappily lost (by 
reason, perhaps, that I had inclosed in it a plant pasted 
down), I quoted the express text of Aristotle, " That the 
thing was not unknown to the ancients ;" and. where he 
says, " That spiders dart their threads as porcupines do 
their quills ;" which text, though very plain in itself, yet 
it will not easily enter into our imagination before we 
have made the observation by sense : witness the misin- 
terpretation of Redi and Blancanus. And yet in the set 
of inquiries I sent to Mr. Oldenburgh, I have purposely 
given, to incite the curious, another interpretation of the 
text, which too, perhaps, it will bear, and not much 
wrested. But too much of this. 

I have communicated to Mr. Oldenburgh my notes of the 
bleeding of the sycamore, in answer to a late letter of his. 
He likewise put the query to me of the pismires changing 
blue flowers red, which it seems somebody had sent him 
in. As for Mr. Jessop's and Mr. Fisher's experiments 
which you communicated to me, I did not send them to 
him as not belonging to me ; but I told him there were 
such persons that had better examined the matter than I. 



80 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Somewhat after the receipt of yours, I found another 
insect, which I guess will yield an acid juice, for it most 
fiercely strikes the nose with a fiery and acid smell, just 
after the manner of the bruised bodies of pismires. This 
insect hath no sting, and is the long and round-bodied 
lead-coloured Multipeda or lulus. Methinks the juice of 
that creeping Flammula about Montpellier was, as far as 
I remember, much like this of pismires. 

My hearty humble service to Mr. Willughby. If you 
try the experiment of gilding, remember that the scum 
be suffered to become a little stiff and firm, otherwise it 
will be apt to break into very small pieces in the filter, 
and not show so well. I might inclose part of a gilt 
filter, but that it is so apt to break and wear off with the 
lightest touch. 

I pity your pain, which I begin to know a little myself; 
but in truth I know no certainer remedy than one grain, 
or less, of laudanum dissolved in spirit of wine. This 
never failed to ease me. 

I thank you for my Book of Proverbs; I am much 
pleased with it, but my wife will have it her book. Adieu, 
my dear friend. 
Feb. 8, 70. 

Our sycamore bled yesterday at the breaking up of a 
seven days' continued frost, and I am now apt to believe, 
if I had had the care to have made new wounds upon 
every like change of the weather, that our York trees 
would have bled before now. But I affirm no more than 
I have seen and tried. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. LISTER. 



DEAR SIR, 1 have not yet had the fortune to strike 
any other trees that would bleed, besides maple, vine, 
sycamore, walnut, birch, and willow. I have heard that 
the quicken and aspen trees will sometimes bleed, but I 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 81 

could never happen to wound them in that fortunate 
hour. Your experiment communicated to Mr. Olden- 
burgh, and by him imparted to us, that a bough of syca- 
more, maple, and walnut, when full of sap, cut off and 
held perpendicularly, will not drop till you cut off the 
tops of the twigs, and then it will, to us hath not suc- 
ceeded. For a branch cut off hath begun to drop before 
it was topped, nor could we perceive that striking the top 
did at all promote the running out of the sap ; though, I 
confess, the day when we made this trial was not very 
propitious to such an experiment. All that we found 
was, that exposing the branch to the cold wind, the end 
downward grew presently dry, and no sign of bleeding ; 
but holctthg it in the sun, and in the beams reflected 
from a wall under the wind, it presently began to grow 
moist, arid dropped through very slowly. Looking over 
my notes in 1668, 1 find thus : March 6, we sawed off a 
small bough of a willow, and held it perpendicularly 
erected ; it presently dropped, and that indifferently fast 
considering its smallness, viz. once in fourteen pulses. 
This we tried in three boughs, one after another, all 
which dropped at the same rate, and that without cutting 
the tops of the branches. 10th, we experimented the 
same in a sycamore with like success. Notwithstanding, 
when I get a favorable day, I intend, with all diligence 
and exactness, to repeat the same experiment. I am 
sorry any letter of yours should miscarry, being fraught 
always with good notions and experiments. I long to 
know what plant it was you inclosed, and where, in 
Aristotle, I might find what you mention, and quote out 
of him. I have not yet tried those luli, which you write 
so fiercely strike the nose with a fiery and acid scent : I 
hope you will proceed to make farther experiments with 
them. As for the Book of Proverbs, I esteem it a toy 
and trifle not worth the owning ; besides, there are many 
proverbs of my own knowledge, partly through incogi- 
tancy and partly in transcribing, omitted ; many out of 
their due place and order, and some that want explain- 

6 



82 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

ing. If your lady think it worth her perusal, and can be 
content to bestow upon it some shreds of spare time, 
the author takes that esteem of it to proceed from her 
partiality to her husband's friend, rather than the merit 
of the work. However, I pray present my very humble 
service to her, and tell her I wish that I had something 
to present her might be worthy her acceptance. Those 
experiments of Dr. Hulse and Mr. Fisher about the acid 
juice of pismires, I myself sent to Mr. Oldenburgh to be 
communicated to the Royal Society. 

Middleton, March 3, 1670. 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. RAT. 

DEAR FRIEND, You have most ingeniously given the 
reason of that experiment I sent Mr. Oldenburgh, con- 
cerning the not bleeding of entire twigs, which I did 
after find to be the air only ; the posture 1 held them in, 
that hindered their bleeding ; for, if I cut a twig with my 
penknife, and held it up awhile, and then perpendicularly, 
it would not bleed ; yet, if it were then topped, it would 
in some time show moisture, yet not always ; but the 
bough from whence it was taken did constantly bleed, 
and that immediately, in case it was a bleeding time. 
And here I must observe to you one circumstance, that 
the trees I wounded at Nottingham did bleed from the 
same wounds five months together; but then these wounds 
were next a brick wall, and not exposed to the air : on 
the contrary, the trees I wounded here the beginning of 
November have never bled from those wounds then made, 
but from fresh ones many times. And this neglect in not 
making new wounds certainly was the reason of the dif- 
ference, or not bleeding of these York trees when yours 
did in autumn. 

Feb. 21. I made many experiments upon trees by 
bringing them to the fire-side, and did discover many 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 83 

phenomena, of which you will have an account from Mr. 
Oldenburgh. I made them in order to some queries I sent 
him formerly, and especially while saps may not be found 
at all seasons of the year in a much like quantity and 
consistence, ***** part o f a plant, &c. 

The place in Aristotle is ' Hist. Anim.' lib. ix, c. 39. 
" Aranei statim cum editi sunt, fila mittunt, non intrin- 
secus tanquam excrementum, ut Democritus ait, sed ex- 
trinsecus de suo, corpore veluti corticem, aut more eorum 
quae suos villos ejaculantur, ut Hystrices." Concerning 
which passage I pray see Redi, p. 170, and give me your 
opinion how you understand the Greek text : this inter- 
pretation is Gaza's. I will also transcribe for you Pliny 
upon the place, lib. xi, c. 24. " Orditur telas, tantique 
operis materia3 uterus ipsius sufficit ; sive ita corrupta alvi 
natura stato tempore (ut Democrito placet); sive est 
quasdam intus lanigera fertilitas." My sense I have set 
down among the queries I sent Mr. Oldenburgh. Here is 
a fair hint for the darting of threads, if it be not absolutely 
so to be understood ; but, for their sailing and mount- 
ing up into the air, as yet I find the ancients were silent, 
and I think I was the first who acquainted you with it ; 
but that is best known to yourself, and I challenge it 
only by way of emulation, not envy, there being nothing 
more likely than that several persons following the same 
studies, may many of them light upon one and the same 
observation. I am no Arcana man, and methinks I would 
have everybody free and communicative, that we may, if 
possible, considering the shortness of our lives, participate 
with posterity. 
York, March 21, 1670. 



Mr. RAY'S Answer to Dr. LISTER'S last. 

MOST DEAR FRIEND, Since the receipt of your last, I 
have fallen into a feverish distemper, which is now turned 



84 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

to the yellow jaundice, a disease wherewith I was never 
before acquainted. It has not proceeded to any great 
height, and hath rendered me rather indisposed and list- 
less than sick. I hope it is now leaving of me. This hath 
taken me quite off making any farther experiments upon 
trees; but yet I must acquaint you, that upon careful 
and exact trial made in branches of walnut, birch, syca- 
more, and willow, cut off and held perpendicularly, the 
cut end downwards, we found that they would all bleed 
entire as they were, without topping the twigs at all; 
neither could we find that topping of them did sensibly 
promote their bleeding. As for willow, we observed that 
the young shoots being cut clear off, and held perpendi- 
cularly as before, would drop, though from an incision 
made in the branch where it was cut off it would not 
bleed. The place of Aristotle I have not yet looked out 
in the Greek, nor considered. I think something might 
have been gathered from it to that purpose you speak of, 
if any one had diligently heeded and weighed it ; but I 
doubt whether yourself, or Dr. Hulse, had any hint from it. 
The flying or sailing of spiders through the air is, for 
aught I know, your discovery ; from you I had the first 
intimation and knowledge of it. Dr. Hulse acquainted 
me with no more than the shooting out their threads. I 
would not be so injurious to any man, especially to so 
esteemed a friend, as to rob him of any part of the reward of 
his ingenious endeavours and transfer to another what is 
due to him, though it be as much commendation to find 
out a thing by one's own industry, which hath been already 
discovered by another, as to invent it first ; this last being 
rather a happiness than anything else, though I know the 
world will hardly be induced to believe that two men 
should hit upon the same discovery at the same time. 
You do well, in my judgment, to be free and commu- 
nicative of your notions and inventions; treasuring up 
secrets being an argument to me of a disingenuous spirit, 
or of a weak stock in them that seek to get or uphold 
their fame thereby. Those secrets, too, for the most part, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 85 

when discovered proving to be things of no great value. 
If it please God I get well, I intend this week a journey 
into Essex. Your experiments made upon trees brought 
to the fire, I have as yet heard nothing of from Mr. Olden- 
burgh. ***** 

Middleton, April 13, 1671 . 



Sir PHILIP SKIPPON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I should have sent you the last week the inclosed 
particulars which Willisell desires you to take notice of. 
The one is, as he says, a Salix n. d. that casts its outward 
bark and stands naked : it hath a remarkable lulus. It 
grows near the small brook that runs into that river nigh 
Darking in Surrey. The other is, as he would have it 
called, Veronica spec. Paroni/cJtice fol. Rut. facie \Vero- 
nicte trijjhyllos, Linn.] It grows at Rowtam, in Norfolk, 
betwixt the town and the highway, twelve miles before 
you come to Norwich ; and at Mewell, in Suffolk, betwixt 
the two windmills and the warren-lodge in a wheat- 
ground, on the right hand of Lynn road ; and in gravel- 
pits, two miles beyond Barton Mills, on the ridge of the 
hill, where a small cart way crosseth the road to Lynn. 
It grows also in the grass thereabout very plentifully 
nigh the latter end of April. Of these two I have sent 
samples. 

He hath discovered Hetteborine flo. albo \CepJialan- 
tkera grandiflord\ to grow a mile on this side Greenhithe, 
in a valley near a church, and in the beech wood nigh 
Darking. He hath also found Absinth, inod. [Artemisia 
campestris, Linn.] a mile from Barton Mills, where a 
small stone standeth in the road to Lynn for to guide 
passengers; and in the furze bushes under the hill 
plentifully; and on the road to Norwich, before you 
come to a town called Elden, where a great road from 



86 CORRESPONDENCE Ob 1 RAY. 

Lynn into the country crosseth Norwich road, and in the 
way on the other side of Elden, as you go up that hill 
towards Norwich. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. LISTER. 

DEAR AND HONOURED FRIEND, For my part, I am, 
God be thanked, in good health. The jaundice, which 
seized me here this spring, by sticking to one medicine 
for four or five days (that was an infusion of stone-horse 
dung with saffron in ale) I got pretty well rid of before I 
began my journey, as I think I formerly acquainted you. 
I believe any other medicine (of which for that disease 
there are good store), if I had been constant to the use 
of it for some time, would have wrought the same effect. 
One thing I cannot but wonder at in that disease, that 
many astringent things, as plantain-water, &c. should be 
good for it. I am glad that you have been prevailed with 
to communicate your observations and discoveries to the 
public. I remember you formerly acquainted me by letter, 
that you had found out an insect which yielded a purple 
tincture; but I did not then suspect it to be anything 
akin to the kermes kind. I have not yet found those 
membranous husks you mention sticking to rose-tree 
twigs; indeed I have not searched for them. I had 
thought that the kermes berry had been a blister of the 
bark of the oak, and not a thing merely contiguous or 
adhering, as a patella to a rock. I am sure the matrices 
of many insects bred on the leaves and branches of trees 
are excrescences of the plant itself; howbeit I will not 
say, but that they might be first caused or raised by the 
mother insect wounding the bark or leaf, either by punc- 
ture or distilling thereon some virulent juice. Mr. Olden- 
burgh hath written to me for a sight of your letter, wherein 
you give an account of your opinion concerning vegetable 
excrescences ; but truly all my letters which I had here I 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 87 

bound up in bundles and sent away into Essex this spring, 
and cannot, without some trouble, recover that particular. 
I desire, therefore, that you yourself would give him satis- 
faction and write your thoughts upon that subject again. 
Your Chnex feeding upon henbane I have observed, but 
not his eggs as yet. I cannot but wonder at your cunning 
and luckiness in observing and finding these things. I 
intend, God willing, on Monday next to begin a simpling 
voyage into the north, taking Thomas Willisel along with 
me, and to go over and view particularly myself, those 
plants which he hath discovered there, by me not ob- 
served, wild with us. In my return, if York lie not too 
much out of our road, I may chance wait upon you ; till 
when/l*shall defer what farther I have to inquire of you 
or communicate to you. 

Middleton, June 28, 1671. 



Sir PHILIP SKIPPON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I have inclosed the best account I can yet make 
of herring fishing, and shall hint some proverbs that I 
think are omitted in your book, viz.: 

One renegade is worse than two Turks. 

A Scot, a rat, and a Yarmouth herring, go all the world over. 

He is a hot shot in a mustard-pot, when both his heels stand right up. 

The brother had rather see the sister rich than make her so. 

They go far that never turn. 

The more cost the more worship. 

I have dined as well as my lord mayor. 

It would make a man scratch where it does not itch, to see a man live poor 

to die rich. 

Free of her lips, free of her hips. 

When fern begins to grow red, then milk is good with brown bread. 
Liquorish tongue, liquorish* tail. 
If it rain on Sunday before mess, every day of the week more or less. 

I believe I shall somewhat surprise you with what I 
have seen in a little boy, Will. Wotton, five years old the 

* [Qu. Lecherous.] 



88 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

last month, the son of Mr. Wotton, minister of this parish, 
who hath instructed this child within the last three quar- 
ters of a year in the reading of the Latin, Greek, and 
Hebrew languages, which he can read almost as well as 
English ; and that tongue he could read at four years and 
three months old as well as most lads twice his age. I 
could send you many particulars about his rendering 
chapters and psalms out of the three learned languages 
into English, and his admirable memory, which it is 
hoped will be attended with as good a judgment and 
understanding. His father, I believe, will signify here- 
after the great proficiency of his child, so much admired 
by every one that knows what he can already perform. 

Sept. 18, 1671. 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. RAY. 

DEAR SIR, I confess to you that I am not at all satis- 
fied with the account of vegetable excrescences, because 
I was not able to attain the end and give any clear light 
to the question. Moreover, upon review, I see that the 
last proposition is ill expressed; that the substance or 
fibrous part of many vegetable excrescences not to be the 
food of the worms to be found in them ; my meaning is, 
that the worms in those vegetable excrescences which 
produce ichneumones (to which kind of insect we would 
limit this proposition and expunge all other instances). 
These worms, I say, do not seem to devour the substance 
or fibrous part of them, as other worms devour the kernels 
of nuts, &c., but that, whatever their manner of feeding 
is, and we doubt not but they are nourished in and from 
them, the vegetable excrescences still mightily increase in 
bulk and rise as the worms feed. 

It is observable, if we would endeavour a solution, 
that some of the ichneumones delight to feed upon a 
liquid matter, as the eggs of spiders, the juices (if not 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 89 

eggs) within the bodies of young caterpillars and maggots, 
whence we conjecture that those of the same genus, to be 
found in vegetable excrescences, may in like manner 
suck in the juices of the equivalent parts of vegetables. 

And this the dry and spongy texture of some of these 
kinds of excrescences seems to evince ; for, if you cut in 
pieces a wild poppy-head for example, or the great balls 
of the oak, you will find in those partitions wherein these 
worms are lodged, nothing but a pithy substance like 
that of young elder : and, if there chance to be any cells 
unseized (which I have sometimes observed) the seeds 
therein will be found yet entire and perfect. Whence 
very probably they feed upon, or suck in by little and 
little tn^Tyet liquid pulp of the tender seeds, and leave 
the substance or fibrous parts of the seeds entire ; which 
fibres are, as the intermediate juice is exhausted, mon- 
strously expanded into an excrescence by the yet vege- 
tative power of the plant. 

As for matter of fact to clear the truth of that opinion, 
that the divers races of ichneumones are generated by 
their respective animal parents, and particularly that 
those which the various excrescences of vegetable produce 
are not plantigenous : I am in great hopes the instance 
of poppy-heads swollen into excrescences, will favour us 
the next season. My expectation is chiefly grounded 
upon the condition and nature of that plant, which is 
such, that nothing can pierce the skin of it and wound it 
but it must necessarily leave a mark of its entry, the 
milky juice springing upon the lightest touch, and dry- 
ing or concreting suddenly into a red scar. And this I 
think I may affirm, that of the many heads grown into 
excrescences which I gathered this summer, all had these 
marks upon them ; but our aim is here only to make way 
for the observation against the next season. To which 
purpose also we propose the following queries : 

1. Whether the shagged balls of the wild rose are not 
excrescences from the bud and very fruit of the plant, 



90 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

like as the wild poppy-heads are apparently not designed 
for worms, but seed ? 

2. Whether the large soft balls of the oak are not in 
like manner, the buds of the oak seized about the latter 
end of April or the very beginning of May ; that is, 
whether they be not the future acorn or acorns, with all 
the parts of a sprouting branch thus monstrously per- 
verted from the first intent and design of nature ? 

3. Upon what parts or juices the ichneumones worms 
thrust into caterpillars or maggots can be thought to 
feed? and whether there be actually eggs in caterpillars 
sufficient to serve them for food ? 

York, Oct. 25, 1671. 



Sir PHILIP SKIPPON to Mr. RAY. 

IF this finds you at Chester, be pleased to tender my 
humble service to his lordship ; and if you meet there 
with any Irish pieces of money, I desire your kindness 
to purchase some for me. I am very desirous to find 
those Elizabeth, or Pudsey shillings, Webster mentions 
in his ' History of Metals,' p. 21, that were made of silver 
ore, in Yorkshire. He says they are marked with a 
scallop. As you happen upon any of them, lay one or 
two aside for me, and I shall be obliged to you. I can- 
not yet send you the inscriptions concerning the 365 
children and Sir Jo. Mandevil, but in lieu of them shall 
send you a humorsome rhyming will, of one Moore, 
who died not long since about Mershland, in Norfolk, 
and gave his estate to his grand-daughter, now married 
to one Mr. Shelton, a gentleman of this country, that 
hath a good estate near Bury. 

" In the name of God. Amen. I, Thomas Moore, 
The fourth year of my age above threescore, 
Revoking all the wills I made before, 
Making this my last and first. I do implore 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 91 

Almighty God into his hands to take 

My soul, which not alone himself did make, 

But did redeem it with the precious blood 

Of his dear Son ; that title still holds good. 

I next bequeath my body to the dust. 

From whence it came, which is most just ; 

Desiring yet that I be laid close by ^ 

My eldest daughter, though I know not why. 

I leave my grandchild, Martha, her full due 

My lands, and all my cattle, save a few 

You shall hereafter in this schedule find 

To piety or charity design' d, 

Whom I my sole executrix invest 

To pay my debts, and so take all the rest. 

But since that she is under age, I pray 

Sir Edward Walpole and her father may 

The supervisors be of this my will, 

Provided that my cousin Colvil still, 

And Major Spensly, her assistants be ; 

Four honest men are more than two or three. 

Then I shall not care how soon I die, 

If they'll accept it, and I'll tell you why. 

There's not a man of them but is so just, 

With whom almost my soul I dare to trust. 

Provided she do make her son 

Heir to my house at least, and half my land, 

If she hath such ; and when she hath so done, 

She be a means to let him understand 

It is my will his name be written thus 

T. A. B. C. or D. Moore alias." 



" EPITAPH. 

Here lies in this cold monument, 
As appears by his last will and testament. 
He was very rich his name was Moore ; 
Who ever knew poet die rich before ? 
But, to speak truth, his verses do show it, 
He liv'd a rich man, but died a poor poet." 



Mr. JESSOP to Mr. RAY. 



SIR, I showed Mr. John Fisher your letter yesterday, 
his brother not being at home when I went to visit them, 
lie gives you many thanks for your account you gave 
him of young Helmont. He gives this account of their 



92 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

menstruum, of which you inquired. The experiment was 
made accidentally ; for having kept it in a glass phial 
(part of the relics of which he showed me), and going to 
take out some for their use, they found that it was all 
run out, and yet they could observe neither crack nor hole 
in the glass ; yet observing that the glass was very white 
as far as it had been filled, he not imagining what might 
be the reason, endeavoured to cleanse it with an iron 
prepared for that purpose ; but the glass proved so ten- 
der, that at the first touch the iron made a hole through 
it. Upon this they began to consider what might be the 
reason of this accident, for they had often made the same 
preparation, and yet not met with this effect. At length 
they remembered that they had by chance used a stronger 
fire than they did formerly; and therefore, upon the next 
occasion, after they had drawn part of it with their usual 
degree of heat, towards the latter end they urged it with a 
stronger fire, and found, according to their expectation, that 
what was drawn first did not dissolve glass, but the latter 
did. This experiment they have made four times with suc- 
cess, and without failing at any time. They showed me 
about a pint of their last extraction in a thick green glass 
bottle, and it seemeth to have dissolved it about half-way 
through. He seems to make a doubt of the meaning of 
those words in your query (whether the menstruum dissolve 
glass constantly and certainly) ; if you mean as I imagine 
you do, you have your answer already. 

But if you ask whether the same portion of the men- 
struum, which hath formerly dissolved glass, will again 
do the same with the same vigour? He answers, that 
in this particular it doth not differ from other ordinary 
menstruums ; for at the second time it works its effect 
more weakly, and the third time scarce discernibly, as he 
hath observed. If, after this account, Mr. Boyle think 
this a matter worth his consideration, he may absolutely 
command Mr. Fisher in this particular, or any other, 
without any conditions or reservations, as he may do all 
that part of the world which pretends to ingenuity and 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. "*93 

gratitude : and yet Mr. Fisher would esteem it an exceed- 
ing great honour if he would condescend so much as to 
instruct him in anything. I thought it convenient to let 
you know that, although the account I gave you of draw- 
ing spirit of wine out of vinegar was all that either you 
or I received from Mr. Fisher, yet he tells me that it is 
not the best way (and saith he told you as much), nor 
the way that he useth ; which, for several reasons, he yet 
keeps as a secret. He is busy at present about improv- 
ing an experiment he hath lately made of turning the 
whole substance of vinegar into an urinous spirit. He 
let rue see about half a pint that he had already done, 
which, both for taste and smell, was like a middle sort of 
spirit oT*hartshorn. He is endeavouring to turn the 
whole substance of vinegar into spirit of wine, and saith 
he hath hopes of good success. I should be very glad to 
see you here in your return from Chester. 

December 18, 71. 



Sir PHILIP SKIPPON to Mr. BAY. 

SIR, Some particulars I lately met with I shall here 
insert. 

" The N . side of trees is distinguishable by quantity of 
thick moss growing there." Lederer's Disc, of N. Ame- 
rica, p. 24. 

In some of the late Transactions, viz. Nos. 71, 74, 
76, are observables which I doubt not you have taken 
notice of. 

" Specified proprietate, mania3 resistere creditur Radix 
nymph, lut. quse mense majo effossa," &c. Sennertus. 

" Folia Buxi, et decoctum Anagallid. flo. purp. maniam 
curant." Idem. 

In Mr. Boyle's last piece of the Usefulness of Natural 
Philosophy, he tells you several ways to take the shape 
of a leaf, which he recommends to travellers. In a little 



94** CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

book called ' Polygraphice,' c. 12, is another way, viz. 
" First take the leaf, and gently bruise the ribs and veins 
on the back side of it ; afterwards wet it with linseed oil, 
and then press it hard upon a piece of clean white paper, 
and so you shall have the perfect figure of the leaf." 

As anything else occurs which may be worthy your 
knowledge, I shah 1 give you information. Some remarks 
about insects in the Philosophical Transactions bring to 
my memory what I read in ' New-England's Memorial, 5 
1633 : " Plymouth was visited with an infectious fever. 
The spring before this sickness, there was a numerous 
company of flies, which were like, for bigness, unto wasps, 
or humble-bees. They came out of little holes in the 
ground, and did eat up green things, and made such a 
constant yelling noise, as made all the woods ring of 
them," p. 90. 

Wrentham, Feb. 10, 167i- 



Mr. RAY to Dr. LISTER. 

DEAR SIR, I thank you for the account you sent of 
the Bret [the Brill Rhombus vttfyaris*~\ and Turbut 
[Rhombus maximus]. By what you write of the Bret, I 
perceive that what they call Bret in Lincolnshire and 
Yorkshire, and I believe also in all the east part of Eng- 
land, is the Turbut of the west country, where the name 
Bret is not known ; and I believe the Halibut \Hippo- 
glossus vulyaris\~\ of the west is the northern and eastern 
Turbut. And I would fain know how your Halibut and 
Turbut differ ; for if there be another fish of the make 
and bigness of your turbut, it is a stranger to me. Our 
common dictionaries english Rhombus a Turbut; but 
your Bret answers better the figure so called than your 
Turbut doth. 

* Our Brill is sometimes called the Pearl, on account of the small white 
pearl-like spots on the upper surface. The term bret means spotted, 
f On our N. E. coast the Halibut is called aTurbot. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. '95 

I am of your opinion that the Bret is the Rhombus 
asper ; but what manner of fish that is you call Sand- 
screiter* I know not. Of this sort of flat fishes I have 
as yet seen only seven species, but doubt not that there 
are many more. Those are the Sole \8olea vulgaris], the 
Pole [Platessa polo], which is a kind of sole ; the Hali- 
but, which you call Turbut ; the Turbut, which you call 
Bret ; the common Plaise [Platessa vulgar is\, or Passer 
Icevis vulgaris maculatus ; the Fluke or Flounder [Pla- 
tessa Jlesus], called by some Passer non maculatus, and 
by others, I believe, Rhombus Jluviatilis ; and the Passer 
asper sive squamosus of Rondel, called a Dab [Platessa 
lwiandd\ in Cornwall. We were told there of some 
others, ~>iz. one they call a Lantern Fish [the Whiff, 
Rhombus megastomd\, another they call a Queen. But 
of these things I hope to receive more full and particular 
satisfaction from you. As for what you have published 
in print, I judge it worthy of you, and think you deserve 
much thanks and commendation for so frankly communi- 
cating your ingenious observations and useful discoveries 
to the world, and will, doubtless, be recompensed with 
the honour due to you therefore. In one thing I am as 
yet of a different opinion from you, and that is the origin 
of those stones which we usually call petrified shells, 
though you want not good ground for what you assert. 

Middleton, March 2, 1671. 



Mr. JOHNSON to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, You have the head of a Fieldfare 
[Turdus pilaris\ almost white, the rest of the body was 
not at all altered, whether it be lusus natures, old age, or 
some accidental cause, I know not. I have only observed 

* Perhaps the Rough Dab, Platessa limandoldes. 



9fr CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

this change from proper colours to white in Larks which 
are about Carlisle, to be very usual in Titlarks [Anthus 

fratensis] , which I have seen on our moors ; in Crows 
Corvus corone], whereof there is one just now in Cliffe- 
wood, near Peirce Bridge; in Daws [Corvus monedula], 
whereof, this year, one was at Hurworth, near Croft 
Bridge, which was altogether white, neb [beak], nails, 
and all ; and in Sparrows [Passer domesticus], which 
is usual. I have sent you the little yellow bird 
[Sylvia sylvicola*] you called Regulus non-cristatus, what 
bird it is I know not ;f but we have great store of them 
each morning about sunrise, and many times a day ; 
besides, she mounts the highest branch in the bush, and 
there, with bill erect, and wing hovering, she sends forth 
a sibilous noise like that of the grasshopper, but much 
shriller. 

It is like enough our Whitethroat [Curruca cinerea] is 
of the FicedulfB ; for it is her manner with us to fall 
upon a fair and ripe cherry, whose skin when she hath 
broken, with a chirp she invites her young brood, who 
devour it in a moment. 

Brignall, near Greta Bridge, March 29, 72. 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. RAY. 

DEAR SIR, I shall teh 1 you only that Kermes is this 
year a greater puzzle to rne than I expected it would have 
proved. For I observe 1, That these are soft in the 
early spring, and very pulpy. 2. That not only that 
which I took to be the excrement of the bees, but also 

* Called also S. sibilatrix, in reference to its note. 

f Doubtless this bird was the Locustella, in Willughb. Ornith. book 2, 
ch. 2, sec. 5, and not the Regulus non-cristatus, ch. 12, which I call the 
Yellow Wren, and of which I have discovered three distinct species, but not 
one of them that sings as is here described, and as I have seen two sorts (if 
I mistake not) of Locustella birds do. W. D[erham]. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 97 

the liquameri itself, which I took to be provision of bee- 
meat, is nothing else but an infinite number of small eggs, 
out of which a certain sort of mites (as I take them to be) 
are hatched. 3. That these kermes seem to be of dif- 
ferent sorts; some having red, or carnation-coloured 
mites in them, wrapped up in a pure white silk ; others 
are of white colour, &c. 4. That not only the bee mag- 
gots I described the last year have been found in these 
kermes, but as Dr. Johnson of Pomfret assures me, he 
found in one kermes one large maggot filling all the 
husk. 

I desire to know what you and Mr. Willughby have 
farther observed on this subject. 



Mr. OLDENBURGH'S* Letter. 

SIR, After my long silence, I must now put you in 
mind of some particulars which were recommended to 
you and Mr. Ray when you were with us here. One 
was to communicate what you had observed concerning 
the Vermis setaceus, or Hairworm, of which Mr. Lister 
had made so rational a narrative already. Another, to 
experiment to what degree of magnitude a maggot may 
be advanced, by continuing to give it new flesh every 
two or three days, upon the occasion of Sir Sam. Tuke's 
relation of a maggot, which, within two months, by that 
way increased to the bigness of a man's thigh. A third, 
to try whether insects will be bred in a beef's bladder so 
close that no passage be left for any flyblows. And 
because flies may be said to have blown on the outside of 
the bladder, and the flyblows to have eaten through the 
bladder, it will be proper to include such a bladder in a 
case, to defend it from flyblows outwardly as well as in- 

* [Memorials, p. 30.] 



98 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

wardly. A fourth, to try, if occasion serveth, the virtue 
of Lichen cinereus terrestris \Peltidea canina, Ach.], 
which was said to be exceedingly efficacious in curing 
dogs bitten by mad dogs. A fifth, to inquire of Mr. Fisher 
whether he be master of the experiment of dissolving 
glass, and reducing it into a white calx ; and after the 
glass is well moistened with the menstruum, whether it be 
capable to be shaved with a knife, almost like horn? 
And, farther, whether the menstruum employed for that 
purpose performs upon all sorts of glass ? 

I intreat you, sir, to present Mr. Ray with my hearty 
service ; and, he being concerned in some of these par- 
ticulars, to give him the reading of this paper. 

Dr. Grew is now amongst us at Arundel House, making 
now and then very good observations upon plants ; and 
having showed to the company, among divers particulars, 
the tracheae mentioned by Malpighi in his ' Discourse of 
Vegetables,' that you have seen. 

He hath been desired to endeavour whether he can 
discover any such thing as a peristaltic motion in plants 
when growing ; for which purpose he hath been directed 
to choose some of the bigger sort, wherein that motion, 
if there be any such, is like to be more discernible. 

We hope, sir, that you and your friend will join in 
making a research so considerable. 

I presume you know that Mr. Boyles's essay of the 
' Origin and Virtues of Gems ' is now abroad ; and I be- 
lieve that Signer Malpighi's discourse ' De Formatione 
Pulliin Ovo Fcecundo,tamnon Incubato quam Incubato' 
will be printed in a short time. I desire very much to 
know that these lines are come to hand.* 

London, July 6, 1672. 



* [To whom this letter was addressed does not appear : probably Mi 
Willughby.j 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 99 



Mr. JOHNSON to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, I saw near Kendal, to my great 
wonder, a Broom-tree (if I may so say) four or five yards 
high, much thicker than my leg, spreading large branches 
every way, adorned with large fair flowers, a very fair 
spectacle. I found at Haughter, in the Bishopric, your 
Varietas altera Jacea nigrce, with the flower all white, a 
very pretty plant, worthy a garden. 

Brignall, August 5, 72. 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, August 18 1 passed through Marton Woods, 
under Pimco Moor, in Craven. In these woods I then 
found very great plenty of mushrooms, and many of them 
then withered, and coal-black, but others new sprung 
and flourishing. They are some of them of a large size, 
and yet few much bigger than the champignon, or 
ordinary red-gilled eatable mushroom, and very much of 
the shape of that that is, an exactly round cap, or crown, 
which is thick in flesh, and open, deep gills underneath ; 
a fleshy, and not hollow, round foot-stalk, of about six 
fingers' breadth above ground, and ordinarily as thick as 
my thumb ; the foot-stalk, gills, and cap, all of a milk- 
white colour. If you cut' any part of this mushroom, it 
will bleed exceeding freely and plentifully a pure white 
juice. Concerning which, note 

1 . That the youngest did drop much more plentifully 
and freely than those that were at their full growth and 
expansion. That the dried and withered ones had no 
signs of milk in them that I then discerned. 

2. That this milk tastes and smells like pepper, and is 
much hotter upon the tongue. 



100 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

3. That it is not clammy or ropy to the touch. 

4. That although I used the same knife to cut a hun- 
dred of them, yet I could not perceive, all that time, that 
the milk changed colour (as is usual with most vegetable 
milks) upon the knife-blade. 

5. That it became, in the glass phial I drew it into, 
suddenly concrete and stiff, and in some days dried into 
a firm cake, or lump, without any serum at all. 

6. That it then also, when dried, retained its keen 
biting taste, as it does at this day, yet not so fierce. Its 
colour is now of a yellowish-green, yet very pale. 

7. This milk flows much faster from about the outmost 
rim, or part equivalent to the bark of plants, than from 
the more inward parts, &c. 

8. I observed these mushrooms even then, when they 
abounded with milk (not to be endured upon our 
tongues), to be exceeding full of fly-maggots ; and the 
youngest and tenderest of them were very much eaten by 
the small, gray, naked snail. 

You can tell me what author describes this mushroom, 
and what he titles it. 

I have revised the History of Spiders, and added this 
summer's notes. Also I have likewise brought into the 
same method the land and fresh-water snails, having this 
year added many species found in these northern lakes ; 
and by way of appendix I have described all the shell- 
stones that I have anywhere found in England, having 
purposely viewed some places in Yorkshire, where there 
are plenty. The tables of both I purpose to send you. 
I am not so thoroughly stocked with sea-shells as I wish 
and endeavour. I aim not at exotics, but those of our 
own shires. Concerning St. Cuthbert's Beads, I find 
three species of them in Craven ; and this makes it plain 
that they have not been the back-bone of any creature, 
because I find of them rarnous and branched like trees. 

York, October 12, 1672. 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 101 



Mr. JESSOP to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I received both yours, and am very glad to hear 
of your design of reviewing Mr. Willughby's Collections ; 
and I shall give what assistance I can in the business 
concerning Hawks. In the mean time you may peruse 
Latham's ' Falconry/ whose descriptions are true, though 
not perhaps so full as you may expect. There are, be- 
sides these that are mentioned in the common books, a 
Boccarell and a Boccaret, the which, although I have 
often seen, yet I did not observe them so well as to be 
able to describe them exactly. They are the names of 
the male* and female. A Boccarell I once kept myself, 
which was much larger than either the Lanner or Falcon ; 
and yet the common tradition is, that they are a bastard 
Hawk, bred betwixt a Lanner and a Falcon ; how true I 
know not. 
March 14, 72. 



Mr. JESSOP'S Paper. 
My Mun William's way of making Hard Soap. 

TAKE wood-ashes, and ashes of nettles or thistles (for 
fern-ashes make the soap soft), as much as you please ; 
put unto them a third part of lime ; make a hole in the 
ashes, and lay the lime in the middle of the ashes, and 
quench it with water or small ley ; then cover it with the 
ashes that lie round it close, so let it lie for half a quarter 
of an hour, or thereabouts, till you think the lime be 
fallen. With a shovel mix them well together, having 
your fat, or tub, ready, for fear they lose their virtue. 
Let your fat, or tub, have a hole in the bottom ; cover it 
with a slate-stone, or board, laid upon other little stones, 
which may keep it about an inch from the bottom of the 
tub ; and over the slate-stone, or board, lay straw to 



102 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

keep the ashes from the hole. Fill the tub almost full 
with the ashes and lime mixed as above, and press them 
down pretty hard; lay a wisp of straw on the top of the 
ashes in the middle of the fat, to keep the water from 
making a hole ; pour on a little water upon the wisp at 
first, so as it may spread in the ashes about a hand- 
breadth about the wisp ; then pour on more than at the 
first, as soon as the first is drunk up by the ashes ; and 
at the next time you may pour so much as will spread 
over all the tub ; and if it take that without breaking the 
ashes, you may pour on more. If that ley which comes 
through the hole into your receiver at the first be not 
clear, put it up again, and so long continue pouring on 
water as the ley in the receiver will bear an egg ; and 
this they call strong ley. 

Keep this by itself, and pour on cold water again, 
and the next will be middle ley, which you must know 
by its taste. The last will be small ley, prepared after 
the same manner, which hath scarce any taste at all. 

Take next a hundred weight of tallow ; put it into the 
copper ; put about six gallons of middle ley upon it ; 
then put fire under the furnace, and melt it down in the 
ley, but so as it do not boil . Draw the fire from under 
it, and let it stand for four or five hours; then warm it 
again, and put in three or four gallons of strong ley, and 
so let it cool again four or five hours. Warm it again, 
and, if need require, put in more ley, which you will 
know by the sharpness of the taste of the soap : if it be 
pretty strong, let it boil until it become like a jelly. 
When it is ready for graining, if you dip your knife into 
it, and take out some, and let it cool, it will roll about 
your knife. 

To grain it, or separate the ley from the soap, put in 
a peck of bay-salt ; then keep a fire only upon one side 
of your copper, so that it may boil only on that side 
where the fire is. After it hath boiled a little, take out 
some of the ley, and look whether the tallow be clearly 
separated ; if not, you must put in more salt. It must 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 103 

boil till all the froth, which will rise at first a great 
height, be wholly fallen ; then take the soap out of the 
ley with a scummer, and put it into a chest with a sheet 
under. 

Take an ounce of indigo, beat it to powder, put it unto 
a pottle of middle ley in a little pan, and put unto it 
some hot soap out of the copper, so as to make it pretty 
thick. Let it boil ; and, being hot, pour this into the 
middle of the soap in the chest. Whilst it is hot, stir it 
up and down with a stick very well, and it will make blue 
veins in the soap. 

When it grows cold, they cut it into square cakes with 
wires. 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. KAY. 

DEAR SIR, I am very joyful at the news you give 
me of your thoughts of publishing the Natural History 
designed by Mr. Willughby. I am very sensible of the 
great pains it will ask to perfect any one part of it. I 
only beg of you that you will let one part see the light 
before you undertake the next, and that they may not 
stay one of another. My notes are very slender upon 
the subject of birds. 

I have very little time to bestow upon natural history, 
yet what pleasure I give myself is to divert myself that 
way, I have been at Bugthorp since I last wrote to you, 
to view the place of petrified shells. I shall not trouble 
you at present with any of my observations made there, 
save that I found some Star-stones branched, as I had 
found formerly St. Cuthbert's Beads in Craven. 

This year has much changed my thoughts concerning 
kermes. I have found them upon old ropes and deal 
boards. I am pretty confident that it is an animal of the 
multipede kind, which does fix itself in order to the laying 
of its eggs ; and that the eggs are laid and fastened about 



104 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

its belly, just as the eggs of a cray-fish are under her tail. 
I have taken the animals before the fixing of themselves ; 
but shall tell more of this ere long. 

For other discoveries and experiments I refer you to a 
late letter I wrote to Mr. Oldenburgh, which he threat- 
ened to print in the next Transactions. When you see 
it, give me your opinion freely of the particulars. 

York, June 20, ?3. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. LISTER. 

DEAR SIR, I received your last letter of November 1 1 , 
with your accurate observations about St. Cuthbert's 
Beads. A strange thing it seems to me, that the broken 
pieces of those bodies which you find (I mean of the main 
stems) should be of equal bigness from top to bottom, 
and not at all tapering, if they be indeed the bodies of 
rock-plants. There are found in Malta certain stones 
called St. Paul's Bastoons, which I suppose were origi- 
nally a sort of rock plants, like small snagged sticks, but 
without any joints, the trunks whereof diminish, according 
to the proportion of other plants, after the putting forth 
of their branches. Those roots that you have observed 
are a good argument that these stones were originally 
pieces of vegetables. Wonderful it is that they should be 
all broken, and not one plant found remaining entire ; 
and no less wonderful that there should not at this day 
be found the like vegetables growing upon the submarine 
rocks, unless we will suppose them to grow at a great 
depth under water. And who knows but there may be 
such bodies growing on the rocks at this day, and that 
the fishers for coral may find of them, though, being of 
no use, they neglect and cast them away. Certain it is, 
that there is a sort of coral jointed. The small collec- 
tion of local words I mentioned to you is abroad. I had 
sent you one of them, but that I knew not how to get it 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 105 

conveyed, unless I had sent to Mr. Martin for direction ; 
and truly the thing is so inconsiderable a trifle, that I 
thought it not worth the while to give him the trouble. 
Besides, it is so ill corrected, that I am also in that re- 
spect ashamed of it. 

I am going on as fast as I can with the Ornithology. 
That the work may not be defective, I intend to take in 
all the kinds I find in books which Mr. Willughby de- 
scribed not, and to have a figure for all the descriptions 
I can procure them for. I have sent this week to Mr. 
Martin to begin to get some figures engraved. 
Middleton, Nov. 29, 73. 



Mr. JOHNSON to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, You desired a particular account of 
the Barnacles, which I have given, and am confident they 
are two species at the least, yet so near akin, that they 
have all a dark veil, covering head and neck alike. 

If you have not yet determined what those shells upon 
old planks and ships (which antiquity fancied to be young 
goslings) are, give me leave to propound one conjecture 
among many, viz. that they are the spawn of shrimps. 
It was my brother Jo. Johnson's observation, who told 
me, that so far as his naked eye could discover, there 
was an exact proportion of parts betwixt the contents of 
those shells and the shrimp. If this conjecture have any- 
thing of probability in it, pray examine it farther ; if not, 
pardon this trouble. The conjectural reasons which I 
here and there add of the parts of fowls I express posi- 
tively, to avoid prolixity of words ; and if in many of 
them I err (as like enough I may), it is not for want 
of . 

Most of the Latin names I give are Jo. or Gesn., for 
I have not Aldrovand., though I confess sometimes their 
descriptions are imperfect, or do not exactly agree ; and 



106 CORRESPONDENCE OF 'KAY. 

sometimes (though rarely) I take the liberty to feign a 
name where I find not one. 

It is commonly reported with us of the Heron [Ardex 
cinerea] and Bittoun [Botaurus stellaris] , that they have 
but one wide gut, and therefore, they say, when they eat 
an eel, she presently goes through them, which the heron 
in her flight catches again and again ; but when I opened 
them I found the story false, for they had guts like other 
birds for anything I saw ; therefore I rather think the eel 
(if at all) makes her escape out of her feet. 

Brignall, Jan. 15, 167?. 

I have often taken notice that the summer birds do 
all, or most of them, feed on such insects whose being 
consists mostwhat in motion I mean who have more 
store of animal soul than of all the rest, and therefore 
afford a plentiful supply of animal spirits to the brain, 
and genus nervosum of the birds, which I sometimes 
fancy to be the reason why these birds are so restless in 
motion, and such continual singers ; and perhaps some 
reason may be taken from hence why the Sows [Omscidte], 
and some other insects, are so beneficial to the nervous 
kinds, and why a greater medicinal improvement may 
be made of insects. 



Mr. OLDENBUKGH to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, My worthy neighbour, Mr. Hatton, giving me 
a visit, acquainted me that my Lord Mordaunt hath at 
his house at Parson's-green, near London, some of those 
Barbadoes Turtles that are not bigger than larks, and 
that his lordship is willing to permit any artist that shall 
come to him in his, Mr. Hatton's, name to take a draught 
of that bird. If, therefore, you are minded to have that 
bird inserted in your History of Volatiles, it not being 
hitherto described, as Mr. Hatton thinks, you may give 
order to Mr. Martin to send some fit person to the place 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 107 

mentioned to receive that satisfaction, which I could not 
omit to give you notice of. 

London, July 11, 74. 



Mr. HAY to Dr. LISTER. 

DEAR SIR, In the last ' Philosophical Transactions,' 
I saw a table of land and fresh-water snails of your draw- 
ing up, which is indeed very full and disposed in an 
excellent method, and the lively figure of each shell, being 
elegantly engraven, added; so that there is little wanting to 
a complete history of them. I have not been very curious 
in searcnlng out and noting the varieties of our English 
land-snails ; many of yours I have not taken notice of. 
The second kind I think is that you and I observed about 
Montpellier, but I do not remember to have seen it in 
England. Of your water-snails I have discovered most, 
if not all. Your first Buccinum, which is the 18th in the 
plate, I used to call Conchula persica for some resemblance, 
if I mistake not, it hath to that shell. It hath also the 
likeness of those they call Porcelain shells beyond seas, 
and use for cosmetics. I have observed a small water- 
snail in our brooks, which I used to term Nerites fluvia- 
tilis for its similitude, which I think is not in your table, 
unless it be the 18th ; but then it is not rightly figured, 
for the bottom or vertex in mine is round and not at all 
produced. I have also observed abundantly in our brooks 
a, Patella Jlumatilis no broader than a lentil sticking to 
the stones. But of these things, being thus by you quick- 
ened, I shall hereafter, God granting life and health, take 
more exact notice. I thank you for your communications, 
and exhort you as earnestly as I can to proceed with all 
vigour in your search into the history and mysteries of 
nature ; in the prosecution whereof, the success you have 
already had, and discoveries you have made, have both 
rewarded your endeavours and given you encouragement 
to persist. 



108 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. OLDENBUKGH to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, My late absence from London, and other occa- 
sions, have kept me from sooner giving you the following 
account from Signor Boccone, in return to the letter 
you wrote to him, which, it seems by this his answer, 
was without your name to it. He saith thus in French : 

L'autheur de la lettre latine tesmoigne d' avoir beau- 
coup de bonte pour moi, et ce ne puis luy respondre dans 
les formes, a cause que la dite lettre n'est point signee. 
Je croy pourtant de pouvoir deschiffrer 1'autheur, par 
I'histoire de ses voiages en Sicile, et a Malthe, et de 
ni'arrester sur la personne illustre de Monsieur Rayus. 
Je vous prie done, de luy vouloir rendre mes tres-humbles 
reconnoissances, et de luy temoigner mes obligations ; et 
que, s'il arrive jamais qu'il revient en Italic, je le serviray 
pour compagnon dans toutes les peines inevitables, qu'on 
rencontre dans les occasions d'herboriser. 

La Vicia sesamacea [Astragalus sesameus, Linn. ?] qui 
a este descrite par Fab. Columna differe d'avec la Securi- 
daca siliquis fabaceis [A. btsticm, Linn.], en beaucoup de 
parties ; scav. les siliques, que produit la dite Vicia, sont 
plus petites, plus aigue's, et (ce qui est le plus remarqu- 
able) attachees au caulis sans la mediation sensible du 
pediculus ; ce qui n'arrive guere dans les parties de la 
Securidaca sicula. J'ay trouve une figure de Vicia sesa- 
macea, qui a este tiree avec la mesnie plante selon la 
methode prescrite par Spigelius dans son Isagoge: si 
vous ou M. Rayus ferez tirer la figure de la Securidaca 
siliquis fabaceis par la mesme methode, vous connoistrez 
d'abord par cette espece de demonstration la difference 
des parties. Pour le present j'ay 1'honneur de vous envoier 
le portrait, mais avec le temps ce pourroy vous envoier la 
plante mesme, "ou ses graines. II me semble, que j'ay 
remarque dans les ' Observations Topographiques' quel- 
ques plantes, que j'ay trouvees dans la Sicile, sgav. un 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 109 

Hypericum, un Gramen, une Jacea, une Campanula, une 
Lychnis, et autres plantes rares. Je souhaite avoir un 
exemplaire de cet ouvrage, pour y expliquer, a 1'occasion 
d'une autre impression, que ces plantes la sont les mesraes 
avec celles, que M. Ray us et moy avons observees et des- 
crites. Et je dois faire cela pour rendre justice a ce 
sgavant voiageur, et pour empescher la multiplication des 
especes, estant les mesmes plantes. J'apprens avec 
plaisir, que le Solanum spinosum man/time tomentosum a 
este apporte de la Virginie en Angleterre la premiere fois, 
cela m'ayant este inconnu jusques icy. 

So far Signer Boccone. To which 1 shall add some- 
thing tKaf may concern the Ornithology ; which is, that I 
saw lately two or three sorts of East Indian birds, brought 
thence with the last return ships, very fine creatures ; and 
they were: 1. A curious speckled Indian hen. 2. Some 
East Indian pigeons, delicately shaped. 3. Some very 
small birds, with short scarlet beaks, and curiously 
speckled feathers, &c. These, if we could learn their 
names and something of their nature and qualities, were 
very well worth, in my opinion, to be taken into your 
book. I hear they are shortly to be brought from Wap- 
ping (where I saw them in the company of my Lord 
Brouncker) to Tower-hill ; and, if they be so, we may 
then get a draught of them, if you think fit, for the en- 
graver, especially if the person that brought them can give 
us any tolerable description of them. 

I cannot conclude this without giving you notice, that 
the Council of the Royal Society intends to engage those 
of the Fellows of that body, that are able and willing, to 
give them once a year, each of them, an experimental 
entertainment at their ordinary meetings, that is, some 
good discourse grounded on experiments made or to 
be made ; that so their weekly meetings may be more 
considerable and inviting than hitherto they have been, 
and the work of the Society not lie altogether on the 
shoulders of three or four of the Fellows. And this being 



110 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

to reach the absent as well as the present, I mean of those 
that have opportunity and ability, I do herewith intimate 
to you (as I have lately done to Mr. Lister), that you are 
looked upon as one of those which the said council have 
in their eye for such an exercise, desiring you that you 
would think upon such a subject as yourself shall judge 
proper for one entertainment of that company after our 
anniversary election-day the next year ; and if your occa- 
sions should not permit you to step to London to present 
your discourse yourself, they have found an expedient, 
viz. to desire you, and such others as shall be in that case, 
to send it up to London to any of your friends that may 
present and read it for you. It is farther intended, that 
such discourses shall be made public if the author so 
think fit, not otherwise. Pray, sir, let me know that you 
have received this, together with your particular answer 
to the latter part thereof. 

London, Sept. 15, 74. 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. RAY. 

DEAR SIR, I am well pleased you like the Table of 
Snails ; some things I have thought fit to alter since they 
were sent up; particularly the title of the third snail, 
which I now call, after a great collection of them, by this 
title, which I think will comprise all the difference, Cochlea 
citrina aut Leucoph&a unicolor, vel unica, vel %, vel 3, vel 4, 
plerumque, vero quinis fasciis pullis distincta. Again, some 
of the figures are unhappily mistaken by the graver, which 
I hope to get corrected; particularly the 19th, which I 
guess to be that you mean by your Nerites fuviatilis. 
This I say, if any, is that you mean ; but I hope yours is 
a new species. I have myself figured it by the life, and 
indeed it was as truly designed before in the design, but 
I know not how monstrously mistaken by the graver in 
the plate. It is true, the second is that you and I found 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. Ill 

about Montpellier ; but I have found it in divers places 
in England since ^my return, in Kent, in Lincolnshire, 
here at Oglethorpe, in a woody bank, upon the wharf 
plentifully near the paper-mills. The Patella fluviatilis 
you mention is a curious discovery, and is wholly new to 
me ; I shall look for it here if perchance it may be found 
in these parts. 

York, October, 1674. 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. RAY. 

DEAR FRIEND, I had a letter from the Barbadoes 
from a"foarned and ingenious physician of that island the 
other week ; he practised long in Cleveland, and, in his 
passage this summer to the Barbadoes, gives me an 
account of two birds he met with at sea. I thought to 
ask your opinion of them. I shall transcribe that part of 
Dr. Town's letter to me that mentions those birds : 

" One night, when the mariners were disagreeing about 
our distance from Barbadoes, a bird, by the seamen usu- 
ally called a Booby [Pelecanus sula], lighted upon a man 
sleeping on the quarter-deck, which, from its stupidness 
has its name, for it sat very quietly looking about it until 
it was taken by a seaman's hands ; and by the cry of 
this (which is like, and almost as loud as the sound a 
buck makes upon the rut) immediately came another 
Booby, which was taken after the same manner. And 
many more might have been so taken, the seamen said, 
had there been more about the ship ; but they were wel- 
come guests, because they put us out of doubt, as usually 
appearing about forty or fifty leagues from land. They 
are of no beauty at all, yet I will send them to you, 
because they are great enemies to the flying-fish. As soon 
as we crossed the tropic we were met by a bird called the 
Tropic-bird [Phaeton tetliereus], because they commonly 
are first seen at twenty-two or twenty-three degrees of 
latitude. They are about the bigness of a parrot; the 



112 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

feathers appeared white, with red intermixed ; the beak 
crooked and of a scarlet colour ; their tail at a distance 
not to be seen, but nigh at hand about the thickness and 
length of an ordinary tobacco-pipe. I wonder what their 
food may be so far from land, for I cannot learn that they 
have been observed to prey upon any fish or birds, unless 
they resort to some small island yet undiscovered. I 
heard, since I came hither, that they frequent the rocks 
on the windward, or eastern part, of this island ; which, 
if true, I will endeavour to procure some," &c. 

York, December 13, 1674. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. LISTER. 

DEAR SIR, I thank you for the information sent about 
the birds. I have read of the one in some books of 
voyages, viz. the Booby, but know nothing else of it but 
the name. I wish I had a particular description of it, that 
so I might insert it in our Ornithology. The Doctor, 
your friend, seems to promise you the bird dried, which, 
when you receive, I shall beg a description of it from 
you. 

The Tropic-bird dried I have seen in the Repository of 
the Royal Society, and have described as well as I can, 
I find it to belong to that sort of birds which I call Palmi- 
ped, with all the four toes webbed together, such as are 
the Cormorants [Phalacrocorax carbo] and Soland-goose 
\j3ula alba\ ; and therefore, without doubt, preys upon 
fishes and lives only upon them. That which I observed 
most remarkable in it was, that the tail consisted only of 
two very long feathers ; at least, I was informed that it 
had only two feathers in the tail, and there were but two 
left remaining in the case, which accords well with what 
Dr. Towne writes ; yet I am suspicious, that besides those 
two long feathers, there are other shorter in the tail. 

Having finished the History of Birds, I am now 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 113 

beginning that of Fishes, wherein I shall crave your 
assistance, especially as to the flat cartilaginous kind, 
and the several sorts of Aselli [the family of the Cod-fishes, 
Gadidts] especially I desire information about the Cole- 
fish \filerlangm carbonarius\ of Turner, which I suppose 
may sometimes come to York. When I was in Northum- 
berland I saw of them salted and dried, but could not 
procure any of them new taken. Besides the common 
Cod-fish [Morr/tua vulgaris\, the Haddock [Morrhua cegle- 
fnus], Whiting \Merlangus vulgaris], and Ling [Lota 
molva], I have in Cornwall seen and described three 
other sorts of Aselli, from which I would gladly know 
whether the Cole-fish be specifically distinct. I am also 
at a losslftTout the Codling* of Turner, what manner of fish 
it should be, and how certainly differenced from the Cod- 
fish. Of the flat cartilaginous I have seen and described 
four or five sorts, but I am to seek what our fishermen 
mean by the Skate [Raia batis], and what by Flair [Fire- 
flaire, the Sting Ray, Trygon pastinacd], and what by 
Maid.f By the affinity of name one would think that 
the Skate should be Squatina, which yet I believe it is 
not. The sorts of Raia that I have seen and described are 
the Thornback, or Raia davata, a certain and character- 
istic note of which is want of teeth. 2. The Raia laevis 
vulg. 3. Raia lavis oculata, with only two black spots 
on the back, one on each side. 4. The Raia Oxyrhyn- 
chos. 5. The Rhinobatos, or Squatano-raia. Rondeletius, 
and the following authors out of him, have many more 
sorts. But I have not time to add more, than that 

I am, &c. 
Middleton, Dec. 19, 74. 

* A name for the young of the Cod-fish. 

f A name bestowed on the females of several species as Skate-maid, 
Homelyn-maid, Thornback-maid, &c. &c. 



114 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. OLDEXBURGH to Mr. BAY. 

SIR, Your accurate discourse touching the Seeds, and 
the specific difference of Plants, was read before the 
Royal Society on Thursday last, and was so well received, 
that the President, in the name of the whole body, returns 
you their hearty thanks for so good an entertainment. 
They doubt not but that you will in good time commu- 
nicate to them also what you shall farther observe con- 
cerning the seeds of bulbous plants, and the positive 
specific difference of plants; and they wish you much 
health and good success for performing what you intend 
in reference to the history of animals : wherein, if I could 
contribute anything, I would do it with great joy. I 
received lately from Hamborough a German description 
of that country in Africa, called Fetu (of which I have 
given some account in the last 'Transactions' of No- 
vember), and found in the book bound some loose cuts 
which I see not that they belong to that book ; amongst 
them were these three here inclosed, which I thought fit 
to send you, that you might see whether you have all the 
birds therein expressed, and whether you know the plants 
that are in one of them. That cut which is marked 1, 
seems to represent the Anas arcticd Clusii [the Puffin], 
the eye only is different, if I mistake not. You may, 
when you have done with them, return them to me in a 
paper to Mr. Martin, to whom I spoke lately that I had 
gotten permission to have a draught taken of the East 
Indian pigeons, and the other birds, brought from those 
parts by Captain Erin, now living on Tower-hill, if it 
were worth while. But he tells me, that since we cannot 
have their names and peculiarities, it will be improper to 
insert them into your Ornithology. All that I could learn 
of the pigeons was, that they were Suratta pigeons, 
sprightly, and with extraordinary broad tails, which they 
spread out almost peacock-like. And as to the other 
birds, no more can be said of them, than what fine shape 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 115 

and variegated colours they have. Having thought fit to 
give this notice of these creatures, I must leave it to you 
what use to make of it, who am, &c. 

P.S. In the above-mentioned African book there is 
mention made of a quadruped called Adwa, which I re- 
member not to have met with in other authors. It is 
described to be no bigger than a lady's lapdog, in shape 
like a young roebuck, with a beautiful long head, very 
neat feet, short slender body. 

Just when I was going to send this, I was informed 
that you had caused only some young ones of the little 
East InJj# birds to be drawn, but that the old ones differ 
so much from the young ones, by their being most cu- 
riously speckled (which I hear the young ones are not), 
that those that know the old ones, and not the young, 
will hardly think them to be the same birds. 

London, December 21, 74. 



Dr. TOWNE'S Letter about the Shark to Mr. DENT, and by him communicated 
to Mr. RAY. 

I SEND you by this fleet the skin of a young shark-fish 
stuffed ; you may receive it from Mr. Penn, if it come 
safe to him. The skin of this fish, when fresh, is so 
porous, especially about the head, that though never so 
little squeezed, it sends forth water-drops about the big- 
ness of a small pea through its pores, and so harsh, that 
it wore my nails, as I was helping to flay it, to the quick 
almost in a moment. I believe you may now whet your 
knife upon it. His ventricle is without any folds in its 
inmost coat, or any sensible acidity, which makes me 
think that perhaps the philosophers do not justly attri- 
bute concoction to the famous succus acidus and calor 
innatus, for both of these he wants, and yet is extremely 
voracious, insomuch, one was taken by some of our sea- 



116 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

men in a former voyage, that had in his belly a woman 
stitched up in a strong rug, and bit into halves, and almost 
digested to the bones within the compass of a very few 
hours ; for the woman died, and was thrown overboard 
the same day the shark was taken. He has usually the 
attendance of about two or three Pilot-fishes \Naucrates 
ductor\ about a foot long, which are commonly seen to taste 
of the bait immediately before their master ; and there 
are often found sticking to his side small fishes [Echeneis 
remora], which, with transverse folds upon the head and 
back, cling close to his skin, and I believe wait there for some 
little reversions that slip from his teeth. When he catcheth 
at a prey, he turns his belly up, thrusteth his jaw-bones 
forth of the skin (as you see it now), and sets his teeth 
upright, which, at other times, He flat, in three, four, five, 
or six rows, according as his age is. I could make no 
more observations, the seamen urging me to rid him out 
of hand, thinking it a very childish thing to sit poring on 
a carcase. I see daily here strange plants, which, with 
their seeds and other toys, I would have long ago sent 
you, could I have got a friend that would take care of 
them ; but as soon as may be you shall have them. 

This is part of the letter I received from Dr. Towne 
and mentioned to you. I have the fish hanging in my 
hall. 



Dr. LISTER to Mr. RAY at Coleshill, in Warwickshire. 

DEAR SIR, I received the kind token of the Ornitho- 
logy with much joy : I pray for the continuance of your 
health, that you may with the same diligence and accu- 
rateness put forth the remaining papers. Certainly never 
man was so happy in a friend as he has been in you, 
who have been so just to his memory and labours. 

I am very glad you say so much concerning the English 
edition, which you tell me you intend to augment. 



CORRESPONDENCE OY RAY. 117 

If I might advise you in the history of hawks, it would 
be very acceptable to have their managery and training, 
which I find is done with much skill and faithfulness in 
a certain late piece, called the ' Gentleman's Recreation/ 
printed 74, where is the best account of hawks and 
hawking that ever I met with. 

Again, in the history of small birds, some account of 
the keeping and ordering of them in cages would please, 
which also is very well done in a late book, entitled the 
' Epitome of the Art of Husbandry/ where you will 
find a large and very accurate tract of singing-birds; 
both done by experienced and judicious persons in that 

wa J- ^_ 

I shall hint to you the perusal of the late ' History of 
the Island of Pero/ where is much said of the Puffin 
[Fratercula arctica] and that tribe. 

Again, you will find a most accurate and very parti- 
cular anatomy of an eagle, done by a good hand, viz. 
Borrichius, in his ' Vindication of Chemistry/ against 
Conringius, a late piece : I would you saw it, for I think 
it worth the inserting into your history. 

If I meet with anything farther, I will give you notice 
of it. 

The Curruca or Hedge Sparrow [Accentor modularity 
which I have often seen, lays sea-green or pale blue eggs, 
which, neatly emptied and wired, fair ladies wear at their 
ears for pendants. 

One and the same Swallow [ffirundo rustica], I have 
known, by the subtracting daily of her eggs, to have 
layed nineteen successively, and then to have given 
over. 

The Bunting [Emberixa miliaria] breaks not oats, but 
shells or hulls them most dexterously, as I observe, having 
of them by me at this present in cages. 

The Robin Redbreast [Erythaca rubicula\ will not touch 
a hairy caterpillar, but will gladly take and eat any sort 
of smooth one that I have given to him ; and there is no 
better way speedily to tame and make wild birds sing, 



118 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

than to give them a pleasing insect or two daily ; neither 
thin- nor thick-billed birds but will gladly eat spiders, as 
I have experienced in some kinds. 

York, Feb. 8, 75. 



Mr. DENT, of Cambridge, to Mr. RAT. 

SIR, Since my return I could not meet with any 
Thornbacks till upon Friday last, and then I had a male 
Flairmaid \Trygon pastinacd] and a female Thornback 
\Eaia clavatd]. They were so far from assisting me to 
perfect what I had begun, that they have given me just 
occasion of a great deal farther search, especially the 
male, which had between the fins and the tail, of each 
side, another tail, as the fishmonger called it, and which, 
he saith, all the males of flair and flairmaid, thornback 
and thornback-maid, have. They are not tails, but such 
(creatures I had like to have called them) as deserve an 
excellent description, and the art of an excellent graver. 
The extreme part, more than half way, very much resembles 
an eel without eyes ; within an inch of the fins it grows 
a little smaller, the outside of each is a rima, from the 
extremity to that part which begins to be smaller. This 
rima examined and dilated (which it easily admits of, and 
afterwards contracts itself), that which was like the head 
and part of the body of an eel, seems to be an expanded 
webbed foot, with several remarkables in it, as a heel, a 
sharp-edged bone half-inch long, &c. These, called tails, 
seem to me like unshaped legs kneed, and joined with 
the bones of the fins (which may be called thigh-bones), 
and they to the coxendix. In each, above the rima, or 
rather under the fins (examining the muscles rather than 
expecting to find anything), I run my knife upon a vessel, 
which afforded a great quantity of liquor (for that part), 
part white, part bloody, which, being wiped off, I found 
seminal vessels ; being more careful on the other side, I 
found a large vessel full of liquor, as on the former men- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 119 

tioned side. What to call this bladder or vessel, I do not 
yet determine : scrotum I must not, for that the testicles 
(very pretty to a curious eye) are within the abdomen. 
Whether in or nigh this vessel is one of the glandules 
prostrate, and whether there are any vesiculse seminariae 
within these, or any other besides these, I would farther 
examine. I believe, but dare not assert, that the penis 
on each side is annexed to these vessels ; some ramifica- 
tions of the epididymis seem here, but not so plain as in 
the abdomen. While I was searching for anything that 
might be annexed to the foramina, which by Gesner are 
called foramina vulvas (and very cunningly by Steno 
passed over in silence), though they are in all males as 
well asfemales, I cut with the os pubis so much as hin- 
dered the discovery whether both penises might meet or 
not. I am satisfied that those foramina serve only to let 
in water into the abdomen, as those behind the eyes let 
it into the mouth shut, the ten trapdoors or floodgates 
of the branchiae being shut at pleasure ; and this receiving 
in so much water, may be (if it be lawful to conjecture) 
by the weight of the water to make her more swift in 
pursuing prey, if at all, downward. 

Cambridge, June 21, 1675. 



Another Letter of Mr. DENT'S to Mr. RAY, without date. 

SIR, I could not in my last, of the 1 5th instant, give 
you any good account of the eggs of flair or thornback, 
because they were very small then, and only in the vitel- 
larium. Since that I have found a female flair with two 
eggs in shells in the duplex ovarium, as Dr. Needham 
observes in his ' Disquisitio Anatomica/ p. 202. The 
one I dried whole and have it by me : I opened the other 
and found the vitellum to be grown flat, swimming in the 
albumen, and with moving the egg upwards or downwards 
(I mean whilst whole) would easily glide through the 



120 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

albumen to which end I pleased, which is easy to be seen 
through the shell between the light and the eye. It was 
pale coloured, and without any cicatricula, which I do 
suppose will be found hereafter in others more mature. 
Mr. Mayfield would persuade me that these fishes are 
Vivipari, for he saith, about a month or five weeks hence 
I shall see the fish perfectly formed in that egg-shell 
I doubt he is mistaken ; however, I will weekly observe 
their several alterations, and give you a full account here- 
after. The other eggs, without shells, in or upon the 
vitellarium, are all round ; the largest about half the big- 
ness of a tennis-ball. I boiled both parts of them in 
water ; the vitellum grew solid, like to that of a hen's, 
but the albumen grew not white like the hen's egg it 
grew a little more solid, but remained diaphanous. I have 
inclosed the shell, which does not agree with Dr. Need- 
ham's description of his Testa Ovi Raice ; he saith, " Ex 
quatuor angulis totidem lingulse excrescunt;' at one end 
it hath excrescences rather to be called cornuce than lin- 
gula ; the other end seems more like a fin than either. 
What they may hereafter come to I know not ; but will 
give you an account. 



Sir PHILIP SKJPPON, from Wrentham, to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I shall now acquaint you, that having read the 
Observations sent from Barbadoes, and published, No. 
1 1 7 of the ' Philosophical Transactions,' I soon after dis- 
coursed about them with one Mr. Tho. Glover, an inge- 
nious chirurgeon of these parts, who lately came from 
our western plantations, having lived some time in Vir- 
ginia, and nine months in Barbadoes, where he says he 
has let above twenty negroes blood, and always observed 
the colour to be as florid and red as any European's 
blood ; and that he never saw any of a dark colour, as 
is represented by the letter the ingenious Mr. Lister 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 121 

received from that island. The difference in these two 
persons' observations ought therefore to be farther ex- 
amined by correspondents in that and other places 
where blacks inhabit. 

Purslain, Mr. Glover says, is also very common in 
Virginia, and troublesome too to the tobacco-planters. 
Asarum is much used by the Indians to provoke vomit- 
ing, and they are frequently troubled with violent colics, 
which oftentimes terminate in palsies. **** 
Wrentham, Feb. 11, 167|. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. LISTEB. 

DEAR FRIEND, I received yours of February 8, and 
have resolved to follow your advice, in adding to the 
Ornithology an account of the ordering of birds for sing- 
ing, as also something of falconry; and, besides, an 
epitome of the art of fowling. To this purpose I sent 
for the books you minded me of about those subjects. 
I find that the author of the ' Gentleman's Recreation,' 
in what I have read in him, is a mere plagiary ; all that 
he hath concerning fowling being transcribed out of 
Markham's ' Art of Fowling,' without once mentioning 
his author, as you may soon find by comparing them. 
I suspect the like of his falconry. What he writes of the 
Haggard Falcon* is contracted out of Latham. When I 
shall have compared the rest with Latham and Turbervil, 
I shall be able to tell you whether it be not borrowed of 
them. 

As for the tractate concerning singing-birds in the 
' Epitome of the Art of Husbandry,' I do not find what 
is there delivered so manifestly purloined from any one 
author, although in Aldrovand and Olina I find the sub- 
stance of most he hath ; only that about the manner of 
breeding Canary-birds \_Fringilla canaria] is either his 

* A falcon that is not steady, but bears away its quarry down wind. 



122 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

own, or borrowed of some author unknown to me. 
Much also he hath about the Woodlark \_Alauda arborea] , 
which is either of his own observation, or, as the other, 
taken out of some modern writer it hath not been my 
hap to see. This author, I believe, hath good skill in 
the feeding and ordering of singing-birds ; yet he makes 
a fifth sort of Throstle, which he calls a Heath-throstle 
[perhaps Turdus torquatus\ , which I never saw nor heard 
of, nor any author besides that I know of mentions. I 
pray read the history of it in him, p. 92, and tell me 
whether any such bird be known to you. These birds, 
he saith, in some countries are called Mevisses. I am 
sure his fourth (Wood Song-throstle) is so called in 
Essex, and I believe elsewhere. What he writes con- 
cerning a hole left in the bottom of the nest, I remember 
not to have observed in such nests of this bird as I have 
found. 

I was somewhat offended at his manner of writing 
concerning the Solitary Sparrow [?], as if it were a bird 
breeding with us in England, advising which bird to 
choose out of the nest to bring up, &c. ; all which his- 
tory makes me suspect he transcribed what he hath out 
of some writer, either Dutch, French, or Italian, that I 
have never seen, both concerning this and other singing- 
birds ; for the Solitary Sparrow is a bird that was never 
seen, scarce heard of, in England, and but rare in Italy. 
If he were so well acquainted with them, I wish he had 
informed us where they breed. But enough of censure. 
In the 'History of the Fero Islands' I find no more species 
of birds than what I have already inserted in the Orni- 
thology, partly of our own observation, and partly out of 
Clusius, who had an account, and better descriptions of 
them from Hoier than any be in this history ; only here is 
more of the manner of climbing the rocks for taking 
them. Borrichi's anatomy of an eagle I have not seen ; 
but there is also a very particular anatomy of it in Aldro- 
vand, which I thought not fit to insert, few readers being 
willing to take the pains to read, much less consider, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 123 

such descriptions, unless illustrated by figures. Mr. 
Willughby himself hath left a myotome of a swan, and 
some other birds, which I thought not fit to cumber the 
book with. 

Sutton Cofield, April 4, 76. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. LISTEK. 

DEAR SIR, I have been lately solicited to reprint my 
Catalogue of English Plants, partly by the bookseller, 
and partly by an unknown person, who sent me a letter 
without a name subscribed, and withal pressed me much 
to add to each plant the French name; whereupon I 
thought to have intreated you to undertake that trouble, 
as you are a master of the French tongue, myself being 
but a smatterer in that language, and wanting the con- 
veniency of books to assist me in such an undertaking ; 
but, upon serious consideration, concluding that those 
names would not render the book really much more 
useful, only, if well done, might add a little to the 
author's reputation (to the vanity of any affectation 
whereof I desire to be wholly mortified), I resolved not 
to add them, and have sent the copy up to London as 
it is. If you have observed any errors or mistakes 
therein, or have any new plants or observations to add, 
be pleased to send them ; and though the book be already 
gone out of my hands, I shall take care to get them in- 
serted in their proper places. Since my last, I com- 
pared what the ' Gentleman's Recreation ' hath con- 
cerning hawking with Turbervile's Collections, and find 
every syllable transcribed thence. The like, I dare say, 
he hath done about hunting, for there is of Turbervile's 
a large treatise of hunting ; and for fishing, doubtless, he 
hath done the like. I had not blamed him had he ac- 
knowledged his authors, and confessed to the world that 



124 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

all he hath is nothing else but an epitome of such and 
such books ; but now he hath basely abused the world. 
Mr. Oldenburgh hath published him as a considerable 
author, and in his preface made us believe that he hath 
advanced knowledge by giving us a perfect catalogue of 
fishes. I am sorry Mr. Oldenburgh should be so mis- 
taken as to attribute to such a pitiful plagiary any im- 
provement of the history of nature ; but enough of him, 
and for this paper. I recommend you to the Divine 
protection and blessing, and rest, &c. 
Sutton Cofield, June 14, 76. 



Dr. LISTER'S Answer to Mr. RAY. 

DEAR FRIEND, I am well pleased your Catalogue 
of Plants is again to be printed : it certainly deserves it. 
You might have commanded any service in my power ; 
but I think the addition of the French names would have 
been but a fancy. 

I cannot say I have anything worth sending you to 
add. I shall only put you in mind that you leave not 
out the vinegar that is to be drawn from Gallium luteum, 
\Galium verum, Linn.] which I have tried, and is a 
rare experiment, and is owing, for aught I know, to 
Borrichius. You will see a farther account of it in the 
Danish Transactions. 

Also you may please to remember the Fungus pipera- 
tvx \Agaricus piper atus, Linn.], which I have yearly 
found in Marton Woods ever since. 

Again, the fulminating powder, which the spikes of 
Muscus Lycopod. [Lycopodium sp.~\ yield, I have gathered 
much of it in Craven, and find it will fire briskly in a 
flame. I gathered the ears a little before they were 
ripe, and put them in a box, and found they shed their 
powder of themselves. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 125 

See more in the German Transactions, and in Olearius, 
of this. 

As to that question of a Heath-throstle, I find that 
the Ring-ouzle* is so called with us in Craven, where 
there is everywhere in the moors plenty of them. I am 
glad you have discovered those authors to be plagiaries, 
this sort of men being the bane and pest of learning, and 
you ought to brand them. 

I have much improved my Catalogue of Snails, having 
added five species thereto. I long to see you, that I 
might confer with you about the note I gave of this 
nature ; for I would either put them out separately, if 
they deserve it, or throw them into Mr. Willughby's 
store, U perchance anything has escaped his diligence ; 
but I shall resolve upon nothing till I see you. Methinks 
we might meet half way the latter end of the summer. 

York, July 2, 76. 



Mr. RAY'S Answer to Dr. LISTEE. 

DEAR SIR, Yours of July 2 came to hand. I thank 
you for the advices therein contained. I should, myself, 
have remembered and inserted the Fungus piperatus 
[Agaricus piperatus, Linn.], of which you formerly sent 
me a large account ; but the experiments of the vinegar 
of Gallium, and fulminating powder of Lycopodium, if 
ever I read anything of them, were quite slipt out of my 
memory. I fancy that I have read something of the first 
in our Transactions ; and the second, if it be in Olearius's 
Travels, I must also have read of, but, it seems, heeded 
not. I have not at present by me those Transactions, or 
other books, to which you refer, and therefore beg of you 
a full account of both those experiments ; for I should be 
loth either of them should be omitted in my Catalogue, 

* The Ring-onzle is so called in Yorkshire. 



126 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

which I suppose is ere now begun to be printed, though 
I have not yet received any proof of it. I thought it the 
more expedite way to give you this trouble than to stay 
the sending to London for those books. Your notes 
and observations in natural history do very well deserve 
to be made public, and I should advise rather by them- 
selves than be buried in Mr. Willughby's work, the 
printing also of which depends upon my life and health ; 
and, besides, it will be long before his History of Insects 
and Exanguia be fitted for the press, I being at present 
upon the History of Fishes, which will take up still a 
year or two's time. I have only this to object to you, 
and myself, against their speedy publication, that the 
longer they lie by you, if still you prosecute the same 
studies and inquiries, the more perfect and full they will 
be, every day almost adding or correcting, or illustrating 
somewhat ; but if you have quite given over those re- 
searches, defer not to put them out. If it had been my 
hap to find out so many before unobserved particulars 
and experiments, I should have thought myself wanting 
to my own reputation had I not published them in my 
own name ; though I confess I have always thought 
that, for new inventions and discoveries, we are rather 
beholden to a good genius, dyaQy <W^ovi, than to our own 
wit or industry at least the faculty and SECVOTJJC, or 
shrewdness in inventing and discovering, is a particular 
gift of God, and not conferred upon all. But yet those 
discoveries and new inventions are not granted even to 
such men usually, unless busied in searching and inquir- 
ing into those things. **** 

SuttonCofield, July 15, 76. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 127 



Mr. JOHNSON to Mr. RAY. 

DEAR SIR, What I said of salmon being perfect at 
their first return from sea, I did not mean that they 
were come to their utmost growth or bigness, for I think 
they wax for five or six years ; but that they were true 
salmons, i. e. neither trout, scurfe, nor grey, but bigger 
than any of these, and bring forth young that year. In 
the river Tees we take notice but of two distinctions of 
size, viz. a salmon cock, which some call a half-fish, 
usually about twenty or twenty-two inches, and a whole 
fish, above that length. In the mouth of Eden, in Cum- 
berland, the fishers have four distinctions of yearly growth 
(after "ftife first summer, when they call them free, or 
frie, as we sinowts, or smelts) before they come to be 
lackes ; and this, they say, they have curiously observed, 
by fixing so many pins in the fins of yearlings, or two 
years old, and after taking them again ; and thus, per- 
haps, in Ribble they have made the like observation, 
though I am a little jealous that their Sprods are but 
Scurves \Salmo trutta] , their Moris [Morts, Salmo eriox] 
Greys, their Fork-tails [young salmon, Salmo salar~\ our 
Cocks, their half-fish, middling salmon, and their Salmons 
the Lacks, or overgrown salmon. I have one observation 
more, viz. besides what salmons are bred in our rivers, 
there come some years from the north (I guess when the 
winds are much northerly) great shoals of salmon, which 
often take in at the mouths of our rivers, especially if the 
north bar be open ; and these have a broad blue spot on 
their heads, and are by our fishers therefore called Blue- 
caps. The sight of one of these makes a fisher leap for 
joy, especially if his gills be lousy, for then he is certain 
there is a great shoal, and one starves another for want 
of food. The manner of the breeding of eels I do not 
certainly know, but I think them to be oviparous ; for I 
have several times found in one small bed of mud great 
numbers of very small eels, more, I am sure, than the 
belly of any eel could contain, lying very close together 



128 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

like the young fry of other fishes. What your Cornish 
Butterfish \_Gunnettus vulgaris\ is I know not. I a little 
suspect it will prove the same with our Sea-snail, if yours 
melt into oil as ours do. I sent you a draught of ours 
long since with red chalk. 

I wonder as much that fishers have not certainly de- 
termined whether salmons live upon anything save water, 
and what ? As that horsemen have not agreed what that 
is the foal is said to sneeze, which they call a milt. I 
am apt to believe that water cannot be a competent sus- 
tenance for them. Common experience tells us that they 
will not only take a worm, or minnow, or other small 
fish, but swallow the bait with the hook down into the 
stomach. It is likely they take no food till what they 
had be digested, and possibly their stomach may digest 
very quickly. Farther, I think only the anglers have 
made the observation of finding their stomachs always 
empty ; but I am persuaded that, if the net-fishers would 
open any considerable number, they would find in them 
food indigested, which they seldom do, but sell them 
whole. Perhaps I may give farther answer to this query, 
and some others about Whitsuntide, at which time I 
purpose to go to our coasts, and gather what I can. In 
the meantime wishing you success in your studies, I 
rest, &c. 
Brignall, April 16, 77. 



In a Letter from Mr. JOHN AUBKEY to Mr. RAT. 

I HAVE at length gotten my desire, viz. an able 
Frenchman to translate the real character of Bishop 
Wilkins into French. It is Dr. Lewis du Moulin, son 
of the eminent doctor. 
London, May 7, 1678. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 129 



Mr. AUBKEY to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, I heard lately from my friend Mr. 
Paschal (as I often do), who tells me he hath given an 
account to some friends o*f his of some tables that might 
be made according to those of yours in the Bishop's 
Essay, and fitted to be hung up in garden-houses in the 
manner of maps. He desires me to advise with you if 
it might not be worth while to get those five (viz. 1. 

Herb-leaf; 2, ; 3, Herb Seed-vessel; 4, Shrub; 

5, Tree) done at London, and made public ; and that if 
to the iMune of each plant were adjoined a neat cut, and 
to the description in the foot of the table, in English, 
were added the several names in English, Latin, Greek, 
they might become a fine ornament for summer-houses, 
and very useful for those who delight in that kind of 
knowledge. If this be approved, the like may be done 
for those other tables of stones and metals, and those 
also of insects, birds, and beasts. The same may be also 
put into a little pocket-book, which may be of use where 
the larger tables cannot be had. He adds (and Sir 
Christopher Wren agrees with him in it), this may do 
good service, to occasion the real character to be taken 
notice of, and the way and manner of it to be under- 
stood. He says, if this find approbation, he will take 
the pains to draw these out, with the description of each 
species, as it is in the Bishop of Chester's, and send it 
up, desiring that the learned contriver of those tables, 
Mr. Ray, may be consulted with for making such altera- 
tions and additions as he shall see cause for. 

Mr. Merret (the doctor's eldest son) hath methodized 
the laws of England very ingeniously, secundiim mentem 
Episcopi Cestriens. which was never done before. 

London, July 9, 1678. 



130 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAT to Dr. HANS SLOANE.* 

Black Notley, June 8, 81. 

SIR, It is now about a fortnight since the post 
brought me your very civil and obliging letter, the 
receipt whereof I should sooner have acknowledged, but 
that I awaited the arrival of your acceptable present, 
which Mr. Smith sent me not till last week, deferring so 
long, I suppose, that he might send my book and that 
together, which, by the printer's fault, was not sooner 
furnished. I am too conscious of my own weakness to 
own what you write of me, yet look upon it as an effect 
of your kindness and goodwill, it being a common fault 
in friends to permit their affection too much to influence 
and bias their judgment. I am sorry that I had not 
leisure and opportunity when I was in London curiously 
to view your rare collection of plants. I know I should 
have received much information and satisfaction thereby. 
I hope you persist in your resolution of making your 
discoveries and observations public, for your own honour, 
and the advancement of real philosophy, and that you 
move forwards vigorously in it. I am sensible that the 
charge of figures may deter you, therefore I think it were 
adviseable to imitate Dr. Plukenet, to draw them in 
piccolo, using a small scale, and thrust many species into 
a plate. I would not have the ingenious deferred the 
fruition of such a treasure, the sight of so grateful 
objects, nor you the credit of your inventions. 

I hope you have received the little tract which I 
ordered Mr. Smith to present you with a copy of. If 
you come down into the country this summer, I hope 
you will do us the kindness to give us a visit at Black 
Notley. My wife (who tenders her humble service to 
you), as well as myself, would be very glad to see you 

* Memorials, p. 40. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 131 

here. This, with due thanks for your many favours and 
great kindness, is all at present from 

Sir, 

Your affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans.Sloane, at the 
Duchess of Albemark's, iu Clcrkenwell, London. 



Mr. RAY'S Queries to Dr. TANKRED ROBINSON. 

1. WHETHER the bird called Macreuse [the Scoter, 
Oidemia nigrd\ * at Paris be the Anas arctica of Clusius, 
or the Manks Puffin, or a species distinct from both, 
perhaps"*^ sort of Colymbus ? 

2. Whether the vapour ascending out of the earth, 
and causing an appearance of boiling in a water called 
the Boiling Fountain, at Peroul, near Montpellier, be 
inflammable by the application of a lighted candle, &c., 
as that is which causes the like phenomenon at Wigan, 
in Lancashire. 

3. Of what sort of moss they make their cypress- 
powder, and whether of more sorts than one, at 
Montpellier ? Either bring a sample of it, or describe it 
so exactly, that one may not mistake it. 

4. Whether the Chondrilla ccerulea Cyani capitulis 
[Catananche ccerulea, Linn.] of Bauhinus, commonly 
called Sesamoides, have naturally a full or double flower, 
or only consisting of a pale or border of leaves, encircling 
a thrum of small flowers, which are vulgarly mistaken 
for stamina ? 

The like query I would make about the Cichorium 
pratense vesicarium \Crepis vesicaria, Linn.] of Co- 
lumna, which grows in the fields about Leghorn, as the 
former does plentifully about Montpellier. 

5. Whether the Stcechas Citrina alter a tenuifolia sive 
Italica, J. B., be specifically distinct from the Stcec. 
Citrina tenuifolia Narbonensis, J. B. ? It grows plen- 
tifully in the mountains of Liguria as about Gavi, 

* Living on fish, Roman Catholics eat this duck on maigre days. 



132 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Voltagio, &c. To be sure of this, the best way would 
be to compare the plants together. 

6. I observed in the borders of some fields about 
Leghorn a sort of trefoil, with a little spike of bright 
purple or red flowers, which afterwards turned to spumose 
vesicles, like to the head of the strawberry trefoil. 
Whether this be the Trifolium fotticulateum sive Vesica- 
rium minus purpurenm, J. B. ? [T. resupinatum, Linn.] 

7. Whether the Seseli pratense Monspeliensium be a 
species distinct from our English Meadow Saxifrage ? To 
me it seemed the same. [Both are, Silaus pratensis, Bess.] 

8. There is a sort of Jacea purpurea capitulo spinoso 
growing on the sands a little beyond Naples, of which I 
desire either the seed, or a plant dried, or so exact and 
particular a description, as that I may know whether it 
be already described or not. I saw at the house of John 
Maria Ferro, an apothecary in Venice, living near Santa 
Maria Formosa, many rare dried plants, but especially a 
great number of- figures of plants, drawn exactly by a 
curious hand, in black. If the said Signer Ferro be yet 
living, please to visit him, and inquire of him whether he 
designs to engrave and publish any of those icons, or 
be willing to part with them for their worth to one that 
will. 



Dr. TANKRED ROBINSON'S Answer to Mr. RAY'S Queries. 

SIR, In order to satisfy those queries which your 
curiosity and goodness were pleased to bestow upon us, 
we have been very industrious since our coming to Paris, 
but could not meet with the Macreuse, it being now out 
of season ; and the histories which the French here do 
give of it are so very various, that a man knows not what 
to conclude from them. They all say that it is originally 
a fish (as some erroneously imagine our barnacles to be), 
and therefore the convents, and most of the inhabitants 
here, do generally eat it in Lent, and upon maigre days. 
My friend Mr. Charlton, a very curious and worthy 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 133 

gentleman, hath promised me that, as soon as ever the 
Macreuse comes into season here, he will get it exactly 
designed and painted to the life, and the skin stuffed, so 
that then, sir, you shall have a better account of it. In 
the mean time be pleased to accept of the following de- 
scription, which I have taken out of a late French author, 
not to be met withal now in booksellers' shops, the priests 
having forbid it I am confident it is faithful, and will 
afford you some light. " La Macroule ou Macreuse passe 
constamment a Paris, en Normandie et ailleurs pour la 
veritable Oye d'Ecosse." 

Monsieur Tournefort, a Languedoc man, and doctor 
of Montpellier, demonstrates now the plants in the 
King's^arden here. He speaks with great veneration of 
you; but in his demonstration of the Bistorta alpina 
\JPolygonum viviparum, Linn.] he dissented from you, 
saying that you confounded the two species together, 
whereas he affirmed they were really distinct. Since 
our coming to Paris, we have observed a few plants 
growing wild that may be not at all found in England, 
or rarely, as the Reseda crispa Gallica [Reseda lutea (3, 
Linn.], described by Boccone; the Conyza Canadensis 
annua alba acris linarice foliis \JErigeron canadense, 
Linn.]; Psyllium erectum, Bauhin. pin. \Plantago Psyl- 
lium, Linn.]; Veronica erecta angustifol., B. pin. ; Pul- 
monaria maculosa, B. pin. \_Pulmonaria officinalis, Linn.]; 
Turritis minor, B. pin. \Turritis hirsuta, Linn.]; Ascle- 
pias fore alb., B. pin. {^Asclepias Vincetoccacum, Linn.]; 
Sideritis hirsuta erecta, B. pin. [Sideritis Scordioides, 
Linn.?]; Chamadrys repens maj. vulgar., B. pin. \Tcu- 
crium Chamcedrys, Linn.]; Chamacistus plantag. fol., B. 
pin. ; Securidaca dumetorum Jlore vario siliquis comic., 
B. pin.; Fcenum Burgundiacum \Medicago saliva, Linn.]; 
Attractilys lutea, B. pin. [Carthamus lanatus, Linn.]. 
Pardon, sir, the imperfect names, for we have few or no 
books by us, unless your travels and two or three more. 
No more trouble at present from. 

Paris, July 12, 1683. N. s. 



134 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, I render you many thanks for the pains you 
have taken in endeavouring to resolve and satisfy me as 
to the query concerning the Macrense. The description 
of Monsieur Graindorge is scarce sufficient to determine 
to what genus it belongs, much less whether it be a 
nondescript species. Those notes of having flat feet 
(and those weak and unfit for marching on land), a small 
flat back claw, or toe, small wings in proportion to the 
bulk of its body, being all over black, argue it to belong 
to the genus of Colymbi, or Douckers ; but what he adds 
of the flatness of its bill, and its rising up with a high 
eminency, and its various colours, agree not to the 
Douckers, but rather to the Palmipedes tridactyla ; so 
that I am still at a loss about it, but yet do now con- 
jecture it to be of the Douckers tribe, because it comes 
in the winter time, and breeds not here ; whereas the 
Palmipedes tridactylcB come to us in summer, and breed 
with us, none appearing in our seas all winter. But if it 
be a Colymbus (as is now to me most likely), it is of a 
middle size, and of the caudate kind ; for they only have 
musculous stomachs, or gizzards, and are by extremity of 
weather driven into our seas, and the mouths of great 
rivers, in winter time. What he hath of the mobility of 
the upper chap of its bill I believe to be a mistake. 
From this description I can conclude negatively, that it 
is not what I imagined it once to be, viz. the Puffin of 
the Scillies and Isle of Man. An exact picture, or the 
skin stuffed, when obtained, will at first sight inform us 
to what tribe it appertains, and whether it be already 
described or no. 

Monsieur Tournefort is a person I have no knowledge 
of. When I was at' Paris, Monsieur Joncquet demon- 
strated the plants in the King's Garden. Monsieur 
Marchand and Dr. Magnole, of Montpellier, were the 
most skilful herbarists I met with in France ; but it is 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 135 

now about seventeen years since I was there, and there 
may be some arisen of note and eminency since that 
time. 

As to the Bistorta alpina, I am now come over to 
Mr. Tournefort's opinion, that there are two sorts thereof. 

Of the plants you have observed about Paris, the 
Conyza Canadensis annua alba is improperly styled 
Canadensis, as Dr. Morison also takes notice, being fre- 
quently found in the woods and vineyards of France, 
and, if you will believe him, of England also, where it 
hath not yet been my good hap to meet with it. He 
entitles it Conyza acris annua alba, omitting the epithet 
of Canadensis. 
Black Motley July 27, 83. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAT, from Montpellier. 

SIR, I troubled you with a letter from Paris last 
July, giving an account of the Macreuse. It was not so 
satisfactory as I wished, the bird being then out of 
season. However, my worthy friend, Mr. Charlton (now 
at Paris), will take care to get the Macreuse exactly 
designed to the life, together with the skin stuffed, which 
he intends to preserve in his own excellent museum, but 
will order them to be left at Mr. Faithorn's for your use. 
As for the queries which you have been pleased to give 
me about Montpellier, I am afraid that I may be defective 
in answering them, the present troubles of Languedoc 
putting a great stop to arts and sciences, there happening 
daily skirmishes between the king's soldiers and the 
Protestants of these parts ; yet I have been a little indus- 
trious in the search of natural curiosities, though not so 
accurate as I ought to have been, especially when I 
intend to write to the best botanist, and the most accom- 
plished naturalist, of this, or perhaps any, age. 

1. The vapour ascending out of the earth, and causing 



136 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

an appearance of boiling in the fountain of Peroul, is not 
in the least inflammable by the application of 'a torch, or 
candle, which I experimented several times ; therefore it 
is of a different kind from that of Wigan, in Lancashire. 
This vapour rushes out of the ground so violently in some 
places, that I had much ado to keep a candle lighted 
near it. It is a perfect subterraneous wind, making the 
water (which we carried along with us) much colder than 
before it was put into the holes, which we made in the 
adjacent earth. A learned physician of Montpellier, then 
in company with me, opposed your opinion concerning 
the bubbling of this fountain, ascribing it to a strange 
fermentation between the earth and the water; but I 
presently convinced him, by putting several parcels of 
the earth into vessels, and pouring water upon them, for 
then we could not perceive the least disturbance in the 
water, which in the ditch itself was heaved up three or 
four inches perpendicular. I could not make any 
chemical experiments upon the water itself, because of its 
scarcity ; but the inhabitants of Peroul told me that they 
all commonly drink of it when the hole is full, without 
any alteration. I am confident the vapour does not im- 
pregnate the water with any new quality, but flies 
through it, just as though one should blow into water 
with a pipe. What our most ingenious and learned 
countryman Mr. Lister, of York, hath lately writ of 
mineral waters, may (as I fancy) give some light as to 
the generation of this subterraneous air at Peroul. Upon 
putting my ear close to the ground, I perceived a great 
noise in the bowels of the earth, like unto the hissing of 
hot iron in water. 

2. The perfumers at Montpellier do make their famous 
cypress powder generally of the moss of the green oak, 
for they tell me it is the most spongy, and, after washing 
and drying, will imbibe their perfumes better than any 
other moss whatsoever. 

3. The Chondritta carulea Cyani capiiulis \Catananclie 
carulea, Linn.] hath only a pale, or border of leaves, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 137 

encircling a thrum of small flowers. It hath no full, or 
double flower. M. Magnole told me that he hath fre- 
quently found about Montpellier the Chondritta Sesamoi- 
des, dicta carulea, fore complete Eyst. circa fontem Piguet. 
This hath a very full flower, and seems to me to differ 
nothing from the Chondritta ccerulea Cyani capitulis, but 
in its flower. 

4. The Seseli pratense Monspelicns. [Silaus pratensis, 
Bess.] agrees with our English Meadow Saxifrage in 
every particular. I cannot find the least note of dis- 
tinction. 

Thus far your queries as to France, to which I will 
tack an observation to fill up. 

I have*75bserved the inhabitants of Languedoc to get a tar- 
like substance out of the Juniperus major baccd rufcscente 
[Juniperus Oxccdrus, Linn.], much after the same man- 
ner as pitch is got from the Pinus by a kind of distil- 
lation per descensum. This they do successfully use in 
curing several diseases of their cattle, especially scabs, 
impetigo, and such like diseases. I know a practitioner 
in Montpellier who frequently uses this same resina 
junipcri in cutaneous diseases ; and I fancy it may prove 
a good medicine in some scorbutic and calculous cases, if 
methodically and judiciously managed. 

Since my coming into Languedoc, I have observed an 
insect boring the lle coccigera with an instrument, or 
organ, coming from its belly. I know not whether it 
might not be conveying its eggs into the ilex, together 
with a venomous vehicle for the birth of the kermes. I 
wish I could meet the same opportunity again of making 
farther observations. Malpighi's ' History of Vegetable 
Excrescences ' might be farther confirmed thereby, as 
that also which that excellent naturalist, Mr. Lister, 
essayed in the ' Philosophical Transactions ' several years 
before Malpighi. 

Since my coming to Montpellier I have seen several 
scorpions creeping on the walls. I think they are the 
same which Swammerdam hath figured in his ' History 



138 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

of Insects.' Several curious persons of this city have 
assured me that they have killed several animals with 
these scorpions ; so peradventure some circumstances 
make them differ from those of Italy, with which S. Redi 
might make his experiments. Animals stung by these 
scorpions fall generally into tremblings and convulsive 
motions. Their blood is always found coagulated, which 
may make a philosopher suspect that the venom of these 
scorpions, of vipers, and many other animals, may chiefly 
consist in a subtle acid ferment ; for, besides the pheno- 
mena, we find by experience that volatile alkalies (as the 
volatile salt of vipers, of salt armoniac, &c.) are the most 
effectual remedies in these cases, as they destroy those 
nimble acids upon the account of texture, and free the 
blood from coagulations. Be pleased, sir, to pardon 
these imperfect miscellanies, for you may encourage 
thereby one that does really admire you above the rest 
of mankind ; and is, &c. 

Montpellier, Sept. 10, 1683, s. N. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Feb. 11, 84. 

SIR, I thank you for your letter of Jan. 31, which I 
received by post, with the plants inclosed. The Fungus, 
upon opening the letter, unluckily slipped out, and was 
not minded, because not expected, and it being candle- 
light, and company in the room, was trod to pieces of a 
sudden, before I had taken out the other plants, and 
read so far as to know it was sent. The other two were 
a little crumpled, and the Lucinice doubled, but without 
much prejudice I reduced them again to their right 
situation. They are both plants I had never before the 
good hap to see. The Polypodium plumosum is an ele- 
gant plant, and the leaf you sent a perfect one, and well 
conserved ; but I am to seek for the reason of the name, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 139 

and should be glad to learn its place of growth, and 
more of its history, from you. 

I am not sure that Mr. Newton was the first inventor 
of that plant I put under his name. I rather suspect 
Mr. Lawson might be. I mean no more by putting his 
name to it than that it is published in his work under 
that name, as I do by the names of other authors, v. g. 
Abies Ger. PurJc. However, he was the first showed it 
to me, and gave me as much as I have set down of the 
history of it. Dr. Plueknet's observation of the vesicles 
on the back side of the leaves deserves to be added to 
its description. 

I am not positive in asserting the plant called Homio- 
nitis tS^be only a variety of Phyttitis \Scolopendrium 
vulyare, Linn.], and not a distinct species, but only put 
it down as my suspicion. You that have seen it, and 
know it better than I do, are better able to judge of that ; 
but the HemionitiSy vera Dioscoridis of Lobel I assert to 
be nothing but a small Pliyllitis growing in a shady 
place. Your advice concerning inserting the varieties of 
sundry species, especially such as are esteemed for their 
beauty or variety, I approve, and shall observe. How- 
beit, it is not my intention to supersede the use of any 
approved botanic authors, but my reasons for attempting 
this work were 1. To satisfy the importunity of some 
friends who solicited me to undertake it. 2. To give 
some light to young students in the reading and com- 
paring other herbarists, by correcting mistakes, and illus- 
trating what is obscure, and extricating what is perplex 
and entangled, and in cutting off what is superfluous, or, 
under different titles, repeated for distinct. 3. To alle- 
viate the charge of such as are not able to purchase many 
books ; to which end I endeavour an enumeration of all 
the species already described and published. 4. To 
facilitate the learning of plants, if need be, without a 
guide or demonstrator, by so methodizing of them, and 
giving such certain and obvious characteristic notes of 
the genera, that it shall not be difficult for any man that 



140 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

shall but attend to them, and the description, to find out 
infallibly any pl[ant] that shall be offered to him, espe- 
cially being assisted by [the] figure of it. And, lastly, 
because no man of our nation hath lately attempted such 
a work ; and those that formerly did, excepting Dr. 
Turner, were not sufficiently qualified for such an under- 
taking, and so have acquitted themselves accordingly. 

I wish I had assurance, from eye-witnesses of credit, 
that those sorts of linen you mention are made of nettle 
stalks. I have heard and read the like of Scotch cloth, 
but dare not give credence to it, because I find not that 
Dr. Sibbalds, in his ' Prodromus,' makes any mention 
of it, and am loth to put in anything on uncertain ru- 
mour. The Polygonum pusillo vermiculato Seopylli folio 
of Lobel I do not take to be the Erica maritima Anylica 
supina [Frankenia lavis, Linn.], which is well known to 
me ; but I put down such an opinion, because so reputed 
an herbarist as Mr. Goodyer describes the said Erica for 
that Polygonum, at least if I mistake not; and, to say the 
truth, there is nothing in Lobel's figure, description, or 
in the place, which contradicts it. Your sample of Lobel's 
Polygonum, if a perfect plant and well conserved, I 
should be glad to see. The Erica I hope this summer 
(God willing) to see growing in its natural place. I am 
in doubt whether the Polygonifolia per terrain sparsa, 
&c. belong to this tribe, or rather to the Asperifolia. 
That its spike of flowers is so reflected and turned as 
theirs are I can assure you, and I think it hath a perfect 
flower. 

The Slitum Americanum spinosum is a plant to me 
unknown. I am as yet doubtful of the characteristic 
note of the Garden Elite. 

The 'Hortus Farnesianus,' said and supposed to be 
written by Tobias Aldinus, but indeed Petrus Castellus 
his work, as appears by his name in capital letters in 
some preface or epistle to the book, I have not, and should 
be glad to see. 

I render you many thanks for your assistance and com- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 141 

munications, and shall, with an honorable mention of 
you, own what I have or shall receive from you. I rest, 

Sir, 
Your very humble servant. 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend Dr. Sloane, 
at Mr. Wilkinson's, bookseller, at the Black Boy, 
over against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet-street, London. 



Dr. T. ROBINSON to Mr. RAT. 

SIR, Some of your queries are so extremely curious, 
and so1se"verely nice, that neither I, nor the best bota- 
nists or naturalists (that I have met withal beyond sea) 
can satisfy such critical thoughts. I am overjoyed that 
so vast a memory, so exact a judgment, and so universal 
a knowledge, will be employed in compiling a general 
history of plants, an undertaking fit only for your extra- 
ordinary talents. I am in great hopes (because I wish 
it very impatiently) that you will bestow on the world a 
general history of nature (if God Almighty bless you with 
health and a long life) ; it is very defective at present, 
and seems to call for method and perfection from you. 

M. Marchand is dead at Paris, so is Zanoni at Bono- 
nia, and John Maria Ferro at Venice. The three volumes 
of dried plants, and that other of designs, are now in the 
hands of his sons, at Venice. I viewed them several 
times, and offered twenty pistoles (which I thought to 
be their full value) for them ; but my money and fair 
words were despised, the jealous Italians keeping them 
like so many wives. Signer Zanoni hath figured many 
of them in his ' Histor. Botan.,' which I have sent to 
London, where you may command it if you want it. 
M. Magnole's Catalogue lies also at Mr. Faithorn's at 
your service. 

I perceive the Academy Royal at Paris goes on with 
their design of publishing a general history of plants, of 



142 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

which M. Dodart printed some years ago the scheme 
and model ; for I saw two or three small folios of this 
history in several bibliotheces at Rome, which I never 
met withal in the shops at Paris, because I suppose it 
will not be sold till ah 1 the volumes are perfected. I have 
several things to object against this mighty French work, 
designed rather for the glory of the monarch than the 
use of the subject. If you had their encouragement, I 
am sure your work would be far more satisfactory and 
advantageous than theirs, which, in my poor opinion, 
will be like a great palace full of fine ornaments, but 
wanting order, necessary conveniences, and regular 
structure. 

I had several conferences with S. Malpighi at Bononia, 
who expressed a great respect for you, and is not a little 
proud of the character you gave him in your ' Method. 
Plantar, nov./ which book I had presented him withal a 
day before. He honoured me with two visits at my inn, 
where once he took occasion to be a little angry with Dr. 
Lister (whose history he had by him), for his opinion of 
the origin of stones and shells resembling animal bodies. 
He is very positive that he can demonstrate against the 
doctor, having been very industrious upon that subject 
when he passed the Italian mountains, and when he was 
in Sicily and Malta. Besides, he showed me several 
letters sent lately from Bishop Steno (who, after a pilgrim- 
age to Loretto, got that preferment of the Great Duke), 
now at Florence, concerning that hypothesis, all which 
put him into some passion against our sagacious country- 
man, though he professed himself a great admirer of 
Dr. Lister. I took occasion, from this, to interpret some 
passages and discourses in your travels relating to this 
point, which pleased Malpighi to that degree, that he 
smiled to see you inclined to his opinion. Just as I left 
Bononia, I had a lamentable spectacle of Malpighi' s house 
all in flames, occasioned by the negligence of his old 
wife. All his pictures, furniture, books, and manuscripts 
were burnt. I saw him in the very heat of the calamity, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 143 

and methoughts I never beheld so much Christian 
patience and philosophy in any man before; for he 
comforted his wife, and condoled nothing but the 
loss of his papers, which are more lamented than the 
Alexandrian Library, or Bartholine's Bibliothece, at 
Copenhagen. 

In my journey from Rome to Naples, I observed that 
plant commonly called in the physic garden Ficus Indica 
[Cactus opuntia, Linn.] growing very plentifully on the 
hill side near the Tre Taberne, as also near the ruins of 
Old Anxur, and in several other places near the Via Appia, 
so that it appeared to me like a common wild plant in 
that country. Afterwards I rode through great woods 
of corktrees, more especially near Fundi and Old 
Formise. 

I remember very well I took notice of the Sardina and 
Sardone* at Rome, calling them always at dinner pilchard 
and herring. All the English were of my opinion. If 
I had had your query then, I would have been more 
curious. I cannot think of any difference, only that 
which you intimate, magnitude. 

Geneve, April 18, 84, s. ur. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, Most of our herbarists in these parts are em- 
ployed at present in carrying on the ' Hortus Malabari- 
cus.' The fifth volume is ready to come forth, and 
eight more are designed a mighty work of thirteen 
volumes. Breynius labours hard upon his second cen- 
tury of exotics ; and I am told that M. Tournefort in- 
tends to publish a history of some rare plants observed 
by himself on the Alps and Pyrenean Hills. The 
Academy Royal at Paris does also go on with their 

* Distinct from herring and pilchard. 



144 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

general history of plants, but I long for nothing but 
yours, which I hope is now under the press. I question 
not in the least but you have all the encouragement that 
the learned part of the world can possibly give you. 

When I was in Italy, I observed many operators there 
to make great varieties of sapos and balsams out of the 
salts and oils of vegetables. They proceeded much after 
the same manner as you have set down in your ' Observ.' 
pp. 202, 203 (only adding now and then a few odoriferous 
ingredients), viz. by uniting the salt and oil of the same 
vegetable by the help of slaked lime. Without this latter 
ingredient the union would be difficult, for I have known 
several miscarry by omitting it. By this process we have 
the entire complexion of a vegetable under the form of a 
sapo or balsam (especially if, instead of common water 
for the lixivium, we make use of the distilled water of the 
plant), a composition, perad venture, as beneficial to man- 
kind as any other whatsoever. The little experience that 
I have had in the world hath sufficiently convinced me 
(though I am unhappily a little inclined to scepticism 
and incredulity) of its successful and unexpected efficacy 
in many cases, internally given in proper vehicles, and 
dosed pro re natd, prcemissis prcemittendis, as also exter- 
nally applied, v. g. in icterical, arthritical, scorbutical, 
and nephritical cases; in several nervous and cephalic 
distempers (more especially the palsy and lethargy), in 
correcting and destroying all sorts of poisons. I speak 
experimentally of the sapos, or balsams (made as before- 
mentioned), of the Hypericum, Juniperus, and Abies, 
though I do not doubt but the same may be expected 
from many other vegetable compositions of the like 
nature. I am so short upon this particular, by reason 
of your extraordinary sagacity and great talents. 

The cortex exterior, or outward skin of Seville oranges, 
dried, powdered, and given every three hours in electuar. 
or white wine, is no mean specific in intermittent fevers 
(even in quartans themselves), dose sj. to 3ij. Next to 
the Quinquina, or Jesuit's-bark, I believe it may be one 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 145 

of the best alterative medicines yet commonly known. I 
beg, sir, a few of your thoughts concerning the quinquina, 
as to the place of its growth and its history. Peradven- 
ture it may be an East Indian drug, and brought from 
the Moluccas to Peru. I am much in the dark, and 
want some of your learned communications about it. 
What Bartholine and Signor Badi have writ of it does 
not satisfy. 

When I was at Rome, I observed many times two 
fathers, belonging to the public elaboratories there, to 
gather up and down, in the villas and gardens, the gum 
and resin of the cypress, as also to get an oily substance 
from the wood by a kind of distillation per descensum. 
Upon nfyinquiry, the fathers were so obliging as to tell 
me that out of this resin they prepared a lacca, which, 
being superficially spread and dried over any body, would 
preserve it fresh to the end of the world. The prepara- 
tion is thus. After having distilled a sufficient quantity 
of liquor from the resin, they cohobate that distilled spirit 
on the remaining part of the gum (left in the retort), 
which, by a gentle digestion, dissolves, and becomes a 
lacca. I told the fathers that the very same preparation 
out of amber, turpentine, or mastich, might serve as well 
for that purpose. However, I was very thankful for their 
kind communication. 

In the kingdom of Naples I saw great plantations of 
the Gossipium, or Xylon (observed by yourself in Malta). 
The Neapolitans use the Lanugo very successfully in the 
piles, internally as well as externally, which I had once 
an opportunity to remark. 

Leyden, June 4, 84, N. s. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 



SIR, The 'Hortus Malabaricus,' which the Dutch 
herbarists are so busy in carrying on, is too pompous 

10 



146 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

and costly a work, and not to be purchased by mean 
persons. They might have thrust it into a quarter of 
the compass, and rendered it more useful. The like 
may be said of Breynius's book. Monsieur Tournefort's 
history I long to see, not doubting but it will answer 
my expectation of it. 

As for my intended history, I am now sensible I have 
undertaken a task beyond my strength, and yet it is res 
Integra. I have not yet proceeded so far but I can, 
without inconvenience, give it over; but yours, and 
some other friends' opinions of, and expectations from 
me, do inspire me with such force and courage as not to 
despair of my abilities, but to contemn all difficulties, 
and contend even to excel and outdo myself. I had 
some expectation of Dr. Morison's work; but finding 
myself much frustrated therein, and likewise a stop at 
present put to his proceedings, though it be out of my 
way, and belong not to my profession, yet because there 
is no man that I know of, of our nation (as indeed neither 
is Dr. Morison) competently qualified, either engaged in 
or designing of such a work, I was more inclinable to 
listen to the solicitations of my friends putting me upon 
it. That, whereas those of other nations beyond the 
seas are busy and active in this kind, it might appear 
that the English are not altogether idle or asleep, but do, 
at least, endeavour to contribute something to the pro- 
moting and cultivating so pleasant and useful a know- 
ledge. I do not intend to begin to print, or so much as 
procure, or engrave figures, till I have finished the whole 
work, to avoid (as much as may be) omissions, mis- 
placings, and appendixes, and for some other reasons. 

Your remarks upon the sapos of plants I was much 
pleased with. I did never reflect upon them, nor con- 
sider of how great use this might possibly be. 

I am a great stranger in the history of the Jesuit's- 
powder, and therefore not likely to give you any light 
thereinto. 

Your observation concerning the rind of Seville oranges 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 147 

being a specific against agues, puts me in mind of a pre- 
scription I had from a physician in Nottinghamshire, to 
prevent, or divert the fit of an ague, viz. a Seville orange 
entire, rind and all, eaten up, an hour, as I remember, 
before the accession. 

Though the Ficus indica [Cactus opuntia, Linn.] be so 
frequently found growing plentifully in Italy, that one 
would be apt to think it were a native of that country, 
yet doubtless it is originally a stranger and an American, 
and was first planted there wheresoever it is found, 
where probably afterward it might propagate itself by 
seed ; as is also the Conyza acris alba canadensis annua 
\Eriget^m canadense, Linn.], which yourself and some 
others nave observed to grow as a wild plant about 
Paris. 
Black Notley, June 16, 84. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAT. 

SIR, I have sent you two Macreuses, male and 
female, and hope they will come safe to Black Notley. 
My' ingenious and worthy friend Mr. Charlton (now at 
London) procured them for me at Paris, who hath them 
both designed to the life in proper colours by the most 
accurate hand in France. If you saw the pictures, I 
believe they would give you a better insight than these 
skins, which are a little broke and changed ; yet never- 
theless your most discerning faculties may discover that 
in the dark which few can distinguish at noonday. This 
Parisian bird (very famous of late) may be no unwelcome 
subject, it being in Lent, and upon maigre days, the 
greatest dainty of convents. I have been told by several 
of the most learned priests beyond sea, that the Macreuse 
was as much a fish as the barnacle (and indeed I am of 
the same opinion), that the blood was the same in every 
quality with that of fishes ; as also the -fat, which (as 



148 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

they falsely affirm) will not fix, dry, or grow hard, but 
always remains in an oily consistence. Upon these and 
other reasons the Sorbonists have ranked the Macreuse 
in the classis of fishes. For the rest, I refer you to my 
paper from Paris, and impatiently wait for your judg- 
ment, for which I have a particular esteem. 

London, August 1, 84. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, I received the box with the cases of the male 
and female Macreuse you were pleased to procure and 
send me, for which I hold myself very much obliged to 
you. 

I had no sooner opened the box, but instantly I found 
that the Macreuse was no stranger to me, though un- 
known by that name. I was very much pleased to be so 
suddenly rid of my long continued scruples about it, and 
not a little surprised, when I found it to be another kind 
of bird than I imagined. A particular description of the 
cock you may find in Mr. Willughby's ' Ornithology/ 
p. 366, of the English edition, among the sea-ducks, to 
which kind this bird belongs, and not to the divers, or 
douckers (Mergi or Colymbi], as I falsely fancied to myself. 

Mr. Graindorge's description, which you sent me a 
breviat of, I find, upon attent reading and comparing it 
with the case of the bird, and mine own description, to 
be very faithful, and sufficient to lead into the knowledge 
of it one that had not been prepossessed with a strong 
opinion that it was of another kind, as I have already 
intimated myself to have been. Had there been but one 
word added, that it was of the duck-kind, I should then 
presently have apprehended what bird it was; and yet 
there was enough in the description (had I not been 
blinded with prejudice, and so lightly passed it over, and 
not heeded it) to determine its genus, at least, and to ex- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 149 

elude it from those of the Mergi and Colymbi ; and that 
was, that it had a flat bill, which is a note common to no 
other birds that I know of but the goose and duck-kinds. 
Notwithstanding what he saith of the debility of its feet 
unfit for walking on land, I see riot but that it may 
inarch as well as the rest of its kind ; all which have but 
short and weak legs in proportion to the bulk of their 
bodies, and those also situate very backward. What he 
saith of the smallness and weakness of the wings, and 
shortness of their feathers, is common to many sea-fowl, 
viz. the Tridactylae and Mergi, which yet by the nimble 
agitation of them fly very swiftly and strongly. What he 
saith of the mobility of the upper mandible of the jaw, I 
shall lioT be too hasty to believe, as in a former letter I 
remember to have written. 

Now though this bird happened to be known to me by 
another name, yet is it so rare and uncommon, that I 
take it not to have been described by any that have written 
the history of birds before ; though, as I remember, the 
name of Macreuse is mentioned by Gesner or Aldrovand, 
or both. Why they of the church of Rome should allow 
this bird to be eaten in Lent, and upon other fasting 
days, more than others of this kind, but especially the 
Tridactylce, I see no reason : the flesh of these last, which 
live only or chiefly by preying upon fish properly so 
called, tasting stronger of fish than that of any ducks 
which feed upon shell-fish. Many birds of the duck-kind, 
which, as I said, all feed, partly at least, upon shell-fish 
(as Monsieur Graindorge found the Macreuse also to do), 
have a delicate and well-tasted flesh ; as for example, the 
common Mallard [male of the Wild Duck, Anas boschas], 
and Teal [Anas crecca] : whereas the flesh of all those 
kinds that feed wholly or chiefly upon fish, properly so 
called, is of a rank, ferine, and piscose taste ; as for ex- 
ample, that of the Soland Goose \Sula alba], the English 
Puffin \Fratercula arctica], and those of the tridactylous 
kind ; so that only the young ones of those kinds are 



150 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

admitted to our tables. I observed in this bird, and in 
some others of the sea-ducks, which are much under 
water, that they want that vessel, or ampulla, situate in 
the very angle of the divarication of the windpipe, which, 
for want of a better and fitter name, we are wont to call 
the labyrinth of the trachea; which, though being common 
also to the Colymbi, which of all birds dive most and con- 
tinue longest under water, we may very probably from 
thence conclude that the labyrinth doth not serve them for 
a reservatory of air, to enable them to continue the longer 
under water, as I sometimes conjectured, but for the 
intending or modulating of the voice, seeing in the plash- 
ducks the females want it. But I am somewhat to seek 
about the use of this vessel, and I think it were worth 
the while to examine what sorts of birds have it, what 
want it; and in those sorts that have it, whether the 
males only, or in some the females also. I observed it in 
the Mergus cirratus lonyiroster major, or the Dun-diver 
\Mergm serrator], and that very large and extended by 
very strong bones ; and yet I thought myself to have suf- 
ficient reason to judge that bird to be the female of the 
Merganser \Mcrym serrator] ; but I dare not be confident 
that it is a female, because of this labyrinth. And now that 
I am writing of birds, I propose it to your consideration, 
whether that sort of bird, mentioned by Dr. Plot to be often 
heard in Woodstock -park, from the noise it makes, com- 
monly called the Woodcracker [ Woodhacker, Woodpecker], 
be not the lesser sort of Picus martins varius? For since 
the publishing of Mr. Willughby's ' Ornithology,' I have 
observed that bird sitting on the top of an oaken tree, 
making with her bill such a cracking or snapping noise, 
as we heard a long way off, the several snaps or cracks 
succeeding one another with that extraordinary swiftness 
that we could but wonder at it ; but how she made the 
noise, whether by the nimble agitation of her bill to and 
fro in the rift of the bough, or by the swift striking of the 
mandibles one against another, as the stork doth, I canuot 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 151 

clearly discern ; but an intelligent gentleman, who was 
very diligent in observing the same bird, said it was the 
former way. 

Black Notley, Aug. 13, 84. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, My own private common-place books do afford 
some odd, and, as 1 think, useful observations and expe- 
riments upon plants, especially those called, and vulgarly 
esteemed poisonous ones ; which, if judiciously mixed, 
prepared^ and managed, may prove the most powerful 
and beneficial medicines in nature, I mean internally 
given ; for they may be so ordered as to work very agree- 
ably, what way soever one pleases, as by vomit, stool, or 
else by sweat only, and urine, or else insensibly, and not 
without such success as can scarce be expected from any 
other vegetables, or from any animal or mineral substances 
whatsoever ; but I will defer this to a particular paper, 
having not at present my notes and records of my trials 
by me. 

London, August 29, 84. 



Mr. RAT to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Much controversy hath of late been concerning 
the origin of those shell-like stones found in the earth, 
either scattered or amassed, in many places both in 
England and beyond the seas : that they were the very 
shells of some sea-fish or got this figure by being cast in 
some animal mould, is the opinion I have declared myself 
to be most inclinable to, as you may see in my Travels 
at large, from p. 113 to p. 131. In favour whereof I 
shall add farther : 



152 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

1. That there are whole beds of the very shells them- 
selves unpetrified found in the earth, and that not only 
in plains and hillocks, such as the Apulian about Andria, 
and the Tuscan about Volterra, may be supposed to be, 
but in mountains of a considerable height. Christianus 
Mentzelius, in his discourse concerning the Bowonian 
Phosphorus Lapis, gives us a relation of many beds of 
them found mingled with sand in the upper part of a 
high mountain not far from Bologna, in Italy. His words 
are these : " Non procul monti Paterno dicto, lapidis 
Bononiensis patriae, unico forte milliari Italico distanti 
(loci nomen excidit meinoria), ingens rnons imminet prse- 
ruptus a violentia torrentium aquarum, quas imbres fre- 
quentes ex vicinis montibus confluentes emciunt, atque 
insignes terrarum moles ab isto monte prosternunt ac 
dejiciunt. In hac montis ruina, superiore in parte vi- 
suntur multae strages seriesve ex testis conchyliorum 
omnis generis plurima arena interjecta, instar strati super 
stratum (ut Chymicoruin vulgus loquitur). Est enim 
inter hasce testarum conchyliorimi strages seriesve arena 
ad crassitiem ulnae et ultra interposita. Erant autem 
testae variorum conchyliorum, omnes ab invicem distinctse, 
nee cuiquam lapidi impactae, adeo ut separatim omnia 
manibus tractari et dignosci potuerint. Eflecerat hoc 
arena pura, nullo limo lutove intermixta, quae conchylio- 
rum testas conservaverat per multa secula integras. In- 
terea vero diuturnitate temporis omnes istae testae erant 
in albissimam calcem facile resolubiles tanquam vehe- 
mentia ignis calcinatae." 

Now if the shells themselves, not petrified, be found 
in such plenty lying in beds, and that near the tops of 
high mountains, a great argument it is, that what stones 
we find of like form, and in like places, were anciently 
shells too. This argument is so much the more consider- 
able, because it frustrates one main objection against our 
opinion, viz. because no account can be given how the 
very shells should be brought to the tops of mountains, 
they being so high above the level of the sea ; for when 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 153 

as we see the thing done, it is vain to dispute against it 
from the unlikelihood of the doing it. But yet we may 
give the same account of the original of this bed of shells, 
perhaps one hundred feet above the level of the surface of 
the sea, as we have elsewhere given of that bed of sand 
and cockle-shells found in sinking a well at Amsterdam, 
at perchance near one hundred feet deep below the pre- 
sent bottom of the sea ; to wit, that both the one and the 
other were of old time the bottom of the sea, and after- 
wards covered by several coats, or floors of earth, brought 
down from the mountains in land-floods ; the several 
beds or floors to be seen in such broken mountains being 
the several settlings of particular floods. 

2. (5me other bodies, besides shells, commonly 
esteemed stones, there are found in the earth, resembling 
the teeth and other bones of fishes, which are so mani- 
festly the very things tfcey are thought only to resemble, 
that it seems to me great weakness in any man to deny 
it. Such are the Glossopetrce dug up in Malta in such 
quantities, that you may buy them by measure and not 
by tale ; and also the vertebres of thornbacks, or other 
cartilaginous fishes there found, and sold for stones 
among the Glossopetra, which have no greater dissimili- 
tude to the teeth of a living shark, or the vertebres of a 
quick thornback, than lying so long in the earth, as they 
must needs have done, will necessarily induce. Now in 
this same isle of Malta we found also many shell-like 
stones, which why we should not esteem to have been 
originally the shells of fishes I see no reason ; for if in 
one and the same place we find many teeth and bones of 
fishes entire and unpetrified, and likewise stones exactly 
imitating the shells of other fishes, a great presumption 
to me it is that these were originally the things whose 
shape only they now seem to bear. Neither are these 
Glossopetra found only in Malta, but also in many places 
of Germany, far remote from the sea, in a hill near Aken, 
in so great plenty that Goropius makes it an argument they 
could not be the teeth of sharks. " In colle illo," saith he, 



154 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

" qui Aquis-grano imminet, tantum id genus fuisse pi- 
scium quis crederet, quantum de Glossopetrarum copia 
conjectari deberet?" 

8. It seems strange to me, that if these bodies were 
formed after the manner of the shooting or crystallizing 
of salts, it should happen that two shells should be so 
adapted together at the heel, and shoot out to the same 
extension round, and the upper and nether valve be of 
different figure, as in natural shells, and that not only in 
one or two rarely to be found, but in multitudes of them. 

4. Why should not nature as well imitate other na- 
tural bodies, or their parts, as the horns and hoofs of 
land animals, or the nuts and seeds of plants, as the 
shells and bones only of some sea-fishes. 

5. Were these bodies produced by a concretion of 
salts, it seems strange to me that there should be such 
great variety of them, and their shapes so regular and 
exactly circumscribed ; so great a diversity of figures 
arguing a greater variety of salts, or of the modifications 
and mixtures of salts, than are likely to be found in 
nature ; and the curvilineous concretions of salts never, 
that I have yet seen, appearing in that regularity of 
figure and due circumscription as in these bodies, which 
is an argument that the government of some principle 
superior to matter figured and moved in their formation. 

6. Were these bodies nothing but concretions of salts, 
it seems no less strange that so many liquors impregnated 
with all sorts of salts and mineral juices in all proportions, 
having been at one time or other industriously or acci- 
dentally exposed to crystallize and let stand long in ves- 
sels, there should never be found in them any such con- 
cretions ; for, if any had happened, we should doubtless 
have heard of them, and the observers would have im- 
proved such an experiment to the production of the like 
bodies at their pleasure, which would have been a suffi- 
cient refutation of the opinion I incline to. 

Some of the arguments against this opinion admit of 
an easy solution. Others I do not see any way as yet to 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 155 

answer, but by granting that many sorts of shells are 
wholly lost, or at least out of our seas. Others, as the 
three last of Dr. Plot, do hitherto puzzle me, and put me 
to a stand. 

As for what Dr. Plot produces out of Camden and 
Childrey, in confirmation of his fourth argument, viz. 
that the Ophiomorphites of Cainesham have some of them 
heads, I doubt not but it is a mistake, proceeding from 
their credulity. For Mr. Willughby and myself inquiring 
diligently there after such stones, the common people 
affirmed that there were such found : we not satisfied 
with their assertion, but desirous ourselves to see them, 
were at last directed to a man's house who was said to 
have onej"to whom when we came, he showed us the 
stone, which indeed at the upper extreme had some kind 
of knob or protuberance of stone, but not at all resem- 
bling the head of any animal. Such a kind of stone might, 
perhaps, be shown to Mr. Camden, whose fancy being 
possessed with the vulgar conceit, he might without any 
strict view or examination of it, admit it to be what the 
vulgar would have it. 

That the species of Brontia cannot be the petrified 
shells of Echini Spatagi, the arguments Dr. Plot alleges 
out of Aristotle and Rondeletius do not evince; for, 
though in some seas they may be ireXa'ycoe and airdvioi, 
yet in others are they plentiful enough. In our own seas 
at Llandhwyn, in the Isle of Anglesey, we may reason- 
ably conjecture they are more plentiful than the common 
Echini anywhere with us, because we found more of their 
shells cast up there on the shore than of the Echini on 
any shore about England. And though their bristles or 
prickles were indeed but small, yet were they not few, or 
thin set, as Rondeletius saith. 

I thank you for your last letter and the information 
and advices therein given. As to the particular of figures, 
I find that others are of a different opinion from you, 
looking upon an history of plants without figures as a 
book of geography without maps. A good figure conveys 



156 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

that to the mind suddenly, and with ease and pleasure, 
an idea whereof cannot be formed by the help of a de- 
scription without time and pains, and a greater attention 
than most readers have patience to give it. And for 
directions to the best figures of known and described 
plants in other books, to have recourse to them would 
distract and interrupt the reader ; and it is likely but few 
readers would have the books referred to, so that though 
by printing this work without figures it would be ren- 
dered of more general use, being less bulky and of 
lower price ; yet inferring some kind of necessity of pur- 
chasing the books referred to, it would occasion as great 
an expense as if it had been printed with cuts. But as 
for the danger of losing the whole, that is inconsiderable, 
it being, perchance, as good lost as found. For my own 
part, my motives to attempt the compiling it were the 
instigation of some friends, and a consideration that no 
Englishman since Dr. Turner hath written so of plants, 
but that a man of no more skill in botanies than myself 
may easily enlarge and amend what they have done. 
Besides, had they done never so well, their works are in 
great measure useless to foreigners, as being written in 
English. Dr. Morison is a Scotchman, so I make not 
him an English herbarist, nor pass any sentence on his 
performances; judicio stetque cadatquc tuo. But this 
paper will hold no more ; scarce room left to assure you 
that I am, &c. 
Black Notley, October 22, 84. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 



SIR, 1 am heartily glad to hear that you are about so 
useful a work as the history of plants, done by you, will 
be ; I am sure we want it extremely, and that it will be 
very much esteemed by the botanists beyond sea, parti- 
cularly Monsieur Tourriefort, the king's professor at Paris, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 157 

with whom I correspond, who told me he desired it ex- 
tremely, and that he had a very great respect and honour 
for you, desiring me to give you his most humble service ; 
and if you will be pleased but to let me know anything 
you may have occasion for that can. be procured at Paris 
or Montpellier, I will do all in my power to help you to 
it. I have several plants that I brought from both places ; 
amongst which are several nondescripts ; all which shall 
be at your service, with what remarks I made about them, 
either as to their growth or virtues. 

The following plants are thought rare at Chelsea and 
Fulham :* 

Arbor Ifttkca Benzoinumfundens. N. D. It smells very strong, just like 
balm. 

Cedrus Nova Anglia. N. D. 

Cedrus Bermuda. N. D. 

Cedrus fol. lands Conifer. B. pin. 

Acer Jiorescens, Tradescanti. 

Sassafras. 

Polypodium Mexicanum. Reccii. 

Arbor Amara Reccii. 

Lonchitis aspera major Maih. 

Amygdalus Afr. Fl. plenofruct. 

Holoser. Breyn. 

Polypodium Plumosum. N. D. 

Pseudo-dictamnum Tingitanum acetabulis Molucca spinosa Mor. 

Pinus Hierosolymitana. N. D. 

Convolvulus peregrinus fol. hederaceo anguloso. B. pin. 

Cedrus ex God. N. D. 

Evonymo affinis Afr. Herm. 

Oxycantha Virgin. N. D. 

Styraxfol. aceris Virg. N. D. 

Galega affinis Hexaphyllos Zeilanica. N. D. 

Senecio arboresc. N. D. 

Genista Platyphyllos Zeilanica Fl. purpureo siliq. bullat. N. D. 

Geranium arboresc. N. D. 

Hemionites multifid. Park. 

Anonymusfol. etfruct. Rites. 

Amomum Nova Anglice, N. D. 

Arbutus Virgin. N. D. 

Nerium Odoratiss. Herm. 

I believe you may have seen most of these, they being 
survivors of the last winter, and probably the most of 

* I can determine but few of them, and so omit them altogether. C. C. B. 



158 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

them will keep out this. Mr. Watts having a new con- 
trivance (at least in this country), viz. he makes under 
the floor of his greenhouse a great fire-place with grate, 
ash-hole, &c., and conveys the warmth through the whole 
house by tunnels, so that he hopes, by the help of weather- 
glasses within, to bring or keep the air at what degree of 
warmth he pleases, letting in upon occasion the outward 
air by the windows. He thinks to make, by this means, 
an artificial spring, summer, winter, &c. 

London, November 11, 1684. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAT. 

SIR, The Fungus Campaniformis niger multa Sem. 
plan, in se continens of Merrett's Pinax \Nidularia cam- 
panulata, With.], grows plentifully here in several places 
in London, and seems to me very pretty in the contriv- 
ance of the seed ; for within the cup of the fungus, which 
is like a bell, or rather the top of Muscus Pysoides, or 
Pixidatus Ger. [Scyphophorus], there lies several seeds 
fastened to the bottom of the cup by means of a very 
small thread, or fibril, which I suppose might bring 
the sap from the root to the seed : it has but a small 
root, and usually comes out in a round white tumour from 
old wood, which serves to keep up the sides of borders ; 
the rain falling into this cup, and filling it, the seeds are 
heaved up and washed over, and sow themselves. Per- 
haps this Fungus may have a near affinity with the common 
Muscus Pixidatus, and this may have some seed too. This 
Fungus is figured by Menzelius in his description of some 
plants in several places of Germany. Its name, or what 
he says of it, I do not now remember, not having the 
book by me. If you have not taken notice of this Muscus 
or Fungus, I will observe it more narrowly and send you 
its history. Yesterday I was at Chelsea Garden to see 
how the plants were preserved there this cold weather, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 159 

and found that in the daytime they put no fire into 
their furnaces, and that in the night they not only put in 
some fire, but cover the windows where they stand with 
pitched canvas, taking this off and opening them as much 
as the air or wind permits. There is now in flower the Se- 
dum arbor esc. [Sempervivum arbor eum, Linn.] This is the 
fourth year of its age ; it is in a pot, and has continued 
flowering for this four months, and is very pleasant. Mr. 
Watts expects to have Aloe this year in flower, it being 
already set for it. He has several myrtles not described, 
a fine amaranthus, of a crimson colour, which comes from 
the East Indies, and some fine Cyclamini. When I shah 1 
have the happiness to peruse what you have, or are a 
writingpen any of the tribes, if I shall have observed 
anything concerning them not mentioned therein, I shall 
not fail to give you an account. 

There is a vast number of East and West India seeds 
come over this year ; among the rest, great store of Pimm 
arbor escens, all the sorts of the Abrus, Tea, &c. Of all 
which there are great expectations, and as they come to 

perfection you may expect from me an account of them. 

* * * * 

London, Dec. 20, 1684. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

g IR> I should be of the mind, that to supersede the 
use of botanic authors, and make your history everyway 
complete, it would be necessary to mention all the varie- 
ties of the Harts-tongues, for instance, to be found in any 
catalogue or garden ; and so of all other herbs ; for it 
will much please the humours of men, and the possessors 
or admirers of such varieties may take it ill to have what 
they esteem so much left out. Therefore, if at the end of 
each species there were named all the variations, I think 
it would not be amiss, especially considering it would 



160 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

tend to the giving of a fuller history of the plant itself, 
and that it may hinder mistakes. 

I have two sorts of the Bangue, which were sent from 
two several places of the East Indies : they both differ 
much from our Hemp, although they seem to differ most 
as to their magnitude ; I do not in the least doubt but 
these sorts of Bangue are those with which the Indians 
use to provoke venery ; the leaves, and all the plant, not 
being carefully dried, makes a good description from them 
impossible. 

I have been told by several, that Muscelin (so much in 
use here for cravats) and Calligo, and the most of the 
Indian linens, are made of nettles, and I see not the least 
improbability but that they may be made of the fibres of 
them. 

London, Jan. 31, 168|. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, Tour advice concerning inserting the varieties 
of sundry species, especially such as are esteemed for their 
beauty or variety, I approve and shall observe, Howbeit 
it is not my intention to supersede the use of any approved 
botanic author ; but my reasons for attempting this work 
were, 1. To satisfy the importunity of some friends, who 
solicited me to undertake it. 2. To give some light to 
young students in the reading and comparing other her- 
barists, by correcting mistakes, and illustrating what is 
obscure, and extricating what is perplexed and entangled, 
and in cutting off what is superfluous, or under different 
titles repeated for distinct. 3. To alleviate the charge of 
such as are not able to purchase many books : to which 
end, I endeavour an enumeration of all the species 
already described and published. 4. To facilitate the 
learning of plants, if need be, without a guide or demon- 
strator, by so methodizing of them and giving such 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 161 

certain and obvious characteristic notes of the genera, 
that it shall not be difficult for any man who shall but 
attend to them and the description, to find out infallibly 
any plant that shall be offered to him, especially being 
assisted by the figure of it. And, lastly, because no man 
of our nation hath lately attempted such a work; and 
those that formerly did, excepting Dr. Turner, were not 
sufficiently qualified for such an undertaking, and so have 
acquitted themselves accordingly. 

I wish I had assurance from eye-witnesses of credit, 
that those sorts of linen you mention are made of nettle- 
stalks. I have heard and read the like of Scotch cloth, 
but dare not give credence to it, because I find not 
that Dr?*Sibbalds, in his ' Prodromus,' makes any men- 
tion of it, and am loth to put in anything on uncertain 
rumour. 
Black Notley, Feb. 11, 84. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY'S last Letter. 

SIR, For the Polypodium plumosum, I can tell you 
but very little of it, except that it had its name from its 
leaves being like feathers. Its place of growth, and other 
things relating to its history, can scarce be told by any 
in England ; for I think it is sent us from Holland, and 
probably may come to them from the East Indies, 
though I cannot say that positively. It is a perennial 
plant, and has endured this last winter without being 
either in pot or greenhouse. 

I was the other day at Chelsea, and find that the arti- 
fices used by Mr. Watts have been very effectual for the 
preservation of his plants, insomuch, that this severe 
enough winter has scarce killed any of his fine plants. 
One thing I much wonder to see that the Cedrus Montis 
Libani \Pinus Cedrus, Linn.], the inhabitant of a very 
different climate, should thrive here so well, as, without 

11 



162 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

pot or greenhouse, to be able to propagate itself by layers 
this spring. Seeds sown last autumn have as yet thriven 
very well, and are like to hold out. The main artifice I 
used to them, has been to keep them from the winds, 
which seem to give a great additional force to the cold 
to destroy the tender plants. 

I have one very perfect leaf of the Japan Camphire 
tree, and have likewise some of the root of the Cinnamon 
tree, with a specimen of the oil and camphire that is 
distilled from it. One thing I would acquaint you with 
about cinnamon is, that a gentleman of my acquaintance 
having a great mind to have some of the true oil of 
cinnamon, he took 12lbs. of it and distilled it in a proper 
vessel, but had no oil at all. He from thence concluded, 
that all the cinnamon is divested of some of its most fine 
particles before any of it comes to us ; and, speaking to 
Mr. Hermans on that subject, I remember he could scarce 
deny it, although his being a servant to the Dutch East 
India Company would hinder his telling of that secret, 
by which they receive so much money. 

London, March 7, 168J. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I have inclosed some sugar of the first boiling, 
got out of the juice of the wounded maple ; Mr. Ashton, 
our secretary, gave it to me for you ; it was sent him from 
Canada, where the savages prepare it out of the afore- 
mentioned liquor, eight pints whereof affords a pound of 
sugar. If you have any of these trees near you, or the 
birch, or any other weeping trees, I wish you would make 
a trial, proceeding as in the juice of the sugar-cane. The 
Indians of Canada have practised this time out of mind ; 
the French begin now to refine it, and to make great 
advantages. 

London, March 10, 84. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. ' 163 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Yours of the 10th instant I received last post, 
and therein an inclosed specimen of the Canada sugar, 
&c., a thing to me strange and unheard of before. It 
were, as you suggest, well worth the experimenting 
whether the like might be gotten by boiling up the juices 
of any of our weeping trees, though I confess I doubt 
much of the success. For, first, there are so few trees 
common to the New and Old World, that it is likely this 
may be a sort of maple* specifically distinct from any of 
ours. But, secondly, suppose it be not, it may yield 
a saccharine juice in America, and yet not in England ; 
as we see the ash-tree yields manna in Calabria, and yet 
not anywhere else in Italy itself. Thirdly, if it be the 
lesser or common maple, that is such a nice tree that few 
of the kind, and those only at some critical seasons, will 
bleed with us ; so that it is a hard matter to get any 
quantity of their juice. For mine own part, there are 
not any of the greater maple, or sycamore trees, that I 
know of, growing nearer than half a mile off us, so that 
I cannot attend the gathering their juice, without the 
expense of more time than I can or am willing at present 
to spare. The like I may say of birches. We have, 
indeed, of walnuts some growing near us, but I suspect 
their scrupulous owners would scarce be willing I should 
pierce them ; so that I doubt whether I shall be able to 
make any trials of this kind ; and I make no question 
but some members of the Royal Society may have 
more leisure and better opportunities of making them 
than myself. My thoughts are almost wholly employed 
at present in the carrying on the History of Plants ; and I 
am like him who said, " Pectora nostra duas non adrnit- 
tentia curas." 

As for the History of Fishes, I doubt not but you may 
add to it many things by me omitted; those authors 

* It is the Acer sacc/utrinum, Linn. 



164 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

you mention having not been seen by me. Dr. Tyson's 
* Anatomy of the Phocaena,' I dare say is very exact ; 
but, when I begun, that history was not published, at 
least I had no knowledge of it, and since have neglected 
to send for it. 1 am sensible that the history of the 
cetaceous kind is far from perfect, but in my circum- 
stances it was not easy for me to carry it on any farther. 
There wants a description of the Unicorn-fish [the Nar- 
whal Monodon monoceros], of which there are figures of 
two kinds in the History of the Antilles, written in French; 
but I do not much confide in that author. There is a 
prolix description of the skeleton of the head in Wor- 
mius's Museum, but too tedious for me to transcribe. I 
am to seek for descriptions of many species of whales, 
mentioned in catalogues of them ; but I take many of 
them to be fictitious, and have little hopes of getting any 
good information of them. Both myself and the public 
(if this work ever be printed) shall be beholden to you 
for your contributions to it. If the publishing of it be 
deferred till Mr. Willughby's son comes of age, I doubt 
not but he will be at the charge of necessary plates rather 
than it should be suppressed. My Lord Bishop of Ox- 
ford is highly to be commended for his forwardness to 
promote any good design. For this History of Fishes, I 
can warrant it to be as full and perfect as to the number 
and species, and their descriptions (excepting only the 
cetaceous kind), as was the history of birds. The Exan- 
ffuia aquatica I account rather insects than fishes ; and, 
besides, neither Mr. Willughby nor myself had so fully 
described each several species, nor ranged them in their 
classes as was necessary for a complete history of them. 
But as to designs for the cuts, I have several drawn by 
hand from the life, and have already, for every species, 
made a reference to the place where the best figure of it 
is extant in Gesner, Aldrovand, Rondeletius, Salvianus, 
&c., (I mean in my judgment) in a paper I have by me, 
which you may command. 

Black Notley, March 13, 84. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 165 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, A friend and neighbour, apothecary, whom I 
employed yesterday, brought me the effect of his boiling 
the juice of the greater maple. Having boiled as high 
as an extract, he found a whitish body somewhat like 
brown sugar, and tasting sweet, but withal of a woody 
relish, immersed in a body of the colour and consistency 
and taste, too, of molasses. Upon curing, I do not doubt 
we shall have, after the molasses are separated, a perfect 
sugar, but in very small quantity, not above an ounce 
from a ggjlon of liquor. Possibly, nay likely, afterwards, 
when the liquor begins to run thick near its ceasing, it 
will yield a greater proportion of sugar. When he hath 
cured it, I will give you a farther account of it. 
Black Notley, April 1, 85. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Dr. Lister's opinion (from whom I had all I 
know of the Rudde) and yours, who have thoroughly 
examined and compared figures and descriptions, con- 
curring, do fully satisfy and convince me that the Rudde 
\Lcuciscus erythrophthalmus\ is the Rotcle of Baltner, 
and not the Orphus or Nerfling. I also perceive, that 
the fish described by us for the Orphus, is no other than 
the Rudde or Rotcle, which I suppose was somewhere in 
Germany brought us by the name of Nerfling, and under 
that name described, which occasioned all this mistake 
and confusion. If I had Mr. Willughby's notes, I doubt 
not but I could find out a more exact description of the 
Orphus than will be met with in authors ; for that fish, I 
am sure, was more than once described by us. But it is 
almost impossible to procure a sight of them, and there- 
fore we must be content with such a description of the 



166 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Orphus as we find in Gesner. I did describe most of the 
animals we met with in our travels ; but all my notes of 
high and low Germany were unfortunately lost. 

Your chapter de Chymicd Plantarum Analysi I have 
read over with much pleasure and satisfaction ; in the 
title before Usu, I think it will be necessary to add Re- 
solutarum, or Partium Resolutarum. It is all very good, 
only in a particular or two, wherein you are positive I am 
somewhat doubtful, as whether all the parts into which 
a plant is separable by fire, be transmutable one into 
another. For though I am of your opinion, that their 
immediate component particles are not primary and indi- 
visible elements, yet do they contain so many such of one 
kind, that I doubt whether the whole body of one (for 
example fixed salt) be transmutable into the whole body 
of the other (for example water) ; for if it may, then these 
being the most simple bodies we know, one would think 
that quodlibet may be made ex quolibet, and that there 
are no fixed and indissoluble principles in nature, which 
I think is otherwise demonstrable. 

I grant that the component particles may be separated 
from each other, and some of them mutually transmuted 
as inflammable spirits and oils, they, after the separation 
made by fire remaining still mixed ; but from argumenta- 
tion we must appeal to experience. Another thing I 
suspect is, that fixed salts of plants, were they perfectly 
freed from all adherent heterogeneous particles, would 
not be found to differ from each other in any sensible 
quality or accident ; but neither do you affirm so much 
of fixed salts so freed, but of them such as we have them, 
wherein I do fully agree with you. 

Black Notley, April 29, 85. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 167 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, As for the transmutation of secondary principles, 
or elements, one into another, I was tempted to believe 
it practicable, upon discoursing several times with Mr. 
Boyle upon that subject, and upon reading his new 
Appendixes to the ' Sceptical Chemist/ and to the ' Aery 
and Icy Noctiluca,' where he affirms that oils and water 
may be wholly changed into earth, though never so well 
purified before ; and that salt and sulphur are trans- 
mutable into insipid water, which also Tachenius demon- 
strates, and salt into earth ; and this not by the 
addition^of any new parts, but by mere transposition, 
division, or some new modification of the constituent 
parts, which, making a different impression upon our 
senses, may produce new qualities or accidents ; but you, 
being a much greater master of the Epicurean philosophy 
than myself, are the best judge of this. I always fancied 
that there were no fixed or immutable principles (I mean 
elements) in nature, as she stands at present, but what 
may be subject to changes upon new motions, or modifi- 
cations, unless we suppose pure atoms without concre- 
tions, and them too under the same constant laws of 
motion. I grant that salt, water, or any other purified 
element, may contain many corpuscles of the same kind ; 
yet these same particles, by various transpositions, di- 
visions, motions, or any other new modifications, may 
put on different faces and shapes, and raise in us various 
perceptions of different qualities and accidents. If this 
philosophy be true, then fixed salts themselves may differ 
from each other in sensible qualities, or accidents, ac- 
cording to the operations or other circumstances, though 
they be carefully purified. Mr. Lewenhoeck hath ob- 
served great variety of figures in them after they had 
been diligently freed from adhering heterogeneous par- 
ticles ; and the very same numerical lixivial salt will put 
on different shapes and figures, so that it will appear a 



168 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

marine or muriatic salt, an essential salt or nitre of plants, 
and also a fixed alkali salt. I have seen great varieties 
of fermentations produced, by pouring the same acid 
spirit upon many several fixed salts prepared and purified 
all alike. Their sapors do very sensibly differ in solu- 
tions ; and you cannot make aurum fulminans with so 
small a quantity of any fixed salt as that of tartar. I do 
conclude, therefore, against you and Mr. Daniel Cox, 
that fixed salts do really differ in qualities and accidents. 
However, I submit to your excellent judgment, and I will 
not be positive in this or the other controversy. 

London, May 9, 85. 



Mr, EAT to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Yours of May 9 came to hand last post, wherein 
you produce good authority for what you affirm concern- 
ing the mutual transmutation of vegetable principles, or 
immediate component particles, whereto I can say no- 
thing, unless I had the author's books you cite ; and 
perhaps not then neither, unless I should repeat the 
experiments myself. 

But that there are fixed and physically indivisible 
principles in nature I thus argue : 

If there be no such, but bodies are infinitely divisible, 
how can there be any constancy in generations or pro- 
ductions ? 

Why are there not infinite new concrete and mixed 
bodies daily produced, and as many lost ? 

For if bodies be infinitely divisible, figures being in- 
finite, the particles whereunto they are divided must pro- 
bably be of infinite figures, and few alike ; and why 
should those of the same figure convene ? 

How come bodies to be divisible, even by fire, into 
great numbers of parts, either really homogeneous, or 
seemingly so, and not rather into infinite varieties of par- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 169 

tides ; as when a man, with the forcible stroke of a ham- 
mer, breaks, for example, a brick, it flies into innu- 
merable parts, of different figures, perhaps scarce any two 
like? 

How come there to be such great aggregates of bodies 
of the same kind, as water, earth, air ? 

Whereas you say the same particles, by various trans- 
positions, divisions, motions, &c. may put on different 
faces, and stir up in us various perceptions, I answer, 
that I cannot imagine any other difference of bodies but 
what proceeds from the motions of figures of then* com- 
ponent particles. 

From the motions of them can come nothing but a 
greater^ less measure of fluidity; therefore all other 
varieties must arise from their figures. From the figures 
of homogeneous particles, or such as are of the same 
shape, no considerable varieties can proceed ; for, from 
suppose a bag of shot, perfectly spherical and solid, 
should 1 shake or move them to the world's end, I should 
get a body of no other texture than I had at first ; though 
in bodies of other figured particles there might possibly 
be variety of textures, from the situs of the component 
particles in respect of each other. Yet this is not likely, 
because it is very difficult to set the particles, all or most 
of them, in one and the same situs one to another, and 
scarce possible to be done but by an intelligent agent, 
which yet must be done to produce like and homogeneous 
textures ; therefore the most of these differences must 
arise from the admixture of heterogeneous particles. The 
fire is not such an analyst but that it doth communicate 
particles to the bodies it divides or transforms, as we see 
in minium made of lead, in which, that some parts out of 
the fire adhering to the lead do so transform it, appears 
probable by the increase of weight ; and many other like 
instances there are. 

That fixed salts are all alike (whether they be com- 
pound or simple bodies), I gather from the impressions 
they make on our senses, and from their operations. 



170 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Probable it is, that the heterogeneous particles may, in 
greater quantities, and more closely adhere to them in 
some vegetables than in others. 

In fine, that there are innumerable concrete bodies of 
the same figure is evident to sense in the crystals of 
salts. That these particular crystals must be composed 
of like-figured particles (one to another, though not to 
the concrete), and those again of the like, usque ad minima, 
is highly probable, if not demonstrable, in reason ; 
whereas, were bodies infinitely divisible, and conse- 
quently of no certain figure (the minima I mean), I do 
not see how we could ever come to such regular concre- 
tions, at least to such multitudes and masses of them, 
but that the world must have continued, as the poets 
first fancied it, a chaos. But enough of this. 

Black Notley, May 12, 85. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I received yours of the 12th instant, and am 
sufficiently convinced that there are fixed and certain 
principles in nature, and settled laws of motion ; yet I 
have some reason to believe that they are not immutable, 
but that some outward violence and preternatural causes 
may alter them, though they are seldom or never mutable 
in the ordinary course of things. If you please, the 
transmutation of the parts of analysed bodies shall be 
struck out of the chapter de Cliym. Plant. Analysi parti- 
umque resolutarum Usu. 

London, May 19, 85. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 171 



Mr. BAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Last post brought me yours of May 19. In 
answer whereto, seeing what you assert concerning the 
transmutation mentioned may be true, and is supported 
by good authority, and your opinion, I see no reason it 
should be struck out ; for those principles into which 
bodies are immediately resoluble by fire, being not pri- 
mary but compound bodies, it may consist with my 
opinion of certain and fixed first principles well enough. 

Reading in the ' Philosophical Transactions' of March 
last yoJtf observations on subterraneous streams, I find 
you mistaken in one of your conjectures concerning mat- 
ter of fact, that is concerning that they call the burning 
fountain [La Fontaine qne brule] near Grenoble, in 
Dauphine, which our curiosity led us to make an excur- 
sive journey from Grenoble on purpose to see. This 
place is about three leagues distant from the city up the 
river. When we came there, we were much deceived in 
our expectation ; for, instead of a burning fountain, which 
we dreamt of, from the name and relations of others, we 
found nothing of water, but only an actual flame of fire 
issuing out of a vent, or hole, in the side of a bank, 
plainly visible to the eye, to which if you applied dry 
straw, or any other combustible matter, it took fire pre- 
sently. I took it to be nothing else but a little spiracu- 
lum of a mine of coals, or some such like substance, fired ; 
and my reason was, because the bank, out of which the 
flame issued, looked much like slate and cinder of coals. 
One thing 1 cannot but admire, that is the long continu- 
ance of this burning. I find mention of it in ' Augustine 
de Civitate Dei,' lib. i, cap. 7. " De fonte illo ubi faces 
extinguunter ardentes et accenduntur extincta3 non inveni 
in Epiro qui vidisse se dicerent, sed qui in Gallia similem 
nossent, non longe a Gratianopoli civitate ;" by which 
relation of the good father, we see how he was abused 



172 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

and imposed upon by relators that were eye-witnesses. 
I myself also was abused in like manner, and therefore 
do verily believe there was then no more fountain there 
than is now that is a fountain of fire, which, from the 
constancy and perpetuity of its issuing out, it may be 
called. Hence we may learn what credit is to be given 
to the verbal relations of the generality of travellers. 

Black Notley, May 22, 85. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I thank you for freeing me of my error concern- 
ing the burning fountain near Grenoble. Some French 
and other writers were the authors of my mistake. Mon- 
sieur Boissieu (a native of Dauphine, and a learned per- 
son), speaking of the burning fountain of that countiy, 
says, " Aqua e rupe procurrit, et ipsa frigida, sed sulphure 
et bitumine leviter imbuta, cujus superficiei si sulphura- 
tum admoveris extinctum statim accenditur, ardetque lu- 
culenter ; ardet et admota palea, imprimis ccelo nubibus 
cooperto." To save his credit, we may suspect well 
enough that he either speaks of a different place from 
that you were at up the river, or else that some times of 
the year springs may arise near the bank, where the com- 
bustible steams may meet with, and run through them, 
and so produce the aforesaid phenomena ; but this is 
only a mere conjecture of mine. 

London, June 2, 85. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 173 



Mr. RAY'S Answer to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Yours of the 2d instant I received last post. 
In answer whereto, I approve one of your excuses and 
salvos for the credit of the authors that have written con- 
cerning the burning fountain, viz. that probably enough 
in winter time there may issue water out of the same 
vent whence the fire proceeds ; for the time we saw it 
was in the height and heat of summer, viz. about the 
latter end of July ; but that the water hath no interest 
in the kindling anything applied thereto I am confident, 
for we saw an actual flame streaming thence, which must 
needs Tftndle straw, or any other combustible matter it 
meets with. And here, by the way, I cannot but reflect 
upon a passage I meet with in Doctor Plot's letter con- 
cerning sepulchral lamps, in the ' Philosoph. Transact/ 
of December last. It is this : " Such as the flame over 
the well and earth about it in one Mr. Hawkley's ground 
in Lancashire, that (like the fire of Plato) only shines, 
and does not burn." Herein is contained a double mis- 
take ; for, as I was informed by persons of the greatest 
credit and undoubted fidelity, where the inflammable 
steam or vapour ascended, was no well at all, but only 
water in a ditch, which dried up in summer time, and 
which the experimenter who told me (no other, indeed, 
but Dr. Wilkins, Bishop of Chester) caused to be laded 
all out ; and that when the ditch was quite empty the 
inflammable steam ascended in like manner as before. 
Next, the words seem to import that there is a constant 
flame over the well and ground about ; whereas there 
is no such thing, but only a steam constantly ascending, 
which catches fire by the application of a lighted candle, 
or any other flame. Besides, I never before heard, and 
can hardly be induced to believe, that that flame only 
shines and does not burn, none of my relators mentioning 
any such thing, which had been the strangest miracle 
of all. 



174 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Your former conjecture, that there may be a different 
place, I cannot allow, because those who write of it say 
it is near Grenoble, as this was ; and we, inquiring upon 
the place, heard of no other but this ; and that this is 
that which is usually visited by travellers one may know 
by the hackney-men, who are very well acquainted with 
it ; and Golnitz, in his ' Itinerary of France,' notes this 
for the " Fontaine que brule." But enough of this. 
Another thing I meet with in the same ' Transactions ' of 
January last, in Mr. Waller's observations concerning the 
Cicindela volans, of which I am in doubt, though I confess 
I am more inclinable to believe what Mr. Waller asserts, 
that both male and female have wings, it being more 
agreeable to the analogy of other insects, besides the 
credit of the person who saw them in copulation. But 
then what shall we say to Carolus Ventimiglia, to whom 
I am loth to give the lie. Indeed, if his credit were as 
good as the relator's, E. Columna, I dared not. " Cum 
enim (saith he) ex nudis plurimas haberet in vitro inclu- 
sas, animi causa alatam captam iis adjecit, qua3 continuo 
se spectante unam ex nudis subegit, eique adhaesit ut 
bombyx solet, ab ea deinde divulsa aliam atque aliam, 
quae sequenti die parere cceperunt,'' &c. Besides, how 
came this to be the received opinion before ? 
Black Notley, June 5, 85. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, Take a Pilchard \ClupQa pilcliardus\ by the tip 
of the back-fin, and it hangs in equilibrio, but a Herring 
[Clupea harengus\ so held sinks headlong. This was 
tried lately. 

M. Dodard affirms that he hath frequently found be- 
tween the bark and the wood of old hornbeam trees a very 
odd vegetable substance, having black membranaceous 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 175 

stalks, dividing themselves into many branches, at the 
ends of which there generally grew little balls, or buttons, 
as large as peas. He fancies this to be a vegetable as 
much distinct from the hornbeam as mistletoes are from 
the trees they grow on. M. Dodard could only find it 
in old wormeaten hornbeams, never in young or sound 
ones, which makes him conclude that it cannot anyways 
serve the economy of the tree, but that it is a plant 
growing up in decayed hornbeams, exactly between the 
bark and the wood. It is as it were set (enchassee) in 
the bark, into which it here and there enters, and loses 
itself. M. Marchand found a hornbeam tree, whose 
trunk being cut off, yielded on all sides a gum very like 
to gumTSfcca. This gum of the hornbeam M. Clos dis- 
solved in spirit of wine. The trunk continued to pour 
forth many gummy threads for some years after it had 
lain in a low room. M. Dodard afterwards observed 
the same gum upon many hornbeam trees. I have 
extracted this from the 'Journal des Scavans/ an. 1675. 
Mens. Decemb. 

Wepfer, in his history of the Cicuta aqnatica, proves 
that most of the poisonous plants, as all the hemlocks, 
the hellebores, the solanums, the napellus, hyoscyamus, 
&c. are hot and acrimonious, and kill by saline, fiery, 
and pointed particles, which vellicate the genus nervosum, 
and either congeal, or else colliquate, the blood. The 
best way to cure these poisons is first to give a gentle 
vomit, then oils, broths, warm water, and fat emulsions, 
till all be evacuated and come away; at which time 
alexipharmics, volatile salts, and other alkalies and ano- 
dynes are to be given. 

I find upon the journals of my late voyage, that I 
observed many people in the Low Countries to make use 
of the turmeric root [Curcuma] in pickling and preparing 
their fish. They told me that it gave the fish a grateful 
taste and a yellow colour, which was much esteemed by 
them. I think Bontius remarks the same thing of the 
Germans and Poles. 



176 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

I travelled from Capua to Naples in the company of 
an ingenious Neapolitan physician, who entertained me 
with the history of his country. He assured me that 
the Fraxinus, or Ornus, in many places north-west of 
Naples, afforded manna, of which the inhabitants made 
advantage, though it was not so much esteemed as that 
of Calabria ; for, gathering and evaporating in the sun 
this saccharine juice, they always make use of wooden 
instruments and vessels, for it will prey upon metalline, 
or bony ones, and so lose its white colour when con- 
creted. The afore-mentioned Neapolitan informed me 
that the Cicada did feed much upon the Ornus ; which 
makes me conjecture that this insect (which you have 
well distinguished from our grasshopper) does pierce the 
tree, and so opens the passage for the manna to sweat 
out. 1 remember, in one of the German Ephem. I lately 
sent you, there is an account and figure of an Indian 
tree, upon which some insects are said to work, and pre- 
pare a sort of manna. I am apt to believe it may be a 
mistake, and that the manna works itself out of the tree 
opened and sucked by the insects ; but you are best able 
to judge of these matters. 

September 8, 85. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, M. Dodard's vegetable substance growing on 
the hornbeam tree I know not what to say to. I wish 
it were my luck to see it. That the same tree yielded a 
gum like lacca seems to me very strange, that being a 
bleeding-tree, of which I never heard of any that yielded 
any gum. Howbeit, M. Marchand was a very credible 
person. 

Wepfer's poilosophy concerning poisonous plants may 
be possibly true, but it deserves farther consideration. 
Pauca respi denies falsa pronunciant. 

I better approve your conjecture concerning the exuda- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. ] 77 

tion of the manna ; for I do not observe any kind of 
glim, or resin, or concrete juice, to issue out of any tree 
or herb but at some incision, or wound, or rift, or con- 
tusion, and therefore it is likely enough that the manna 
may issue out of the vessels containing the specific juice 
of the tree perforated by some insect. Your other con- 
jecture also concerning the insect preparing a kind of 
manna is not improbable. 

Black Notley, Sept. 14, 85. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I wrote a pretty while ago to you about the 
Hockesdon earth, which, because I fear it miscarried, I 
now repeat, desiring your opinion of it. 

Not far from Moorfields, near the new square in 
Hockesdon, some workmen digging a cellar for a new 
house in the end of a garden, when they were about 
three feet below the surface of the ground, found a very 
strong smell in the one half thereof. Passing that way, 
and finding it very surprising, and a thing that I had 
neither heard of nor seen before, I thought it worth 
farther inquiry. 

The workmen having dug a pit about six feet deep, 
at about three yards' distance from that end of the cellar 
which smelt so strong, I there found three several layers 
of earth one over another, all of them, more or less, 
having the same scent. The uppermost stratum was 
clay, or, as the workmen call it, loom. It did not smell 
till three feet deep, but then was very strong, and some- 
thing noisome. If one look earnestly on some pieces of 
this clay, there are easily discernible several small quan- 
tities of a bituminous substance, brownish colour, and 
tough consistence. I doubt not but this substance gives 

12 



178 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

the smell and other qualities to this layer. This clay 
preserves its scent a pretty while, though by degrees it 
grows fainter ; and being exposed to the air for about a 
month, will lose it quite. Eight pounds of this clay dis- 
tilled in a retort, placed in a sand-fire (third degree of 
heat), yielded one pound of phlegmatic liquor, and six 
drachms of oil, of a quite different smell from anything I 
have hitherto met with. 

The second layer was gravel, which reached from three 
and a half to about four and a half deep, or thereabouts. 
It very much resembles the other in all its qualities, ex- 
cept the noisomeness of its smell. It loses its scent much 
sooner than the former. 

The third layer was an earthy sand, which smells 
stronger than the other two, and withal is much more 
fragrant. The deeper you dig it smells the stronger. I 
took eight pounds of this layer, at nine feet deep, and 
filled a retort with it, and placed it as the clay ; but it 
afforded only six ounces of phlegmatic liquor, and two 
drachms of oil. This sandy loose earth quits its scent in 
about a fortnight, being exposed to the summer air. 

Considering that waters owe their greatest differences 
to the several soils through which they pass, I was very 
desirous to see what sort of waters would be produced 
by their being percolated through such a strainer as this 
strange sort of earth ; and desiring the owner to dig till 
he should find water, he accordingly did ; and when he 
came to about eighteen feet deep, water came in very 
plentifully, conditioned as follows : 

It had at top a curiously coloured film, the colours of 
it resembling those of the rainbow. Under this was a 
whitish-coloured water, which, upon standing in a phial 
some days, lets fall a brownish sediment, and by that 
means becomes diaphanous. It smelt very strong, as the 
earth did ; was somewhat bitter and clammy, as one may 
see by putting his hands in it, and suffering them to dry 
without wiping. If you put some powdered galls into a 
glass of this water, so soon, or a little after, you take it 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 179 

out of the well, it will turn of a purplish red ; but if it 
stand a day or two, it will not at all. 

Several persons having drunk of this well, about three 
pints, say that usually it works about three times by 
stool, and very much by urine. 

From which I conclude it to be a natural bitumen, 
perhaps sui generis, that impregnates both water and 
earth. I desire your opinion in it, and remain, &c. 

London, November 10, 1685. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I received both your letters, and ought before 
now to have acknowledged the receipt of the former, but 
I must make my late illness and indisposition my excuse 
for so long delay. I now return you many thanks for 
the pains you have taken in assisting me in the carrying 
on the history that is now before me, and the many in- 
formations and advices you have given me, and other 
contributions you have made thereto, which shall be 
owned and gratefully acknowledged by me. My garden 
being a cold soil, and an ill-situated place, would not 
bring to maturity the gourd, so that I am like to lose that, 
as also the Alcea Indica Ulmisea carpini folio, and 
several others. The Lunaria radiata Eobini \_L. radiata, 
Linn.] came up and flowered, and formed its cod with 
me, but brought it not to maturity. I have a sort of 
Lychnis, raised, I suppose, from the seed you sent, which 
I cannot find described. It hath a very small white 
flower, though the plant be of a middle size, the least of 
any Lychnis I ever saw. The Medico, \Medicago, Linn.] 
still continues to flower, and the trailing branches, as they 
lie on the ground, put forth roots from the joints. The 
book you did me the favour to send hath been of use to 
me, though I find it to be for the most part nothing but 
a collection out of Dr. Morison. I agree with you that 



180 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

those who cultivate plants, and have the liberty and free- 
dom to pluck up and observe their roots, have a great 
advantage of those who see them only in one state, and 
can take notice only of their superficial part, for that they 
may, as Dioscorides advises, mark their several states of 
first springing and growth, of consistency and declension, 
and note their differences, and so give us a perfect history 
of their whole progress and several mutations. But I 
should rather have been content with an imperfect and 
defective history, so it had contained notes sufficient to 
distinguish them from all others (because then I could 
have inserted them in their proper places in the body of 
the history), than to have waited for a more perfect and 
accurate to be put as an appendix. 

I thank you for the account of the Hockesden earth, 
and the rather because I was lately informed that it was 
no natural bitumen mingled with it, but had its original 
from the burning of a painting-shop standing over the 
spot where the earth was digged up, and there was no 
such earth round about, but just within that compass ; 
so that, as the Corinthian brass was made by an acci- 
dental mixture of metals melted down and running into 
one mass at the deflagration of that city, so this bitumi- 
nous earth became impregnated by a mixture of oils and 
colours melted and mixed together, and soaking into the 
ground at the burning of that shop. Whether there be 
any truth in this you can best inform ; but I suppose 
there is none, because you mention no such thing ; and 
you have done very well thoroughly to examine the earth, 
for that probably there may be good use made of it. 

I do herewithal send back your dried plants, and the 
book wherein they were, with thanks for the use of them. 
They have, I am sensible, received some prejudice which 
could not be avoided. 
Black Notley, Nov. 17, 85. 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 181 



Mr. COLE'S Letter to Mr. RAY. 

WORTHY SIR, I have for a long time engaged many 
masters of ships, and others, to bring home whatever they 
can find for me, as also on both the sides of Severn, and 
am of opinion, by what I have this winter found, that no 
river in Europe doth yield more variety, especially sea 
animals, great and small, and minerals, there being very 
high land on either side, high and rapid tides, often with 
violent storms, which have so much gained on the rocks 
and clifis, that many fossils and figured stones are cast 
out and found on the shore, especially where at spring- 
tides tRe water ebbs far out. Such I have found this 
winter, i. e. figured stones, which would put you out of 
all doubt that there are many varieties of naturally-formed 
stones, which never were either animals or vegetables, or 
any parts of them, not only because no such shell-fishes 
were ever found, so far as appears by any known authors, 
or the collections that I have seen or heard of (and to 
suppose any species of creatures to cease cannot consist 
with the Divine providence, and is contrary to the opinion 
of all philosophers as well as learned divines) ; but it 
doth evidently appear by the figures of some of those I 
have found this winter, that they were never capable of 
being living creatures ; as among others, to instance in 
one of those which can be reduced to none but the 
ophiomorphites, which I found growing between the thin 
plates of a kind of brittle blue slate in large rocks, some 
a furlong within full sea-mark, and some where the water 
comes not at the highest tides, only in great storms where 
the waves break, and sometimes dash when forced up by 
the wind. These being broken with a convenient tool, 
will shiver all into very thin plates, between which I 
found an abundance of those stones, as brittle as the 
slate in which they grow, and of the same consistence, 
yet so thin, that the broadest, being about four inches, 
are not so thick as a half-crown piece ; some not half an 



182 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

inch, and as thin as a groat, and so proportionably up to 
the largest, covered with a superficies as thin, and exactly 
of the colour of silver foil: and where the sea- water 
washeth them, and they are exposed to the sun and wind 
when the tide is gone, are tarnished, and appear of a gold 
purple, blue and red, as anything on which silver foil is 
laid, when exposed to the sun, wind, and weather, will 
do in a considerable time. These have the same spiral 
figures, and as regular as the other serpent stones, and, 
with a knife being taken off, leave the impressions on 
both sides of the slate. In such rocks of slate, but much 
harder, I found (and employed men with tools to dig 
them out) some of those stones of another kind, thick in 
proportion to then 1 breadth, from an inch to twenty-eight 
inches broad ; and the last broadest one was at the great 
end (on which some authors have fabulously reported 
the head to grow) six inches thick, all of them covered 
over with a white scale, which may be taken off, one 
coat under another, as pearls, or the shells of some fishes. 
I saw some impression of others near as big as the fore 
wheel of a chariot. I could not get one of those large 
ones whole, but brought it home in parts, and have pro- 
mised a good reward to the labourers I employed if they 
dig out and send me a whole one, which will be a rare 
sight, the magnitude, colour, and figure considered. I 
found other stones something resembling a nautilus, but 
so much differing from those we know, that I am confident 
they were never shell-fishes. 

Bradfield, March 27, 1685. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 183 



Mr. JOHNSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I have inclosed a draught of our Branlin [the 
young of the salmon, Salma salar], which I took from 
the fish, which now I know comes too late ; but I hope 
you found the other I sent you before, which was far 
more exact, being done by an excellent artist. On the 
back side you have the description of a new English bird 
[the Bohemian Waxwing, Bombycilla garruld\. It agrees 
in material points with your Garrulus bohemicus ; and 
therefore I imagine it to be of that sort, for some birds 
vary nmeh in colour. They came near us in great flocks, 
like Fieldfares \Turdus joilaris], and fed upon haws, as 
they do. I cannot but think that the wars in those parts 
have frightened them thence, and brought them hither 
this winter (which with us was above measure plentiful in 
haws), for certainly they are not natives. And now it is 
in my thoughts, I would intreat you, at your best leisure, 
to let me know if you can tell anything certain concern- 
ing the birds of passage, whither they go, when they 
leave us ? If it be granted that the swallow kind, and 
such small birds, do hide themselves in rocks or trees, 
yet storks, soland-geese, and birds of great size, cannot 
possibly do so. The moon is too far a journey ; and a 
new world in the south temperate zone methinks they 
can hardly reach, seeing Wild Geese [Anser segetwn\ from 
Ireland, and Woodcocks \Scolopax rusticola] from Nor- 
way, come often so tired to us ; and yet how they should 
escape the eyes of so many diligent inquirers, both by 
sea and land, especially since our increase of trade and 
navigation, is to rne a matter of no less difficulty. 
Brignall, May 7, 86. 



184 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Mr. JOHNSON'S Descriptions. 
Salmoneta. A Branlin. 

LONGITUDO semipedalis, capitis gracilitate, dorsi colore 
caerulescente, et cauda furcata salinonem aemulatur ; linea 
lateralis 6 vel 7 notulis rubris insignitur. Pars superior 
ad dorsuni usque naevis etiam nigricantibus aspergitur. 
Per latus umbrae 7 (plus minus) nigricantes descendunt, 
quibus facillime a trutta distinguitur. Oculi ampli, 
aurei, protuberantes. Pupilla caerula. Os parvum den- 
ticellis repletum. Pinnae, quales in salnionum geuere, 
in ventre rubescunt. Branchiarum operculum nota nigra 
quandoque duabus niaculatur. 

Capta in Teesa flu. Mart. 10, 168|. 
e viva delineavit B,. J. 

An Garrulus Bohemicusj* sive Ampolis. 

Merula paulo minor, rostrum nigerrimum, passeris 
magnitudine, caput crista longiuscula decoratum quae 
versus rostrum ex castaneo rubet, retro cinerescit. Sub 
mento macula nigra, ampla, supra oculos linea etiani nigra 
retrogreditur. Totum dorsum leucophaeum, versus uro- 
pygium tamen magis cinerescit. Cauda quae 1 2 pennis 
constat, ima parte ciuerea, media, nigra ; extima pulchre 
lutea. Alee nigricant, e rectricibus Ima tota nigra, 2da, 
3tia, et 4ta, exteriore margine in album desinit, 4 proxi- 
niae in luteum deinde 8 in album, adeo tamen ut ex 
his 5 interiores appendices habent cinnaberinos. Alarum 
tegeres exteriores in album terminantur. Reliquas leu- 
cophaeae. 

Pectus leucophaeum, caudam versus albicat. Sub 
cauda plumae castaneas quasi alteram caudam minorem 
efficiunt, caro et plumae tactu mollissimae, nee linguam, 
nee pedes, nee rostra, nee barbam picorum vel lyngis 
habebat. Gregatim volitant. 

Capt. mense Martio IGSjj. 
* The Wax wing, called also the Bohemian Chatterer. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 185 

I saw another, perhaps the female, like the former in 
all things, save that the breast and belly were all of one 
colour (leucophaBous), not growing whiter toward the tail, 
and that the two utmost rectrines had no white at all, 
nor scarce any appearance of yellow in the rest, and but 
four tagged or pointed with crimson ; and which I did 
wonder at, there were indeed but ten feathers in the tail. 
Whether this was the natural number, or that two had 
been shot away, I could not satisfy myself. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, In turning over my Paris Garden Catalogue, I 
found a catalogue of nondescript plants growing there in 
the year 1683. I saw and took notice of them there, 
most of the names being given by Dr. Tournefort, whom 
I expect to see here shortly. The catalogue I transmit 
you as follows: 

Abrotanum foemina foliis crethmi. D. Fagon. 

Abrotanum foemina foliis rorismarini. D. Tournefort. 

Betonica purpurea spied molliori, longiori, et serins Jlorente. Tournefort. 

Brunella alpina folio angusto Integra. D. Tournefort. 

Caucalis elegantissima pyrenaica. D. Fagon. 

Cerinthe major alpina. Tournefort. 

Chanuesyce foliis hirsutis. Tournefort. 

Cicutaria latifolia foetida. D. Fagon. 

Cucumis Asininus folio Anguriee, D. Fagon. 

Daucus pyrenaicus odore citri. D. Fagon. 

Echium Creticum latifolium rubrum. Tournefort. 

Erysimum siliquis quasi implicitis. D. Fagon. 

Ferula folio latissimo. D. Fagon. 

Horminum pyrenaicum anguricB folio viscosum. D. Fagon. 

Laserpitium umbelld contractd et concand. D. Fagon. 

Meitm adulterinum longiori folio. D. Tournefort. 

Nasturtium aquaticum maximum. D. Fagon. 

Oenanthe capitulo longiori et hispidiori. D. Tournefort. 

Ruta arborea latifolia. D. Tournefort. 

Salvia Cretica coccifera. Tournefort. 

Scabiosa folio dipsaci. Tournefort. 

Senecio Jjamii folio. D. Fagon. 

Seseli pyremtictiM Thapsite folio. D. Fagon. 



186 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Succisa angustifolia alpina. Toumefort. 
Stachys pyrenaica. D. Fagon. 
Stachys Cretica major. Toumefort. 
Tithymalm ranunculi radice. D. Fagon. 

In our simpling joui'ney to Sheppey we found a peren- 
nial ~K.a\i[8alicornia fruticosa, Sm.*], differing something 
from that on the Mediterranean shore, in that it creeps, 
whereas the other is erect. Then the green tops are 
thicker than that on the Mediterranean shores ; and Mr. 
Watts assures me it is a perennial. It grows near King's 
Ferry, in Sheppey, where also is cast upon the shore the 
Fucus spongiosus nodosus Ger. emac. In the same place, 
in the ditch, grows plentifully an Atripleoc maritima folio 
sinuato candicante angusto. It seems to differ from the 
common Sinuato candicante pin. as the common Maritima 
from the Sylvestris altera. I send you down specimens 
of them, and Axtius de pice conficiendd, and Arboribus 
coniferis, by the first carrier ; as also that Fucus I for- 
merly told you of, to look like a honeycomb, which I 
found cast upon the shore on Sheppey, as well as at 
Nesson. There is in town a bark come from Virginia, 
which has prickles, the bases of which resemble petrified 
Malta teeth. It stings the tongue in a very extraordinary 
manner; and he that brought it says it grows plentifully 
on the shore there. On Sheppey, searching for the cop- 
peras-stones, or Pyrites, I found that the most part of 
those taken up in that island are after north-easterly 
storms, that they are beat up by the waves, and taken 
up at low water. Among others I found one something 
extraordinary. It had been a Buccinum petrified, and 
after that turned into a Pyrites ; so that you might see 
everything in it as in a Pyrites, viz. weight, colour, &c. 
I leave you to judge whether or no the difference between 
the Atriplexes maritime and sylvestres may not be 
occasioned by the differing soil; for, considering that both 
the maritime are less in their leaves than the sylvestres, 

* Not of Liun. It is a form of the S. radiants, Sm. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 187 

it is somewhat probable that the brackish aliment of the 
one does not mollify nor distend the cells of the leaves 
so well as the other ; but that is but a conjecture. I wish 
you all health and happiness ; and am, &c. 

London, August 10, 1686. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, The other day I and Mr. Doody (an apothecary 
here) had occasion to go five or six hours down the river, 
we found many rare plants upon the chalk hills and 
marshes^iear Gravesend ; but they are all mentioned by, 
and very well known to you. We observed in the long 
broad vesicles at the end of the leaves of the Fucus mari- 
timus latifolius vulgatissimus, many small dark round 
bodies adhering to the inner membranes, which contained 
a mucous liquor; whereas the round bladders in the 
other parts of the leaves were void of liquor, and of those 
dark solid globules, which gave Mr. Doody and myself 
reason to fancy that this plant abounds with seed, which, 
upon drying, disappears. And this seems to me to be 
no extravagant conjecture, for I begin to conclude that 
the seed of this plant (and others of the same class) may 
in time appear as manifest as the seed of the capillary 
herbs. 

London, August 24, 86. 



Mr. JOHNSON to Mr. RAY. 



g IR) I did indeed once imagine a possibility of know- 
ing the medicinal virtues of plants by their signatures, 
which project, if it could have been brought to perfection, 
might have been of great use to physicians, who know 
nothing of them but by quack and second qualities, I 



188 CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 

was hereunto encouraged by the unaccountable variety of 
colours, forms of seeds and seed vessels, especially num- 
ber, which I found the Conjugate religiously to observe 
in some plants to the very division of the pointel. Be- 
sides the Galeatce of sweet smell being mostwhat cardiac, 
the Scandentes often cathartic, those of a lurid flower 
poisonous, &c. ; farther, I did consider that the Tc^t/co, 
or general terms of virtues, were not well ordered, but 
often did interfere one with another ; and that if they 
were reduced to a method truly natural, plants might be 
accommodated to them more easily. These considera- 
tions did some time encourage me to observe the analogy 
of plants of the same kind, and their minute differences, 
not without great pleasure and delight ; but when I found 
Dr. Grew had hit upon the same notion, and laid his 
inquiries much deeper than mine, viewing the internal as 
well as external parts of plants, and yet could conclude 
nothing, I quite desisted from farther search, despairing 
to meet with what others with more diligence had not 
found. 

Brignall, October 29, 86. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, The Willows will sometimes drop and run 
prodigiously in dry and clear seasons at noon-day, as I 
have been told by several of good credit. In the year 
1685 the willows wept so fast at noon-day in the month 
of March, near the neat-houses, that Dr. Plucknet pass- 
ing on the road was extremely surprised, and almost wet 
to the skin ; yet it had been no rain for many weeks 
before, and the air and other trees were very dry at the 
same time. I have heard this relation confirmed by other 
persons that observed the same. Trees may now and then 
be subject to bleedings, sweatings, catarrhs, and other 
extravasations; yet this is no very strong argument, I 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 189 

confess, for the Arbor aquam fundens, because it is said 
to observe certain periods. 

The Manchinelo is not only mentioned by Hughes 
and Lyon, but Rochefort. I think he hath misplaced it, 
for, as I remember, he hath put it amongst the animals. 
A planter tells me that they use the wood for beds and 
floors, because those insects, which eat and destroy all their 
other timber, will not touch this. Their beds and floors, 
and other wood-work, suffer extremely by an insect un- 
less they are made of the maiichinel wood. 

The Cochineal* is a dried hexapode, that runs up and 
down a Ficus indica, and turns into a Lady-cow. I took 
it once for a Kermes, or Coccus of an Opuntia, or Tuna. 

London, January 29, 8f 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I have talked a long while of going to Jamaica 
with the Duke of Albemarle as his physician, which, if I 
do, next to the serving his grace and family in my pro- 
fession, my business is to see what I can meet withal 
that is extraordinary in nature in those places. I hope 
to be able to send you some observations from thence, 
God Almighty granting life and strength to do what I 
design ; but our voyage having been put off so often, I 
doubt it very much. I am glad to hear by Dr. Robinson 
that your elaborate and excellent work goes on so fast as 
to begin already to print the trees. Great feuds are like 
to be between the French and our philosophers about the 
magnitude of London and Paris, ours alleging that London 
is as big as Paris and Rouen both together ; and being 
urged by them to give some proof for what they say, I 
intend to print certificates from hearthmen here, and 
ingenious men there, that in London are 100,000 houses, 
and in Paris but 24,000. There is no less a dispute on 

* The Cochineal is the Coctus Cacti (Linn.), it is found on the Cactus 
cochenillifer (Linn.) It is scarcely necessary to add, that it does not turn 
into a Lady-cow, or Coccinella. C. C. B. 



190 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

another account. The French ambassador to the king of 
Siam, carrying a Jesuit with him, he made several obser- 
vations, and found that that kingdom was misplaced in 
longitude, to the east, about 22 degrees ; but Mr. Hally 
says that he long ago found that out, and gave an account 
of it in the ' Transactions.' But I am mistaken if there 
were not something rectified about that a great while 
ago by some learned men. I suppose you have had an 
account of Dr. Magnol's new appendix ; it is but small 
and less worth than I thought, for when I was there he 
designed to simple the Pyrenees and Hortus Dei, or 
mountains of Auvergne, where are many curiosities. We 
are now mighty solicitous about the Jesuit' s-bark, or 
Cortex peruvianus, it being so good a drug, that they 
begin to adulterate it with black cherry and other barks 
dipped in a tincture of aloes, to make it bitter ; but the 
bitterness of the adulterated bark appears upon its first 
touch with the tongue, whereas the other is a pretty 
while in the mouth before it be tasted. I am, &c. 
London, Jan. 29, 1786. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I received yours of August 1 Oth, and on Satur- 
day last the specimens of plants by you discovered, with 
' Antius de Pice conficienda' and ' Zaluzonius Methodus 
Herbaria,' which I have not as yet had time to turn over. 

As to the plants, the Fucus is no other than that de- 
scribed and figured in J. Bauhine's history by the name 
of Alga marina platycer os porosa \Flustrafoliacea, Linn., 
not a plant but a zoophyte], and is frequently found cast 
up on our shores; I take it to be that they call silken 
ivrack in ' Phytologia Britannica.' I have entered it 
under J. Bauhin's name, and borrowed his description. 

The Kali geniculatum \_8alicorniafruticosa of Smith], 
I agree with you and Mr. Wattes to be different from 
that of the Mediterranean shores, and a new species, as 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 191 

far as I can discern by the dried plant. The grass you 
sent I think is not the Gramon aureum of Dalechamp, 
for that is paniculate, and hath a pendulous panicle. We 
have discovered this grass hereabouts. The Muscus or 
Conferva I cannot say I have observed myself, but I think 
it hath been shown me by Mr. Newton. Your Atriplex 
maritima folio sinuato candicante anyusto I am not satis- 
fied in. You that saw it growing and green can better 
judge of it than I by a dried specimen ; I make some 
doubt whether it be of that genus or not, and whether it 
may not be the Atriplex angustifolia maritima dentata 
\Atriplex marina, Linn.] described in our History, p. 193. 
The seed vessel I cannot discern, and so can affirm 
nothingT^ut incline to think it is that. 

I thank you for your continued friendship, in so frankly 
affording me your assistance in carrying on this tedious 
work I have in hand, and desire you would quicken Mr. 
Wattes to hasten the accomplishing what he hath pro- 
mised, that so the [matter] may not be deferred in ex- 
pectance of his contribution. I do resolve (God granting 
life and health), with as much speed as strength and 
leisure will permit, to pursue the work, that so the sub- 
scribers may not have reason to complain of delay and 
frustration. I long to see Dr. Herman's book, which, 
as you well intimate, will in all likelihood much facilitate 
the work, and ease Mr. Wattes of much trouble in de- 
scribing and giving the history of his rarer and non- 
descript plants. I am, sir, 

Your very humble servant, 
JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, Aug. 24, 86. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., April 1, 87. 

SIR, The last week the coachman brought me a 
second letter from you before 1 had acknowledged the 



192 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

receipt of your former, which delay I hope you will im- 
pute rather to my incumbrances than negligence ; for 
truly the prosecution of this work I have in hand leaves 
me but little time to spare. I thank you for the informa- 
tion and intelligence communicated in your first letter. 
Were it not for the danger and hazard of so long a 
voyage, I could heartily wish such a person as yourself 
might travel to Jamaica, and search out and examine 
thoroughly the natural varieties of that island. Much 
light might be given to the history of the American 
plants, by one so well prepared for such an undertaking, 
by a comprehensive knowledge of the European. Nay 
(which is more), that history, we might justly expect, would 
not only be illustrated but much improved and advanced. 
The fair specimen you sent inclosed in your last hath 
informe'd me concerning the Irish Dulrsh,* for so I think 
you spell it. I own myself to have been mistaken in it ; 
for it is not the Alga membranacea purpurea parva com- 
monly thrown upon our shores, but a plant not observed 
by me though I take it to be the Fucus membranaceus 
ceranoides, C. B., both from the Scottish name Dils, and 
in that he makes it resemble the Lactuca marina, which 
this very much doth, so that I am in doubt, whether I 
ought to entitle it a Fucus or Lactuca. It may be deno- 
minated Fucus membranaceus poluscliidos Hibernicus viola 
odore, which scent is very remarkable in it. In the ap- 
pendix we may give a more full and perfect history and 
description of it. I pray the continuance of your corre- 
spondence and rest, Sir, 

Your very humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, at Mr. Wilkinson's 
a bookseller, at the Black Boy, over against 
St. Dunstan's church, in Fleet Street, London. 

* The Dulse of Scotland and Dillesk of Ireland is, according to Greville 
(Brit. Alg. 94) the Rhodomenia palmata (Grev.) The Iridtea edulis is called 
Dulse in the south-west of England. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 193 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, Monsieur Bernier, who passed the Red Sea into 
Arabia, doth affirm in a private letter, that the Arabs 
assured him that the coffee fruit was sown every year 
under trees, up which it did climb and run, from which 
he concludes it to be a species of Convolvulus. I think 
he might as well have concluded it to be a Phaseolus, or 
some other scan dent legume. If M. Bernier was truly in- 
formed of its annual sowing and climbing, then Alpinus- 
never saw the true coffee plant. The Arabians are as 
careful-4, destroying the germinating faculty of the coffee 
fruit or seed, by boiling or burning, as the Dutch of the 
Moluccas are in their nutmegs. I have spoke with several 
curious persons that have been several times in Egypt, 
and they all said that they never saw the coffee plant; 
neither, as I remember, did Bellonius ever meet with it 
in that country or Arabia ; for the coffee is said only to 
grow in that part of Arabia that lies within the tropic. 

I have examined many coffee berries, as they call them, 
here at London, and am almost persuaded by my own 
observation, that they are neither berries nor the seeds 
of any Convolvulus, nor of any legume, but are rather of 
the nut kind : the entire fruit is covered with two skins, 
being round on one side and flat on the other ; the exte- 
rior skin, or rather shell, being as thick almost as that of 
a pistachio, is of a dark colour ; the second, or interior 
membrane, that covers the kernels, is much finer and of 
a yellowish -white colour, as the kernels themselves are. 
Under this second skin lies generally two kernels, some- 
times one, round on one side and flat on the other : on 
the flat side of the kernel there is always a slit, or a 
mouth, so that every kernel doth exactly resemble a 
Concha Veneris. The fruit doth generally come to us 
decorticated, but I, finding some entire, have made this 
description. 

London, May 21, 87. 

13 



194 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I send you here inclosed the specimen of a plant 
growing on Newmarket Heath, and in Surrey, known by 
the name of Star of the Earth in those parts. It is par- 
ticularly taken notice of on the account of its extraordi- 
nary and admirable virtue in curing the bitings of mad 
dogs, either in beasts or men. One of his majesty's 
huntsmen having proved it a great many times, gave the 
king his way of using it, which was an infusion in wine 
with treacle, and one or two more simples. His majesty 
was pleased to communicate it to Gresham College to the 
Royal Society; and nobody knowing the plant by that 
name, some there present confirming its use in that dis- 
ease in some places of England, and procuring the herb 
itself, it is as little known here as if it had come from the 
Indies. I told the Society I would let you have this best 
specimen of it, which I question not but it is known to 
you. If you please to give your sentiments about it, you 
will extremely oblige, &c. 

London, June 21, 1687. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I received your letter with the specimen inclosed, 
which seems to me to be the Sesamoides Salamanticum 
magnum of Clusius [Silene otites, Sm.], or Lychnis viscosa 
Jlore muscoso of C. B., which I have observed to grow 
plentifully upon Newmarket Heath, that part I mean that 
is in Suffolk, for on Cambridgeshire side I have not found 
it. I wonder it should have such a virtue as you mention, 
but it seems it is well attested. Dr. Hulse writes to me 
he finds it in Graye's * Earrier.' 

If you go to Jamaica I pray you a safe and prosperous 
voyage. We expect great things from you, no less than 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 195 

the resolving all our doubts about the names we meet 
with of plants in that part of America, as the Dildoe, 
Mammee, Mangrove, Manchinello, Avellance purgatrices, 
the Sower-sop, and Custard-apple. Of most of which, 
though I am pretty well informed and satisfied by Dr. 
Robinson, yet I shall be glad to be either confirmed or 
better informed by so knowing and curious an observer 
as yourself. I should be glad to know what manner of 
fruit the Mandioca bears; for, whatever some have written, 
that it is not without, I am confident. You may also 
please to observe whether there be any species of plants 
common to America and Europe, and whether Ambergrise 
be the 7ice of any sort of metal or aloe dropped into the 
sea, as Trapham would have it. What kind of Arundo 
it is the same author calls the Dumbcane, as also what 
his animal seeds may be. The shining barks of trees 
which he mentions deserve observation, because I find 
nothing of them in other writers. I shall not instance in 
more particulars. I wish your voyage had so long pre- 
vented the publication of my history, that I might have 
been satisfied and informed by you of these and a thou- 
sand other particulars, and had so great an accession of 
new and nondescript species as your inquisitions and ob- 
servations would have enriched it withal. I take leave, 
and rest, &c. 



RICH. WALLER, Esq. to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I thought it might not be an unacceptable com- 
munication to tell you, that being this last summer at 
Keinsham, in Somersetshire, and making a search after 
the Cornua ammonis, I found, amongst several of the 
ordinary snake-stones in which the shelly diaphragms 
were very visible, one of the true nautilus shape, covered 
in some places with a shelly incrustation, with the dia- 
phragms to be seen to the centre of the voluta ; and in 



196 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

each diaphragm the hole by which they communicate 
with one another, by a string or gut in the fish. This 
was of a very hard stone and large size, weighing at least 
twenty-eight pounds, though some part was broken off. 

London, Feb. 4, 1687. 



Mr. WALLEK to Mr. RAT. 

SIR, Since one of the chief ends of an herbal is 
thereby to attain a true knowledge of plants, I have ad- 
ventured to propose my thoughts to you, how by a few 
tables, with iconisms, one wholly ignorant in plants may 
know how to find any unknown plant, together with the 
help of your method and tables in your most exact and 
elaborate ' Treatise of Plants,' lately published. My 
thoughts in short are these : 

I would, according to your general table of herbs, 
inserted at page 58, take the two first divisions, imperfect 
and perfect ; giving the figure of any one imperfect plant, 
as of a fungus or the like. Of a perfect one I would do 
the same ; under the perfect another figure of the minute 
seeded, viz. a capillary, with a larger seeded plant. This 
should be my first table. In the second, coming to the 
larger seeded, I would give the figure of a seed coming 
out of the ground with two lobes or seed-leaves, beside 
the plant-leaves (referring the Unifolia to another table, 
as also all larger plants or trees) ; under this I would re- 
present an imperfect or staminous flower, and against it 
a perfect or leafy flower, both compound and simple; 
and so on throughout all the generic and specific divisions 
in several tables, which I suppose need not be many, with 
references to the books and chapters of your Treatise. 
The use of them will be this : taking any unknown plant, 
my first inquiry must be whether it has a seed or no ; if 
a seed, whether small or large ? if large, whether bivalve 
or not ? &c. By which method proceeding, I shall at 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 197 

last be brought to find the very plant itself and the place 
where described at large in your book, my design in these 
tables being only to give an idea of the difference of 
plants by pictures (the representations of beings) rather 
than by words (the representations of pictures). This I 
submit to your censure before discovering it to others, 
requesting your thoughts upon it ; for it is very possible, 
that being so unknowing as I am in plants, I may frame 
an image to myself of that, which, brought to the test, 
will prove a mere chimera. If so, pray pardon my rash- 
ness, and accept of my real desire of advancing know- 
ledge. 

I thkjjt fit to communicate, that being this last autumn 
at Bristol, in August the tide brought in floating some of 
the vesiculiferous sea-wrack ; the bladders were some 
filled with air, some with a slimy water, and in some I 
found a round (as I suppose) seed, thinly dispersed in a 
tenacious matter. They were somewhat smaller than 
rape-seed, and of a brownish colour. This, if a new dis- 
covery, may be farther prosecuted. Thus having already 
troubled you with too large a letter, I beg leave to sub- 
scribe myself, &c. 

London, April 5, 1688. 



Mr. THO. LAWSON to Mr. EAT* 

MR. RAY, Acetosa scutata repens, C. B. Acet. ro- 
tundis. Westmerlandica Mor. \0xyria reniformis, Hook], 
by Buckbarrow Well, in Longsledale ; also on little 
Harterfell Crag, copiose, Westmoreland. 

Adiant. petr. perpusittum, sc. [Hymenopliyllum tun- 

* Although the plants mentioned in this letter of Mr. Lawson may 
be met with in Mr. Ray's books, yet there being many of the northern 
plants put together in alphabetical order, with the places where they grow, 
I thought it might be acceptable to the northern botanists to publish the 
letter as I found it. W. D[ERHAM.] 



198 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

bridgense, Sm.],* on Buzzard rough Crag, close by Wre- 
nose, in Westmoreland. I was with Ja. Newton when it 
was found. 

Alchimilla alp. quinquefolia [Alchemilla alpina, Linn.], 
by Buckbarrow Well plentifully, as on the rocks between 
Thornwhait and Mardale, copiose, Westmoreland. 

Allium mont. bicorne [A. carinatum, Linn.], is doubt- 
less AL syl. bic.pur.prol. Chab., in Trout Beck Holme, 
by Great Strickland, Westmoreland. 

Alnusnigra baccifera, J. B. [Bhammis Frangula, Linn.], 
in Thorny Holme, in Whinfield Forest, Westmoreland. 

Saccifr. gram. sc. Cat. Cant. \Sagina procumbens, 
Linn.], called in your history, Sax. gram. pusil. fl. 
parvo tetrapetalo. Hereof I found another species, Foliis 
brevioribus crassioribm et succulentioribus \Spergula su- 
bulata, Sw.], on Whinneyfield Bank, by Cullercoats by 
Tynemouth, in Northumberland. 

Anagallis aquat. minor fol. subr., C. B. [Veronica Bec- 
cabunga, Linn.] Anagal. aquat. min. fol. oblong., C. B. 
\V. Anagallis, Linn.] Both fl. albo, about Shap, in 
Westmoreland. 

Anag. aquat. rotund., Ger., Samolus Valerandi \Samolus 
Falerandi, Linn.], at Marshgrainge, in Furneis, and be- 
tween Bare and Pulton, nigh Lancaster, on the sea-bank. 

Anchusa degener fa. mil. solis [Zit/iospermum arvense, 
Linn.], on Lansmoor, near Great Strickland. It is not 
plentiful with us, Westmoreland. 

Androsoemum vulg., Park. \Hypericum Androscemum, 
Linn.], in the Lady Holme, in Winander Mear, West- 
moreland. 

Apium palustre seu off., C. B. \_A. graveolens, Linn.], 
near Cartmall Medicinal Well, on the Marsh Ditches, 
Lancashire. 

Armeriaprat., Ger.,/. albo[Dianthus Armeria, Linn.], 
at Orton, Greatstrick, Westmoreland, and by Penigent, 
in Yorkshire. 

* Perhaps more correctly H. Wilsoni, Hook. C. C. B. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 199 

Aria Theophrasti, Ger. [Pyrus Aria, Sm.], Wither- 
slack, Consick Scar, Silverdale, Arnside, places in Lanca- 
shire and Westmoreland, where they call it Chess-apple 
and Sea-oulers. It is Sorbus alpina, J. B. 

Asplenium, J. B. [Ceteracli Officinarum, Willd.], on 
Troutbeck Bridge, near Winander Mear, copiose Barba 
Neptuni. Mrs. Warde, of Gisborough of Cleinelayne, in 
Yorkshire, first observed this and called it Sea-bird : she 
showed it to me and after to Mr. Newton, who called it 
Bar. Neptuni. She is very knowing in plants. 

Betonica aquat., Ger. \_Scrophularia aquatica, Linn.], 
at Allythwait, nigh Cartmal, Lancashire, copiose. 

Bijk&um minimum, J. B. [Listera cordata, R. Br.], by 
the Picts' Wall, in Northumberland. 

Bistorta minor, Ger. \Polygonum viviparum, Linn.], 
at Crosby Ravensworth, in Westmoreland, copiose. 

Bryonia alba, Ger. [B. dioica, Jacq.], near Darlington, 
all along the horse-way to Thornton, in the bishopric of 
Durham, copiose. 

Buglossum luteum, Ger. [Picris echioides, Linn.], be- 
twixt Stockton and Norton, in the bishopric of Durham, 
plentifully. 

Bur sa past, minor. Nastur.petr. Tab., \Teesdalia nudi- 
caulis, R. Br.], by Common Holme Bridge, near Clibburn, 
in Westmoreland. 

Campanula Cymbalaria fol., Ger. Emac. \Walilenbergia 
hederacea, Reich.], in Bagley Wood, near Oxford, I ob- 
served it. 

Cardamine, Ger. [C.pratensis, liam^fl.pleno, on Little 
Strickland pasture, Westmoreland. 

Carduus nutans, J. B. [C. nutans, Linn.], by Hardin- 
dale Nab, Westmoreland. 

Card, stellat., Ger. \_Centaurea Calcitrapa, Linn.], be- 
twixt the Glasshouses and Dent's Hole, nigh Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne, in Northumberland. 

Card, monstrosus Imperati [Carlina vulgaris, Linn. ?] 
in a limestone quarry in Great Strickland field, West- 
moreland. 

Caryophyllata purpurca prolifcra fl. amplo [a double- 



200 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

flowered variety of Geum rivale, Linn.], by Great Strick- 
land, Westmoreland. 

Caryopkyttus mar. minimus, Ger. \Armeria maritima, 
Willd.], in Bleaberry Gill, under Hinckell Haugh, at the 
head of Stockdale fields in Craven, Yorkshire, far from 
the sea. 

Caryophyllus virgin., Ger. \JDianthus deltoides, Linn.], 
on a sandy hill, a little below Common Holme Bridge, 
where the water is crossed near Great Strickland, West- 
moreland. 

Catanance leg. quorundam, J. B. \Latkyrus Nissolia, 
Linn.], between the Glasshouses and Dent's Hole, 
nigh the North Shore-house by Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 
copiose. 

Centaurium luteum perfol., C. B. \_Chlora perfoliata, 
Linn.], in many places by Worcester and Gloucester. 

Centaurium min., C. B., /. albo [Erythrcea centaurium, 
Pers.], by Cartmall Medicinal Well, Lancashire. 

Cerasus syl. fructu min. cordiformi, Ph. Br. \Prunus 
Avium, Linn.],* nigh Stockport, in Cheshire, at Bery 
or Bury, in Lancashire, at Rosgill, in Westmoreland. 
In all these places it is called Merry-tree. I could ob- 
serve no difference from other cherry-trees, save in its 
small cordiformous fruit. 

Chamcecistus vulgaris fl. albo \_Helianthemum vulgare, 
Gaert.] On Gogmagog's Hill I gathered it. 

Alysson Dioscor. montanum, Col. [Veronica montana, 
Linn.], at Lartington, in Yorkshire, near Bernard Castle, in 
Buckham, belonging to Sir John Lowther, Westmoreland. 

Cham&morus, Ger. \JRubus Cham&morus, Linn.], be- 
tween Bannisdal Head and Water Sledale, as on Cross- 
fece, Westmoreland. 

Ckristopkoriana, Ger. \Actaa spicata, Linn.], among 
the shrubs by Malham Cove, Yorkshire. 

Cochlearia marina fol. anguloso parvo [Cochlearia da- 
nica, Linn.], in the Isle of Waney, Lancashire. I pur- 

* See Leighton's 'Flora of Shropshire 3 (pp. 523-7) concerning this 
and the P. Cerasus, Linn., which have usually been confounded by English 
botanists. C. C. B. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 201 

pose soon after Pentecost to send fair samples and seeds. 
I saw nothing to distinguish it from the rest but its little 
cornered leaves. 

Conyza major Mat. sc. J. B. \Inula Conyza, De Cand.], 
by Cartmall Medicinal Well, Lancashire. 

Conyza car. acris, C. B. \_Erigeron acris, Linn.], on 
the old walls by Sawley Abbey, Lancashire. 

Cotulanonfcetidaplenofl. \Pyretliruminodorum, Sm.], 
at Great Strickland, Westmoreland. 

Cotyledon Idrsuta, P. B. \Saccifraga stellaris, Linn.], 
by Buckbarrow Well, in Longsledale, Westmoreland, 
copiose. 

Critfynum mar. spinosum sc. Park. \_Echinophora spi- 
nosa, Linn.], at.Roosbeck, in Low Furneis, Lancashire. 

Digitalis fl. albo \Digitalispurpurea, Linn.], in a close 
called Millbank, at Lorton Town End, in Cumberland, 
copiose. 

Dryopteris alba Dodonei, Ger. Emac. \Cystopterisfra- 
gilis, Bernh.] ; Dryopt. nigra Dod. \Asplenium Adiantum- 
nigrum, Linn.] ; Dryopt. Tragi. \Polypodimn Dryopteris, 
Linn.] ; these three I found plentifully in a place called 
Trowgill, near Clibburn, Westmoreland. 

Ecldum mar., P. Br. [Stenhammaria maritima, Reich. ; 
Pulmonaria maritima, Linn.], by Whitehaven, in Cum- 
berland, and also over against Bigger, in the Isle of 
Waney, copiose. 

Elceagus cordi \Myrica Gale, Linn.], by the rivulet be- 
tween Shap and Anna Well, Westmoreland. 

Elatine fol. acum., Park. \Linaria Elatine, Mill.] ; 
Elatine fol. subrot., C. B. [L. spuria, Mill.] ; both these 
I observed on Stanhill, west of Henley Wood. 

Equisetum sive hippuris lac. fol. mansu aren., Gesn. 
[ Ckara hispida, var. Linn.], in Hell Kettles, nigh Dar- 
lington, in Conzick Tarn ditches, Westmoreland. 

Eruca marina, Ger., Cakile sc. \Cakile maritima, 
Willd.] at Roosbeck, in Furneis, as also in the Isle of 
Waney, Lancashire. 



202 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Eruca Nasturtio cognat. tenuifolia, P. B. [Vella annua, 
Linn.], on Salisbury Plain. 

Eruca monensis lacin. lutea [Sinapis monensis, Bab.], 
between Marshgrainge and the Isle of Waney, Lancashire, 
in Sella Fields, Sea Bank, Cumberland. I purpose to 
observe this in the Isle of Man, at Pentecost. 

Eryngium vulg. J. B. \JB. campestre, Linn.], on the 
shore called Fryer Goose, near Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 

Ferrum equinum, Ger., sil. in summ. sc. C. B. [Hippo- 
crepis comosa, Linn.], on the rocks by the rivulet that 
runs from Anna Well towards Shap, Westmoreland. 

Filipendula, Ger., J. B. [Spiraa flipendula, Linn.], 
on the top of Conzick Scar, copiose, Westmoreland. 

Fumaria alba latifolia, Park. [Fumaria claviculata, 
Linn.], at Thornwhait, foot of Longsledale, on the thatched 
houses in Kentmeer, Isan Paries Cave mouth, copiose, 
Westmoreland. 

Fumaria major scandens [F. capreolata, Linn.], in 
Great Strickland, Westmoreland. 

Fungus Phattoides, J. B. [Phallus impudicus, Linn.], 
in Croft Short Close, by Great Strickland. 

Geranium batrachoides, fl. eleyanter variegato \G. syl- 
vaticum, Linn.], in Old Deer Park, by Thorn whaite, 
Westmoreland. 

Ger. hfsmatodes fl. eleganter variegato \G. sanguineum, 
Linn., |3. prostratum ; G. lancastriense, With. ; G. pro- 
stratum, Cavan.] Thousands hereof I found in the Isle of 
Waney, and have sent roots to Edinburgh, York, London, 
Oxford, where they keep their distinction. 

Gladiolus lacustris Clusii, sc. Park. [Lobelia Dortmanna, 
Linn.] This I found in Winander Mear, copiose, and in 
Grayson Tarne, near Cockermouth, Cumberland. 

Gladiolus palustris Cord., Ger. [Butomus umbellatus, 
Linn.] This I observed betwixt Tewksbury and Glou- 
cester, in the ditches. 

Glaux Dioscor., Ger. [Astragalus hypoglottis, Linn.], 
close by Huntcliff Rock, in Cleveland, Yorkshire. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 203 

Glausc vulff. Ad. Lob. [is this Glaujc maritima, Linn. ?], 
on the shore called Fryer Goose, by Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 

Gnaphalium mont. album, Ger. \Gnaplialium dioicum, 
Linn.], by the Force, between Anna Well and Shap, on 
Sir John Lowther's pasture, between Lowther and Hack- 
thorpe, Westmoreland. 

Gramen triylochin, J. B. \Triglochin palustre, Linn.], 
by the rivulet between Shap and Anna Well, Westmore- 
land. 

Gramen sparteum capite bifido vel gemino* betwixt 
Hackthorpe and Lowther, copiose, Westmoreland. 

Hederula aquatica, Ger. [Lemna trisulca, Linn.], in 
ditches* between Warton and Cornforth, Lancashire. 

Helleborine minor alba, Park. \Ceplialanthera grandi- 
jlora, Bab.], in Sir John Lowther's wood, directly against 
Askham Hall, Westmoreland. 

Helleb.Jlore atro rubente, Park. [Epipactis ovalis, Bab.], 
in the lane by Abbot Wood Close, near Great Strickland, 
Westmoreland. 

Hieracium Macrocaulon hirsutum fol. rotundiore [H. 
murorum, Linn.] This I found by Buckbarrow Well, in 
Longsledale, and on the rocks by the rivulet between 
Shap and Anna Well, Westmoreland ; expect fair samples 
and my description. 

Hipposelinum, Ger. Emac. \Smyrnium olusatrum, 
Linn.], within and without the walls of Scarborough 
Castle, copiose, Yorkshire. 

Hypericum elegant, non ramosum fol. lato, J. B. \H. 
montanum, Linn.J, on Conzick Skar, by Kendal, on the 
rocks by the rivulet between Shap and Anna Well, West- 
moreland. 

Hypericum pulchrum Tragi, J. B. \H.pulchrum, Linn.], 
in Trowgil, near Clibburn, Westmoreland. 

Jacobaea latifol. palustris [Senecio aquatics, Huds.], 
at Great Strickland, in the watery places by Clibburn 
Bridge, Westmoreland. 

* This may be Ammophila arenaria, Link, Antndo arenaria, Liun., but 
the station requires examination. C. C. B. 



204 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Juncus acutus cum caudd Leporind, J. B. being Gra- 
menjunceum montanum subsc&ruled spied Mer. \_Eriop7io- 
rum vaginatum, Linn.] It is always Spied simplici. 
Its bluish spikes appear soon after Christmas. After it 
turns white sheep are greedy after it; so it is called 
Moss-crops about Clibburn, Water Sledale, and in all 
places here Westmoreland. 

Lacluca Agnina, Ger. \Valerianella olitoria, Moench.], 
about the bank of the Roman fort Maburg, nigh Round 
Table, Westmoreland. 

Ladanum segetum sc. J. B. [Galeopsis Ladanum, Linn.], 
on Lansmoor, near Great Strickland. 

Lapathum pulchrum bononiense, sc. J. B. \Eumex pul- 
cher, Linn.], betwixt the inn and the smithy at Sir John 
Lowther's new town, Westmoreland. 

Latliyrus major latifolius, Ger. Emac. [L. latifolius, 
Linn.],* on the rocks by the Red Neese, by Whitehaven, 
cop. Cumberland. 

I/aureola, Ger. [Daphne Laureola, Linn.], by Thornton, 
in the bishopric of Durham. 

Lilium convallium, Ger. \jConvallaria majalis, Linn.], 
in Witherstack Park. 

Lilium convallium angustifolium \_C. majalis, var.], on 
the Skar, near Waterfall Bridge, by Great Strickland, 
and in other places, Westmoreland. 

Linum syl. ft. cteruleis, Ger. Emac. \_Linum perenne, 
Linn.J, at Crosby Ravensworth, and between Shap and 
Threaplands, Westmoreland. 

Lunaria ramosa, and Lunaria crenata \_Botrychium 
Lunaria, Sw.], grow in Croft Short Close, by Great 
Strickland, Westmoreland. 

Marrubium aquaticmn \_Lycopus europceus, Linn.], in 
the moss by Hawkshead, Lancashire. 

Melilotus vulgaris, Parkinson [Melilotus ojjicinalis, 
Lam.], by Langanby, Cumberland. 



* It appears that the late Mr. Winch only met with the Z. sylvestris, 
Linn., at the place mentioned by Mr. Lawson. C. C. B. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 205 

Mentastrum folio rugoso rotund, sc. J. B. [Mentha 
rotundifolia, Linn.], by Marshgrainge, in Lancashire. 

Millefolium aquaticum dictum Viola aquatica, J. B. 
\Hottonia palustris, Linn.], in the river Kent, by'Kendal, 
Westmoreland. 

Mil. palustre galeric. Ger. Emac. [ Utricularia vulgaris, 
Linn.], and Mil. pal. gal. minus jl. minore [U. minor, 
Linn.], in the ditches by the causeway over the moss to 
the Fell-end, near Witherstack. 

Millegrana minima, Ger. \Eadiola millegrana, Sm.], 
on Clifton Moor and Clibburn Moor, Westmoreland. 

Morsus Diaboli, Ger., flore albo [Scabiosa succisa, 
Linn^at Great Strickland, Westmoreland. 

Dendrobryon geniculatum, Col. \_Usnia barbata, Ach.], 
near Kendal, Westmoreland. 

Muscus cupressiformis, Park. {Lycopodium alpinum, 
Linn.], by Buckbarrow Well, in Longsledale, Westmore- 
land. 

Muscus terrestris repens clavis singularibus, sc. J. R. 
\Lycopodium inundatum. Linn.], towards the foot of 
Longsledale, Westmoreland. 

Muscus terrestris polyspermos [Lycopodium selagi- 
noides, Linn.], by Buckbarrow Well, Westmoreland. 

Myrrhis syl. seminibus asperis, C. B. \Antliriscus vul- 
^r*,Pere.], on mud-walls atBlackwell, in the bishopric 
of Durham, on mud -walls in Burlington, Yorkshire. 

Numularia minor, sc. C. B. {Anagallis tenella, Linn.], 
at the foot of Longsledale, and near the Cloven Stone, on 
Great Strickland Moor, Westmoreland, copiose. 

CEnanthe Cicutce-facie, Lob., Park. \CEnantlie crocata, 
Linn.], about Kendal and Hiltondale, Westmoreland, 
copiose, where it is commonly called Dead Tongue ; in 
the water-course of St. John's Well, by St. John's Chapel, 
in or near Scelsmoor, three miles from Kendal. 

Orchis palmata rubella cum longis calcaribus rubellis, 
J. B. \_Gymnadenia conopsea, R. Br.], in Troutbeck 
Holme, by Great Strickland, Westmoreland, where it is 
also found Jlore niveo, ctjl. carneo. 



20G CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Orchis spliegodes sivefucumfeTens,~Pttt\i. \0plirys ara- 
nifera, Huds.], in the close on the west side of Charlton 
church, in Kent, copiose. 

Orchis my odes, Ger. [Ophrys muscifera, Huds.], in 
the lane or way between Holm-park House and the crag ; 
also in the wood there pretty plentifully, Westmoreland. 
luteum, C. B. \Gagea 



lutea, Ker.], in 

the bushes at Bander Bridge-end, by Cotherstone, near 
Rombald church, Yorkshire. 

Omithopodium minus, Ger. \_0rnithopus perpusillm, 
Linn.], on Clibburn Ling, near Common Holm Bridge, 
copiose, Westmoreland ; nigh Ravenglass, Cumberland. 

Pedicularis pratensis vulgaris Jl. albo [Pedicularis 
sylvatica, Linn.], at Gunnerthwaite, in Lancashire; at 
Great Strickland, Westmoreland. 

Pedicularis palustris elatior Jl. albo [P. palustris, 
Linn.], in the lower end of Longsledale, Westmoreland. 

Pentaphyttoides fruct. [Potentilla fruticosa, Linn.], by 
Mickle-force, in Teesdale, copiosissime. 

Persicaria siliquosa, Ger. \Impatiens noli-me-tangere, 
Linn.], by the cloth-mill in Saterthwait parish, Lanca- 
shire, and in many places of Westmoreland. 

Phyllitis multifida, Ger. [Scolopendrium vulgare, 
Linn.], on the rock by Cartmall Medicinal Well, Lanca- 
shire. 

Plantago aquat. minor, Park. [Alisma ranunculoides, 
Linn.] , near the Cloven-stone on Great Strickland Moor, 
Westmoreland. 

Plantago aquat. minor stellata, Ger. Emac. \Actino- 
carpus Damasonium, R. Br.], on Clapham Heath, in 
Surrey. 

Polygonum mar., J. B. \Polygonum Raii, Bab.], on 
the shore between Workington and Whitehaven, Cum- 
berland. 

Populus libyca, Ger. [P. tremula, Linn.], in St. Her- 
bert's Isle, in Derwentwater, Cumberland. 

Primula pratensis inodora lutea, Ger. veris caulifera, 
$c.3. ^.[Primula vulgaris var. umbettata probably]. Great 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 207 

Cowslips. This, in the north, is commonly called Lady 
Candlestick. 

Ptarmica fl. pleno [Achillea Ptarmaca, Linn.], in the 
small holm in Winander Mear, Westmoreland. 

Pyrola brasiliana, Park. [P. rotundifolia, Linn. ?], by 
Guisborough, in Cleveland, Yorkshire. It grew in my 
garden several years ; whether his major or minor 1 was 
not satisfied. 

Ranunculus flam, major, Ger. Lingua Plinii, J. B. 
[Ranunculus Lingua, Linn.], in the water and ditches of 
the moss by Hawkshead, in Lancashire. 

Ranunculus nemorosus dulcis secundus Tragi, Park. \R. 
auricomus, Linn.], in dumetis, copiose, particularly in 
SheriflHPark, by Great Strickland, Westmoreland. 

Ranunculus palustr, rotundifolius, Ger. [R. sceleratus, 
Linn.], by Robin Hood's Well, nigh Wentbridge, York- 
shire ; by Middleton, near Lancaster. 

Reseda vulgaris, C. B. \_R. lutea, Linn.], by Clifford's 
Fort, at Tinmouth Castle, in Northumberland, copiose. 

Rkamnus catharticus, J.B. [JR. catkarticus, Linn,], in 
the rocks and hedges by Great Strickland, Westmoreland, 
copiose. 

Rhamnus secundus Clusii, Ger. Emac. [Hippophae 
rhamnoides, Linn.], on the sea bank between Whitby 
and Lyth, Yorkshire, copiose. 

Ros solisfol. oUongo, C. B. [Drosera lonffifolia, Linn., 
Sm.]; Ros solisfol. rotundo, Ger. [Drosera rotundifolia, 
Linn.] ; both these in Mosey Mire, in Witherslack, West- 
moreland. 

Rosmarinum syl. minus nostras, Park. [Andromeda 
polifolia, Linn.], in Brigsteer Moss, not far from Kendal, 
Westmoreland ; in Middleton Moss, by Lancaster. 

Rubia cynanchica, J.B. [Asperula cynanchica, Linn.], 
on Beltharrow, in Witherslack Park, and on the top of 
Conzick Scar, near Kendal, copiose, Westmoreland. 

Ruscus, J. B. [R. aculeatus, Linn.], on Westwood 
Common, nigh Sydenham, in Kent, not scarce. 



208 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Saponaria Jl. plena \_8aponariaofficinalis, Linn.], at 
Carnforth, in Lancashire. 

Saxifraga palustris Anglica, Park. \Spergula nodosa, 
Linn.], in Troutbeck Holm, by Great Strickland, West- 
moreland. 

Scabiosa minor prat. jft. carneo, Park. [S, columbaria, 
Linn.], in the closes between Melkinthorp and Waterfall 
Bridge, Westmoreland. 

Scropkularia major, Ger. \8croph. nodosa, Linn.], by 
Waterfall Bridge, and in many other places in Westmore- 
land, where the common people call it Hastie Roger. 

Sedum alpinum trifido folio, C. B. \Saxifraga hypnoides, 
Linn.], by Maltham Cove, Yorkshire; among the rocks 
south of Sir John Lowther's, Westmoreland. 

Senecio hirsutus viscidus major odoratus, J. B. \_S. vis- 
cosus, Linn.], about Sunderland ; nigh Lancaster. 

Serratula fl. albo [^Serratula tinctoria, Linn.], in a 
close by Hampstead Heath, and on Sowfield, by Great 
Strickland, in Westmoreland. 

Slum minimum, J. R. [S. inundatum, Linn.], near 
Cloven-stone, in the sike on Great Strickland Moor; in a 
watery place by the Roman fort called Maburg, West- 
moreland. 

Soldanella marina, Ger. [Convolvulus Soldanella, Linn.], 
in the Isle of Waney, Lancashire. 

Ornus sive Fraoo. sylvestris, Park. \Pyrus Aucnparia, 
Gaert.], in the scars nigh Waterfall Bridge, in the north. 
It is known by the name of Rawn, or Rown-tree, or Rone- 
tree, Westmoreland. 

Sorbm torminalis, Ger. \Pyrus orminalis, Sm.], in 
Levens Park, near the bridge, Westmoreland. 

Stellaria aquatica, Park. [S. uliginosa, Murr.], in the 
ditches of Middleton Moss, Lancashire. Here I saw it 
in flower. 

Thalictrum majus, Ger. [T. majus, Crantz], by Cart- 
mall's Old Well, near the Medicinal Well, Lancashire. 

Thalictrum minus, Ger. \T. minus, Linn.], in the Isle 
of Waney, copiose, Lancashire. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 209 

Tormentilla fl. pleno \Polentilla tormentilla, Nesl.J, at 
Temple Sourby, in Westmoreland. 

Filiaj marina Anglica, Park. {Asplenium marinum, 
Linn.], under a shadowy sea rock by Middleton, near 
Lancaster. 

Pneumonanthe, Ger. {Gentiana Pneumonanthe, Linn.J, 
on Red, or Rud Heath, in Cheshire, copiose. Also near 
Clapham, in Yorkshire. 

Trachelium minus fl. albo [Campanula glomerata, Linn.], 
in Troutbeck Holm, by Great Strickland, Westmoreland. 

Trifolium album umbelld siL, Mer. [a monstrosity of 
T. repens, Linn.], betwixt Virginia House and Nag-head 
Inn, in-ijje way to Hackney, London. 

Trifol. pumilum supinum flos. longis albis, P. B. ; Tri- 
fol. subterraneum tricoccon, Mor. [T. subterraneum, Linn.], 
on Blackheath, in Kent. It grew in my garden. 

Trepolium, sc. [Aster tripolium, Linn.], Isle of Waney, 
Lancashire. 

Turritis, Ger. \_T.glabra, Linn.], at Clibburn, West- 
moreland. 

Vaccinia niyra, Ger. \Vaccinium myrtillus, Linn.] ; 
Vac. nigr. fruc. maj., Park. [Vaccinium uliginosum, 
Linn.] ; Vaccinia rubra, Ger. [Vac. vitis-idcsa, Linn.] ; 
Vac. palustria, Ger. [Vaccinium Oxycoccos, Linn.], all 
grow in the forest of Whinfield, Westmoreland. 

Verbena vulg. J. B. [Verbena officinalis, Linn.], at 
Cockermouth, in Cumberland, plentiful. 

Viola mont. lutea grandiflora, C. B. [V. lutea, Huds.], 
by Elden Hole, in Derbyshire ; Malham Cove, in York- 
shire ; on Stanmoor, in Westmoreland, abundantly. 

Virga aurea, Ger. \Solidago Virgaurea, Linn.], in 
Clibburn Field, Westmoreland, abundantly. 

Umbilicus Vcn. } Ger. \_Cotyledon Umbilicus, Linn.], at 
Oxford, and about Bristol, copiose. 

As for Orchis palmata pal. mac., Park., and his Orchis 
2ml. pal. dracontias, in my judgment you have truly 
referred them. I have consulted Park, and Ger. Emac., 
and see no reason to distinguish them. Pray consult 

14 



210 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Park, and Lobel. Lobel I have not. Park., I suppose, 
distinguishes them upon his authority. 1 purpose to 
mind them in this following season. 

Great Strickland, April 9, 88. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Jan. 8, 89. 

SIR, Not long since one Mr. Pratt, a gardener, a 
person (as himself told me) well known to you, who now 
lives with Sir Thomas Willughby, son and heir of my 
worthy friend and benefactor, Francis Willughby, Esq., 
being here with me, and hearing that you were returned 
from Jamaica, and had brought over with you, among 
many other natural varieties, divers seeds not common, 
by you discovered in that and the neighbouring islands, 
engaged me to write to you to entreat you, if you have 
not already disposed of them, to communicate some part 
to Sir Thomas, who, I know, will be very thankful to you 
for them, Mr. Pratt will take care of them, and part of 
the product you may command. 

Being advised by Dr. Robinson that my first letter, in 
answer to yours, miscarried, I wrote a second, which I 
hope came to your hands. I should be glad to hear 
what progress you have made in order to the publishing 
your curious observations and discoveries, whereby you 
will much oblige the learned naturalists of this age, and 
erect a lasting monument to your own memory. 

I am, sir, 
Your very humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, 

to be left at Mr. Wilkinson's, at the Black Boy, 

over against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet street, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 211 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, October 21, 89. 

SIR, I was much troubled when I was advised by 
Dr. Robinson that my letter, in answer to yours of 
August 3, came not to your hands, the subject whereof 
was to give you thanks for your intended visit, and to 
tell you how glad I should be to see you (when your 
occasions should draw you this way) at my poor habita- 
tion at Black Notley, and be made partaker of some part 
of your discoveries and observations ; to encourage you 
in yourlflSsign of publishing the fruits of your travels in 
the New World ; to offer you any assistance I could afford ; 
and finally (which should have been first mentioned) to 
congratulate your safe return into England. I was long 
in hope and expectation of seeing you here, and wondered 
that you came not, nor sent any word of the alteration of 
your purpose, and the reason of it. I also (which I had 
forgot) in the same letter returned you many thanks for 
the present of seeds you designed me. The days are now 
so short, and the ways and weather so unfit for travel, 
that I have little hopes of seeing you here this winter, 
unless your occasions should engage you to take a journey 
to New Hall (which is not above eight miles from us), 
and then I entreat you would make a further step hither, 
where you shall be most welcome to, 

Sir, 
Your very humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloaue, 

at Mr. Wilkinson's, a bookseller, at the Black Boy, 

over against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet street, London. 



212 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. LHWTD* to Mr. RAT. 

HONOURED SIR, The same varieties of Entrochi, with 
those you sent me, are found in Staffordshire, but 
1 had none exactly like them ; for, though I picked up 
some variety of them in Wales, yet they all differ 
from these in texture, consistence, and colour. About 
Oxford we have considerable variety of formed stones, 
more than Dr. Plot has mentioned in his history ; but 
no Entrochi were ever found in this county that I have 
heard of. If any one of these formed stones may be 
acceptable to you, I can send you a parcel whenever you 
please to command it. 

Dr. Morison's first tome, which, with the second 
already printed, contains all the herbaceous kind, is 
ready for the press. Pray excuse this hasty scribble, 
and repute me, &c. 
Oxford, Feb. 25, 16f. 



Mr. LHWTD to Mr. HAT. 

HONOURED SIR, Dr. Lister acquaints me that Mr. 
Charlton has lately received a land-snail from Surinam, 
not bigger than a hen's egg, which yet lays eggs as big 
as those of a sparrow ; and the snails that are hatched of 
them are, he says, twice as large as the eggs. 

Sir, I thank you for your pattern of the Muscus den- 
ticulatus major. One Mr. Richardson, a gentleman of 
Yorkshire (a person very curious about plants, and the 
other parts of natural history, and that has spent about 
six or seven years with Dr. Herman in that study), told 
me he was somewhat secure that plant grew in Yorkshire, 
under the heaths, and promised to send me patterns of 
it this summer. 

I only expect your commands for some figured stones. 

* See Appendix B. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 213 

Those that this country affords are chiefly in imitation of 
shells. We have none that resemble fish, or any other 
animals besides, nor that have the resemblance of any 
plants. Cornu Hammonis, Asteriscus, Asteria S. Astroi- 
tes, and Belemnites of divers sorts, we have plentifully, 
as also some others that I cannot compare to any natural 
bodies that I have any notion of. One quarry within 
two miles of Oxford I have searched at least forty times, 
and sometimes had five or six with me ; yet last Saturday 
I discovered there three varieties of Glossopetrce, though 
none had ever been observed in this part of England 
before, for what I can learn. One of them is a Tricuspis, 
such as~r. Lister's in one of the ' Phil. Transact.' 

Oxford, April 14, 1690. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Concerning the Catalogue of Local Words,! shall 
add nothing till I hear farther from you, save that a 
friend, whom casually I met withal last week, asked me 
concerning that catalogue, and told me that he had 
made a collection of a few words proper to this county, 
which he was willing to communicate, in case the book 
came to a second edition. 

Upon this occasion I cannot but take notice that, as if 
Divine Providence governed even such small matters, 
when I have been about to publish, or in publishing a 
work, there have been casually offered to me, without my 
own or friends' procurement, at that very time, some 
assistance or contributions by mere strangers, and such 
as knew nothing of the present publication, or at least 
such as I made no address to, nor expected anything 
from. Mr. Lhwyd lately wrote me word of a strange 
snail Mr. Charlton had received from Surinam, which 
was not above the bigness of a pullet's egg, yet laid an 



214 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

egg as big as a sparrow, and that the young one hatched 
of it was twice as big as the egg, of which particulars I 
desire confirmation from you. 

Black Notley, May 16, 90. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAT. 

SIR, Mr. Charlton has such a snail-shell, as you 
mention, with eggs and young ones, which are the 
wonder of our philosophers here ; but I being naturally 
too jealous, do almost suspect (though I durst never 
declare my suspicion, the thing appearing clear to every- 
body besides myself) that the eggs and young ones have 
been severally, and very artificially added to the snail, 
though indeed the snails are oviparous, and peradventure 
perfect-shelled animals may be observed in the eggs 
themselves ; so that I may be under an unreasonable 
doubt. 

London, May 17, 90. 



Dr. PLUKENET'S Observations on Mr. RAY'S Synopsis Stirp. Britan.* 

Page 57. SIR, The laborious Parkinson was indeed 
mistaken when he confounded the Cham am. vuty. [Ma- 
tricaria Cliamomillu, Linn.] that grows among corn with 
the Nobile \Anthemis nobilis, Linn.], or Roman kind ; 
and we are not a little obliged to your learned and pierc- 
ing observation for the discovery of it; but I cannot 
readily submit that the Cham&ui. for. pi. (which we 
have so common in gardens, or the naked sort) should 
either of them be varieties of this Amarum [Matricaria 
Chamomilla, Linn.], kind, since they are both very fra- 

* It is the first edition of the ' Synopsis,' published in 1690, to which 
ibis letter refers. C. C. B. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 215 

grant, and creeping upon the ground, and nothing diffe- 
rent, but in those very accidents of flowering, from that 
which grows trailing on our commons, which, however 
erroneously styled vulgar., yet in reality is the Roman, or 
noble sort of Chanwem. But that which ordinarily goes 
under the name of Cotula fcetida fl. plen., which I once 
found in some plenty on the high road from London to 
Barnet, about half a mile short of the town, is both 
upright in its stalk, and of no scent at all ; and this I 
dare pronounce to be the double of the Chamam. arvor. 
vulff., which I take also to be different from the Cotula 
fcetida Dod. [Anthemis Cotula, Linn.], or Chamam. 
inodon^ C. B. P., of which sort I never yet beheld any 
with a double flower. I must needs own that Dr. 
Morison, in ' Praslud/ 249, relating there how frequently 
this CotuL inod. sem. nigr. did occur to him upon the 
coasts of Bretagne, in Trance, assigns our doable flower- 
ing to a variety of this, assuring it also to produce seed 
of a like hue. I will not question the doctor's seeing the 
seed (though double-flowering plants seldom bear any), 
because he seems to be very positive in it ; nor indeed 
was I ever so curious to observe it, not having seen a 
growing plant for above these twenty years, and so am 
ignorant of its colour ; but the mien and air, the total 
habit of this multiplex kind, of which I still retain a firm 
idea in my mind the lower stature of it, though upright, 
the brisk and vivid colour of its leaves, the fewer branch- 
ings of its stalk, the lesser compass of its double flowers, 
and shorter lengths of its fine-cut leaves in all which 
the Chamcem. vulg. differs from the Cotula inodora, which 
bespeak it to appertain rather to the former ; of which 
in my Catalogue I have made it a more immediate 
variety. 

Page 61. There is a Livnonium minus \Jttatice spathu- 
lata, Desf.J said to grow with us in the north of Eng- 
land, and which I have observed in gardens : perhaps the 
same sort that Parkinson asserts Lobel to have found 
about Colchester. The most peculiarity that I could 



216 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

observe, beside that of its being smaller than our com- 
mon, was a foliaceous wideness on the pedicle of each 
leaf, even to its insertion to the root or stalk ; whereas 
our common has a slender, round, and nervous pedicle, 
for a considerable distance towards the leaf. 

Page 64. Although you seem to suspect the Arch- 
angel. Dod., Cms., to be the same growing on mountainous 
places with the common Angel, sylv. [A. sylvestris, Linn.] 
in our meadows, and so difference of place only to make 
the diversity, I assure myself they are specifically diverse ; 
and the Scandiaca* has this peculiar, that it produces its 
umbels not only a-top, but also on the side of the stalk, 
two or three ex alis foliormn, and sometimes one or two 
along the upper stalks without any leaf at all ; and I 
have seen it above seven feet high. 

Page 247. Among the emendanda I find a query 
about the Cnicus spinosior of the Parisian Catalogue, 
which I take to be no other than that perennial sort you 
set down in your incomparable ' Cat. Angl./ and observed 
it to grow plentifully at lesser distances from the sea, 
both in Italy, Sicily, and the more southern tracks of 
France, whose resemblance, though it come well nigh 
that figure in Cms., under the title of Carlina sylv., 
which I esteem no more than our spontaneous annual 
sort, yet certainly it seems more nearly to respond the 
Heracantha, Tab. Ic. 697, both as to its figuration and 
manner of growing, putting forth its flowers in the way 
of an umbel. And though this be made use of as a 
synonyme to express the foregoing common kind, as we 
find it even in C. Bauh. himself, yet I am inclined to 
believe this very Heracantha is nothing different from the 
Cnicus of the Parisians, and in all likelihood the same 
with the Cnicus sylv. spinosior polycaph. of the same 
C. Bauh. ; not, therefore, to be accepted for our common 
kind, nor indeed the Acarna 8. Acorna altera Apula 
column., which latter, both from the Fabian description 

* This appears to be a mountain form of Angelica Arcluuu/elica, Liun., 
but not a native of Britain. C. C. B. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 217 

of it, and synonyme of C. Bauh., which seems by him 
particularly adapted from the parvity of its flowers and 
heads, must be quite another thing. But what this is I 
cannot determine, as never having seen the plant, and 
therefore do submit it to your most excellent and 
discretive judgment. 

The Polygala repens nivea, C. B. P., repens nuperor, 
Lob., I do readily grant is a Polygonum, but extremely 
differing from the Polyg. Serpylli folio verticiltat. Cat. 
Angl., parvum fl. albo verticillat., J. B. \Corrigiola litto- 
ralis, Linn.], which comes under a much nearer resem- 
blance to the Polyg. muscosum, P. Bocc., though it be 
very^4Uferent from this too, as by collating the plants 
themselves, I having them by me, you will easily 
perceive. 

That pretty Polygonum \Glaux maritima, Linn.] Mr. 
Newton found in Cornwall, myself upon the Severn shore, 

cannot be the Pusillo vermiculato Serpylli folio, 

J. B., Serpylli folio, Lob., Park. \Frankcnia laevis, Linn.], 
if at least the figure of it among authors does any way 
agree with the thing, since the leaves of this are round 
and shining, but nothing of a Stonecrop shape ; and, 
therefore, as you have given it the honour of a place in 
the Appendix of your learned Synopsis, you may find I 
have given it a different name, viz. Polygonum maritimum 
longius radicatum nostras Serpylli folio circinato crasso- 
nitente ; and perhaps it is the same with the Polygon, 
minus lentifolium, C. B. \Herniaria lenticulata, Linn.*], 
as 1 have there set down my suspicion. 

The Gnaphalium maritimum [Diotis maritima, Cass.] 
you have ranged, without any remark, among the pap- 
pescentf of that kind, when Breynius, in Prodr. 2, assures 
it hath solid seed. 

Page 54. The Carduus leucograplms hirsu,tus capilulo 



* To which Linnaeus has also erroneously referred this plant of Plukcnctt, 
in the Sp. PI. ed. n. C. C. B. 
f It lias no puppus. C. C. B. 



218 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

minori, Moris. \Carduus leucographus, Linn.], I take to 
be very different from the Card. Maria Airs, maculatm 
\Silybum marianum, Gaert.], growing so copiously about 
Clerkenwell, whose head is little inferior for bulk to the 
more common with milky veins. 

Page 120. Queer. Whether the Anagallis aquatic, 
major folio oblongo, C. B. P. \Veronica Anagallis ^ Linn.], 
be not clearly omitted. As for the Aquatica major foliis 
subrotundis \Veronia Beccabunga, Linn.], perhaps it may 
be only a luxuriance of the minor under the same 
denomination. 

Page 108. Queer. Whether the Leucommluteum \_Chei- 
ranthus Cheiri, Linn.], upon walls, be not a different plant 
from the Leuc. vulgar. Jl. simpl. \CheirantUus Cheiri, 
Linn.] growing in gardens. It seems to me to be much 
more woody, with larger flowers : the leaves glaucous, 
and extremely rigid or stiff, qualities not to be observed 
in the garden kind. 

Page 133. I ever took the Trifol. pumilum supin. 
Jlosc. long, alb., Phytol. Brit. [Trifolium ornithopodioides, 
Linn.], to be very applicable to the Trif. siliquis ornitho- 
podii nostras ; and perhaps the author of this name meant 
no other thing by it. The flowers are long, slender, and 
piped ; they are of a most immaculate Avhite (though 
your description seems to put them to the blush), and 
often with three on a stalk ; which number of short and 
curved pods succeeding, does make out a pretty resem- 
blance of a bird's claw ; and I am fully persuaded the 
Trifolium parvum album monspeliac. cum paucis foribus, 
J. B.* is no other than this Bird's-foot Trefoil, which in 
my Catalogue I have made a synonyme for it. As for the 
Trif. subterr. tricocc., whereunto you incline to apply the 
phytologist's title, it is true it has indeed the same sort 
of white fistulous flowers ; but withal it has such a sin- 
gularity in the mode of growing, as thrusting the stalks 

* This name, and T. pumilum supin. fl. &c., a few lines back, are now 
referred to T. sulterraneum, Linn., in common with T. subterr. tricocc. 
C. C. B. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 219 

of its flowers, even while it is in flower, into the bosom 
of the earth, that I cannot but think this very peculiarity 
could not possibly have escaped the observation of its 
first explorers, who could not be so deficient in their way 
of imposing names, as to neglect such a remarkable note, 
so signal a characteristic in the composition of its title, 
as alone might serve to distinguish it from all the Tcrrce 
flii and Trefoils in the world. After this manner it was 
that the famous Dr. Magnol accommodated his name for 
it ; so did Dr. Morison his, who indeed pretended to be 
the first discoverer of it, or at least assigned it to his 
princely patron, whose badge (Gastonium) was annexed 
untcr^jis other titles in memory of its first invention, 
though I find it (yet still by names expressive of this 
peculiar) in authors before him, as in Vallot, Joncquet, 
and other catalogue writers, before that of the ' Garden 
of Blois,' by Morison, had any being in the world ; so 
that I only hence infer that, had the authors of the 
' Phyt. Brit.,' or the most learned J. Bauhine (but he 
saw not the growing plant), in their denominations in- 
tended the subterranean trefoil, they would not have 
contented themselves with lodging their discriminating 
character upon the flowers alone (that are intercommon 
with others of the same genus), but would certainly have 
taken along with them this wonderful property, which, 
while the plant was flowering, could hardly have evaded 
their notice ; and therefore I presume they understood 
by those stated names no other than the Trif. ornithopod. 
siliq. [T. ornithopodioides, Linn.], which they might 
observe in flower, not heeding the pods ; or perhaps find- 
ing the plant before it was podded, they were content to 
transmit such a diversity in its name as was derivative 
only from its flowers. Both these pretty trefoils grew in 
great abundance in Tothill Fields, by Westminster. 

Page 145. The Alsine tetrapetalos caryophylloides 
qmbusdam Holost. minim., D. Rap. [Moenchia erecta, 
Pers.j, that grows frequently about London in upland 
pastures, is very different, in my opinion, from the Alsine 



220 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

montan. capillac. folio C. B. P. [Mcekringia muscosa, 
Linn.], which indeed is a foreigner to us, but has a leaf 
as fine as a hair, and four white leaves to the flower, as 
the name imports, and is a pretty upright plant, of about 
a small span in stature, and not much unlike the Alsin. 
tenuif. muscosa ejusd. C. Bauh. [M. muscosa /3, Linn.] 

The Auricula muris pulcJiro Jlore, J. B. \_Cerastium 
arvense, Linn.], omitted in the Synopsis, but inserted 
among the Supplenda, might perhaps have been supplied 
by the the Alsine myosotis lanuginosa alpina grandiflora 
S. Auricula muris vittosa Jlore amplo membranaceo, D. 
Lhwyd \C. latifolium, Linn.], as being the same, or a 
variety of it. 

Page 150. As for the Sedum parvum acre fore luteo 
[Sedum acre, Linn.], it is multisiliquous, or multicornous 
in its capsule, divided into five points, and when ripe 
makes a pretty resemblance of a star; and therefore, 
in my opinion, ought not to be disjoined from the 
Sedums, properly so called. Under this banner does the 
Sedum minimum acre march, and, if I mistake not, the 
Minus teretifol. album [Sedum album, Linn.] ; but I have 
not yet thoroughly examined it, and therefore am not 
positive therein ; nor can I say, without a peradventure, 
the like of the Alpinum ericoides cceruleum, G. B. P. 
\Saxifraga oppositifolia, Linn.]. Indeed your Sedum 
min. Alpinum luteum nostras \Saxifraga aizoides, Linn.] 
is, to the best of my memory, only bicornous, and is 
rightly disposed with the Sedum Alp. trifid. folio, C. B. P. 
\Saxifraga hypnoides, Linn.], which, in my Catalogue, 
goes under the name of Sanicula aizoides tridactylites ; 
and for the better distinguishing it from the Sedums, I 
have made bold (and I hope not without your good leave) 
to alter your name, and prefix another to that elegant 
plant of your own happy discovery, which, with all its 
synonyma, I must submit to your approbation, viz. 
Sanicula aizoid. Alp.Jl. majuscul. lut. punctis croceis gut- 
tato. Sedum minus Alpinum luteum nostras, D. Raii. 
Sedum parvum montanum lut. J. B. Sedum Alpinum 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 22 I 

flore pallido, C. B. P., Park., and forte Sedum montanum 
Coris carulece fol., Cat. H. R. P. [Sax. aizoides, Linn.] 

Among other of our vegetable English rarities, I should 
think the Sedum minus lato et crasso caule, Cat. H. R. P. 
Portlandicum Belyarum might have deserved some place 
in your well-instructed Synopsis. I never was upon the 
island myself, but I have had it from very worthy persons 
that have seen it grow there. It is a vermiculate kind, 
but I could not learn that it ever flowered. Perhaps the 
grossness of its fascial stalk absorbs the nourishment that 
might otherwise have contributed to the production of its 
flowers. 

T^^^edum Alpinum trifid. folio, C. B. P. [Sax. hyp- 
noides, Linn.] , must be allowed the same with the Sedis 
affinis trisulca Alpin. ft. albo, J. B., and yet I have seen 
it in a dry season notably correspond both with the de- 
scription and figure of the Sedum Alpin. hispidum fere 
spinosum [Sax. aspera, Linn.] of the same author, and 
perhaps the same thing. 

Page 151. The Cotyledon Ursula, Ph. Br. [Sax. stel- 
laris, Linn ], though to my own knowledge it be very 
different from the Sedum minus, Cms., yet methinks it 
bears a very favorable resemblance to the Saniculte 
AlpincB aliquatenus affinis, J. B. 

1 must needs acknowledge that I am not a little en- 
tangled in my thoughts about the Juncus parvus cum 
pericarpis rotundis, J. B. [Juncus compressus, Linn.], 
which, though you are pleased to make the same with 
the Gram. June, marit., Lob., I cannot easily obtain 
with myself a compliance herein, but do rather accept 
it as the Juncus acutus Cambro- Britannic., Park., and 
which I take to be a true and genuine Rush, as you 
most truly have observed. But unto this you are pleased 
to apply the June. Cambrobr., Park. (h. e.), Gr. June, 
maritim., Lob., whose Icon of it (and indeed so do 
those of all other authors) agrees exactly with our Moss- 
rush, the capsules whereof are somewhat elongated and 
pinched in towards the top, resembling more a cone than 



222 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

a globe, the capsules of the former being more accurately 
round, according as its name imports. 

Page 213. I must here beg leave to excuse the cele- 
brious Dr. Herman, who in ' Cat. Hort. Acad. Ludg.' with 
good reason separates the Abies conis sursilm spectantibus 
S. mas, C. B. P., Taxifoliis [JPimts picea, Linn.], from 
the Abies alba S. fcem. ejusd., C. B. P. [P. abies, Linn.] 
And, indeed, this male-kind does in nothing differ, as I 
could observe from the short specimen (and it was all 
that he had) I received from that ingenious and worthy 
gentleman, Dr. Tancr. Robinson, who gathered it in some 
noted garden there, and brought it over into England, when 
with the present Marchioness of Winchester he last came 
out of Holland ; I say, from what I could observe, it does 
nothing differ from the female but in the colour of its 
pectinated leaves, which in our pattern are green on both 
sides; in this, of a silver and gaudy hue underneath. 
And, perhaps, from this lovely gaiety of its silver colour, 
it might at first challenge to itself the annex of female, 
since men are generally apt to appropriate the most ami- 
able and lovely, and indeed the most excellent of every 
kind, to the more elegant sex, as we see the more mascu- 
line arts and sciences are feminine in their names, and, 
by an universal suffrage, -submitted to the dominion of 
the Muses. 

Casting my eye upon your most curious index at the 
latter end, which is indeed of necessary use both as to 
the virtues of those plants contained in the Synopsis, as 
also in respect of those references you make from the less 
to their more proper denominations, I found in your ac- 
count of the Cannabis sativ. the received opinion of an 
untoward faculty it has of emasculating mankind, and 
making impotent by extinguishing the fluid principles of 
generation, and which in some degree hath staggered 
your resolution what to determine about the Bangiie in- 
dorum. This, from the testimony of Olearius Acosta, and 
others, being of frequent use, both among Persians and 
Indians, to exstimulate and incite to venerv, and therefore 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 223 

very unlikely to be of the cannabine order. I confess I 
cannot determine how far it may conduce to this purpose, 
or the other to the contrary effect, but so much I know 
of the Bangiie (the seed whereof I have by me, and is 
very little differing from that of our hemp), that it will 
certainly cause a dementia, or frantic and ludicrous sort 
of madness, which runs the body into all the idle gesticu- 
lations and postures of the most lascivious, when in the 
mean time they are only the effects of present distemper, 
and not any lustful pruritations. And that nature is in 
distress, and under distemper, till the force and powers 
of the seed be dissipated and vanquished, will appear by 
this, t^ if you overdose your patient, it will certainly 
kill. I have known, where upon too liberal a dose, the 
effects have continued for almost a week, and had like to 
have put the poor soul to have sought for a Bethlem in 
another world. And why may not the Cannabis prove an 
incentive in the same unlucky sense, especially if that be 
true, as authors have alleged, that its seed, if freely taken, 
will induce an dtypoavvn, and, as Herodotus attests, a fu- 
migation of the seed being cast upon hot coals, is said to 
affect the Scythians with raving and a sort of frenzy, that 
was attended with frightful ejaculations and howlings ; 
so that they well enough agree in this particular. And it 
cannot surely but be allowed on all hands, that this Indian 
Bangiie is a true and genuine hemp, though in the mean 
time I must pronounce it specifically distinct from our 
European sort. I confess I was perfectly surprised to find 
Dr. Herman, in his ' Academic Catalogue,' so perempto- 
rily assert it among the race of Alt h teas, and to promise 
the world an entire history of it under that head in his 
desired Musseum Ceylanicum, till calling to mind a mis- 
take that had crept into the Garden of Chelsea, where, 
some time before the Catalogue came out, the Sabdariffa 
Clus. (which is no other than an Indian Alcea) was with 
mighty ostentation exposed to view for the Bangiie in- 
dorum. I presently bethought, that as that demonstrator 
had imposed upon Dr. Lister and other worthy gentle- 



224 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

men here at home, so, holding at that time a correspond- 
ence in Holland, he might in all probability have trans- 
mitted the occasion for Dr. Herman's most palpable 
hallucination abroad. 

June 3, 1690. 



Mr. LHWYD to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, The formed stones were very accept- 
able. The Oculi serpentum are, indeed, of the same kind 
with those they call Toadstones. The Cats-heads seem 
to me to be arches or joints of some Cornu Hammonis. 
Baculi S. Pauli are of the same substance with those 
stones that resemble the bristles of some American Echini, 
which, as I mentioned in my last, Dr. Plot has called 
Lapides judaici ; nor is the Doctor much mistaken 
therein, for the real Lapides judaici seem to be nothing 
else but overgrown stones of this kind, as your large 
Glossopetra is amongst the rest of that sort ; whereof I 
have seen one found in Sheppey much larger than that 
elegant one you sent me. When I say overgrown, I mean 
a large sort, or variety, much exceeding those of its fa- 
mily; which puts me in mind of a current report, how 
that in the county of Antrim, in Ireland, there are divers 
large pillars of star-stones able to support a church. 
How your bastions of St. Paul differ from our bristle- 
stones, you will best judge from some I shall send you. 
The vertebrae seem to be so indeed, and to have under- 
gone but a small alteration. Those inscribed Denies 
serpentum and Ova, I can say nothing to. 

A Synopsis Method, of the Animals and Fossils of 
England would, doubtless, prove very instrumental to the 
advancement of natural history ; and though a complete 
enumeration of those things would require much time, 
labour, expense, and travail, yet I doubt not but such a 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 225 

catalogue as you could give us would be very grateful to 
the public, and prove a direction to several others to make 
farther observations of that kind, as well as your Catalogue 
of Plants has done. I question not but you may give us 
a great deal of information in the Catalogue of Insects, 
as well as you have done already in the Histories of Birds 
and Fish. I shall be very forward to give in my contri- 
bution, which will be some observations on Formed Stones 
and of the Exanguia marina. Dr. Plot will be likewise 
as ready. 

We have performed our visit to Mr. Cole, and received 
abundant satisfaction in our journey. He received us, 
thought unknown to him, very friendly, and spent six 
hours in showing us his collection, without any interrup- 
tion, or the least sign of being weary. It consists alto- 
gether of natural things, and seemed to us a very extra- 
ordinary collection for one person (and who, perhaps, 
had not the advantage of a liberal education to invite him 
to such studies) to be able to amass together. 

We observed a Virginia animal of the cat-kind, seven 
foot and a half long, and another of the colour and big- 
ness of our wild cats, which he told us was the common 
House-cat of Virginia ; also a Skunk, which he rendered 
Putorius virginianus. This he told us would stink several 
miles, and sometimes so infect the air as to cause a pesti- 
lence. He showed us the horn of a Narhual, curiously 
wreathed, and about five feet long. A Danish gentleman 
told me he had seen a Narhual that had been taken by 
some Hamburghers at Groneland, an. 1684, having two 
very long horns, and that he suspected they generally 
have so, and that the Unicorns of them are but monsters. 
We also observed some of the Cornea lamina of a whale, 
about three feet long and one broad, of a black colour. 
We have some at our Museum of a whitish colour, and 
about nine inches long ; also the blade of a Sword-fish 
[Xiphias gladius\, caught about Swansea, in Glamorgan- 
shire. He has several curious figured stones and shells, 
found in the west of England and in South Wales ; very 

15 



226 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

elegant trees of the Abrotanoides Planta Saxea 
with considerable variety of other Pori, Corals, Horny 
Sea Plants, &c. I admired a sort of Cornu Ammonis, 
found somewhere in Somersetshire, resembling a nautilus, 
but having two prominences each side of the aperture, 
about as thick and taper as the end of a walking-staff to 
be screwed in and out. Another Cornu, of a rainbow 
colour, about six inches diameter, and as thin as a shil- 
ling, composed of a sort of Selenitis or Talc. The resem- 
blance of several exotic plants (as it should seem to me) 
in a kind of cole-slat, found somewhere near Bristow; 
they seemed to be of several capillaries, and one particu- 
larly like the Capittus Ven. verm; the signatures of the 
leaves as curiously veined as the real plants have. I have 
room to add no more at present. 

Oxford, July 1, 1690. 



Mr. LHWTD to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, Considering your local words since 
I read your letter, I find some amongst the north-country 
words to bear affinity with the Welsh, both in sound and 
signification, which possibly may be some remains of the 
British tongue continued still in the mountainous parts 
of the north. Of these, if you please, I shall hereafter 
send you a catalogue ; but in the mean time I must con- 
fess, that although they may agree in sound and sense, it 
will yet be difficult to distinguish whether they have been 
formerly borrowed from the Britons, or whether they are 
only an argument that the ancient British language had 
much affinity with those of Germany, Denmark, &c. I 
omit the supposition of the Welsh borrowing them from 
the English, in regard I find them not (at least but very 
few of them) used by the borderers of both nations ; and 
the Britons might leave them in Westmoreland, Cum- 
berland, &C., having heretofore lived there; but the 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 227 

English of those parts could communicate nothing of 
their language to the Welsh, in regard they have never 
lived in Wales nor have bordered on them. Moreover, 
some of these words are in the c Armorican Lexicon/ and 
the Britons that went to Armorica left this country 
before the Saxons came in. 

The Pectinites Amphiotis latiuscule sulcatus, and the 
Echinites rotularis minor angmticlavius, with some others, 
are commonly found in beds of sand, which lie under the 
vein of stone at the bottom of the pits, though sometimes 
I have found the former in the stones by breaking them ; 
but those usually of a different colour from the sand- 
shells. ""Whether they were ever the tegumenta of ani- 
mals or are only primary productions of nature in imita- 
tion of them, I am constrained to leave in medio, and to 
confess I find in myself no sufficient ability or confidence 
to maintain either opinion, though I incline much to the 
latter. However it be, it seems an extraordinary delightful 
subject, and worthy the inquiry of the most judicious 
philosophers. On the one hand, it seems strange if these 
things are not shells petrified, whence it proceeds that 
we find such great variety of them so very like shells in 
shape and magnitude, and some of them in colour, 
weight, and consistence ; and not only resemblances of 
sea shells should be found, but also of the bones and teeth 
of divers sea fish, and that we only find the resemblances 
of such bodies as are in their own nature of a stone-like 
substance. On the other hand, it seems as remarkable 
that we seldom or never find any resemblance of horns, 
teeth, or bones of land animals, or of birds, which might 
be apt to petrify, if we respect their consistence; inso- 
much that I suspect few formed stones are found (at 
leastwise in England), except in some extraordinary petri- 
fying earth, but what a skillful naturalist may, and that 
perhaps deservedly, assimilate to some marine bodies; 
but yet when we confer them with those bodies they seem 
most to resemble, they appear generally but as mock- 
shells and counterfeit teeth, differing from them little less 



228 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

than the works of art do from those of nature, which we 
endeavour to imitate, as if the earth in these productions 
(to speak vulgarly) should only ape the sea. To find out 
the truth of this question, nothing would conduce more 
than a very copious collection of shells, of the skeletons 
of fish, of corals, pori, &c., and of these supposed petri- 
fications. 

The figures of plants in the Cole-slat I have formerly 
mentioned to you, is clearly a different thing from the 
Pictrd Imboschata of Imperatus. Indeed I have hitherto 
seen imperfect pieces of it ; but whereas the Pictra Im- 
boschata (of which kind of figures we have also some 
variety in England and Wales) represents only rude 
branches imitating rather some coralline or sea-moss than 
trees ; the Cole-slat exhibits whole branches with leaves, 
and distinction of the veins and texture of them I have 
a small piece which seems to resemble a branch of the 
Filix fcem. very much, but the specimen is very im- 
perfect. 

Mr. Bobart tells me the Gymnocrithon is the very same 
with the London Triticum Spica hordei. The Alsine 
my os. Ian. Alpina grandiflora \Cerastium latifolium, Linn.] 
I do not question at present to be a distinct plant from 
the Aur. muris pulchro fl. albo, J. B. [(7. arvense, Linn.], 
which is very common in these parts, but nowhere in 
North Wales (supposing this no mistake) that ever I 
could find. The plant I mean I never saw but at the 
highest part of all Snowdon : it is very woolly, but more 
especially before it comes to flower, which is extraordinary 
membranaceous, or thin ; the calyx very long, crooked, 
and transparent, and divided at the top with many 
notches; the whole plant every way bigger than the 
Auricula muris. Since I sent you the collection of stones, 
I have discovered several new ones, whereof you may 
hereafter expect some farther account from, &c. 

Oxford, Nov. 25, 90. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 229 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, The Essay you propound concerning the ancient 
and modern learning were not difficult to make ; but I 
think you are better qualified for such an undertaking 
than I, and therefore shall refer it to you. In summe the 
ancients excel the moderns in nothing but acuteness of 
wit and elegancy of language in all their writings, in 
their poetry and oratory. As for painting and sculpture, 
and music and architecture, some of the moderns I think 
do equaj^, if not excel, the best of them, not in the theory 
only, but also in the practice of those arts ; neither do 
we give place to them in politics or morality; but in 
natural history and experimental philosophy we far tran- 
scend them. In the purely mathematical sciences ab- 
stracted from matter, as geometry and arithmetic, we 
may vie with them; as also in history; but in astronomy, 
geography, and chronology, we excel them much. No 
wonder they should outstrip us in those arts which are 
conversant in polishing and adorning their language, 
because they bestowed all their time and pains in culti- 
vating of them, and had but one, and that their native 
tongue to mind. But those arts are by wise men cen- 
sured as far inferior to the study of things, words being 
but the pictures of things ; and to be wholly occupied 
about them, is to fall in love with the picture and neglect 
the life ; and oratory, which is the best of these arts, is 
but a kind of voluptuary one, like cookery, which sophis- 
ticates meats and cheats the palate, spoiling wholesome 
viands, and helping unwholesome. 
Black Notley, Dec. 15, 90. 



230 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Your last letter, of March 3d, expresses such 
excess of kindness, as one that did not well know you to 
be alien from all flattery or dissimulation would hardly 
think you wrote your own sense, especially seeing no 
merit of the object could induce you. I cannot but thank 
you for your great though undeserved (that I say not ill- 
placed) affection, which must needs enkindle an answer- 
able flame of reciprocal love in the breast of any man 
that hath the least sense of gratitude or spark of good 
nature in him. 

Of English Serpents, I never knew nor heard of above 
three kinds ; and though one cannot be sure of a nega- 
tive, yet I verily believe there are no more : those are, 

1 . Natrix Torquata, or the Snake, so called because it 
hath a pale yellow spot or streak on each side of its neck, 
though not encompassing it. 

2. Viper a, or the Adder. I am well assured that 
Viper and Adder are two names of the same species, 
having taken exact notice of the viper beyond sea, and 
our adder at home. The differences between the Adder 
and the Snake are, that the former is much shorter for 
its bigness, especially his tail below the vent ; that he is 
marked on the back with black lines or spots, which the 
snake wants ; that his belly is blackish and of one colour, 
whereas the snake's is particoloured, of a pale yellow and 
blue. That the adder never grows to the bigness that I 
have seen some snakes attain to; and lastly, that the 
adder is viviparous, as I myself can testify, having taken 
seven young ones out of the belly of a female, come to 
their full perfection, as big almost as some women's little 
finger. 

3. Cecilia, the Blind- worm, or Slow- worm, which 
again are two names of the same sort of animal. It is 
much less than the adder, and streaked with blackish lines 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 231 

along the body. All these kinds are plentifully in my 
own fields. 

As for outlandish serpents, I saw but one kind beyond 
seas different from ours. Indeed I have such a natural 
abhorrency of that sort of animal, that I was not very 
inquisitive after them. That I saw was bought at Rome 
by Sir Philip Skippon, of a man that brought them about 
to sell : it was very gentle and innoxious, and I suppose 
the Anguis ^sculapii ; but I described it not. After a 
while it escaped out of the box wherein we kept it, and 
hid itself that we could find it no more. 

Besides these I have mentioned, I doubt not but there 
are div^i^, species of European and African serpents ; but 
know little of them of certainty which we may confide in 
but their names. Of the American serpents described by 
Piso, Marcgrave, and Hernandez we have more assur- 
ance, among which the Rattle-snake, whose exuviae are 
common in museums, is most noted and best known. 

Since my last, viewing the Mosses growing about my 
house, to see whether they were as yet come to the head, 
I found some of them were ; of which I observed no less 
than four sorts of such as Dr. Plukenet and Mr. Doody 
call Musci trichoides, but herbarists generally Adiantha, 
or Polt/tricha aurea, two with erect heads, and three with 
reflex, besides one which was not come yet to the head ; so 
that I have already discovered six species growing upon 
my own house. 

Meeting yesterday with Mr. Dale, and examining him 
about serpents, he confidently affirmed to me that he had 
twice seen the Amphisbcena in this country, and named 
the places : not that there is any serpent that hath two 
heads, or a head at each end, but only that it hath a 
faculty of going backward as well as forward; and the 
tail is turrit, and somewhat resembles a head. I confess 
I did formerly distrust the very being of an Amphisbana, 
but considering that worms, and some Erucce, can and 
do move nimbly backward and forward, I see no reason 
but some serpents may do so too, and we have pretty 



232 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

good authority that there are such. I was a little stag- 
gered at his assertion, but yet must suspend my belief 
till I have better assurance. 

March 10, 90. 



Dr, PLUKENET to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, Your kind acceptance of my poor present is an 
addition to former favours, and I give my hearty thanks 
for the pains you took in the perusal of my Botanic Icons. 
I shall think mine the better bestowed on their produc- 
tion, in that you are pleased to give so great a character 
of them. I am only sorry anything of the desirable 
exactness, in reference to yourself, should escape my 
notice ; for though I have industriously designed to avoid 
all exposing others mistakes, the omissions here are purely 
humane, and slips of frailty, without the least partiality 
or any sinister design of derogating from the felicity of 
your parts, or the honour that is due to the painful dis- 
coveries you have so freely communicated to the world. 

1 . Your first particular is an instance in the Alsine 
Caryophyttoides tenuifoL, 8fc. [Arenaria verna, Linn.] of 
my Phytography, arid its reference to that of the Liniflorc 
in your general history. I confess I did make it a ques- 
tion of doubt, and the want of a closer application to 
yourself was the occasion of the misconjecture ; and since 
it was only my doubt, which is not without a scope and 
latitude, that being always allowed to questions of this 
nature, though there be not an exact concurrence of 
every nice particular, it will I hope seem more tolerable, 
especially when I have so good an example as yourself to 
warrant me herein ; for I observe, even in the very same 
plant, you are pleased by way of question to annex the 
Auricula muris pulchro flore folio tenuissime diviso, J. B., 
as a proper synonyme thereto, which does as little answer 
it in the petala of its flowers as mine, and perhaps much 
less in its leaves. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 233 

2. Your second objection as to the Asparag. aculeat., 
with its reference to your Sicilian sort, was but a bare 
suspicion, and may come under the same excuse. 

8. The Asarum e Terra Mariana, which I have since 
better referred as I conceive to another genus in Piso, 
together with the Ttilipifera caroliniensis, which I refer 
to Hernandez, are indeed inserted in the appendix of 
your history, which, however they came to slip me, I 
know not, I own the failure, and acknowledge the obli- 
gation to have taken notice of them there ; and yet to a 
person of your goodness and candour, the straitness of 
my letter-plates will make an excuse for the omission, 
with lefc,difficulty obtainable. 

4. The Euphrasia lutea latifol. and your Crataogon 
Westmorland, which you seem so much to dislike, were 
designed from the best dried patterns I had by me, 
which perhaps were not so perfect as I could wish j and 
yet I should be glad to see them better figured anywhere 
else ; the shanks, indeed, of the flower of the latter might 
have been made a little longer. 

5. The Hippuris lacustris mansu arenosa was designed 
from a dry specimen I had from Chiselhurst, where it 
grows abundantly ; but the leaves, or dentals, are a little 
too long and sharp-pointed, which was a thing I com- 
plained of to my graver ; but it seems it passed without 
amendment. As it is, it bears some likeness to your 
Mittefol. aquat. Equisetifolium, but in a much nearer 
degree of resemblance (in my mind) to the Equisetum 

foe fid. sub aqua repens, to which it is next akin. 

6. As for the Gramen spied laxd pyramidali I was 
positive herein, because Mr. Doody, who communicated 
the grass to you, communicated your name to me, and 
affixed it here. The Gram. Phalaroid., I believe, may be 
your Lusitanicum, since mine was drawn from a dried 
specimen I long ago gathered in Mr. Morgan's garden, 
where, it seems, you had yours. The Gram. Cyperoid. 
lanuginos. was designed from the dried leaf, and rather 
less than so large as it is. Perhaps it was a plant of 



234 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

the same kind, more than ordinarily luxuriant in its 
spikes. 

7. As for the Gram. Cyperoides elegans spied com- 
positd, if there be any mistake herein, it must lie at Mr. 
Doody's door, for he it was, who with great assurance, 
appropriated your name to this very grass, and I think 
writ it with his own hand. 

8. I am glad you tell me my Lichen parvus erectus, 8fc., 
is not what you intended by the Lichen minimus foliolis 
laciniatis, it being by so much more my own ; and yet 
you see how unwilling I was to make it so without your 
farther assurance. Indeed the source of most of these, 
my failures, was the aversion I had of multiplying species 
without apparent cause, or giving myself the credit of a 
discovery which perhaps was due to some other. 

9. Your separating my Melilotus luteus procumbens 
from yours of Messina is truly instructive. 

10. Your CorymUfera Millefolii umbelld I thought 
must fall between the Millefol. Tanaceti foL, Moris., and 
the Ptarmica Alpin., Triumfetti. And therefore in my 
catalogue I put the doubtful quaere to them both, espe- 
cially since to the former I find an asterisk prefixed, 
denoting you had not then seen the plant, and therefore 
I could not peremptorily exclude it from a competitorship 
with that to which you have now assigned it, I confess 
that passage in your appendix had escaped me. 

11. I could almost have sworn I had been right in 
the reference of my Muscus Corattoides to your name of 
Muscus pennatus ramulis et capillament. falcatis, it does 
so exactly answer that title, and therefore your monition 
here is extreme kind. 

12. The Salix long.fol. kirsuta rosca I did not propose 
as a new species, but only as an accidental variety in the 
Caprcea kind, which I think has not anywhere else been 
exposed in Icon. 

13. As to the Litliosperm. mcy., Dod., which is repent 
at the root, you would soon be convinced if you compare 
the other kinds with this, which was taken from a dried 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 235 

specimen out of Mr. Charlton's collection, with the title 
affixed by Dr. Magnol, and which answers well enough 
to Thalius's name, it being very twiggy in its branches 
towards the top ; but whether trailing on the ground or 
not I cannot determine, as never having seen it grow ; 
perhaps mine may be only a single twig atop. 

14. That the two Astragaluses, the Stella leguminosa, 
mdmjFiwaSeaamaceaJjwIaFab.jColuiwi., are extremely 
differing by their collation, nothing can be more apparent ; 
nor can your argument from Dr. Magnol make anything 
against it, since his, and our commonly received Vicia 
Sesamac. Apula, is no other than the Secnridaca siliquis 
foliacei$,j)i Monsieur Boccone, which has a variety with 
those affections you speak of, viz. the pods with foot- 
stalks almost an inch long. We may perceive Dr. Mo- 
rison himself labouring under the same mistake, when in 
his ' History of Oxford' he proposes in Icon his Astra- 
galus annuus rectm Jlore ochroleuco, which is no other 
than Boccon's Securidaca ; for the Vicia Apula, Column., 
and that which is truly so (as everybody must own, both 
from the figure and description of Columna, in his 
' Ecphras.' pp. 1, 301, 303), he sets down under the title 
of Astragal, annuus siliq. et fol. hirsntis, tab. 9, sect, ii, 
and makes it the same with Fcenugrceco sylvestri Tragi 
in quibusdam accedens, J. B., as may be seen in his 
History, p. 109. And if ever my catalogue see light, 
these things will be better explained. 

15. I thank you for your kind information about the 
Cambrian ferns ; yet methinks I cannot but be steady to 
the title of Filix pumila Myrrhidis facie, it being a name 
that in few words so graphically denotes the thing itself. 

16. The shrub that grew in Mr. Wilkinson's garden 
coming in some disguise, and in a different face from 
what I had from Carolina, had like indeed to have put 
upon me; but after it was graved I acquainted Dr. 
Robinson with my suspicions about it, and if you please 
to remind, you will find a note upon it amidst its 
synonyma; which, though it be put there only as a 



236 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

variety, the hint may be sufficiently understood, as indeed 
I would have it; and it is the only double oversight 
(I think) committed in the whole work. 

17. As for your suspicion of my misapplying synonyma 
to the Altli. profunde serrato 8. dentato folio, J. B., it 
will be soon taken off, when I shall tell you that my 
opinion is, the Thuringiaca Camerario ejusd., J. B., is 
the selfsame thing, though he seems to make them two, 
but with a great deal of vacillation and wavering. And 
now you will find Gasp. Bauh. synonyma here used recon- 
cilable enough to what it was intended, and Clusius's 
names will fall in pat, as you would have them. 

18. If your Ledum Alpinum hirsut. min. Cat. Exteror. 
be my Cistus Chamarhododendros, fyc., it is very different 
from the Cistus pumilis montis Baldi, fyc., J. B., though 
this be a Chamarhododendros too, as being a monopeta- 
loid, having but one leaf, with some top division in the 
flower. 

19. My Polygonum minus procumbens niveum Glaucis 
exiguce fol. is undoubtedly the Polygala repens, nuperor, 
Lob., and I believe the Polygonum minus candicans 
supinum of Dr. Magnol, though he upon mistake applies 
it to the Paronycliia kispanica, Clus., which is a more 
surrect plant. And that the Polygonum verticillatum, 
J. B., is very diverse from this Polygala of Lobel, may 
be observed from the particular of its leaves towards the 
tops of the branches ; for arriving within an inch and a 
half thereof, they leave the stalk well nigh naked for 
some space, and then, as it were to recover that loss, 
they grow to the very lip in a most close and imbricated 
order, which is never to be found in the Polygonum 
verticillatum kind. Something of this peculiar may be 
observed in Lobel's figure of it, though the interstice be 
not expressed. The Polygon, minimum montanum ni- 
veum et sericeum, Aldr., is no other than the Paronych. 
Hisp., Clus., a false synonyme, and ill applied by Dr. 
Magnol to his supine sort, which I believe to be the 
same with mine. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 237 

20. I must confess it was not without some surprise 
upon me that you should condemn the collocation of my 
Brassica spuria caule magis folioso with the Pilosetta 
siliquata Thalii, in that the stalk of mine is foliose, when 
the very Pilosella siliquata itself is not altogether desti- 
tute of leaves upon its stalk and branches, as the thing 
itself assures, and is so represented in the figure annexed 
to the Harcynia by the learned Camerarius. But were 
its stalks really viduate of leaves, and naked, I do not 
see why mine, arrayed with this ornament of leaves, 
should be shut out from a society with the other upon 
that account, any more than the Bursa pastoris Alpina 
minorTtirsuta loculo oUongo, C. B. P., with its leafy stalk 
from the Bursa pastoria minima verna loculis oblongis 
J. B. Chabr., or the Paronychia vulgaris, Dod., both 
whereof (poor scabs) are Nudicaules ; and yet I believe it 
were a hard matter to obtain your consent for a bill to 
divorce them upon the account of these inoffensive nu- 
dities. 
July 17, 92. 



Mr. J. AUBREY to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, As to lime trees, I must advertise 
you that in Bedfordshire there are woods where are 
thousands of them, e. g. at Chicksands (Sir Osburn's), 
and in other woods thereabouts; also at Mr. Wyld's 
estate at Totharn in Essex, and this I do assure you from 
my worthy friend Edm. Wyld, Esq., Mr. Bullock's 
kinsman. They also grow wild, but not so common in 
the Forest of Dean. In Cranborne Chace (Dorset) are 
very few, and they know not their name. As to Shave- 
weed used by artists (which they have from Holland), 
we have of the same sort, and as good, in a hill by B 
Abbey, in Wilts. I do think there is a greater variety 
of Withys than you mention ; a bencher of the Middle 



238 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Temple is very curious in them, but he prefers the red 

withy. King James II sent, by Sir Garden, to 

the Royal Society, a plant 'caljed Star of the Earth, with 
the receipt made of it to cure the biting of mad dogs, 
which is in ' Transact./ No. 187. By the salt-pits at 
Lymington, Hampshire, grows a plant called Squatmore, 
of wonderful effect for bruises, not in any herbal. This 
I had from Th. Guidott, M.D., whose father had the salt- 
works, and is a witness of the cures done by it. My old 
friend, Mr. Fr. Potter (author of the Interpretation 666), 
told me that a neighbour of his who had the gout many 
years, an ancient man, was cured by an old woman with 
the leaf of the wild vine. I came there above a year after, 
and the party had never a touch of it. E. W., Esq., tells 
me of a woman in Bedfordshire who doth great cures for 
agues and fevers with meadsweet, to which she adds 
some green wheat. A Parliament captain (in Ireland) 
told me, when the army was sorely afflicted with the 
bloody flux, and past the skill of the doctors, they had a 
receipt from an Irishman, viz. to take the partition pith 
of a walnut and dry it, then to pulverize it, and drink as 
much as could be heaped on a 4d. or 6d., in wine, or, &c., 
and this cured the army. Sir Chr. Wren told me once 
(eating of strawberries) that if one that has a wound in 
the head eats them it is mortal. 

London, Aug. 5, 1691. 



Mr. J. AUBKEY to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, When I was lately at Oxford I gave several 
things to the museum, which was lately robbed since I 
wrote to you. Among other things, my picture in 
miniature, by Mr. S. Cowper (which at an auction yields 
twenty guineas), and Archbishop Bancroft's, by Hillyard, 
the famous illuminer in Queen Elizabeth's time. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 239 

" For an head or eye 
By Hillyard drawn, 
Is worth an history 
By a worse painter made." 

I found among my papers this receipt for the king's 
evil, which I had from Dr. Stokes. Let the patient chew 
the roots of Piperitis, and it will make him spit, and bring 
away the malignity, and cure the distemper. 

In another letter of Jan. 21, 169|, are these words, 
viz. " Mr. Lhwyd sent me a letter this week, acquainting 
me he hath received an ear of rye (but without any grain) 
taken out of a child's side of half a year old, under the 
short j[ibs, in Merionethshire." 

London, Oct. 22, 1691. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAT. 

SIR, All our sea officers and understanding seamen 
agree that the Mediterranean sets out again into the 
Atlantic; and a gentleman who was employed many 
years in the mole of Tangier, brought back a chart with 
him of this ebbing out of the Strait's mouth; I own 
it is scarce reconcileable to the common notions of phi- 
losophy that there should be two contrary declivities or 
currents in the same channel ; but the seamen have often 
laughed at my way of reasoning, telling me that the 
same thing is frequent in many straits, as the Hellespont 
and Bosphorus, but more notably in that of Negropont. 
I would not be thought to bias your better judgment, 
yet I must tell you that all the scholars about the town 
who read your book, do agree you to be under an error ; 
indeed general opinions never determine me when I am 
inclined to think upon any subject (which happens 
seldom), and to speak the truth, I doubt of this ; though 
Dr. Lister, Mr. Aston, Mr. Hally, Mr. Flamsted, &c., 
are all against you, so are all the seafaring men. 



240 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

I told you there are many Pectunculites four and six 
times as large as any shell of that yet known ; I speak of 
England. 

The Nautilus shell in museums seems to me to be 
only the tail of the animal, and the diaphragms thereof 
the vertebrae ; I know not how many volutae the perfect 
shell itself may have. 

Your opinion of cartilaginous fishes poising and raising 
themselves seems probable to me. I am not able to 
resolve you about those blood-vessels of vipers, serpents, 
and fishes, which you mention. 

How do the cetaceous fishes raise and poise them- 
selves? I think they spout water. How doth the 
Lamprey \Petromyzon marinus~\, the Mullus [Red 
Mullet], the Anchovy \Engraulis encrasicholos], the 
Draco marinus [the Great Weever] , the Tunny [Thynnus 
vulgaris], the Drum Fish \_Tamburo~\, the Uranoscopus, 
the Dolphin, the Centrina, the Skate, Torpedo, Earn 
Piscatrix, Scorpius major, the Bull Head [Coitus 
ffobio], &c., which Signer Redi in a late book affirms 
to have no air- or swimming-bladder, raise and poise 
themselves ? 

London, Feb. 25, 9J. 



Mr. LHWYD to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, The Holywell Moss seemed to me a 
variety (though perhaps it may be a distinct species) of 
the Mttscus Trichomanis facie, Sfc., Jungermanni. The 
common people will not have it called Mwswgl [moss], 
but Gwiribh ; which word is nowhere else used in any 
other signification than for a virgin. And here perhaps 
it may allude to the virgin St. Winifrid, and might 
have been formerly called Gwdlht Gwiribh, i. e. Capillus 
virginis. Georg. Agricola* says that the stones smelling 
* DeNat. Foss.,1. i. c.5. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 241 

of violets acquire that smell from a moss adhering to 
them ; but Wormius, in his ' Museum,' p. 38, says, a 
piece of one of those stones kept in his museum many 
years, having no moss adhering to it, did still retain that 
scent. I design to send for some of the moss and stone, 
when I have an opportunity, and then we may hope to 
be able to judge better of this phenomenon. I have sent 
to my correspondent to inquire farther about the truth 
of the relation of the ear of rye. Mr. John Aubrey writes 
to me, that he could give a guess how the ear might 
come in, but that it would not be fit to be inserted in a 
letter. In the same letter he acquaints me that a young 
Cornish^gentleman assures him that he has lately observed 
in Catalonia, and amongst the Pyrenean Hills, many 
British words amongst the natives. I did not think that 
any young Cornish gentlemen had understood British ; 
however, this wants a confirmation, and 'tis possible this 
gentleman having picked out five or six parallel words 
(which is easily done out of any language in these parts 
of Europe) took it for granted, from their guttural pro- 
nunciation, that there might be many more. " He* 
informs me that he was present when a stone was broken 
by workmen, which lay upon the top of the ground, 
wherein was contained a toad, in form and colour alto- 
gether resembling the common one, though something 
less, which, being laid upon the ground, crawled about as 
long as the sun shone warm upon it, but towards night 
died. I examined the stone (says he), and supposed it 
at first to be of an extraordinary open texture, or else the 
hole wherein the toad lay to have some private communi- 
cation with the air ; but upon a more strict inquiry I 
found the stone of a close grit, but that place especially 
where she lodged to be of a much harder texture, much 
of the nature of the iron stone which the workmen call 
an iron band." 

Upon the reading your discourse of the rains continu- 

* Dr. Richardson, of North Bierley, in Yorkshire. 

16 



242 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

ally washing away and carrying down earth from the 
mountains,* it puts me in mind of something pertinent 
thereto, which I have observed in the mountains of 
Caernarvonshire, viz. : 

1. First, that generally the higher the hills are, the 
more steep are their precipices and declivities (I except 
the sea rocks), thus Moel y Wydhrha, y Grib gotch, and 
twenty others that might be named, reputed the highest 
hills in Wales, have the steepest rocks of any mountains 
I have seen ; and that not only in their highest cliffs, but 
also in most of their other crags, till you descend to the 
lower valleys. This I can ascribe to nothing else but 
the rains and snow which fall on those great mountains, 
I think, in ten times the quantity they do on the lower 
hills and valleys. 

2. I have observed a considerable quantity of the 
chips or parings (if I may so call them) of these cliffs to 
lie in vast heaps at the roots of them ; and these are of 
several sorts and materials, being in some places covered 
with grass, and in others as bare as the sea shore ; and 
those bare places do consist sometimes of gravel, and an 
innumerable number of rock fragments, from a pound 
weight to twenty, &c., and are sometimes composed of 
huge stones, from an hundred pound weight to several 
tons. 

3. In the valleys of Lhanberys and Nant-Phrancon 
the people find it necessary to rid their grounds often of 
the stones which the mountain floods bring down ; and 
yet notwithstanding this care they often lose considerable 
parcels of land. 

4. I affirm, that by this means not only such moun- 
tains as consist of much earth and small stones, or of 
softer rocks, and such as are more easily dissoluble, are 
thus wasted, but also the hardest rocks in Wales ; and 
they seem to be as weighty, and of as firm and close a 
texture as marble itself. It happened in the valley of 

* Dissol. of the World, p. 44. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 243 

Nant-Phrancon, anno 1685, that part of a rock of one of 
the impendent cliffs, called yr Hysvae, became so under- 
mined (doubtless by the continual rains and subterraneous 
veins of water occasioned by them) that, losing its hold, 
it fell down in several pieces, and, in its passage down a 
steep and craggy cliff, dislodged thousands of other 
stones, whereof many were intercepted ere they came 
down to the valley, but as much came down as ruined a 
small piece of ground, and several stones were scattered 
at least 200 yards asunder. In this accident, one great 
stone, the biggest remaining piece of the broken rock, 
made such a trench in its descent as the small mountain 
rills comuaonly run in ; and when it came down to the 
plain ground, it continued its passage through a small 
meadow and a considerable brook, and lodged itself on 
the other side it. From hence I gather, that all the 
other vast stones that lie in our mountainous valleys, 
have, by such accidents as this, fallen down ; unless 
perhaps we may do better to refer the greatest part of 
them to the universal deluge. For, considering there are 
some thousands of them in these two valleys [of Lhan- 
berys and Nant-Phrancon], whereof (for what I can learn) 
there are but two or three that have fallen in the memory 
of any man now living, in the ordinary course of nature 
we shall be compelled to allow the rest many thousands 
of years more than the age of the world. But [ have 
been too tedious in things that are no information to 
you, for which I must beg your pardon, though I cannot 
forbear to add two other particulars which seemed very 
singular. First, at the highest parts of the Glyder, 
(a mountain about the height of Cader Idris), there are 
prodigious heaps of stones, many of them of the largeness 
of those of Stonehenge, but of all the irregular shapes 
imaginable, and they all lie in as much confusion as the 
ruins of a building can be supposed to do. Now I must 
confess I cannot well imagine how this has happened ; 
for that ever they should be indeed the ruins of some 
edifice, I can by no means allow, in regard that most of 



244 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

them are as irregular as those stones are that have fallen 
to the valleys; we must, then, allow them to be the 
skeleton of the hill exposed to open view by rains, snow, 
&c. ; but then how came they to he across each other in 
this confusion ? some of them being of an oblong flat form, 
having their two ends e. g. E. and w., others laid athwart 
these, some of them laid flat, but many of them in- 
clining, being supported by other stones at the one end, 
&c. I must confess I have seen nothing that appeared 
to me so strange as this in all those mountains. Had 
they been in a valley I had presently concluded they had 
fallen from the neighbouring rocks, but being on the 
very summit of the hill, they seem to me unaccountable. 
I know it might serve to confirm Dr. Bumet's hypothesis, 
but for my part, though I admire his learning and 
ingenuity, yet I must confess I cannot (as yet) reconcile 
his opinions either to Scripture or reason, though I have 
not seen either of those books that are written against 
him. The other observation is not so unaccountable as 
it is singular, and in some respects opposite to the 
former, viz. on the N. w. side of the same hill there is, 
amongst many others, one naked precipice, as steep as 
any I have seen ; but so adorned with numerous equi- 
distant pillars, and these again slightly crossed at certain 
joints, that should Dr. Burnet see it, I believe he would 
say it is one small pattern of the frame of the antediluvian 
earth. I must confess I admired it almost as much as 
he does (lib. i, c. 9) his precipice by the Mediterranean 
Sea, to which, after a long encomium, he says, Vale 
Augusta sedes rege digna, &c., though I must grant that 
the shepherd, who was my guide, was far from wishing 
himself a mansion at this palace. 
Oxford, Feb. 30, 1691. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 245 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, What you write of the Pectunculites found in 
England I grant to be true, in comparison with any Pec- 
tunculi commonly known ; but there may be such species 
found in our seas which do not appear, but lie among 
rocks, or in great depths ; and that this is not a mere 
subterfuge, and altogether gratis dictum, I will give you 
an instance of a testaceous fish that is the Echinus 
marinus three or four whereof Mr. Willughby and 
myself found, and took up alive in the sea, among the 
rocks between the Isle and Calf of Man, of that kind and 
bigness as I never heard before to have been found cast 
upon our shores, or drawn out of the sea by our fisher- 
men. They were as big as both my fists. I have seen 
of them in Italy. 

You must excuse me if I think the nautili shells, that 
are frequent in museums, are entire shells, and not broken 
pieces ; for in such as I have seen there is no appearance 
of any fracture, and the enormous wideness of the mouth 
argues it not to be broken. And, besides, I myself have 
taken up on the shores of the Mediterranean small 
nautilus shells, of the striate kind, entire, which, for the 
shape and turn, were like to the common great nautilus 
shells. 

How the cetaceous fishes raise, sink, and poise them- 
selves in the water is, I think, clear enough, and the 
dolphin, you know, is of that kind ; and for the other 
fish you mention out of Francisco Redi, the Centrina, 
Skate, and Torpedo, are cartilaginous. Of the rest F 
do not find mention in my notes of any swimming-blad- 
der they had, excepting the Uranoscopus, which I do 
expressly say had a small one. Those fishes are farther 
to be examined. The Lamprey, I believe, cannot raise 
itself up in the water, and I doubt whether the Bull-head 
do or can. 

As for the contrary currents at the Straits, if they be 



246 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

at the same time, your argumentation must needs be 
good j and Mr. Smith, who was upon the spot, and on 
purpose to inquire and observe, acknowledges no such 
thing, but insists upon an under current ; and as for the 
Thracian Bosphorus, he confidently affirms that the cur- 
rent constantly sets outward I mean from the Euxine 
Sea. I am not concerned that the current (at the 
Straits, I mean) should constantly and only set inward, 
and it would suit my hypothesis better that it should be 
indifferent. 

I have read over your Peyer's ' Merycologia,' and do 
own him to be an ingenious and careful writer ; but yet 
in some few things I must needs differ from him, they 
being contrary to my opinions and observations, for I 
have, many years ago, with as much diligence as I could, 
examined the stomachs of kine. 

I doubt whether Mr. Lewenhoeck's observations be 
exact ; for in those of the seeds of plants I find him mis- 
taken in some, v. g. radish, turnips, and others of that 
kind, which I have forty times dissected and opened with 
my hands, and seen clearly with my naked eyes. He 
saith they have four leaves, and figures them accordingly ; 
whereas they have but two only, with a notch or crena at 
the top, but that not very deep, so as to make any show 
or appearance of two leaves. And it is clear, by their 
coming up, that they have but two leaves, for they bring 
up the very same that were inclosed in the seed. And 
Signer Malpighi agrees exactly with me, both in the 
number of leaves and the manner of their complication, 
both in his figures and descriptions. 

B. N., March 3, 91. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 247 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Since my last to you, I find that our Fallow 
Deer is not the Cervus palmatus of Gesner, but, by the 
consent of Clusius, Bellonius, and Peyerus, the Platyceros 
of Pliny, lib. ii, c. 37, described by Bellonius, but in 
some particulars erroneously, v. g. with a long tail. It 
is vulgarly called Dama, but is not the Dama of the 
ancients. The French call it Dain, and the Germans 
Dam-hirsch ; so that what the Cervus palmatus is I am 
yet to seek. 

I am at some loss about the place of the Camelopar- 
dalis. 1 think there is good reason to place him among 
the Euminantia cornigera, but whether he be of the 
Cervinum genus or no is questionable, seeing his horns 
are not ramose, as all the rest of that kind are. 

In the year 1667, 1 saw in the Strand a strange animal 
(deer they called it), of which all the notes I took are 
these. It was near of a fox-colour, its body bigger than 
a goat, but of a like make ; the horns black, not branched, 
once wreathed, not large ; the ears long, and hanging 
down like a hound's. It had two wattles under the 
throat, such as are seen in some hogs. I saw it eat hay 
and barley, and it was very tame. If the horns of this 
creature were round, which I am in some doubt of, it is 
clear that it must be some species of Gazelle. 

Your conjecture that Poor John is nothing else but 
the Hake [Merlucius vulgaris\ salted and dried, seems to 
me very likely; but where they may be had I desire 
demonstrations. 

I never very curiously observed Trouts \Salmo fario], 
because they do not often come in my way, there being 
none in the country near us. I believe I was thirty years 
of age before ever I saw one. Sprats \Clupca sprat f us] 
I know to be nothing else but the young fry of Hen-ings 
[Clupea Tiarengm\ and Pilchards \Clupea pilchardus]; 



248 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

both which fishes come to their full growth in a year's 
time or less, and then breed. Upon this occasion I 
will communicate to you a particular which hath a long 
time perplexed rne, and that is, whether all fish cast all 
their spawn at once (I mean in one year), or only part of 
it, retaining part for future partuses. That herrings 
cast all I am confident, finding none in shotten herrings. 
It is a principle with me that all animals have, from their 
very first formation, the eggs or seeds of all the young 
they shall ever bring forth, for when they are once ex- 
hausted and spent, the animal becomes effete. Now, a 
fish at every birth casting forth such an innumerable 
number of eggs as are contained in her whole roe, it 
seems strange there should remain seed-eggs enough, let 
them be never so small, as to suffice many years' births ; 
and yet the whole mass of them together to be so little 
and inconsiderable, as not to be so much as taken notice 
of by any naturalist. 

I find among my papers a short description I took of 
the skeleton of the elephant, in the Duke of Florence's 
museum, and therein this description of the bones of the 
feet. The toes of the fore feet, or rather the bones of the 
metacarpium are five ; for it hath properly no toes at all, 
but only five ungulas upon these five bones, which appeal- 
without side the skin. The like is said of the bones of 
the metatarsus, in the hind feet. It follows the ungulae 
of these hinder feet are small, round, and blunt. So it 
seems this animal hath that peculiarity to have no toes in 
his feet. And it is doubtful whether his nails be ungulae 
or ungues, they being round and blunt, and covering the 
very tops of his toes. 

B. N., April 15, 92. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 249 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I have lately seen a collection of petrifications 
with Mr. Beaumont. Amongst the rest is the Lapis 
astroites, which is a sort of coral generated in the seas, 
between the tropics ; and it seemed to be so clearly that, 
as nothing plainer. It is turned to flint, and the inter- 
stices between the starry pores are transparent. One of 
this kind he showed to me was half petrified, the other 
half remaining, like a common star-stone. He showed 
me likewise many impressions of several plants in slatt, 
as ferrfSfflags, &c. very fair and plain, with several stalks 
of plants petrified and inclosed in flint, which he talks of 
publishing, together with some figures of, and reasonings 
upon, them. 

London, May 20, 1692. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, May 25, 92. 

SIR, Monday last I received your kind letter, attended 
with a rich present of sugar to my wife. They were 
both very grateful and acceptable ; only the latter was 
too great and inadequate to any merit of mine to be 
received without some shame, as well the quality as 
quantity concurring to render it valuable. You have so 
highly pleased and obliged my wife, that she is much in 
commendation of your generosity, and returns you her 
humble service and hearty thanks, wishing that you were 
here to partake of some of the effects of your kindness. 

I have been importunate with you to hasten the pub- 
lication of your discoveries in the history of nature, as 
well for the advancement of real knowledge, and gratifi- 



250 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

cation of the learned and inquisitive, as for your own 
deserved honour, that some other man might not prevent 
you, and by some means or other intercept what is yours. 
I am glad you make such progress, and cannot but 
approve your deliberation and circumspection ; and 
agree with you that the clearing up of difficulties, and 
reconciling of authors, and reducing and settling the 
several histories and relations of species, will be a thing 
of eminent use, and of as much advantage to the reader 
as pains to the author. 

The little plant you sent formerly you now conclude 
to be the Cattitriche Plinii of Columna \_Callitriche 
verna |3, Linn.], and so it may be, I having never seen 
that. I find it overseen and omitted by me in my 
history ; I suppose because, being seminiferous, I deferred 
it when I entered the Lenticulce [Lemna, Linn.], thinking 
to put it in another place, and afterwards forgot it. 

Those instances you would have added to my discourse 
concerning the wisdom of God I know are so consider- 
able, that I am sorry my book wants them, which might 
have recommended it to the reader. If I had thought 
you would have been willing to spare time to peruse it, 
you should have had a sight of the copy before it had 
been committed to the press. 

I am this morning sending away my discourses con- 
cerning the Primitive Chaos and Creation of the World, 
the General Deluge, and Future Conflagration, with 
additions for a second edition. If you please to revise 
and correct it before it be printed, I will order Mr. 
Smith to deliver the copy to you for that purpose. 

Mr. Beaumont is a person that hath been very diligent 
in searching out and collecting, and curious in observing 
of, petrified shells and other bodies, and I suppose well 
qualified to write concerning them. I heard that he 
once threatened to write something in contradiction to 
Mr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, which piece I could 
wish to see. 

I am now upon a methodical synopsis of all British 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 251 

animals, excepting insects, and it will be a general synopsis 
of quadrupeds. It will take me up more time to finish 
than I thought when I first set upon it ; indeed so much 
as, if I had foreseen, I should hardly have been induced 
to undertake it ; but now I must go on. 

The remainder is, great thanks for your extraordinary 
kindness, attested by real effects, and profession of 
readiness to show myself grateful, if any occasion of 
serving you offers to, 

Sir, 
Your affectionate friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr*4Jans Sloane, at the 

Duchess of Albemarle's, in Clerkenwell, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, I received yours of March 20, in an answer 
whereto I can only tell you as to the first particular, 
about bisulc and quadrisulc, that the reasons why I con- 
jecture the Rhinoceros and Hippopotamus to be quadri- 
sulc are (what I intimated before), the bigness and posi- 
tion of the outward hoofs, as they are represented in the 
sculps, not being set at that distance as they are in bisulc 
animals ; and the authority of Columna as to the Hippo- 
potamus, who (had the hind ungulse been like to, and 
situate in like manner, as in other bisulc animals) would 
never have made such a remark upon it, viz. that its feet 
were quadrisulc. 

As to the second, concerning the Viper, I believe that 
the eggs have no cohesion with the uterus, neither the 
young. I have easily turned the eggs out ; and in the 
young, when ready for exclusion, I have indeed observed 
a navel string ; but it seemed to be nothing but one 
single membrane, which served only as an infundibulum 



252 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

for the yolk of the egg into the intestine of the young 
viper ; just as I have seen in young Dog-fish \_Scyttium 
canicula] , in the belly of the old one, half, or a good part 
of the yolk hanging out of the body at the infundibulum. 
It seem to me not at all likely that creatures of the same 
genus should have a different manner of generation ; and 
we see this hatching of eggs, properly so called, in the 
belly, exemplified in cartilaginous fish. 

I have some reason to doubt of what you and Dr. 
Tyson write concerning adders having no vesiculae semi- 
nales. A male that I dissected had a long vesicula re- 
plete with sperm (as I took it to be), like the milt of a 
fish, extending the whole length of the belly ; but I did 
not carefully examine it, and therefore might be mistaken, 
and it might be nothing but fat. 
B. N., June 1, 92. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, Our principal physician at Braintree, Mr. Allen, 
my acquaintance and friend, hath discovered hereabouts 
flying glowworms ; and I doubt not but they are every- 
where to be found, being nothing else but a kind of long- 
bodied beetle, though they shine not in this country. 
They answer exactly to Aldrovand's description of the 
Cicindela volans of Italy. The reason why I mention 
this is, because this gentleman meeting with this beetle, 
and finding by strict observation that the body of it 
answered exactly in figure to that of a creeping glow- 
worm, suspected it to be the male glowworm; and 
having some creeping glowworms by him, put this 
animal into a box with one of them, which, after some 
short time, coupled with it ; but because the box where- 
in to they were put was small and shut, to confirm the 
experiment, he put a creeping glowworm into an open 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 253 

box, and a flying one to her, which, fluttering with his 
wings, did presently, in his sight, march to the creeping 
one, and couple with her. How this can accord with 
what Mr. Waller delivers of the winged Cicindela, that 
they are both male and female, and couple together, I see 
not, unless we say that there are two sorts of flying glow- 
worms, the one sort having both sexes flying, and the 
other being the male of the creeping ; for Dr. Plot's salvo 
will not here serve the turn, viz. that the animal in which 
Vintimiglia made the first experiment might be prurient 
with lust, and being shut up in a glass with creeping 
glowworms, might couple with them, as horses do with 
she-ass^,; for in our case the flying glowworm was not 
pampered, as wild creatures seldom are, nor withheld 
from those of his own kind for some time, and was at 
his free liberty in the box to take his flight away. 
B. N., July 8, 92. 



Mr. LHWYD to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, When your last letter came I was 
at London about a legacy of books, medals, and pictures, 
bequeathed by Mr. Ashmole to the University, since 
which time I have been so continually employed in taking 
a catalogue of them, that I have had but small leisure to 
go abroad to make any discoveries. 

My discoveries in formed stones of late are but few. 
1 have a stone almost a foot long (but broken in several 
pieces), something of the colour, shape, and politeness of 
a rhinoceros's horn, which, perhaps, is congenerous with 
that they call Unicornu fossile ; and have also found at 
Witney and Charlton, in Oxfordshire, and Farringdon, 
in Berkshire, several very odd petrified bones, to me at 
present unaccountable, and like to continue so, at least- 
wise a long time. At present I only suspect them to be 



254 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

the bones of some marine creatures. It is certain they 
differ totally from the bones of any land animals at pre- 
sent in the island ; and we have no reason to imagine 
that this country was possessed anciently of any other 
land animals than what it is at present, unless we should 
give way to Dr. Burnet's hypothesis, or some such other 
invention. I have also two fossils, which seem to be 
fragments of fish-jaws petrified, each of them having 
their teeth (to wit, toad-stones, or the Occldedi serpi of the 
Maltese) placed in their natural order, as they are in the 
Lupus, and probably in some other fish. I have likewise 
discovered very elegant stones of those kinds which I 
have called Siliquastrum and Punctularia. As for the 
Cornua Hammonis, I am now satisfied they are all of the 
nautilus kind, and of such like shells ; but, as you say, 
what is become of all these species, if they are petrified 
shells ? I say they are all of the nautilus kind, not that 
any of them scarce resemble the known species of Nautili 
(for such as do have been called by Calceolarius and 
Morcardo Nautili, &c., and not Cornua Hammonis), but 
because they consist of several articulations, which is a 
structure agrees with no other shells but the Nautili. 
The sutures upon them, which Boccone and others com- 
pare to oak-leaves, are nothing else but the commissures 
of the joints, and these joints nothing else but the spar, 
or other stone, filling the cavities of the cells in the 
nautilus ; and this I conclude from one or two specimens 
I have found, which have the shell still remaining in the 
interstices of the joints. That figure of the joints which 
I compared to vertebrae is acquired from the shape of 
the septum, or partition in the shell. I think Olaus 
Wormius was the first that compared any Cornua Ham- 
monis to a nautilus. 

Oxford, October 7, 92. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 255 



Capt. HATTON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, Those few plants of Rauwolfius's collection, pub- 
lished in the Appendix to the ' Historia Lugdunensis,' 
got him so great fame amongst the lovers of botany, 
that I have heard Isaac Vossius declare above 400 
sterling had been offered for the four specious volumes 
he had of dried plants collected by Rauwolfius ; and to 
most strangers who came to see his deservedly-famed 
library, he constantly showed those amongst his other 
most valuable books ; and very few books writ in any 
moderi^language are mentioned with a higher encomium 
than Rauwolfius's ' Itinerary ' is ; but being printed 
about a hundred years since, it is very rare, and being 
never translated out of High Dutch (in which language 
it was writ), it is unintelligible to those who do not un- 
derstand the German tongue, which occasioned me, some 
time since, in discourse with our learned and ingenious 
friends, Dr. Sloane and Dr. Robinson, to express my 
sentiments, that I believed a translation of it into Eng- 
lish would be very acceptable to all the ingenious persons 
of our nation ; and they both concurring in my opinion, 
Dr. Sloane borrowed it out of the library of the Royal 
Society, and Mr. Staphorst is about the translation of it 
into English, and hath near finished it. But before it be 
published, it would be very necessary not only that the 
style of the translation (which is performed by a German) 
should be corrected by a master of the English language, 
but that the author himself should be animadverted on 
in some places. The learned and famed Ludolphus, in 
his incomparable Commentary on his ' Ethiopic History,' 
hath reproved him for asserting that the Unicorn was in 
the Abyssin's country ; but Rauwolfius doth not pretend 
to have been there, only relates it from one, his affection 
to whom had biassed his judgment ; and it is much to be 
feared that even the perspicacious and judicious Ludolphus 
himself may have been imposed upon in some things he 



256 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

asserts by the credibility he gives to the relator ; and con- 
sidering that, since the time Rauwolfius travelled into 
Asia, the manners and customs of those countries may 
have been altered and changed, and some have been 
more fully discovered than he could in his short stay in 
those parts. It was highly to be wished that some person, 
duly qualified for such an undertaking, would, where 
requisite, make some brief animadversions and diluci- 
dations ; and if any person of great and deserved fame 
would, in a short preface, give some account of the author 
(whose life is not, as I know, related by any person but 
Melchior Adamus, and that with his wonted brevity), and 
by a favorable character of the work, give it a recom- 
mendation, it would be an invitation to all ingenious 
persons to peruse it, for which achievement there is no 
person on earth so duly qualified as the justly-renowned 
Ray. Therefore, pardon me, sir, if I join my humble 
desires to those of our afore-mentioned worthy friends, 
that you would please to give a new life to Rauwolfius, 
put him into a fit garb and dress to appear in, and by 
your passport and recommendation, make his converse 
not only acceptable, but desirable, to all the ingenious 
men of our nation ; which, if you will please so far to 
condescend as to perform, Mr. Smith engages to return 
you, in a fitting manner, his thanks for the benefit he 
shall receive by the book, being thereby rendered much 
more vendible ; and all persons of learning or ingenuity 
will, I doubt not, acknowledge it as an obligation from 
you to them. 

Whilst I am now writing, a Westmoreland acquaint- 
ance of mine coming to see me, in discourse did acci- 
dentally mind me of the surprise I was in, some years 
since, at Lowther Hall, in Cumberland, the house of Sir 
John Lowther. Seeing at Sir John's table a fresh- water 
trout, which was thirty-eight inches in length, and twenty- 
seven in girth, taken in Ulleswater, a large lake in 
Westmoreland, in which, I was assured by Sir John and 
other persons of unquestionable credit, trouts of that size 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 257 

(nay, larger) are frequently taken, I thought fit to men- 
tion this to you, not knowing whether you have seen or 
heard of these trouts, or any other of that bigness, com- 
monly taken in England. I am, sir, to yourself, lady, 
and family, with all due honour and regard*, &c. 

October 25, 1692. 



Mr. AUBREY to Mr. RAY. 

London, December 15, 1692. 

are Water Blackbirds \Cinclus aquaticus] 
about Rentcomb in Cotswald, which I never heard of 
before, &c. Mr. Gibson, of Queen's College, Oxon, of 
Westmoreland, saith, that in Westmoreland, eagles do 
breed in Willow-Cragg in the parish of Bampton. 

I remember the saltpetre men told me heretofore, that 
in ground abounding with saltpetre they find a little yellow 
insect, as yellow as gold, which is a good indication to 
them for saltpetre. In Mr. Wyld's woods, at Totham, in 
Essex, an eagle was killed about eight years since, whose 
wings extended nine feet long. Mr. Wyld has one of 
the feathers. 



Mr. LHWYD to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, The account you have been pleased to give me 
of your Tract concerning the Dissolution of the World, 
makes me think it very long till I see it. Your discourse 
of Formed Stones comes in very opportunely, and indeed 
must necessarily affect the reader with its novelty and clear- 
ness of argument. 

As to the fossil oysters, and my other observations of 
late in this kind, they do, 1 must confess, confirm me in 
my apostacy ; for 1 have been inclined to a misbelief of 
their being mineral forms, ever since 1 found the first 

17 



258 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



, viz. above a year since. If I had 
abilities of travelling one or two summers, I believe I could 
make this matter clear enough, and beyond dispute. 

I have also an ear of rye out of Dolgelhe parish, 
Meiryonydhshire, that was taken out of the side of an 
infant. The truth whereof is so well attested, that as yet 
I fully believe it. When the child was born, he had a 
protuberance on the left side under the ribs, about the 
bigness of a small nut j all the sustenance given him for 
six weeks he vomited, and did not thrive at all : about 
which time the knob broke ; and the mother surprised at 
some odd thing she saw therein, called to her husband, 
who observing the straw end to peep in and out, as the 
child cried, or was quiet, he held it between his nails, and 
plucked out this ear. The mother applied a plantain 
leaf to the sore, and it was well in twenty-four hours. 
Your opinion how it came there would be acceptable. My 
Lord of Bangor has sent to me to desire your opinion of 
the Holywell moss, as to its sweet scent. It is very true 
that it smells sweet (as I myself experienced anno -88) 
at the very place. Whence it acquires its scent is the 
question : my lord thinks it sweetened by art ; but then 
he knows not perhaps that it has that smell in its native 
place. 

Oxford, Dec. 20, 92. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOAXE. 

Black Notley, Jan. 31, 93. 

SIR, This morning I have sent back the box you were 
pleased to send me, containing the papers of fishes, and 
Mr. Sherard's dried plants ; and should have given you 
by letter more timely advice, but that I was not sure I 
should finish them so soon. You will find in the box a 
letter to Mr. Sherard, and another to Mr. Smith the 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 259 

bookseller ; which, indeed, is nothing but a catalogue of 
exotic plants drawn out of Mr. Sherard's papers. 

I have set down some of my conjectures concerning 
some of the species of fishes, which I offer to your consi- 
deration. There are two draughts upon the same paper 
without names, of fishes which I suppose want the infe- 
rior pair of fins, but I would willingly be further assured 
thereof from yourself, and whether they be known to the 
seamen by any names. 

I cannot but admire your industry and diligence in 
collecting and describing so many species in so short a 
time, not only of plants, but also of animals ; and I hope 
you wiil^go soon as may be gratify and oblige the curious 
in publishing of your labours. The copy of my Synopsis 
is so intricate and perplexed by references already, that I 
thought not fit to confound the compositors with more, 
and have therefore put a great number of the fishes, which 
I had not room to enter in their places in the body of my 
work, together by themselves at the end of it ; by which 
means the author of the descriptions will be more taken 
notice of, than if they had been scattered and dispersed 
singly through the body of the book. 

I give you hearty thanks for your great kindness in 
wishing me health. I thank God I am well, saving the 
sores upon my leg, which, according to the weather, are 
more easy or troublesome ; in general, they stand much 
at a stay : and my wife salutes you with her humble 
service. 

I shall be very glad to have a sight of your descriptions 
and figures of birds. 

I am, Sir, 

Your very affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 



260 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. HAY. 

London, Feb. 16, 169f . 

SIR, I should have some time since given you my 
thanks for the favour you did me in sending me one of 
your books of Physico-Theological Discourses ; which I 
now do, assuring you at the same time, that you have me 
very much at your command and service. I have perused 
most part of RauwolfP s Voyage ; which being only extant 
in High Dutch, and that understood by veiy few, I thought 
would do well in English, and so borrowed it from the 
Royal Society : and Capt. Hatton being desirous of it 
likewise, we put it into the hands of Mr. Staphorst, who 
has done it as you see, I think pretty clear ; though the 
making it good language, and the notes, are left wholly 
to you. Some passages are not to be well translated, 
because of differing customs and proverbs ; but I think so 
far as the natural history is concerned it may be under- 
stood. Authors make mention of a fourth part of this 
work printed the next year, viz. in 1583, which is very 
true ; for some of the plants of Rauwolff mentioned by 
him, and described in this journal, were engraven in wood, 
and without any farther descriptions, only references in 
the margin to the descriptions in the pages of the journal, 
make up a fourth book, or part ; which, with a new title- 
page, was what made the second edition ; the book in 
pages, &c., without cuts, and of the first edition in 1582, 
being exactly the same as with the fourth part, and cuts, 
in 1583. The compiler of the Historia Lugdunensis at 
the latter end, in an Appendix, takes all these cuts, bating 
some few, which had been graved in the body of that 
history ; and adding the descriptions out of the journal to 
the cuts, makes that Appendix which we have at the latter 
end of that work. I think this work a very curious one 
in several natural remarks, as in the spiral cutting of the 
poppy-heads, in making opium, &c. I have likewise 
solicited hard to get one Martin's book of Greenland trans- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 261 

lated and printed. It was done into order from his mouth 
by Martin Fogelius of Hamburgh, and there printed 1673 
in 4to, with many cuts of birds, plants, &c., of those parts, 
and is not extant that I hear of in any language but High 
Dutch. I have seen two plants from the Cape of Good 
Hope ; they are both coniferous trees, and one has a seed 
pappous, or rather feathered, like the seeds of Viorna ; but 
with those seeds of feathers sticking between the scales, 
it makes one of the loveliest cones I ever beheld, if you 
add that the leaves are covered with the longest, whitest, 
and thickest tomentum I ever saw, being else like to the 
leaves of a willow. The other cone has its seed in the 
middle>aiid not between the scales, but at top of the cone 
together, and is also feathered. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I received all your letters, and Monday last the 
box containing your draughts and descriptions of birds, 
which I have perused, but shall make no remarks upon 
till I receive the Synonyma you mentioned, that I may 
see how far we both jump and accord therein. I perceive 
there are several species of water-fowl, both of such as 
swim, and such as haunt and frequent watery places 
common to Europe and America. I cannot again but 
admire your industry in collecting so great a number of 
species in so short a time, and not only collecting, but so 
exactly observing and describing them. I return you 
hearty thanks for your kind offer of the Catalogue of your 
Jamaica plants ; but think not fit to accept it, for two 
reasons : first, because in these Catalogues I now publish, 
I meddle not with American and Indian plants, but 
secondly, and principally lest I should deflower your work, 
and in any measure prejudice the sale of it. Else such a 
Catalogue would be the greatest ornament and jewel I 
could add to set forth my book, and recommend it to the 



262 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

reader, and make it current all over Europe. My wife 
sends you her very humble service, and I am, 

Sir, 
Yours entirely to command and use, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, Feb. 28, 93. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, April 10, 93. 

SIR, I ought long since to have acknowledged the 
receipt of, and returned something in answer to, your 
friendly letter of Feb. 16, 1692, but truly I have been 
ever since so afflicted with constant pain by reason of 
exulcerated pernios of both my legs, that I have had little 
heart to write or to do anything else but what was neces- 
sary. I am now, I thank God, at a little more ease, and 
do hope warm weather coming on will dry up and heal 
my sores. You need not have taken any notice of my 
book ; an hundred of them will scarce suffice to acquit 
me of the obligations you have laid upon me by your 
many favours and kindnesses. 

You have done well in procuring Rauwolff's ' Itinerary' 
to be translated and published in English. I wonder, 
indeed, so good a book hath lyen so long locked up in 
High Dutch. The translator hath done his part as well 
as could be expected from a foreigner ; I have revised it, 
and altered the phrase and language, where I thought it 
less grammatical, or consonant to the idiom of the English 
tongue, or to the words approved now by use among the 
learned and civil part of the nation. Annotations (either 
parallel or additional out of other writers, or corrective or 
significative of the partial alterations of customs and 
manners since Rauwolff's time, which, as Captain Hatton 
suggested to me well, must in all likelihood have hap- 
pened in the space of above an hundred years) I have 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 203 

had no leisure to add, but have referred that back to Mr. 
Robinson, who I hope will perform it well. A catalogue 
of more rare Oriental plants, growing in those parts where 
Rauwolff travelled, I have drawn up, to be added to the 
end of the work, referring such as are found therein to 
the page where they are mentioned or described. 

I have formerly drawn up and published a Catalogue 
of such plants, not native of England as I myself found 
growing spontaneously in my travels beyond sea, to 
which I have added what escaped my notice, out of 
Mangol's Catalogue and Appendix of Montpellier plants, 
M. Hofman's Cat. of Alterfine, C. Bauhine's, of Ba- 
silian, -!oni incline's Holland Catal., P. Beccone's Si- 
cilian Plants; moreover, all Clusius's Pannonic plants, 
and all the Helvetic and Rhaetic, besides, mentioned and 
described in C. Bauhine's 'Prodromus.' These are all 
put in one alphabetic catalogue, wherein I have still room 
left to receive what you shall please to contribute, or pro- 
cure from Mr. Sherard : for this book will not be printed 
before September next, my bookseller having his hands 
so full that he cannot attend it. 

The work you mention of Martin's, &c., must needs 
be a curious piece, if well done, and deserves to be trans- 
lated and published. If well done, I say ; for if Martin 
did not take notes from the plants and animals lying 
before him, but dictated to Eogelius from his memory, 
his descriptions cannot be exact. 

The two trees you mention from the Cape of Good 
Hope are very curious, singular, and extraordinary. 

I am sorry my book wanted the advantage your me- 
moirs and figures would have given it, in reference to 
the earthquake at Jamaica. But my description and 
notes concerning it were huddled up in haste (the press 
stopping all that while), and sent up to London in loose 
papers, as you may perceive by the confusedness of them ; 
and truly you did not then come into my mind, else 1 
should have made 1 them stay a little longer, till I had 
written to you concerning it. 



264 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

If ever the book come to another impression, they may 
then be added to it. My wife returns you her very 
humble service by the hand of, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

I am glad you have brought your Jamaica work so 
near to a period, and long to see it in print, 

To Dr. Hans Sloane, at the 
Lord Montague's House, 
in Clerkeuwell, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, October 16, -93. 

SIR, I received your friendly letter last post. I should 
be ungrateful should I not take notice of and acknow- 
ledge your great kindness in being so solicitous for my 
ease and relief. But truly my ulcers are mail moris, such 
as have hitherto resisted and frustrated all means and 
methods of cure ; and I fear this last of mercury will 
prove unsuccessful : for since my letter to Dr. Briggs, I 
took another dose of calomelanos, and that a very mode- 
rate one, of no more than x gr., and I am confident well 
prepared, being done by our physician himself. But yet 
this had the same effect upon me as the former, keeping 
me waking all the latter part of the night, and withal 
casting me into a sweat (which might happen by reason 
of the warmth of the weather). The next day it purged 
me pretty much, not ceasing to work till night. The day 
following it put me into a feverish heat, which went off 
the next morning in a sweat; then I thought it had 
done, but on the eighth, ninth, and tenth days it purged 
me again, but very moderately, and I know not whether 
it be yet quite out of my body. During all this time I 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 265 

find no remission of pain or abatement of the running of 
my sores. Yesterday I, by the advice of Dr. Robinson, 
applied the emplastrum, and ranis cum mercurio, which 
is so far from giving any present ease, that it aggravates 
the pain, especially in the night, so that my rest was 
much interrupted by it. What good it may do for the 
future I know not, but in other plasters that 'l have used 
at first they have been most easy, and afterwards more 
troublesome and afflictive ; only this which I have used 
all this summer and part of the spring gave me present 
ease the first night I applied it, and so hath done ever 
since, my ulcers never disturbing or interrupting my rest, 
which^Jjey did very much before. 

I have this summer made use of a decoction of sassa- 
fras sarsa, and china with some sage and hypericon, and 
shavings of hartshorn, but without guaiacum, for a short 
time : I found that it heated and dried my body, but gave 
me no sensible relief, so I gave it over because it was 
nauseous and ungrateful to my stomach ; but upon your 
recommendation I will make another trial of it. 

I thank you for your kindness in expressing so great a 
readiness to comply with my desires in communicating 
your undescribed birds and fishes of Jamaica, towards 
the perfecting of my Synopses of those genera. I shall 
desire (they being new things) the entire description of 
them. They will be the greatest ornament of my book, 
there being nothing besides new in it. Indeed I under- 
took it only at the instance of my bookseller, and to gra- 
tify him, not without some regret. It will be of little 
use to those who have Mr. WiUughby's Ornithology and 
Ichthyology. I have the copy of this book ready for the 
press, wanting only your contributions : I suppose it 
cannot yet be printed for want of paper. 

I cannot but wonder at the relation you sent of the 
effect of Cynocrambe. I never read or heard of any 
such noxious or deleterious quality in it, yet possibly 
there may be, for I doubt much whether any of our 
herbarists ever made trial of it. I believe what they have 



266 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

of the virtues of it they took out of Dioscorides, whose 
Cynocrambe is another thing.* 

I intend this week to remit Martens's Spitzberg voyage. 
When I say I have nothing new in my Synopses, I mean 
by new not published in print, for else I have some 
species of birds and fishes taken out of Martens, and 
some others out of Hernander, which are not in the his- 
tories I mentioned of Mr. Willughby. I should be glad 
to see anything of yours published in print, for I know 
it will answer the opinion I have of it. My wife tenders 
her humble service to you by the hand of, 

Sir, 
Your affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

This letter should have been sent last post, but that 
the postboy neglected to call as he passed by; since 
which time, upon applying a new plaster of that e ranis, 
I found my leg so painful all day, that I was afraid to 
continue it on all night, so I took it off, and applied my 
usual plaster : after which, going to bed, I rested about 
three hours, and then waking found a great disturbance 
in my belly, so that I was forced to rise. Afterwards I 
could not sleep till daylight. The day following (which 
was yesterday) I was more at ease than I have been a 
great while, feeling no pain at all : yet in the night, after 
my first sleep, the pain returned and continued as before, 
but yet during the remission of the pain the sores ceased 
not to run as before. I am apt to think that the mercury 
in the plaster might affect and work upon my body, for 
I find still a working in my belly, so that I believe I am 
not yet qmte clear of it. 

Eor his honoured friend, 
Dr. Hans Sloaue, at 
Montague House, London. 

* The Cynocrambe of the herbalists is Mercttrialis percnuis, Linn. ; that 
of Dioscoridcs is Theliffoniiw Cynocrambe, Linn. C. C. B. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 267 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HAJJS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, November 1, 93. 

SIR, I received yours of October 21, and that of the 
28th of the same month by post ; and the woods and 
roots you were pleased to send me by carrier on Monday 
last, for which being not able to make you any amends, 
all that I can do at present is to return you many thanks. 
I intend speedily to observe your directions in making 
use of them. Lime-water I have made use of outwardly 
to wask^he sores the greatest part of last summer, and 
have received some benefit by it, but not so much as to 
heal and dry them up. I have lately applied a plaster 
in form of a cerecloth, which I had from a neighbour, 
who knew not the ingredients of it; but, by the scent 
and consistency of it, I plainly perceive that there is Bur- 
gundy-pitch and rosin in it, which at first agreed marvel- 
lous well with the ulcers (as all plasters I have used did 
best at first), so that had the weather favoured, I was in 
some hopes it might have healed them up ; but it hap- 
pening lately to be cold and frosty, they fell off itching 
and spread again, and are now come to be as bad as 
before. I observe, that let me keep them never so con- 
stantly warm, yet frosty weather will affect them, and 
cause such a pruritus as in chilblains we experience. 

I have myself lately received a letter from Mr. Smith, 
whereby I understand that he designs not to begin to 
print my Synopses till Christmas next ; it may be not till 
Lady-day; and then I dare say, if committed to Mr. 
Mott, they will be half a year in hand : howbeit I would 
willing, now the copy is finished, rid my thoughts of it, 
and therefore am ready and desirous to receive your con- 
tributions so soon as may stand with your convenience. 
I am not yet in such haste as to intrench upon your more 
urgent occasions, or to incommode you in any kind, 
being, you see, at liberty to await your leisure, if it be 



268 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

half a year or more. My wife tenders her humble service 
to you by the hand of, Sir, 

Your affectionate friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

I needed not have given you the trouble of this letter, 
because Mr. Dale being in town can fully inform you of 
my present condition and affairs, but only to acquaint 
you with the receipt of the parcel. 

For his honoured friend, 
Dr. Hans Sloane, at 
Montague House, London, 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HAXS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, November 29, 93. 

SIR, Your continued kindness and solicitousness 
for my ease and relief exacts no less from me than a 
grateful acknowledgment. I have for some time made 
use of a diet drink, made by decoction of those materials 
you were pleased to send me, the effect whereof is scarce 
any discernible diaphoresis, but a manifest diuresis, it 
causing a great defluxion of urine. I think for the pre- 
sent, while I am taking it, it doth somewhat abate the 
running of the sores (which yet after a day or two's inter- 
mission returns as copious as before), but makes them 
more painful. Yet is not the pain so great in the night- 
time as to cause any disturbance or interruption of rest, 
nor indeed hath it ever been since I first applied the 
plaster I still use : so that to mitigate pain or procure 
sleep I need not the assistance of any opiate. One incon- 
venience I find by the use of this drink, that it keeps me 
waking, and much diminishes my rest, whether by drying 
the brain or some other unknown virtue. But to return 
to my sores. I have now, I think, upon good ground re- 
assumed my former opinion, that they are nothing else 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 269 

but ill-natured kybes or exulcerated chilblains called 
pernios. My reason is, because cold, but especially frosty 
weather, aftects them much, causing such a troublesome 
itching as we experience in chilblains ; and further, they 
spread with little hard tumours or knots within the skin, 
and this though I keep them constantly warm. Hence 
I infer that the cause of them is not so much the chilling 
of the parts affected by the external cold, to which they 
are exposed, as the congelative particles (whether nitrous 
or of what nature I know not) with which the air is 
charged, drawn in by the mouth in breathing, and in 
the lungs communicated to the blood. You will demand, 
why th^n are these tumours excited only in the hands and 
the feet? I answer, that the external cold doth indeed 
concur to the generation of them : for the hands and 
feet being the extreme parts of the body and of small 
bulk, and most distant from the fountain of heat, the 
heart, the blood by that it arrives there loses much of its 
heat; and so these particles being by reason of their 
gravity, unapt to comply with the motion of the blood, 
it lets fall many of them (as we see warm water will 
sustain much more salt than cold ; and as the heat dimi- 
nishes lets it fall by degrees), which resting there, cause 
these tumours so troublesome with their itching when they 
are externally heated. In persons young and vigorous, 
who abound in natural heat, and in whom the blood is 
maintained in a brisk motion, if these parts be kept con- 
stantly warm there are no chilblains generated, the blood 
retaining these congelating particles, which are easily sup- 
ported in it, and whirled about with it, till they be gradually 
cast off and evacuated by the natural connectorics. But 
in persons aged, in whom the motion of the blood is 
languid, when it is sated with them, a little diminution 

of heat, which must needs follow from 

* * ,''.'.* * * 

[per]suaded and confirmed in my opinion of the nature 
of these ulcers by the ineffectualness of all the physic I 
have used toward'the healing and drying them up ; and 



270 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

I do believe, had not the last spring been so unusually 
and unnaturally cold, they would have healed of them- 
selves before summer was ended. But that also succeed- 
ing not very warm after a cold spring, there was not heat 
enough to do it in one of my age. And this I rather 
think, because those on one of my legs did heal and dry 
up at last, though long first, and not till the very end of 
the summer. 

You need not make more haste with what you please 
to contribute to my work of fishes and birds, of yourown 
observation in Jamaica, than will well consist with your 
other occasions ; for, by Mr. Motte's proceedings with 
my Catalogues, I believe that book will not come on this 
twelvemonth yet. 

Dr. Robinson tells me of one Father Plumier, who 
hath published at Paris two folios of West India Plants ; 
it is like he may have anticipated some of your discovery. 
I shall add no more at present but my wife's service, and 
that I am, Sir, 

Your very affectionate and obliged friend and 
humble servant, 

Jo. RAY. 

The carrier brought me nothing from Mr. Churchill. 



Mr. LHWYD to Mr. RAT. 

SIR, I observed near Kidwelly, in Carmarthenshire, 
this last summer, that the Gryllo Tdlpa live there in the 
sea-lands that are covered every tide. I brought one of 
them with me, and cannot find that they differ from those 
of the midland counties. In Wales they are called Rhing 
y Les., q. d. Stridor (estivitatis. I am, &c. 
Oxford, Dec. 12, 1693. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 271 



The Reverend Mr. PASCHAL to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, There seems to be throughout the universe a 
mutual contranitency between parts central and circum- 
ferential ; those emitting and propelling outwards ; these 
resisting and repelling inwards. Of this I have three 
instances now in my thoughts. 

1. In this, or any other planetary system the sun sends 
forth, chiefly by its ecliptic parts ; and the ambient fixed 
stars in their respective ethers, and according to their 
powers, give bounds, and beat back, from whence proceeds 
a plenitude as absolute and entire, and close, as the na- 
ture oisuch a fluid can admit of. 

2. In this, or any other planet, the internal solar matter 
inclosed in its cortex, moving rapidly about its own axis, 
continually steams out most directly and vigorously in the 
equinoctial parts ; and the encompassing ether is always, 
according to its power, giving limits to those steams and 
driving them back. 

3. In all those particular mixed bodies, made so as to 
send outward chiefly whatever individuals, in any of the 
three kingdoms of nature, there is an internal principle 
or agent causing effluvia to come forth ; and in the atmo- 
sphere, in which they are, a resistance to these motions 
outwards, suitable to the nature and motions of its parts 
and the determinations belonging to those motions. 

Sir, I fancy, but with submission to better judgments, 
that if these three were with application and diligence 
looked into, they might contribute something towards an 
explication of sundry phenomena in nature, such as, first, 
gravity, by which I understand the vis centripeta in the 
pails of a planet, whether united or to some certain dis- 
tance separated from it. This seems to be a natural and 
necessary result from such a plenitude as is named above. 
Secondly, the order, distances, motions, which their regu- 
larity in the planetary system of the planets, whether 
primary or secondary, being and moving therein. Thirdly, 



272 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

those Justus atmosphere, or air-tides, to which my .last 
referred, and those sundry variations of the air, and 
effects considered in meteorology, which possibly may be 
found to owe their origin to, and to depend upon, those 
opposite pressures proceeding from parts central and cir- 
cumferential acting and reacting upon one another. As 
for the vigour I noted to attend the diurnal motion of the 
earth about its axis, toward the moon, in the southing . 
and anti-southing senaries, I am by many observations 
inclined to think, that it comes from the terrestrial effluvia 
in those times at liberty to flow forth more plentifully. 
And consequently the abatement thereof .in the ebbing 
senaries is from advantage then coming to the circum- 
ferential pressures, at liberty to repress these effluxes 
from within the earth. 

Fourthly, culinary and vital fires, both which kinds 
move a centra ; particularly life, as to its nature, original 
progress, state sane or morbose, decay and dissolution, 
may have some light from a nearer and accurate inspection 
into these. Sir, my narrow and but late observation, and 
that much interrupted, supplies me with enough to make 
a volume upon this noble subject. 

But if there be anything worth regard in what I here 
offer, he to whom I write will see it without large dis- 
courses : and if there be nothing, I have in this already 
said too much. I am, &c. 

Chedsey, near Bridgwater, Jan. 20, 169-^. 

P. S. Lately reading Mr. Leweng's ' Observation of 
Scales in our Skin,' it gives me occasion to reflect upon 
the wisdom of Nature, in providing for the regulating of 
transpiration. That the circumferential pressure may 
not hinder it too much, fishes, in their elements, need a 
stronger and larger scale than we do in ours. 

NOTE. This hypothesis its learned author applies in 
his following letters to the solution of divers phenomena, 
as magnetism, the variations of the weather, the tides, and 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 273 

their senaries, and the tiling he imagines to happen in 
them (of which see the Philos. Trans., No. 202). Also 
to. the repositing of fossil-shells in high mountains, the 
life and health of animals, and some other matters. But 
because the letters are long (not to say tedious by reason 
the hypothesis is abstruse and somewhat strained), I 
have thought they would take up too much room, unless 
I could have been so happy as to have obtained Mr. Ray's 
answers, which no doubt were very considerable ; but that 
I could not do with my greatest diligence. 

W. D[ERHAM]. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, You are, I perceive, not as yet satisfied with the 
addition of Provincial Catalogues to Camden ; to which 
I reply, that I am not concerned for the beauty or de- 
corum of the work : let the undertakers look to that. As 
for these Catalogues, I have promised them, and they have 
accepted, and I must be as good as my word. 1 have 
already sent up those from Cornwall to Kent, and have 
received a letter of thanks from Mr. Gibson, who manages 
the whole work for them, and seems by his writing to be 
a good scholar and ingenious person ; so that I perceive 
they have a great opinion of my contributions, and better 
I think than" they do deserve. I have, upon your sug- 
gestion, made more additions to Cornwall: as first, I 
have given them a general catalogue of all the sea-fish 
taken on those coasts, with synonymes. 2. A catalogue 
of the more rare sea-fowl. 3. An account of two or three 
sorts of stones digged there. 4. A short account of the 
improvement of the soil by sea-sand. 5. A more full 
description of some antiquities, viz. the Hurlers and other 
stones. 6. Something of the manners and language of 
the present inhabitants. As for other counties, I told 
them I had neither will, nor skill, nor leisure to do the 
like. 

18 



274 CORRESPONDENCE Ol 1 RAY. 

The metals, minerals, and other fossils, are many of 
them taken notice of by Camden in the places where they 
are found ; and as for the plants, had he known what had 
been rare and peculiar in every county, I perceive, by what 
he hath done in some, he would have mentioned them in 
the places whereof they are native. And now that I am 
speaking of local or provincial plants, give me leave to 
tell you that I think you labour under a mistake, in think- 
ing and asserting that few or no plants are peculiar to 
this or that shire. Be pleased to resolve me where 
Calceolus Maria \Cypripedium Calceolus, Linn.], Chris- 
tophoriana \Actcea spicata, Linn.], Lysimaclda lutea flore 
globoso [Trottius europ&us, Linn.J, Pentapliylloides fruti- 
cosa \_Potentilla fruticosa, Linn.], Polygonatum floribus 
ex singularilus pediculis \Convallaria Polygonatum, Linn.], 
Pyrola folio mucronato serrato \Pyrola secunda, Linn.], 
Pyrola Alsines flore brasiliana [Trientalis europcea, 
Linn.], Eibes alpinus dnlcis [R. alpinum, Linn.], Salix 
pumila montana folio rolundo [probably JS. herbacea, 
Linn.], Sedum alpinum Ericoides cceruleum \Saxifraga 
oppositifolia, Linn.], Sideritis arvensis latifolia hirsuta 
flo. luteo \_Galeopsis ochroleuca, Larn.], Thlaspi foliis 
Globularits [T. alpestre, Linn.], Lunaria vasculo sublongo 
intorto [Draba incana, Linn.], and Valeriana grteca 
\_Polemonium caruleum, Linn.], grow wild but in your 
own native county of Yorkshire. I could give you as 
large a catalogue of peculiars in the little county of West- 
moreland. But to instance no more particular shires, I 
shall only add, that I know very few counties in England 
wherein I could not instance some peculiars. But I am 
come to the end of my paper. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 275 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, April 4, 91. 

SIR, I have this morning sent back by carrier your 
descriptions and draughts of birds, for the use whereof I 
return you thanks. I have also sent in the box a small 
parcel for Mr. Smith the bookseller ; which, if he doth 
not send for soon after it conies, I entreat you would 
please to convey to him, I have put in some papers con- 
taining my conjectures about some of the species ; two or 
three I_ent before in a letter, the receipt of which you 
make no mention of in your last concerning the Cuntur 
[the Condor, Vultur Gryphus, Linn.], which the last post 
brought me. To say the truth, before the receipt of your 
letter I was suspicious that the story of the Cuntur was 
fabulous and romantic, and that indeed there was no such 
bird in nature, and therefore made no mention of it in 
Mr. Willughby's ' Ornithology.' But by your letter I 
am now convinced of the truth of it, and shall therefore 
add it to my Synopsis. I am now more and more con- 
firmed in my opinion that there are many species both 
of fishes and birds, and of these last especially aquatic, 
common to Europe and America ; but why more water- 
fowl and more water-plants deserves consideration. I 
suppose among the numerous species of Hernandez's 
Mexican small birds there may be some the same with 
some of yours, but I was too slothful to compare them. 
My wife salutes you with her service, and I am 

Sir, 
Very much yours, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at Montague House, London. 



276 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

B. N., April 11, 94. 

SIR, There are some things new in my ' Synops. Ay. 
et Piscium.' By new, I mean such as were not com- 
prehended in Mr. Willughby's works. Those are 
Hernandez's Mexican Birds. 2. Some names and de- 
scriptions of Birds out of Nieuhoff. 3. Frid. Marten's 
Spitzberg Birds and Fishes. 4. Sir Robert Sibbald's 
Whales. 5. Dr. Sloane's Jamaica Birds and Fishes. 
6. Your Birds and Fishes taken out of the Ley den Cata- 
logue. And lastly, some few things out of Du Tertre. 
Those Birds of Hernandez being shortly described, and 
no figures added, are very puzzling and confounding : a 
little to illustrate them, and make them easier to be com- 
pared with the descriptions of other authors, I have 
reduced them to a kind of method according to their 
bigness. 

2. I will not confidently affirm that there are in this 
island any topical plants so peculiar to one place, or spot 
of ground, as not to be found in any other. Some species, 
which for a long time I thought to be such, I afterward 
found myself mistaken in ; for example, Eryngium vulgare 
fi. campestre \Eryngium campestre, Linn.J, Rhamnus 
secundus Clusii \_Hippophae rhamnoides,UmT\^\, and Pisum 
maritimum Aldeburgense [Lathyrus maritimus, Big.], to 
which I might add the Box-tree : yet I am verily per- 
suaded there are some such; as to name no more, 



PeridymenumparvumPrutenicum Clus. \_Cornus sanguined, 
Liun.J, and Calceolus Marice \_Cypripedium Calceolus, 
Linn.J But that there are some peculiar to a county, 
and that few counties of any extent want such, is my pre- 
sent opinion and assertion. However, it is enough for 
my purpose, and I pretend to no more, than that there are 
some, for aught hath yet been discovered peculiar to each 
county. Nay, in these Catalogues [added to Camden's 
Brit.] I pretend not to so much, but have entitled them 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 277 

only ' Catalogues of more Rare Plants growing in this or 
that County,' not affirming them to be peculiars. You 
must needs grant, that different soils and different climates, 
and tempers of air, produce different species ; and conse- 
quently the mountainous and northern parts of this island 
differ from the more level, depressed, and southern, not to 
confine ourselves to counties. But enough of this. 



Mr. BAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, April 13, 94. 
post brought me yours of the 12th, 
whereby I understand that you have not as yet received 
the box, and that my letter came to you a post later than 
by its date it might have done. To put you out of all 
pain about it, a double unlucky accident hath occasioned 
all this trouble. First, my letter, by the negligence of 
the postboy, was not sent the day it was written ; and 
then the box was committed to a friend in Braintree, who 
promised to send it very carefully, but I suppose did it 
not, by the carrier I use to employ. This friend is at 
present in London, so that I cannot give you that satis- 
faction I desire. But I am very confident the box is safe, 
and that we shall retrieve it, for I never yet lost anything 
going or coming by carrier. Thus much I thought neces- 
sary to signify speedily, in part to ease your mind, and to 
assure you that nothing shall be wanting on my part to 
procure and convey the box to you, knowing well the 
importance of the papers therein contained. So I take 
leave, and rest. 

Sir, 
Your affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

I'or bis honoured friend Dr. Hans Sloanc, 
at Montague House, London. 



278 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 



SIR, I received yours of the 17th, and am very glad 
that the box with the papers is come safe to your hands, 
though I did not much fear the loss of it. You need not 
be solicitous about the charge, for there was nothing extra- 
ordinary, and yet if there had, I ought in all reason to have 
borne it. 

Two things there are I cannot yet fully agree with you 
in 1. The referring of the old-men or rain -fowl to the 
cuckoo. For the cuckoo is so strange, anomalous, and 
singular a bird, and so remarkable, and taken notice of 
even by the vulgar, for his voice, manner of breeding, and 
absconding all winter, that I think no bird that agreeth 
not with him in these particulars ought to be joined with 
him, neither is the length of the tail a sufficient argument; 
for the synx, a genuine woodpecker, hath a tail as long in 
proportion to his body, and marked with cross-bars too. 
2. In referring the Savanna-bird to the lark-kind. For 
that distinction of small birds into slender and thick- 
billed, or, as our fowlers phrase it, into soft and hard- 
beaked, dividing the numerous genera of them almost 
equally, is of such eminent use for the clear understanding 
and ranking of them, that I think it ought by no means 
to be rejected, or the birds of those kinds confounded, 
though the places they frequent, and their shape and man- 
ner of living may agree, and that characteristic note of the 
lark-kind may be common to some of them, I mean having 
a very long back claw or spur. I have taken notice of 
some that agree with larks in these particulars, as the 
bunting, and a sort of mountain finch. Yet I believe 
that there is a difference in the diet of these birds. For 
the slender-billed, though they feed upon the pulp and 
grains of fruit, yet they seldom meddle with dry seeds 
unless driven by hunger. But the hard-billed touch not 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 279 

pulpy fruits, but feed upon dry seeds, as all sorts of grain 
and thistles, &c. To feed upon insects is common to 
them both. 

Your opinion or conjecture of the Rabihorcado being 
a kind of fork-tailed lavus or sea-swallow I very much ap- 
prove and agree with you in. I fancied that they were 
no palmiped bird, because those that write of them wonder 
that they should be found so far out at sea, which is no 
wonder in a lavus. 

My wife salutes you with the tender of her very humble 
service. The ulcers upon my leg, which I thought had 
been perfectly healed and dried up, continuing well all 
winter ,"Bi?e this spring broken out again, and become very 
troublesome and painful. They puzzle my philosophy, 
and I am at some loss how to order them. I am, 

Sir, 
Your very affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

B. N., April 23, 94. 



Mr. PASCIIALL to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I was lately thinking that this globe, in several 
parts, and times, and states of it, sends forth various 
effluvia, sulphureous, nitrous, aqueous, &c., in greater 
abundance, one or other, or compositions of them, as 
causes concur. 

I have suspected, that in this unusual constitution of 
the air we are now in, the sulphureous steams have 
abounded, partly from beautiful and promising blowing of 
fruit-trees, and from the warmth of the season, and from 
the frequent lightnings we have. Last night I noted in 
my own orchard, in this my low country habitation, what 
confirms me in it. Walking between two fair coddling 
hedges I noted something to fall white upon my hat : it 



280 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

felt clammy, and tasted sweet ; I took it off with my knife, 
the white grains ran into a clear liquor, and in a short 
time I was able to get together a small quantity into a 
little gallipot that I keep ; upon shaking of any bough this 
would fall as a mist doth. All day in these hedges was a 
noise as of a swarm of bees. We saw it lying upon the 
leaves as well as blossoms. I have noted honey dews, 
which do much hurt to our corn ; but never thus early, 
nor in this form of manna. Taking some on a broad 
smooth leather, I observed they did not dissolve pre- 
sently, but run along as small round seeds, upon the motion 
of the leather. 

Chedsey, April 24, 1694. 



Mr. PASCHALL to Mr. RAY. 

Chedsey, May 25, 1694. 

SIR, I was engaged in a journey when your last came, 
and observed in both going out and coming home, that 
taking in both the rising senaries I was much less weary 
than I use to be if I travel in a falling senary. This holds 
with me generally, as I have many times noted. I also 
noted, as I have done frequently, that in the ebbs, the 
mid-heaven about the zenith was clearer, and more free 
from clouds in a cloudy, and nebulae in a nebulous season, 
than the parts nearer the horizon, and that it was vice versa 
in the tides. 

I know one who commonly finds that if he take but a 
very gentle purgative in a rising senary, or the former 
part of a tide, it works not till the ebbing senary begins, 
and then doth very kindly. And he takes it for a rule, 
that in tides the healthy are best, and the sickly worst, 
but in ebbs the contrary holds. He also thinks, upon 
several trials, that the surface of a wholesome earth opened 
in a tide, emits steams that arc more salutary and healing, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 281 

and corroborating than the same doth send forth in ebbs. 
But I stop a rambling pen, and ever resf, &c. 

P.S. The miraculous cure upon the French maid was 
in the midst of a tiding senary * the power that effected 
it made use of a heightened imagination, and a vigorous 
season. 



Mr. LHWYD to Mr. 

HONOURED SIR, Your last was of January 22, 
since which time I have not been able (though I have 
endeavoured it very much, by sending queries to the 
countr^r to give you any farther and more accurate 
account of that prodigious fire I then alarmed you with. 
I understand only, in general, that it lasted at least 
three or four months ; nay, some add that it still con- 
tinues, though not in the same place, but appears up 
farther in the country, and that it has been also commonly 
seen on the sea coast of Caernarvonshire. The reason 
that induced me, at the beginning, to think of the locusts, 
was only a random guess, that so strange and unheard 
of effects must proceed from some cause no less unusual ; 
for if ever our sea or land had been capable of their own 
nature to produce such a meteor, I should expect to find 
it recorded, that at one time or other, in the revolutions 
of some centuries, such a thing had happened. 

You have probably seen, ere this, the ' Phil. Trans.' 
of February, where there is all the account I could give 
of the locusts, but no figure of the animal, though I 
sent it up, and Mr. Waller promised to have it engraven. 
I have been informed since that many of them have been 

* Of these senaries see Mr. Paschall's opinion in Philos. Transact. 
No. 202. W. DfEBHAM]. 

f There are divers letters of Mr. Lhwyd to Mr. Ray, relating to this 
unusual fire here mentioned, which I omit publishing, by reason there is an 
account of Mr. Lhwyd's and Mr. Jones's in Phil. Transact.' Nos. 208, 213 ; 
but this letter having some of Mr. Lhwyd's thoughts about it not there 
published, I thought it couvenicnt to entertain the reader with it. 

W. D[EJIIUM]. 



282 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

seen amongst the sea weeds at Lhyn, in Caernarvonshire, 
and also in the Severn sea, in Monmouthshire. It was 
my suspicion that the infectious exhalation of these 
dead locusts might kindle, &c. j for Pliny tells us that 
even whilst they five, multa contactu adurunt. There has 
been, and still continues, a great mortality of cattle, 
horses, sheep, and hogs, about the place where the fire 
happened. Some say cattle were wont to die there for- 
merly, others only that it was no good thriving or feeding- 
place for them ; but all agree in that it never was infec- 
tious anything comparably to what has happened this 
year. These locusts, it seems, came also last year into 
Germany ; and Job Ludolphus (as you find by the 
inclosed) designs a particular treatise of them, wherein he 
will maintain that the quails, wherewith the children of 
Israel were fed in the wilderness, were no other than 
these creatures. 
Oxford, May 27, 1694. 



Mr. PASCHALL to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I lately received from a worthy friend in Oxford, 
in an eminent station there, proposals for a method of 
providing for the widows and children of poor clergymen, 
which took so in one county, that in a short time, by the 
voluntary subscriptions of clergymen, there was raised 
near 100 per annum for five years as an essay, with 
expectation of much more there. When a trial was made 
here to see how it would take in the country, there was 
a beginning made with great alacrity ; and when it was 
recommended to our bishop, and the dean and resi- 
dentiaries present in Wells, it received encouragement 
there from every one of them ; and Dr. Jurden, your 
neighbour, writes me word that he will advise with the 
Bishop of London, and the archdeacons, and chief of 
the clergy in Essex about it : wishing his endeavours may 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 283 

have good success. The thing is particularly recom- 
mended to me by this consideration, that this well settled 
may be as a channel into which particular and private 
charities may be derived, in which they may run to the 
named good purposes, and to still higher and better, if, 
under the Divine blessing, it shall go on and prosper. 
If you meet anything for or against it, you will oblige me 
by the communication. 

Ch. August 20, 1694. 



^, Mr. RAY to Dr. ROBINSON. 

SIR, There are three particulars which I must beg 
information from you concerning. Whether there be 
sufficient authority that the blood of a living hedgehog 
is cold to the touch ? which Dr. Lister takes for granted. 
I never read of any but Segerus who did affirm it, and 
do much doubt of the truth of it. 2. Whether the blood 
flowing from the artery of a living fish, between the heart 
and the gills, be of a florid red, like the arterial blood of 
quadrupeds, as Dr. Lister affirms? 3. Whether the 
venal blood of an animal may by any artificial compres- 
sion or constriction be changed into the colour of the 
arterial ? To which I shall add a question more, viz. 
Whether in the chicken before exclusion there be any 
foramen ovale, or arterial channel for the passage of the 
blood, while the lungs lie vacant. 

Dec. 20, 94. 



Dr. ROBINSON to Mr. RAY. 



SIR, Some of your queries I can answer, as that 
relating to the blood of a hedgehog, which I found to be 
warm to the touch when I was at Mr. Clutterbuck's, in 
Essex, where I was particularly curious to examine that 



284 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

particular ; but I would not be quoted against Dr. 
Lister, lest he should take it ill. 

I never observed the arterial blood of a fish to be as 
florid as that of quadrupeds. 

I do not think that the venal blood of animals can by 
any artificial compression or constriction be changed 
into the colour of the arterial. I am sure that the air 
immediately changes its colour and consistence upon 
phlebotomy. 

I cannot answer that of the chicken before exclusion. 
I wonder Aquapendente, Harvey, Malpighi, and others 
have not cleared it. 

London, December 20, 94. 



Mr. BURKELL to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I have, sir, in some of my melancholic hours, 
been diverted by the Tract I have of yours, and particu- 
larly your ' Synopsis Animalium,' &c., wherein I observe 
your opinion settled against equivocal generations, and 
fol. 1 5, confirmed by many arguments and great authori- 
ties, yet, if I had leave, I would ask if the species of 
worms bred in human bodies, or those of brutes, are at 
any time observed to be generated elsewhere, for I should 
think it would be hard to say their eggs are conveyed 
out of one man, or one horse, into another; and the 
phthiriasis, which I suppose is where worms are bred in 
the flesh, and which happens to one single man in a 
nation, and that perhaps once in a hundred years, will 
be more difficultly answered, where that species of worms 
or lice do all that time conceal and preserve themselves, 
and at length light upon this single person. But, sir, it 
is said by somebody, " Sequimur non qua veritas sed qua 
ratio trahit :" whether that be applicable here or not 
I pretend not to determine. I observe likewise, fol. 300, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 285 

you say, " Quod non verisimile videtur quodvis animal 
a natura ita factum esse, ut cibi deglutiti partem aliquem 
vomitu semper aut etiam frequenter rejicere debeat." I 
should here inquire whether the castings of hawks, which 
you know constantly throw up lumps of flix, or feathers, 
or down, &c. (the wild as well as the reclaimed), bring 
any of the food up with them. In fol. 309, I presume 
there is an error in the print, i. e. Hirundines for Hiru- 
dines. You see, sir, how confidently, not to say impu- 
dently, I trouble you with what I myself cannot believe 
will deserve your considering ; but, however, this shows 
you I read what you give (though not with that advan- 
tage which a man of a wiser head would do), and it is 
an evidence, likewise, that I rely very much upon your 
candour and friendship to forgive such impertinencies. 

Jan. 9, 1694. 



Mr. BAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Feb. 3, 95. 

SIR, Your extraordinary kindness merits great thanks 
from me, and your ingenuity, in being willing so frankly 
to communicate to me the sight and use of your labours, 
no less, but I am not free to make use of them till pub- 
lished, lest I should in any measure prejudice the sale, 
by rendering the contents not absolutely new to the world ; 
but as for the reputation of being first author and dis- 
coverer, I hope I shall not prejudice that, because I shall 
acknowledge of whom I had them, with as ample a 
character of the benefactor and contributor to my work 
as he justly deserves. 

I am much of your temper as to the clearing up of 
obscurities, and 1 doubt not but you have done more in 
that, in reference to Hernandez, than any man yet hath ; 
and I should be very glad to see your papers, but I am 
in no haste. I shall not be able to finish my Supplement 



286 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

this summer. I take into it all the last six volumes of 
the ' Hortus Malabaricus,' and Plumier's first vol. 1 
hear there is a second published already by him, but have 
not yet seen it. 

I am now upon a little treatise concerning the method 
of plants, wherein I shall give a more particular account 
of the several methods that have been attempted, and 
especially of my own, with an answer to what Monsieur 
Tournefort hath objected against it. In the meantime I 
do not altogether neglect the prosecution of the History 
of Insects, which I intend to extend no further than to 
take in such as are found within two or three miles of 
my habitation. My wife gives you her humble service, 
and I am, 

Sir, 
Yours entirely in all offices, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloaue, 

at his house, at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAT to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Feb. 12, 95. 

SIR, Yours of Feb. 6, with the inclosed papers, came 
safe. I have, according to your desire, read them over 
with some attention, yet not so much as they require and 
deserve. I was very much satisfied with them, and 
informed of many things I was ignorant of, or did not 
clearly understand before. I find nothing that I can 
censure or reprehend. What I do not fully understand 
I may afterwards acquaint you with, and desire satisfac- 
tion in. The language, as far as I am able to judge, is 
proper and good, only some typographical errata there 
are, which I suppose yourself have taken notice of, and 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 287 

yet none of them, except in the Greek words, consider- 
able. Your instructions in letting nobody have a sight 
of what you sent shall be observed. I cannot but admire 
your patience in turning over so many voyages and 
relations of travellers, besides herbarists and other 
authors, and making collections out of them, and that 
to so good purpose, to correct mistakes, to clear up diffi- 
culties and obscurities, and to contract the number of 
species. Your method is good enough, for I suppose 
you intend not to be very critical and exact in that. In 
your next be pleased to tell me how far the press hath 
proceeded in this previous work, and by what time you 
think i^jvill be wrought off and published. I suppose 
the succeeding summer will not suffice to perfect my 
Supplement, which yet I shall carry on as fast as my 
necessary affairs and occasions will permit. So I take 
leave, and rest, 

Sir, 

Your much obliged and affectionate friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 
For Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house, at the corner of Southampton street, 

towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Feb. 21, 95. 

g IRj I deferred not to read over the papers you last 
sent me, and was much pleased and satisfied therewith ; 
and would I act the critic, could find very little, if any- 
thing, to carp at or reprehend therein. You have, in 
my opinion, done botanists great service, by illustrating 
and clearing up many obscurities in authors, and contract- 
ing and reducing to one many plants distracted into 
many species by the unskilfulness of some, and misap- 
prehension of others, even the best writers, who, having 



288 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

not seen the plants themselves, but only meeting with 
descriptions or light mentions of some of their parts in 
some, and others in other travellers, must needs be at a 
loss about them, and often multiply species beyond what 
there are in nature ; or else, for fear of unnecessary mul- 
tiplication, contract two or three into one, as I find myself 
to have done more than once or twice. 

Give me leave only to ask you, for my own satisfac- 
tion, two or three questions. 1. Whether your Phyttitis 
non sinuata minor, apice folii radices agents \Asplenwm 
rhizophyllum, Linn.] be the same with, or different from, 
that of Mr. Banister, figured in Dr. Plukenet's ' Phyto- 
graphy,' Tab. 105? 2. Whether you did not observe 
two species of maize in Jamaica ? I think I have myself 
seen two different kinds ; and I remember there is men- 
tion made of two in one of the ' Philosophic Transactions ' 
lately printed, which I cannot now find. 3. Why you 
make the Cam brasiliensibus Inhame de St. Thome, &c. 
of Marcgrave [Dioscorea alata, Linn.] different from the 
Igname sen Inhame, Clus. ' Var. Plant. Hist.' 1. 4, p. 78, 
both coming from the same island? 4. What reason you 
have to suspect the common Xylon or Gossipium herbaceum 
[Gossypium herbaceum, Linn.] not to differ specifically 
from the Arboreum, or Aminiju brasiliensibus, &c. of 
Marcgrave, seeing in the common Xylon herbaceum the 
cotton sticks fast to the seed round about, which it doth 
not to the seed of the Bombax offic. (which I take to be 
that of the Aminiju), and besides is not so situate nor 
black of colour as that is ? 

You have enlightened me in many things ; and the col- 
lections I may make out of your work will be the best 
part of my Supplement. 

I am very glad when myself or friends discover any 
errors or mistakes in my writings : thank God, that he 
hath let me live so long as to acknowledge and amend 
them. I have not yet compared the titles of your capil- 
laries with Plunder's descriptions, for the figures I have 
not by me, having remitted the book Mr. Smith sent me. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 289 

My wife sends you her very humble service, and repeated 
thanks for your great kindnesses, by the hand of, 

Sir, 
Your very affectionate and much obliged 

friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

This letter should have been sent last post, but that I 
failed of a messenger. I shall add now a question or 
two more. 

1 . Whether may not your Milkwood be the Pirm- 
pinichi sive arbor lactescens of Monardes, which occurs in 
the first tome of Jo. Bauhine ? 

2. "Vfaether your sweet-scented Jamaica pepper be not 
certainly a species really distinct from the Amorum aliud 
quorundam, and Caryophyllon Plinii of Clus., as I take 
it undoubtedly to be from the leaf and fruit ? 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at liis house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Aug. 25, 95. 

SIR, I have this morning, by carrier, remitted the 
three tribes you were pleased last to send me, and return 
you thanks for the use of them. I am the more hasty 
in despatching them, because, as I think I told you, 
I would gladly have gone over the whole work before the 
extreme colds come, which will render writing difficult 
and troublesome to me, if it please God to produce my 
life so long. 

I do not find anything amiss in matter or language. 
I must impute it to my own dullness and incapacity if I 
do not sometimes apprehend or rightly understand your 
meaning. I was much surprised with your description 

19 



290 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

of the reservatory of water made by the disposition of 
the leaves of the Viscum caryophyttoides, [Tillandsia 
lingulata, Linn.?] which was a thing wholly new to me, 
having never heard or read of it before. I thank you for 
your good advice concerning my herpeses, but hitherto I 
linger and use nothing ; but the "pruritus which attends 
them now, more than lately, will quicken me to attempt 
something for their stopping and cure. My wife salutes 
you with the tender of her very humble service, and I 
am no less, 

Sir, 

Yours in all service, 

JOHN RAT. 

For his honoured friend Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the comer of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. LHWYD to Mr. RAY. 

DEAR SIR, The first of your queries was, whether the 
impressions be all of leaves, or parts of leaves ? To which 
I answer, that the stone wherein these mineral leaves are 
exhibited is generally so brittle, that when we endeavour 
to split it, to get out a plant, it breaks also transversely ; 
so that, for one whole fern branch we find, we see twenty 
broken ones, but for single leaves, they are very common. 
Moreover, those stones are broken in such small pieces 
by the workmen in the pit, that we find few lumps big 
enough for whole plants ; and indeed if they contained 
whole ones, it seems impossible so to split them as an 
entire plant should be exposed to view. Howbeit, it has 
not been my fortune hitherto to meet with any other 
parts of plants than either single leaves or branches ; 
whether there be any roots or flowers to be met with I 
shall endeavour, God willing, to be informed hereafter. 
Your other questions are, whether they are found smooth 
or crumpled, and whether we meet with the impressions 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 291 

of each side of a leaf? To which I answer, they are 
always smooth and fair, and that I have seen both sides 
of leaves. Nay, lately (since the date of my last) I have 
seen both sides of the same numerical leaf, so that I can 
now confirm that observation of Dr. Woodward's, which 
I mentioned in that letter. I have sent you here a figure 
of one of these coal plants, from which, and those in 
Camden, you may make some estimate of the rest. I 
found it at a coal-pit in the forest of Dean, together with 
several others. As, 1st, Hart's Tongue; 2dly, a kind of 
Trichornanes ; 3dly, Lonchitis aspera, called by the 
workmen Vox Vearn, i. e. Fox Fern ; 4thly, a kind of 
Equisetunk which they call Cat's Tail ; 5thly, a small 
Gallium, or Mollugo, with some others which I know not 
whither to refer. This seems to resemble partly the 
Osmund Royal, but to me the leaves are too small, too 
thick set, and round-pointed ; but I leave you to match 
it, who are best able. 

Oxford, August 28, 95. 



Mr. LHWYD to Mr. RAY. 

HONOURED SIR, I received your letter of the 4th ; 
and that you may have a truer idea of these subterraneous 
plants than I can possibly give you by correspondence, I 
have sent this day, by the carrier, a small box of them, 
directed for you, to be left with Mr. Smith. I had 
brought a great clod of them, about half a year since, 
from the forest of Dean, and had buried it in the ground 
here, in a moist place, in hopes it would keep the better, 
the figures being very apt to disappear after some months' 
keeping. This, at the taking of it up, crumbled to pieces. 
However, I have sent it to you as it is, and hope it may 
serve to give you as clear a notion of the state of these 
fossil leaves as if you were yourself at the coal-pits. I 
have also added those three specimens I have figured in 



292 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Camden, though one of them (I mean that which I sup- 
pose to be an undescribed plant) I was willing to venture 
only the one half, not knowing whether I may ever meet 
with the like again. These three are much fairer than 
those we have from Gloucestershire and Somerset, and 
lodged in firmer stone. When you have viewed them 
sufficiently, be pleased to take what you like out of the 
Gloucestershire parcel, and return the rest to me at your 
leisure. I heartily wish you may be able to satisfy 
yourself upon sight of them, whether they are original 
productions, or the remains of once real plants ; for I 
must confess that at present I cannot acquiesce in the 
opinion of their having been once mere plants growing 
on the surface of the earth. I have in my custody a 
piece of native silver, lodged in spar, brought, four years 
since, out of the West Indies, whereof some part appears 
out of the stone, in the form of a small spiral or twisted 
capreoli ; and another part is a thin plate, having such a 
superficies on each side, as if it had received an impres- 
sion from a piece of fine cloth. Now, seeing that fossils 
do naturally shoot into these forms, may we not reasonably 
suspect they might also put on the shapes of leaves and 
shells ? I have likewise several times seen somewhat like 
the form of a piece of fine linen in flint, which seems to 
require no less admiration than these plants, though we 
are the more affected with them, because we find the 
same natural things in the bowels of the earth as we 
knew before on the surface. However, I am almost 
fully convinced, and have been so for several years, that 
many of those vertebra and shells which I have met 
with are the spoils of once living animals, my chiefest 
reason for which is, because many of the vertebrae and 
other bones are of a mere bony substance ; and several 
shells which we meet with are scarce distinguishable in 
consistence from the same species on the sea shores. 

Oxford, Sept. 12, 95. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 293 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., March 10, 1696. 

SIR, The spring coming on, and the weather now 
favouring, I am desirous, with all convenient speed, to 
finish and prepare for the press my Supplement. Hist. 
Plant., not that I think the booksellers will be very for- 
ward at so difficult a time as this to be at the charge of 
printing it, but because I would rid my mind of the 
thoughts of it, being sensible that my glass runs low. 
I desire, therefore, that you would please, so soon as may 
stand with your convenience, to send me your Observa- 
tions and History of the Jamaica and other American 
Plants, ^nich you were so kind as to offer me the sight 
and use of. I should not have had the confidence other- 
wise to have begged such a favour of you, but should 
have contented myself with the names and titles I had 
found in your Catalogue, the greatest part of my Supple- 
ment being only a collection of such names and titles 
gathered out of books ; but yet, notwithstanding your 
kind offer, if, upon second thoughts, you judge it may 
be detrimental or prejudicial to the sale of your work to 
permit me to deflower it, or take excerpta out of it, I shall 
be willing rather to want such ornaments and advantages 
to my book than to be thereby injurious to you. It 
being now so long since I received a letter from you, I 
am not without some fear that you may not have been 
well ; and therefore for my satisfaction therein, and the 
premised particulars, please to send me a line or two. So 
I humbly recommend yourself and family to the Divine 
protection and blessing, and rest, 

Sir, 
Your very affectionate and obliged friend 

and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

My wife gives you her humble services. 

For his honoured friend Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



294 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, March 22, 96. 

SIR, I received both your letters, and must needs 
acknowledge myself extremely obliged to you for your 
extraordinary and unmerited kindness. The sugar you 
design me I cannot, without some violation of modesty, 
receive, having no prospect of making you any other 
amends than verbal, by acknowledging the obligation and 
returning thanks. The reason why I desire to hasten 
the finishing my Supplement is, because I am sensible 
my time is but short, and I would willingly get it off 
hand, that I may have some time to spare before the 
access of death. Yet do I not intend to part then with 
the whole copy, or put it all at once into the bookseller's 
hand, but by piecemeal, as it is printed off. You tell me 
news of posthumous pieces of Malpighius, but I since 
find them in the catalogue of books printed for Hilary 
Term, which I received last week. The weather is again 
grown very sharp, which, if it continues so, will hinder 
my proceedings, being unable to continue long from the 
fire to write much. I am at present, I thank God, in 
health, as I hope yourself and family are. The sores 
upon my legs are in a likely way of healing up shortly. 
I have of late made use of a new salve, made up of two 
parts of diapalma and one of basilicon, which I have 
experienced to be very effectual for healing and drying, 
though I must expect their breaking out again next 
winter, if 1 live so long. My wife gives you her very 
humble service. I shall expect your submarine tribe 
this week. I am, 

Sir, 

Your much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 295 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, June 23, 96. 

SIR, I received your very kind letter of June 6th, 
and not long after the acceptable present of your book, 
for which I return you many thanks. I cannot but 
admire your industry and patience in reading and com- 
paring such a multitude of relations and accounts of 
voyages, and referring to its proper place what you found 
therein relating to your subject, and that with so much 
circumspection and judgment. You have done botanists 
great service in distributing or reducing the confused 
heap of names, and contracting the number of species. 
But who is able to do the like ? No man but who is 
alike qualified, and hath seen the things growing in their 
natural places. For my own part, I do freely acknow- 
ledge my self altogether insufficient for such a task, having 
not seen the plants themselves, nor of many of them 
so much as dried specimens, and of the rest having had 
but a transient view. I shall therefore put down what 
I find in late writers, viz., Plukenet's ' Phytography,' 
the remaining six volumes of ' Hortus Malabaricus,' 
Father Plumier's ' Schola Botanica,' ' Paradisi Batavi 
Prodrom.,' ' Flora? Batavas Flores,' Tournefort's ' Elem. 
Botan.,' Breynius, his two Prodromi, and, above all, your 
' Catalogue and History of the Plants of Jamaica and the 
Neighbour Islands,' which you are pleased so frankly to 
offer me the use of, without interposing my own judg- 
ment. Did I live about London, and had I opportunity 
frequently to visit the physic gardens thereabouts, and 
to observe and describe the new species, I might make a 
better Supplement to my History than now I shall do, 
my circumstances not admitting so long an absence 
from this place. I have been lately very ill and indis- 
posed, with a hoarseness and violent cough, attended 



296 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

with a feverish heat, of which I am not yet fully recovered. 
I hope you are well, and pray for your health. My wife 
sends you her very humble service. I must own myself 
to be much obliged to you, and am, 

Sir, 

Your very affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
next Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, July 17, 96. 

SIR, Since my last to you, considering my infirmities 
and craziness, admonishing me of the near approach of 
death, I think it best to speed the finishing and fitting 
my Supplement for the press, and to deliver it up into 
the bookseller's hand who put me upon it, to be pub- 
lished or suppressed, as he shall find it most for his own 
interest. I am sensible that it must needs be a very 
weak and imperfect thing, I wanting those helps which 
those that have travelled into the Indies and live about 
London have. But yet none so fit to make a Supplement 
to my own History as myself ; and there be many faults 
I am advised of which I would willingly correct. But I 
would fain dispatch it, and rid my hands of it, that so it 
may be no disturbance to my thoughts. Your History, 
were it reasonable for me to beg the defloration of it, 
would afford the greatest ornaments to it. But I am 
almost come to a resolution not to desire any such thing 
of you, but content myself with the names I find in your 
Catalogue of such as are nondescripts, and with your 
synonyma for the reducing of such as are repeated. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 297 

I have gotten a sight of Dr. Plukenet's ' Almagaestum 
Bot.,' though as yet he hath not presented me with a 
copy of it ; I find in it many mistakes in the language, 
and in the composition of Greek names ; and I doubt 
not but there are many in the matter. It is impossible 
but that a man who relies wholly upon dried specimens 
of plants (be he never so cunning) should often mistake 
and multiply. He hath abundance of Jamaica plants, 
which, if in your Catalogue, it is very difficult to reduce 
them, especially his Filices. As far as I am able to 
judge, he is often out in his conjectural synonymes ; in 
one or two he is reprehended by Mons. Tournefort, and 
is ofNwmself apt enough to multiply species. But no 
more of him. 

I am not yet quite rid of my distemper : I hope it will 
off by degrees. Here hath been a very unseasonable 
summer, for the most part very cold and wet, and I live 
in a sharp air, my house standing on a hill exposed to 
the north and north-east winds, which is inconvenient 
for one who is subject to colds, and whose lungs are apt 
to be affected. Excuse this irtpiKwoXoyia, and take me 
to be, as really I am, 

Sir, 

Your much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

I must not forget my wife's service, who is very much 
yours. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the comer of Southampton street, 
next Bloomsbury square, London. 



298 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANB. 

Black Notley, July 22, 96. 

,-^-! believe you cannot but wonder that I should 
at this time so pester you with letters, of which I am not 
wont to be very prodigal. For giving you the trouble of 
this I hope you will excuse me when I shall have told you 
my reason. Coming to examine and distribute the capil- 
lary plants [Ferns] in Dr. Plukenet's 'Almageest.' accord- 
ing to my method, I find such a multitude denominated 
of Jamaica, that I am quite confounded with them, and 
unable to reduce them (I mean so many of them as are 
probably the same) to those of your Catalogue without 
your assistance and direction, which I earnestly beg of you. 
I mean that of such as are not referred to F. Plumier's, 
you would tell me which you think are referable to those 
of your Catalogue, and to which each, and which are new 
and strangers to you. 

In the mean time I cannot but wonder how and from 
whom he should procure so many Jamaica capillaries ; 
who in that island should be so skillful and diligent as 
to find out and collect so many ; and whether he did not 
get a sight of some sheets of your Catalogue. I dare say 
before your discovery, no herbarist imagined there had 
been half that number to be found there, nay, I think I 
may say in all America. I fear this task I impose upon 
you may be too laborious for you, and rob you of more 
time than will consist with your business and necessary 
occasions, and therefore I do not absolutely desire it, but 
only if you have will, and can find leisure sufficient for I 
had rather have it not done than to put you upon any- 
thing that may be unpleasant or incommodious to you. 
For the doing of it take your own time. I find it diffi- 
cult to settle the genera of these capillaries by certain 
characteristic notes. I pray tell me your notions of 
Phyllitis, Hemionitis, Lonchitis, Polypodium, Trie/to- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 299 

manes, Adiantum album and nigrum and ceterach. Her- 
barists make ramose kinds of Phyllitis, Hemionitis, and 
Lonchitis, and therefore the differences of these plants 
must consist in the different figure and texture of the 
leaves. I am not yet perfectly well, but, I thank God, 
much better. I hope you are well, and pray for your 
health, resting, 

Sir, 

Your very affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Aug. 5, 96. 

SIR, Your very friendly and obliging letter of July 
21st came to my hands about a fortnight since. I give 
you most hearty thanks for the kind offer of the use of 
your papers of descriptions and observations of Jamaica 
Plants ; as likewise of the sight of those dried plants 
and memoirs about them you received from the Straits of 
Magellan and the South Sea, and do accept of it. I 
shall proceed gradually, beginning with the imperfect 
tribes of Fuel, Fungi, and Musci; these I have already 
finished as well as I am at present capable, contenting 
myself with the names of some, and short descriptions of 
others. I am now upon the capillary tribe, wherein in 
my last I desired your assistance in reference to Dr. 
Plukenet's catalogue of such as he hath had an account 
of from Jamaica, for I was puzzled to reduce them ; and 
could not but wonder how he could get such a number 
not observed or mentioned by you. I fear there are 
many mistakes in his work. A good number I have 
observed in synonyms of such species as are known to 
me, and I doubt not but there are many or more in such 
as are unknown. He is a man of punctilio, a little con- 



300 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

ceited and opinionated, and such men are incapable of 
advice, especially reprehension, 

I told you in my last what disadvantages I labour 
under in composing this Supplement, and shall add no 
more about it. I must do it as well as I can with the 
helps that I have. And by reason of my age and in- 
firmities I am willing to make all the haste I can. As 
for the method of capillaries, though that I proposed in 
my letter to Rivinus seems to me the best, yet I have not 
skill enough to make use of it, but must be forced to 
employ my old one. Only now I shall take no notice 
whether ferns are cauliferous or not cauliferous, whether 
their whole superficies consists of mere leaves or no, but 
shall divide them according to the leaf, as before, into 
those which have a simple and which have a divided leaf, 
and these last into such as have a leaf divided singly, 
doubly, or trebly, as before. 

Your advice in reference to my health I greatly approve, 
but all the symptoms of my cold are now gone, and I 
am as I used to be ; only the ulcuscula upon my legs 
continue still, and are more painful and troublesome than 
they used to be in summer time, I suppose by reason of 
the coldness and moisture of the weather. Milk and 
milkmeats agree well with me, and I intend to make use 
of them. I return you thanks for your generous offer of 
sarsa and china, &c., and must not forget my former 
obligation to you for what of that nature you sent me the 
first year these pernios broke out. But 1 am not under 
any necessity at present to make use of your kindness, 
and if I were, I could not with modesty accept it. 

My wife and children are at present (I thank God) in 
health, and tender their humble services to you. With 
humble prayers for your health and well-being, I con- 
clude, and rest, 

Sir, 

Your much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 301 



Mr. HAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Aug. 15, 96. 

SIR, I received yours of the llth, and do hold myself 
extremely obliged to you for your readiness to assist me 
in compiling my .Supplement. Your papers, if you please 
to do me so great a favour as to lend me them, to use for 
some time for the illustration and ornament of my work, 
I am now ready for them, having run over Dr. Plukenet's 
' Almagaest.' wherein I find many mistakes, so that I 
dare not confide in him for things which I am ignorant 
or ^Idiibtful of. A man that relies wholly on dried 
specimens, were he cunninger than Dr. Plukenet is, must 
needs commit many mistakes. 

As for the method of capillaries I proposed in my 
letter to Rivinus, I have not skill enough in that kind of 
plants to be able to make use of it, and so must be 
constrained to adhere to my old method a little altered. 
For whereas I did suppose that no capillaries were 
properly cauliferous, but that their whole superficies did 
consist of mere leaves. I am now convinced of the con- 
trary, and therefore intend not to meddle with it any 
more, but to divide those plants, whether cauliferous or 
not cauliferous, according to their leaves, into such as 
have a simple leaf, which I make to be either whole or 
laciniated, and such as have a compound leaf. And 
these into such whose leaves are compounded of 1, 
single leaves, or pinnules ; 2, surculi pinnati, or decom- 
posita ; 3, ramastri, divided into surculi and pinna ; 
which leaves Bauhine calls ramose. But to render things 
clear, I take it to be needful to define a compound leaf, 
which I shall do thus : Apart of a plant which is made 
up of pinnules, surculi, or ramastri, connected on each side 
to a middle rib growing gradually shorter and shorter 
towards the top of the middle rid, which also terminates 
in a leafy the footstalk and middle rib having its supine 
superficies different from its prone, viz. either flat or 



302 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



channelled. Thus defining a compound leaf, I seclude 
several sorts of compound or pinnate-leaved plants from 
being Phyttitides or Hemionitides, &c. 

The objection concerning the cocoa-nut you have very 
well cleared and answered. But your balsam tree can- 
not be Dr. Plukenet's, unless he be grossly mistaken in 
applying a wrong fruit to it, which yet I cannot wonder 
he should, since T find him often tripping. 

Concerning the tree called cedar, in Jamaica, you have 
informed me, I took it to be no other than a sort of 
juniper. I once saw a young tree, in a vessel, brought 
from Barbadoes, which the seamen told me was the 
cedar, so like our European juniper that I could observe 
but very little difference ; and Parkinson describes it for 
such, p. 1029, and you know that the Oxycedrm of 
herbarists is but a great juniper. 

I must confess myself to have been stumbled about 
your making the two sorts of Guaiacmn of Terentius and 
other authors to be all one, whereas Terentius seems to 
describe both from the sight of the plant and fruit com- 
municated by Corvinus. 

Discoursing with Mr. Vernon about the primary use 
of respiration, I expressed myself desirous to know the 
opinion of some learned and experienced anatomists con- 
cerning it, whereupon he recommended to me Dr. 
Connor as a very learned, ingenious, and experienced 
person in that kind ; and I have since wrote to him, and 
received from him a very curious letter with a brief 
account of his opinion, since which, being informed of 
some medico-physical dissertations which he wrote and 
published at Oxford, I sent for a copy of them, and find 
the author to be indeed an ingenious man, and one that 
writes well in Latin. And finding him to dedicate one 
of his dissertations to you, I thence learn that he is well 
known to you and acquainted with you, wherefore I 
desire some further account of him from you, especially 
as to his temper of mind. I offered him a sight of my 
papers concerning the subject I mentioned, which he 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 303 

accepted of. I shall desire ray bookseller to send those 
papers to you and entreat you to communicate them to 
the doctor. 

Mr. Petiver is a person well known to me, and hath 
contributed some observations to my ' Synopsis Stirp. 
Brit.,' and I shall, according to your advice, make what 
use I can of his skill for my assistance in this work. 

I am troubled that I am constrained to put so many 
nuda nomina of plants without descriptions, but it is not 
to be helped. Many of them are not to be seen growing 
in England, and them that are I have not opportunity of 
seeing, so that many errors will creep in, let me use all 
the oijumspection possible. 

Please to tender my humble service to Capt. Hatton, 
and tell him that I should be glad to see Mons. Magnol's 
method, and if he please to lend it me I will return it 
carefully to him, when I have made what use I can of it. 

I am very glad you have so well settled your domestic 
law business, which I had advice of from Dr. Briggs, and 
was fearful it might create you some trouble and dis- 
turbance. 

My little family are, I thank God, at present all in 
health. We return you our hearty thanks for your good 
wishes. We often taste of your kindness, and as often 
remember you, and talk of you. My wife salutes you 
with the tender of her very humble service, and I am, sir, 
Your very affectionate and much obliged 

friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
Bloomsbury square, London. 



304 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Dr. VAUGHAN and Dr. WOOD to Mr. RAY.* 

SIR, And now, sir, I shall take the freedom to press 
you to favour the learned world with the icons of the 
plants described in your history, which would render it 
the most complete work of the sort the whole world 
affords ; it is a work which you in your ' Historia Plan- 
taram' express an inclinableness to, and which I am 
heartily sorry you have not met with due encouragement 
to perform. Sir, I need not lay before you the great 
difficulties which the lovers of botany are forced to en- 
counter by reason of the want of this most desirable 
work, nor urge you how agreeable it would be to the 
botanic world, but especially to your curious countrymen ; 
neither need I tell you, what without the least suspicion 
of flattery I justly may, that of all men that ever were 
in England, you are without dispute allowed to be the 
most fit to perform such a work. Pray, therefore, sir, 
think on some expedient by which we may be enabled 
to reprint your history, and render it complete by the 
addition of the cuts and another review, which will make 
it much more correct. I question not but that I can 
procure at least eighteen subscriptions in this poor king- 
dom for the promotion of so advantageous a work. But 
if you find that this will not quit cost, if you printed 
only the small icons of the plants and their names in 
quarto or octavo, I am confident you would highly oblige 
all that have the least curiosity to promote their know- 
ledge in botanies. Sir, Dr. Wood, Dr. Mitchell, and I, 
have resolved to be as curious as our leisures will permit 
in making a collection of what plants this kingdom 
affords. We have begun this summer atWexford, where 
we casually meet to drink the medicinal waters, and in 
the month we stayed there we made up a catalogue of 

* Dr. Vaughan having given an account of the fatal consequence of eight 
young^ lads eating of hemlock water-dropwort [(Enanthe crocata, Linn.] 
(published in Phil. Trans., p. 283) proceeds thus. W. D. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 305 

above 280 plants, the which we have, and design to 
augment as opportunity offers to any of us. Sir, I hope 
you will pardon this trouble, &c. F. V. 

Clonmel, Aug. 26, 1696. 



SIR, In your Synopsis you question whether the Irish 
in drying their dullysk do not add some alkaline salt? 
I have inquired, and can assure you that they add no 
kind of salt, nor indeed anything else. They only pull 
it off the rocks whereon it grows, and spread it on the 
grass in the warm sun to dry, or rather on a lousy green 
mantle*4as my friend adds, who gave me this relation, 
and has seen much of it dried and eaten in Kerry, and 
elsewhere) while drying. It sometimes appears frosted 
over with a salt, which for the most part falls off again in 
handling it, and is probably nothing else but the par- 
ticles of salt remaining after the sun has exhaled the sea- 
water that stuck to it. When thoroughly dry it is fit for 
use, and may be kept seven years, if hung up in a net or 
the like. They eat it at all times, when no other food is 
to be had, but chiefly in the morning, and esteem it good 
against worms and the scurvy, and to cause a sweet 
breath. And now, sir, if it were necessary, I could 
muster up several arguments to press you to what myself 
and friend and colleague has urged about the icons, but 
you know well the necessity and usefulness of such a 
work ; I would, therefore, at present only hint one thing, 
that it is pity that so beneficial a work is not promoted by 
public authority ; and what if a motion were made, and 
effectually backed, next session of parliament, that it be 
carried on at a public charge ? If it be objected, that 
our treasure is exhausted by a war, &c., I would answer, 
that (not to mention the hopes we have of a general 
peace) the French king, notwithstanding the tedious and 
expensive war he is engaged in, thinks it yet fit to 
encourage all arts and sciences. Fas est et ab hostc 
doceri. N. W. 

Kilkenny, Aug. ult. 1696. 

20 



306 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I have received, after much search, three sorts 
of beans from the north-west islands of Scotland, which 
are thrown up by the sea from the north-west great 
ocean, and gathered in plenty on those north-west shores, 
and are such as grow in Jamaica, viz. the bean called 
there cocoons, that called horse-eye bean, and the ash- 
coloured nickar, or bonduch. You will find them all in 
my Catalogue, under those vulgar names, by the index ; 
there is also a fourth sent me thence, which is, I think, 
the Avellana quadrifida, J. B. Where its natural place 
is I know not ; but the others you may find their countries 
by the authors which speak of them, for they must come 
to Scotland by the currents of the sea. I have heard of 
some thrown up in England, and should be glad to have 
your thoughts of this matter. The small coral in Eal- 
mouth Road you may see I found in England, and had 
it from the Magellan Straits. I beg your pardon for this 
trouble. 

London, Sept. 11, 1696. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., Sept. 17, 96. 

SIR, Yours of Sept. llth I received Monday last; in 
answer whereto, first, I return you many thanks for the 
pains you have already and shall further take in assisting 
me and promoting my work ; but my haste is not so great 
as to straiten you for time, not intending to begin to print 
till next spring, so that you may proceed leisurely as your 
affairs and occasions will permit. I am sensible what a 
difficult task you have to clear up and reconcile things in 
difference between yourself and Dr. Plukenet, which would 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 307 

soonest and best be done by conference and mutual in- 
spection of each other's dried specimens. But I know not 
whether Dr. Plukenet will be willing to come to that, being 
a man reserved, jealous of his reputation, and none of the 
best natured, not to give him a worse character, being 
my friend. 

What you write concerning the fruits gathered in 
plenty on the shores of the north-west islands of Scotland 
is very strange ; I have formerly read something of it in 
the 'Philosophical Transactions,' I think, but gave no 
great heed to it, but now I see there was truth in it. It 
is very unlikely to me that they should be brought so far 
by ari^-current of the sea. I should rather think they 
came from vessels cast away by shipwreck near those parts. 
But it is a thing very well deserves to be further and more 
diligently inquired into, sith the matter of fact is certain. 

You make no mention of my papers concerning the 
primary use of respiration, which I desired Mr. Smith to 
send to you. My relatives here are (I thank God) in 
health, and join in the tender of their services to you. I 
humbly pray the like blessing to yourself and family, and 
take leave, resting, 

Sir, 

Your very much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, at his house 
at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., October 20, 90. 

SIR, I return you many thanks for your last letter of 
Sept. 25th, wherein you pleased to communicate many 
useful observations concerning our domestic plants, which 
I wish had been imparted before the publication of the 
last edition of my ' Synopsis Stirp. Brit.' However, they 



308 CORRESPONDENCE OJt 1 RAY. 

will serve to enrich my ' Supplement. Hist.' You write 
like an ingenuous person and a lover of truth. Give me 
leave to acquaint you, that I think you are mistaken in 
making the Milium indicum arundinaceo caule granis 
jlavescentibus, Herman. Cat.,* to be the same with 
Sorgum, which he makes a different plant ; and the same 
with Frumentum indicum quod Milium indicum vacant, 
C. B. Theat. Bot. 488. Looking over your Catalogue, I 
find you refer to Urtica several plants, which have little 
agreement one with another, except in the figure of the 
leaf, and having a stamineous flower, and therefore I pray 
tell me what you make to be the characteristic note or 
notes of an Urtica; for neither Folia adversa, spinula 
urentes, fructus racemosi, nor s.emina solitaria, are com- 
mon to them all. 

I hope, ere now, my bookseller hath sent you my paper 
concerning respiration, of which I desire you would freely 
give me your opinion, and also communicate it to Dr. 
Connor, to whom I wrote, but doubt, for want of a suffi- 
cient direction, whether my letter came to his hands. My 
wife gives you her very humble, and I am, 

Sir, 
Your very affectionate and much obliged 

friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, at his house 
at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Dr. CONNOR to Mr. BAY. 

London, Bow street, Nov. 9, 96. 

SIR, Dr. Sloane has been pleased to give me your 
ingenious and learned 'Dissertation about Respiration,' 
to peruse it, which I have done with a great deal of satis- 

* This plant and the Frumentum indicum, &c. C. B., are referred to Holcus 
saccharatus by Linnaeus ; but Sloane's Milium indicum, &c, is named H. bicolor 
by him. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 309 

faction and improvement, finding in it a great many solid 
observations concerning the respiration of fishes, insects, 
and other animals. I find that you think that the sub- 
stance or body of the air passes from the bronchia and 
lungs into the substance of the blood ; and that, pabuli 
instar, it foments and maintains the vital flame which you 
suppose to be in the sulphureous parts of the blood, as the 
air foments the common flame of a candle, and that the 
nitre has nothing to do in this effect. 

You and I, sir, agree in this, that the body of the air 
gets into the mass of blood, and that its nitre there is of 
no use or energy. We agree, likewise, that the use of 
respirafttfn is to rarefy and vivify the blood ; we only differ 
in the manner how this rarefaction is performed. I know 
that there are very eminent men which are of opinion that 
the oily parts of the blood do constantly entertain not only 
a considerable heat, but likewise a true flame in the whole 
mass : you add to them that the air comes to foment it. 
I was much of this opinion myself not long ago, but you 
will be pleased to let me (with submission to your mind) 
to propose to you, in order to be informed, the difficulties 
I met with in this opinion. I find that those who eat 
most of cheese, butter, fat meat, and other sulphureous 
aliments, and those that are very corpulent and fat them- 
selves, have generally lesser heat in their blood, and a 
slower circulation and pulse, and are less subject to fevers, 
than persons that are dry and lean, I mean the bilious. 
I find that in most chemical fermentations sulphur is far 
from increasing motion and heat, it rather retards it by 
involving the saline principles, which are the true cause of 
fermentation and heat. I consider, likewise, that if there 
was anything of the nature of a flame in the blood, it 
would only be in the lungs where it meets the air ; but 
when once it would pass from the lungs into the heart, and 
into the narrow passages of the veins and arteries, it could 
no more flame than a lighted candle passed into the deep 
mouth of a hollow candlestick. Besides, I cannot believe 
that the air is an aliment to our common flame, no more 



310 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

than by its pressure and elasticity in keeping and crowd- 
ing together into a vertex the igneous particles, as I have 
hinted in the treatise ' De Antris Lethiferis.' For I can- 
not conceive how the air that comes to the mouth of an 
oven can serve for a pabulum to the flame which is in the 
bottom of the oven, for it cannot come near it ; so that I 
am apt to believe that the candle goes out in the air-pump, 
only because, the air being exhausted, there remains 
nothing to keep together the flying parts of the candle, 
and so they soon vanish away ; not because there wants a 
pabulum of air or nitre, since the sulphureous parts of the 
candle itself are pabulum enough. 

From these and several other reasons I have concluded 
that the intestine motion of the blood is a true fermenta- 
tion arising from the struggling of its saline parts, and 
mitigated by its sulphureous ones, like the fermentation of 
beer, wine, or cider, though in a higher degree. This 
fermentation causes heat in the blood, this heat expands 
and rarefies the air that comes in by respiration : the 
expanded air expands reciprocally the blood, and makes 
it frothy, thin and florid. So that respiration is indis- 
pensably necessary for life, to be a constant cause of the 
attenuation and subtilization of the blood ; though the 
sulphur of the blood is not supposed by me to be the 
cause of this heat, yet it is very necessary to bridle and to 
keep together the saline principles, and to hinder them 
from evaporating too soon till new ones are supplied by 
the chyle ; so by its pliable and limber oblong particles it 
wraps up and keeps close together the volatile principles 
of the blood, that otherwise might fly away. This is, sir, 
in few words, what I think of this subject, which I submit 
entirely to your better judgment, contending for nothing 
else but truth. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 311 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., Jan. 22, 97. 

SIR, I return you most hearty thanks for the medi- 
cine you commended to me for the cure of my diarrhoea, 
which doth indeed effectually stop it toties quoties : but I 
perceive it doth not only stop that flux, but likewise the 
running of my sores, which renders them very painful in 
the nights, and causes them rather to spread. 

I have now another case to beg your advice in. My 
daughter Mary, one of the twins, after a long trouble with 
the cllterosis, is fallen into the jaundice, all the symptoms 
whereof she hath in a high manner. We have made use 
of our neighbouring physician Mr. Allen, who first gave 
her some powders, which, taking no effect, he gave her, I 
suppose, Riverius, his first medicine for the jaundice, which 
she hath now taken five days, half a quarter of a pint 
thrice a day ; which, notwithstanding, all the symptoms 
continue, or rather increase, and she grows faint and 
feeble. Now, sir, myself and wife (who tenders her very 
humble service to you) earnestly entreat your counsel and 
direction how we are to order her, and what remedies you 
think most proper and effectual for her. I myself was 
cured of that disease by an infusion of stone-horse dung 
steeped in ale for a night with a little saffron added, and 
in the morning strained, and the liquor sweetened with a 
little sugar. I took about half a pint at a time, and was 
cured perfectly with twice taking, as I remember. I pray 
give us your judgment of this medicine. I had given it 
her before now, but that I was loth to do anything of my 
own head, physic not being my calling. Be pleased to 
write a word or two in answer by the next post, for we 
are very much concerned for the child. I am, 

Sir, 
Your very affectionate and much obliged 

friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 



312 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

P.S. Mr. Allen advises the letting of her blood, because, 
upon blowing of her nose, a little tincture of blood some- 
' times appears. She is troubled with a short cough, so 
that my wife is afraid she may be consumptive. She is 
also troubled with a great heat in the soles of her feet, 
but this is not new to her, for she had it in summer-time. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Feb. 1, 97. 

SIR, My dear child, for whom I begged your advice, 
within a day after it was received, became delirious, and 
at the end of three days died apoplectic, which was to 
myself and wife a most sore blow. I doubt not but you 
will commiserate our sad condition. 

Nothing afflicts me so much as that I did [not] in time 
make use of that remedy, which I had proved so effectual 
to my own relief and cure in the same disease. I am 
extremely sorry for your spitting of blood, which I humbly 
pray God deliver you perfectly from. I am not in case 
to write much, and therefore shall only subscribe myself, 

Sir, 
Your much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, at his 
house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloonisbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 



B. N., March 2, 1697. 

SIR, I have this morning sent back by carrier the 
section I last received from you, and entreat you to send 
me the remainder of the copy, or as much as is ready, for 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 313 

I intend to apply myself wholly to it, till I have finished 
it, being desirous to get the work off my hands. For upon 
this sad accident, and by reason of my growing infirmi- 
ties, I am well mortified as to natural studies and in- 
quiries, though I shall not, so long as life and strength last, 
wholly desert them, but make them some part of my 
parergon and diversion, as I should only have done before. 
I should be glad to hear of your health and welfare : my 
wife is full of grief, having not yet been able fully to con- 
coct her passion : she tenders her humble service, and 
thanks for all your favours, with whom joins, 

Sir, 
^our affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, at his 
house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., March 16, 1697. 

SIR, I shall now communicate to you a story or two 
of the direful effects of (Enanthe aquatica, cicutte facie 
succo viroso of Lobel [CEnanthe crocata, Linn.] which we 
may English Hemlock Water-dropwort upon several per- 
sons that eat of the roots of it, sent me not long since in 
a letter from Dr. Francis Vaughan, a learned physician in 
Ireland, living at Clonmel, in the county of Tipperary. 
This gentleman observing me, notwithstanding what 
Dr. Johnson, in his ' Gerardus Emaculatus/ and Lobel, in 
his ' Adversaria/ had written of the venerose quality of 
this plant, to be somewhat doubtful of it in my ' Synopsis 
Methodica Stirpium Britannicarum,' for my fufl satis- 
faction and conviction, wrote the following abstract of a 



314 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

history drawn up by a person, who is at present his 
brother-in-law, concerning the effects of it upon himself 
and seven other young men, who ignorantly mistaking it 
for Sium aquaticum, or Apiumpalustre, did eat of it. 

" Eight young lads went one afternoon a fishing to a 
brook in this county, and there meeting with a great 
parcel of (Enanthe aquatica succo viroso (in Irish Tahoic), 
they mistook the roots of it for Sium aquaticum roots, and 
did eat a great deal of them. About four or five hours 
after going home, the eldest of them, who was almost of 
man's stature, without the least previous appearing dis- 
order or complaint, on a sudden fell down backward, and 
lay kicking and sprawling on the ground. His counte- 
nance soon turned very ghastly, and he foamed at the 
mouth. Soon after four more were seized the same way, 
and they all died before morning, not one of them having 
spoken a word from the moment in which the venenate 
particles surprised the genus nervosum. Of the other 
three, one run stark mad, but came to his right reason 
again the next morning. Another had his hair and nails 
fall off, and the third (who is my brother-in-law) alone 
escaped without receiving any harm. Whether he eat 
less of this fatal root, or whether his constitution, which is 
to this day very athletic, occasioned it, I cannot tell, 
though I am of opinion that his speedy running about two 
miles home after that he saw the first young man fall, 
together with his drinking a very large draught of milk, 
warm from the cow, in his midway, were of singular use 
to him. For his violent sweating did doubtless expel and 
carry off many of the venenose particles, and had a better 
effect than the best of our alexipharmics (which you know 
are generally diaphoretic) might have produced in this 
case. Besides, I believe the draught of warm milk did 
act its part by involving the acid or acrimonious poisonous 
particles, and rendering them inactive, and preventing 
their seizing the genus nervosum till they were expelled 
per diaphoresin. But this is but my conjecture, which I 
willingly submit to more mature judgments. This hap- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 315 

pened about thirty years ago ; but there are many yet alive 
who assert the truth of it, having been eye-witnesses of 
this dreadful tragedy. There was also a Dutchman, about 
two years [since] within eight miles of this place, poisoned 
by boiling and eating the tops of this plant shred into his 
pottage ; he was soon after found dead in his boat, and 
his little Irish boy gave accounts of the cause of his death 
to be eating this herb, which he forewarned his master 
against, but in vain, the Dutchman asserting that it was 
good salad in his country, so that I believe he took it for 
Apium palustre, which its leaves much resemble." Thus 
far Dr.Vaughan. 

Several parallel, and no less tragical histories of later 
date, of the miserable destruction of divers persons by the 
eating of the roots of this pernicious and deleterious plant, 
I find recorded by Jacobus Wepferus, in his book ' De 
Novis Cicutae Aquaticae,' and in the ' Miscellanea Curiosa,' 
or ' Epheinerides German.' Dec. 2, An. 6, Observ. 116, 
wherefore I think it is for the interest of mankind that all 
persons be sufficiently cautioned against venturing to eat 
of this, and indeed any other unknown herb or root, lest 
they incur the same fate, and in order thereto that such 
histories be made public and transmitted to posterity, as 
what 1 send you may be by being inserted into the 
' Philosophic Transactions,' if you think fit. I am, 

Sir, 
Your very humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, at his 
house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



316 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, April 2, 97. 

SIR, Wednesday night last, after I had sent away my 
letter giving advice of the receipt of the box of sugar, 
your parcel of submarine plants came. The carrier's 
excuse for not delivering it together with the box was, 
that it was put up in a pack which was not then opened. 
I was no less troubled at this delay or neglect of the car- 
rier, than I knew you would be for fear of the loss or 
miscarriage of papers of so great concern, and therefore 
thought it necessary by the first opportunity to send you 
word of their safe arrival. I shall, with what speed I can, 
make my excerpta out of them, and remit them to you ; 
and what I borrow out of them I shall do the author 
right in acknowledging. 

Last week Mr. Smith sent me a large Dutch herbal of 
Abraham Muntingius, of a very fair letter and paper, and 
beautified with many figures of more rare or nondescript 
plants. But it will be of little use to me, being written 
in Dutch, which language 1 understand not, and because 
the Latin names are his own, without synonymes or re- 
ferences to any author that hath written of plants. The 
book hath formerly been printed, but this edition is much 
larger, and hath more than double the number of sculps. 
Possibly I may be impertinent in telling you of a book 
you know much better than myself. This being a busy 
time, I shall add no more than that I am, 

Sir, 

Your very affectionate and much obliged friend 
and humble servant, 

Jo. RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Blooinsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 317 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, April 13, 97. 

SIR, I do now return the papers you did me the 
favour to send and grant me the use of. If you have 
any more ready, be pleased to put them into Mr. Smith's 
hands, who will take care to send them in the parcel he 
next dispatches to me ; for I would not willingly give 
you more trouble than needs. 

I am very glad you give us any hopes of seeing you 
here next summer. Though we cannot treat you accord- 
ing to"yr?ur merit, yet no friends can be more welcome 
than yourself or any related to you. 

I find that if I proceed thus to translate out of your 
work, my Supplement will swell to a large volume, If, at 
least, you be so curious and particular in your descriptions 
of the species of other tribes. But as Pliny saith, " Ut 
alia bonse rei ita bonus liberes melior est quisque quo 
major." And what is borrowed of yours will communi- 
cate a great degree of goodness to my book. My wife 
and girls are well, and send you their humble service, and 
I am, Sir, 

Your much obliged and affectionate friend 
and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I have this morning, by carrier, remitted the 
tribe of Siliquose Trees, for the use of which I must not 
neglect to return you merited thanks, and to pray the 
sending hither the remainder of your copy, which in your 
last, of March 24, you were pleased to tell me you had 
quite finished. 

About three weeks since I sent up to Mr. Smith the 



318 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

copy of my Supplement, all but of the Dendrology, which 
is not yet perfected. Now, sir, I think it were convenient 
that you revised at least all that is translated out of your 
Jamaican History, that so you might correct and alter 
what is mistaken or misunderstood, and supply what is 
wanting ; for I dare not impose such a task upon you as 
perusing the whole, though, if you would favour me so 
far as to undertake that trouble, I arn sensible it would 
be much for the advantage of the work. The truth is, I 
am not in condition to perform this task anything well. 
Did I live at London, and so had opportunity to view all 
the gardens about that city, and to describe all species 
that I should find either not at all but lamely described, 
and to take more exact notice of all I had not before seen, 
I might be able much better to judge of names and sy- 
nonyma, and to render the work more perfect and exact ; 
but with those helps I have I must do as v well as I can. 
Dr. Sherard might have assisted me more than any man, 
he having seen and collected all the plants now cultivated 
in Europe. But his dried plants, though the sight of 
them might afford me much pleasure, yet I should not 
be able to make use of them in this history without 
danger of mistakes. Possibly he may return again before 
the book be quite printed off and published. 

Mr. Tournefort's answer to my Dissertation about Me- 
thods I should be glad to see before I put out my re- 
formed method, which is almost ready for the press ; and 
therefore if you please to send it you will oblige further 
him who is already much in arrear to you. 

Sir, 
Your very humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloorasbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 319 



Dr. VATTGHAN and Dr. WOOD to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I shall add a few observations concerning the 
Tithymalus hibernicus Ascyron supinum villosum palustre, 
&c. [.Euphorbia hiberna, Linn.] I ordered an Irish 
chirurgeon to make a decoction of the root and a few 
leaves of the Tithymalus hibernicus, but its exhalations 
were so very acrimonious, that, he holding his head two 
or three times over the decoction to see how it proceeded, 
his face and hands were blistered most sadly. Some of 
the Ifteh use this root boiled in milk as a cathartic, 
whose direful effect there was a melancholy instance of, 
about three years ago, eight miles hence. A brisk young 
Irishman, who complaining of a dull pain in his left side, 
which I suppose was an inveterate obstruction of his 
spleen, a countryman quack of his gave him a dose of 
the above decoction, which occasioned a violent hyper- 
catharsis, dreadful convulsions, and death before ten 
o'clock that night ; but I believe that an extract might 
be prepared with the addition of spiritus vitrioli, which 
might be of excellent use in chronic distempers of robust 
bodies. I was by your ' Historia Plantarum,' induced to 
make an extract of Trifolium paludosum \Menyanthes 
trifoliata, Linn.], which I found an excellent remedy in 
vomitu, imbecillitate ventriculi, cruditatibus acidis, scor- 
buto, chlorosi, and question not but that it is an extra- 
ordinary universal deobstruent : I have used several 
pounds of it this last year, and shall make greater use of it 
for the future. I have also used it as an injection (in 
sordid ulcers) dissolved in fountain water, and think it 
has as good mundifying effects as tincture of myrrh and 
aloes ; but then you must dissolve as much of the extract 
as the water will well contain. I much wonder that the 
Ascyron tomentosum palustre [Hypericum elodes, Linn., 
probably] has not been more taken notice of in physic, 
or I look upon it to be one of the best balsamic 



i; 



320 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

astringent plants we have ; the native Irish call it Birin 
Yarragh, which signifies Herba dysenterica, and use it 
in that distemper with good success, and I have used 
it boiled in milk with very good success, prtsmissis uni- 
versalibus, in fluore albo. It is doubtless an excellent 
vulnerary, and effectual in all fluxes beyond any herb I 
know. 
Clonmel, April 24, 1697. 



WORTHY SIR, As to Insects, I am sorry I have nothing 
by me worth communicating. I had formerly made 
several observations on these animalcula, but being forced 
in the late troubles for England, I left most of what I 
was worth in Limerick, which place holding out longer 
than any other part of the kingdom, I there lost most of 
my books, and, what I esteem more, my papers and 
manuscripts. At present I have only to say, that I am 
apt to think there are few plants but if narrowly looked 
into would be found to produce some kind or other of 
insect, not by way of equivocal generation, which notion 
is now as universally as deservedly exploded, but by be- 
coming fit matrices to cherish and mature eggs deposited 
in or on them. I have lately observed many eggs in the 
common rush, Juncus Itevis vulg. \Juncus conglomerate , 
Linn., and /. effusw, Linn.], but I know not yet what 
animal they produce. One sort are little transparent 
bodies in shape somewhat like a pear or a retort, lying 
within the skin, upon or in the medulla, just against a 
brownish spot on the outside of the rush, which is appa- 
rently the cicatrix of the wound made by the fly when 
she put her eggs there. Another kind I observe, which 
are much larger and not so transparent, of a long oval or 
rather cylindrical form ; six, eight, or more of these lie 
commonly together across the rush, parallel to each other, 
like the teeth of a comb, and are as long as the breadth 
of the rush. These, sir, are only hints to be farther im- 
proved by you, who, being so conversant with plants and 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 321 

designing a Treatise of Insects, may have opportunity of 
examining them more accurately. I can see no reason 
in the fancy of some men who would deduce all distem- 
pers from insects, yet I am persuaded they have more 
share in the production of some than many will imagine. 
In some sorts of scabs and itch I have seen very small 
white animals taken out with a needle, and to have been 
living and very nimble in their motion. These often 
make visible passages under the skin from scab to scab, 
like a mole under the earth. Add hereunto animals taken 
out of the gums, and other parts, mentioned in the ' Phi- 
losoph. Transact.' I wish a good account could be given 
of som&fmimals produced with of others, as the 

Lumbriri lati in men, and of toads found living in the 
middle of massy stones, &c. 

Kilkenny, April 28, 1697. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, April 27, 97. 

SIR, I received your letter of April 16th, and on 
Saturday last the parcel you sent by carrier came safe to 
my hands. I shall make what haste I can to collect 
what is wanting in my Supplement, and to return it 
again. You are still laying new bonds and obligations 
upon me, which I am always ready to acknowledge and 
return thanks for, though never likely to requite. In the 
former papers I found one or two passages which seemed 
to me somewhat obscure, which I cannot call to mind ; 
if for the future any the like occurs I shall, according to 
your desire, give you notice of them. I have not seen 
Mr. Dale since the receipt of your letter, but so soon as 
I shall, I will communicate to him your pleasure. You 
have found me work now for a considerable time, so that 
you are secure of trouble from me for two or three weeks. 

21 



322 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

I have been and still am troubled with a cold, which dis- 
ease is epidemical hereabouts. I am, 

Sir, 

Your most obliged and affectionate friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

I must not forget my wife's humble service to you. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
next Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. DOODY to Mr. RAY. 

, SIR, Dr. Woodward has shown me slates, wherein 
there were not only shades of plants, as in the Dendroides, 
but the real body, and become very hard by imbibing in 
these stony particles; in one side of the slate a cavity 
with the impress of the leaf, and on the other side it may 
be seen prominent, and in both every little lineament so 
exact, that I could not doubt that they had once grown. 
I have not seen them very lately, but I intend ere long, 
and then I shall be able to give you a farther account. 



TENTZELIUS to Mr. HAY. 

VIR CELEBERRIME, Bienniurn est, ex quo controversia 
agitur inter me et Collegium Medicum Gethanum de 
prsegrandibus ossibus terrse effossis, quse ego ab Elephanto, 
Medici autem pure fossile esse contendunt. Epistolam, 
quam Magliabechio tune inscripsi, primo statim mense 
ad illustrem Societatem Regiam misi, una cum ossium 
fragmentis, illiusque judicio cuncta subjeci. Verum non 
pervenisse ad manus vestras, ex silentio colligo, cum satis 
ex adverso mihi constet, qua humanitate respondere so- 
leatis Germanis, curiosa vobis dijudicanda offerentibus. 
Opto igitur, ut hie fasciculus felicior sit, quern curandum 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 323 

susceperunt fratres Janssonio-Waesbergij, Bibliopolae Am- 
stelodamenses, cum quibus his nundinis, celebemmum 
Ludolfum visitans, notitiam contraxi; iidemque respon- 
sum, si quo beare me volueris, hue transmittent. Enim- 
vero ad te scribendi audaciam mearn benigne interpreta- 
beris, quae non solum ex Synopsi Quadrupedum TUA 
hinc inde in litteris meis allegata, oritur, verum etiam ex 
Rivini Lipsiensis aliorumque exemplo, qui tuo consilio 
operaque feliciter usi sunt. Quare spe sustentor optima, 
fore, ut eandem mihi gratiam praestes, et epistolam meam 
Medicorumque Apologiam inter se et cum fragmentis 
ossium additis conferas ; quorum bina ex dentibus maxi- 
mis prtTSminentibus sumta tubulos striasque manifestis- 
time praebent conspiciendas ; tertium ex cranio cum alias 
ob causas, tarn propterea notabile est, quod continet 
particulas margse crassiores ex fluore remanentes et sub- 
stantiam ossis in lapidem convertentes, eo modo, quern 
docuit Bootig in epistola mea laudatus. Hue ergo tendit 
votorum meorum, summa, ut vel tuo solum, vel illustris- 
simas etiam Societatis nomine de tota controversial liber- 
rime sententiam feras, et quamprimum licuerit, ad me 
transcribas, cum debito vobis elogio libello meo inseren- 
dam, quern Medicorum simul Italorum, Gallorum et Ger- 
manorum judiciis exornabo. Denique si vivit adhuc 
Moulinus, anatomic elephantinaB auctor, nihil gratum 
magis acceptumque mihi foret, quam ut illi quoque omnia, 
quae mitto exhibeantur, eum potissimuin in finem, ut se 
defendat ab tyKX?V aT ' adversariorum meorum, quasi per- 
peram bestia3 applicuerit terininos anatomicos soli homini 
proprios. Sed is indubie habet fundamenta, quae cen- 
soribus illis opponat. Vale et certus esto me nihil praeter- 
missurum officiorum tibi praestandorum, quod in mea 
quidem potestate situm est. Vale iterum Francofurti ad 
Mcenum, Cal. Maii CIOIOCIIC. 

NOTE. Tentzelius's account of those subterraneous 
bones is in ' Philos. Transact.' No 234. W. D[ERHAM]. 



324 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, May 12, -97. 

SIR, I have this week, by carrier, sent back the sec- 
tions you did me the favour to lend me, which I thought 
necessary to give you advice of, lest the carrier should be 
negligent in doing his duty. I am now ready for more, 
so soon as you shall please to send them. I find them 
very correct, nor can discover anything that needs amend- 
ment. The messenger's haste will permit me to add no 
more, but that I am, Sir, 

Your very affectionate and much obliged 
friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, July 7th, 97. 

SIR, I wrote to you last week, which I hope came to 
your hands. I have received the parcel you sent Friday 
last, together with the letter of advice, for which I return 
thanks. One thing I have to acquaint you with in refer- 
ence to myself, and to beg your advice. In the beginning 
of May last, if you remember, there was about a week of 
extraordinary hot weather, which had such influence upon 
the sores of my legs (which were then almost wholly dried 
up and healed, that it altered the nature of them, and 
turned them into a kind of lieppes or tetter, which hath 
spread very much, and encompassed my legs ; it was and 
is still attended with an extraordinary heat and itching. 
I have used, by the advice of our physician at Braintree, 
a decoction of litharge, of his own preparing, to bathe 



CORRESPONDENCE OP IIAY. 325 

them with to take away the itching ; which doth it for a 
while, but it returns upon me again ; and have taken 
flower of brimstone inwardly, and applied an unguent to 
the soles of my feet, which, though they mitigate and put 
a little check to the spreading of the herpes, yet do not, 
as they say, kill and cure it. At first it issued out a thin 
humour out of the small pimples, but now there is no 
visible humour, but only a scurf upon the eruptions. But 
enough of this. I shall only add the tender of my wife's 
very humble service, and take leave, resting, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

For bis honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloorasbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., July 12, 97. 

SIR, Your great kindness expressed as well by the 
speedy return of answer to my last, as in the solicitous- 
ness and concern in your letter discovered for my health 
and relief, do exact and indeed naturally excite in me 
suitable affections of love and gratitude. But I thank 
God, the case is not so ill with me as my letter might 
give you just reason to suspect. My herpes, for so I 
will call them, though they are not quite killed, as the 
vulgar phrase it, and it may be not without reason, yet 
are they well qualified, the heat and itching much allayed, 
though I cannot say the spreading quite stopped. I take 
inwardly flower of sulphur, half a drachm at once, which 
keeps my body soluble, and gives me a stool or two. 
Outwardly, I use a decoction of elecampane, dock-root, 
and chalk, in whey, twice a day bathing the affected 
places therewith. I do not constantly take sulphur, but 



326 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

intermit once in two days and sometimes more. Mer- 
cury I dare not be bold with. I have formerly taken 
mercurius dulcis inwardly liora somni. After taking it I 
slept about two hours and then waked, sleeping no more 
all night ; in the morning it began to purge me, and so 
continued for the most part of the day. And, lest I 
should take non causam pro causa, I reiterated the expe- 
ment three times, with the best prepared mercury, and 
always with the like effect. The emplastrum de ranis I 
also applied, with no better success. For two years after 
I had good reason to think that the mercury was not 
quite out of my body, and yet found no effect of drying 
or healing my sores. I am now come to a suspicion that 
these tumours are owing to insects making their burrows 
under the cuticula ; their juice mingling with the serum 
of the blood causes an ebullition, and excites the tumours, 
pustules, inflammation, and itching. But this I propose 
only as a conjecture, though I could bring probable argu- 
ments to confirm it. 

Your advice about letting blood I approve of, and had 
it been given earlier in the year I should have taken it. 
My blood is hot, and adust when I have been let blood, 
which hath not been often ; it was always of a very dark 
or blackish colour. I hope the method I am in will in 
time quite cure me, though I do not much delight in 
sulphur, nor indeed any strong medicine. You would not 
think what effects opium hath more than once had upon 
me ; instead of pacifying and stopping the ebullition or 
orgasmus of the blood, or giving rest, hath put it into 
such a rage and so inflamed me, that I got not well of a 
month after, whereas before I had little fever upon me. 
But I will tell you my reverie in relation to sulphur. 
You know the fume of it inflamed kills all manner of 
insects of a sudden, though they be not near the flame, 
or at all scorched with it. You know what a twinge it 
gives a man that holds his nose near the fume of it. Now 
I fancy that, taken into the blood, it may be heated to 
that degree as to emit a fume sufficient to kill or destroy 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 327 

the insects lodged in the tumours. But enough of this. 
My wife and girls are very much yours, and so is, 

Sir, 

Your affectionate friend and most humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 
-^ Black Notley, July 15, 97. 

SIR, I gave you no advice of the receipt of your 
Graminifolious tribe, because I had written word thereof 
to Mr. Smith, and presumed he would acquaint you 
therewith. I now remit it to you, attended with my 
hearty thanks, and pray the loan of the next section. I 
thought it not necessary to direct to Mr. Smith, but have 
done it immediately to yourself, and hope it will safely 
come to your hands, having bidden the messenger to lay 
a strict charge upon the carrier to take great care of it. 
I am not yet fully satisfied with your change of opinion 
concerning the Milium indicum arundinaceum, &c., that it 
is different from the Sorgum or Melica of the Italians. 
For not only Caspar Bauhine's description of the Sorgum 
agrees with yours of the Milium indicum, but to the best 
of my memory the plant itself, which I saw cultivated in 
Italy, answers your description. But it is a great while 
ago since I saw the plant, and have no dried specimens 
of it, and so may be mistaken. I did indeed take Fru- 
mentum indicum quod Milium indicum vacant, C. B., to 
be a species distinct from sorgum ; but we have no clear 
knowledge of that. Hermans makes his Milium indicum 
arundinaceo caule, &c. to be a distinct plant from Sorgum, 
and one would think could not be therein mistaken, 
having, as I presume from his inserting both in his Cata- 
logue, cultivated both in his physic garden. If you have 



328 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

seen Sorgum cultivated, or have specimens of it, I must 
yield to you. Your two genera of Gramen dactylon and 
new genus of Juncus cyperoides I do very much approve, 
as well observed by you. My wife salutes you with the 
tender of her very humble service, and I am, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN R,AY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HAKS SLOANE. 

B. N., July 19, 97. 

SIR, These are to acquaint you that I intend next 
Wednesday to send back your Stamineous tribe. I had 
within a little finished it last week. Wednesday a young 
German doctor gave me a visit, known to you better 
than myself, for he told me he had been with and received 
several things of you. He draws insects, as far as I am 
able to judge, exceeding well. He stayed at Braintree 
two days, which time he spent in drawing several Papi- 
lios and Plialcena, some of Mr. Dale's and some of mine. 
He hath seen and delineated all the Papilios of England 
known to me, about forty species, and assures that the 
most of them are common to Germany with us, and that 
Sibylla Myrion to his knowledge hath drawn none of 
them but what we also have. He seems to be very inge- 
nious and communicative, and, were I but ready with my 
History of English Insects, might be of great use. But 
alas ! I have not gone through one tribe, that of butter- 
flies nocturnal and diurnal ; nor, should I live ten years 
longer, were I like to come to any near prospect of the end 
of it, should I pursue it with that diligence and applica- 
tion I have done now these seven years. What then shall 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 329 

T say of the other tribes of Scarabai and flies, which are 
as numerous as they. You would not imagine how much 
time it takes one to search out and to feed them, I mean 
the Erucce. 

My legs continue much in the same state they were, 
the ulcuscula almost healed, but the tetter rather spreads. 
I have not as yet made use of mercury, which, if other 
medicines fail, I shah 1 make trial of, but outwardly. My 
wife gives you her very humble service. I am, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his"Wuoured frieiid, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., Aug. 3, 1697. 

SIR, I have this morning sent back by carrier the 
tribe of plants with a monopetalous flower, which I last 
received, and which I hope will come safe to your hands, 
and it may be before this letter. I find nothing in it as 
to the matter that needs correction so far as my skill 
extends, but am wholly your scholar as to exotics which 
I never saw. Some few things I meet with in the lan- 
guage and expression which I do not clearly understand, 
which yet I suppose is to be attributed to my slowness 
of apprehension and incapacity, which therefore I thought 
it not worth while to note. My herpes continue in 
statu quo, neither sensibly mending nor impairing. I 
could wish I had some safe and effectual medicine to kill, 
as our people hereabout not improperly term it, or, if you 
please, cure, these tetters before winter. Mercury I should 
venture upon using, but that I find it takes away my rest. 
Last week I anointed the soles of my feet with an un- 
guent, prepared by our physician Mr. Ah 1 en, in which I 



330 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

suspect there was something of mercury, though he told 
me not so, for upon using of it, after about two hours 
rest, I waked and could sleep no more all night ; in the 
morning it gave me a stool, and caused a motion in my 
belly all day. I shall take leave when I have told you 
that my wife salutes you with the tender of her humble 
services, and that I am, Sir, 

Your very affectionate and much obliged 

friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Sept. 10, 97. 

SIR, I received your letter of Sept. 2d, and, in ex- 
pectation of the papers you therein signified you intended 
to send me, I dispatched a messenger to Braintree to 
inquire at the carrier's if they had not a parcel for me, 
but they all told him they had none, whereupon I 
thought fit to give you advice thereof, both for mine and 
your own satisfaction, that if they were sent and be in 
the carrier's hands I may make more diligent search 
after them. If so, I fear not much the loss of them, 
having never as yet had anything lost that was delivered 
to any of them ; if not, I may be put out of all trouble 
and disquiet about them by a h'ne or two from you. 

I am, sir, 
Your much obliged friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 331 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., Oct. 29, 97. 

SIR, I have this morning by carrier remitted the two 
tribes of Jamaica plants you last sent. Mr. Smith in his 
letter to me made no mention of his detaining them. 
He sent me together with them a book in folio of the 
description and figures of the more rare plants of the 
physic garden of Amsterdam, which I suppose you have 
by this time perused. Some plants I there find discovered 
also and described by you. I hope now you will hasten 
the ediftOn of your Natural History of Jamaica, &c., that 
it may be published before my Supplement be finished, 
which then may neither defraud you of the honour of the 
first publication, nor hinder but rather advantage the sale 
of the book. So with the tender of my wife's humble 
service, I take leave and rest, 

Sir, 
Your obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., Oct. 13, 97. 

SIR, I have this morning, by carrier, remitted the 
three tribes you were pleased to send me a fortnight 
since, and am now ready for more. In the ' Horti Med. 
Amst. rar. Descriptio et Icones,' lately sent me by Mr. 
Smith, I find some plants of your observation, and others 
besides there may be which I have not taken notice of. 
I am informed by Dr. Robinson that Dr. Woodward hath 
lately affronted and abused you before the R. S. I wonder 



332 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

what occasion he could find for so doing. By all I hear 
of him, he is a rude and insolent fellow. My wife salutes 
you with the tender of her humble service. I am, 

Sir, 

Your very affectionate and obliged 
friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I have this morning returned you by carrier the 
three tribes you last sent, and give you many thanks for 
the use of them, as also for your kind and friendly letter. 
Mr. Harris's book I gat not till yesterday. I have hastily 
perused it, and find it to be a scurrilous piece, wherein 
the author hath discovered a great deal of pride, scornful- 
ness, and ill-nature; besides his rashness, inconside- 
rateness, and maliciousness in injuriously attributing to 
Dr. Robinson pieces of which he was so far from being 
the author, that he knew not who was. As for his treat- 
ing me, though it be not very civil, yet it is not so vilely 
rude and contemptuous as might have been expected from 
a person of whom you have given so just a character. 
And now, sir, since you command me to find faults in 
your writings, and I have nothing to carp at but gram- 
matical niceties, and because I see Mr. Harris hath exer- 
cised his pedantic critics upon that subject, give me leave 
to acquaint you with one orparorarnata, or perchance only 
typographical errata of that nature. ' Cat. Jamaic.' p. 1 b', 
1. 9 ; " Ex insula Jamaica adduxit," &c., for brought. 
This, I remember, was many years ago derided by Mr. 
Hobbes for improper. But the Oxford Professors, in 
whose writings he found "adduxit secum malleum," which 
he interpreted, lead with him a hammer, and upbraided 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 333 

them with, spent two or three pages in justifying it by 

rrallel examples brought out of good authors. P. 18, 
6 ; after " communicata" there seems to want " erat," 
or else it must be " communicabatur." P. 120,1. 1 ; 
" innascere" seems to be put for " innasci." I told you 
formerly that some passages or clauses I did not well 
understand ; but I noted them not, because they were 
not very material. Your work I cannot but highly ap- 
prove of, and do account it the greatest ornament, and, 
indeed, most valuable part of my Supplement, and you 
shall not fail of having right done you in the publication 
of it. The inclosed be pleased to despatch away to Dr. 
Prestori>who ordered me to recommend it to your care. 
My wife salutes you with the tender of her humble service, 
and I am, Sir, 

Your much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house, at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, December 7, 97. 

SIR, It is now a fortnight since I sent you the two 
last tribes I received, viz. the last of herbs, and first of 
trees, which I hope are come safe to your hands. I was 
in hopes you would have sent me some more, though it 
be no great matter as yet, for the weather hath for some 
time been, and continues still to be, so sharp, that it hath 
cast me into a diarrhoea, and rendered me very listless to 
prosecute any studies. It is a distemper that usually 
attends me in very cold weather, proceeding, I guess, 
from the relaxation" of the tonus of the bowels. I was 
wont to cure myself with a Naples biscuit, boiled in milk, 
a safe and pleasant medicine ; but this year it hath not 
its usual effect upon me. I hope your lady is perfectly 



334 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

recovered and in health, which I mention, because I am 
not without some fear that her illness may be some occa- 
sion of your deferring to send me a further part of your 
history. 

Now, sir, since you are pleased to take so kindly my 
advising you of some oversights or typographical errata 
in your Catalogue, I shall add two or three more ; though 
in the mean time I must and do acknowledge that I meet 
with very few books so well correct as that ; I am sure 
there are none of mine but have twice as many errors, 
partly owing to mine own ignorance or oversight ; for 
through inadvertency I do often commit mistakes in 
things that I know, did I but heed, tanquam ungues 
digitosque, partly to the compositors at the printing-house. 
P. 129, 1. 12; for "inrredible" I suppose it to be read 
" inremediable ;" 1. 27, for "illinita" read "illita," and 
in the same line, for " pericutietur," {e percutietur." 
P. 138, lines 31, 33, and 35 ; for " Zanthoxylon" read 
" Xanthoxylon." Though here you do but copy your 
author, and the mistake be his ; yet you might be so kind 
to him as to correct it, and lest the reader, being ignorant 
thereof, may attribute it to you. But enough at pre- 
sent. My wife salutes you with the tender of her humble 
service, and I am, 

Sir, 
Your affectionate friend and obliged servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, at 
his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. EAT to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., November 17, 97. 

SIR, Your last papers, containing the herbs, with a 
compound flower and first tribe of trees, being not sent 
by the carrier formerly employed, I received not till 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 335 

yesterday. The weather sets in very sharp sooner than 
is usual, so that I cannot bear long absence from the 
fireside, and so cannot proceed so fast as otherwise I might. 
I am bold to trouble you with the inclosed to Dr. 
Sherard, because I know not his address. It is to tell 
him that I do thankfully embrace his kind offer made me 
to accept. But now that he hath promised to ease me 
of a great part of the labour by digesting his plants into 
the method of my history, and communicating his own 
notes and observations concerning them, I could not be 
such an enemy to the perfection of my work as to refuse 
so advantageous an offer, which will give it its utmost 
compleiftent, and render it as full as it is hitherto capable 
of being made, wanting but very few species that have 
hitherto been discovered in or brought into Europe out 
of the other parts of the world. 

I am, sir, 
Your obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, at 
his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Jan. 17, 98. 

SIR, Last week I sent to Mr. Petiver a small parcel, 
and therein inclosed a sheet of excerpta, out of Signior 
Boccone's second book, which I desired him to send to 
you, which I hope he hath done. I am sensible that the 
language and writing is rude and slovenly, and therefore 
beg your excuse for my slothfulness in drawing up and 
suffering such a paper to go out of my hands, and con- 
fidence in exposing it to your view. But I suppose you 
will suppress it, and let it go no further. 

I remitted to Mr. Petiver Father KameUi's papers of 
figures and descriptions, some of which, I think, deserve 



336 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

to be published in the ' Philosophic Transactions/ viz. 
De Tugus sen Amomo legitimo; De Contrayerva sen 
Doso ; De Mananangtang seu Arbore corticis emetici. 

I have now run over your books, and if you desire or 
stand in need of them, will send them back ; my only 
reason for detaining them is, that if Mr. Smith will print 
my Supplement, I may collect out of them what species 
are therein wanting, and insert them in the copy, which 
must be sent back to me. Wife and daughter give you 
their humble services by the hand of, 

Sir, 
Your very affectionate and much obliged friend 

and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, at 
his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley. March 1, 98. 

SIR, I have received yours of Feb. 29, and do return 
you many thanks for the care and pains you have taken 
about my concerns. As to my Supplement, I have written 
to Mr. Smith to return me a speedy answer either affirma- 
tive or negative to this question, whether he will 
undertake the publishing this work this summer, and to 
begin it this next May or no. According as his answer 
is, so I shall proceed to act ; whether it may sell or not, 
I know not. It takes in a great deal. The last six volumes 
of the ' Hort. Malab.' entire ; all Father Plunder's work ; 
all Dr. Plukenet's ; Dr. Herman's ' Paradisus Batavus ;' 
Sig. Boccone's * Museum Plantarum ; ' Commelin's more 
Rare Plants of the Amsterdam Garden ; besides collections 
out of many other books, and descriptions of dried plants. 
But what will most recommend it to the reader, and give 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 337 

it greatest advantage of sale, is such a multitude of rare 
plants not yet described by any, as your ' History of 
Jamaica' contains. But still it is but a blind work, not 
illustrated by any figures, and so useless almost to any 
but great proficients in botanies, and I am sensible that 
there must needs have crept in a multitude of mistakes, 
I having seen none almost of the species, and of a great 
part having only a name or title, with a few epithets. 
Your collection of Maryland plants I am desirous to add 
to this work, and at your best leisure and convenience 
pray you to send them down hither, together with the 
copy of my Supplement, to which I shall add Herman's 
' Parad.^lat.,' and Boccone's ' Museum Rariorum,' which 
I have already almost transcribed into papers, to lie in 
their proper places inserted into my Supplement. The 
Maryland plants I desire your opinion concerning, whether 
I shall dispose them in the Supplement under heads, or 
ut them in an alphabet by themselves. I shall make 
ut poor work with them myself, and therefore hope you 
have carefully reviewed them, and put down your judg- 
ment of each. 

My sores continue still to be very painful and trouble- 
some, especially in the night. Little hopes of amendment 
this winter. I am sensible of my obligation to you in 
being so solicitous concerning my health. I thank God 
I have a tolerable measure of ease in the daytime, so that 
I am able to do somewhat, yet scarce ever quite free from 
pain. Myself and relatives remember you as oft as we 
taste the effects of your kindness, and that is almost daily. 
I do not say we drink your health, but we pray for it. 

I am, sir, 
Your most affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



22 



i; 



338 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B.K, April 13, 98. 

SIR, I received yours of April the 7th by Friday's 
post, and by carrier the parcel therein mentioned, con- 
taining two tribes of trees, and Mons. Tournefort's book, 
which I shall more carefully peruse and consider. The 
copy of my Supplement being ready for the press, I put it 
into Mr. Smith's hands, because at his instance I drew it 
up, and he hath furnished me with books all along for 
carrying it on. So that it is his, and I am but his 
journeyman or operator. But yet had I known that there 
were any so ill-natured persons as to wish ill to you 'and 
your doings, I should have cautioned him not to show it 
to anybody but such as I should order him. Indeed I 
have given him commission to show it none but yourself 
and Dr. Robinson, with whom I hope you stand right. 
He is the person to whom I am beholden for my know- 
ledge of you and acquaintance with you, and hath not 
long since in his letters to me commended your ' Jamaica 
Catalogue.' None hath as yet seen or shall see any of 
your papers, so long as they are in my hands. I have 
not seen Mr. Dale since the receipt of your letter, but 
when I do, I shall desire of him a sight of the Medicina 
curiosa. My wife gives you her very humble service. 
We all are indifferently well, as I hope yom'self and 
whole family also are. So I take leave, and rest, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 339 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, April 27, 98. 

SIR, I have been so interrupted and disturbed lately, 
that I have not been able to finish the two tribes you 
last sent me. I presume Mons. Gundeleschmir since his 
return to London hath acquainted you that he hath been 
with me. He endeavoured to excuse Mons. Tournefort, 
and to vindicate him from the imputation of rudeness 
and incivility in his treating of me in his ' Elem. 
Botaniq.' wherewith he hath been charged. I can easily 
pass it by, because he hath treated me no worse than I 
deserve!**" But truly his method, considering it with all 
the indifference I can, seems to me faulty and liable to 
many exceptions ; and as for what he hath written against 
my ' Dissertation,' it admits in most particulars of an 
easy answer, as I may afterwards show. I own him to 
be a skillful herbarist, and had he let me alone I should 
not have opposed his method, but permitted every one 
his freedom to embrace and follow what seemed best to 
him ; only I might have corrected the errors of mine own, 
as many as I knew of, and set it in as good a light as I 
could. I hope you will, I do not say take the liberty, 
but do me the favour to correct whatever you find amiss 
in my Supplement, and to add, cut off, and alter what- 
ever you observe to be deficient, redundant, and incon- 
gruous, or erroneous. I remember I was in some places 
doubtful about your meaning, and therefore probably 
might mistake it. 

My wife presents her humble service to you, and we 
both many thanks for your intended present of sugar, 
which we can hardly without violation of modesty receive 
at your hands. You do bencficia beneficiis cumulare, and 
even load us with your kindness. I cease to give you 
further trouble, and rest, Sir, 

Your very affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloanc, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



340 CORRESPONDENCE Ol 1 RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, May 13, 98. 

SIR, Lest you should be doubtful and solicitous 
about the safe conveyance of your last papers, I thought 
it necessary to acquaint you that I received them on 
Sunday last, and should have made some progress in 
them, had I not been busied in writing an answer to a 
letter I lately received from Dr. Hotton, professor of 
physic and botanies in Ley den. Whereas you desire my 
opinion of your history when I shall have finished the 
reading of it. I need not defer so long to give you it, 
for the end I know is answerable to the beginning and 
middle, and the whole, to speak impartially, without 
being biassed or influenced by interest or affection, though 
I cannot truly say with the historian Quorum causas pro- 
cul habeo ; the whole I think to be an excellent work, and 
of great use to the ingenious and inquisitive, nay, to 
those that have but a smattering in botanies, and even to 
the vulgar themselves ; containing many instructive re- 
marks and observations concerning the nature and uses 
of many plants, culinary, medicinal, and mechanical, not 
to mention others that are chiefly luciferous. But enough 
of this, and perhaps though true more than your modesty 
can well bear. In my dealings with Mr. Smith I shall 
chiefly be governed by yours and Dr. Robinson's advice ; 
I think I have formerly acquainted you how far I have 
been obliged by him, and therefore would willingly deal 
friendly and ingenuously with him, having no reason to 
the contrary, excepting the deferring the publication of 
my Synopsis Avium and Piscium, of which the reason 
he pretends is his distrust of the sale of it. But I am 
now in some haste, and therefore shall at present take 
leave, resting, 

Sir, 

Your very affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 341 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, June 1, 98. 

SIR, I have this day returned the last three sections 
of your work, for the use whereof, as of all the rest, I 
render you many thanks. I told you in my last what an 
opinion I had and .... of it, acknowledging it to be the 
greatest treasure and ornament of my Supplement, and 
which will chiefly recommend it to the curious and 
learned^jeader. I have not now time to write what I 
can truly say in commendation of it without flattery . . . 
though perhaps not without suspicion of it. The mes- 
senger [is] waiting for my letter. My wife hath lately 
been very [ill], but is now, I thank God, much better. 
One of my daughters, twin-sister to her that died, is 
inclining to the same disease, that is the jaundice, for 
whom 1 need not pray your advice, because I had it 
formerly for her sister, though too late. I take leave, 
and rest, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his honse at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., June 28, 98. 



SIR, Looking over some papers, I found among them 
two leaves of your Jamaica History, which were scattered 
out and mislaid, which I have sent you herein inclosed. 



342 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 

Your last three tribes I returned, and hope they are come 
safe to your hands, though you have not been pleased to 
give me advice of it. I wonder that I have not of a long 
time heard anything of or from Dr. Preston. I have some 
papers of dried plants of his in my hands, which I would 
willingly remit, if I had but order from him whither I 
should send them. My other twin-daughter, as I think I 
hinted to you before, hath been very ill of the same disease 
of which her sister died. I thank God she is now in a 
hopeful way of recovery, though not out of all danger. 
We have plied her with chalybeate medicines, judging 
her disease to be complicated of the jaundice and chlo- 
rosis. My wife tenders her very humble service to you ; 
and I am no less, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, My Supplement to the Dendrology, being in a 
manner wholly yours, I have this morning sent you up 
by carrier, and been bold also to put the charge of car- 
riage upon you, for the better security of conveyance. I 
entreat your pains in correcting what is erroneous or mis- 
taken in supplying what is wanting, in altering and 
amending what is obscurely delivered, or not well ex- 
pressed, and whatever other faults of any kind you shall 
find therein. 

I am at present in evil case, the sores upon my legs 
spreading and increasing, and growing very deep many 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 343 

of them, and running extremely, being also so painful 
that they do very much hinder my rest ; and sometimes 
the heat and itching is so violent, that they force me to 
quit my bed. I have not as yet hit upon anything which 
affords me relief. I do now take these sores to be ill- 
conditioned herpeses, and to proceed from invisible insects 
nestling in the cutis, and these making cuniculi, and 
spreading from place to place ; for about the sores are 
many red but flat-headed tumours or spots, some greater, 
some less, which may be the nests of these insects (like 
ant-hills), they seeming to be gregarious ; but all this is 
only conjectural. 

My igwl, I thank God, is perfectly recovered of the 
jaundice, and hath been for some time. I know not but 
that I might acquaint you therewith in my last. For 
some time (about three weeks) before she was perfectly 
clear of the disease there fell an humour into her legs 
and feet, which swelled them, and made her so lame, 
especially in the afternoon and at night, that she was not 
able to walk. These tumours were taken down and dis- 
cussed by a poultice of oatmeal, upon which a little 
barrow -hog's grease was spread, and that in two or three 
times using, which was advised by a gentleman who 
came to visit us accidentally. 

But enough of these impertinencies ; the remainder is, 
my wife's very humble service to you, and that I am, 

Sir, 
Your affectionate friend, and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 
B. N., August 10, 98. 



344 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, August 19, 98. 

SIR, I am much, obliged to you for your condolence 
with me, for truly I am but in evil case, partly with 
itching, and partly with smarting, which are most grievous 
in the night, keeping me waking very often many hours 
together. One while I took these eruptions to have been 
pernios, but now am returned to my first opinion, that 
they are herpeses, but mali moris, and suspect that they 
may be occasioned by nests of insects harbouring under 
the cuticula, and making cunicult, and so spreading from 
place to place ; for round every sore there are small red 
tumusculi, flat, and bigger near the sore, which I conjec- 
ture to be the nests or swarms of those insects. The 
news of the sickness of that sweet lady, the only daughter 
of my ever honoured friend, Mr. Fr. Willughby, would 
have been very sad and bitter to me had it terminated in 
death ; but since, through the Divine blessing upon your 
endeavours, she is recovered of it, the more dangerous 
her condition was, the greater subject of joy and eucharist 
it is to me. 

Your botanic books, if you please to afford me a sight 
of them, if I be in case, I shall gladly peruse and make 
some excerpt out of them. Dr. Hobbs's ointment you 
mention, I fancy would be the most likely thing in the 
world to afford relief in my case, but I am not able to 
bear mercury : it will by no means agree with my temper, 
however taken or applied. I am so drowsy that I can 
scarce hold my pen, or know what I write, and therefore 
it is time to take leave. I am, sir, 

Yours in all service, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the comer of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 345 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, October 26, 98. 

SIR, I want words to express the sense I have of 
your extraordinary and unmerited kindness, in making 
us so many noble and rich presents. Sincere gratitude, 
and a ready owning and professing my obligations to you, 
is all the amends you are to expect from a person in so 
mean circumstances, not for want of will, but ability, to 
requite. My wife is very much taken with the quality, 
as weH^as quantity, of your largess, the fineness and 
fatness of the sugar. She returns you her very humble 
service and thanks, and so do my girls. 

The sores upon my legs continue still very painful and 
troublesome, with little intermission, night and day. I 
have not yet made use of your advice ; indeed I thought 
it not safe to do so without first cutting issues to carry 
off the humour ; and I desire your opinion whether you 
think it safe or advisable to dry up the sores without 
making some provision to drain the blood of the humour 
that used to be evacuated that way. 

Dr. Preston's dried plants I shall take care to send up 
whithersoever he shall direct, so soon as I shall receive 
orders from him. I should be glad of any of his 
observations relating to the method of plants, in which 
he is very knowing and curious. 

I should be glad to see Monsieur Tournefort's Latin 
edition of his ' Botanic Elements,' which I cannot but 
wonder he defers thus long. 

I hear of several new botanic pieces come over, viz. of 
Paul Herman, Signor Boccone, &c, 

I have lately received a letter from Father Camelli, a 
Jesuit, living at Manilla, in the Philippine Islands, with 
some draughts and descriptions of plants growing there, 
of which, I suppose, Mr. Petiver hath given you an 
account. 



346 * . CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

I cannot take leave without telling you that I dare not 
own anything of worth in myself meriting respect from 
any man, -but the less I deserve it, the more I am obliged 
to them that : give it, but especially you, sir, who must 
needs see'through me, and discern how mean my skill is 
in 'anything, and must therefore therein be partial to, 

Sir, 

Your most affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. BAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, November 2, 98. 

SIR, I thank you for your last kind letter, wherein 
you so frankly offer me the sight and perusal of Dr. 
Herman's 'Paradisus Batavus,' and Signor Boccone's 
late pieces, which I do gratefully accept, and desire you 
would do me the favour to send me them so soon as 
conveniently you can. I shall be careful to return them 
again so soon as I have done with them, and that shall 
not be long. 

Since my last to you, I have been sadly afflicted with 
a diarrhoea, which I hope is for the present stopped. I 
have, according to your direction, made use of diascor- 
dium, which hath several times given me relief; but my 
small stock being spent, sending to our shops they sent 
me pitiful slop, which had neither the colour, consistency, 
taste, nor, I believe, virtues of diascordium ; so I made 
use of conserve of roses inwardly, and outwardly applied, 
as hot as I could endure them, little cakes made of pow- 
dered chalk with the white of an egg, to my belly, circa 
umbilici repionem, drinking burnt claret, which I think 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. . 347 

stop the lash, though I may possibly mistake' non causum 
pro causa. The sores upon my legs are at present very 
painful and troublesome. Now that the weather is come 
to be open, I intend to have issues cut, which I hope 
will deliver me from this misery I labour under, else vita 
minime vitalis esset. My wife and daughter tender their, 
humble services by the hand of, 

Sir, 
Your most affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towa.rds Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, November 36, 98. 

SIR, Last week I received the parcel of books you 
were pleased to send me, together with a pot of diascor- 
dium, for both which I return you thanks. As for the 
latter, I know not how to excuse myself from the imputa- 
tion of impudence in writing so as you might interpret 
it a begging ; yet you should not so far have complied 
with me as to have put yourself to the charge and trouble 
of sending me a pot, but rather have governed yourself 
by that proverb, " A bold beggar must have a bold nay- 
say." By Dr. Herman's 'Paradisus Batavus' I have 
learned several things which may be of use to me, both 
in my ' Supplement' and ' Methodus Plantaram.' 

I doubt not but Mr. Petiver hath long since acquainted 
you that Father Camelli, a Jesuit, in Manilla, hath sent 
me some designs and descriptions of plants growing in 
the Philippine Islands, together with a letter, wherein 
he writes that he hath in like manner designed and 
described above 300. He seems to be well skilled in 
botanies. He is a German by nation, native of Brin, in 



348 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Moravia. His papers must be sent back again with mine 
and the Society's opinion of them, and exceptions against 
them. Mr. Petiver is of opinion that it would be well 
done, if the Society approve it, to print them in the 
' Philosophical Transactions/ because possibly they may 
else be lost, which I refer to you and them. 

I have an issue cut on each leg, which now begin to 
run, but yet afford me no relief, my sores being as painful 
and troublesome as ever. The weather falls out so 
vehemently cold, that I dare not as yet go about to dry 
them up. I am but uneasy at this instant, and therefore 
take leave, resting, 

Sir, 
Your very affectionate and much obliged 

friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

I should have desired your opinion concerning Dr. 
Colbatch's hypothesis. I have read his books, and must 
confess that I am inclinable to it, though it be directly 
contrary to the received. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., December 14, -98. 

SIR, I have hastily scribbled something concerning 
Dr. Herman's ' Paradisus,' which, if it may serve your 
turn, I have my end ; if not, there is not much time lost. 
In your last you did not give me your opinion concerning 
Dr. Colbatch's hypothesis, nor touch anything concerning 
Father Camelli's figures and descriptions of Amomum 
contrayeron and other plants, I am still full of pain and 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 349 

trouble, my issues giving me no relief. The lapis medi- 
camentosus is too sharp for me. Myself and mine are, 

Sir, 
Very much yours, 

JOHN RAY. 

Paradisus Batavus, continens plus Centum Plantes, &c. 

The learned and much celebrated herbarist, Dr. Paul 
Herman, author of this work, whose name alone is 
sufficient to recommend it to the ingenious reader, 
designed therein to give us the history of such rare and 
nondescript plants, as well European as Indian, as were 
cultivated either in public physic-gardens, or those of 
private curious persons, in and about Holland, as we see 
now accordingly performed. Of some of these he pre- 
sents us with both descriptions and figures ; of others 
with descriptions only; and of others which had been 
before described, but not delineated, with figures, refer- 
ring us for their descriptions to their first authors. Of 
the first kind, this work contains more than 100 species, 
digested in an alphabetical order. The author intended 
a second and third century, for which he had prepared 
materials, having caused many more plants to be drawn 
by hand, which are not as yet engraven, a catalogue 
whereof the editor hath added to the end of the book, 
which it were to be desired some public-spirited persons 
or societies would be at the charge of cutting in brass, 
that so great a treasure be not wholly suppressed and 
lost. 

All that I shall or need say of this piece is, that the 
descriptions are very accurate, and sufficient alone to 
lead us into a certain and unerring knowledge of the 
plants described, and withal concise, and not encumbered 
with superfluous and unnecessary stuff, which obscures 
rather than illustrates ; and that the icones are answer- 
able to the descriptions, not needing their assistance to 
give us a certain idea of the species they represent ; to 



350 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

which I may add, that they are so exactly delineated, 
and curiously engraven, that for their elegancy alone they 
may invite the curious in sculpture to purchase the book. 
But, besides the subject of the work, that is, the 
descriptions of the more rare plants therein contained, 
the author gives us some remarkable observations by the 
by, as p. 19, &c. An exact division of mallows, or mal- 
vaceous plants, which he distinguishes into two kinds. 
1. Such as bear naked seeds. 2. Such as bear seeds 
inclosed in cases or vessels. To this last kind he appro- 
priates the name of Althcea, referring the common Althaa 
of the shops to Malva strictly so called. I think it had 
been more proper, to avoid confusion and mistake, to 
have left in quiet possession of the name Althcea the plant 
on which it was imposed by the ancients, by which that 
plant is denoted in ah 1 the writings of herbarists and 
physicians, ancient and modern, and imposed a new name 
on the Indian Mallow \Hibiscus, Linn.], as M. Tournefort 
hath done, viz. Ketmia. Such as bear naked seeds he 
divides into Malvce, in specie so called, and Alcea. The 
notes of Malva he constitutes many naked semilunary seeds, 
disposed in the form of a rundle or placenta, a double calyx 
divided into eight segments, or more, as it were into so 
many leaves. Flowers made up of five leaves or petala 
joined at the bottom, and a style in the middle, furnished 
with many apices ; or, instead of such style, made up of 
many leaves. Simple leaves, alternately situate, either 
roundish or oblong, either entire and undivided, or 
divided, but not deeply. Those called by the name of 
Alcea are, he saith, of two kinds. Those of the first kind 
agree in their principal parts with Mallows [Malva], only 
their stalks and leaves are somewhat more rough, and 
these divided into narrower and deeper lacineae, or jags. 
Their flowers have no petala in the middle, but a style 
with many apices, proceeding sometimes singly, sometimes 
many together, out of the bosoms of the leaves. Those 
of the latter kind have naked triangular seeds, five for 
the most part, rarely more or fewer, close joined together 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 351 

into a head, either of a smooth surface, or echinated 
after the manner of Xanthium. Their calyces are 
divided into five segments, their flowers like those of 
the precedent kind, but less ; their leaves either entire, 
only nicked in the edges, resembling the leaves of horn- 
beam, elm, or mulberry, or divided less or more deeply 
into lobes. Those of the second kind, or Indian Mallows, 
which he calls by the name of Alth<e<e, bring forth seeds, 
either angulose or round, in vessels divided into five cells, 
more or fewer, of different form and magnitude, having 
malvaceous flowers and calyces, leaves alternately situate, 
some whole, some divided into lobes, some deeply 
laciniatfcfl. 

Another remark he gives us concerning the plants 
called by the distinct names of Apocyna, or Dogsbane, 
Asclepiases, or Swallow-worts, and Neria, or Rosebays, 
which three he reduces to one kind : the characteristic 
whereof he makes Siliqua, or cods of one piece, opening 
longways, and containing seeds piled one upon another 
imbricatim, each having a long appendant filament of 
down. For, whereas some make the difference between 
these to be, that the Swallow- worts have single cods suc- 
ceeding each flower, but the Dogsbanes and Nerias, or 
Rosebays, double, and that the Neria are shrubby, or 
arborescent plants, containing a limpid, or yellowish 
juice, whereas the Apocyna yield a milk. He shows that 
these notes are not proper to one kind, but agree pro- 
miscuously to all the rest ; for sometimes the Swallow- 
worts bear single cods (he might have said always, 
according to the intention of nature), and on times 
solitary or single. Neither doth Neria only grow up to 
the magnitude and stature of a tree, or contain a limpid 
yellow juice, but also some sorts of Apocyna. Neither 
doth Swallow- wort only yield a limpid watery juice, but 
[some] sorts of Apocyna also. Besides, though this juice 
in Swallow-wort be limpid in the beginning of summer, 
yet towards autumn it grows thick and m . . . , as 
Fab. Columna hath observed. Of these Apocyna, which 



352 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

are very nu[mer]ous, he gives us a catalogue, containing 
both those observed by himself, and those described by 
others, which he distinguishes into two kinds : 1. Erect. 
2. Scandent. 3. He gives us an enumeration of such 
plants as may be comprehended [under] the general name 
of Aron, the characteristic whereof he makes to be a 
Ba[tavian] plant, having a monopetalous cucullate flower, 
whereof there are fo... sorts, called by the name of Aron, 
Arisarum, Dracontium, and Colocasia . Arisarum differs 
from Aron in being less and slenderer in all its parts. 
Colocasia from both, in having smooth, umbilicate leaves, 
without any. .spots. 1. Footstalk inserted not in the 
end, but in the middle of the leaf, after the manner of 
the Cotyledones; flowers sometimes single, sometimes 
more than one proceeding out' of the same folliculate 
footstalk, a style thicker and shorter than Aron, and 
terminating in a slender point. . Dracontium differs from 
Aron and the rest, in having a leaf deeply laciniated or 
divided into many jaggs. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mmeo di Plante rare delta Sicilia, Malta, Corsica, 
Italia, Piemonte e Germania, 8fc. di Don Paolo 
Boccone, fyc. 

The learned and ingenious author of this work, Signor 
Paolo Boccone, a gentleman of Sicily, botanist to the 
great Duke of Tuscany, and now a monk of the Cistercian 
order, of the province of Sicily, having changed his 
prsenomen into Sylvius, hath rendered himself well 
known to the learned world by his writings published 
many years since, viz. his ' Icones et Descriptiones 
Variorum Plantarum Sicilias, Melitae, Gallia?, and Italic,' 
printed at Oxford in the year 1674. And his letters 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 353 

about several natural curiosities, which he entitles 
'Recherches et Observations Naturelles,' Paris, 1671; 
Amsterdam, 1674; and ' Recherches et Observations 
Curieuses/ Paris, 1671, written in French, and printed 
at Amsterdam. In this present work he gives us a large 
collection of rare plants, the greatest part whereof are 
new and nondescript, curiously delineated and engraven 
in 130 octavo plates, which he divides into decades, 
inscribing each decade to a Venetian nobleman. Two 
defects there are in this work ; the one want of. method, 
the other of descriptions. 1 . As for method, there is 
none at all observed in it, the species being . promis- 
cuouslyafcd indiscreetly placed as they came to hand, 
without any order or connexion. 2. Besides the names, 
the stature, and magnitude/ the places where he found 
them, or the persons 'from whom He received them, lie 
hath to a great number of. these plants added no descrip- 
tions of the principal parts, root, stalks, leaf, flower, fruit. 
This though he endeavours to excuse, p. 171, by telling 
us that he writes to such as are advanced in the know- 
ledge of botanies, who need no long descriptions, and to 
whom they would be rather tedious than useful, and not 
to novices, yet can he not easily persuade us but that 
concise exact descriptions would ease the greatest pro- 
ficients of much trouble in rinding out and exactly deter- 
mining the species. He had also obliged us if he had 
given us the synonyms of such as he took to have been 
described by others before him, together with the names 
of the authors of such synonyms and descriptions. This 
also he endeavours to excuse by want of time and books. 
Yet all this notwithstanding we ought rather thankfully 
to accept what he hath done, by enriching the history of 
plants with such a multitude of new species, than to 
censure or reprehend him for what we apprehend he hath 
omitted, which he might have done. 

Besides this main subject of this work, the author 
intermixes many curious observations and remarks, phy- 
siological and medicinal. As, for instance, he tells us 

23 



354 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

that because we find not either among the ancients or 
moderns any alkalick medicine drawn only from a simple 
vegetable, without any other preparation but mere tritu- 
ration, therefore he will in this observation (which is the 
second in number) communicate an antacid medicine of 
much efficacy in curing the biting of a mad dog, of a 
viper or other serpent, of fevers, colics, wounds, &c., 
called by the Palermitans sanatados, which is only a 
part of a plant of no great account among herbarists ; in 
brief, it is nothing else but the sponge of the dog-rose, 
called by some bedeguar, dried and grossly pulverized. 
For this biting of a viper, after scarification and cupping, 
sprinkle upon the wound the powder of sanatados, and 
afterwards give to drink in generous wine a good quantity 
of the same powder several times. For the biting of a 
mad dog, give of the same powder inwardly, and apply 
it outwardly to the wound, first moistened in strong 
wine, or oil olive ; in like manner use it for the stinging 
of a scorpion. For continual fevers it is to be often 
taken in broth or other meats. Several other diseases he 
mentions in which it is useful, especially the colic, the 
pains whereof, being given to drink in red wine, to the 
quantity of about a drachm, it mitigates in half an hour's 
time. One thing I cannot but wonder at, that Signer 
Boccone should take no notice that the root of this rose 
had been of old celebrated by Pliny for the cure of the 
hydrophobia, as a medicine revealed in a dream (Hist. 
Nat. 1. xxv, c. 2, and 1. viii, c. 4), in these words : 
" Insanabilis ad hosce annos fuit rabidi canis morsus, 
pavorem aqua? potusque omnis afferens odium. Nuper 
cujusdam militantis in prasterio mater vidit in quiete, ut 
radicem sylvestris rosae blanditu sibi aspectu pridie in 
frutecto, mitteret filio bibendam. In Lusitania res gere- 
batur proxima Hispaniae parte ; casuque accidit, ut milite 
a morsu canis incipiente aquas separescere superveniret 
epistola orantis ut pareret religioni, servatusque est ex 
insperato, et postea quisquis auxilium simile tentavit." 
2. Another observation he gives us concerning the 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 355 

seed of Sophia chintrgomm, or Flixweed [Sisymbrium 
Sophia, Linn.], which being taken in wine or broth 
entire, without reducing to powder, stops vomiting of 
blood, and cures the dysentery or bloody flux, from 
whence the plant hath its name in English, which doth 
not succeed if it be well pounded or beaten to powder ; 
the reason whereof he assigns to be, because the oily 
substance, which is more apt to dissolve than to coagulate, 
is loosened by pounding, and separated from the other 
parts. 

A third observation we shall mention is, that in many 
plants the flower receives its tincture or colour from the 
root, fle instances in the greater Celondine \Chelido- 
nium majus, Linn.], whose roots and flowers are of a yellow 
or saffron colour. The Barbery [Berberis vulgaris, Linn.], 
or Oxantha, which also hath both roots and flower of a 
yellow. The Dentellaria of Rondeletius [Plumbago euro- 
pcea, Linn.], whose roots and flowers agree in the same 
vinous or grisdelin colour. The Acacia indica Aldini, 
&c. The reason whereof he assigns, because the more 
fixed parts, wherein the colour consists, preserve the same 
tincture without being altered by a long circulation they 
make to the flower. Hence he observes that those plants 
are more fit for dying cloth which are lignose, and have 
their root agreeable in colour with the flower. 

4. He gives us out of Ccesalpinm the preparation of 
cate (which he takes to be the same with catechu}, which 
is the inspissate juice of the Lycium indicum [Barleria 
hystrix, Linn. ?], or tree called cadira by the Indians, 
which they thus prepare : they divide the heart (medulla) 
of the tree into thin slices, which they grind upon a 
marble such as painters use, and boil the powder in a 
sufficient quantity of water for twenty-four hours, and 
then strain it. This decoction they boil again beyond 
the consistency of honey, but not so hard as wax, of 
which they make pastilli, which, being dried, are out- 
wardly black, but inwardly reddish. This opinion he 
rather adheres to than that of a late learned traveller in 



356 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

India, who asserts catechu to be made up of the juice 
of the fruit of Areca or Faugel, and a certain mineral 
earth of that place. 

5. He presents us with a sort of pistachio tree, which 
he calls Pistacium mas siculum folio nigricante [Pistacia 
trifolia, Linn.], which produces no esculent fruit, being 
by itself barren, though in respect of the female, which it 
impregnates with fruit, it may be said to be fruitful. 
Then he gives us the notes of distinction between the 
male and female pistachio, and tells us how the country- 
men ingravidate the female with the flowers of the male, 
viz. : they wait till the female hath its flowers explicated. 
Then they take at their discretion many flowers of the 
male which are in bud and just ready to open, and put 
them into a vessel, and having encompassed them with 
earth moistened with water, they hang this vessel with 
the flowers on a branch of the female pistachio, and there 
leave it till the flowers be dried, so that the powder 
which they scatter may more easily, by the help of the 
wind, be dispersed over all the branches of the tree, and 
ingravidate them with fruit. Other more compendious 
ways he mentions, which the countrymen use of scatter- 
ing the dust or powder of the flowers of the male upon 
the female. He tells us that the male for the most part 
flowers and scatters its prolific powder before the female 
puts forth its blossoms, which happens in most plants 
supposed to differ in sexes, and what provision they make 
in that case. This being the general practice in Sicily 
must needs depend upon observation, that without so 
doing the trees would not be fruitful, or at least not to 
that degree, and confirms the opinion that there is in 
plants also a difference of sex. 

This whole observation about the pistachios he inserts 
also into his Museo di Fisica and di Esperienze 
Variato, &c. 

6. He brings an observation concerning a woman of 
Chambery, in Savoy, who, being afflicted with a fierce 
apoplexy, after various medicines in vain used, grew lame 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 357 

on her whole left side from head to foot, whom an em- 
piric undertaking to cure spent eight boccale of aqua vitas 
and twelve pounds of camphire upon her in six weeks, 
anointing every morning and evening the whole part 
affected without any benefit at all. The woman, mean- 
time, was with child, and, without suffering any incon- 
venience, at her due time brought forth a son, otherwise 
perfect, save that all his bones were so soft and tender 
that he could not bear himself up on his feet, the bones 
of his legs, as also his arms and hands, being so tender 
that they seemed flexible tendons ; and in this case he 
lived eighteen months. This effect he, and not without 
reason, attributes to the camphire. 

I have often wondered how outlandish authors should 
so grossly mistake in the orthography of English words 
we find in their writings, but by an observation in this 
book concerning the Serpentaria virginiana (the name 
and a tolerable description thereof Signor Boccone had 
from one Edward Painthen), I perceive how it might 
come to pass, viz. they received these words from some 
illiterate Englishmen, and put them down according to 
the pronunciation, spelling them as words of such sound 
and pronunciation in their own language are spelled. 
So, doubtless, Edward Painthen pronouncing the word 
snake-root as the Italians do, snecrut (we often pronounc- 
ing a as they do e, and they having no double o), Signor 
Boccone writes it snecrut. But because he desires fur- 
ther satisfaction concerning this Serpentaria virgin., or 
snake-root, I shall give him and others that concur with 
him in that desire a full and exact description of the 
whole plant, drawn up and sent me by a person that 
knew it very well, and was as well able to describe it, 
the learned and most skillful herbarist, Mr. John Banister, 
whose unhappy and untimely death cannot sufficiently be 
deplored. 

The Pistolochia, or Serpentaria virginiana* hath a 

* Linnaeus refers the Serpentaria virginiana of Boecone to his owu 
Satureja virginiana, and that of Ray to his Aristolochia Serpentaria. 



358 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

bushy root, consisting of a number of small strings of a 
yellowish colour, and hot aromatic scent and taste, thence 
grows one or two smooth, at least very little hairy stalks, 
round, and most commonly upright, not square nor 
trailing. The leaves grow alternately on this side and 
that, one at a joint or knee. They are thin, long, and 
pointed, coming in like a heart at the footstalk, a little 
hairy above, and rough with many protuberant veins 
underneath, and in handling they stick a little to the 
fingers. Near the ground grow one or two hollow 
flowers, each upon its proper footstalk, different in form 
from the Pytolochia retica, or any other yet known ; 
all whose flowers (if authors' figures or the plants them- 
selves dried rightly inform me) resemble a cow's horn, 
the top growing to the rudiment of the seed-vessel, and 
the open end cut slanting like a drenching-horn, whereas 
this of ours terminates with a heel, which supports a 
broad round galericulated lip, the centre of which opens 
into the hollow of the flower. The lip of a light russet 
or dirt colour. The seed-vessel is hexagonal, shaped like 
a pear, when full-grown nearly half an inch in diameter. 
It is not an evergreen, but after the seeds are ripe the 
leaves and stalks begin to wither [and] decay. It flowers 
in May, and its seeds are ripe in August. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Dec. 28, 98. 

SIR, I approve much your judgment of Colbatch, but 
yet I think acids may cure the gout. There is a gentle- 
man now living who was perfectly cured of the gout after 
it was come to be tophous, only by drinking Tunbridge 
waters. I thought to have put an account of Boccone's 
second book in this paper, but I have expatiated too far 
upon this. I thank the R. S. for so favorably accepting 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 359 

any of my poor endeavours. I shall shortly send you 
Father Camelli's papers. I am in constant pain, no 
means I have hitherto used affording any ease or relief. 
My wife salutes you with tender of her humble service. 
I rest, 

Sir, 
Your obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. LHWYD to Mr. RAY. 

DEAR SIR, I know not whether I ever mentioned to 
you (though you have probably frequently observed it 
yourself) in what manner the bats are lodged in the 
caves during winter. The caves of this country (to 
mention that by the by) are always (I speak of the 
inland caves), in limestone, and in such places only are 
all our subterraneous brooks, which in Wales are no 
great rarity. In these caves the bats choose the driest 
apartments, where, planting their talons to the roof, they 
cover their bodies with their wings, and so, hanging per- 
pendicularly in great numbers (but so as they touch not 
each other), they sleep for some months. 

D61 Gelhey, Jan. 21, 9|. 



360 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, This day a large tiger was baited by three bear- 
dogs, one after another. The first dog he killed j the 
second was a match for him, and sometimes he had the 
better, sometimes the dog ; but the battle was at last 
drawn, and neither cared for engaging any farther. The 
third dog had likewise sometimes the better and some- 
times the worse of it, and it came also to a drawn 
battle. But the wisest dog of all was a fourth, that 
neither by fair means nor foul could be brought to go 
within reach of the tiger, who was chained in the middle 
of a large cockpit. The owner got about 300 for this 
show, the best seats being a guinea, and the worst 5s. 
The tiger used his paws very much to cuff his adversaries 
with, and sometimes would exert his claws, but not 
often, using his jaws most, and aiming at under or upper 
sides of the^neck, where wounds are dangerous. He had 
a fowl given him alive, which, by means of his feet and 
mouth, he very artfully first plucked and then eat ; the 
feathers, such as got into his mouth, being troublesome. 
The remainders of his drink in which he has lapped, is 
said by his keeper to kill dogs and other animals that 
drink after him, being by his foam made poisonous and 
ropy. I hope you will pardon this tedious narration, 
because I am apt to think it is very rare that such a 
battle happens, or such a fine tiger is seen here. 

I am, &c. 

London, March 9, 169|. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 



Black Notley, March 14, 9g. 

SIR, Yours of the 9th instant I received Friday last, 
and next post came to hand a letter from Mr. Smith, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 361 

who, I perceive, is unwilling to let go his hold of my 
Supplement, and tells me at last that he supposes it will 
be convenient that I have the copy down again to review, 
and augment what I can, and that he doubted not but that 
they should do all things to my content ; that he could 
not write more fully, because his partner was out of town. 
I had written to him to send me his final answer whether 
he would undertake the printing of my book this sum- 
mer, and begin it May next, or no. If he answered 
negatively, I would endeavour to procure it to be printed 
by some other means ; and that if he did not return 
answer to that letter in convenient time, I should interpret 
his sil&Rce as a denial, and act accordingly. But con- 
cerning my intercourse with him I have written more 
fully to Dr. Robinson. I now desire you would please 
to send down to me your Maryland plants, and the copy 
of my Supplement, if it may stand with your convenience, 
this week. 

By my being so affected and hurt by tl^e coldness of 
the air, I guess the gentleman you mention was of the 
same temper with myself. Cold was always my great 
enemy, and very afflictive to me. When I was young I 
was every winter much troubled with itching tumours on 
my feet, whifeh in this country we call Uoudy fals, but 
never exulcerated chilblains ; whether these ulcers I now 
have are of the nature of chilblains or pernios I am not 
fully resolved, because they spread and diffuse themselves 
by little red flat tumours more after the manner of an 
herpes. I have been of opinion, and am not yet quite 
off it, that those little red flat tumours were nothing else 
but the nests of insects making cuniculi under the scarf- 
skin, and so spreading and diffusing themselves in the 
skin ; these tumours answering to ant-hills in pasture, 
the insects being gregarious. 

I shall be very willing and forward to serve the R. S. 
in assisting the carrying on. of whatever methods they 
shall pitch upon as most convenient for the vigorous 
prosecution of the ends of their institution, but I do not 



362 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 

see how I can be any way instrumental or subservient 
thereto. 

I thank you for your account of the tiger's combat 
with the dogs. That creature was very rarely seen at 
Rome itself. I wonder how they got it here. Surely it 
is no true Asiatic tiger, but an American. I take leave 
and rest, Sir, 

Your much obliged and affectionate 

friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
- at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Blooms bury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

JB. N., March 22, 9|. 

SIR, The parcel you sent last week I received on 
Saturday, which, when I had opened, I was very much 
taken with the beauty of the dried plants, indeed I 
cannot say that ever I saw the like spectacle ; such large 
and fair samples of rare and nondescript plants, so 
curiously and exactly extended and preserved, and so 
many of them ; and could not but wish that they might 
be drawn, engraven, and published. But, alas ! I find, as 
I told you, that I can make but poor work with them ; 
the fruit or seed scarce to be seen, at least perfectly 
discerned, in any of them ; neither the colour or figure of 
the flower, without marring the specimens, which it were 
a great pity to do ; the stature to be known but in few, 
and nothing of the root. Those that gathered them 
might easily have given an account of all these, as also of 
the place where they were found. For my part, I am 
loth my work should want such an ornament, yet am I 
afraid to meddle with them, having not been conversant 
among dried plants, especially Indian and American. I 
arn at a loss what to do in this case, and want your 
advice. I was in hopes that both the collectors and 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 363 

yourself had named them, added some notes and re- 
marks upon them ; but, alas ! I find none, so that I am 
in a wilderness, and at a great uncertainty. But enough 
of complaints. So soon as I shall have finished what 
additions I have to make to my Supplement out of 
Herman and Boccone, I shall more pressely and particu- 
larly consider and compare these Maryland plants, and 
see whether I can impose convenient names on any of 
them without committing too many mistakes, as I must 
certainly do by conjectures, if 1 should indulge myself to 
make many. I am, Sir, 

Yours in all offices of love and service, 
- JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., April 15, 99. 

SIR, I must beg your pardon for my slothfulness in 
thus long deferring to answer yours of March 16th. I 
have been since busy in inserting the collections I have 
lately made out of Herman and Boccone into my Sup- 
plement; and in viewing and reviewing the parcels of 
dried plants you were pleased to send. Yet I would 
gladly see and have some conference with Dr. Kreig and 
Sir. Vernon, before I take any notes of them. I thank 
you for the account of the whale, but have not as yet 
had leisure to compare it with Sibbald's. I doubt not 
but it is one of those by him described. For my own 
part, though I have taken a great deal of pains, yet have 
I made but little progress in the History of Insects. The 
most that I have done is in observing the generation and 
transmutations of the papilionaceous tribe, of which I 
have found at least 200 species near my own habitation, 
ncidmn finitce, every year bringing new ones to my 
knowledge. Of these, as many as I could get the eggs 



364 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

or caterpillars of, I have fed and endeavoured to bring to 
their changes, though I have failed in many. This hath 
taken me up no small time and pains ; and yet if I had 
not taken this course I had never seen abundance which 
now I have knowledge of. The other tribes of insects I 
have not been so diligent and curious in observing, yet 
have I made collections of such as came in my way. 

The next tribe I intended to have fixed upon after I 
had despatched Papilios was Beetles, which are no less 
numerous, and whose way of generation is the same with 
Papilios, and which may be as easily fed and brought to 
change as they. But, alas ! my glass is almost out, and 
I am so afflicted with pains, that I have no heart to pro- 
ceed any further. Indeed I could do very little all last 
summer, and I must alii lampada tradere. 

As for a method of insects, we need no better in my 
judgment than Dr. Swammerdam's, in his ' History of 
Insects,' which is the best book that ever was written on 
that subject. My wife and relatives salute you with the 
tender of their humble services, so I take leave, and rest, 
Sir, 

Your most affectionate and obliged friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, June 2, 99. 

SIR, Since I wrote last to you, I have, with what 
care and consideration I could, viewed and compared 
your Maryland dried plants, and find that I can make 
but poor work with them. They all, save one or two, 
want roots, and I can determine the stature of but few of 
them certainly. The figure and number of petala in the 
flower can clearly be discerned scarce in any, nor the 
colour. The seed-vessel and seed are wanting or imper- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 365 

feet in most ; so that it is a very hard matter for me, 
who am a stranger to them, to determine the genus. I 
was in hope to have seen Dr. Krieg here, who could have 
informed me of all these particulars ; but now I hear that 
he is speedily leaving England. I wish you would please 
to inform me which of them are common to Jamaica, 
and described by you in your elaborate and exact Natural 
History of that island, if you remember or have taken 
notes of such, if not it must be deferred till the plants 
are remitted, for I would be loth to multiply and make 
two or three species of one. 

Your Herman's ' Parad. Bat.' and Boccone's two 
books ^intend to remit by next week's carrier, with 
thanks for the use of them. I must beg your pardon for 
having in some measure defaced them .... by sullying 
them myself, being forced to use them by the fireside, 
and partly by a child's unluckily scattering ink upon 
them. I intend to have the books myself, and if you 
please to send me back these again, I will order Mr. 
Smith to get them bound for you in the same manner 
that these are. 

I have now agreed with Mr. Smith and partner about 
printing my Supplement ; they 'are to give me for the 
copy in proportion as Mr. Fairthorne and Motte gave for 
the History itself, viz. thirty pounds in money and twenty 
copies bound; and I have permitted to procure what 
subscriptions they can to save themselves harmless. This 
I thought best to do, because there is such a discourage- 
ment put upon the book trade, and because I am told 
that should I have undertaken to publish it myself, suffi- 
cient subscriptions would with great difficulty have been 
procured, and I must have put myself and friends to a great 
deal of trouble, which by this means is avoided. 

I am, Sir, 
Yours entirely (cum tota sequela), 

JOHN RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloorasbury square, London. 



366 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, 1 have detained your Maryland plants too long, 
it is now time to think of returning them, which I intend 
shortly to do. I have now reduced most of them ; some 
I cannot, and so must let them pass, lest I refer them to 
wrong genera, and impose false names upon them. To 
some I have put labels inscribed with their titles, in 
which if I have erred, when you shall have received them, 
I desire you would rectify me. My undertakers are 
extreme dilatory, and have not as yet published their 
proposals for subscriptions. I do not well understand 
their meaning in it. 

I have lately received another letter from Tentzelius, in 
which I find him very desirous to know the judgment of 
the Royal Society about his opinion concerning the bones 
dug up at Tonna. His words are these : " Te interce- 
dente a Doctissimo Societatis vestras secretario literas 
exspecto. Ex fronte epistolae mead ad Magliabechium 
facile cognoscet characterem meum, et ex ejusdem calce, 
urbem in qua vivo. Summo enim desiderio teneor 
videndi judicium inclyta* Societatis vestra3, cujus defectus 
hactenus impedivit, quo minus uno libello includerentur 
quaecunque ex Germania, Gallia, Italia, Belgio, aliisque 
regionibus de elephanto nostro ad me sunt perlata." I 
wish this Society would satisfy him one way or other. 

I am at present somewhat ill and indisposed, and shall 
only add the tender of my wife's very humble service, 
and that I am, 

Sir, 
Your much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 
Black Notley, Aug. 16, 99. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 367 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Sept. 13, 99. 

SIR, I have this morning sent back your Maryland 
plants, excepting one that was taken out and pat in a book 
to be observed and described, and shall be returned again 
the next parcel I send. I hope these plants have received 
no considerable harm or damage. Some could not be 
avoided, in so shuffling and removing them. For I have 
taken the freedom to put those of a kind together, with- 
out respect to whose collection they belonged. I have also 
put the,jjames and titles to a good part of them, with 
references to Plukenet, &c. To some I have put none, 
partly such as are well known, I mean their genuses, 
partly such whose genera are to me unknown, concerning 
which I desire light and information from you. I return 
you many thanks for the use of them, and accept of the 
kind offer of the sight of your collection from the Magellan 
Straits, which I desire you would please to send me so 
soon as may stand with your convenience. 

1 have no way of conveying a letter to Tentzelius but 
through the hands of Dr. Hotton, Professor of Physic and 
Botanies in Ley den. I suppose a letter delivered into the 
post-house, with a proper direction, would pass quicker 
and surer to him. 

I have not lately heard from Mr. Smith and Walford : 
I perceive they will not begin to act till next term, if then ; 
and then, if they cannot procure subscriptions enough to 
save themselves harmless, they will (I believe) lay the 
work quite aside. Possibly, if my friends would use their 
interest to procure subscriptions, I might be enabled to 
print it at my own charge, but that is not certain ; and 
besides, it would be a business of great trouble, and I 
know not who to employ in it. I am still pained with 
the sores on my legs. I am now come to the use of strait 
stockings and bandage, from which I have great expecta- 
tion of ease and relief, having seen the experience thereof 



368 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

in the like case in a neighbour or two of mine. I have as 
yet made trial but in one leg, which is already much better 
by it. I should be ungrateful should I not acknowledge 
my great obligation to you for your constant and un- 
wearied kindness expressed in many real effects of bene- 
ficence to me. My wife gives you her most humble 
service. I humbly recommend you to the Divine pro- 
tection and blessing, resting, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Nov. 22, 99. 

SIR, It is now a long time since 1 received a letter 
from you. I was in hopes you would have sent me advice 
of the receipt of your Maryland plants, for the shuffling 
and transposing whereof I am to beg your excuse. I 
hoped also you would have given me the sight and use of 
the plants received from the Straits of Magellan, and some 
account of your answer to Tentzelius. I hope you have 
not taken offence at any action or miscarriage of mine 
towards you. I am sure I should be very loth to give 
any to such a friend. 

I understand that Mr. Smith hath played the fool, and 
spoke to you again for the books I have already perused 
and collected out of. I wrote to him to send me those 
books (thinking he had them in his shop) for my own 
private use, to lay by me, to have recourse to upon occa- 
sion. He fancied that I sent for them in order to the 
filling up my Supplement. Hist. ; and so, without my 
order, spoke to you for them. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 369 

I am in sad pain, and have little heart to write or to do 
anything else : the days are so short, that the forenoon is 
almost wholly spent in dressing my sores, which are now 
more troublesome than ever, notwithstanding I have used 
fomentations, traumatic drinks, mercurial purges, &c. I 
pray what think you of vomiting with Turbith mineral, 
which is recommended to me as a medicine which will 
certainly give ease. I am, 

Sir, 
Your much obliged affectionate friend 

and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

My "rwfe salutes you with the tender of her very humble 
service. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Dr. HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

London, Nov. 25, 1699. 

SIR, I saw this day the strong Kentish man ; he lifted 
up about 2000 Ib. weight, broke a rope that would lift 
up about 3000 Ib., and kept himself from being pulled 
out of his place by a very strong dray-horse. He has 
nothing appears outwardly to give him such force. 



Mr. J. MORTON, of Oxendon, in Northamptonshire, to Mr. BAY. 

What are your thoughts of the origin of that concrete 
juice [Manna] collected from the leaves of the Calabrian 
Ash? Is it not an exudation, occasioned by insects 
opening orifices in the leaves with their terebella? ? The 
exudations of the leaves of oaks, ashes, and other plants 
in England, I think I can show are frequently occasioned 
by these means. Of which, see Mr. Morton's ' Nat. Hist, 
of Northamptonshire/ 

Jan. 15, 1700. 

24 



370 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Feb. 19, 1700. 

SIR, I received yours with the inclosed from Dr. 
Preston, for which I thank you. When you write next to 
him be pleased to tell him, that I return him many thanks 
for the pains he hath taken in my behalf, and that I intend 
shortly to answer the particulars of his letter. As to my 
' Methodus Emendata,' it lies by me finished, and ready 
for the press, but I believe will hardly ever be printed. 
No bookseller will undertake it, and Dr. Robinson writes 
me, that the undertakers for Mr. Lhwyd's 'Lithophy- 
lacium,' complain that they are losers by it, so that 
nothing is to be attempted that way. Mr. Smith and 
Walford at present are very busy in endeavouring to pro- 
cure subscriptions for my Supplement, which, if they 
shall fail them, I believe they will not undertake it, and 
so that also is in danger to be suppressed. 

Being much indisposed at present by a diarrhoea pretty 
violent upon me, I can add no more, but the tender of 
my wife and daughters' very humble service to you, and 
thanks for the obligations you have laid upon them, and 
that I am, 

Sir, 

Your very much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

I had almost forgot the particular business that in- 
duced rne to write at this uneasy time, viz. that I have 
sent you this morning by carrier Dr. Preston's dried 
plants. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 371 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, April 13, 1700. 

SIR, Upon reading your letter of the 6th instant, I 
could not but be moved with indignation against those 
vile rogues, who, when they failed in their attempt of 
breaking open your house, were so malicious as to set it 
on fire. I congratulate with you your deliverance from 
so great* a danger, and humbly thank God on your 
behalf. 

The scurrilous pamphlet entitled the ' Transactioneer' 
I did always believe to be no better than you repre- 
sent it. 

And for Dr. Plukenet, I look upon him as an ill-natured 
man, and liable to mistakes, however confident and self- 
conceited he may be, that I say nothing of his unskillful- 
ness and want of exactness in the Latin and Greek 
tongues. His arrogance and overweening opinion of 
himself and his performances appears by that heruisti- 
chium prefixed to his ' Phytography,' Nil nisi prtemia 
desunt. 

I do not urge the sending me your Magellan Straits 
plants ; I am in no haste for them, but can well wait 
your leisure. 

I did not expect so great and rich an addition to my 
Supplement of History, as you tell me Dr. Sherard in- 
tends generously to contribute, in which respect it is well 
my undertakers were so dilatory in beginning upon it. It 
will be greatly for the advantage of the work, if ever it 
come to be published. I should be very glad to see 
Dr. Sherard, and to have some conference with him, 
though loth I am he should put himself to the trouble 
and expense of such a journey for my sake. Please to give 
my service to him, and tell him so much. 



372 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Your intended present of sugar doth so far exceed my 
merit or expectation, that I may justly be ashamed to 
accept it. We are so far obliged already for largesses of 
this and other kinds, that we want ability to make you 
any amends. All we can do is to retain a grateful memory 
of your kindness, and to own the obligation. My wife 
and daughters return their very humble services and 
thanks to you. 

Dr. Touniefort's ' Institutions' may be of use to me as 
to the ' Methodus Plantarurn Emendata,' which I have 
ready for the press, both for the correcting of some mis- 
takes which possibly I may have committed, and the 
enlarging of it by new observations. I have done when 
I have told you that I am, 

Sir, 

Your very much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 



Dr. WOOD to Mr. HAT. 

Kilkenny, July 18, 1700. 

HONOURED SIR, Prunella is a plant esteemed by all 
authors and practitioners that I have met with, to be a 
vulnerary, and used only in that case, and the distemper 
whence it takes its name, wherein it is effectual on the 
same account : but the natives of this country, who pre- 
tend to great skill in herbs, give it frequently (boiled in 
posset-drink) in all sorts of common continual fevers, I 
mean all but malignant ones, and expect great matters 
from it. And some give it also in intermitting fevers : 
but I have not been able to judge whether it be so 
effectual as they pretend, or no, because commonly other 
medicines are also given. I am credibly informed that 
it is used in the same case in several parts of Wales, where 
they call it by the same name with the Irish, Cannavan 
Beg. I would gladly be informed whether you have 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 373 

known it made use of to this purpose, and with what 
success. 

An ingenious friend of mine frequently troubled with 
the gout, has sometimes found ease by applying Bardana 
\Arctium Lapp a, Linn.] to the part affected. Being 
lately afflicted with this distemper in his foot, he was 
desirous to make use of the same remedy ; but by a 
mistake he applied a leaf vl Petasites \Tmsilago Petasites t 
Linn.] instead of Bardana, and being somewhat short- 
sighted, did riot presently perceive the mistake, until 
morning, he was surprised with a speedier cure than he 
expected. For whereas the Bardana was wont to give 
him eaSC in three or four days' time, the Petasites had in 
one night wonderfully relieved him, insomuch that the 
pain and inflammation were wholly gone, and the tumour 
in a great measure abated. Since that time he has been 
very free from this distemper, but does almost long for 
another fit, that he might have the opportunity of repeat- 
ing this experiment. I have not since he gave me this 
account had an opportunity of making use of this plant in 
this case, but question not I soon shall, the gout being of 
late years become very common in this country ; and if I 
find it any way successful, you may expect to hear 
from me. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Aug. 14, 1700. 

SIR, You are pleased still to lay fresh obligations upon 
me, and load me with kindnesses. I may justly be 
ashamed to receive so many favours from you, and to re- 
turn nothing but empty thanks, and yet that is all I am 
capable of doing, and therefore all you are to expect from 
me ; who yet retain a will of making amends, if either you 
needed or desired it, or my condition and circumstances 



374 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

should mend, which yet I have little reason to hope in that 
short time I have to live in this world. I must acknow- 
ledge myself also obliged very much to Dr. Sherard for so 
frankly communicating his vast collections of rare and 
nondescript plants for the enriching of my work ; though 
the ordering and naming of them, with brief notes of dis- 
tinction added, is a business above my strength, who have 
seen none of them growing, nor am sufficiently versed in 
dried plants to be able to judge of them aright. 

Some of the books Dr. Sherard mentioned to you, espe- 
cially Mr. Bobart's History, I would willingly see as soon 
as may be, that I may finish my Method of Plants, 
which I would fain get off hand as soon as I can, that so I 
may apply myself wholly to the perfecting of this Sup- 
plement. One such task is enough to take up my 
thoughts : Pectora nostra duas non admittentia euros. 

The letter you sent me came from Father Camel. I 
doubt not but Dr. Sherard hath shown it to you. I should 
be very glad to hear that the designs and descriptions he 
mentions were received : they would be a very great advan- 
tage and ornament to my work. I cannot but look upon 
it as an effect of Providence to stir up a man so weh 1 
skilled in plants to apply himself to the inquisition, deli- 
neation, and description of the plants growing in those 
remote parts of the world, and giving an account of their 
virtues and uses. 

My wife gives you her very humble service, so I take 
leave, and rest, 

Sir, 
Your very affectionate and much obliged 

friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloom sbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 375 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Aug. 21, 1700. 

SIR, These are to acquaint you, that I received last 
week from Mr. Smith the third part of Morison's History, 
which I thought necessary to give you advice of to pre- 
vent the sending that book among the rest which you are 
pleased to favour me with the loan of, and which I shall 
run over and remit so soon as I can. I doubt whether 
my letter to Dr. Sherard found its way to him, because it 
had onl^"a loose and general description, viz. to him in 
Mark lane. I have been this day or two very ill of my 
usual distemper. My wife salutes you with the tender 
of her very humble service, and that I am, 
Sir, 

Yours entirely, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, September 18, 1700. 

SIR, I received your rich present of sugar, which 
needed no excuse either for quantity or quality, far ex- 
ceeding, I do not say the merit, for that is none, but the 
expectation of the receiver, and suitable, I should have 
thought, to the largeness of your own generosity. All 
the amends you are to expect from me is thanks, which 
I return, together with wife and daughters, whom you 
have highly gratified and obliged ; not but that I retain 
a will, if occasion offer itself and ability serve, to requite 
your kindness, and serve you to the utmost in anything 



376 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

wherein you might stand in need of assistance, but be- 
cause, in the" circumstances I am, I do not foresee any 
likelihood of that. 

This morning I sent you by. carrier M. Tournefort's 
' Institutions/ which I had done sooner had I known 
you needed them. I am now busy in running over Mr. 
Bobart's History, wherein I find more new plants than I 
expected; a great part- whereof are owing to Dr. Sherard's 
collections, so that it is likely to take me up a great deal 
of time. 

I thank God I. am able to go on with this work, though 
I have little or no absolute intermission of pain ; and so 
it is more troublesome and difficult to me by far than it 
would be were I well. I thank you for your advice, and 
do find myself at present somewhat better as to those 
particulars I mentioned. 

I have a small present for you, a little tractate of about 
half a dozen sheets of paper, which I drew up at the re- 
quest of a friend last winter, entitled, a 'Persuasive 
to a Holy Life,' &c. It hath been finished a pretty 
while, and I wonder Mr. Smith is so slow in putting it 
to sale, and that I hear nothing from him about it. 

I am, Sir, 

Your very affectionate and much obliged 
friend and servant, 

JOHN RAT. 

I suppose Dr. Sherard showed you Father Camel's 
letter to me ; I am very solicitous about the descriptions, 
designs, and draughts he mentions to have sent, and 
should be glad to hear of them. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 377 



FATHER CAMEL to Mr. RAY. 

ERUDITE DOCTISSIME AC COLENDISSIME DOMINE, 
DOMINE JOANNE RAYE. ^-Literas.tuas Notleiae in Essexia 
] 9 Januarii anni 1700 ad me datus accepi 18 Septembris 
ejusdem anni, in quibus rescribis accepisse plantas illas 
Luzonis quas mittebam . Reliquarum Iconas misi Januario 
anni 98 : sed navis a piratis intercepta fuit, et proba- 
biliter periere. Misi postea denuo Icohes plantarum 
humilitim una cum descriptionibus Januario anni 99. 
Verum ob mortem D, Samuelis Brauwne, quo devenerint 
me latet, scripsi D. Edwardo Bulkleyo Meliaporum ut 
ea requireret; ac simul literas tune pro te expeditas. 
Miraris me scripsisse Indigenas Philippinarum do- 
mestica fastidire, et negligere, peregrinis vero inhiare; 
sed hoc non sit ob defectum medicaminum domesticorum, 
verum ob cognitionis, ut scribebam, defectum. Et si 
Europam Thomas Bartholinus exoticis non indigere sentit, 
multo minus mea sententia opus habet India Europeeis. 
Nucem vomicam off. Fungum appellavi cum Ccesalpino 
et Chinensibus, non tamen pro tali habebam, cum simile 
semen, (quamvis minus) invenerim plants volubilis, et 
postea prius maceratum dissecuerim, facile in duas pla- 
centulas dispescuerim, et dividuum seminale corculum in 
ea invenerim. Pseudo-Amomum quorundam, seu Caryo- 
phyllon Plinianum Clusii suspicabar esse unam Fagarce, 
verum paulo post certior factus fui in Luzone, et adjacen- 
tibus Fagarum adolescere utramque. Pro nunc, et cum 
praesentibus plura de plantis non mitto, quia rogatus a 
D. Doctore Wilhelmo ten Rhyne, ei omnia, quae de plantis 
adnotata asservabam Bataviam misi, qui utrum ea, vel 
aliqua ex iis, forte una cum plantis. quas ipse Javae ob- 
servavit, typis mandare cogitet, ignore; certiorem te faciam 
ubi responsorias nactus fuero a D. ten Rhyne. Mitto hac 
occasione D, Jacobo Petiver (quia te morbis provecta3 



378 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

senectutis molestari considero) paucula de insectis qui- 
busdam, qui ut spero ea tecum communicavit, phira dabo 
occasione proxima. Interim vive diu felix, et annis senec- 
tutis placida salute comitatis, quam dulcissime fruere in 
annos plurimos ut ex animo precatur, 

GEORGIUS JOSEPHUS CAMELUS. 

Dabam Manila, 28 Octobris, anni 1700. 



Mr. KAY to FATHER CAMEL. 

REVERENDE PATER, AMICE COLENDISSIME, Literas 
tuas novissimas accepi superior! sestate, et post dimidii 
anni expectationem descriptiones et icones Stirpium 
Luzonicarum : pro quarum magnifico sane et gratissimo 
munere me tibi valde obnoxium et obasratum esse lubens 
agnosco, et plurimas gratias ago. Opportune admodum 
advenere : nam 'Supplementum Historic mea3 Botanic^/ 
prelo aptatum est, et jamjam imprimi cceptum, cui de- 
scriptiones tuas et historias Luzonicarum adjiciendas 
curabo, omnes una, eodem quo dispositae sunt ordine, 
praefixo nomine tuo cum debito elogio, ne si eas distra- 
herem, suisque locis secundiim methodum nostram Sup- 
plemento insererem, opus extenuarem, illud in tot 
particulas discerpendo, et longius a se invicem remo- 
vendo. Reliquas Scandentium et Arborum historias, quas 
adeo generose alia vice te missurum promittis, ut quam 
potes celerrime expedias oro, ut ante opus nostrum inte- 
grum absolutum hue appellant, suumque in eo locum 
inveniant. Icones pulcherrimas, et lucem publicam (si 
ita loqui liceat) videre dignissimas, quae descriptiones 
mirifice illustrant, a typographis et bibliopolis nostris ob 
sumptus in calchographis faciendis, ut impensis suis im- 
primant asgre, ut vereor, impetrabo. Conabor tamen 
(quantum in me est) ut id effectum reddam. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 379 

D. Petiver a te efflagitat, ut ramulos stirpium descrip- 
tarum et depictarum in schedis ad nos transmissis, ex- 
siccatos transmitters digneris, ita enim certius judicium 
de eis fieri posse, conferendo cum plantis quas ab Indiis 
exsiccatas amid plurimas transmiserunt, an scil. novae et 
nondum a se visae fuerint. Exsiccari autem posse ex- 
tensas cum noviter decerptae snnt inter chartas bibulas seu 
emporeticas reponendo, et subinde antequam putrescant 
rnutando, donee exaruerint. 

Valeas, celeberrime vir, Historiae Botanicae promo- 
vendae nate, immortali laude dignissime, et opus in quod 
tantum temporis studii et laboris impendisti, totam 
mmirufifr' Philippinarum insularum historiam naturalem, 
feliciter absolvas, ita precatur. 



Mr. J. MORTON, Rector of Oxendon, in Northamptonshire, to Mr. RAY. 

Amongst the many requests which are made to you 
by the learned world, permit me to mention one, that is, 
that you would enrich the public with the history of 
the Scripture plants ; a work which, although attempted 
by some, is certainly one of the desiderata still ; and all 
do agree you the fittest person in the world for it. 

November 23, 1700. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 



Black Notley, December 1, 1700. 

SIR, I find that you are unwearied in loading me 
with kindnesses. I lately received from one of the best 
of my friends, Dr. Hotton, that after two letters to 
Mess. Smith and Walford, to inquire whether I were 



380 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

alive, and how I did ; he could obtain no answer, where- 
upon he addressed himself to you, who presently satisfied 
him. 

I am now much worse than when I wrote to you last, 
being, by the sharpness of my pains, reduced to that 
weakness that I can scarce stand alone, so that I lay aside 
all thoughts of the History of Insects, and despair even 
of life itself. 

I remember in one of your former letters to me, you 
told me that my condition might lead to a dropsy, and 
did advise to a chalybeate course. I now find your pre- 
diction true, my feet and legs swelling and puffing on the 
least pressure. I humbly beg your advice at this time 
how I ought to do. 

My wife gives you her most humble service, so do my 
daughters. I am, 

Sir, 
Your extremely obliged, most humble, and 

obedient servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Dr. PRESTON to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, Since my arrival in Scotland, I have been so 
much diverted by business that I have got but little spare 
time to mind anything of curiosity (save this last summer 
that I made some few observations on plants), which has 
been the occasion of my long silence. Besides, I could 
not perform my promise in giving you the synonyme of 
such plants as were entered in the 'ElementaBot/ under 
a new name, and as nondescripts, and yet were old plants, 
for I wanted the Elementa Bot. And having advice from 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 381 

Paris of his [Tournefort's] publishing the Latin edition 
with all expedition, made me something remiss ; for I 
knew he would save us that trouble ; therefore I hope 
you will excuse my silence, and I shall recompense it by 
transmitting to you from time to time such observations 
as I had occasion to make. I do not propose any order 
or method in doing it, but give them you, such as they 
are, as they come to hand. I confess Tournefort in his 
Elem. Bot. hath treated both you and my countryman, 
Morison, very indiscreetly, for which I did reprove him 
while at Paris, and desired him to correct that as well as 
other things in the Latin edition, which he promised to 
do ; arilV accordingly, I find all along in his characters 
he has omitted what he said in the other edition against 
you. In this Latin edition he gives a very good account 
of the rise and progress of botany, and of the several 
writers thereof, from Hippocrates' time to our days, 
among whom Gesner, Caesalpinus, and Fabius Columna 
were the first who laid down any solid and rational prin- 
ciples of method, and for constituting the genders of plants; 
and as Tournefort says very well (Instit. Rei Herbariae) : 
" Eaque in tenebris adhuc jaceret nisi Robertus Morisonus 
Scotus earn quasi ab herbariis ab alienatum renovasset 
instaurasset et primus ad usus quotidianos adjunxisset." 
After him you have been the great restorer of method 
and ornament of botany by your several learned writings. 
Dr. Herman, whose memory is to be lamented, was a 
great promoter and follower of the same method, and 
designed to publish a short compend of it for the use of 
his scholars, if an untimely death had not prevented him, 
as may be seen in the ' Flora Batava non edita. 3 Rivinus 
has a singular method, and establishes the character from 
the number of petala in a flower. Last of all, is Tourne- 
fort, who finding so many learned men had writ before 
him, and that he could not propose to make great ad- 
vances in following the same method, therefore, to gain 
a name to himself, bethought on this new method, of 



382 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

classing the plants by their similitude in flowers, and 
distinguishing them into several genuses by their seeds 
and seed-vessels, not knowing whether the method would 
take or not : but it is no more than the other method 
inverted ; and since he has once published it, he is obliged 
to maintain and defend it, whatever inconsistencies there 
may be in it. Tournefort, indeed, is a most indefatigable 
and nice observer of nature, but I do not think that 
either his method is to be accounted the best or only 
infallible ; for it may be made appear that his method is 
as liable to objections, and he as subject to mistakes, as 
others. We are certainly obliged to the writings of those 
learned men, and every one of them deserveth just praises, 
but I think it may be done without detracting from the 
merit of others. I confess I judge it a very difficult 
matter to lay down such principles of method as will 
comprehend even the species of plants already known, 
and far less those that are yet undiscovered, or that will 
not be subject to change or admit of alteration ; for I 
find, by the few observations that I made this year, that 
a plant must be viewed in all the seasons of it before one 
can venture to give a true and exact character of it : and 
it is not one single observation that is sufficient to con- 
stitute the character of a plant, for that may escape our 
sight or memory at one time which we may discover at 
another. Besides, a plant appears under several disguises 
or shapes before its fruit come to maturity, therefore it 
must be from repeated observations in all the seasons of 
it ; for 1 have found, that after having viewed a plant 
with ah 1 the niceness and exactness imaginable at one 
season, yet on a second review I have been obliged to 
alter my thoughts ; for instance, in the Herniaria. 
Neither is it to be thought that botany alone is come to 
that height of perfection as to need no help or correction, 
or that it is less capable of improvement than other 
sciences are ; for how many new species have been dis- 
covered of late years both in East and West Indies never 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 383 

known in the world before, and how many lie hid to this 
day? Has not botany made more advances and is more 
improved in our days, by the several learned men and 
writers thereof, than for some ages past ; and I think we 
owe no less obligation to the revivers and restorers of 
method than to the first inventor. Anatomy is a science 
which it is thought might have come to its height of 
perfection long ago, by the many and frequent dissections 
on human bodies of learned and curious men, and yet we 
find several things have escaped even the knife of the 
most curious dissectors for some ages past, and are only 
discovered in our days. So it is as to botany. 

Now^ir, I shall subjoin a few of these observations 
that I have had occasion to make ; and first I begin with 
some of those in the former queries, where answers were 
not so distinct or positive, or where I have since found 
myself to have been in an error. 

Alsine scandens baccifera, C. B. P., Cucubalum Plin. 
Lugd., Tournefort \Cucubalus baccifer, Linn.], has a pen- 
tapetalous flower, " flore caryophyllo petalis bifidis calice 
pelviformi vel instar Lychnidis cujus pistillus mutatur in 
baccam vel capsulam ovalem semina plurima reniformia 
placentae adhserentia continentem." The reason it appears 
to be capsular, because it is not juicy. Tournefort (Inst. 
R. H.) places it " inter herbas flore Caryophyllio cujus 
pistillum abit in fructum," after Lychnidis species, and 
nearest to the lAni species : by reason of the flower and 
calyx it is well enough placed, but by the fruit, it ought 
rather to be placed amongst the bacciferous plants. 

Pimpinella Sanguisorba minor Icevis, C. B. P. [Pote- 
rium Sanguisorba, Linn.], has a monopetalous flower, 
divided into four segments, ad centrum usque, whose 
calyx becomes a quadrangular capsule, in which are ordi- 
narily contained two oval seeds or kernels, sharp at one 
end. Tournefort, in his Elem. Bot., gave them fores pel- 
viformes, but in his 'Inst. R. H.' places them " inter 
herbas flore monopetalo rosato cujus calix abit in fruc- 



384 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

turn/' after Moschatettina, and I think very improperly, 
for the fruit of Moschatellina is reckoned bacciferous ; 
but I could never as yet find the fruit come to any per- 
fection. There are several of the Pimpinellae species that 
seldom come to maturity, therefore it is difficult to make 
observations on them to purpose. 

Ageratum vulg. foliis serratis \Ac1iillaea Ptarmaca, 
Linn.?] I find constantly with a radiate flower, and is so 
placed by Tournefort (Inst. R. Herb., 496), so that he has 
corrected himself in this particular. 

I have been mistaken in my former account I gave you 
of Herniaria, following too much the faith of Dr. Tourne- 
fort, not having examined it nicely enough myself ; there- 
fore what I have discovered since is as follows : Herniaria 
Ger., J. B., has a tetrapetalous and herbaceous flower, 
whose pistil becomes a round membranoidous carinulate 
or straight capsule, like the fruit of the Linum catharti- 
cum, divided into eight loculaments, in each of which is 
contained one small seed, ovato-acuminatum. Besides the 
four herbaceous petala, that are green without and white 
within, it has also several stamina ; but those petala never 
become the involucra seminis. This is what I have found 
on repeated observations. Tournefort (Inst. R. H.) places 
it "inter herbas flore stamineo cujus pistillum abit in 
semen calice obvolutum;" and in the particular note 
says, " Quoad pistillum deinde abit in semen in capsula 
oblonga et striata, quse calix floris fuit, reconditum." 
But this plant cannot properly be called staniineous ; for 
the petala or calyx never become the capsule or involucra 
seminis; but they have a distinct thin membranaceous 
capsule, as above described. You have also given it a 
stamineous flower, consisting of four herbaceous petala, 
and placed it amongst the Polygonums ; but whether it 
can be properly called stamineous for the reasons above, 
I leave it for you to determine. 

Quaere if Herniaria, Ger., J. B. (page 69, Synopseos) 
[H. glabra, Linn.], be a distinct genus from Millegrana 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 385 

minima Ger. (Syn., p. 207), \_Radiola millegrana, Sm.] 
The last is placed amongst the vasculiferous plants, with 
a pentapetalous flower, but more particularly amongst 
the Alsines species, Anomalce flore tetrapetalo. This note 
seems to agree even to the Herniaria Ger., J. B., in that 
it is vasculiferous, and has a tetrapetalous flower; the 
other placed amongst the Polygonums, and you have 
given it a stamineous, but tetrapetalous flovyer : so that, 
they seem not much to differ in flower. The reason of 
my query is, because in all those I had occasion to 
meet with, both in Ericetis, on lee-grounds, and in corn- 
fields, I could never observe any difference in the charac- 
teristic r ^ut only as to the growth. I shall not question 
but there may be two distinct genuses under that name, 
but I should be glad to know if it is of your own ob- 
servation. 

Eruca maritima Anglica siliqud fmgosd Morisoni 
\_Cakile maritima, Willd.], plantse genus flore et calice 
tetrapetalo, cujus pistillus mutatur in fructum oblongum 
fungosum geniculatum et in duas capsulas divisum in 
quibus singulis unicum continetur semen oblongum. 
Tournefort (Inst. R. H., p. 212) makes this plant a species 
Crambes, under the name of Crambe maritima foliis Emc. 
latioribus fructu hastiformi ; but it does not agree to the 
character of Crambe, and therefore I think Dr. Herman 
was rather in the right, who says it has capsulam dys- 
permam. 

Anthyllis maritima lentifolia, C. B. P. [Arenaria pe- 
ploides, Linn.], is placed in your Syn. amongst the pen- 
tapetalous and vasculiferous plants, next the Alsines 
species, and I think with very good reason; for, by 
observing the plant, I find it to have a pentapetalous 
flower, and calix petalis ut plurimum bifidis cujus pistillus 
mutatur in capsulam subrotundam et acuminatum in 
cujus cavitate semina plurima rotunda et alba continentur, 
so that it may very well enter that tribe. I cannot find 
where Tournefort has placed it, except it be under the name 



386 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

of 41-sine maritima supina villosa foliis lanceolatis. (In 
appendic. Inst. R. H., p. 665.) 

Equisetum fcetidum sub aquis repens [Char a vulgaris t 
Linn.] As for the flowers of this plant, I could never 
observe it with any, sed semina profert rotunda, ad sin- 
gulos nodos foliolis adhaerentia, foliis rigidis et asperiori- 
bus et brevioribus, odor gravis. 

Equisetum non fastens sub aquis repens. Caules 
eniittit graciles glabros, intus cavos et succo viridi re- 
pletos, ad singulos nodos etiam semina profert minuta 
rotunda foliolis adhaerentia, eodem modo ut in altera 
specie quae foetida est. 

Equiscti fcetidi sub aquis repens, secunda species. This 
plant has longer, more slender, and smaller leaves than 
the former, ad Spithamae unius longitudinem crescentia, 
more greenish, et non tarn rigida ut in altera specie, sed 
semina profert minuta rotunda rubescentia ad singulos 
nodos foliolis adhaerentia ut in priori specie, odor gravis- 
simum. I know not if these two last species be de- 
scribed. 

Kali spinosum cochleatum [Salsola Kali, Linn.], plantac 
genus flore staniineo vel apetalo, cujus calix e 5 foliis 
acuminatis componitur, quse simul juncta capsulam con- 
stituunt quasi echinatam, in qua unicum continetur semen 
subrotundum spirae in modum convolutum vel cochleae 
ad instar. Tournefort (Inst. R. H., p. 247) places this 
plant inter herbas flore rosaceo cujus pistillum aut calix 
abit in fructum unicapsularem. After the Junci species, 
and next the Telephii species, in the particular note he 
says, " Quod pistillum deinde abit in fructum fere globo- 
sum membranacemn singular! semiue fcetum, cochleae ad 
instar intorto et plerumque petalis florum obvolutum." 
On very strict observation in all the seasons of it, I could 
never discover any petala but only stamina ; so that I see 
no reason for your giving it a rosaceous flower, except 
one would take those echinac leaves of the calyx for the 
petala of the flower, which I think scarce any botanist 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 387 

would do ; and if it were so, it would be still a stamineous 
flower, even according to his own sense of stamineous, if 
the petala become the involucra seminis, as he says they 
do for the most part in this. In his ' Elem. Bot/ he has 
given it also a rosaceous flower, but wanting a calyx, 
whose pistil becomes a round and membranaceous fruit, 
in which one seed is contained spirae in inodum convo- 
lutum; but neither of these characters agrees to this 
plant, for I found it constantly as above described. So 
that Tournefort must either be very far mistaken, or the 
plant must vary in different places. 

Kali minus album semine splendente, C. B. P. \_Cheno- 
podiuttomaritimum, Linn. ; Schoberia maritime*, C. A. Mey.], 
has a stamineous flower, whose calyx consists of five leaves, 
and together compose a round capsule, in which one round 
and shining seed is contained. You have placed it amongst 
the Blita, but it does not agree to Tournefort's character 
of the Blita. He has excluded it from the Kali species, 
but where he has reduced it I cannot find. 

Lichen vulg. [Marchantia polymorpha, Linn.] I could 
never observe it to have any flower, but there arises from 
the middle of the leaves a long, slender, and white pedi- 
cule, aliquando ad digiti unius longitudinem assurgens. 
It is hollow and pellucid ; on the top of which there is a 
round black head, or capsule, fitted with a farinaceous 
and greenish substance, quod revera locum seminis sup- 
plet, or the seed itself, as observed by Tournefort with 
the help of a microscope, and is subrotunda. This capsule 
being so very slender, soon opens or breaks by the heat 
of the sun, and then it appears of the figure as in Tourne- 
fort's character, but is constantly round (ante rupturam), 
so that it would appear Tournefort has not observed them 
in all seasons ; for early in the spring it is easy to observe 
them as above described, but they are not able to endure 
heat, and so quickly vanish. 

Alsine rotundifol. sen Portulaca aq. minima serpyllifol. 
[Peplis portula, Linn.] This plant was past the flower ; 
the pistil of it becomes a round capsule opening into two 



388 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

parts, horizontaliter, et pyxidis in modum, in whose 
cavity are contained many round and small seeds. Calyx 
tetrapetalous. It riseth about an inch high ; the leaves 
resemble those of Serpyttum vulg., and the capsules those 
of Anagallisfl. phceniceo, but differs in this from Ana- 
gallis, quod capsulae in alis foliorum positee sunt et pedi- 
culis carent. 

Asp/todelus palustris Scoticus minimus \Tofieldia palus- 
tris, Huds.], plantae genus flore hexapetalo rosaceo, calice 
carente, cujus pistillum mutatur in capsulam oblongam 
acuminatam et in 3 loculamenta divisam, in quibus sin- 
gulis semina plurima continentur aristata. You have 
placed it inter bulbosis affines, without any particular 
note of flower or seed-vessel. Where Tournefort has 
classed it I cannot find, for his book is deficient in a 
good index. 

This letter being sufficiently charged, 1 shall reserve 
what other observations I have made till another occasion. 
I doubt not but your Supplement to your History will be 
near completed by this time j and as for your Methodus 
Emendata, it is what I shall expect with impatience. 

Edinburgh, Jan. 13, 1701. 



Mr. RAY to Mr. JAMES PETIVER. 

Black Notley, February 3, 1701. 

SIR, I have, though long first, returned you the box 
of plants you were pleased to send me, for which I give 
you many thanks, and especially for the names and notes 
added to them, without which I should have made but 
bad work with them. I find among them many very 
rare, and indeed wonderful, species, especially of ferns. 
I now entreat you to send me some more tribes, for Mr. 
Smith calls upon me for the copy, and is, I believe, 
resolved in good earnest to begin to print the work this 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 389 

spring. I want now not much but your contributions to 
perfect the herb, part I mean so far as I am capable of 
doing it. I wish you good success in your labours and 
endeavours for carrying on and promoting natural history 
and the knowledge of the works of God. For my part 
I have done, finding my memory and parts fail me, and 
being almost continually afflicted with pain, so that 
indeed it is time for me to prepare for death, which seems 
to approach. I rest, Sir, 

Yours to serve you, 

JOHN RAY. 

I pPBjt present my humble service to Dr. Sloane and 
Dr. Sherard, and any other friends who may happen to 
inquire of me. 

For Mr. James Petiver. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. JAMES PETIVER?].* 

SIR, Your very obliging letter of April 1 came to my 
hands last post, for which I return you most hearty 
thanks. I am sorry that my bookseller should be con- 
strained to give my friends the trouble of procuring 
subscriptions for the printing of a book which perhaps 
may not deserve it. That which gives it value is what 
yourself, Dr. Sloane, and Dr. Sherard have already, and 
shall yet further contribute to the enriching and perfecting 
of it. Since I came to prosecute the work in good 
earnest, I have been in no case to travel to visit gardens, 
and to see plants growing, flowering, and seeding. Dried 
specimens, figures, descriptions, and names of plants, is 
all I have had to work by, so that I must needs be liable 
to commit a thousand mistakes. Had I had several 
specimens of the same plant, in its several growths, I 
might have been better able to judge of it. Upon this 
and other accounts, you and the persons forenamed would 

* Eound in the Sloane MS. without direction, but most probably is the 
letter referred to at page 393. 



390 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

have made far better work than I have done, or can do. 
However, I must now go through with it, and shall 
thankfully receive what you shall further please to com- 
municate, and insert each particular in its due place, 
according to the best of my skill. I am very glad you 
have found out and received Father Camelli's papers, 
who deserves the character and commendations you have 
given him. So soon as I shall have received and con- 
sidered his descriptions and designs, I shall send him a 
letter of acknowledgment and thanks, with a request that 
he would send his designs and history of trees and climb- 
ing-plants, which, in his letter to me (which is now in 
Dr. Sherard's hands), he promised. 

I am sorry for the news of Mr. Brown's death, which 
I heard not of before the receipt of your letter. He was 
a very commendable person, very ingenious, and as well 
fitted as inclined to promote natural history. 

I have seen and read, and transcribed into my Supple- 
ment, what I found of your notes and remarks upon 
Mr. Brown's two books of plants in the ' Philosophical 
Transactions.' You have discovered so many oversights 
and mistakes in Dr. Plukenet's works, that I fear he may 
have led me into some errors, who followed him as a 
most exact botanist, without due examination. You 
that have seen his dried plants, and have often received 
specimens of the same, are better able to judge of his 
performance. 

I am glad your business increases so as to require 
more attendance, and take up more of your time, which 
cannot be better employed than in the works of your 
proper callings. What time you have to spare you will 
do well to spend, as you are doing, in the inquisition and 
contemplation of the works of God and nature. Indeed, 
you are highly to be commended for what you have 
already done, and encouraged to proceed with vigour, 
notwithstanding the snarlings of some silly pretenders to 
wit, whose scoffs you need not more to value than the 
barkings of small whelps in the street. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 391 

The sharpness of the weather, and unusual continuance 
of it, doth so affect my legs, that I am scarce able to 
attend any studies, and hath much retarded my proceed- 
ings, fixing me constantly to the fireside. I shall add 
no more but prayers for a blessing upon your laudable 
endeavours, and thanks for your constant affection to, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, April 4, 1701. 



Dcntaria afflnis annulets, H. R. P. Herbe cachce on clan- 
destine de Leon, Lugd. edit. Gall. 960. 
Clandestina Jlore albo, Bonetti Obs. 30, cent. 1. 

DESCRIPTIONEM hujus plantae ex ' Histor. Lugd.' ita 
Suppl. Herbam hunc Clandestinam sen occultam denomi- 
navi, quod folia producat sub terra latitantia, qua3 mem- 
branacea sunt, alba, fungis illis siinilia, qui super arbores 
vetustas nascuntur, suntque semper virida, nee unquam 
decidunt una constipata ad modum pomi pinel. Radix 
pedali circiter longitudine est, tenuis seu tenella,spongiosa, 
fiavicans, medullam seu cor intus habens parvum et vclut 
lignosum plantum hanc primo vidi florentem ad Pan- 
corvu dioceseos Purgensis, anno 1578, loco huniido ad 
viam publicam non procul Fontibus Hontoria3, qui 
exeunta fluminc Mirandam del Ebro praeter labente, 
postea vidi innumeras prope Leovera comitatus Pernia? 
in foresta la Dehesa, dicta ubi planta haac probe cognita 
est nomine Madronna3, hoc est, matricis kerbax, eo quod 
mirabiliter conducit ad humiditatem et oppilationem 
uteri ut experientia longa didici, tarn folia ipsum flores 
amara sunt, sed praecipue flores, qui nonnihil ctiani 
acrimonia obtinent. 



392 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Dentaria quam vidi in loco a D. Raio memorato ad 4, 
pollicum altitudinem supra terrain assurgit, e pluribus 
cauliculis sibi invicem proxime admotis, composita : quod 
plantam densam admodum et (si ita loqui liceat) cespi- 
tosam reddit, unusquisque cauliculus florum congeriem 
gestat velut in fasciculum dispositam. Flores autem 
isti binatim e caule exeunt secundum totam ejus longi- 
tudinem pediculis sustentati cylindricis, rectis, diversse 
longitudinis, illi iterum qui & partibus caulis inferioribus 
exeunt, duos circiter digitos transversos longitudinis 
obtinent, reliqui ordine quo summitati propiores eo 
breviores evadunt, ea proportione ut flores omnes, tarn 
superiores quam inferiores sequali fere altitudine termi- 
nantur, unusquisque a pediculus ad pedem seu exortum 
suum specie quadam folii seu squamre instruitur figure 

versus summitatem ore tenui et fere transparenti 

terminata et pluribus radiis obscuris striata, reliqua pars 
folii dicti tenera est et carnosa unusquisque insuper pedi- 
culus sustinet calicem scyphi figura 8 circiter lineas 
longum et5 linearum diametro,membrana tenui,rufescente 
et canaliculata a summo ad unum constante. Summa 
pars hujus scyphi in 4 folia finditur, quae in punctum 
tenninantur paullum obtusum, ab hujus fundo exit flos 
tubulosus 14 linea longus, duas circiter latus. Tubus 
isthie prope media longitudinem in dua labia dividitur, 
quorum superius, quod majus est, latera sua et anteriorem 
partem deorsum reflectens et dorsum in fornicem elevans, 
speciem quanda galea3 eflformat ; inferius deorsum vergit 
versus extremitatem suam, quae in tres partes dividitur, 
estque ejusdem fere figure cum Orobanches flore. Flos 
isthie 4 staminibus donatur, e quibus duo grandiora ab 
interiori parte labii inferioris duabus circiter lineis a tubi 
fundo originem sumunt, reliqua duo a lateribus labii 
superioris circa locum ubi tubus se findit oriuntur. 
Stamina isthuc filamenta valde tenuia sunt, quorum unurn- 
quodque parvum apicem gestat. 

Fructus ovalis est, paullum planus, lineas unius dia- 
metro camosus ; e fundo calicis exit, seque in posteriorem 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 393 

floris pultem ingenit, inque stylum terminatur pollicem 
et dimidium longum et inferius prope extremum intortum. 
Fructus isthic cum maturescit et grandescit formam cordis 
assumit, et granula triangularia continet et neque fruc- 
tuui nee semina perfecta vidi color floris e rubro violaceus 
est, ut et suminitatum calicis. Caules et floram pediculi 
albi sunt, carnosi teneri et fragiles, unusquisque caulis 
18 circiter florum fasciculum sustinet. 

P. Sherard ob convenientiam notarum plantam hanc 
eandem cum clandestina Tournefortii flore subcoeruleo 
' Institut. Rei Herb./ p. 652, sibi persuadet cujus opinio 
et nobis verisimilis videtur. Descriptio autem D. Tourne- 
fort ~sie se habet clandestina est plantse genus flore 
monopetalo personate, inferne tubulate, superne in duo 
labia diviso quorum superius fornicatum inferius vero 
tripartitum. Ex calice autem tabulate pariter crenatoque 
sergit pistillum quod infima floris partem perfodit, 
abitque deinde in fructum oblongum .... salarem 
in duas partes dehiscentem vi elactica semina subrotunda 
propellantes. Clandestine speciem unicam novi cujus 
varietates sunt. 



Mr. HAY to Mr. JAMES PETIVER. 

B.N., April 15, 1701. 

SIR, It is not long since I wrote to you at large, in 
answer to yours of April 1, since which time Dr. Robinson 
tells rne that you had an opportunity of sending to 
Leyden, and would do me the kindness to convey the 
manuscript of my ' Methodus Flantarum Emendata ' to 
Dr. Hotton, in order to the printing of it there ; where- 
upon I have sent up the copy to you, entreating you to 
take the care of it, and to transmit it to him when occa- 



394 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

sion serves; which doing, you shall lay a further obligation 
upon him who is already indebted to you, 

Sir, 
Your faithful friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

Be pleased to hasten your observations upon, and 
additions to, the first tribes, for the booksellers make me 
believe they will begin to print suddenly, if they can but 
get subscriptions for 200 copies. 

For Mr. James Petiver. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. JAMES PETIVEH?]. 

SIR. I received by the last week's carrier the parcel 
you sent me, containing Father Camelli's papers; and your 
own plants, and observations thereupon, to be added to 
the first three tribes of Euci, Fungi, and Musci. You 
have gratified me very much, and by adding the names 
to each plant, have eased me of a great deal of trouble 
I should have been put to in searching them out, and at 
last should not have done it half so well as you, to whom 
they are so familiar and well known ; and I entreat your 
assistance in like manner in contributing your notes and 
additions to the following tribes, which you may do at 
your leisure and best convenience, they having not yet 
begun to print the work, which stop is partly owing to 
myself, I desiring the first tribe back again to make 
some additions to it, as particularly the submarine plants 
you sent, which I know not through whose negligence I 
have not yet received. 

When you see Dr. Sloane, be pleased to acquaint him 
that I have received his books of Magellanic and Aleppo 
Plants, which I return thanks for, and shall be careful of, 
that they receive no harm. 

Several of the ferns you sent me are very rare and 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 395 

strange plants, the like whereto I never saw before. If 
you remember the Adiantum nigrum speciosum canarien&i, 
I pray consider whether it may not be the same with 
Filicula lusitanica Polypodii radice, described and 
figured in ' Hort. Reg. Monspel.' 

I wish you happy success in your studies and endeavours 
in promoting natural knowledge, and illustrating the 
power and wisdom of the Divine Creator of all, to whose 
holy protection and blessing I humbly recommend you, 
and rest, Sir, 

Yours to serve you, 

JOHN RAY. 

Blacklfetley, May 3, 1701. 



Mr. RAY to Mr. JAMES PETIVEK. 

Black Notley, May 20, 1701. 

SIR, I wrote to you not long since to give you advice 
of the receipt of your dried plants, and your annotations 
upon, and additions to, my first four tribes of Fuci, Fungi, 
Musci, and Capillares, in which, by adding names to the 
several species, you have eased me of a great deal of pains 
and trouble, and enabled me to perform better than, 
without such your assistance, I could have done by my 
utmost diligence and industry, so that I must acknowledge 
myself to be highly obliged by you. But this hath been 
the subject of my former letter, and therefore I shall add 
no more. 

My business now is to entreat your care in dispatching 
the inclosed by the first opportunity to Father Camelli. 
It is to desire that he would speed the sending of his 
figures and descriptions of the scandent plants and trees, 
which he promised in his letter to me (which is now in 
Dr. Sherard's hand), that if possible they may come 
timely enough to be inserted in the appendix to this 
Supplement. 



396 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

I have, by the person who will bring or send you this 
letter, your friend and neighbour Mr. Bourchier, sent up 
the three tribes of imperfect plants, to be speedily put 
into the printer's hands to be begun upon. I am, 

Sir, 
Your faithful friend to serve you, 

JOHN RAY. 

I had almost forgotten to return you thanks for the 
present of your eight century, which I received in a 
packet from Mr. Smith. 

. med friend 



iver. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, August 27, 1701. 

SIR, 1 received yours of August 23, with the inclosed 
from Dr. Preston, in answer whereto, first, I return you 
most hearty thanks for your great and unmerited kind- 
ness many ways expressed, as for being concerned for 
both mine and wife's illness. For mine own part I have 
been in worse condition this summer, by reason of the 
multitude of my sores, and their extreme painfulness, 
than ever, though, I thank God, I have not been inwardly 
sick or any way indisposed. About some three months 
ago, a gentleman of mine acquaintance wrote me word 
that a gentleman's son thereabouts, who had a running 
sore in his back so long, that it had almost brought him 
to his grave, and had had the advice of the ablest phy- 
sicians and chirurgeons about town without any success, 
was brought back into the country, and at last, by the 
prescription of a diet-drink given by a poor woman, was 
perfectly cured. The diet-drink was this : 

Of oak-bark, taken green from the tree, j of a pound ; 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 397 

of ribwort, monsecar, comfrey (leaves or root), cinquefoil 
ana, 1 handful. Put all into three or four gallons of ale ; 
boil it as you do hops, and drink it for your ordinary 
drink. 

Advising with some friends whether it might be safe 
for me to use this diet-drink, and being encouraged by 
them, I got it made, and drunk of it for about a week, 
by which time the vessel leaking, had run out all my drink. 
This drink had not the effect of drying up my sores, but 
effectually stopt my diarrhoea, so that, ever since, my 
belly hath been astrictior. I am not sorry that I lost my 
liquor ; for though, if I could have gone on with it, I 
believ&4t would in time have stopped my sores, but I 
fear would have had an ill influence on my health. 

Since the time of drinking this diet-drink, Sir Thomas 
Millington coming to see me, discovering my condition, 
told me that he believed no outward application would do 
me any good, and advised me to use a plain antiscorbutic 
diet-drink, made of dock roots, water-cress, brooklime, 
plantain, and alder-leaves, which I have done now this 
fortnight, but as yet have received no sensible benefit 
by it, my sores running as bad, and being as painful 
as ever. 

My wife hath been very sick of the epidemical fever 
hereabouts, but, thank God, is now perfectly recovered. 
She gives you her most humble service. Another ex- 
pression of kindness is your intention to make us another 
present of sugar. We have been already so extremely 
obliged to you for many presents of this nature, that I 
am greatly ashamed to receive any more, having no 
prospect of ever making you the least part of an amends. 
I want words to express my thankfulness, and therefore 
can add no more on that subject. The books I have of 
yours, besides the two great volumes of dried plants, are 
' Hyacinthi Ambrosini Phytologia/ Cupani's ' Hortus 
Catholicus,' with the second Supplement in sheets, Boc- 
cone's ' Observazioni Naturali/ and RauwolfFs ' Itinerary* 
in High Dutch. I should be glad to see your China 



398 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

plants, though truly, sir, I cannot attend to anything 
long. I rest, 

Sir, 

Your very much obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAIT. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAT to Dr. HAKS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, October 10, 1701. 

SIR, The occasion of my giving you the trouble of a 
letter at present is to entreat your assistance in dispatch- 
ing the inclosed to Dr. Preston. I am still busy in 
adding new species to my Supplement. Dr. Sherard 
hath lately sent me a parcel of about 230 dried plants, 
received from the Prince of Catholica, most of them new 
and unknown to me, all of them growing in the Hort. 
Cathol. I am able to make but slow progress, by reason 
of the pains and trouble I labour under. Our under- 
takers are very slack and remiss in printing this Supple- 
ment. The time is past when they should have published 
it, and they have not yet began it. I hear nothing of 
them. I have sent up to Dr. Hotton, at his request, a 
method of grasses, such an one as I was able to draw up 
in the circumstances I am now in. My wife and girls 
give you their humble services. I am not insensible of 
my obligations to you, and retain a grateful memory of 
them, though unable to make you any amends; and 
therefore must remain, 

Sir, 
Your most obliged friend and servant, 

JOHN RAT. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 399 

Mr. RAY to Dr. DEEHAM.* 

SIR, I received yours of April the 24th last past, for 
which I return you thanks ; and first, for your approba- 
tion of such books as I have published, though I dare not 
own any such worth in them as to deserve so good an 
opinion as you or others may have conceived of them. 
However, the more unmerited such commendation is, the 
more thanks I owe you and them for it. 

2. For that particular and exact account you have 
given me of the appearance of an innumerable multitude 
of small frogs covering the highway, &c., I doubt not 
but had" others, to whom the like phenomenon hath oc- 
curred, been as inquisitive and observant as yourself, they 
might have found out whence they came forth. Had I 
received this history before the last edition of my book of 
the Wisdom of God, &c., I could have made good use of it. 

Your observations of the whole process of the genera- 
tion of gnats, from the egg to their mature state, I should 
be glad to see. I have seen that water animalcule, out 
of which they immediately proceed, but never saw their 
eggs, or where they lay them. It is not many years since 
I applied myself to the observation and search of insects 
in order to compose a history of them, but now I am 
wholly taken off from that study by the afflictive pains I 
almost constantly labour under, by reason of ulcers upon 
my legs, I having not been half a mile out of my house 
these four years ; and though I have made use of many 
means, and have had the advice of some of the most 
skillful surgeons and physicians, yet without success, 
growing yearly worse and worse. Besides, I have been 
very much haunted with a troublesome diarrhoea, fre- 
quently recurring, so that you may well think I can have 
but little heart to mind natural history ; but yet I am so 
far engaged, that I cannot shake it off. I have now just 
ready to go under the press a third volume of the ' His- 
tory of Plants/ being a Supplement to the two former 

* The original is thus endorsed by Dr. Derham : " licceivcd this May the 
8th, 1702." 



400 CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 

volumes, which hath engrossed almost my whole time for 
two whole years. Besides, I have a little book now 
printing at Ley den, in Holland, entitled ' Methodus 
Plantarum emendata et aucta.' 

An account of your observations about other aquatic 
insects would be very acceptable. 

As for books about insects written in, or translated 
into, Latin, I know none but Aldrovand, Mouffet, John- 
son, and Goedartius, except Malpighius 'de Bombyce,' and 
Dr. Lister 'de Araneis.' The best general history or ac- 
count of insects is that of Swammerdam, written in Low 
Dutch, and translated into French. 

The small worm you mention and describe, I have 
often met with among the viscera and intestines of ani- 
mals and elsewhere, but never attempted the discovery 
of its manner of generation, and do guess it would be a 
very hard task to find it out. 

Your discovery of the long-beating death-watch I read 
the account of in the ' Philosophical Transactions,' soon 
after the publication of it, with great satisfaction; its 
noise is more agreeable to the leisurely and constant tick 
of the death-watch commonly observed than that of Mr. 
Allen's. It is time that I put a period to this letter, the 
remainder being only that I am, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAT. 



Dr. SHEEABD to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I forgot in my last to answer your query about 
corymbiferous plants. Mr. Bobart told me Dr. Tourne- 
fort's making Bidens a distinct genus was a false notion ; 
for the seeds of those plants (as of many others of the 
CorymbifercB] had each four spinulse, though two of them 
generally fell off before they were ripe. He says all those 
that have quadrangular seeds have four spinula3, which 
in many plants fall all off, in others only two remain. 
London, June 11, 1702. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 401 



Mr. RAY to Mr. DEKHAM. 

SIR, I find that you have been very curious in ob- 
serving the generation of gnats, to which I must needs 
own myself to be a great stranger, having never seen any 
aurelia3 of that insect but those with club-heads, whence 
I suppose our most common gnats come. Of the ver- 
miculi or nymphae, previous to these aureliae, I knew 
nothing ; and now I perceive that the change of one of 
these into the other is not instantaneous, by the casting 
of a skin, as the change of the aurelia into a gnat, but 
graduate that this seems to be a different sort of genera- 
tion from the rest of this kind. 

I think you need not doubt but that the perfect gnat 
lays the eggs in all these kinds, and that those that are 
fecund are rendered so by the coition of the male and 
female ; for this is agreeable to the process of nature in 
the generation of all insects, none ever generating till 
they have run through all their changes. As for the 
suddenness of laying their eggs after their leaving the 
aurelia state, that need not startle you, for it is usual for 
many of them to couple and lay eggs so soon as ever 
they are come out ; the females also may drop their eggs 
without any coit, if there be no male near. 

From these different sorts of vermiculi and aurclias 
doubtless do proceed various kinds of gnats, notwith- 
standing I find but two described in authors. Howbeit 
I think you mistake in charging Swammerdam with that 
error, for I find in my French copy of him these words : 
" Car nous en trouvons des plusieurs sortes." You will 
deserve well of those who apply themselves to the history 
of insects, if you shall find out, describe, and distinguish 
these species. 

For my own part, I am now almost threescore and fif- 
teen years of age, so that it is time for me to give over 
these studies and inquiries ; and besides, I am so lame, 
and almost continually afflicted with pain, that I cannot 

26 



402 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

attend any study, being diverted by pain. It is true of 
late years I have diverted myself by searching out the 
various species of insects to be found hereabouts, but I 
have confined myself chiefly to two or three sorts, viz. 
Papilios diurnal and nocturnal, beetles, bees, and spiders. 
Of the first of these I have found about 300 kinds, and 
there are still remaining many more undiscovered by me, 
and all within the compass of a few miles. How many, 
then, may we reasonably conjecture are to be found in 
England, in Europe, in the East and West Indies, in the 
whole world. The beetles are a tribe near as numerous 
as these, and the flies of all sorts not fewer. I have now 
given over my inquisition, by reason of my disability to 
prosecute and my approaching end, which I pray God fit 
me for. You that have more time before you may profit- 
ably bestow some of your spare hours upon such inquiries, 
and may probably make useful discoveries, at least may 
reap a great deal of pleasure and satisfaction in finding 
out and bringing to light some of the works of God not 
before taken notice of. So I heartily bid you farewell. 

Black Notley, June 30, 1702. 

NOTE. At the time when this letter was written I was 
but a novice in the history of insects, particularly of gnats, 
having begun my strict observations of them but the fore- 
going spring. In order to the discovery of the process of 
their generation, I shut up in glasses divers nymphae and 
aurelise of gnats, with the water in which they were pro- 
duced ; and after all the aureliae were become gnats, and 
the nymphae, aurelia?, I found there were other nympha? 
succeeded ; and, not having seen any eggs in the water, 
I very inadvertently concluded that those nymphse, or at 
least the aurelia3 (which I thought might be more perfect 
animals than I afterwards found them), might lay eggs, 
and be the parents of those succeeding nymphs. But I 
soon found my error, and that what my friend Mr. Ray 
saith in this letter was true, and also discovered the whole 
process of the generation of gnats^ and that this tribe of 



CORRESPONDENCE OF HAY. 403 

insects is much larger than was ever imagined ; for in the 
parts only near Upminster, in Essex, where I then lived, 
I discovered above thirty distinct species of them, both 
male and female most of them, and saw many of them in 
their coit, how they deposit their eggs, &c. 

W. D[ERHAM]. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVEK?].* 

SIR, I thank you for the information and philosophic 
intelligence given in your last. I shall not at present 
answer-to the particulars therein contained, because I am 
in some doubt whether this letter will find you in London. 
The subject of this is to acquaint you, that the under- 
takers for publishing my Supplement. Histor. will not 
begin to print till they have the whole copy entire deli- 
vered up into their hands (perhaps not then neither) ; yet, 
to take away all excuse and pretence of delay from them, 
I am resolved to satisfy them in this particular, and have 
done what I can toward the perfecting of it myself, so 
that I only want your and Dr. Sherard's additions and 
corrections ; which cannot possibly so soon be prepared 
and entered in the body of the book, as that there will 
remain time enough to print it this summer, and therefore 
must necessarily be cast into an appendix. 

As for what I have done myself, I have entreated Dr. 
Sherard to revise and correct it, expunging what is re- 
peated, and adding what is wanting ; with whom I pray 
you also to join, being the best skilled in Oriental and 
indeed all exotic plants of any man I know, as having 
seen various specimina of the same species in all their 
states, and a man of the greatest correspondence of any 
in England as to these matters. 

The plants in your Centuries I would willingly but 

* This letter is numbered in a scries, in which are contained several letters 
addressed to Mr. Petiver, and it is probable, from their subjects, that they 
were all written to him. 



404 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

dare not enter, for fear of mistakes, only such as you 
yourself have given me information of. Father Cainelli 
hath not dealt ingenuously in delivering his icons and 
descriptions of trees to another, which he gave a kind of 
promise of. His icons and descriptions lying in my hand 
you may command, for what time you need them, for I 
have some thoughts of getting them graven by a sub- 
scription. It is now time to make an end, and assure 
you that I am, Sir, 

Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, 25, 1702. 



Mr. RAT to Dr. HANS SLOAITE. 

Black Notley, Nov. ]8, 1702. 

SIR, I have at last sent back all the books of yours I 
had in my hands, so far as I know. The Magellanic 
plants were of little use to me, most of them being im- 
perfect specimens, and I unable to compare them with 
such as are already described or figured, or myself to de- 
scribe them by reason of the pain I almost constantly 
labour under, which permits me not to attend anything 
for any considerable time. You formerly told me that 
you had some plants from China, which you promised to 
give me a sight of; and since, Dr. Sherard told me, that 
you had received another parcel thence, and promised to 
desire you to send me them. It is pity they should be 
wanting in this work. If you will do me the favour to 
lend me them awhile I will make hard shifts but I will 
give some short account of them and insert them. 

I doubt not but Dr. Sherard hath acquainted you what 
overtures have been made for procuring and printing 
icons for my History of Plants, and how forward my Lord 
Bishop of London is in it, promising his utmost assist- 



(ORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 405 

anco, and he is able to do as much as any man, by reason 
of his interest in the Queen. But I look upon it as not 
feasible in these difficult times, and therefore shall not 
concern myself much in it. 

My wife tenders her humble service, and so do my 
girls. Both they and I are sensible of our obligations to 
you, and return you many thanks for your former kind- 
nesses. So I humbly recommend to the Divine protection 
and blessing, and remain, 

Sir, 

Your very much obliged friend and humble servant, 
^ JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloaue, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I received your kind letter of Dec. 9, for which 
I thank you. The method of insects was too small a 
tribe to have been taken notice of by you. 

I should be very glad to see the collections both of 
insects and plants sent you by the learned and very in- 
dustrious Father Camel, were I in condition to overlook 
them. His history of scandent plants are very well worth 
the publishing. The learned world must not want them. 
They must, I think, be printed by themselves : but, alas ! 
I am in such sad pain and misery, and reduced to that 
extremity, that I cannot rise alone, and look upon myself 
as no man of this world. All I can do is to sit still, be- 
moan myself, and pore upon my pain. Father Gamers 
designs I intend to send you by next week's carrier. 

Mr. Dale communicated to me as from you Mr. Cun- 
ningham's papers concerning the Catamba and Xylatoes, 
which were much to my satisfaction. I return yon many 
thanks for all your assistances and contributions to my 



406 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Supplement, and for all your present literary communi- 
cations, but, alas ! I am in too miserable a condition to 
take notice of them all, and therefore here I must rest, 

Sir, 
Yours to serve you, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, Dec. 11, 1702. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Dec. 16, 1702. 

SIR, About the beginning of this session of parlia- 
ment, I received a very courteous and obliging letter 
from my Lord Bishop of London, wherein, among other 
things, he desired me to send one of my friends to treat 
with him about the design of procuring figures for my 
History of Plants. Whereupon I wrote to Dr. Sherard, 
to desire him to attend upon his lordship for that pur- 
pose ; but he, being one of the commissioners for sick 
and wounded soldiers, was sent to Portsmouth, where he 
still resides, so that he could not fulfil my request ; yet 
I cannot excuse him for deferring thus long to give me 
notice thereof, the business requiring haste, and my lord 
advising that what is done would best be done while the 
town was full of nobility and gentry sitting the parlia- 
ment. 

Now, sir, understanding that you are acquainted with 
the bishop, I must beg the favour of you to attend his 
lordship, and to do that which I requested of Dr. Sherard, 
that is, to give him your opinion whether the thing be 
feasible, and what difficulties are likely to occur in it, and 
what is the best method to proceed in. I conceive the 
great difficulties will be in procuring gravers, and super- 
visors to make choice of the best patterns of plants that 
are already published, and get such delineated as they 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 407 

can procure specimens of ; and to superintend the gravers 
to see that they do their work well, and to put titles to 
the several sculps, &c. Such supervisors, I doubt, it will 
be difficult to find, and pensions or salaries must be 
allowed them. I was loth to give you any trouble about 
this affair, because I know you to be full of business, and 
to have but little time to spare, but I am constrained, 
Dr. Robinson excusing himself for not being acquainted 
with the bishop. I am in some haste, the messenger 
waiting for my letter, and so shall add no more than that 
I am, 

Sir, 

much obliged and affectionate friend and 
humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Sir HANS SLOANE to Mr. RAY. 

SIR, I received yours, and have spoken to the Bishop 
of London about the graving the plates for your History. 
He seems to be in very good earnest about it, and with- 
out question will be able to do very considerable matters 
in it ; but I find Dr. Sherard and others think it impos- 
sible to be effected. I will inquire a little farther into it, 
and talk with Dr. Sherard, Dr. Robinson, and Mr. 
Petiver, &c., and then again discourse his lordship about 
it. I imagine it would be best done by sections. 

London, Jan. li, 1702. 



408 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOAKE. 

Black Notley, .... 1702. 

SIR, In one of your last letters you were pleased to 
tell me that you had a parcel of China plants which you 
would do me the favour to give me a sight of. Having 
now almost gone over Dr. Sherard's, I am ready to receive 
them; and therefore desire you would please to send 
hither so soon as may stand with your leisure and con- 
venience. I am very listless, and unable to stir about 
and to turn over and search books, and so can make but 
poor work with new and nondescript plants, unless the 
specimens be very fair, which is the reason I can make 
but little use of your Magellan Straits' plants. My 
' Method us Plantarum em en data et aucta ' is now printing 
in Holland, and almost finished, so that I hope shortly 
to have a copy to present you. I am highly obliged to 
Dr. Hotton for his pains and care in presiding the edition, 
and revising and correcting the proofs, so that I doubt 
not but the book will come out very correct. My wife 
salutes you with the tender of her humble service, with 
whom joins, 

Sir, 
Your most obliged friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. KAY to Dr. HAXS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Jan. 20, 1702. 



SIR, I received your noble present of sugar, highly 
valuable both for the quantity and quality, for which 
myself, wife, and girls return you our most hearty thanks. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 409 

I wish we were as well able as we are willing to make 
you some part of an amends j but we have no hope of 
that ; so that for real favours we have nothing to return 
you but verbal acknowledgments. 

I do also render you many thanks for attending my 
Lord Bishop of London at my request, to have conference 
with him about the subject of procuring plates for my 
History of Plants. For my part, I never thought of such 
a design, but some friends here were very earnest for it, 
and treated about it with the bishop without my know- 
ledge, who showed a great inclination to me, and used 
many expressions of kindness, and was very forward to 
offer InT assistance towards the promoting such a work ; 
whereupon I could do no less than send him a letter of 
thanks, which he favorably accepted, and returned me an 
extremely obliging answer, wherein he desired me to 
send one of my friends to him to treat about that affair, 
and tell him what he should do in it ; but I see there are 
so many difficulties that attend the management, that as 
I never intended it at first, so I am now very willing to 
lay aside all thoughts of it. 

I have a small present for you, which I entreat you to 
accept as magni affecius eriguum effectum. It is my 
' Methodus Plantarum emendata et aucta/ of which I 
have desired Mr. Smith to send or deliver you two copies, 
one in the larger, and the other in the common paper ; 
but I am ashamed that I must put you to the charge of 
binding them, for they came to me in quires, and perhaps 
you will not find them worth the binding. The straitness 
of time will not permit me to add any more than that 
I am, 

Sir, 

Your most humble and very much obliged servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloanc, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbwy square, London. 



410 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notiey, .... 1702. 

SIR, I understand by Mr. Dale, not long since 
returned from London, that it is the opinion of my 
friends there, excepting yourself, that the design of pro- 
curing figures for my History of Plants is impossible 
to be effected for want of gravers, but especially super- 
visors. For my part, as I did not first set it on foot, so 
am I well contented that it be laid aside. 

I suppose you hold some correspondence with Dr. 
Preston, whom, when you write to, I pray be pleased to 
tell him that my ' Methodus Plantarum aucta et emen- 
data ' is now published, and that I have a copy of it at 
his service, if I knew how to convey it to him, though I 
fear the charge of carriage would be more than the book 
is worth. 

Mr. Dale tells me that some of my friends at London 
talk of imposing a new task upon me, that is, of describ- 
ing such exotic insects as are found in the museums of 
the virtuosi about London, which, if there be no more 
able and better qualified person living in or near the city 
for such an undertaking, I should not be much averse 
from, if it please God to continue me any tolerable 
measure of health and ease, for that I may do sitting, 
and without much motion. But then they must be sent 
down to me by parcels. As for our English insects, I 
think I may, without vanity, say, that I have taken more 
pains about some tribes of them than any Englishman 
before me. If I were to publish a history of insects, in 
each tribe I would first place the English ones by them- 
selves, and then the exotics. 

I have by me a history of our diurnal English Papilios 
of my own knowledge, which I drew up some years since. 
They are in nuinber about forty. I understand that Mr. 
Petiver hath several new ones sent him out of Cornwall, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 411 

which I suppose he will shortly publish. In case you 
think fit to employ me in this service, I would begin with 
the tribe of Paptiios, because therein I have taken the 
most pains, though that be far from the first tribe ; for I 
divide insects into Apoda and Pedata, and Pedata into 
Pedata tantum, and Pedata and Alata simul ; and these 
last I would divide according to Swammerdam's method. 
Excuse this prolixity. I have now done, and remain, 

Sir, 
Your very much obliged servant, 

JOHN RAY. 



Mr. BAY to [Mr. PETIVER?] 

SIR, I have this morning, according to niy promise, 
remitted your box by carrier. I intended to have taken 
some short notes of the rare and curious plants therein 
contained, but the weather fell out so extraordinarily 
sharp as confined me to the fireside, and utterly disabled 
me from doing anything of that nature. All that I could 
do was to transcribe your names, which contain such 
characteristic notes as will in some measure supply the 
want of larger descriptions. I now again renew my re- 
quest to you to send me your Chusan plants, which I hope 
the weather will be so favorable as to permit me to com- 
pare with Dr. Sloane's, which I have by me, without 
names added. I am so crazy and pinched with the cold, 
that I must have done when I have told you that I am, 
Sir, 

Very much yours, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, Jan. 12, 1703. 



412 CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Mr. SAMUEL SMITH. 

B. K, March 8, 1703. 

SIR, Since my last to you I have been brought even 
to death's door. Near a fortnight since there befel me a 
very strange accident ; one of my small sores began to 
run with that extraordinary rage as no man could believe 
or imagine that had not seen it, and so continued night 
and day for five days together, till it had reduced me to 
that weakness that I was unable so much as to rise up from 
my chair, or move when I was up. All this while, 
besides my usual pains proceeding from sores, a fever 
attended me, which at last determined, at least much 
abated, in a plentiful sweat, so that you need not wonder 
I should be able to do so little in the Appendix. 

I received the parcel you sent last week, and do thereby 
perceive that it will not be long ere the work be finished 
at the press ; but then it will require some time to finish 
and transcribe the Index. Give my thanks and service 
to Mr. Petiver for his pains. I have sent you inclosed a 
paper of observations of the virtues and effects of some 
plants less known, which I pray see that it be inserted at 
the end of the first parcel of the Appendix I sent you. 

I am at present in but evil case ; and so omitting all 
matters of mere civility, shall only add that I am, 
Sir, 

Yours to serve you, 

JOHN RAY. 

JTor Mr. Samuel Smith, Bookseller, 
at the Princes Arms, St. Paul's Church- 
yard, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, March 17, 1703. 

SIR, You may justly wonder I should detain your 
box of rare plants so long, and suspect that I never intend 
to return them back any more ; and therefore I think 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 413 

myself obliged to give you an account thereof. The 
Badminton plants I intended to revise carefully, and 
compare with those in my Supplement, and to have put 
the names to them I found. But, alas ! the sharp cold 
brunt which happened in January gave me such a shock 
as utterly disabled me to do anything but sit still and 
pore upon my pain. And since, about three weeks ago, 
a strange accident befel me ; one of my small ulcers all 
of a sudden bubbled up like a fountain, and ran at that 
rate night and day for five days together, as no man that 
had not seen it could have believed it ; and in that time 
reduced me to that weakness that I could not rise alone 
off mjschair, or stand alone when I was up. This was 
attended by a pretty smart fever, which determined shortly 
in a long sweat. Since this, another sad accident hath 
befallen me. A part of the skin of one of my insteps by 
degrees turned black, and now is, with the flesh under it, 
rotted and corrupted, which yet sticks fast and comes not 
off, yet runs a copious gleet. 

As for your Chinese plants, I intended to have com- 
pared them with Mr. Petiver's Chusan plants, and wrote 
to him to send them to me, but he hath not been pleased 
to do it ; and yet had he sent them, I have not hitherto 
been in case to compare them. I should do nothing 
more willingly than serve you in anything in my power ; 
though this doing I should rather serve myself, by im- 
proving my little skill in botanies, by the addition of so 
many new and nondescript species which you have pleased 
to communicate the knowledge and sight of to me. I 
am sorely afflicted with pain, and scarce know what I 
write. Yet so long as spiritus hos regit artus, I shall 
remain sensible of all your favours, and, 

Sir, 
Yours in all service, 

JOHN RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



414 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. KAY to Mr. DERHAM. 

SIR, I received yours of the 19th, for which I thank 
you and acknowledge myself much obliged to you for 
being at the expense of so much time and pains to gratify 
me. What you have been pleased to communicate con- 
cerning the sudden appearance of a vast multitude of 
small frogs, and the account you give of the place where 
they were generated, and whence they did proceed, I 
have written out and sent to London to be inserted in 
this last edition of my Treatise concerning the Wisdom of 
God, &c., as also what you have imparted concerning the 
use of those extremely small water insects or animalcules. 

As for the History of Insects, I intend not a general 
one, but only of such as are native of England, adding 
such exotics as are found in. the museums or cabinets of 
the curious about London or elsewhere. Neither yet can I 
hope that all that I myself have observed, or shall obtain 
from friends, will amount to the fifth part of the species 
that are native of this island. I have, for some years 
together, been a diligent searcher out of Papilios diurnal 
and nocturnal, and though I have found and described 
near 300 species, great and small, of that tribe or genus 
within the small compass of four or five miles, yet came 
I not to the end of them, so long as I prosecuted that in- 
quiry, but every year afforded me new ones. Now the genus 
of beetles is as numerous as that of the Papilios, if not 
more. The flies (so at present I call all insects that have 
naked and smooth, not farinaceous wings), both bipennes 
and quadripennes, are in a manner infinite, nor hath their 
history been with diligence prosecuted by any man that 
I know of, except Mr. Willughby, whose manuscript I 
hope to procure. 

I cannot but admire your industry and patience, in 
searching out and observing the various species of gnats, 
with the manner and process of their generation, and the 
success you have had in discovering them, which may 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 415 

encourage you to proceed in such inquiries, to which you 
are so well qualified, and, if I may so say, gifted : for I 
look upon such a sagacity in searching out, and happi- 
ness in finding, new things as a gift of God. Were there 
but a sufficient number of such men, who would apply 
themselves to the prosecution of the history of insects, 
much might be done in it, and many rare discoveries 
made. I cease to give you further trouble, and rest, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, March 31, 1703. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, March 29, 1703. 

SIR, I received your extremely kind and compassionate 
letter, and return you most hearty thanks for it, I am 
fully of your opinion that my case is scorbutical, and that 
my sores, as they are now, are in a great measure the 
effects of that distemper ; and therefore do highly approve 
of your advice, and resolve to follow it. Sir Thomas 
Millington, about two years since, did me the honour to 
make me a visit here, and, discoursing concerning my 
ulcers, he told me that he believed no outward application 
would do me any good, and therefore advised this diet- 
drink : take water-cress, brooklime, plantain leaves, dock 
roots, and a few alder leaves : boil these in wort instead 
of hops, and work up the liquor in a vessel, and use it 
for my ordinary drink. This I did once, and received 
some benefit by ; but the winter coming on, and little 
virtue in the herbs, I gave it over, especially not finding 
that sudden amendment that I expected ; but I shall not 
be so unconstant in the use of your prescriptions. I 
cannot but wonder at what you write about the danger 
of leading me to a dropsy. I have been myself in some 
fear of that disease this year and a half, my legs and feet 



416 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

swelling and pitting; but because the swelling did not 
grow upon me, I imputed them to the bandage which I 
used. 

I have this morning sent you, by carrier, the box of 
rare plants you were pleased to lend me, and am sorry I 
was not in case to use them. I hope they have received 
no great harm. 

My wife is very, .much your servant, and in great 
admiration of your extraordinary kindness to so mean a 
person as is, 

Sir, 
Your highly obliged and most humble 

servant and orator, 

JOHN RAY. 

To -his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at. his house at the corner of Southampton street, % 

towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, April 14, 1703. 

SIR, I have sent you this morning Hyacinthus am- 
brosinus, which I now find to be yours , and am sorry I 
should be so careless and forgetful as not to send it with 
the last books, which inadvertently I thought and wrote 
were all of yours I had in my hands. 

I give you most hearty thanks for the kind and generous 
offer of the use of your exotic insects to describe. I have 
not yet begun what I intended upon that subject, ex- 
pecting Mr. Willughby's collections from Sir Thomas W. 
I shall not pretend to a general history of insects, but 
confine myself to those that are natives of our own country, 
and such exotics as are in the museums and cabinets of 
yourself and other curious persons about London and 
elsewhere in England, so far as I can procure them. 
When I have done my best, I believe all the species of 
British insects which I have observed myself, or shall 
procure from friends, will not amount to the fifth part of 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 417 

those that are here bred. My wife and girls give you 
their very humble services. Excuse this unnecessary 
trouble, and pardon my forgetfulness in thus long detain- 
ing your book. I am, 

Sir, 
Your much obliged servant and humble orator, 

JOHN RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, ' 

towards Bloorasbury square, these present,. London. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVER ?] 

SIR, It is now a long time since you were pleased to 
send me your large and instructive contributions to the 
first four tribes of the Supplement to my History of 
Plants, with promise to do the like to the succeeding 
tribes, which would have been of great advantage to the 
work ; but either you forgot your promise, or were so 
interrupted and diverted by multiplicity of other business, 
that you could not find time to attend and make it good. 
However, it is not yet too late to insert such additions 
and observations as you think good to communicate in 
the Appendix ; by which you will reap this advantage, 
as to have all that is yours put together and known to be 
so, and so to lose no part of the honour due to you for 
any of your observations and discoveries. If you please 
to draw them up yourself, and deliver them to the printer, 
you will save an infirm and crazy person some pains ; if 
you think better that I should do it, be pleased to send 
them to me. 

Something further I have to communicate to you. I 
am advised by some of my friends to describe such exotic 
insects as are in the hands of the virtuosi in and about 
London, which, God granting life and any tolerable 
measure of ease (which I can hardly expect), I am not 

27 



418 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

averse from doing. Of such insects I suppose you are 
of any man best furnished with variety of species. I am 
likewise about drawing up a history of all the British 
insects which have been either observed by me, or shall 
be communicated by friends ; all which I conceive will 
not amount to the fifth part of the natives of this island. 
I hear that you have several new ones of the Papilionaceous 
tribe, sent you out of the west of England, which I should 
be glad to see. I was told by Mr. Breynius, who did me 
the kindness to give me a visit here, that you had not 
been well lately, which I was sorry for. I can heartily 
condole with friends, myself being not insensible how 
uneasy a state of pain and sickness is. I wish you health 
for the future, and rest, 

Sir, 
Your faithful friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, April 24, 1703. 



Mr. THOKESBY to Mr. RAY. 

Leeds, April 27, 1703. 

HONOURED SIR, This additional list of local words is 
larger than I expected, and therein you will quickly ob- 
serve several words already inserted in your very curious 
and accurate collection ; but then it is either when the 
same word has a different signification (which is not un- 
common) or pronounced after so different a manner, as 
considerably to alter the orthography ; or lastly, when 
the etymology has fallen in my way in the perusal of 
some of our Saxon authors, as Wheelocks, Bede, Somner, 
Spelman, Hicks, &c. 

I am tempted to think the German Silk-tail [Bomby- 
cilla garruld\, registered in the Philosophic. Trans., No. 
175, is become natural to us, there being no less than 
three killed nigh this town the last winter : 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 419 

Alack for alas. 



After-maths, q. after-mowin 

mowing the eddish ; roughiugs we take for that rough coarse grass the 

cattle will not eat. 
Arls or Earls, earnest. 
An Arvil, a funeral treat ; the word and practice retained in the Vicarage of 

Halifax. I was at one for an ancient minister a few months ago. 
As or Asse, ashes, var. dial. 
As tite, as soon; titter, sooner. 
An Ashler wall, freestone hewed with a mason's axe into smoothness, 

q. Axtler. 
Aud-farand, out of fashion when applied to elder persons ; and witty above 

their age, when to children. 
Avkardly, opposite to towardly. 
An Awmoss, alms, from French aumosncs. 
Awn, owiljW. dial. As ajen. 



Backus, bakehouse. 

Very Bain, about one, officious, ready to help. 

Bang his Banes, beat his bones. 

Bawks, the large timber beams that support the roof by sign-trees, under the 

side-wavers, and a prick-post under the rig-tree, summers or summer-trees 

are never contiguous to the roof, but only the main-beams in a chamber- 

floor. 

Bannock, &c. Tharfe cakes. 
A Barn, a child, S. beajin, Matth. ii. 18. 
A Barn, a garner, S. Matth. iii. 12. 

A Barr, a gate of a town or city, Mickelgate, from S. mycel, not St. Michael. 
Bawt, without. 
A Bawl, bowl. 

Belling, matter mixed with blood running out of a sore. 
Beneson, benediction. 
A Benkit, a small wood vessel with a cover that is loose, and fitted with 

notches to two prominent legs that have a string through them to carry 

it by. 

To Bezle, waste, embezzle. 
To Bid or Bead, to pray, from S. bea'se, oratio. 
To Blare, to put out the tongue. 
To Blate or Bleil, proper to a calPs or sheep's voice. 
Bleak, exposed to the weather ; it stands bleak. 
A Binding, a hazel rod, or thorn, two or three yards long, so called, because 

used for binding the hedge-tops. 
Blew Milk, skimmed milk. 
Blind-mans-buffe, a play. 
Bloa, black and blue. 
A Blowse or Blawze, proper to women; a blossom, a wild rinish girl, proud 

light skirts. 
A Bloated look, a bloa, dusky, dark countenance, caused by intemperance 

mostly. 

To Boken, to nauseate, ready to vomit. 
The Boonht of the elbow. 



420 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Boons or Booyns, fowl, and sometimes labour, to be given to the landlord, over 

and above the rent, from the French boon. 
The Boyl of a tree. 

A Booyse, or Buyse, same as boose or stall. 
Brakons, fern, brakes. 
A Brandred or Rid, a trivet, or iron. 
You Braid of the miller's dog. 
Sown, as whither art thou bown, i. e. going or bound. 
A Breid, a shelf, or board, var. dial. 
To Breiden, to spread or make broad. 
A Brock, a badger. 

A Bridle-sty, a way for horse only, not cart or carriages in common. 
A Broych, a small spike of iron or wood to put coppins on. 
To Broych, or broach, as masons an atchler, when, with the small point of their 

axe, they make it full of little pits, or small holes. 
To Bruzzle, to make a great ado, or stir. 
A Bumper, a glass or mug brimful. 
A Bur-tree, an elder or dog-tree. 
A Burk-tree, or rods, birch, var. dial. 
Bytte (Warwickshire) a bottle or flagon, ab S. byrte, uter, dolium. 

To Cadge, a term, in making bone-lace. 

A Cankerd cart, or froward fellow. 

To Cape a wall, to crown it. 

A Carding of wool. 

A Caw, cow, var. dial. 

A Cawl, or Cowl, a lump rising in the head through a knock. 

To Caure down, to ruck down. 

To Cast or Kest, to vomit. 

A Caup, as a muck caup. 

A Chare, or Char-woman, one hired by day (not a fixed servant) to wash. 

Chaffer, to chaffer, exchange. 

To Chase a laughter. 

Chid, rebuked, S. cibl>e. 

Chizzel, wheat-bran. 

To Clutter, make a noise, talk fast and loud. 

A Clawt, a tattered cloth, or rag. 

Gleam' d, daubed on as with a trowel. 

Clem'd, or Clam'd, pined, hungered. 

Clinch, or clunch-fisted, covetous. 

I'th' Clout, drunk. 

A Clughe, a valley between two steep hills. 

Clumps, bungling. 

Clukes, clutches. 

Clots, clods, var. dial. 

A Clumpst fellow, i. e. plain-dealing, that speaks at the mouth, Prov. 

A Clunter, an unnimble stumbler. 

Coup, fight. 

Cobby, saucy. 

Coits, Coats, var. dial. Thou'rt a lad i' coits, spoken to men ludicrously. 

Coddy, joined with little, to diminish, as a little coddy lamb, bird, fly is 

exceeding little, perhaps but a var. dial, for conny. 
Cokend, choked. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 421 

Com, came, S. com, Matt. ii. 21. 

To Con, i. e. ply a lesson as schoolboys. 

A Coppin of yarn. 

A dottrel, a piece of iron with a hole in to fasten. 

A Cragg, a stony, rocky bank, &c. 

A Dish Cratch, same with the cradle. 

Crawse, jolly, brisk. 

To Creak as a door. 

Cree'd Wheat, hulled arid boiled. 

To Crinkle, to crouch, to yield sneakingly. 

Cowks, or cinders, coals burnt in common fire, not charred. 

To Laker, to work for hire after the common day's work is over, at 2</. 

an hour. 

To Darne, i. e. sow up holes, so as not to pucker, but fill them up. 
A great Deal or dele, S. Saelar parts, Matt. ii. 22. 
To Deegbfiuug, spread mole-hills. 
To Dither^Q quiver with cold. 
A Dingthrift, a spendall, prodigal. 

To Dizen, to be curious and look big, to sit in state, as if great. 
Dodges on, keeps poorly doing. 
Dog-tree, elder. 
A Dole, Dool, or Doal, a share or part in a townfield ; also money or bread 

distributed at a funeral to the poor. 

To Dree, to be able to go through to the end of the journey. 
A Dribble, an iron pin that carpenters use to drive out wooden pins. 
Driffh, long, tedious. 
A Dubler, a platter. 
A Dub, a puddle, or plash of water. 
The Dule, devil, var. dial. 
He Dung, or Dang it down, threw it down. 
To Durse is to dress ; to durse the house, horses. 
To Durse the ing, to spread the molehills and dung that is in fields. 

Mine Earn, my uncle, S. eame, avunculus. 

For Eance (once) and use it not. 

An Eapns, hands full. 

Earnder, forenoon drinking. 

Edgeyovi brethren, make room, give way. 

Eeen for eyes. 

To Eek, enlarge, S. ican augmentarc. 

Eeen for even, var. dial. 

To Elf, to beat in the dough with more meal and yeast. 

Murk i'th' Eemin, dark in the evening. 

Eeen, evening, per Aplweresin. 

The Fag end, the hinder or latter end. 

F Fate, Faith (an oath). 

Far, for farther, as the far bank. 

Fastne's een, the Tuesday before the Dies Cinerum, or Ash Wednesday. 

Fat (in composition), vessel, as in guile Fat ab S. pat, vas. 

Faugh, fallow ground. 

To Faugh, to plough, and let it lie fallow a summer or winter. 



422 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Fear'd, frightened, afraid, S. apajie's. 

Feer, or Fere, wife, S. geperia, socia. 

To Fest, i. e. put out apprentice. 

To Fitter, to kick smartly with the feet, as children do when pettish, meta- 

phorically to be in a passion, a pelting chase. 
To break or tear all to Fitters, is to reduce to the smallest bits. 
A Filly-foal, from S. pytian to follow the mare. 
A Flacket, a wood or leather vessel. 
A Flask for water to wash in, ab S. pareri plaxan. 
. To Fling, to throw. 
To Flire, or Flear, laugh scornfully. 
Flaughter'd, affrighted. 
A Fleyk, a hurdle made of hazel, or other wands radled, for the clothiers to 

swing or beat their wool upon. 
He- Float me, chid or scolded. 
Flue-full, brimful, flowing full. 
A Flurts, a light housewife. 

Yau'r mains Flush, full-handed, prodigal, wasteful. . ^ 

To Fodder, i. e. give hay or straw to cattle. 
Fogg, wEdish, is the second growth of grass (after mowing). 
To Foreheight, predetermine. 
A .Fo^?- of lead. 
Forspoken, bewitched, forespoken. 
Frayn, (Lane.) ask, S. beprtan, interrogare. 
Freem, handsome. 
A Fr'osk, frog. 

A Fruggan, applied to stirring women. 
To Frust, trust for a time. 
Fulsum, nasty, foul. 
Fur, far, var. dial. 
A Fur or Poor, a furrow. 

To Gang, to go, S. janj. 

Gant, lusty, hearty and healthful. 

Gar" em ken us ale, prodigious strong, make them know us. 

A Garsom, a foregift at entering a farm, a Godspenny. 

To Gaup, to stare about with open mouth. 

A Gauster, a hearty loud laughter. 

A Gawd, a guise, custom, fashion. 



Gawa, go we, let us go. 

Geen, given. 

Gemean mather, the common sort, S. semsene, Matt, viii, 29, from whence 

the present Dutch (ttttqm, common, vulgar. 
Gestinas, q. Geestlings, young geese. 
Gif, if, S. sip, si. 

Do you Gawm me, understand, or mind me. 
A Gladden is a void place, free from encumbrances. 
To Glawm, to look sad. 
To Glee, to look asquint. (Yorks. as well as Line.) 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 423 

To Glizzen, glister or sparkle, as stars in frost ; it freezes hard, and cen 

glizzens, (in which sense alone it is used). 
Gloppen'd, surprised. 
To Glore, to look staringly. 
Goyts of mills, where the stream passes out. 
To Graw before the ague fit. 

Graut, wort, sweet drink, ale before it is wrought with barm. 
Greese, or Greece, stairs. 
The Groyn of a swine, the snout. 

A Groop, the hinder part of the mystall, where the cattle dung. 
Griesly, ugly, grisled. 
Guizend, oddly and skittishly habited. 
A Gystefa cattle, to be pastured. 

A Hackstaver, hasty, slovenly fellow, both in habit and deed ; but it has a 

peculiar respect to speaking ill, naturally or morally. 
To Haffpbrto cut irregularly. 
A Haking fellow, an idle loiterer. 
Hala, bashful, nicely modest. 
Hame, home, S. ham. 
Happens, perhaps. 

Hard, for covetous, and in some places for half drunk. 
Harenut, earthnut. 
Harns, brains (Yorkshire). 
Havers, manners. 
To Heald, to lean to one side. 
A Hebble, a narrow, short, plank-bridge. 
The Heck is ordinarily but half a door, the lower half. 
Hen-harrow, a kind of kite harrier. 
To Hent, to catch a flying ball. 
Height, called, &c. 
To Height, to threaten. 
To Higle, to loiter long in buying. 
Hineberries, raspberries. 
Hippins, stoppings, large stones set in a shallow water at a step's distance 

from each other, to pass over by. 
Hitter, eager, keen. 
Hoast, cough, a S. ppor-ta. 
A Hoppet, a seed basket ; also that in the mill in which the com is put to 

grind. 

A Hooyze, a half cough, proper to cattle. 
A Host, a cough. 
A Hullet, (a howlet) an owl. 
To Hype, to gird at, to cast out disgraceful words. 
A Hott, a wood, S. polt, sylva. 

An Ing, a plain even ground (mostly meadows) by the waterside. 

To dress the Inn, that is the molehills, and dung, which is durst or drest, 

i. e. spread aproad with an ing-rake. 
An Inkling, an intimation, or notice. 
An Ize-bone, the huckle-bone, the coxa. 
A Junket, a wicker long wisket to catch fish. 



424 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

To Reive a cart, whelm on one side. 

A Keiver, a bumper, or brimmer of liquor. 

A Kitt, a milking or water-pail with one or two ears, with or without a 

cover. 

A Kiting, a term of reproach. 
It stands Kittle, i. e. ticklishly, ready to fall. 
Knoffg, nine-pins. 

A Konny thing, a little, as well as a fine thing. 
A Kivver, or Kimlin, a powdering tub. 

To Lag, to come last behind, as if tired, flag. 

Laird, (Scotice) lord, S. plapoji'fc. 

To Lake, play. 

Lang, long. var. dial. S. lang. 

La-ngholds, spaniels upon horses' feet, fastened with a horse-lock to keep 

them from leaping wrong. 
To Lane nothing, to conceal nothing. 
To Lant ale, to put urine into it. 
Laughter, laying as a hen lays her laughter, that is, all the eggs she will lay 

that time. 

To Lawk, i. e. weed corn. 
Lass-a-day, (alas !) an expression of condolence. 
I'd as Leive do so, as willingly, it is equal to me. 
Leathwake, limber, pliable. 
leasing, lying, a S. leapunj, mendacium. 
Leath, ease or rest. 
Leer, laugh deridiugly, Hear. 
Leet you, pretend. 
Ley, fallow ground. 

To Leyse, to pick the slain and trucks out of wheat. 
A Libhorn, a sow-gelder. 

To Litt, to colour or dye, whence the name Lister or Litster. 
Listring, thickening, (Yorkshire as well as Ches.) 
To Loup, or Lauf, to leap. 
To Lug, to pull one by the hair, or ears, lugs. 
A huge Lunshin of bread, a large piece. 

Maine, as by might and main, S. msesen. 

To Maine, to lame. 

A Malkin, a cloth at the end of a pole, wherewith, whetting it, they cleanse 

the bottom of the oven ; applied to a slut. 
Mare, more, var. dial., S. majie. 
Mate, match. 

My Maugh, my brother-in-law. 
A Mawkin, a dirty frow. 
Mawm, tender, friable, short, mellow. 

A Mazed Goose, applied to a person astonished, amazed per aphseresin. 
Heedless, without measure. 
Just Meet, exact. 

Meeterly, indifferently, meeterly, as Megge Rylay danced. 
Mensfull, neat and clean. 

Menya, a family, a house menya, S. CDemo, Matt. viii. 1. 
A Midge, no gnat, but the smallest of all flies. 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 425 

Millums, watery places about a mill-dam. 

A Minstre, cathedral, S. GDynrrjie, Chri. 

Miscryed, discovered. 

It Mizzles, rains small, like the falling of a mist. 

To Mobb, to dress awkwardly. 

A Moqfin, a wheat cake, baked upon a bake-stone over the fire, as oat-cakes. 

Moolter, toll of a mill. 

A Miln and Milner, for a mill and miller. 

Welnee Moyder'd, almost distracted. 

To Mooysen, i. e. wonder, from musing. 

Mucky, dirty, as the streets in rainy weather; muck, towngate mire, as well 

as dung. 

It Mugyles, rains small, mist-like. 
Munsworn, foresworn. 

Munt, hint, as I know your meaning by your munting. 
Mystall, mewstall for cattle, oxen, and cows. 



Nar, 

A Nawt-heard, neat-herd. 

Nawt-foot-same, the oil or grease that is boiled out of a neat's foot. 

A Neave, a fist. 

I did not Neigh it, came not nigh it. 

My Neame, or Neme, my uncle. 

To Net, to wash clothes, give them a net. 

A Nether, or Nedder, an adder a S. ne^na, Matt. iii. 7. 

Nifles, are glandules, kernels, which being hid and covered with fat, perhaps 

might either be denominated from, or denominate covert and secret filch- 

ing of things, Nifling, Nifle. 
Nise, strange, nice work, strang. 

Nise, applied to a person, is precise, opposite to free and hearty. 
He Nim'd it, took it, S. mm, Matt. ii. '20. 
Noffs, shank-bones, hence playing at nogs, or nine-pins, because the bones of 

the shanks of cattle are used therein. 

Onters, many enters, pretences, allegements, scruples. 

An Oskin of land, an oxgang contains ten acres in some places, in others 

sixteen, eighteen, twenty-four, and fifty in some part of Bradford parish. 
Ossell, perhaps. 
Oumel, a title of reproach, sometimes applied (as by Mr. Gafbut, in his 

'Demonstration of the ^Resurrection of Christ') to the devil. 
Ournder, afternoon drinkings. 
An Ores, an ox. 
An Ox-Boyse, an ox-stall, a S. bonh, prsesepe, a boose. 

A Paddock, or Parrock, a small narrow close, that is an appendix to a greater, 
for the most part. 

Pan, that descnbed as the pan in a building, is properly the wall-plate ; the 
pan is that piece of timber in wooden houses that lies upon the top of the 
posts, and upon which the balks rest, and the spar-foot also. 

Parrisht, starved with cold, qu. perished. 

Push, I'll pash thy harns out. 

Pat, fit, proper, pat to the purpose. 



426 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

To Pee, is also look near and narrowly. 

Peel the pot (cool it), with the ladle, taking out and pouring in again. 

Peil, stir, what a peil keep you ? 

Perepoint, a perepoint wall made of a thinner sort of hewn stone, set upon 

the edge. 

A Pig-tail candle, the least, put in to make weight. 
A Plat, a place. 

Pock-arid, marked with the smallpox. 
To Poyt the clothes off. 
A fire Poit, an iron to stir up the fire with. 
A Prigge, a little brass skillet. 
To Pucker, to draw up like a purse, unevenly. 
A Puddle, a fat body. 

Quite for wholly is general, for quit, Northern, 'twill not quit cost. 

Radlings, hazel or other boughs, put within the studs of a wall to be covered 

with lime or mortar. 
A Rawp, a hoarseness. 
To Raume, to reach. 
The Reefe, the itch; reefy, itchy. 
To Reek, to smoke, a S. jiec, smoke. 



Rinish, wild, jolly, unruly, rude. 

A Riggald, abusively, applied to men as well as to cattle. 
Roky, misty. 
To Rooyse, to extol. 
A Roitp, a hoarseness. 
Rudd, red stone. 
A Rudle, a riddle. 

Ryndta, used to cows to make them give way and stand in their stalls or 
booyses. 

I Sagh, I saw. 

Samme milk, butter in the churn, after the milk breaks into butter, a S. 

rammam, conglobare. 

Saur, sour, mend like sour milk in summer, Prov. 
Sawl, soul, var. dial., S. pa^el. 
I'll Saul him, beat him. 
To Sawce, Rustic, pro sowce, box the ears. 
To Scream, cry aloud. 
Scruby-grass, var. dial, for scurvy-grass. 
Scuff of a hill, the declivity or side. 
Seaves, pilled rushes, of which they make seav candles. 
Sel, Seln, self. 

Sere, several, sere ways, several ways. 
A Setle, a seat, a S. retl. 
To Shaffle, a Shuffles, a bungler. 

To Shale (proper to the feet), in with the heels and out with the toes. 
No Sheds, no difference. 

To Skill, as peas, to take them out of the swads. 
A SAive of bread, cut off the loaf. 
Shoe, or Shou, ilia, she, var. dial. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 427 

Shooen, or Shune, shoes. 
Shool, shovel, var. dial. 
Shooyts, shovel-board, where the shillings are directed as at a mark in 

shooting. 

Cow Sharn, or dung. 

Shroffs, a company of bushes, of hazel, thorns, briers. 
The Site, used in straining milk. 
It Sites, i. e. rains fast. 
To Sipe, to let all the water or liquor out which cleaves to the sides of a vessel 

after the main is poured out. 
Skath or Scath, loss, S. a Scat>e, nocumentum, as the scath came in at his own 

fence, Prov. 

A Skeel, a kit or milking-pail. 
Skeller'd, warped Yorkshire as well as Derbyshire. 
Sheer the esse, tide esse. 

Skanskback, easily knowable, having some special mark. 
To Skimmer, shine, look bright. 
A SlamtrasJi, a slovenly dirty person. 
To Slap one, i. e. beat, a sono verbonun, vox ovoparoir. 
To Slart, to plash with dirt. 
To Slap out the tongue. 
To Sleat a dog. 

Slim, sometimes signifies crafty, knavish, a slim customer. 
To Slive, to clear, to rive. 
A Slivinff, a lazy fellow. 
To Slot the door, to bolt it when shut. 

A Slough, a watery hoggish place, item, the cast skin of a snake. 
A Slush, wasteful. 

To Slush through work, to do much, but slimly, carelessly. 
A Smithy, a smith's shop. 
To Smoar, to smother, per contrac. 
To Snaffle, to speak through the nose. 
A Snaffle-bridle or Bit, snape bit. 
A Snap, & lad or servant, now mostly used ludicrously, a S. Suapa, pucr, 

Matt. viii. 13. 

To Snaffle, to linger, delay, magno conatu nihil agere. 
To Snavle, snivel, speak through the nose. 
Snever, slender, smooth. 

To Sniff, to draw the wind smartly up the nose. 
A Snicket, one that pincheth all to nought. 
To Suite, is to blow the nose ; to wipe, is to dry it. 
A Sod, a turf, is thin and round, or oval, taken from the surface of the earth ; 

a sod thick and square, or oblong mostly. 
Soncy, cunning. 
To Sonter, to loiter, a santering or sonlriny body, one that squanders the 

time in going idly about. 
To Sosse, proper to dogs. 
To Souse or Sawse on the ears, i. e. box. 
Snuffers for the nose, or nostrils. 
A Spaniel. Qu. If not the S. name for N. Langholds, we have in these 

parts no other name but Cow-ty. 
To Sparkle away, disperse, spend, waste. 
To Specr, inquire the road, a S. Spynian, scrutari. 

A Spclk, a wooden splinter tied on, to keep a broken bone from bending or 
unsctting jigain. 



428 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Spick and span new, that has never been worn. 

To be Spurr'd, is to have the banns of marriage asked. 

To Squat down, to cower down suddenly. 

A Stawk, i. e. stalk of plants. 

Stark, stiff., weary ; also covetous. 

Staupings, winter steps, the holes made by the feet of horses and cattle in 

miry highways and other places. 
Stovers, hedge-stavers, i. e. stakes. 
Stav'd, stawv'd, as a hedge that is cut. 
To Steim, to bespeak a thing. 
Stevon, a strong-sounding voice, a S. Srerin. 
A Stiddy, an anvil. 
A Stiffh, a ladder. 

Storcks Bill, to storken, proper to fat growing cold, and so hard. 
Stowd, cropped as horses' ears. 
Stradling, strutting and striding. 
Strea, straw. 

ToStreik, stretch out the limbs. 

A Stroak of corn with us is but half a bushel, or two pecks. 
A Stroom, Strawm, the instrument to keep the malt in the vat, that it run not 

out with the liquor. 
Strunted, cut off short. 
A Swaithe, the row of grass cut down with the scythe. Laid o' th' swaithe 

bank, is spread abroad. 
Swamous, modest. 

A Swamp, a boggy bottom, a soft rushy piece. 
A Swatch, a shred of cloth. 
To Sweat, as a candle with the wind. 
A Swine-coat, hog's-stye, a S. Cote, domuncula. 
To Swinge, scourge, a S. Spinsan, to thresh. 
To Switch a hedge, i. e. to cut off the outlying boughs. 
To Swither, to singe. 

Taplash, small beer, or thin drink. 

A Tarrant (forte pro tyrant), a crabbed froward fellow. 

A Tavern, a cellar. 

To TW-witb. the hand. 

A water Tawv, a swooning fit. 

A Teathy body, peevish, crabbed. 

A Teeming-woman, i. e. child-bearing woman. 

A Tether, tedder, var. dial. 

Thor-cake, or hearth-cake. 

Tharms, pudding-skins. 

Thaw, thou, var. dial. 

To Thoyl, afford. 

To Thraw, to turn wood with a tool. 

A Threave of straw, a burden of it. 

A Thwang for a shoe, the latchet, S. $pan3, a thong. 

To Tifle, to stifle, overset. 

A Tifted Horse, when broken above the loins. 

To Tipe over, fall, or overturn. 

Tiper-down, strong drink, for tiping over. 

Tipsy, almost drunk, from tipling. 

Titter and better, sooner. 



COlffRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 429 

To Topple down, fall. 

Toota well, very well, too too well. 

A Tooming, wool taken off the cards. 

Topsy-turvy, upside-down. 

Trawth, as faith and trawth, S. TneopSe, fides. 

A Trippet, a quarter of a pound. 

To Tries A, to run through all the dirt, a sono, 6vop. 

To keep Tutch, to be as good as the promise. 

Tuta, too too; thou'rt tuta earnest, clamorous, covetous, importunate, 

unsatisfiable. 

Titrlings, coals about a fist's bigness. 
Twills, quills. 

Uncoiith, strange, uncommon, unusual, a S. uncofc, unknown. 
An Urchion, a hedgehog, urchin. 
Uvver, for upper, or over, var. dial. 

Fa rsallfjjj^ versal . 

A Waag, a lever. 

To Wade the water. 

Wae'st heart, a condolence to the same purport with 

Woe's me, woe is the heart, &c. 

To Waite, to blame. 

Walker's earth, for scouring cloth. 

A Waugh-mill, fulling-mill. 

Waugh, insipid, unsalted, and so unsavoury. 

The Wawks, or corners of the mustachios. 

Wamb, womb, var. dial. S. pamb. 

Wane, decline ; the moon is in the wane. S. panian, minuere. 

War, stand aside, give way, beware. 

Warld, i' th' varsafwarld, universal world. 

Worse, worse, var. dial. 

To Wax, grow, S. peaxan, crescere. 

A Wee-bit, a tiny wee-bit, a small piece (a pure Yorkshireism). 

Weet, i. e. wot, know, I weet full well. 

Weeting, urine. 

Weiky, moist. 

To Ween, think, a S. penan, opinari. 

Welling, boiling. 

To Welt, to totter. 

To Welt or Wolt, overturn cart or wain. 

Wellaneerina, alas. 

Wei-nee, well-nigh ; it's wel-nee night, almost. 

Wesh, or wash, urine. 

To Whakker, tremble, shake every joint. 

Whaint, strange, odd, implying naughtiness, whaintwark. 

A Whamire, a quagmire, var. dial. 

Whawm, Whelm, overwhelm, is whawmed over. 

A Whein, a quean. 

A Wheel-pit, whirlpool. 

Wheemly, neatly. 

Whak't, for quaked, whence. 

Whakers, for quakers, le trembleur*. 



430 CORRESPONDENCE OF ftAY. 

WTiart, quart ; meit m' a whart o' ooyl, i. e. measure me a quart of oil. 

Whilk, which, S. philc. 

Whilkin, whether. 

White, for quit ; it will not white cost. 

To White, to cut sticks with a knife, and make them white. 

Whiskin or Whisking, adjectively is great, applied to almost anything, as floods, 
fire, winds. 

Whisking\s> also switching; there will be whisking for't, also beating, swing- 
ing, whipping. 

Whreak, to speak ingutture, and whiningly. 

A Why, an heifer. 

Wight, swift. 

Wind-raw, grass or hay raked into long rows for drying. 

Wine-berries, not grapes, but gooseberries, pin-bejiian, Matt. vii. 16. 

A Wither, strong fellow. 

A Wogh, any partition, whether of boards or mud-walls, or laths and lime ; 
as a boardshed-wogh, studded wogh. 

A Woggin, a narrow passage between two houses. 

To Walter (as welter). 

Wormstall, shelter for cattle in hot weather. 

Wote, know. 

To Tall, and to Yawl, or Yowl ; the latter appropriated to dogs, the former 
to bawlers. In yall the a sounds as in that, in yawl as in the rustic caw 
for cow. 

A Yawd, a horse. 

Yeast, barm. 

To Yeather, to beat with a long hazel, thorn, &c. 

Yeeke, itch. 

Yield, i. e. reward. 

The Yeender, or Earnder, the forenoon, Halifax, in Yorkshire. 

Yew, you, var. dial. S. jep. 

Yews, for ewes. 

Yooyle, yule, de Yule, vide Mareschalii Observ. in Version. Anglo-Sax. 
Evang.' p. 520. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, July 27, 1703. 

SIR, It is now a good while since that I acquainted 
you that some friends advised me, in order to the compiling 
a History of Insects, to describe such exotic species as were 
to be found in the cabinets of the curious in and about 
London or elsewhere, if I could procure the sight and use 
of them; whereupon you very freely and generously 
offered me the use of your collection, which far transcends 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 431 

all the rest, and wherein there are not many species 
wanting that are in other men's hands, especially of such 
as are for their rarity or beauty most valuable. Your 
kind offer I was not then very forward to accept, because 
1 thought it very difficult, if possible, to send and remit 
them without prejudice. But since I have been so ill and 
indisposed with frequent diarrhoeas and the pain of my 
sores, that I have had little will or ability to mind any- 
thing else, and therefore begin to think I must lay aside 
all thoughts of such a history. 

But because I do not remember that I gave you a full 
account of my design, I shall do it now. I did not in- 
tend fcwvrite an universal History of Insects, but only of 
such British ones as have or should come to my know- 
ledge, which I do believe would scarce amount to a third 
part of such as are natives of these islands ; and such 
exotics only as are to be found in the hands of the virtuosi 
about London, especially yourself. But these separately ; 
first, the British by themselves in each tribe, and then 
the exotics after them by themselves. I intended to begin 
with the Papilionaceous tribe, not because they are the 
first in order of nature, but because I have taken most 
pains in searching them out, and have described most 
species of them. Of these, the diurnal ones are not very 
numerous, I having not observed above forty-five sorts of 
them. But of the nocturnal, should I live twenty years 
longer, I despair of ever coming to an end, every year 
offering new ones; and yet I have already observed 
about 300 species, and this within a small compass of 
ground. But these I shall so methodise that it shall not 
be difficult for any man to find any Phalaena he shall 
discover in the method, if it be there described, or else 
to know that it is a new one, and not described by me ; 
but enough of this, it not being like to take effect. 

Now, sir, let me ask (for I hear you have had him 
under cure) what you think of Sir Thomas Willughby, 
whether he be likely to recover a perfect state of health 
again. I cannot but be much troubled and concerned 



432 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

for him. I wrote to him about his father's ' History of 
Insects,' but received no answer from him. I shall give 
you .no further trouble at present; but with humble 
thanks for the many favours and kindnesses you have 
formerly shown me, and the tender of the services of my 
wife and girls, conclude this prolix letter, resting, 

Sir, 
Your most humble servant and orator, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVEE ?]. 

SIR, I wrote to you a while since concerning those 
additions which you were pleased to give me hopes you 
would make to my Supplement. Hist. Plant., which I hope 
came to your hands, and that you are not unmindful of 
the request I made to you therein, which I now renew ; 
I have also something else to communicate to you, and 
desire your assistance in. Some friends would put a new 
task upon me, that is, of drawing up a History of Insects, 
which I have some thoughts of doing, though, indeed, I 
am in ill case to attempt such a thing, labouring under 
almost constant pain, which renders me unfit for business, 
being not able to mind anything with attention. If I do 
undertake it I must desire the use of your exotic insects 
to describe, and get figured, as also a sight of your 
English Papilios, both diurnal and nocturnal, or Phalsense. 
I have seen and described the most part of the English 
diurnal ones, but I hear you have some new ones out of 
the west. The Phalaenae are innumerable, and doubtless 
you have met with abundance not discovered by me. 

Most of the exotic insects that are come over into 
England are in your and Dr. Sloane's hands. Dr. Sloane 
hath very frankly and generously promised me the use of 



-S 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 43& 

his, and I hope you will not deny the like of yours,- My 
design is, first to describe and figure our British insects 
by themselves, tribe by tribe ; and then to each tribe to 
add the exotics. I shall not pretend to write a perfect 
history ; for though I have described above 200 Phalaenae 
of our own land, yet I doubt whether I have described a 
third part of the natives thereof. The exotics are ten 
times more numerous ; but there are but few of them in 
comparison come over to us, with which I shall content 
myself. I shall begin with the Papilionaceous tribe, not 
because I intend that for the first, but because I have 
taken most pains in it. I shall give you no further trouble 
at present, resting, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 
Black Notley, Aug. 25, 1703. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVEK ?]. 

SIR, You may justly wonder that having so lately 
written to you I should now give you the trouble of 
another letter. But I hope you will be satisfied of the 
reason of my present writing when you shall have read 
the following lines. 

I have lately received a letter from Mr. Smith, wherein 
he tells me that Mr. Motte saith, he fears that he shall 
stay for the Appendix to the Third Volume of Plants, and 
that it will not be ready so soon as he shall have printed 
off all the rest. This will be very unhappy indeed if it 
should prove so, for the work hath been already retarded 
too long, &c. It concerns us, as well for our credit as 
interest, to get it out as soon as possible, so far he. 
Wherefore I do now again press you with all earnestness 
to expedite and get ready your additions as soon as may 
be. I esteem them so very considerable that the work 
must not want them, though the edition should be 

28 



434 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

retarded in expectation, which I hope you will take effectual 
care that it be not. As for the ' History of. Insects/ I 
am advised by some friends not to engage myself in it. 
And, indeed the sad pains and infirmities I labour under, 
threatening the approach of death, incline me to listen to 
their counsel, though I am not yet resolved what to do. 
No more at present, but that I am, 

Sir, 
Your faithful friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, Sept. 1, 1703. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVEK?]. 

SIR, I received yours of Sept. 9th, and am very glad 
to understand thereby that you are in so hopeful a way 
of a perfect recovery from so long-continued an indispo- 
sition. I give you thanks also for your readiness to 
communicate your exotic insects to be by me described 
for my intended history of those animalcules, with what 
you know of them. But truly they are so numerous, and 
I so crazy and infirm, that I am not resolved whether to 
attempt such a work or not. But yet to cut short and 
facilitate it, I intend not to insert more exotics than are 
to be found in the cabinets of the curious in England, 
and which I myself shall see and describe, the most of 
which (as I before told you) are in your and Dr. Sloane's 
hands, so that I shall not concern myself with those 
published and to be published by the Lady Marian, as 
neither with those of Goedartius, Hoefnagell, Hollar, 
Aldrovand, any further than to take out of them synonyma 
of our British ones, and such exotics as shall be seen to 
[be] described by me. 

I cannot but wonder you should have such a great 
number of diurnal exotic Papilios; by diurnal ones I 
understand with you such as have antenna: davata. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 435 

And for the English ones you have been more industrious 
and happy than I in discovering fifty-five species ; whereas 
all that I could find or procure amount to no more than 
forty-three ; and yet I think I have all mentioned in your 
'Centuries.' Of Phalaenae, or nocturnal ones, I have 
described above two hundred kinds, found near us, and 
yet am not near come to an end of those of our neigh- 
bourhood. I guess those to be found in all England are 
treble of that sum. But I shall say no more of this subject 
at present, because I shall not meddle with it till my 
Supplement be despatched ; only, which I had almost 
forgot, I must acquaint you with what method I intend to 
use, anfrthat is Swammerdam's, in his general 'History of 
Insects/ which seems to me the best of all. It would be 
long to describe it, and therefore I refer you to the book. 
Be pleased to respite the sending your insects till I be 
at leisure to describe them, which will not be till my 
Supplement be out. 

Your contributions to my Supplement I wish you 
would fit for the press yourself, to save me any pains 
about them ; for, alas, I am so ill and afflicted with pain 
that I am fit for nothing ; and yet were I never so well, to 
examine all particulars would be impossible for me, be- 
cause I want books, and it would take up more time 
than the undertaker's interest will admit. My parts and 
memory are much impaired by age and continual pain. 
Yet should I be glad to see the plants themselves, which 
you may please to send down as you intended next 
week. If figures cannot be procured, it were better lay 
aside all thoughts of writing a history. I shall at present 
add no more than that I am, 

Sir, 
Yours to serve you, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, Sept. 11, 1703. 



436 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, November 17, 1703. 

SIR, I received yours of the 13th November by post, 
and the next day your rich and noble present of sugar by 
carrier, for which myself and relatives here return you 
our very humble service and thanks, which is all the 
amends we are either at present able, or for the future 
likely to make you ; yet am I willing and desirous to 
testify my gratitude by some real effect of it, if at any 
time it shall lie in my power. 1 shall be very glad to see 
your China, Indian, and Badminton plants, believing 
them to be a rare spectacle ; but, alas, I am not conversant 
enough with exotic plants as to be able to rectify any 
mistakes about them. I fear they come too late to be 
inserted in my Supplement. I am so constantly afflicted 
with pain, that I am able to do little, and can proceed 
but very slowly in any business I undertake. I have not 
laid aside all thoughts of the History of Insects, but wait 
till this Supplement be off hand before I set upon it. 
Dr. Robinson would have me first to compose and pub- 
lish a Method of Insects, which I think might be of use, 
especially if I should happen to die before the History be 
finished. My booksellers have imposed a new task upon 
me, that is, to make such alterations and amendments as 
are necessary or convenient in, and additions to, my three 
Physico-theological discourses, which they are now about 
to print the third time. This being all I have to com- 
municate at present, I take leave, and rest, 

Sir, 
Yours in all service, 

JOHN RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 437 

Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, November 24, 1703. 

SIR, The box of plants, which you did me the favour 
to send me last week, came safe, for which I return you 
thanks. I have cursorily overlooked them, and do find 
that the specimens from Badminton are very fair ones, 
and curiously dried and preserved. The Chinese and 
Indian ones want much of that perfection and elegancy 
the others have. 

As Insure and freedom from pain will permit, I intend 
to survey all more diligently, and give you such a poor 
account as I can of them. I have not been conversant 
enough among Indian and American plants to be able to 
judge aright of them. Dried specimens cannot represent 
all the principal parts, flower, seed-vessel or fruit, and 
seed ; and I have seen none of late discovery growing in 
gardens, not having ability to take journeys to visit 
them. 

I long till this Supplement be off hand. I am sensible 
that I am no longer able to do anything laudable in 
botanies, memory and parts failing me, being much 
weakened by age and diseases ; but enough of complaints. 
I take leave, and rest, 

Sir, 

Your very humble and much obliged 

servant and orator, 



JOHN RAY. 



To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



438 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Mr. MOTT. 

B.N., December 1,1703. 

SIR, I received yours of the 27th, imparting the sad 
news of the dismal effects of the late tempestuous wind 
at the City of London. We in the country hereabouts 
have not fared much better as to our damages, but I have 
not heard as yet of any person that hath been killed. 
For mine own part, I have not escaped altogether scot 
free, but have sustained considerable loss in the tiling 
and covering of my house and barns, and by the blowing 
down two trees, a large oak and an apple-tree. 

In the little roll of copy I sent you there were three 
parcels, the last of which wanted a title, which I have now 
subjoined to this letter, and desire you would prefix it to 
that parcel. 

I sent a paper containing several observations to be 
added to my Supplement to Dr. Sherard, who told me 
he had delivered them to Mr. Mott, who promised to 
insert them in their proper places ; but I do not find 
them in the copy. They cost me some pains, and I 
should be sorry they should be lost. Better be thrust 
into the Appendix than quite omitted. 

My wife and girls salute yourself and brother partner 
with the tender of their respects by the hand of, 

Sir, 
Yours to serve you, 

JOHN RAY. 

lor Mr. Mott, 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 439 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVER P]. 

SIR, I received yours without date on Sunday last 
by post, and the evening before a parcel inclosing some 
letters, and the book you mention, which I read over, and 
found some very good observations and experiments 
concerning the male seed and generation of plants. You 
being in haste to have it returned, I shall send it next 
week if the carrier go, and may then send my papers to 
Mr. Mott, with punctual directions where to insert the 
particulars. You do very well to continue correspondence 
with ^Father Camelli, who is a very industrious and 
ingenious person ; but I am sore afraid that the wars will 
interrupt your epistolary commerce. He deserves to be 
by all means obliged, being made, as I may say, for the 
advancing of natural knowledge. 

The dried plants you were pleased to send me I had 
before now finished the perusal of and sent back, had not 
the weather fell out so sharp, and my pains so great as 
in a great measure to disable me ; however, God willing, 
you shall have them within three weeks at furthest, and 
then I desire you would send your Chusan plants, for I 
would fain compare them with those Dr. Sloane sent me, 
which are without names. The rest of the plants you 
signify your intention to send me, though I should be 
glad to see, yet because they will come too late for me 
to take any notes of to use in this work, you may please 
to respite the sending of at present ; only I desire you 
would draw up such an index as you mention of them, 
that the book may not quite want them. There are some 
other particulars which I should have returned answer to, 
but I want time at present, the messenger being in haste. 
I thank you for your kind expressions of affection, and 
am, reciprocally, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notlcy, Dec. 22, 1703. 



440 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVER?]. 

SIR, I received your affectionate and obliging letter, 
and return you many thanks for your good opinion of rny 
doings, and so much the more by how much I am sen- 
sible it is less deserved. Though I dare not suspect for 
insincere anything I find therein, but do look upon all as 
the real language of your mind, and true expression of 
your present sense, yet I should very much contradict 
my own knowledge should I accept as due the high 
character you are pleased to bestow upon my mean per- 
formances, or value myself thereby. Tecum habita et 
noris quam sit tibi curta supellex, was a good advice of 
the poet. I may truly say, that if, secluding affection, 
you would, after just examination, weigh my ' History of 
Plants ' in the incorrupt balance of impartial judgment, 
you would find it rather to need pardon than to merit 
praise, so many defects and errors there might be dis- 
covered therein. Though I was to blame for undertaking 
such a task, being conscious of my own inability to per- 
form it, yet more culpable for not rendering it so correct 
and perfect as I was capable, by huddling it up in haste, 
and not bestowing time and pains enough upon it ; in 
excuse whereof I have no more to plead than I have 
already alleged in the preface. 

As for what I have said concerning yourself, I am sure 
that could not bribe you so far to exceed in my com- 
mendations, it being no more than you might justly 
challenge. You may, without the least imputation of 
pride or self-flattery, think as well of your own abilities 
as the usual acception of these epithets amounts to ; and 
this all that know you so well as I do must needs acknow- 
ledge is no more than the truth will warrant. I hope ere 
long you will verify what I have written of you, and 
oblige the ingenious by making public, with the addition 
of your learned illustrations, that rich treasure, or botanic 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 441 

store, which you have with so much pains and cost 
amassed. You may with more alacrity and satisfaction 
prosecute such an undertaking, or might indeed have 
composed a history of plants, whose profession leads you 
thereto, than I, without the verge of whose calling it lies, 
and who can scarce find arguments sufficient to satisfy 
myself, and justify my proceedings. Your, and other of 
my friends' opinions and arguments do so much weigh 
and prevail with me, as to induce me to think more 
favorably of what I have done, and not altogether con- 
demn my studies. I could do no less than return these 
few lines in answer to your elaborate letter, to wluch I 
shall olfly add that I am, 

Sir, 
Your very humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notlcy, March 5, 1704. 

SIR, Yours of April 1st I received, whereby I under- 
stood that the box of plants found not its way to you, at 
which I was not a little troubled ; whereupon I sent to 
the carrier's to inquire after it. They told the messenger 
the box was not at Braintree, but was sent up to London 
Wednesday before. The carrier laid the fault on his 
porter, but promised, at his next going up, to take care 
of it himself, as I hope he will, else he must be account- 
able for it. I must now, to do Sir Thomas Millington 
right, acknowledge a mistake of mine in the description 
of his antiscorbutic receipt, for he did not say that all the 
ingredients were to be boiled in the wort, but the dock 



442 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

roots only. The herbs were to be put in a bag, and 
hung up in the vessel after the drink was wrought. I 
have not begun this method yet, the weather falling out 
so very sharp. 

My wife and girls give you their most humble services. 

I am, Sir, 

Yours entirely, 



JOHN RAY. 



To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, May 7, 1704. 

SIR, Since you were so kind as to desire to know the 
success of the method of physic I have lately entered 
upon, I ought to have given you satisfaction before now, 
and you may justly think me very much to blame that I 
have not; but when I shall have acquainted you with 
my condition during this time, I hope you will excuse 
me. At first I began with a tincture of steel in wine, 
and the diet-drink prescribed me by Sir Tho. Millington ; 
after which, within a few days, I took a dose of rhubarb, 
which, though sufficient for any ordinary man, yet wrought 
not upon me till the afternoon, nor then to any purpose, 
but the day after I took it, sufficiently. After a few days 
more I took another dose of rhubarb, quickened with 
some grains of scammony, which wrought with me not 
only the day I took it, but four or five days after, yet 
moderately and without disturbance. This interrupted 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 443 

me in the use of the chalybeate medicine, yet I stuck to 
my diet-drink ; but observing lately that I was still in a 
purging condition, so that I was forced several times to 
rise in the night, and that this purging happened those 
nights I had taken a draught of my diet-drink at or after 
supper, I began to suspect, and am now fully persuaded, 
that this diet-drink is purgative by reason of the dock 
roots, those that prepared it boiling too many in the 
wort ; so now I am returned to my chalybeate drink, and 
have moderated the use of my D. D. Notwithstanding 
the inteiTupted and irregular use of this method, my 
smaller sores on my legs and feet are most of them healed 
and l3*ied, and I have cleared my legs of a great part of 
the scabs and scurf wherewith they were almost covered ; 
but yet the pain continues still, and I am as unable to 
walk as before. Pardon this tedious w(>iavtv\yoia, which 
yet I should not have troubled you with but in obedience 
to your command. I am, 

Sir, 
Yours in all service, 

JOHN RAY. 

My wife and girls give you their very humble services. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, at his 
house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVEK?]. 

SIR, The pains I do almost constantly labour under 
make it somewhat uneasy to me to write, else 1 had not 
deferred thus long to return you many thanks for the 
great pains you have taken to enrich my history with 
such a multitude of rare and nondescript plants from 
China, India, Africa, and America, as the many friends 



444 CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 

and correspondents you have in all parts have furnished 
you withal. 

I cannot but wonder that my booksellers should be so 
slow and dilatory in publishing this book, the edition 
whereof one would think it should be their interest to 
hasten. I have received no sheets of the Appendix since 
Father Camelli's history. 

I am now about drawing up a Method of Insects, in 
order whereto the ' General History ' of Swammerdam, 
in Latin, would be very useful to me, and save me much 
pains and time in translating out of the French edition 
(which only I have) into Latin what I shall borrow out 
of it. I have written to Mr. Smith more than once to 
procure me one, but he hath either forgotten or neglected 
it, so that now I must entreat the loan of yours for a 
while. I shall carefully return it again so soon as I have 
done with it. 

Some of your English insects I have not seen, others I 
am in doubt of. Mr. Dale will send you an account of 
them. Such as I have not I desire you would send me 
to describe ; and so doing you will further oblige him 
who is already, 

Sir, 
Very much yours, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, May 17, 1704. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, June 8, 1704. 



SIR, Since my last to you, all my hopes of amend- 
ment and relief by the method of physic I use are 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 445 

quashed. After the sores seemed to be in a fair way of 
healing, and my legs in a good measure cleared of the 
scabs and scurf that covered them ; I know not upon 
what occasion, they broke out again, with more and larger 
ulcers than before, which also ran at a great rate, and 
continue still so to do, notwithstanding all my physic, so 
that I do almost despair of any help or remedy. All 
that I have to do is to endeavour to render them as easy 
and peaceable as I can. However, I will go on still with 
my method for some time, till I find by experience that I 
shall reap little benefit by it. I have drawn up a little 
method of insects which may take up two sheets. It is 
very l&me and imperfect, especially in the tribe of muscae. 
I did intend to have sent it up this day, but I fear it is 
now too late and the carrier gone. I hear the third 
volume of my ' History of Plants' is now finished at the 
press. The ' General History of Insects' I fear I shall be 
in no case to undertake and carry on, should I live long 
enough (which I have no reason to hope), my pains are 
so grievous, and render my life so uneasy and uncom- 
fortable. My wife and daughters send you their humble 
services and thanks for the noble presents you have made 
us. Having nothing further to communicate, I take 
leave, and rest, 

Sir, 

Your very much obliged and affectionate 

friend and humble servant, 



Jo. RAY. 



To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloanc, 

at his house, at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



446 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, June 10, 1704. 

SIR, I received yours of June 8th, and return you 
thanks for your good advice therein contained. In most 
particulars I agree with you, as that this winter weather, 
unseasonable at this time of the year, hath and doth 
much exasperate the pain of my sores. Also I am [in] 
accord with you in what you write concerning too much 
purging in this or any course. But I have a body on 
which no cathartics which I have hitherto used will work 
orderly and seasonably, unless the dose be immoderate. 
I have not been so careful in keeping up my legs and 
not letting them hang down too much as you rationally 
advise, and which I was sensible would be best for 
me for the reasons you allege. Strait-stockings and 
bandage I have used and do still, but carelessly and to no 
great effect. The smalls of my legs I cannot bind 
straight, because they are almost surrounded with 
ulcers. 

Your advice about the antiscorbutic juices of scurvy- 
grass, watercresses, and brooklime, I doubt whether it 
would be agreeable to me, those juices being, I suspect, 
too hot for me. Sir Thomas Millington cautioned me 
against the use of scurvy-grass in my diet drink in sum- 
mer time, upon that account. I find you have a better 
opinion of my performances in natural history than they 
deserve. I have ordered my bookseller to present you 
with a copy of my Supplement of the larger paper, which 
I entreat you to accept as a small acknowledgment of 
your extraordinary kindness and the many obligations 
you have laid upon me. 

As for your observations by way of introduction to 
your ' Natural History of Jamaica,' I should be glad to 
see them, for my own improvement, not that my appro- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 447 

bation is anything valuable. However, I should do 
nothing more willingly than to serve and gratify you in 
whatever lies in my power. I and mine are, 

Sir, 
Your very much obliged and most humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVER ?]. 

SIR, I received the parcel you sent by carrier, and 
soon after your letter by post, for which I return you 
many thanks. You have herein approved yourself to be 
a person of great candour, and a public spirit, so freely 
communicating whatever you have of rare and curious to 
the promoting of any useful design or undertaking, as I 
am in hopes this I am now entering upon may be, only T 
fear that I shall never live to finish it ; indeed at present 
I am in no good case to begin it. 

My design is in every tribe to put all our English 
insects that I can discover or procure that belong to that 
tribe in the first place by themselves ; then to subjoin all 
such exotics belonging to that tribe which I can get a 
sight or certain knowledge of ; the most part of which lie 
in yours, Ur. Sloane's, arid Mr. Stonestreet's hands. 
Whether I shall take in all described by Aldrovand, 
Mouffet, and others, I am in some doubt, and incline to 
the negative. This history of diurnal papilios I do not 
intend now to proceed any further in. I published it 
(if it be published) only as a specimen of the work. I 
have no catalogue or methodical disposition of the several 
tribes of insects already drawn up, nor do I intend to 
draw up any of any tribe till I come in order to that 
tribe from the beginning of the work, which will be the 



448 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



a', when I shall come to those numerous 
tribes of scarabaei, phalaense, and muscae, then a little of 
your company will be very acceptable, and expedite and 
clear all things very much, and save a great deal of 
writing and sending to and fro, as you say well. 

The present of my Supplement is rather the payment 
of a debt than a gift, and therefore there is no thanks 
due for it. 

Mr. Dale and myself have diligently compared the 
specimens you sent of our English papilios, and the 
explications of them in the Catalogue, with ours, and 
find that you have several species we want, especially of 
the blue ones, and we but one or two which you want. 
I have desired Mr. Dale to give you an account of all, as 
also of some mentioned in your Catalogue which you 
have sent no samples of, &c., because much writing is 
grievous to me in the condition I am in at present, and 
besides, I have several letters to write. I have written to 
Mr. Smith to desire him to deliver to you two copies of 
my Supplement for Father Camelli and Mr. Bulkley, 
which I hope he will do. Your specimens of the more 
rare officinal plants are a very curious and lovely spectacle, 
and divers of them, nay, the most of them such as I had 
never seen. They shall be carefully remitted to you. 
This being all that I can think of at present, I rest, 
..... offices of love, 

Black Notley, June 19, 1704. 



Mr. BAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, August 9, 1704. 

SIR, These are to acquaint you that I have now 
begun the ' History of Insects/ which, because it would 
be but a blind and useless work without cuts, I intend, 
with your approbation, to publish such a proposition as this. 

Having by me a competent quantity of materials for a 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 449 

History of Insects, collected partly by myself, partly by 
Francis Willughby, Esq., deceased, expecting also great 
contributions from my friends skillful in that part of 
natural history, I intend, God producing niy life and 
granting me a tolerable measure of ease, to draw up such 
an history, and have already begun and made some 
progress in it ; which, because it will not be of half the 
use if published without figures as it would be if illus- 
trated therewith, and because the graving of them is a 
matter of greater charge than I can sustain, I am con- 
strained to beg the assistance of ingenious gentlemen 
and wellwillers to this kind of learning in contributing 
towarekthe charge of the plates the moderate sum of ten 
shillings, which shall be well husbanded and faithfully 
expended on the gravers and supervisors of the work. 
If the sum collected doth not suffice for plates for the 
whole work, then I must pray a further supply from the 
contributors, to whom what is finished and wrought off 
shall be delivered, who thereupon may either cease or 
contribute further as they shall see cause. 

If you mislike this proposition, or if you would have 
[any] thing added or omitted, altered or amended thereto 
or therein, be pleased to signify to me what you mislike 
or disapprove. I shall shortly want a sight of your exotic 
diurnal papilios, for I intend first to describe and figure 
that tribe ; but I dare scarce desire the sending them 
down hither, for fear lest they should receive any pre- 
judice by the way bringing down or carrying up. I 
continue still very uneasy, by reason of the pain I almost 
constantly labour under. I may possibly find about two 
hours in a day to bestow on this History. This is all I 
have to trouble you with at present. My wife and girls 
salute you, and give you their humble services, and I am, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



450 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETITEK ?]. 

SIR,-^-! had this day sent back your books of figures, 
but I desired first to have a little conference about them 
with Mr. Dale, and he was so busy yesterday that he 
could not come over hither ; next week they shall be sent. 
I fear you may want them. I find that at least half the 
papilios therein figured are common to us in England. 

I have now begun my intended ' History of Insects/ 
which I shall prosecute as fast as health and ability will 
permit, but truly I am but seldom so easy as to do much 
in it. I cannot hope for above two hours in a day to 
bestow upon it. I intend to publish a proposition for a 
contribution toward the charge of graving plates for it, a 
rude draught whereof I have sent up to Dr. Sloane, with 
whom if you please you may see it. 

I have now described all the diurnal papilios hitherto 
observed in England, except two or three of your oculate 
ones ; which also I shall dispatch so soon as I see Mr. 
Dale ; and then there will want nothing but icons for 
them, which you are the fittest person to add, as know- 
ing where the best figures of such as are already graven 
and published are to be found ; and for the rest they 
must be new drawn. I have six of the rarer sorts 
curiously drawn, and sent me by Dr. Kreig when he was 
with you at London. I find in Mr. Willughby's collec- 
tions a diurnal papilio whose eruca is gregarious and 
feeds upon holly. 

I have written to Dr. Sloane to desire the use of his 
exotic diurnal papilios so long till I have described them, 
which I shall do with what speed I can. I now make 
the same request to you. J fear they may receive some 
prejudice by the carriage up and down, but I know not 
how to help it. Up to London I cannot go. One tiling 
may be of advantage, that you see what each other send, 
and so you may avoid the unnecessary sending the same 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 451 

species twice. This is all necessary to acquaint you with 
which occurs to niy thoughts at present. So I bid you 
heartily farewell, and rest, 

Sir, 
Yours to serve you, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, August 9, 1704. 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVEB ?]. 

SIR, 1 should not have troubled you with this letter 
had it not been to beg your pardon for not being so 
good as my word in sending back your books. Really, at 
the time I should have sent them to the carrier's I quite 
forgot it, my memory being much decayed by age and 
the sharp and long-continued pains I labour under. 
Next week I hope I shall remember better. 

I know not whether I told you that I have quite 
finished the descriptions of our English diurnal papilios ; 
there remains nothing now but procuring figures for 
them. I intend (as I told you) to publish a proposition 
for contributions for graving of plates. The rude draught 
I sent to Dr. Sloane is lame, not mentioning in what 
manner the contributors shall be reimbursed, which I 
intend to add to this purpose. 

If the sum advanced upon such a contribution proves 
insufficient to defray the charge of plates for the whole 
work, then upon delivery of so many printed sheets at 
\d. per sheet, and so many plates wrought off at 3d. per 
plate to each particular contributor as shall reimburse 
him, I shall pray a further supply of 5*. a person for the 
finishing of the work. 

I hope you will not forget to send me your exotic 
diurnal papilios to describe. They shall be carefully 
remitted, and I hope without any considerable harm. 



452 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Perchance Mr. Stonestreet may have some exotic 
papilios which both Dr. Sloane and yourself want. 

I am, Sir, 
Yours to serve you, 

JOHN RAT. 

Black Notley, August 10, 3704. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, It is now high time that I give you thanks for 
the kind visit you made me here, and those rare insects 
you were pleased to communicate. 

I am now entering upon an history of insects, for 
which you would have been a far fitter person, having, 
what I want, your senses entire, your strength firm, your 
understanding and memory perfect. The main reason 
which induces me to undertake it is, because I have Mr. 
Willughby's History and Papers in my hands, who had 
spent a great deal of time, and bestowed much pains, 
upon this subject, when there were few that minded, or 
were diligent and curious in it, though now there be 
many, and it is pity his pains should be lost. 

I know not whether I told you that I designed, in 
every tribe, first to put our English species by themselves, 
and then the exotic by themselves. I desire you to 
afford me your help in carrying on this history, and 
enrich it with some of your observations, especially about 
flies, wherein we are most deficient. 

I hear you have published, in the ' Philosophical 
Transactions,' a full account, or history, of your new 
death-watch, but have not yet seen it. I am, 

Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 

Black Notley, August 16, 1704. 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 453 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I received yours of Aug. 19, and return you 
many thanks for the pains you have taken in my affair, 
and the good advice you have given me. Upon second 
thoughts and further consideration, I think it not so con- 
venient to deliver sheets printed and plates to the con- 
tributors so soon as the sum contributed shall be expended, 
but rather, as you suggest, to deliver to them entire 
books when the work shall be finished, they paying the 
surplusage at the rates propounded. My proposition, 
therefore, (which I submit to your judgment) shall be as 
followeth : 

Having already published the Histories of Birds and 
Fishes, and a Synopsis of Quadrupeds, there remains only 
that of Insects to complete the History of Animals ; for 
the furnishing of which, having by me a competent 
quantity of materials, collected partly by myself, and 
partly by Francis Willughby, Esq., deceased, and expect- 
ing large communications from my friends skillful in this 
piece of natural knowledge, I am resolved (God producing 
my life, and granting a tolerable measure of health and 
remission of pain) to draw up a History of Insects, and 
have already begun and made some progress in it. But 
because such a work published without figures would not 
be half so useful as if illustrated therewith, I intend to 
get figures engraven for so many species contained therein 
as I can. The charge whereof being great, I must needs 
make some proposals for contributions for the carrying it 
on. 

For my own part I shall endeavour 1. That all the 
figures be exactly like the species described. 2. That 
they be curiously and elegantly engraven. 3. That they 
be printed on very good paper. For the effecting whereof 
the contributors are to lay down ten shillings a-piece, 
to be put into the hands of Mr. Samuel Smith and 



454 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 

Mr. Benj. Walford, booksellers, at the Prince's Arms in 
St. Paul's Churchyard, and in each university paid in to 
such a person as the said booksellers shall appoint to 
receive it. Each printed sheet shall be afforded at a penny 
and each plate at . 

When the work shall be finished, every contributor 
shall have a book delivered him, he making up what 
shall be wanting of a penny per sheet, and per 

plate. If any shall please to contribute more than ten 
shillings, he shall receive proportionably in printed sheets 
and plates at the rates aforesaid. 

1 am sorely afraid that your insects may receive some 
prejudice in sending and returning, let all imaginable 
care and caution be used in securing them ; though I 
once received a large box of insects from Mr. Tilleman 
Bobart, from Oxford, without being harmed at ah 1 . I 
thank you for your good opinion of me, and wish this 
work may answer your expectation. I shall push forward 
with all the haste my crazy condition will permit, con- 
sidering that my life is uncertain and may likely deter- 
mine before the work be finished. 

I do not well like the cuts of Mr. Petiver's Gazophy- 
lacium j they are not so elegant and polite as I could wish 
mine might be. I am, 

Sir, 
Your highly obliged and most humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

I had almost forgot to tell you that I should be very 
glad to see your Mouffet, and that it may be of great use 
to me. 

I mention receivers to be appointed in each university, 
because I conceive that if the money be to be sent up to 
London by each contributor, I shall not have half the num- 
ber of contributors as if it were to be paid at the universi- 
ties. The like might be done [in] other great cities, &c. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at Ms house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 455 



Mr. RAY to Mr. DERHAM. 

SIR, Yours of August 28th came to hand, for which 
I return thanks. I am sorry you cannot as yet perfect 
your ' History of Gnats,' of which I admire you should 
discover so many distinct species, indeed that there should 
be so many in rerum naturd. 

As for the cimices they may easily be compassed ; but 
to find out, describe, and methodise all the species of 
flies and beetles of England alone, is the work of a man's 
life. ^ 

The phala?nse are so numerous, that should I live 
twenty years longer, and were in condition to search them 
out, yet I should despair of coming to an end of them, 
much less of discovering the several changes they go 
through, from the egg to the papilio, and describing the 
eruca3 and aureliae of each. 

I am of opinion that the number of beetles is equal to 
if it doth not exceed that of papilios, and they all undergo 
the like changes with them, of which I know no man 
hath given us any tolerable account. 

The name of Musca I know not how far to extend, 
but if we make it to comprehend all the Diptera, then it 
will take in gnats and tipula3 ; and if them only, where 
shall we place the Mmcce papilioniformcs and formici- 
formes, &c. 

I should refer all flying insects with four inembrana- 
ceous wings and a sting in their tails, to the bee-kind ; 
but then I must draw under that tribe the formicae, 
which have bodies too unlike. 

The work which I have now entered upon is, indeed, 
too great a task for me ; I am very crazy and infirm, 
and God knows whether I shall over-live this winter. 
Cold weather is very grievous to me ; besides, I have not 
bestowed sufficient time and pains in the quest of any 
tribe of insects except papilios, and I have told how far 



456 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

short I am of perfection in that. I rely chiefly on Mr. 
Willughby's discoveries and the contributions of friends, 
Mr. Petiver, Mr. Dandridge, Dr. Sloane, Mr. Morton, 
Mr. Stonestreet. As for my own papers on this subject, 
they are not worth the preserving ; and Mr. Willughby's 
must be returned to his son, Sir Tho. Willughby, from 
whom I had them, with promise to return them if I did 
not make use of them. 

Black Notley, Sept. 6, 1704. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Oct. 4, 1704. 

SIR, I received yours of Sept. 30th, and am of your 
opinion, that the booksellers will not go cordially about 
the work. There is not that prospect of gain, which alone 
moves the wheels with them. As for any engagement of 
mine to give Mr. Smith the copy, I remember no such 
thing. Let him produce any letter of mine containing 
such promise, and it will suffice. I proposed to him 
whether he would be concerned in the work or no ; and 
after I told him what endeavours I would use to procure 
subscriptions, he consented. Now of a long time I cannot 
extort a letter from him, though I have written to him 
about several particulars. I suppose the sale of my third 
volume of 'Hist. Plant.' doth not answer expectation; 
and that he thinks my demand for the copy too great, 
though it be no more than Mr. Faitherne gave me, and he 
himself first put me upon it. My demand is thirty 
pounds in money, and twenty copies to present my 
friends. 

Dr. Robinson and Mr. Petiver have business enough of 
their own, and cannot spare time to bestow upon another 
man's work. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 457 

I am in a sad infirm condition, and my sores run worse 
than ever, and (which is worse) my toes are ulcerated and 
run at a great rate, so that I have little heart to proceed 
in this work, and have had thoughts to finish the work so 
far as I can before I make proposals for contributions. 
But then the graving of plates would be so tedious a work 
that it deters any from contributing. 

I humbly thank you for your great kindness to me, and 
the offer of the use of your insects, but am not yet ready 
for them. This cold weather hath given me a great shock. 
My wife and daughters present you with their humble 
services by the hand of 

Sir, 

Your devoted servitor, 

J. RAY. 

To liis honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

B. N., November 1, 170-4. 

SIR, I should have written to you in answer to your 
last of Oct. 10, to give you thanks for your many favours, 
but truly I have been ever since so afflicted with pain, 
that I have no heart to do anything. I do very much 
approve all your advices, but yet cannot take them. The 
' History of Insects' must rest, if I continue thus ill, and 
I see no likelihood of amendment unless I should overlive 
this winter, which I have little reason to hope or expect. 
However, though I fail, there are many at present more 
able and skillful in this part of the history of animals than 
myself; as first of all yourself, next Mr. Stonestreet, then 
Mr. Petiver, Mr. Derham, Mr. Morton, Mr. Antrobus, 



458 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Mr. Dandridge, Mr. Bobart, and many more. Pardon 
my scribbling, who am scarce able to manage a pen. 

I am, Sir, 
Most highly obliged and obedient 

friend and servant, 

J. RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, December 12, 1704. 

SIR, Monday last I received by carrier your noble 
present of sugar, for which I return you a thousand 
thanks, as do also my wife and daughters, who say you 
are [a] brave man. 

I thank you for all your advices, I cannot but highly 
approve of that of keeping up my legs. But my knees 
being almost constantly kept bent by .my sitting, the nerves 
and muscles are so contracted that I cannot stretch them 
out without pain, much less keep them so. I will endea- 
vour what I can. 

The other I shall also carefully observe so soon as I can 
get the things, and do hope and believe they may be use- 
ful and helpful to me. Your judgment I much value. 

I continue still full of pain, and my sores rather spread 
than contract, which quite spoil my memory, and weakens 
my other parts, and therefore I hope you will pardon the 
many errors in this short letter, resting, 

Sir, 
Your extremely obliged and most humble 

servant and orator, 

JOHN RAY. 

To Ms honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 459 

Mr. RAY'S last letter to Dr. HANS SLOANE * 

B. N., Jan. 7, 1704. 

DEAR SIR, THE BEST OF FRIENDS, These are to take a 
final leave of you as to this world. I look upon myself as a 
dying man. God requite your kindness expressed anyways 
towards me an hundredfold, bless you with a confluence of 
all good things in this world, and eternal life and happi- 
ness hereafter, and grant us a happy meeting in Heaven, 
I am, Sir, 

Eternally yours, 

JOHN RAY. 

\\%en you happen to write to my singular friend 
Dr. Hotton, I pray tell him I received his most obliging 
and affectionate letter, for which I return thanks, and 
acquaint that I was not able to answer it. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, at his house 
in Southampton square, London. 



Mr. DALE to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Braintree, Jan. 19, 1704. 

SIR, By last Sunday's post Mr. Ray's solemn farewell 
was sent you, since which, viz. on Wednesday, the 17th 
instant, about 10 in the forenoon, death cut the fatal 
thread of life, and deprived the commonwealth of learning, 
of so valuable and worthy a man ; but our loss is without 
doubt his gain; God grant we may meet him above, 
where death can no more separate, which is the earnest 
prayer of 

Sir, 
Your obliged humble servant, 

S. DALE. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton square, 
Bloomsbury, London. 

* Mr. Ray died on Jan. 17, 170$, about 10 o'clock in the morning. 
Note on the original letter. 



460 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



\Tliefollowing Letters of Mr. Ray, without date, are pre- 
served in the Library of Sir Hans Sloane, and as it 
is difficult to assign any particular period to their 
authorship, I have inserted them in this place '.] 



Mr. RAY to [Mr. PETIVEK?]. 

SIR, T. received yours of Feb. 3d, mistaken, I suppose, 
for March, but aui but in bad condition to return answer. 
I suppose Mr. Smith hath acquainted you how I am at 



present. Yet since my last to him a sad accident hath 
befallen me; part of the flesh of one of [my] insteps by 
degrees blackening is come to putrefy and corrupt. I 



suppose it is a beginning gangrene. 

I very much approve what you advise concerning the 
addition of F. Plumier's Catalogue of American plants : 
but I cannot without great difficulty write to Dr. Hotton ; 
and should I write, I fear it would come too late. 

The heads of Rumphius's History I heard nothing of 
from Dr. Sherard, which I much wonder at. 

The sending the Chusan plants you may please to 
respite for the present, for I can do nothing now. I shall 
add no more, but that I am, 

Sir, 
Yours to serve you in what I can, 

JOHN RAY. 



CORRESPONDENCE OP 1 RAY. 401 

Mr. KAY to [Mr. PETIVER?]. 

SIR, I received yours of October 23d, and the box of 
plants you sent by carrier. I have run them over, but 
not as yet carefully perused them ; there are many rare 
things. I thank you for the sight of them, and shall after 
awhile carefully return them to you. I shall be very glad 
to see your Chusan treasure. I give you thanks also for 
your 10 Centuries, which indeed are very useful to me. 
For your second Decade I was beholden to you before, and 
therefore this now sent I desire your order how to dispose of. 

I have another alarm from Mr. Smith concerning the 
Appendix, which Mr. Motte tells him, he thinks he shall 
stay for the copy of, which will be a great prejudice to 
them, the work having been long in hand already ; they 
having disbursed a considerable sum for paper long since,, 
and for the printing lately : wherefore I entreat that you 
would speedily get ready what you are pleased to contri- 
bute ; and if you think it convenient for me to revise it, I 
pray send it hither. What I have to insert I intend to 
send up by next week's carrier; the chief of which is 
Father Camelli's manuscript, and Monsieur Tournefort's 
Corollarium put in an alphabetical method, and your sixth 
book of Mr. S. Brown's in the ' Philosoph. Transact.' Dr. 
Robinson hath persuaded me to draw up and publish a 
Method of Insects, with some general notes, which yet I 
must defer doing till this Supplement. Hist, be off hand. 

Those very kind expressions wherewith you conclude 
your letter, I cannot but gratefully resent, and acknow- 
ledge myself obliged to you for, whom I look upon as one 
of the most skillful and active promoters of natural history, 
I will not say in England, but in all Europe. Indeed, I 
know not any which hath a more comprehensive and 
critical knowledge of all the species of nature. Proceed 
with courage, and transmit your name to all posterity. 

I am, Sir, 
Yours in all offices of love and service, 

JOHN RAY. 



462 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, These are to acquaint you that the box of papers 
you sent last week came safe to hand the beginning of 
this. I cannot but wonder you should find such a multi- 
tude of birds in Jamaica, and yet I suspect some might 
escape your diligence. Among the numerous species of 
Mexican birds described by Hernandez, possibly there 
may be some the same with some of your smaller birds ; 
but it would be too great a fatigue to compare them, his 
being put in no order, so that for every bird one must 
tuni over the whole book, and read the descriptions too 
of such as are of equal bigness. 

I am in some doubt about the Perdix montana, which 
you, not without good reason, refer to the dove-kind, for 
most of the notes agree to it : only by the figure it seems 
to be shorter and rounder winged than any pigeon, and 
therein to resemble the poultry kind. Its breeding upon 
trees argues it to belong to the pigeon kind, for the young 
of all the poultry tribe feeding themselves, must needs be 
hatched on the ground. If it breeds but two young at a 
time, and feeds them by eructating into their mouths meat 
mollified in its crop, it is certainly a pigeon, be the wings 
of what length or figure they will. 

Your singing-bird, mock-bird, or nightingale, is the 
same which Hernandez, and out of him Nieremberg, 
describe by the name of cenconthatolli, and is common to 
Virginia, described by Mr. Clayton in his letter to the 
Roval Society, registered Philosoph. Transact. N. 206, 
p. 993. 

Your Noddy, is the Passer stultus of Nieremberg, which 
I suppose he took out of Oviedo, a book I am not ac- 
quainted with. (See Willugh. Ornithol., Append.) Your 
Long-legs seems to me to be the very same with the Euro- 
pean Himantopus of Gesner and Aldrovand : (Willughby 
Ornithol. p. 227), all notes agreeing. 

But I will trouble you with no more remarks by letters, 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 463 

what else I have made, or shall further make, I will send 
you as I did the former upon the fishes, when I remit the 
papers, which I shall despatch so soon as conven [iently] 

ice, and I am, 

Sir, 

much yours in both capacities, 

friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HAUS SLOANE. 

SIR, I received your letter, with the specimen in- 
closed, which seems to me to be the Sesamoides Sala- 
manticum magnum of Clusius, or Lychnis viscosa flore 
muscoso of C. D. [Silene Otites, Sm.], which I have 
observed togrowplentifully upon Newmarket Heath, that 
part I mean that is in Suffolk, for on Cambridgeshire side 
I have not found it. I can but wonder it should have 
such a virtue as you mention, but it seems it is well 
attested. Dr. Hulse writes me he finds it in Grayes 
Farrier. 

If you go to Jamaica, I pray you a safe and prosperous 
voyage. We expect great things from you, no less than 
the resolving all our doubts about the names we meet with 
of plants in that part of America, as the Dildoe, Mammae, 
Mangrove, Manchinello, Avcllance purpatrices, the Sower- 
sop, and Custard-apple, of most of which though I am 
pretty well informed, and satisfied by Dr. Robinson, yet 
I shall be glad to be either confirmed, or better informed 
by so knowing and curious an observer as yourself. I 
should be glad to know what manner of fruit the Mandioca 
bears, for (whatever some have written) that it is not 
without, I am confident. You may also please to observe 
whether there be any species of plants common to America 
and Europe, and whether Ambergrise be the juice of any 



464 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

sort of metl or aloe dropped into the sea, as Trapham 
would have it. What kind of Arundo it is the same 
author calls the Dumb-cane, as also what his animal seeds 
may be. The shining barks of trees he mentions deserve 
observation, because I find nothing of them in other 
writers. I shall not instance in more particulars. I wish 
your voyage had so long prevented the publication of my 
History that I might have been satisfied and informed by 
you of these and a thousand other particulars, and had so 
great an accession of new and nondescript species, as your 
inquisitions and observations would have enriched it 
withal. I take leave, and rest, 

Sir, 
Your very humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, at Mr. Wilkinson's, 
a bookseller at the Black Boy, over against 
St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet street, London. 



Mr. HAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I have herewithal sent you a short account of 
your Jamaica Catalogue, which I could not defer to draw 
up, being requested by so good a 'friend. What you find 
deficient therein please to supply what erroneous to cor- 
rect ; what, upon any account, you mislike, to expunge ; 
or, if you please, to cancel the whole, and draw up a better 
of your own. 

Myself and wife are so far obliged to you already for 
the rich presents you have made us, that we are ashamed 
to receive any more ; however, we return you our humble 
thanks for your kind intentions. 

As to the Sorffvm, you remember aright, that it hath a 
more compressed and compact panicle than the Milium, 
&c., and the branches of it more stiff and erect, so that (as 



CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 465 

I have elsewhere noted) they make brushes at Venice of 
the panicles thereof, when the grains are stripped off. 

I am inclinable to believe that Dr. Plukenet is in the 
right in making the American Couhage and the Nai- 
Corunna of the East Indies to be distinct plants, as I was 
suspicious when I wrote my 'History of Plants,' from the 
different colour of their seeds. 

I shall not at present return answer to the other parti- 
culars of your letter, being somewhat straightened for time, 
but with the tender of my wife's humble service, conclude 
and rest, 

Sir, 
~ Your affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

To his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Preface by Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE'S Catalogue of Plants. 

THE author of this Catalogue doth not present the 
reader with titles of plants collected out of other men's 
writings, or of which he had seen only dried specimens, 
but of such as himself saw growing in their native places, 
among which there are a great multitude of new and non- 
descript species; in one genus alone, viz. those called 
capillaries, no less than three score, besides those lately 
published by F. Plumier in his first volume of 'Descrip- 
tions of American Plants,' which our author had observed 
and described long before that book came out ; and 
these not small and contemptible ones, or hardly distin- 
guishable from the plants of that kind already described, 
but of eminent stature and beauty, and some of them of 
so strange and exotic form, that if delineated they could not 
but invite and gratefully entertain the spectator's eye; 

30 



466 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

for, 1st, who would not be delighted to see an arborescent 
fern, of a single woody stem, straight and undivided, 
bearing leaves only at the top like a palm-tree ; or, 2dly, 
capillaries of almost ah 1 kinds creeping on trees, or rocks, 
or the ground, with wires after the manner of strawber- 
ries ; or, 3dly, capillaries, the tip of whose leaves turning 
downwards, and touching the earth, takes root and puts 
forth a new plant, so propagating their kind ; or, 4thly, 
capillaries putting forth from the middle stem of their 
leaves two shoots, each bearing a spike of flowers and 
seeds ? I confess, when I first saw the author's stock of 
dried plants collected in Jamaica, and some of the Caribee 
islands, I was much surprised, and even astonished, at the 
number of the capillary kind, not thinking there had been 
so many to be found in both the Indies. I might say 
much of the other generas, but I refer the reader to the 
book itself. 

Secondly. The author in this Catalogue hath done 
great service to at least the inferior ranks of herbarists, in 
reducing and cutting short the number of species, which 
were unnecessarily multiplied. For observing that those 
who have published Itineraries, or descriptions of the 
several parts of America, for want of sufficient skill in 
botanies, and not being versed in describing plants, have 
given us such lame, imperfect, and obscure descriptions of 
such as they took notice of, and of the same tree or herb 
many times under different names, that the compilers of 
general histories of plants meeting with these descriptions, 
and having no other knowledge of such plants than what 
they derive from them, have repeated one and the same 
species, once, twice, thrice, (nay, some great authors some- 
times even nine times) over, for different kinds. Now the 
number of plants being in nature so vast, it is pity to add 
to it more than there are in nature, making two or three 
of one, thereby both deterring and confounding the 
learner. To clear up these difficulties, and to reduce all 
to their proper kinds, no man be well qualified but he 
that hath a comprehensive knowledge of such plants as 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 467 

grow wild, or are commonly cultivated in gardens here in 
Europe, and hath seen the nondescript Americans, or such 
as are here less known, growing in their natural places, 
and hath read, considered, and compared, what hath been 
written of them, either by such who have lived some time 
in those countries, and published descriptions or natural 
histories of them, or by such as have only made voyages 
thither, and given us relations and accounts of their 
travels, and what they observed during their short stay 
there, all which qualities concur in our author. 

Thirdly. This work is of great use to those that are 
delighted in reading the relation and accounts of navi- 
gators and travellers to and in those parts, to inform them 
concerning the names of American and Indian plants, they 
shall therein meet with, to what plants they belong, and 
where they may find exact descriptions or characteristic 
notes of them. The author having with infinite pains and 
patience read the most part of the books of voyages and 
travels extant, referred the plants he met with therein 
named or described to their proper genera and titles, under 
which they are ranked, and by which they are denominated 
and characterised by the most learned and skilful herba- 
rists of the present or immediately precedent age. 

Fourthly. The author in this work hath cleared up and 
resolved many doubts and difficulties, and informed us of 

what plants are signified by many nam quent in 

the mouths and writings of our own countrymen, of which 
before we were either ignorant, or in some doubt. For 
example, he hath informed us that the Dumb-cane so 
called, which being tasted, inflames the tongue and jaws 
in that manner, that, for awhile, it takes away the use of 
speech, is not properly any species of reed or cane, but of 
arum, or wake-robin; which quality, indeed, agrees very 
well to the nature of an arum, which is very acrimonious, 
but not to any sort of cane. That logwood is not (as we 
conjectured) the Ligno Brasiliano simile, seu Lignum 
Sapon, lanis ting endis per commodum of Caspar Bauhine, 
but Lignum Campechianum, so called from Campeche, a 



468 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

province of the continent of America, where they fell 
yearly great store of these trees, and bring them to 
Jamaica, and our other plantations, to be transported 
hither for the use of dyers. That the Dildoe-tree is the 
same with the Cereus or Torch-plant. " Cseterum Dildoe 
nonnullis Priapum fictitium significat, quo oflfoenis lascivias 
mulierculae abuti solent ad nefariae quoddam libidinis genus 
seu coitum umbratilem exercendum." I might add to 
these the Toddy-tree, the Prickly-pear, the Sower-sop, 
Bonavists, and many others whose significations may be 
found in this Catalogue. 

Besides, we are assured by this work, that there are 
some plants common, not only to Europe and America, 
but even to England and Jamaica, notwithstanding the 
great distance of place, and difference both of longitude 
and climate. But here it is to be noted, that the greatest 
part of these common plants are such as grow in the water 
or watery places ; there being, it seems, a greater agree- 
ment between the temper of the waters than of the air in 
these remotely distant countries. 



Mr. RAT to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I received yours of Feb. 29th, in answer 
whereto in the first place I must deny any obligation on 
your part, but own a very great one on mine. Next I 
shall acquaint you with the reason I made those queries, 
which was because in the intended Supplement to my 
History I am resolved to acknowledge and correct all the 
errors and mistakes that myself, friends, or strangers 
shall discover therein. Yet would I do nothing rashly, 
but be fully satisfied before I correct anything, that it is 
indeed a mistake. 

I proceed now to the particular answers you are pleased 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 469 

to give to my queries: 1. As to the Phyllitis, &c., you 
have fully satisfied me that yours is a distinct species 
from Mr. Banister's. 

2. The jfrumentum indicum minus, described by"C.B." 
out of Tabermont. I do still suspect to be a figment. But 
I myself, when I was in Germany, observed whole fields, 
some with a lesser kind of maize differing in nothing from 
the greater but in the lowness of its stature and small- 
ness of all its parts. But whether this lesser sort be or 
be not a distinct species, you are not concerned to deter- 
mine, no such growing in Jamaica. 

3:~J, am not yet fully satisfied that Clusius's igname 
is a species distinct from Marcgrave's, because (as I said) 
they both came from, or at least were denominated of, 
St. Thome, and besides, the figures of the root in both 
authors are alike. Probably, as you intimate, Clusius 
might have of both sorts, and mingle or confound them 
into one. It concerns me to be more curious in this 
inquiry because in my History I have made Marcgrave 
and Clusius's inhame to be one and the same, which, 
if it be a mistake, must be corrected in my Supplement. 

4. You have staggered me in the opinion and per- 
suasion I had that the Xylon herbaceum and arboreum 
were two distinct species. I find Bellus is of your 
opinion, and that Veslingius's description of the seed of 
the tree kind agrees well to that of the herbaceous, as 
you also have observed it. But then the fruit which 
J. Bauhine describes, and which I have seen, must be of 
another kind. What say you to J. Bauhine's note of the 
tree kind, that its leaves are smooth ? and Vesling's, that 
he observed not in it that pale yellow flower which is 
noted in the Xylon herbaceum ? As to the difference of 
arborescent and herbaceous, I make no great account of 
that. 

5. Concerning the Pimpinichi of Manardes, I see I 
must still remain in suspense. 

6. The Jamaica pepper, or allspice, I am persuaded is 
specifically distinct from Clusius's amomum, &c. This 



470 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

I was suspicious of when I wrote my History, upon com- 
paring the Jamaica pepper with Clusius's description 
of the fruit of his amomum, wherein he saith it contained 
but one seed, and takes no notice of the umbilicus or 
corolla on the top of its fruit, but was fully confirmed in 
upon the sight of your figure of the Jamaica pepper-bush, 
and a branch of Clusius's armomum, in which the leaves 
differ too much to be of the same plant. 

I shall now, according to your desire, give you those 
literal errata I have observed in your Catalogue, which 
are very inconsiderable and not worth the taking notice 
of, such as you may find thousands of in my books : 
p. 4, 1. 8, pro fuciformi lege fusi formi ; 1. 1 7, pro ejectum 
lege ejecta; p. 9, 1. 3, lege a</>vAA<^; 1. 10, Tpyo$v\\<& 
and aKiaBc o/coTuXrjSwv <WuaKTt'oiSj}e. Columua, indeed, 
writes these words: a^v\\ov, and T^i^o^uXXov, and 
aKiaSiKOTvXrjSov, referring them, I suppose, to the Greek 
word fipvov, understood, but they being joined with 
muscus, I think it is better to put them in the masculine 
gender; 1. 73, /eye Laricens ; p. 20, 1. 21, lege Maravara; 
p. 26, 1. 12, I was troubled at the word lucum, suspect- 
ing it to be mistaken ; 1. 20, lege Castagneda ; p. 34, 1. 4, 
lege $Lray(vo<t>opov ; p. 23, 1. 36, lege Lonchitidis ; p. 34, 
1. 14, lege panicula ; item 1. ] 7 ; item 1. 22 ; item 1. 26, 
28, 30, 33, 34. But I will go no further, none of these, 
except the Greek, can be suspected to be mistakes of the 
author, but only typographical errata, nor can stop or 
abuse the reader. The truth is, I have not met with a 
book better corrected. If anything afterwards occurs 
that needs mending, I shall give you advice of it. My 
wife gives you her humble service. So I rest, 
Sir, 

Your very affectionate and obliged friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

p. 94, 1. 28,jro Homin. lege Hormini; p. 95, 1. 22, 
pro polyrhizo lege polyrrhizos; p. 129, 1. 27, pro illinita 
lege illita ; pro pericutietur, percutietur. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 471 

You have done botanies great service in contracting the 
number of species, and in reducing many exhibited to 
us by authors under different names to one. I cannot 
sufficiently commend your pains herein, being so well 
qualified for such an undertaking. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house, at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I return you most hearty thanks for your noble 
present of venison, which seems to be very good. I could 
wish we might have your good company at the eating of 
it, only I know it is no novelty to you. I should be glad 
to see you here as soon and as often as you please, 
where you shall be exceeding welcome, as you well 
deserve, to, 

Sir, 
Your very humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

My wife tenders her humble service to you. 
For Dr. Hans Sloane, at Newhall. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 



SIR, I thank you for your last very kind and friendly 
letter of August 28th, and the advice and directions therein 

r'ven, which, so soon as I can get the medicine prepared, 
intend to follow, unless I find a sudden amendment, 
which I am not without some hopes of, the ulcers lately 
seeming to promise healing. I agree with you in opinion, 
and hope that I may find great help from the use of it. 
Mr. Dale tells me that it would not be safe for me to dry 



472 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

the sores without drawing an issue, to give the humour 
vent, which hath so long been wont to be drained away 
by them, lest it become the matter of some other disease. 

The German which was with me from Dr. Tournefort 
told me that Schelhammerus (as I remember) had written 
to Kivinus and me, and that he believed you had a copy 
of his letter, which, if you have, I beg a sight of it. I 
lately received a letter from Tentzelius, the author of the 
Epistle to Magliabechius, published in the ' Philosophical 
Transactions,' together with some fragments of the teeth 
and skull of the supposed elephant's skeleton digged up 
at Tonna, wherein he tells me he had sent the like 
fragments to the Royal Society, with a letter, desiring 
their opinion concerning them, but had as yet received 
no answer from them, so that he suspects his letter mis- 
carried; whereupon he wrote to me urging the same 
request, viz. that I would send him the opinion of the 
Royal Society, or, if that cannot be obtained, my own 
particular, concerning his controversy with the Collegium 
Medicum Gothanum, which it seems have written against 
him, and would have these bones to be Unicornu fossile. 
I wonder the Royal Society should vouchsafe him no 
kind of answer. I have sent Dr. Robinson a copy of 
Tentzelius's letter, which, if you please, he will give you 
a sight of. 

My wife salutes you with tender of her very humble 
service by the hand of 

Sir, 
Your very affectionate and much obliged 

friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

Be pleased to send me word in your next, what is be- 
come of Dr. Preston. I have a parcel of plants 1 received 
from him which I would willingly remit. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 

at his house at the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 473 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I received your very kind letter, attended with 
a noble present of sugar, for which myself and wife, with 
the tender of our humble services, return you most hearty 
thanks. Only give me leave to tell you that you have 
permitted your generosity and kindness too much to in- 
fluence your liberality, and cause this effect of it far to 
exceed the merit and expectation of the receivers, and 
possibility of requital. I have some time since heard of 
your change of state ; and though I have not told you 
that Impish you much joy, yet really I do, and humbly 
pray that such a confluence of blessings may attend your 
marriage as may render that estate comfortable and 
happy to you, 

Your Pinax of Jamaica plants I should be glad to see ; 
not that I hope to correct anything, but for mine own 
information and satisfaction. My opinion is of little 
value, my skill being not great in American plants ; and 
the greater part of those you have observed I have no 
other knowledge of than I received from yourself. 

I was in hopes that you would have perfected and 
published your ' Natural History of Jamaica' before my 
Supplement might have been ready for the press, that 
so I might thence have borrowed materials and orna- 
ments for the enriching and beautifying of my work. 
But I see you proceed with deliberation, and so as may 
consist with due attendance upon the occasions and 
business of your profession, which I cannot but commend; 
though in the meantime others prevent you, and intercept 
the honour due to you, by publishing before you what 
you first discovered. I would willingly take leave of this 
subject of Plants ; but, by the importunity of some, and 
opposition of others, I am constrained to proceed still in 
it. When this Supplement shall be finished, and some- 
thing I have further to reply to Monsieur Tournefort, with 
a fuller explanation and defence of my own method (if God 
grant me to live so long), I shall have done. The principal 



474 CORRESPONDENCE OP RAY. 

help I shall want will be the sight of the plants in the 
gardens in and about London. Dr. Robinson, as I re- 
member, once told me that you either had, or could 
procure, Monsieur Magnol's piece about method, which 
I was promised by Dr. Sherard, but have not yet seen. 
If you have it by you, please to lend me it for some 
short tune. I thank you for your good opinion of my 
doings and endeavours, which yet I must not own or 
accept as in any measure due, but look upon as another 
effect of your good will, resting, 

Sir, 

Your much obliged and affectionate friend and servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
the corner house in Southampton street, 
next the Square, Holborn. 



Mr. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, I have read over with great pleasure and satis- 
faction Frederick Martens's Voyage to Spitzberg you were 
pleased to lend. The author seems to me to have been very 
diligent in observing, and no less true and faithful in re- 
lating and setting down his observations. He hath given 
me a better prospect and idea of those very northern parts 
than I had before. I cannot think that there is very much 
difference in the nature and temper of sea and land, from 
thence to the Pole itself. Several of the species of birds 
are the same I have observed to frequent and build on the 
islets and cliffs on our sea coasts in England and Scotland ; 
only I cannot but wonder that he should meet with so 
many sorts of Lari there, which want the hind toe ; 
whereas we met with only one here which doth want it, 
and he too hath some rudiment of it. 

I have now a request to make to you, that if you have 
in your Jamaica voyage, or other travels, observed any new 
or undescribed species of birds or fishes, you would [be] 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 475 

pleased to communicate the titles of them, and some 
short characteristic notes, whereby they may be known, 
towards the enriching and perfecting my Synopses of 
those genera which I have now drawn up. I shall do 
you right in owning from whom I received them, and 
referring to your future work for a more full account of 
them ; which work, though I long to see published, yet 
do I with the more patience expect, because I know it 
will lose nothing by laying in your hands, but will at last 
come forth, if death prevent not, more elaborate and 
complete. If death, I say, prevent not, which is possible, 
the consideration whereof may spur you on to make the 
more haste with it, knowing the disadvantage posthumous 
pieces come out with if ever they be published. I have 
formerly urged to you the expectation of all ingenious 
persons that know of it, and the danger of being de- 
frauded of some part of the honour justly due to your 
pains and performance. Indeed, God himself seems to 
me to have honoured you in having, as it were, made 
choice of you, and sent you out upon such an errand as 
observing the rarities and undescribed species of that 
island, and communicating the history of them to the 
learned world. 

I lately received a letter from Dr. Briggs, wherein he 
tells me that he had consulted with Dr. Lister and your- 
self concerning the ulcers on my legs, wherewith I have 
been troubled now the best part of a twelvemonth, and 
that you expressed a great concern for my condition ; for 
which kindness I return you hearty thanks. Since my 
answer to him I found the success of the calomelanos I 
acquainted him I had taken, better than I did then ex- 
pect. For after the disturbance and tumult caused by 
the mercury was appeased, my sores of a sudden grew so 
well, the pain leaving them, and only a gentle itching 
succeeding, that I was in great hopes they would have 
suddenly dried and healed up ; but the day following, 
whether it proceeded from some error in diet, or some 
other to me unknown cause, the pain returned again, and 



476 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAT. 

they continue still running and unhealed, though better 
than they were before, so that I am encouraged to repeat 
again the same medicine, and do hope, through God's 
blessing a good effect of it. So I take my leave, and rest, 

Sir, 
Your affectionate friend and humble servant, 

JOHN RAY. 

For his honoured friend, Dr. Hans Sloane, 
at Montague House, London. 



[Amongst the MS. of Sir Hans Sloane in the British 
Museum are the following letters from Mrs. May, 
which, although not strictly coming within the scope 
of this work, possess an interest on account of their 
connexion with the history of the family of John 



Mrs. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, .... 1704. 

SIR, My dear deceased husband always esteemed you 
one of his best and truest friends, and this you manifest to 
me his mournful widow in your kind letter, for which I re- 
turn my most humble and hearty thanks ; and do entreat 
the favour of you to use your interest with Sir Thomas 
Willughby to allow me this half year's salary towards the 
charges of my husband's sickness and funeral ; it is true 
I cannot demand it, and he hath always been kind to 
Mr. Ray, which I gratefully acknowledge hath been the 
support of the family ; but being left with three daughters, 
of which the eldest is about twenty years of age, and the 
youngest sixteen, and nothing near so much left to main- 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 477 

tain myself and them with as that legacy was, my circum- 
stances must be but straight. I do intend to dis- 
pose of Mr. Ray's books, and will get Mr. Dale to 
make a catalogue of them, which shall be sent to you, 
as likewise an account of what papers Mr. Ray left, and 
doubt not your assistance therein. The papers about 
insects are delivered to Mr. Dale, to inspect and give you 
an account of, as likewise the insects, to make a draught 
of them for to present you with, according to Mr. Ray's 
order. I intend shortly to write to Sir Thos. Willughby, 
and acquaint him that his papers are safe, and shall be 
delivered according to his order ; but desire your advice, 
whether I shall request the half year's salary of him, or 
leave [my] friends to intercede for me. I can add no 
more, but that I am, 

Sir, 
Your most humble but sorrowful servant, 

MARGARET RAY. 

For Dr. Hans Sloane, at his house 

in Southampton square, Bloomsbury, London. 



Mrs. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

SIR, Yours of the 9th was very accceptable to me, 
nor can I enough acknowledge the kindness you have 
therein showed to the poor family of your deceased friend, 
which had been done sooner, but that yours came not to 
hand until the 13th, at night. I must confess, sir, that 
although money is the most needful, considering the 
scantiness of the maintenance left by Mr. Ray, and 
the great charge occasioned by his long sickness, yet it 
is not for me to dictate to Sir Thomas Willughby's gene- 
rosity, but leave it to his pleasure ; entreating you to 
travel in that affair for me as you shall think fit ; requesting 
you likewise to present my most humble service to 



478 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Sir Thomas, and to acquaint him that all his papers are 
safe, and ready to be delivered to his order, and thereby 
you will add to the many obligations of, 

Sir, 
Your most obliged humble servant, 

MARGARET RAY. 
My daughters present their most humble service to you. 

Black Notley, Feb. ye 15th, 170|. 



Mrs. RAY to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Nov. ye 19. 1706. 

SIR, Your very kind letter I received last week, for 
which and all other of your favours and kindness I hereby 
return you my most hearty thanks, and especially for the 
great pains and care you have taken upon the account of 
my dear husband and self. I will, as you desire, return 
Sir Thomas Willughby thanks for his kindness, and by 
the first opportunity order where the money he sent me 
shall be paid ; and as to his book and papers about in- 
sects, they are herewith sent to you, and hope they will 
come safe. As to the monument for my husband, I must 
leave wholly to the directions of my friends, whose kind- 
ness and care to preserve his memory I gratefully acknow- 
ledge. I having formerly acquainted you with the cir- 
cumstances of my family, need not repeat it, only let you 
know it cannot but be straight with us, when Mr. Ray 
did not leave 40 per year among us all, out of which 
taxes, repairs, and quit-rents make a great hole. As to 
my husband's papers, I have put all of them, except some 
letters, into Mr. Dale's hands, of which I presume he hath 
given you an account, and will publish what he finds fit. 
The History of Insects, you know, was left unfinished, 
and is at your direction ; and as to my books, I will send 
them up as soon as weather will permit, which I fear will 



CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 479 

not be now until summer, not doubting in the least of 
your assistance in their disposal. 

Sir, I have no more to add, but the repeating of my 
thanks and the presenting the services of myself and 
daughters, subscribe myself, 

Sir, 
Your most obliged humble servant, 

MARGARET RAY. 

To Dr. Hans Sloane, at his house in 

Southampton square, Bloomsbury, London. 
With a box. 



Mrs. RAT to Dr. HANS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Dec. 24, 1706. 

SIR, I would not have you think me ungrateful in 
not returning you my most hearty thanks for your last 
kind letter ; as likewise for the pains you have taken for 
me with Sir Tho. Willughby, but especially for your own 
very kind intended gift therein mentioned me. The only 
hindrance hath been because I could not happen of any 
person in these parts whose stay in London would permit 
them to wait upon you, considering that your business 
occasions your being often absent from your house. I 
entreat the favour of you to leave the money, at your own 
convenience, with Mr. Saml. Smith and Mr. Ben. Walford, 
or either of them, to whom I have given advice to receive 
the money and give you a discharge. As to my husband's 
letters, I intend very shortly to have them overlooked and 
send them. I cannot close this without repeating my 
humble thanks for all your favours, and presenting my 
daughters' humble services, which likewise accept from, 

Sir, 
Your most obliged humble servant, 

MARGARET RAY. 

To Dr. Hans Sloane, at his house in 

Southampton square, Bloomsbury, London. 



480 CORRESPONDENCE OF RAY. 

Mrs. RAY to Dr. HAXS SLOANE. 

Black Notley, Nov. ye 20, 1709. 

SIR, When your kind and obliging letter came to 
niy hand, I was sick in bed of a fever, which continued 
upon me for some time ; but being now, through the 
blessing of God, pretty well recovered, I was not willing 
any longer to omit returning you my most humble thanks 
for all the kindnesses I have received from you, and espe- 
cially for the great respect you have now shown to the 
memory of my dear husband; and I would willingly 
have done the same to my Lady Child and Madam How- 
land, but not knowing where to direct to them I entreat 
the favour of you to present my humble thanks, as like- 
wise to my Lord of London, and the rest of the contri- 
butors, though unknown to me. As to the remaining 
money which you mention, if you please to pay it to the 
Reverend Mr. Wm. Stonestreet, it will come safe to the 
hands of, 

Sir, 
Your most obliged humble servant, 

MARGARET RAY. 

To Dr. Hans Sloane, at his house 
in the corner of Southampton street, 
towards Bloomsbury square, London. 



APPENDIX. 



APPENDIX A. 

[For the following Notice of George Scott, of whom no biographical notice could 
be given in the 'Memorials ' (p. 5), the Editor is indebted to Edw. Forsier, 
Esq., Fice-P resident of the Linnaan Society.'} 

GEORGE SCOTT, Esq., P.R.S., the Editor of his uncle Derham's Select 
Remains of the Learned John Ray/ was Lord of the Manor of Woolston 
Hall, in the parish of Chigwell, in the county of Essex. This manor and 
seat had been in the family many generations, of which he was the twelfth and 
last of-%} name; from him it was inherited by Robert Bodle, Esq., de- 
scended from the daughter and only child of his great grandfather's second 
and youngest son George, Mr. Scott being the grandson of William, the 
eldest. 

This manor was granted, about the beginning of King Henry the Seventh's 
reign, to William Scott, of Stapleford Tawney, in the same county, who was 
lineally descended from Sir William Scott, Lord Chief Justice of England, 
and Justice of the Forests in the reign of King Edward the Third, whose 
papers and silver drinking-cup were in the possession of George Scott, the 
subject of this memoir, who was born in Watling street, London, on the 
29th December, 1719, and was educated at St. John's College, Oxford, where 
he took the degree of Master of Arts in 1743, and an honorary degree of 
Doctor of Common Laws was conferred on him in 1763. He was married on 
the 13th of May, 1746, in the Chapel Royal, St. James's, to Jane, daughter 
of Dr. Edmund Gibson, Bishop of Lincoln, and afterwards London, the inti- 
mate friend of Ray, who communicated the County Lists of Rare Plants in 
the Bishop's edition of Camdeffs Britannia, with the exception of Middlesex, 
which was furnished by Petiver. George Scott gave some assistance in 
family history, in a subsequent edition. His aunt Anne, daughter of William 
Scott, married Dr. William Derham, rector of Upminster, the author of the 
'Select Remains.' George Scott died a widower, without children, on the 
26th August, 1780, and was buried in the parish church of Cliigwell, on the 
5th of September in that year. His wife died on the 5th of January, 1770, 
and was buried on the 21st, in the Bishop's vault at Fulham. There is no 
monument or inscription for him among those of his ancestors in what is 
called the Scott chapel in the parish church. The only memorials of him and 
his wife are their achievements against the walls. It is rather remarkable that, 
among those of the Scott family, there is an achievement for Bishop Gibson, 
and another for Dr. William Scott, President of St. John's College, Oxford, 
son of the rector of Upminster, and therefore Scott's cousin, neither of whom 
dwelt in Chigwell. 

This zealous antiquary resided some time in Sackville street, Piccadilly, 
which house he disposed of on the death of his wife, which happened in 1770, 
and also gave up a residence at Bath, and from that time lived entirely at the 
family seat, Woolston Hall, perhaps rather recluse, as the Rev. Michael 
Tyson, rector of Lamborn, the adjoining parish to Chigwell, in a familiar 

31 



482 APPENDIX. 

letter to the celebrated antiquary Richard Gough, calls him " the Hermit of 
Woolston," not meaning certainly that he avoided all company, for Tyson, 
himself fond of antiquarian pursuits, on becoming incumbent of Lamooni, 
was soon in habits of social intercourse with him, dining at his table. His 
not mixing more with the world arose from the pain he suffered from a dan- 
gerous complaint which hastened his end, and he was excused serving the 
office of sheriff of the county, for which his name was three times put on the 
list, on account of extreme ill health, wldch rendered him incapable of any 
exertion. He was remarkable for his great knowledge and goodness of heart, 
a diligent inquirer after antiquities, freely imparting his discoveries to his 
friends. The late Mr. Da Costa describes him as a very humane, friendly, 
and communicative gentleman; and Morant, author of the ' History of Essex,' 
in acknowledging the assistance he had received from him, by the communi- 
cation of several curious particulars relating to the part of the county in which 
he resided, notices him as " this good man." A plate of the monumental brass 
of Archbishop Harsnet in the work alluded to was supplied by Scott. There is 
no record or tradition of his having a knowledge of botany, to which his 
neighbour Tyson was much attached, but he left a collection of minerals, still 
preserved in Woolston Hall. He appears by Da Costa to have been a col- 
lector of all sorts of antiquities, charters, leaves, records, coins, abbey-seals, 
Roman lamps, Etruscan ware, swords, daggers, pistols, helmets, saws, and 
other ancient instruments, regalia, watches, sarcophagi, bronzes, idols, appa- 
rel, pictures, miniatures, and prints. A part of his collection was sold in July 
1782, and about the same time, his extensive and valuable library. The man- 
sion, now the residence of Robert Bodle, Esq., son of Robert above mentioned, 
still retains its venerable character, the walls hung with portraits of the 
family, two or three of Scott himself, one of Derham (our author), and one of 
his son, the President of St. John's, Oxford, in which college is another 
portrait of George Scott. Among the numerous antiquities, there is the 
little brass Mercury figured in Morant's ' History of Colchester,' also other 
Roman remains from that town. In the hall is a handsome carved oaken 
chair, the principal part of which is known to be five hundred years old. 



APPENDIX B. 

EDWARD LHWYD, whose letters to John Ray, in this work, are reprinted 
from the 'Philosophical Letters,' was born in South Wales about 1670, and 
was the sou of Charles Lhwyd, Esq., of Lhanvorde. He is best known as an 
antiquary, but he deserves more notice than he has received as a naturalist. 
Although many of his works are still well known, the materials for his 
biography seem never to have been collected together. He appears to have 
received his early education in Wales, and in 1687 was entered at Jesus 
College, Oxford. In 1701 he was created M.A. He studied natural 
history with great diligence as a pupil of the celebrated Dr. Plot, and, in 
1690, he succeeded his master in Oxford as keeper of the Ashmolean 
Museum. In 1699 he published the work on fossils which gives him a 
claim to regard as a naturalist, and which must for ever connect him with 
the history of the science of palaeontology. This work was entitled 'Litho- 
phylacii Britannici Iconographia,' and consisted of a systematic catalogue of 
the fossils in the Ashmolean Museum, and was illustrated by a large number 



APPENDIX. 483 

of wood engravings. It was printed at the expense of Sir Isaac Newton, 
Sir Hans Sloaiie, aud some ot his other scientific friends. Only one hun- 
dred and twenty conies of the first edition were printed. Subsequently a 
new edition was published under the care of Mr. Huddesford, and to which 
several of Lhwyd's other contributions to palaeontology were annexed. 
This work contains a systematic arrangement of fossils, which, whatever may 
be its defects, possesses the merit of being the first attempt that was made 
to connect the study of fossils with other branches of natural history. 

The following is a list of his published works and papers from the 'Bib- 
liotheca Britannica : 

1. ' Lithophylacii Britannici Iconographia,' London, 1699. 8vo. New 
edition, by W. Huddesford, 1760. 

2. ' Archseologia Britannica,' Oxford, 1707. Folio. 

3. 'Adversaria de Fluviorum Montium, Urbium,' &c., 'in Britannia 
Nominibus,' 1719, London. 8vo. 

4. 'Letter to the Scots and Irish.' Translated by W. Malcolm. Edin- 
burh,"*W39. 5. Some account of a fiery exhalation in Merionethshire. 
'Phd. Trans.,' Ab. iii, 671. 6. A note concerning an extraordinary hail in 



Ibid., 1704. 10. Account of very large stones voided by the urethra. Ibid., 
1704. 11. Observations in natural history, made in travels through Wales. 
Ibid. 12. Account of some uncommon plants growing about Penzance and 
St. Ives, in Cornwall. Ibid. 13. On the natural history and antiquities of 
Wales. Ibid., Ab. vi, 19, 1713. 14. On an undescribed plant \Tubulanu 
indivisa, Linn.], Ibid. 

In the ' Gentleman's Magazine ' (vol. Ixxvii, p. 41 9) there is an account of 
the sale of Mr. Lhwyd's library, which consisted chiefly of works of antiqua- 
rian interest. Many of his letters to Dr. Martin Lister, and other dis- 
tinguished naturalists, were presented by Dr. Fothergill to the Ashmolean 
Museum, Oxford, where they still exist. 

He died in July, 1709, and his death is said to have been hastened by 
immoderate application to his antiquarian studies. The immediate cause 
was sleeping in a damp and close room in the museum at Oxford, which ho 
chose to sleep in, for the convenience of pursuing his studies. 

The following extract, giving an account of the church in the parish 
in which Lhwyd was born, and some account of his family, is from the MS. 
of the late Mr. John Dovaston, and has been kindly communicated by his 
son, F. M. Dovaston, Esq. A.M., of Westfelton, near Shrewsbury : 

" The old church of Oswestry stood near to Llwynymaen, in a field there 
called to this day Caeyr Eg^lwys, or the Church Leasow. It was called the 
church of Llanforda, from its vicinity to River Morda, and was dedicated to 
the Holy Trinity. Near to the spot was a well of fine water, to which the 
vulgar do yearly resort on Trinity Sunday, where they hold a kind of wake, 
and drink the water of the said well, with sugar in it. No remains of this 
church are to be seen. Llwynymaen house is very near to where the churcli 
once stood ; and I cannot pass this place without very strongly supposing 
that hereabouts was a Druid's place of worship ; for the word Lfan, or 
Llwyn (which is the same thing), does not signify a church. And yet we 
always find churches in those places so bearing tnc name of Llan ; but it 
signifies a grove, or place of Druid worship, which always was in woods of 
oak; and Llwyn y Macn signifies 'the grove of stone;' and probably there 



484 APPENDIX. 

were formerly stone pillars erected, such as Orsedd or Meine Gwyr, or 
Cronlech, for the performance of their religious rites. Amongst the old 
names given to Oswestry, not one of them has the word Llan to them ; and 
possibly this may be the reason, because there was no Llan or grove there, 
nor any church in former days, but a monastery ; for the church which 
belonged to the town was built at Llwynymaen, where the Llwyn originally 
was, and was called Llanforda church, or alonn, a grove of trees for patri- 
archal worship, whence proceeds the Welsh word Llaii, which, although it 
doth not signify a church, although at such places there generally is a church, 
because it was formerly a grove, or Druid place of worship ; and the first 
preachers of Christianity to their followers, did in general erect their churches 
near to these groves, in order, by this means, and slow innovations of the 
patriarchal into that of the Christian, to convert them, which at length was 
accomplished; for there are many places where now there are no churches 
that are called Llan, from there having been groves there. * * 
Llwynymaen, now mostly taken down, was an ancient stone edifice, in form 
of a castle, built very strong, with a square high tower at each end of it ; had 
a gateway before the entrance, and strong doors thereto, and had once been 
walled round. All the demesne of Llanforda once belonged to it. It hath 
been for nearly 200 years past in the family of Llwhyd, the last whereof was 
Edward Lloyd, who died about 1557. Llanforda was given to a branch of 
that family, who were Lloyds of Llanforda for many years, until by marriage 
it came into the family of Williams. Edward Llwhyd, the antiquary, who 
published the ' Archaeologia Britannica ' in 1707, was born there. His father, 
Edward Llwhyd, lived there; and during his life he kept a small light 
carriage, with four wheels, which was drawn by dogs ; and he frequently 
used to ride in it, and drove his dogs to Oswestry, on which account the 
public-house now called ' The Coach and Dogs/ which was then his property, 
had the sign of the Coach and Dogs." 

Mr. Dovaston has in his possession a curious ancient stone sun-dial, found, 
in 1819, among some ruins at Llwynymaen, having on it the initials and 
arms of Edward Lhwyd, without gnomon, showing the hour on five surfaces, 
the edges of the curved hollows acting as gnomons, and casting their shadows 
on the hours. 



APPENDIX C. 

The following notices, extracted from the volumes of the ' Philosophical 
Magazine ' for 1828 and 1829, of the commemoration of the second centenary 
of the birthday of Bay, would have been more appropriately published with 
the 'Memorials,' but the Editor was not at that time aware of their 
existence. 

COMMEMORATION OF THE SECOND CENTENARY OF THE BIRTHDAY OF RAT. 

A meeting is about to take place in London, which, to judge from the 
name of the gentleman who has consented to take the chair, and from the 
stewards who have undertaken to act on the occasion, may be regarded as a 
national festival in honour of our distinguished naturalist Ray. Throughout 
the whole of a long and industrious life, that enlightened observer and sys- 



APPENDIX. 485 

tematist devoted himself unceasingly to the study of the works of the 
Creator, whom in those works lie learned devoutly to adore. His researches 
extended into every branch of natural history, and in each of these he 
excelled. His labours were deservedly esteemed by his contemporaries, and 
continued to receive from succeeding writers the attention to which their 
intrinsic value entitled them. To them Linnaeus himself was deeply 
indebted ; and Cuvier, the first of the zoologists of the nineteenth century, 
does not hesitate to avow his obligations to our illustrious countryman, who 
laboured in the same vineyard during the seventeenth. The admiration and 
gratitude of every naturalist, to what branch soever of the science his atten- 
tion may be more particularly directed, are justly due to Ray, and are indeed 
on all occasions most freely tendered. How well he merited them will 
readily be illustrated by even a brief enumeration of a few only of those 
numerous and valuable productions which we owe to liis observation, bis 
study, and his research. 

Rayhas been pronounced by Cuvier to be the first true systematist of the 
animariRngdom, and the principal guide of Linnaeus in this department of 
nature. To him chiefly the zoologist is indebted for the excellent ' Ornitho- 
logy' and 'Ichthyology' which pass under the name of Willughby. The 
notes collected by both were, after the decease of the latter, digested and 
arranged by Ray, who revised and methodised the whole, and gave to the 
works the form in which they were presented to the world. Both these 
productions are well known, and are still justly esteemed ; the ' Ichthyology ' 
especially, the principles first applied in which have been adopted by Cuvier 
in his primary divisions of the fishes in that great work for which he has 
been collecting materials during nearly the whole of his life, and of which 
the first livraison has just appeared. The posthumous publications of Ray, 
the ' Synopsis Methodica Avium,' and the ' Synopsis Methodica Piscium,' 
afford abridgments of the 'Ornithology' and the 'Ichthyology,' with 
numerous additions. His ' Synopsis Methodica Quadrupedum et Serpentiui 
generis ' was published during his life, and very shortly after his decease 
appeared his ' Methodus Insectorum.' The ' Historia Insectorum,' a work 
of real value, was printed some years after his death, at the expense of the 
Royal Society. 

By Haller, Ray was designated as the greatest botanist in the memory of 
man. Still more emphatic is the character of him given by the late revered 
President of the Linnaean Society " The most accurate in observation, the 
most philosophical in contemplation, and the most faithful in description, 
amongst all the botanists of his own, or perhaps any other time." To Rav 
the British botanist is indebted for the first good Flora of his native land. 
At an early period of his life he gave to the world his ' Catalogus Plautarum 
circa Cantabrigiam nascentium,' wliich was followed in a few years by his 
' Catalogus Plantarum Angliae et Insularum adjacentium.' The tliird edition 
of the latter work was entitled ' Synopsis Methodica Stirpium Britannicarum,' 
and is still universally known. This also passed through three editions, the 
last of which was considerably enlarged and improved by the celebrated 
Dillenius. His earliest attempt as a general systematist was the ' Methodus 
Plantarum nova,' in which, availing himself of the labours of former writers, 
corrected by his own philosophical genius, he produced an outline in several 
respects superior to those of his predecessors. His later 'Methodus 
Plantarum ernendata et aucta ' adopts many of the views advanced by his 
generous rival and contemporary, Tournefort. These systems, modified 
from time to time according to his continually increasing knowledge, had 



486 APPENDIX. 

been employed in his ' Synopsis/ and in conformity with them he digested 
his ' Historia Plantarum generalis,' a work of immense labour and research, 
which contains descriptions of nearly 20,000 species of plants, arranged in 
a systematic order, many of the groups of which are purely natural, and 
agree perfectly with those admitted by the best informed of modern botanists. 
Tn the first book of this history, entitled De Plantis in genere, Ray fully 
established his rank as a physiological botanist. His detached remarks on 
the motion of the sap in plants, ana on other points of vegetable physiology, 
are there embodied with the principal discoveries made by previous or con- 
temporary writers, so as to form, according to Du Petit thouars, the most 
complete treatise which yet exists on vegetation taken as a whole. " To 
isolate this book, and to reprint it in a separate form," continues that dis- 
tinguished botanist, " would constitute the most noble monument that could 
be erected to the memory of Ray." 

As a geologist, the fame of Ray must rest on his three physico-theological 
discourses concerning the primitive Chaos and Creation, the General Deluge, 
and the Dissolution of the World, a highly popular work, which was fre- 
quently reprinted, and which proposes a theory at least as plausible as any 
which had then appeared, or was advanced until long after its publication. 
A portion of his Collection of Unusual or Local English Words, with the 
Preparation of Metals and Minerals in England, &c. proves also that he was 
by no means neglectful of this interesting branch of natural science so often 
as he possessed opportunities of attending to it. 

The preceding list, copious as it appears, contains only the more important 
works of Ray as a naturalist, without including his Appendices, his Supple- 
ments, his Catalogues, his detached papers, &c., and without adverting to 
his various publications on philology, his travels, his philosophical treatises 
and letters, and his theological productions. Of the latter, one, however, 
cannot be passed by without notice. Few works have been more frequently 
reprinted than 'The Wisdom of God manifested in the Works of the 
Creation,' and none have better deserved the popularity they have enjoyed. 
On the character of its author, whether as a naturalist or a divine, that lasting 
monument of his knowledge and his piety confers equal and immortal 
honour. 

Ray was born on the 29th of November, 1628. The two hundredth 
anniversary of his birthday is now rapidly approaching. It will be celebrated 
in a manner worthy of the man and of the occasion. The cultivators of 
natural science, in each of its various branches, are anxious to take a share 
in the commemoration of the event. 

The President of the Royal Society, Davies Gilbert, Esq. M.P., has con- 
sented to act as chairman at the proposed dinner, and the following gentlemen 
have already accepted the office of stewards : 

P. M. Roget, M.D. Sec. R.S. 

E. Forster, Esq. V.P. and Treas. L.S. 

J. Sabine, Esq. Sec. Hort. Soc. 

Rev. W. Kirby, r.u.s. &c. 

J . E. Bicheno, Esq. Sec. Linn. Soc. 

R. Taylor, Esq. Assistant-Sec. Linn. Soc. 

W. J.Broderip, Esq. Sec. Geol. Soc. 

N. A. Vigors, Esq. Sec. Zool. Soc. 

E. T. Bennett, Esq. Vice-Sec. Zool. SoC. 

T. Bell, Esq. F.R.S. &c. 

J. Brookes, Esq. r.n.s. &c. 



APPENDIX. 487 

Rev. W. Buckland, D.D. F.R.S. Prof. Min. and GeoL Oxford. 
J. G. Children, Esq. F.E.S. &c. 
Rev. J. Goodall, D.D. 

R. E. Grant, M.D. Prof. Zool. Univ., London. 
G. B. Greenough, Esq. F.R.S. &c. 
Major-Gencral Hardwicke, F.R.S. &c. 
Rev. J. S. Henslow, F.L.S. Reg. Prof. Bot., Cambridge. 
A. B. Lambert, Esq. V.P.I, s. 
J. Lindley, Esq. F.R.S. Prof. Bot. Univ., London. 
J. Morgan, Esq. F.L.S. 
J. F. Stephens, Esq. F.L.S. 

N. Wallich, M.D. F.R.S. Ed. Cur. Bot. Gard., Calcutta. 
W. Yarrell, Esq. F.L.S. 
To this list additions are still making daily. 

' > ^ p( COMMEMORATION OF KAY. 

The proposal for employing the occasion of the second centenary of the 
birthday of the illustrious John Ray, which happened on the 29th of Novem- 
ber last, for the purpose of a public expression of the high estimation iu 
which he is held at this day by the lovers of every branch of natural history, 
was eagerly adopted, and the public dinner at Freemasons' Hall was attended 
by about 130 of the most distinguished cultivators and patrons of science, 
including most of the officers of the Royal, Linnaean, Geological, Horticul- 
tural, and Zoological Societies, the Rev. the Provost of Eton, and several of 
the professors of the Universities of Oxford, Cambridge, and London. 

Davies Gilbert, Esq. M.P., the much-respected President of the Royal 
Society, took the chair, supported by His Grace the Duke of Somerset, 
President of the Royal Institution, Lord Astley, and other persons of 
distinction. 

In proposing " The Memory of Ray," the chairman said that he felt it to 
be his duty to express his sincere acknowledgments to the company for the 
high honour they had done him in calling mm to the station he then so 
unworthily filled. He was aware that so gratifying a compliment had been 
paid to him solely on account of his occupying the chair in which the too 
great kindness of the Fellows of the Royal Society had placed him ; but he 
valued it the more from that reflection. That society had been greatly 
honoured by having such a distinction conferred upon it ; and he spoke the 
sentiments of every member of the Royal Society when he returned to the 
company his sincere thanks on their behalf for tins distinction. To take an 
active part on such an occasion must be gratifying to every friend of science 
and of virtue ; but, however much pleasure might be felt in participating in 
the proceedings of that day, and doing honour to the memory of a truly great 
man, still far more satisfaction must be derived from a consideration of the 
good effects which such a meeting must produce. Men who had done good 
service to their country, whether in the field of science or elsewhere, were 
entitled to its grateful remembrance. The display of that remembrance was 
calculated to incite others to an honorable struggle for similar distinction ; 
and he was sure that when these proceedings should become known, they 
would tend greatly to promote the cultivation of the science of natural 
history. On the merits of the illustrious man whose birth they had met to 
commemorate, although any remark from him must be unnecessary, he could 
not avoid saying a few words. The state of science at the period in which 



488- APPENDIX. 

Ray lived must be so well known to those present, that it must be useless 
for him to refer' to it, except to remind them of the difficulties with which he 
had to contend. To show the extent and importance of the labours of Raj, 
he would mention some of the principal works which he had produced. 
Among them were ' Historia Plautarum Generalis ;' ' Catalogus Plantarum 
circa Cantabrigiam, &c. with Appendices ;' ' Methodus Plantarum circa 
Cantabrigiam,' &c. ; ' Catalogus Plantarum Angliae et Insularum adjacen- 
tium ;' 'Catalogus Stirpium in exteris regionibus observatorum ;' ' Synopsis 
Methodica Animalium Quadrupedum, &c. ;' ' Synopsis Methodica Avium et 
Piscium;' 'Methodus Insectorum;' 'Observations made in a Journey 
through part of the Low Countries, Germany, Italy, and France, with a 
Catalogue of Plants, not natives of England;' to which is added, 'An 
Account of the Travels of F. Willughby through Spain, and a Collection of 
Travels into the Eastern Countries ;' ' A Collection of English Proverbs and 
unusual Provincial Words ;' ' Dictionarium Trilingue ;' ' An Itinerary 
through England;' ' Translation of Bishop Wilkins's real Character;' various 
sermons and theological works. The work published by Mr. P. Willughby, 
under the title of ' Ornithologise libri tres,' &c. was known to be principally 
by Ray. In the ' Philosophical Transactions ' were printed, among other 
papers, On the manner in which Spiders project their Threads ; On the Dis- 
section of a Porpoise; On the Swimming-bladders of Fish ; On the Effects 
of Poisonous Roots, and the Virtues of the Leaves of Hemlock; and 
Observations (1699) made on the Comet that appeared at Rome ; and the 
last of his works which he should mention was 'The Wisdom of God 
manifested in the Creation.' This had been very frequently reprinted, and 
was clearly the prototype of a late celebrated book on the same subject. 
He had read the work of Ray with infinite delight, and it was alike an 
honour to his head and to his heart. But although his productions were so 
numerous, it was by their excellence that they commanded attention. Ray 
was the first who reduced natural history to a system, and prepared the way 
for those more perfect arrangements which have since had so salutary an 
influence on its cultivation. It was to his penetrating genius and indefatigable 
exertions that the civilized world was indebted for many most important 
discoveries. If he did not himself always arrive at the goal, he pointed out 
the road ; and it was to his pursuing the course he had commenced that we 
owed our present advanced state in many particulars of natural history. 
Haller felt now much he owed to Ray, and he termed him " the greatest 
botanist in the memory of man." Ray very early distinguished himself. 
While at college he acquired a high fame, and some of the exercises he 
performed there have been found to oe worthy of preservation even to this 
period. They formed the foundation of some of his late and important 
works. 

" Of this inestimable writer," says Stillingfleet, in his ' Calendar of Flora,' 
" whose works do honour to our nation, as a late disciple of the great Swedish 
naturalist justly observes, I cannot help saying further, that no writer till 
his time ever advanced all the branches of natural history so much as that 
sagacious, diligent, English observer, whose systematical spirit threw a light 
on everything he undertook, and contributed not a little to those great and 
wonderful improvements which have since been introduced." 

He was invited to become a member of the Royal Society in 1667 ; and 
he happily lived in amity with some of the most able and most virtuous men 
of his age. It was to do justice to the memory of such a man that they 
were then assembled, and he would not longer detain them from drinking 



APPENDIX. . 489 

with gratitude and veneration to the memory of the disciple of Bacon and 
friend of Locke, the intimate friend and contemporary of Willughby, and the 
precursor of Haller and Linnseus. 

After toasts to " The Memory of Linnseus," and " The Improvement of 
Natural History," 

Mr. Bicheno (Secretary to the Linnaean Society) proposed, " Prosperity 
to the Royal Society." In giving such a toast, and in such a company, all 
remark must be unnecessary ; still he might be allowed to say, that he pro- 
posed it from his heart, and that he did so principally from having, in an 
official situation in another society, experienced the good effects which 
proceeded from its fostering care, its kindly protection, and the powerful 
assistance it extended to other societies, especially to that to which he 
belonged, when they had arrived at maturity. He then pronounced a warm 
eulogy on Ray, whom Cuvier had justly called un Methodiste, and whose 
works he had studied, still with fresh advantage, for the last twenty years. 
Ray was indeed a methodist : he was the first who arranged the grand out- 
lines' ^t natural history, and enabled every one to become acquainted with 
the groups, the grand formations of nature. With the minute particulars 
of his subject, Ray had not much interfered; but he had originated that 
system of arrangement which gave perspicuity to the labours of others, and 
had accurately described the character of nature's grand operations. No 
doubt he had gathered much from Grynseus ; but still, even in the application 
of what he had gathered, he had done a vast deal. Most ages were proud of 
the advances they had made in science. While, however, we boasted o, 
systematic arrangement, it should be remembered that, although the natural 
method was too much overlooked during the latter part of the last century, 
Ray first discovered its value. As a zoologist, he was not prepared to speak 
of that great man; but in that branch of natural history with which he 
might pretend to some acquaintance, he felt an admiration for his genius 
beyond the power of language to express. 

The Chairman, on proposing " Prosperity to the Linnsean Society," gave 
a sketch of its origin. It was, in truth, a branch of the Royal Society. It 
had been formed on the suggestion of the late Sir Joseph Banks, in conse- 
quence of the multiplicity of business the Royal Society had been called upon 
to attend to. How well it had discharged its duties the scientific world well 
knew. 

Mr. Lambert, Vice-President of the Linnsean Society, returned thanks; and 

Mr. E. Forster, Vice-President and Treasurer, said, that born and educated 
in the same county with Ray, he had been taught from his infancy to admire 
that great man ; and his admiration soon became veneration, from a study 
of his writings. Nearly forty years ago he had first visited his tomb, before 
it had long since undergone a repair at the expense of a gentleman present 
(Sir Thomas Gery Cullum). In his pilgrimages to Ray's tomb,* he had felt 

* It has lately been repaired again by Mr. Walker, the rector of Black 
Notley. Mr. Tyson, in a letter to Mr. Cole, 1779, says, "One part of my 
ramble was to visit the last residence of that pious philosopher, Mr. Ray, 
Black Notley, con amore. I made a drawing of the church, and of his monu- 
ment in the churchyard. The parish clerk had such remembrance of him 
from others, that he related various incidents. The clerk pointed out to me 
the farm-house which was once his dwelling. I there saw his library (that 
is, the room which once contained his books), and bis garden below it, 
about an acre of ground. Here the father of English naturalists lived em- 
ployed and happy." 



490 APPENDIX. 

great delight iu seeing also the place of his birth, the church in which he 
had been baptised ; and in entering the house in which this good man had 
lived and died, it was pleasing to reflect that he was treading the very 
boards which Ray had trodden, and that he was looking, perhaps, on trees 
and plants which Ray had admired. The Linnaean Society was proud of 
being thought so nearly connected with the chief labours of Ray ; but that 
great philosopher ought not to be considered merely as a botanist, we must 
look on his character as a man. " His religion was pure and free from cant ; 
his piety sincere, and without affectation ; his morality consistent, and his 
manners gentle, affable and kind to those around him." One proof only 
of his integrity need be mentioned, his having resigned his fellowship ; and, 
though reduced to poverty, refused all further preferment in the Church, 
because he would not declare that those who had sworn the solemn league 
and covenant might break their oaths ; not that he had himself signed it, for 
he thought it an unlawful oath ; yet he could not conscientiously make the 
declaration required. 

" Prosperity to the Geological Society" having been given, the President 
(Dr. Fitton), in returning thanks, stated his concurrence in all that had been 
said respecting the great merit of Ray as a naturalist, and the excellence of 
his private character. Ray was in fact, he said, an honest man ; he gave up 
station and emolument rather than swear to what he did not believe ; and 
if such examples of integrity were not found amongst those who devote 
themselves to the pursuit of truth, where else, he would ask, should they be 
looked for ? In geology, Ray made many sagacious observations, and enter- 
tained some opinions much beyond the state of the subject in his own time. 
But our chairman had justly stated, that geology, as a distinct branch of 
knowledge, had not then obtained a name ; and in fact it supposes such an 
advanced state of scientific inquiry, that it scarcely could have existed till a 
much later period. The geologist, it is true, is in a great measure nothing 
more than a physical geographer, and all that constitutes his exclusive 
business lies within a very narrow compass ; but he requires a high degree 
of cultivation in several other departments of inquiry with which his own is 
allied, especially in chemistry, zoology, and botany ; for what without these 
would be geology at the present day ? Instead of regretting this state of 
dependence, he was rather disposed to rejoice at it, since it tended to produce 
more frequent intercourse with those who are engaged in the pursuit of 
other branches of natural science ; so that when he looked about him in such 
an assembly as the present one, he felt that he was surrounded with bene- 
factors ; and great as the merit of Ray unquestionably was, as an original 
observer of the earth's structure, he was disposed to rate still more highly 
the services he had rendered to geology, by contributing to the perfection of 
those other departments of natural history, to which his attention was prin- 
cipally devoted. But there were more general views, which made him rejoice 
that a meeting like this had been brought together. It proved, and must if 
possible contribute to increase, the cordiality of intercourse and feeling that 
distinguish, so very creditably, the naturalists of this country ; and it tended 
also to increase their power and resources. It had been said, perhaps with 
too much truth, that England, notwithstanding the number and wide distri- 
bution of its colonies, has done much less to advance the natural history of 
foreign countries than might have been expected : occasional meetings like 
the present must facilitate the inquiries of our naturalists, not only by 
enabling them to combine their own exertions, but by impressing upon the 
government of the country the importance and value of the researches in 
which they arc engaged. In a country like ours, the government itself could 



APPENDIX. 491 

not, perhaps, be expected to originate measures for the improvement of 
natural knowledge ; it is for you, therefore, to suggest them ; the govern- 
ment can have no other wish than to give effect to the suggestions of dis- 
interested and well-informed men. On every ground, therefore, both of 
general feeling, and as a member of a society, to the success of which the 
progress of the other departments of natural history is almost essential, he 
was happy that this meeting had been held, and Lad peculiar pleasure in 
being present upon such an occasion. 

Mr. Green ough passed a high eulogy on the character of Ray ; and said 
that the meeting gave a strong proot that honorable exertions were never 
thrown away. Independent of the inward pleasure they gave, they were 
sure of receiving the admiration of the good and the informed. After some 
remarks upon the rapid spread of the study of geology, he concluded by 
expressing his hope that that science would daily become more general. 

" The Zoological Society" was then given; and Mr. Vigors, in returning 
thanks, spoke of the high sense now entertained of Ray's merits as a philo- 
sophigj^zoologist, and alluded to the advantages which were to be expected 
from the establishment of the Zoological Society. 

On the healths of the naturalists of Great Britain and Ireland being 
drunk, coupled with the name of Mr. Kirby, the rev. gentleman said that 
he had never before addressed a public assembly of a festive character ; but 
he felt it right to take that opportunity of testifying his admiration of the 
great and good Ray. He was great as a natural philosopher, and great also 
as a moral philosopher. He penetrated the world of science further than 
any of his contemporaries, and by his exertions formed a bright constellation 
of information, whose beams had served as a guide and Deacon to more 
modern labourers. In entomology, the branch of science to which he himself 
was devoted, the naturalist of the present time was indeed deeply indebted 
to Ray, who had combined the system of Aristotle with that of Swammer- 
dam, and cleared the way for Linnaeus. Much had been done to unveil 
nature, but still much remained to be done ; and he hoped that a course of 
perseverance would be pursued until all was accomplished. 

The healths of Cuvier and Jussieu, and the naturalists of Europe, were 
drunk with much approbation. 

Dr.Buckland's health, and "Prosperity to the University of Oxford," having 
been most cordially received ; the learned professor addressed the meeting 
as follows : 

" The President of the Royal Society has already informed you, by a 
detailed examination of his extensive works, how great are the advantages 
which natural history has derived from the labours and the genius of Ray ; 
and in the presence of so many illustrious botanists as I now see assembled 
in this place, it would be highly presumptuous in me to say one word on the 
benefits, the inestimable benefits, which he has conferred on the science of 
botany. My excellent friend and colleague, Professor Sedgwick, were he 
now present (and I regret that severe illness alone has caused his absence), 
would tell you how extensively the influence of his exertions and his example 
have operated to excite a taste for natural knowledge iu the University of 
Cambridge, a taste which he, a member of the same college, and animated 
with the same spirit as the immortal Ray, maintains and keeps alive in the 
present generation with a zeal and talent worthy to follow his great prede- 
cessor in the field of natural science. 

" As a member of the University of Oxford, I rejoice to bear most ample 
testimony to the lasting benefits which the exertions of the age and friends 
of Ray have transmitted to that scat of learning, to which it is my happiness 



492 APPENDIX. 

to belong. The labours of Lister, Plot, and Ashmole, of Lloyd, and of 
Robert Boyle, and the establishment of the Botanic Garden and of the Ash- 
molean Museum, mark in our University the burst of a kindred flame to that 
which Ray had excited in the sister University, and laid in Oxford the 
foundation of that right method of investigation, and of making collections 
in natural history, which have been transmitted to our own time. In the 
department of science to which my own attention is peculiarly directed, the 
genius of Ray had made advances that would do honour to the present day. 
In his 'Treatise on the Wisdom of God in the Creation,' he points out 
examples of design and utility in the form and structure and composition of 
our planet, founded on extensive and accurate observation of facts, and illus- 
trated with sound argument, mixed with much good feeling and good sense. 
And in his ' Discourses on Chaos, Creation, and Deluge,' there is a know- 
ledge of many phenomena of the earth's surface, the discovery of which the 
present generation are too apt to consider as exclusively their own : that 
important and leading doctrine of the Huttonian theorv, which attributes 
the elevation of islands, mountains, and continents to the force of vapour 
acting from below, is set forth in words that form almost an exact parallel 
to the statements of the same theory in Playfair's ' Illustrations ;' the theory 
in neither case was new ; it was, indeed, handed down from high antiquity, 
but it is illustrated by Ray with such abundant arguments and examples, 
derived from the effects of earthquakes and volcanoes which in his time 
raged so terribly in Jamaica, and with such copious and judicious references 
to the authentic records of the elevation of Thera, Therasia, and other vol- 
canic islands, that the essence and leading features of much that has been 
written since, on the theory of elevation and disturbance by subterranean 
vapours, have been anticipated by Ray. His remarks on the ' Structure of 
Mountains,' as containing and affording access to metallic veins, their influence 
on climate, and use in collecting clouds for the formation of rain and production 
of rivers ; his observations also on the general diffusion of springs, and their 
never-failing supply of water, as derived from rains and dews, show much 
accurate observation, and point out correct conclusions which have been 
often repeated, but rarely surpassed, by his followers on these subjects. 

"In another curious and extensive branch of geological inquiry which 
relates to the history of fossil shells, he contended (in opposition to the pre- 
vailing theories of his predecessors and of many of his contemporaries) that 
they were not accidental results of the plastic power and the sport of nature, 
but the real and true exuviae of animals that formerly inhabited them. He 
contended further, that these shells for the most part belong to species un- 
known in our existing waters, but recommends caution iu pronouncing them 
to be absolutely extinct until we know the contents of the bottoms of all our 
deepest seas. Can it be said that modern geology has advanced on this point 
much further than Ray? 

" Again, with respect to the prevailing taste and studies of his time, he 
complains that men are too much occupied in the study of words, and too 
regardless of the study of things ; exclusively absorbed, in attending to the 
works of the creature, and regardless of the woi-ks of the Creator ; admiring 
and collecting carved ivory and curious instruments of human invention, but 
insensible of the exquisite and ten thousand times more admirable mechanism 

" He complains further, that men are too much disposed to rely on the 
authority of others, and too little willing to undertake the labour of investi- 
gating nature for themselves ; he stimulates them to exertion by the hope of 
useful discoveries, any one of which may amply reward the labours of a life. 



APPENDIX. 493 

" Such were the feelings and such the principles by which his energetic 
soul was ever actuated; such the exertions to which he called on his con- 
temporaries; constant and strenuous exertions to extend the sphere of 
human knowledge and useful discovery, and thereby advance the welfare of 
mankind. And surrounded as I now am by a host of individuals, the most 
illustrious members of the numerous learned and philosophical societies 
which in our day have arisen to adorn and benefit our country, I feel that 
you all not only sympathise with me in admiration of the great example he 
has set us, but yourselves rejoice to follow in those paths of useful labour 
which Ray not only pointed out, but was himself indefatigable to pursue. 
To do just honour to the memory of so great and good a man is the object 
of this day : a man whom as an individual we must ever esteem, love, and 
venerate, and whose name the annals of philosophy will never cease to record 
among the first founders and benefactors of natural science." 

On giving " The University of Cambridge," the Chairman took notice of 
the expulsion of Ray from that University, which harsh act he was disposed 
to attnJuite to the persecuting spirit which raged without the walls of that 
learned seminary. He could say of many of the present members of Trinity 
College, that they regret that the violence of the times had compelled their 
predecessors to acquiesce in the retirement of Mr. Ray from his fellowship, 
for refusing to subscribe a declaration altogether unwarrantable. Oxford 
had as much to answer for in regard to her treatment of Mr. Locke. 

The Rev. Professor Henslow returned thanks. He remarked that the 
University of Cambridge had, so far as the marble or the canvas could make 
amends, endeavoured to atone for the little, or, he should rather say, the 
great, injustice which Mr. Ray had sustained. The bust of that great man 
was ranged by the side of those of Newton, Boyle, Barrow, Dryden, and 
Willughby ; and his portrait was considered to confer honour on the place 
in which it was. But Cambridge might with justice boast of possessing a 
far more powerful proof than those of the estimation in which it held the 
genius and conduct of Ray. His spirit still lived there : and although the 
study of natural history had not yet been brought to that degree of perfec- 
tion there which it might be, he hoped the day was not far off when it would 
command general attention : such pursuits he considered the best correctives 
of fanaticism and bigotry. 

" The Universities of Edinburgh, Glasgow, and London," and the healths 
of Baron Humboldt and Dr. Wollaston having been severally drunk, the 
Chairman retired, amidst the applauses of the company. 

The health of Mr. Children, who suggested the commemoration, was then 
given with hearty approbation, and the company separated, after having 
spent a day which they will long remember with delight. 



INDEX. 



ABIES, 144. 
Acacia indica, 355. 
Accentor inodularis, 117. 
Aceras antkropophora, 5. 
AchillwcPtarmaca, 384. 
Actsea spicata, 25-6. 
Adianthum aureum, 47. 
Adiantum album, 299. 
Adonis autumnaiis, 5. 
Adwa, 115. 

Agaricus piperatus, 124. 
Agrostis spica venti, 60. 
Aiuga Cbamsepitys, 5. 
Alauda arborea, 122. 
Alcea indica, 179. 
Alchimilla vulgaris, 14, 45. 
Alga marina, 190. 
Alsine, 81. 

aquatica, 46. 
scandens, 383. 
Althrea, 350. 
Ambergrise, 195, 464. 
Amarum, 214. 
Amber, yellow, 49, 52. 
Amomum, 469. 

contrayeron, 348. 
Amsterdam, plants in, 331. 
Anagallis lutea, 45. 
Anas acuta, 16. 

arctica, 114, 131. 

boschas, 149. 

crecca, 149. 

penelope, 16. 
Angel, sylvestris, 216. 
Anser leucopsis, 33. 
segetum, 183. 
Anthemis tinctoria, 3. 
nobilis, 214. 
Anthus pratensis, 96. 
Apium palustre, 314. 
Apocyna, 351. 



Araneum rufum, 30. 

Araneis, 36. 

Arenaria peploides, 385. 

Arctium Lappa, 373. 

Ardex cinerea, 106. 

Areca, 356. 

Aron, 352. 

Artemisia campestris, 85. 

Arundo, 464. 

Asclepias, 351. 

Vincetoxacum,133. 
Ascyron tomentosum, 319. 
Aselli, 113. 

Aspkodelus palustris, 388. 
Asplenium rkizophyllum, 288. 
Asterias, 213. 
Astragalus boeticus, 108. 

sesameus, 108. 
Atriplex maritima, 186-91 . 
Attractilys lutea, 133. 
Avellana quadrifida, 306. 
Avellanae purpatrices, 463. 

Balsaams from oils, 144. 
Bangue, 160. 
BAUHINTJS, 131. 
Bardana, 373. 
Barleria hystrix, 355. 
BARNHAM, Mr., 9. 
Barnacles, 105. 
Barberry, 355. 
Bastoons, St. Paul's, 104. 
Bats, 359. 
Bee maggots, 97. 
Beetles, 364, 455. 
Bernicle, 33. 
Bidcns, 400. 
Birds in Jamaica, 462. 
Bistorta, 46. 

alpina, 133, 135. 

major vulgaris, 27. 



496 



INDEX. 



Bittoun, 106. 

Blackbirds, water, 257. 

Blita, 387. 

Blitum americanum, 140. 

Blood, movement of the, 310. 

Blood, transfusion of, 22. 

Blood, venous and arterial, 283. 

Bluecaps, 127. 

Boccarell, 101 . 

Bombycilla garrula, 183, 418. 

Bononian Phosphorus Lapis, 152. 

Booby, 111. ' 

Botaurus stellaris, 106. 

Branlin, 183. 

Bret, 94. 

BrHl, 94. 

Brontiae, 155. 

Broom-tree, 29. 

Berberis vulgaris, 355. 

Buccinum, 107. 

petrified, 186. 
Bunting, 117. 

Bupleurum rotundifolium, 5. 
Bursa pastoris, 44, 56. 
Buteo vulgaris, 50. 
Butterfish, 128. 
Buzzard, bald, 50. 

legs of, 50. 

wood, 50. 

Cactus opuntia, 143, 147. 
Csesalpinus, 355. 
Cakile maritima, 385. 
Calabrian ash, 369. 
Calceolus Marise, 25. 
Calligo, 160. 
Camelina, 44. 
Campanula, 109. 

latifolia, 27, 45. 
Canary birds, 121. 
Cannavan Beg, 372. 
Capillaries, 466. 
Capilli veneris, 45. 
Cardona, 7. 

Carduus heterophyllus, 27- 
Carlina sylvestris, 216. 
Carpinus, 43. 

Catananche cserulea, 131, 136. 
Carthamus lanatus, 133. 
Caryophyllon, 377. 

Plinii, 289. 
Caryophyllus, 3, 48. 
Cedar, Jamaica, 302. 



Celandine, 355. 
Cenconthatolli, 462. 
Centaureum luteum, 54. 
Cephalanthera grandiflora, 5, 85. 
Cereus, 468. 
Cerastium arvense, 56. 
Chamacistus plantag., 133. 
Chelidonium majus, 355. 
Chicken, blood in a, 283. 
Chilblains, 361. 
Chlora perfoliata, 54. 
Chenopodium maritimum, 387. 
Chondrilla Sesamoides, 137. 
Cichorium pratense, 131. 
Cimex, 87, 455. 
Cistum, 21. 
Coal plants, 291. 
Cocoa nut, 302. 
Coclilearia Armoracea, 46. 
Cochlea, 22. 

citrina, 110. 
Coccus Cacti, 189. 
Cod-fishes, 113. 
Codling, 113. 
Coffee fruit, 193. 
Colchicura, 46. 
Colocasia, 352. 
Colymbus, 131, 134, 148. 
Conchula persica, 107. 
Condor, 275. 

Convallaria Polygonatum, 26. 
Conyzaacris, 135, 147. 

canadensis, 133, 135. 
Cork trees, 143. 
Cortex, 190. 
Cornus suecica, 61. 

sanguinea, 276. 
Corvus corone, 96. 

monedula, 96. 
Cotula inodora, 215. 

fcetida, 215. 
Corymbiferse, 400. 
Crepis vesicaria, 131. 
Christophoriana, 25. 
Crocus autumnalis, 46. 
Crows, 96. 
Chrysanthemum, 3. 
Cuckoo, 278. 
Cucubalus baccifer, 383. 
Cucubalum Plin., 383. 
Curruca, 117. 

cinerea, 96. 
Custard apple, 195. 



INDEX., 



497 



ress po 

Cypripedium calccolus, 25, 276. 
Cystopteris fragilis, 45. 

Dab, 95. 

Daws, 96. 

Death-watch, 400. 

Delphinus, 39. 

Dentellaria, 355. 

Dianthus deltoides, 48, 60. 

Digitalis purpurea, 45. 

Dils, 192. 

Dildoe tree, 195, 468. 

Dioscorea alata, 288. 

Dog, a mad, cure of the bite of, 354. 

Dogsbane, 351. 

Douqjcers, 134. 

Draba muralis, 44. 

Dracontium, 352. 

Dullysk, 305. 

Dumb cane, 464. 

Eagles, 257. 
Echeneis remora, 116. 
Echini spatagi, 155. 
Echium marmum, 61. 
Eels, breeding of, 127. 

efficacy in hydrophobia, 98, 
Elephant's skeleton, 473. 
Emberiza miliaria, 117. 
Empetrum nigrum, 44. 
Epipactis ovalis, 27. 
Equisetum, 291. 

fcetidum, 386. 

Erigeron canadense, 133, 147. 
Erica, 140. 

baccifera nigra, 44. 
Erodium moschatum, 46. 
Eruca, 62, 329. 
Eryngium campestre, 276. 
Erythraea rubicula, 117. 
Euphorbia hiberna, 319. , 
Excrescences, vegetable, 88. 

Falcon, haggard, 121. 
Faugel, 356. 
Fetu, 114. 
Ficidula:, 96. 
Ficus indica, 143, 147. 
Fieldfare, 95, 183. 
Fishes' blood, 283. 
Filicula lusitanica, 395. 
Filix. saxatilis, 45. 
Flair, 113. 



Flairmaid, 118. 

Flayre maydes, 16. 

Fluke, 95. 

Foenum burgundiacum, 133. 

Fountain, boiling, 136. 

Foxfern, 291. 

Frankenia lams, 140, 217. 

Fratercula arctica, 117, 149. 

Frogs, 399. 

Frumeutum indicum, 308, 469. 

Fuci, 299. 

Fucus spongiosus, 186. 

Fuligula ferma, 16. 

marila, 54. 
Fumaria alba, 47. 

claviculata, 47. 
Fungi, 299. 
Fungilla canaria, 121. 
Fungus campaniformis, 158. 

piperatus, 124. 

Gadida;, 113. 
Galeatea, 188. 
Galeopsis ochraleuca, 26. 
Galium, verum, 124. 
Gallium, 291. 

cruciaturn, 26. 
luteuro, 124. 
Gandia, 8. 

Garrulus bohemicus, 183. 
German silk tail, 418. 
Geranium columbinum, 5. 
museum, 46. 
sylvaticum, 26. 

Gentiana pueumonanthe, 3, 27. 
Glastum, 47. 
Glossopetrae, 153, 213. 
Gnats, 402. 

generation of, 401. 
history of, 455. 
Gnaphalium maritimum, 217- 
Gossipium, 145. 

herbaceum, 288. 
Graye's farrier, 463. 
Gramen, 109. 

dactylon, 328. 
Grass, 3. 

Green cormorant, 33. 
Guaiacum, 302. 
Gurnellus vulgaris, 128. 

Haddock, 113. 
Hairworm, 97. 
Halibut, 94. 

32 



498 



INDEX. 



p, way to make, 101. 
Hart's tongues, 159. 
Hauke butterfly, 33. 
Heath-throstle,' 125. 
Hedgehog, blood of a, 283. 
Helleborine, 85. 
Hemlock- water drop-wort, 313. 
Hemlock water-wort, 304. 
Hemp, 52. 
Hemionitis, 298. 
Herba dysenterica, 320. 
Herniaria, 382, 384. 
Herniaria lenticulata, 217. 
Hermau's Paradisus, 349. 
Heron, 106. 
Herpes, 325. 
Herring fishery, 87. 
Hespens, 47, 44. 
Hibiscus, 350. 
Hieracium, 44. 

umbellatum, 14. 

rectum rigidum, 14. 
Himantopus, 462. 
Hippoglossus vulgaris, 94. 
Hippophse rhamnoides, 45, 276. 
Hirundo rustiea, 117. 
Hockesdon earth, 177. 
Holcus bicolor, 308. 

saccharatus, 308. 
Honey dews, 280. 
Homionitis, 139. 
Hornbeam, 43. 
Horse ants, 30, 36. 
Horses, blindness in, 23. 
Hyacinthus ambrosinus, 397. 
Hypocistidem, 21. 
Hypcricum, 109, 144. 
elodes, 319. 

Ichneumones, 88. 
Ilex coccigera, 137. 
Isatis tinctoria, 47. 

Jacea, 109. 

purpurea, 132. 
Jaundice, remedy for, 86. 

yellow, 84. 
Jesuit's bark, 190. 
Juncus conglomeratus, 320. 
cyperoides, 328. 
effusus, 320. 
Juniper, 302. 
Juniperus, 144. 

oxcedrus, 137. 



Kali, 186. 

geniculatum, 190. 
Kermes, 86, 96. 
Ketmia, 350. 
Knoutberry, 44. 



Lactuca marina, 192. 

muralis, 44. 

sylvestris, 54. 

virosa, 54. 
Lanner, 101. 
Lantern fish, 95. 
Lapathum folio acuto, 3. 
Lari, 474. 
Lark, 278. 
Lathy rus maritimus, 276. 

sylvestris, 45. 

Leaf, how to take the shape of a, 94. 
Leucoium, 44. 

LHWYD, EDWARD, notice of, 482. 
Lignum Brasilianum, 467. 

sapou, 467. 
Ling, 113. 

Linota cannabina, 33. 
Linum catharticum, 384. 
LISTEK, Dr., 11. 
List of local words, 418. 
Lithospermum maritimum, 61. 
Locustella, 96. 
Locusts, 281. 
Logwood, 468. 
Lonchitis, 298. 

aspera, 291. 
Loom, 177. 
Lota molva, 113. 
Lotum pentaphylloii siliquosum 

villosum, 21. 
Lotus, 47. 

hirsutus, 21 
Loxia curvirostra, 6. 
Luciniae, 138. 
Lumbrici lati, 321. 
Lunago, 145. 
Lunaria radiata, 179. 
LychAts, 56, 179, 383. 

diurna, 44. 

sylvestris, 44. 

viscosa, 463. 
Lycium indicum, 355. 
Lycopodium, 124. 

alpinum, 43. 
helveticum, 43. 
Lysimachia nemorum, 45. 



INDEX. 



499 



Macreuses, 131, 132, 135, 147, 149. 

Mallard, 149. 

Mallow, Indian, 350. 

Malva, 350. 

Mammee, 195. 

Manchinella, 195. 

Maiidioca, 463. 

Mangrove, 195. 

Manna corporis, 6. 

Marchantia polymorpha, 387. 

Maryland plants, 337. 

Matricaria chamomilla, 211. 

Mayds, 15. 

Medica, 179. 

Medicago, 179. 

sativa, 133. 
Mentntrum, 45, 47. 
Menstruum, 92. 
Menyanthes trifoliata, 319. 
Merganser, 150. 
Mergi, 148. 
Mergus albellus, 16. 
cirratus, 150. 

serrator, 150. 
Merlangus carbonarius, 113. 

vulgaris, 113. 

Meura athamanticuni, 26. . 
Mevisses, 122. 
Milium, 464. 

indicum, 308, 327. 
Milkwood, 289. 
Milvus serugiuosus, 50, 53. 

vulgaris, 50. 
Mistletoe, 60. 
Moorcock, 33. 
Moorhen, 33. 
MOOKE, THOS., epitaph on, 91. 

will of, 90. 

Morrhua a?glefinus, 113. 
vulgaris, 113. 
Morts, 127. 
Moschatelliua, 384, 
Musca, 456. 
Muscelin, 160. 
Muscus clavatus, 43. 

corniculatus, 43. 

denticulatus, 22, 47. 

denticulatus major, 43. 

lycopodium, 124. 

pyroides, 158. 

pixidatus, 158. 
Mushrooms, 99, 47. 
Musci, 299. 



Naucratcs ductor, 116. 
Nasturtium petrseum, 56. 
Narthecium ossifragum, 46. 
Negroes, blood of, 120. 
Neria, 351. 

Nerites fluviatilis, 107, 110. 
Nidularia campanulata, 158. 
Noddy, 463. 
Nymphaea alba, 4. 

Oak apples, 90. 
(Enanthe aquatica. 313. 
crocata, 304. 
Oidemia nigra, 131. 
Oleum petroleum, 7. 
Ornus sive fraxinus, 44. 
Ouiscidae, 106. 
Ophiomorphites, 155. 
Opium, 52, 21. 
Orobus sylvaticus, 61. 
Osmund royal, 291. 
Oxycedrus, 302. 

Palmipedes tridactylse, 131. 
Palustria thy mi, 46. 
Papilios, 328, 364. 

English, 410. 

Paris Garden Catalogue, 185. 
Passer dornesticus, 96. 

stultus, 462. 
Pedata, 400. 
Pedata tantum, 400. 
Peltidea canina, 98. 
Peplis portula, 387. 
Pepper, Jamaica, 470. 
Perdix montaua, 462. 
Petasites, 373. 
Phaeton aethereus, 111. 
Phaleu!E, 328, 431, 455. 
Phalacrocorax carbo, 112. 

graculus, 33. 
Phaseolus, 193. 
Phyllitides, 302. 
Phyllitis, 139, 298, 469. 
Phthiriasis, 284. 
Pigeons, 114, 462. 
Pelicanus sula, 111. 
Pilot fishes, 116. 
Pimpernel, 47. 
Pimpinichi, 469. 
Pink, 60. 
Pinus, 137. 
Pirmi)inichi, 289. 
Pistachia trifolia, 356. 



500 



INDEX. 



Pistolochia, 357. 
Pisum arborescens, 159. 
Plaise, 95. 

Plantago psyllium, 133. 
Plants, rare, at Chelsea, list of, 15. 
Platella fluviatilis, 107, 111. 
Platessa floras, 95. 
limanda, 95. 
pola, 95. 
vulgaris, 95. 
Plumbago europaea, 355. 
Pneumonanthe, 3. 
Pocker, 16. 
Pole, 95. 
Polemonium cseruleum, 26, 57, 115. 

petraeum, 56. 
Polygonum, 140, 217, 384. 

viviparum, 25, 26, 133. 

angustissimum, 3 

Bistorta, 27, 346. 
Polypodium, 298. 

plumosum, 138. 
Potentilla fruticosa, 61. 
Porcelain shells, 107. 
Porpesse, 39. 

Poterium sanguisorba, 383. 
Prickly pear, 468. 
Proverbs, list of, 87. 
Primula farinosa, 27. 
Prunella, 372. 
Prunus padus, 27. 
Psyllium erectum, 13S. 
Pteris crispa, 26. 
Pulmonaria masculosa, 138. 
officinalis, 133. 
Puffin, 117, 114, 134, 149. 
Pusillum veriniculatum, 217. 
Pyrola rotundifolia, 27, 44. 
vulgaris, 27. 

nostras, 44 
Pyrus aucuparia, 44. 
Pytolochia retica, 358. 

Quinquina, 144. 

Rabihorcado, 279. 
Radiola millegrana, 385. 
Raia batis, 113. 

oxyrhvnchos, 113 

clavata, 16, 113, 118. 

lajvis, 113. 

Isevis oculata, 113. 
Raphanus rusticamis, 46. 
Raspberry, 44. 



RAY, second centenary of birth, 484. 
Reseda crispa, 133. 
lutea, 133. 

Respiration, primary uses, 302. 
Reticula scutulata, 66. 
Rhamnus primus, 45. 
Rhinobatos, 113. 
Rhodomenia palmata, 192. 
Rhombus asper, 95. 

maximus, 94. 
megastoma, 95. 
vulgaris, 9 4. 
Ring-puzle r 125. 
Riverius, 311. 
Robin redbreast, 117. 
Rosa spinosissima, 47. 

sylvestris, 46. 

marina, 21. 
Royal Society, 109. 
Rubus chamaamoms, 27. 
Rumex maritimus, 3. 
Rust, eggs in the, 320.- 

Sabina sylvestris, 43. 
Salicornia fruticosa, 186, 190. 
Sal fossilis, 7. . ' 
Salk amygdalina, 60. 

angustifoh'a, 45. 

reticulata, 61. 

repens, 45. 

peiitandra, 27. 
Salmo salar, 127, 183. 

eriox, 127. 

trutta, 127. 
Salmon, 127. 
Salsoia kali, 386. 
Sanatados, 354. 
Sapo, 144. 
Sardina, 143. 
Sorgurn, 464. 
Sardone, 143. 
Savanna bird, 278. 
Saxifraga aizoides, 26. 

oppositifolia, 26. 
Scarabsei, 329. 
Schoberia maritima, 387. 
Scolopax rusticula, 183. 
Scolopendrium vulgare, 139. 
Scorodonia, 44. 
Scorjrions, 137. 
Scoter, 131. 
Scyphophorus, 158. 
SCOTT, GEORGE, notice of, 481. 
Sea-snails, 128. 



- 



INDEX. 



501 



Sea-wrack, 197. 
Sedum, 3. 

aizoides, 3. 

anglicum, 27. 

arboresc., 159. 
Seeds of plants, 114. 
Sempervivuni arboreum, 159. 
Serpentaria, 357. 
Sesamoides, 131. 

Salamanticum, 10G, 463. 
Seseli pratense, 132. 
tortuosum, 62. 
Shark, skill of a, 115. 
Shell-like stones, origin of, 151. 
Sheldin, 16. 

Sideritis Scordioides, 133. 
Sfajjs pratensis, 132, 137. 
Silcne nutans, 48, 56, 60. 

otites, 463. 
Siliquose trees, 317. 
Silver, native, in spar, 292. 
Sisymbrium -Sophia, 355. 
Sium aquaticum, 314. 
Skate, 113. 
Smew, 16. 
Snails, 107. 
Snake-stones, 195. 
Snap-apple, 6. 
Solanum dulcamara, 45. 

lignosum, 45. 
Soland goose, 149. 
Sole, 95. 

Solea vulgaris, 95. 
Sopliia chirurgorum, 355. 
Sorgurn, 308, 327, 464. . 
Sonchus Isevis, 44. 
Sows, 106. 
Sparrows, 96, 117. 

solitary, 122. 
Spermaceti, 8. 
Spiders, flying of, 84. 
Squatina, 113. 
Statice spathulata, 215. 
Stellaria uliginosa, 46. 
Stirpium Luzonicaruin, 378. 
Staeehas citrina, 131. 
Sula alba, 112, 149. 
Swallow, 117. 
Swallow-worts, 351. 
Sylvia sylvicola, 96. 

Tadorua vulpauser, 16. 
Taearum 377. 
Teal, 149. 



Teesdalia nudicaulis, 56. 
Teucrium Chamsedrys, 133. 

Scorodoma, 44. 
Tetrao tetrix, 33. 
Thlaspi, 25, 44. 

alpestre, 25, 26. 
Thornbacks, 15, 118. 

eggs of, 119. 
Throstleheath, 122. 
Tiger hunt, 360. 
Tilia fcemina, 43. 

parvifolia, 43. 
Tillandsia lingulata, 290. 
Tithymalus hiberuicus, 319. 
Titlarks, 96. 
Toddy tree, 469. 
Tofiefdia palustris, 388. 
Torch plant, 469. 
Tracheiium majus, 45. 
Trees, extravasations of, 188. 
bleeding, 80. 
north side of, 93. 
Trefoil, 132. 
Trichomaues, 298. 
Trientalis Europa:a, 25, 26, 61. 
Trifolium folliculateum, 132. 
rcsupinatum, 132. 
Trolh'us europseus, 27. 
Tropic bird, 111. 
Trvgon pastinaca, 16, 113, US. 
Turbut, 94. 

Turdus pilaiis, 95, 183. 
Turdus torquatus, 122. 
Turritis glabra, 45. 

hirsuta, 133. 

minor, 133. 

vulgatior, 45. 
Turtles, Barbadoes, 106. 
Tussilago pctasitcs, 373. 

Unicornu fossile, 473. 
Urtica, 308. 

Vaccinia nubis, 27- 
nigra, 46. 
rubra, 33. 
Yaccinium oxycoccos, 46. 

myrtillus, 46. 

uhginosuin, 62. 

vitis-idsea, 33. 

Valeriana graca, 26, 45, 57. 
Venus, motions of, 22. 
Vcrmis setaceus, 97. 
Veronica crccta, 133. 



502 INDEX. 

Veronica triphyllos, 60, 85. Wild birds, to. tame, 117. 

Vicia sesamacca, 108. Wild rose, excrescences on, 89. 

Violet stones, 7. Willow, 81. 

Viper, bite of a, 354. Willows, weeping, 188. 

Viseum caryophylloides, 290. Woodlark, 122. 

Volatiles, history of, 106. Woodpecker, name derived from, 

Vultur gryplms, 275. 150. 

Worms bred in the human body, 
Waxwing, 183. 284. 

Widgeon, 16. 

Whewer, 16. Xanthium, 351. 

Whiff, 95. Xylon, 145, 288. 
Whitethroat, 96. ; herbaceum, 469. 



THE END. 



I'ltlM'BU BY C. AND J. AULAIU), 

lMimiUi.UMK\V CUIbli. 



i 3 



OF-CAt- 



University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

405 Hiigard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 

Return this material to the library 

from which it was borrowed. 



JM172SK 










irrr-T a = 

M 1 .5 s.^- 






OJITVD-JO 




I gVJ 
%J 

y /a 










< 





*w 




ITVD-JO^ 




3- 



1 I 




1 a 

! I 




^ ^OF-CAIIFO/?^ ^\\E-I 

S lAi4^M |\j 





^ 2 

% i 




^tu 
iU 






C 




^- t^5 

1 I 

S % 




I * 



Z2 = 

& % 





I i 

3 2 
^ 




^ 5 




^l-UBRARYOr 






I 8, 

i> ; 

5 - 










AUIBBAYO/ 



ii 





University of 
Southern I 
Library I 





