Wheldon & Wesley, Ltd. 

Natural Histury Booksellers 

- . A,-+V„ir«;+ T nnHnn W.C.'. 



THE PHYTOLOaiST FOB 1854. 
Pp. 1—240. 



LONBON: 
PRINTED BY E. NEWMAN, DEVONSHIKE STREET, BISHOPSGATE. 



THE 



PHYTOLOGIST: 



POPULAR 



BOTANICAL MISCELLANY. 



CONDUCTED BY 



EDWAKD NEWMAN, F.L.S., Memb. Imp. L.-C. Acad. 



VOLUME THE FJFTH. 




LONDON: 
JOHN VAN VOORST, PATERNOSTER ROW. 



M.DCCC.LVI. 



" O, these are Voices of the Past, 
Links of a broken chain, 
Wings that can bear me back to times 

Which cannot come again ; 
Yet God forbid that I should lose 
The echoes that remain I " 
Ahon. 

" Yet though thou fade. 

From thy dead leaves let fragrance rise." 

Henby Kirk White. 



PREFACE. 



Mr. Ldxfohd, the able superintendent of the ' Phytologist,' died, 
at his residence in Hill Street, Walworth, on Monday, the 12th of 
June, in the forty-eighth year of his age. He was bom at Sut- 
ton, in Suirey, on the 7th of April, 1807, but shortly removed to 
Reigate, where, at the early age of 11, he was placed under Mr. 
Allingham, a printer and stationer. Mr. Allinghatn's kindness^ care 
and judgment, exercised for a period of sixteen years, tended mainly 
to the aliainment of that useful knowledge which Mr. Luxford eventu- 
ally possessed. While with Mr. Allingham he not only mastered the 
printing business, but also gained an intimate acquaintance with the 
Greek, Latin and French languages, and a vast store of historical, 
geographical, literary and scientific information. At a very early age 
he made Batany his favourite study, and the neighbourhood of Rei- 
gate was the field in which he devotedly pursued it. In 1834 he 
removed to Birmingham, taking a situation in the engraving and 
printing establishment of Mr. Allen ; and in 1837 he commenced 
business as a printer in Ratcliff Highway. The next year he wrote, 
printed and published the ' Flora of Reigate,' a work that bears ample 
testimony to the accuracy and extent of his botanical acquirements. 
In 1841 he commenced the *Phytologist,' superintendence over which 
he exercised up to the publication of the June number. In 1844 Mr. 
Luxford obtained employment on the * Globe * newspaper, which, 
however, be relinquished in the following year, and took the sub- 
editorship of the * Westminster Review,' reading and revising the 
whole, and writing the shorter notices and occasionally the more 
important papers. In 1846 he obtained the Lectureship on Botany 
at St. Thomas's Hospital. In 1851 he gave up both these engage- 
ments, and came to Devonshire Street, where he continued, as com- 
positor aud reader, up to the time of his death. 



VI 

The * Phytologist ' never was successful as a commercial specula- 
tion : the candid and impartial tone of the reviews, mostly written by 
men of the highest botanical standing, prevented this. The botani- 
cal public is a very small public, and a very literary public ; and to 
secure its favour you must laud A with a sort of monthly jtibilate, 
you must conceal the blunders of B. you must insert the cauticities of 
C and the high-sounding nothings of D. An Editor of any feeling 
winces under such restrictions ; an Editor of any truthfulness abhors 
such restrictions ; an Editor of any spirit throws off such restrictions. 
What is the consequence ? A, B, C and D refuse to write for you, 
and refuse in a dignified manner, as men who have a right to dictate; 
they write to each other, they write to strangers, to E, F, G — Z, whose 
names they observe as contributors, and state the withdraw^al of their 
]>atronage, and their regret that E, F, G — Z should still continue to 
write in such a Jounial. So A — Z all withdraw their assistance, as 
far as writing is concerned, and leave only the outsiders to contribute. 
The effect is soon obvious : the quality of the article is deteriorated, 
because the producers are incompetent. A, with glittering eyes, 
writes to B, his old opponent, deeply regretting the evident deteriora- 
tion, B passes the plaint on to C, with additions ; and so it goes 
down to Z. The next step is to apprise the Editor that unless better 
matter is given they must all decline to read the 'Phytologist;' they 
regret — people doing either an unjust or unkind thing always regret— 
they regret their indisposition to purchase what gives them so little 
information. They cease to take it. Still, the * Phytologist' crawls 
on, like the poor tortoise whose brains were cleared out by a cruel 
experimenter, until an event occurs beyond the reach of human skill 
or human ingenuity, and the only tie between the * Phytologist ' and 
its proprietor is broken. 

EDWARD NEWMAN. 
November, 1856. 



CONTENTS. 



Allman, Professor 

Adventitious roots of Jussia3a graiuli- 
flora, 60 
Andrews, William 

Observations on a Saxifrage found on 
the Blasket Islands, 212 
Babington, C. C, M.A., F.L.S. 

Ej>ilobiiim alpinum in Wales, 76 ; 

Statice Docfarti a native of Ireland, 

147 ; Botrychium rutaceura of 

Swartz, 175 ; Carex Moenchiana, 176 

Baker, John G. 

On Salix acutifolia of Willdenow, and 
its discovery in Britain, 33 ; On the 
Yorlishire locality for tJdora Cana- 
densis, 80 ; A supplement to the 
Flora of Yorkshire, 80 ; Note re- 
specting Carex Mcenchiana as a 
British plant, 147; Another locality 
for Salix acutifolia, 148 ; Contribu- 
tions to British Lichenology, 191 
Balfour, J. H., M.D. 

Botanical trip to the Grampians, 24 ; 
Botanical trip to HelvellyUj 26 ; 
Notice of plants fouud in the neigh- 
bourhood of Dollar, in the autumn 
of 1853, 29; On the pollen of Zamia 
horrida, 115; Polj'podiuin alpestre 
at Clova, 178 
Barrett, W. B. 

The Botany of the Chesil Bank, Port- 
land, 217 
Bennett, William 

Enormous plant of Osmunda regalis, 
20 ; Abundance of Asplenium lan- 
ceolatum near Sennen Cove, Pen- 
zance, 20 
Bltth, Mr. 

On ergotised grasses, 61 
BoERER, William, F.R.S., F.L.S. 

Notes on the ' Cybele Britannica,' 
Volume iii., 44 
Brown, Rev. Thomas 

Notice of the Muscology of the East 
Coast of Fife, 116 



Bywater, R. T., M.R.C.S. 

Medical properties of Osmunda rega- 
lis, 30 
Carrol, J. 

Notes on new or scarce Irish plants, 
76 
Clarke, Joshua 

Observations on the parasitic habits of 
Rhinanthus Cnsta-galli, and its 
injurious effects on the growth of 
barley, 103 
CcBREY, Frederick, M.A. 

On the Fungi of the neighbourhood 
of Greenwich, 121, 122; Method of 
preserving Alga;, 123 ; On three 
new Fungi found in the neighbour- 
hood of Greenwich, 144 ; Elaters of 
a Trichia, 145 
Dallas, W. E., F.L.S, 

On the structure of Diatomaceae, 205 
Dickie, Dr. 

On the occurrence of Anacharis Alsi- 
nastrum in Ireland, 88 
Douglas, Rev. R. C. 

Staffordshire locality for Potamogeton 
flabellatus, Bahington, 21 
Dt/Buc, Dr. 

Remarks on the Flora of the Vosges, 
84 
Fairburn, Peter 

On the nightshade family, 89 
Fisher, H. S. 

Lancashire locality for Trifoliura re- 
supinatum, 21 ; Lalhyrus Aphaca 
near Liverpool, 21 ; Gnaphalium 
rectum at Eastham, 21 ; Viola lutea 
at Netherton, near Liverpool, 21 ; 
Thymus Serpyllum and T. Chamas- 
drys, 22 ; Polygala oxyptera on the 
sand bills near Liverpool, 22 ; Rosa 
villosa, Viola imberbis and V. pa- 
lustris near Liverpool, 22; Hypnum 
nodiflorum, H. Lycopodioides and 
Bryum androgynum neat Liverpool, 
22 



45068 



vm 



Flower, T. B., F.L.S. 

Leucojum aestivum in Soulh Devon, 
53 ; Hypericum liiiarii'olium in 
South Devon, 53 ; Vicia lutea at 
Black Head, near Torquay, 54 ; 
Diotis inaritima not growing in 
Babbicombe Bay, 54 ; Poa bulbosa 
plentiful at Plymouth, 54 ; Ok the 
locality for Trifolium resupinatum 
of Linneus near Bristol, 78 ; Coro- 
nopus didyma introduced near Bris- 
tol, 79 ; The Lathyrus near Bristol 
not latifolius, 79 ; Phleum asperum 
not growing near Bristol, 79 ; Carex 
DavaUiana of Smith near Bath, 215; 
Uraba vemalis of Linneus near Bris- 
tol, 215 ; Carex dioiea of Linneus 
near Bath, 215 

GissiNo, T. W, 

A few remarks on Cotyledon Umbili- 
cus, 135; Chrysosplenium altemi- 
folium, &c., near Cheltenham, 148 

GaEGORV, Professor 

Diatomaceaj in the Isle of Mull, 82 

Gbeville, a. K., M.D. 

On a raoss found in North Uist, 205 

Hamburgh, Albebt 

Notice of the occurrence of Aram 
italicum at Steephill, in the Isle of 
Wight, 194 

Hasbis, Rev. Geokge 

Laniicaria iongicruris on the British 
coast, 81 

Hawkee, Rev. William Henry 

Adiantum Capillus- Veneris on Ched- 
dar Cliffs, 82 

Henfeev, Aethcr, F.R.S., F.L,S. 

Remarks on the so-called eye-spot of 
the Infusoria and microscopic Algas, 
108 

Hooker, Joseph, M.D., F.R.S., F.L.S. 
On Hodgsonia, a new and remarkable 
genus of Cucurbitacea;, 106 

Hunter, James 

Note on a vegetable substance formed 
in a water-pipe at Hafton, Argyle- 
shire, 25 

KiNAHAN, John Robert, M.B. 

On a variety of Scolopendrium vulgare, 
113 ; A list of ferns and their allies 
found in the County Dublin, with 
special reference to the Dodder 
Valley, 196 ; Combinations of varie- 
ties in Ferns, 213 ; On a beautiful 
form of Athyrium Filix-femina, 
Newman, obtained near Castlekelly, 
213 

KlBK, J. 

On a specicc of Potamogeton from 
Lough Conib, 183 



Lawson, George 

Notes of a botanical trip to the Tents 
Muir, in the North of Fife, in July, 
1853, 88 ; On the anatomical 
structure of Coniferas and other 
Gyrnnogens, 116 
Lees, Edwin, F.L.S. 

On the geography of plants, 139 
Lindsay, W. Laudee, M.D. 

Illastrations of the value of botanical 
histology to the medical student, 
90 ; Experiments oa the dyeing 
properies of lichens, 179 
Lucas, Caboline Caxhebine 

Vioia lactea and V, flavicornis, 216 
Millen, William 

A list of the more interesting plants 
found lately near Belfast, and their 
latest discovered additional locali- 
ties, 185 
Moore, Davio 

New British Equisetum, 17; Notes 
on some rare plants, ineludirsg 
Ajuga pyramidalb, in Arran, 189 
Moore, Thomas, F.L.S. 

Oa Ophtoglossura lusilanicum, 118 
More, A. G. 

Filago spatukta in the Isle of Wight, 
22 
MoDD, William 

An account of the lichens of Cleveland, 
with their localities, 7!, 07 
Newman, E., F.L.S., Mem. Imp. L.G. Ac. 
Description of Equisetum Moorei, an 
Irish species new to Science, 18; 
Contributions towards a history of 
aa Irish Asplenium, considered as a 
distinct species and as entitled to a 
place in the British Flora, 36 ; 
Discovery of Ophioglossum lusits- 
aicum in Jersey, 60 ; Coiitnbiitions 
towards a history of a British Bo- 
trychiem, cocsiiiered as a distinct 
species and as entitled to a place in 
the British Flora, 129 ; Remarks on 
the new method of arranging ferns. 
222 ; Note on Pseudathyriom flexile, 
239. 
Pamplin, William, A.L.S. 

A brief notice of plants observed 
growing in the neighbourhood of 
Sireatly, Berks, and of Goring, 
Oxon, in April, 1864, with additions 
of such plants as have been gathered 
there during several visits in foi-mer 
years, vi2., between 1833 and the 
present 1854, 163 
Piquet, John 

Supposed new fern found in Jersey, 
149 



IX 



Prentice, Chables 

French locality for Ulex australis, 
127; Plants at Nice, 127 
Ralphs, T. S., A.L.S. 

Earthquake at sea, 56; Sketch of the 
vegetation around Wellington, New 
Zealand, 57 
Reynolds, Richabd 

Impatiens Noli-me-tangere at Amble- 
side, 30 
RoBsoN, Joseph 

A catalogue of the wild plants of 
Gosforth (Cumberland) and adjacent 
district, in 1853, I 
Russell Anna 

Devonshire station for Lythruin hys- 
sopifolium, 81 ; Bifid ferns, 81 
Sanders, Gilbert 

On the fructification of the genus 
Desmarestia, 110 
Sandekson, J. S. B., M.D. 

Note on the supposed Antheridia of 
the RbamneaB, 116 
Sawers, W. 

Desmarestia Dresnayi on the coast of 
Ireland, 84 
Seemann, Bebthold, Ph.D., F.L.S. 
Remarks on Sarsaparilla, 65 



Senoner, Adolph, M.D. 

On Carex pajdiformis and other new 
Austrian plants, 85 
Simpson, Thomas 

Udora Canadensis in the Wiske, near 
Kirby, in Yorkshire, 64 
Stewart, Neil 

On the various sections of coal, consi- 
dered in their relation to ih eblock, 
and the relative views of histologists 
thereon, 208 
Tate, G. R. 

Rare plants in the neighbourhood of 
Edinburgh, 89 
Tulasne, M. L. B. 

On the germination of the spores of 
the UredinesB, 63 
Wabd, N. B., F.L.S. 

Gyianograsjma lepiophylla in Jersey, 
128 
Warington, Robert 

On preserving the balance between 
the animal and vegetable organisms 
in sea watej-, 9 
Yates, James, F.L,S. 

Inflorescence of Cycas revoluta and 
Macrozamia spiralis, 1 03 



NOTICES OF NEW BOOKS. 

The Microscope, in its Special Application to Vegetable Anatomy and Physiology, 
By Dr. Hermann Schacht; translated by Frederick Currey, Esq., M.A. . 15 

The Botany of the Voyage of H.M.S. Herald. By Berfbold Seemaun, F.L.S., &n.. 
Naturalist to the Expedition. Parts III. and IV, Flora of the Isthmus of Panama 
continued 16, 201 

Species Filicum ; being Descriptions of all known Ferns. Illustrated with Plates, 
By Sir William Jackson Hooker, K.H., LL.D., F.R.A. and L.S., kc, &c., &c., 
Vice-Presideiit of the Linnean Society of Loudon, and Director of the Royal Bo- 
tanic Garden of Kew. PartVI., 01 Vol. II. Partil 50 

A Plain and Easy Account of the British Ferns ; wherein each Species is particularly 
described under its respective Genus, and the characteristics of those Genera 
given in words in common use : with a Glossary of Technical Terms, serving as a 
key to larger Treatises. London: Robert Hardwicke, 38, Carey Street . 150 

A History of British Ferns. By Edward Newman. Memb. Imp. L.-C. Acad., F.L.S. , 
Z.S., B.S., Pves. Ent. Soc, &c,, &c., &c. Third Edition. London . Van Voorst. 
1854, 360 pp., 136 Illustrations on Wood. Price !8«. demy 8vo , 30*. royal 158 

A Manual of Natural History, for the Use of Travellers ; being a Description of the 
Families of the Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms : with Remarks on the Practi- 
cal Study of Geology and Meteorology. To which are appended Directions for 
Collecting and Preserving. By Arthur Adams, Wm« Balfour Baikie, and Charles 
Barron. London : Van Voorst. 1854 ....... 203 



EXTRACTS. 

On the Germination of the Spores of the Uredineae. By M. L. B. Tiilasne . 63 

Fii-st General Report of the Government Botanist on the Vegetation of the Colony of 

Victoria ; dated September, 1853 ; and printed by order of the Council . 165 

Botanical Report of the same. By William Swaiuson, Esq., F.R.S. . . 173 



PROCEEDINGS OF SOCIETIES. 

LiNNEAN SOCISTY. 

Motacilla alba, by William Borrer, Esq., 31. On two new British fems, by Ed- 
ward Newman, 31. Letters of Linneus and other naturalists, by J. O. West- 
wood, Esq., 35. Umbellate primrose, by John Hogg, Esq., 56. Earthquake 
at sea, by T. S. Ralphs, Esq., 56. Note from Nees von Esenbeclc, 57. Ve- 
getation of Wellington, New Zealand, by T. S. Ralphs, Esq., 57. Notes of 
the late Mr. Griffiths, 59. Inflorescence of Cycas revoiuta and Macrozamiu 
spiralis, by James Yates, Esq., 103. Parasitism of Rbinanthus Crista-Galli, 
by Joshua Clarke, Esq., 105. On the genus Hodgsonia, by Urs. Hooker and 
Thomson, 106, Eye-spot of Infusoria and Microscopic Algse, by Professor 
Henfrey, 108. 

Phytologist Club. 

New Irish Equisetura, by Edward Newman, 17. Enormous plant of Osmunda 
regalis, by William Beanett, 18. Asplenium lanceolatum, id., 18. Stafford- 
shire locality for Potamogeton flabeliatus, by the Rev. R. C. Douglas, 18. 
Lancashire locality for Trifoiium resupinatum, by H. S. Fisher, Esq., 21. 
Lathyrus Aphaca near Liverpool, id., 21. Gnaphalium rectum at Eastham^ 
id., 21. Viola luiea at Netheiton, near Liverpool, id., 21. Thymus Serpyl- 
lum and T. Chamsdrys, id., 22. Polygala oxyptera on the sand hills near 
Liverpool, id., 22. Rosa villosa, Viola imberbis and V, palustris near Liver- 
pool, id., 22, Hypnum nodiaomm, H. Lycopodioides, and Bryum androgy- 
iium near Liverpool, id., 22. Filago spathulata in the Isle of Wight, by A. 
G. More, Esq., 22. Leucojum cestivum, Linn., by T. B. Flower, Esq., 53. 
Hypericum Hnarifolium, VahL, id., 53. Vicia lutea, Linn., id., 53. Diotis 
maritima, Cass., id., 53. Poa bulbosa, Linn., id., 53. Udora canadensis, 
&u., near Bedale, by Thomas Simpson, Esq., 55. Epilobium alpinum in 
Wales, by C. C. Babington, Esq., 76. Notes on new or scarce Irish plants, 
by J. Carrol, Esq., 78. On the locality for Trifoiium resupinatum, Linn.^ 
near Bristol, by T. B. Flower, Esq., 79. Coronopus didyma, DC, id., 79. 
Lathyrus latifolius, Linn., id., 79. Phleum asperum, Jacq., id., 79. On the 
Yorkshire locality for Anacharis Alsinastrum, by John G. Baker, 80. A 
supplement to the Flora of Yorkshire, id., 80. Ophjoglossum lusitanicum, 
by Edward Newman, 80. Devonshire station for Lj thrum hyssopifolium, by 
Mis. Ru.ssell, 8L Bifid ferns, id., 81. Laminaria'longicruris, by the Rev. 
George Harris, 81. Adiantum Capillus-Veneris on Cheddar Cliffs, by the 
Rev. William Henry Hawker, 82. French locality for Ulex ausiralis, by 
Charles Prentice, Esq., 127. Plants at Nice, id., 127. Gymnogramma lep- 
tophylla, by N. B. Ward, Esq., 128. Slalice Dodartii a native of Ireland, 
by Charles C. Babington, Esq., 147. Note respecting Carex Moenchiana as 
a British plant, by John G. Baker, Esq., 148. Another locality for Salix 
acutifolia, id., 148. Chrysosplenium alternifolium, &c., near Cheltenham, 
by T. W. Gissing, Esq., 148. Supposed new fern, by John Piquet, Esq., 



XI 

149. Botrycbium rutaceum, Swartz, by C. C. Babington, Esq., 175. Carcx 
Moenchiana, id., 176. Garex Davalliana, Smith, near Bath, by T. B. Flower, 
Esq., 215. Draba muralis, Linn., near Bristol, id., 215. Carex dioica, 
Linn., near Bath, id., 216. Herbarium of the Bhenish Menthae, by Edward 
Newman, 216, Viola lactea and V. flavicornis, by Miss Lueas,216. 

Botanical Society op Edinburgh. 

Gamboge plant, by Professor Balfour, 23. Diatomaccous Loricae of the Mull 
deposit, by Professor Gregory, 23. Botanical trip lo the Grampian Moun- 
tains, by Professor Balfour, 24. Vegetable substance formed in a water-pipe, 
by James Hunter, Esq., 25. Botanical trip to Helvellyn, by Professor Bal- 
four, 26. Plants growing about Dollar, id., 29. Diatomaceas in the Mull 
deposit, by Professor Gregory, 82. Desmarestia Dresnayi on the coast of 
Ireland, by W. Sawers, Esq., 84. Flora of the Vosges, by Dr. Berbice, 84. 
Carex paediformis, &c., by Dr. Adolph Senoner, 85. Anacharis Alsinastrum 
in Ireland, by Dr. Dickie, 88. Botanical trip to the Tents Muir, by Mr. G. 
Lawson, 88. Rare plants in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, by G. R. 
Tate, Esq., 88. Nightshade family, by Peter Fairbairn, Esq., 89. Value of 
Botanical Histology lo the medical student, by Dr. Lindsay, 90. Pollen of 
Zamia horrida, by Professor Balfour, 1 15. Muscology of the East coast of 
Fife, by the Rev. Thomas Brown, 116. Antheridia of the Rhamnese, by Dr. 
Sanderson, 116. Anatomical structure of Coniferee, &c., by G. Lawson, Esq., 
116. Ophioglossum lusitanicum, by Thomas More, Esq., 118. Dyeing pro- 
perties of lichens, by Dr. Lindsay, 179, Potamogeton from Lough Corrib, by 
J. Kirk, Esq., 183. Norlh-Uist moss, by Dr. Greville, 205. Structure of 
Diatomaceae, by W. E, Dallas, Esq., 205. Sections of coal, by Mr. Neil 
Stewart, 208. 

Dublin Natubal History Society. 

Adventitious roots of Jussiaea grandiflora, by Professor AUmann, 60. Fructifica- 
tion of the genus Desmarestia, by Gilbert Sanders, Esq., 110. On a variety 
of Scolopendrium vulgare, by Dr. Einahan, 113. On a form of Saxifraga 
found on the Blasket Islands, by William Andrews, Esq., 212. Combina- 
tions of the varieties of ferns, by Dr. Kinaban, 213. On a variety of Filix- 
femina, id., 213. 

Phvtolooical Club. 

Medicinal properties of Osraunda reg^lis, by R. T. Bywater, Esq^ 30. Impatiens 
Noli-me-tangere at Ambleside, by Richard Reynolds, Esq., 30. Enormous 
caudex of Lastrea Filix-mas, by Robert Bentley, Esq., 61. Ergotised 
grasses, by Mr. Blyth, 61. Relation of Meteorology to Botany, 134. A few 
remarks on Cotyledon Umbilicus, by T. W. Gissing, Esq., 135. Geography 
of plants, by Edwin Lees, Esq., 139. 

Greenwich Natural History Club. 

Fungi of the neighbourhood of Greenwich, by Frederick Currey, Esq., 121, 122, 
144. On U»e best method of preserving Algae, id., isfis. Elaters of a 
Trichia, id., 145. 



v 




THE PHYTOLOGIST 

FOR 1854. 



A Catalogue of the Wild Plants of Gosforth {Cumberland) and 
adjacent District, in 1853. By Mr. Joseph Robson. 

In compiling the following Catalogue, I have omitted many plants 
whose habitats are almost everywhere. At the same time, I have 
added a few, possessing uncommon interest, whose localities are 
beyond the bounds of the Gosforth district. 
Thalictrum minus. Great End, Scawfell. 
„ alpinum. Great End, Scawfell. 

„ Tnajus. Wastdale Head and Eskmeals. 

Ranunculus Lingua. Wastdale, Eskdale, &c., &c. 
„ Flammula. Wastdale, Eskdale, &c., &c. 

„ hederaceus. Drigg, roadside ditches. 

„ arvensis. Nethertown. 

Trollius EuropcBus. Miteside, Ravenglass, meadows. 
Aquilegia vulgaris. Gosforth woods. 
Nymphaa alba. Bray stones Tarn. 
Nuphar lutea. Braystones Tarn. 

Glaucium luteum. Nethertown and Couldertown, sea-shore. 
Chelidonium majus. St. Bees, roadside. 
Fumaria lutea. Wastwater foot. 
„ officinalis. St. Bees Valley. 

„ claviculata. Dalegarth. 

Subularia aquatica. Ennerdale Lake. 
Cochlearia officinalis. Scawfell. 

„ anglica. St. Bees Heads, 

Crambe maritima. Couldertown Point, sea-shore. 

* Communicated by Walter Buchanan, Esq., F.L.S. 
VOL. V. B 



Cakile maritima. Couldertown Point, sea-shore. 
Drdba incana. Wastdale. 

„ verna. Wastdale. 
Arahis petrcea. Scawfell. 
Brassica campestris. St. Bees Valley. 

„ Monensis. Couldertown Point, sea-shore. 
Drosera rotundifolia. Wastwater, roadside. 

„ longifolia. Ulpha. 
Silene acaidis. Great End and Mickledore crags. 
„ maritima. St. Bees Heads. 
„ inflata. Gosforth Bottom. 
Lychnis vespertina. Nethertown and St. Bees. 
Sagina procumbens. Glints Brow, Egremont, limestone rock. 
Spergula nodosa. St. Bees shore. 
Stellaria glauca. Muncaster woods. 
Malva moschata. Eskdale roadside. 
Hypericum montanum. Cold Fell. 
„ calycinum. Irton woods. 

„ elodes. Wormgill ; Calder river. 

Geranium ph(Bum. Strands, Netherwasdale. 
„ sylvaticum. Gosforth Bottom. 
„ sanguineiim. Sea-shore, Sea Scale, &c. 
„ Columhinum. Sea-shore, Sea Scale, &c, 

Erodium cicutarium. Gosforth Bottom. 
Impatiens Noli-me-tangere. Duddon Bridge. 
Ononis arvensis. Sea-scale, shore. 
Anthyllis Vulneraria. Nethertown. 

J) 5, A pretty yellow variety, Nethertown. 

Pisum maritimum. Rocks near Whitehaven. 
Vicia sylvatica. Rocks near Whitehaven. 
Lathyrus sylvestris. Rocks near Whitehaven, rare. 

„ pratensis. Gosforth Bottom. 

Genista Scoparia. Drigg Moor. 

„ tinctoria. Drigg Moor. 

„ anglica. Drigg Moor. 
Ulex nanus. Gosforth, commons. 
Trifolium maritimum. Braystones shore. 
Hedysarum Onohrychis. Nethertown. 
Ornithopus perpusillus. Braystones railway -station. 
Prunus Padus. Irton woods. 

„ Cerasiis. Irton woods. 



Prunus insititia. Eskdale. 
„ spinosa. Eskdale. 
Spirma Filipendula. Gosfortb meadows. 

„ Ulmaria. Gosforth meadows. 
Geum rivale. Gosforth woods. 

„ urbanum. Gosforth woods. 
Sanguisorha officinalis. Gosforth fields. 
Agrimonia Eiipatoria. Cleator, Ennerdale. 
Alchemilla alpina. Scawfell and Pillar mountains. 
Potentillafruticosa. Wastwater screes. 
Comarum palustre. Gosforth marshes. 
Ruhus corylifolius. Frizzington, Ennerdale. 
„ rhamnifolius. Ulpha. 
„ ccBsius. Furness Abbey. 
Rosa spinosissima. Sea Scale shore. 
Pyrus Aria. Eskdale, Dalegarth. 

„ AucupaHa. Eskdale mountains. 
Lyihrum Salicaria. Gosforth, banks of Irt. 

„ hyssopifolium. Wastdale, roadside ; Langthatch. 

Peplis Portula. Harras Moor, Whitehaven. 
Isnardia palustris. Lizza, Ennerdale. 
Circcea lutetiana. Gosforth woods. 
Myriophyllam spicatum. Ennerdale. 
Hippuris vulgaris. Dubbeck Cleator. 
Monlia fontana. Cold Fell springs. 
Scleranthus amiuus. Nethertown. 

Cotyledon Umbilicus. Old wall, Langthatch ; Gosforth Bottom. 
Sempervivum tectorum. Roadside, Gosforth Bottom. 
Sedum acre. Braystones. 

„ villosum. Braystones. 
Rhodiola rosea. Wastwater screes and Mickledore. 
Ribes alpinum. Corney Fell. 

„ rubrum. Gosforth woods and hedges. 
„ Grossularia. Gosforth woods and hedges. 
Saxifraga stellaris. Ennerdale mountains. 
aizoides. Wastdale Head. 
hypnoides. Mickledore, Scawfell. 
nivalis. Scawfell, near the summit. 
oppositifolia. Wastwater screes. 
granulata. Cleator, Ennerdale. 
tridaciylites. Furness Abbey ; Whicham, Bootle. 



4 



Hydrocotyle vulgaris. Ennerdale. 
Sanicida Europcea. Egremont. 
Eryngiam, maritimum. Sea-shore, Bray stones, &c. 
Slum nodifloriim. Gill, Egremont. 
Meum Athamanticum. Ennerdale. 
Heracleum SpJwndyliuni. Irton woods. 
Daticus Carota. Nethertown. 
Myrrhis odorata. Drigg railway-station. 
Conium maculatum. St. Bees. 

Ch(BrophyUum sylvestre. Gillfoot Lodge, Egremont. 
Crithmum, maritimum. St. Bees Heads. 
Adoxa Moschatellina. Gosforth, roadside. 
Cornus sanguinea. Gosforth, roadside. 
Lonicera Xylosteum. St. Bees. 
Galium, verum. Braystones shore. 
Sherardia arvensis. Irton and St. Bees. 
Valeriana dioica. Kinneyside, Ennerdale. 
„ officinalis. St. Bees, &c. 

„ pyretiaica. Eskdale. 
Scahiosa columbaria. Nerthertown. 

„ arvensis. Nethertown. 

„ succisa. Nethertown. 
Eupatorium Cannahinum. Gosforth village. 
Senecio sarracenicus. Moresby, Whitehaven. 

„ sylvaticus. St. Bees. 

„ viscosus. Nethertown. 
Apargia hispida. Ennerdale. 

„ autumnalis. Ennerdale. 
Aster Tripolium. Ravenglass, salt-marsh. 
Solidago Virgaurea. Cold Fell rocks. 
Prenanthes muralis. Eskdale. 
Inula Helenium. Coulderton Point. 
„ dysenterica. St. Bees Heads. 
Gnaphalium dioicum. Ennerdale and Wastdale. 
„ germanicum. Nethertown. 

„ minimum. Nethertown. 

„ uliginosum. Cold Fell. 

Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum. Gosforth Bottom. 

„ segetum. Nethertown, railway-bank. 

Pyrethrum Parthenium. Nethertown. 
Anthemis maritima. Coulderton shore. 



Achillea Millefolium. St. Bees. 

Bidens tripartita. Nethertown shore. 

Cnicus acaulis. Ennerdale. 

Cichorium Tntybus. Hensingham, near Whitehaven. 

Hieracium sahaudum. Side, Ennerdale. 

„ atratum. Wastdale Head, 

„ aurantiacum. Holm Rook woods. 

„ alpinum. Scawfell. 

„ umhellatum. Wastdale. 

Artemisia vulgaris. Gosforth village. 

„ maritima. Coulderton Point and Muncaster, 

Petasites vulgaris. Banks of Irt. 
Cineraria campestris. Cold Fell. 
Tragopogon pratensis. Whitehaven meadows. 
Lobelia Dortmanna. Ennerdale Lake. 
Campanula latifolia. Gosforth Bottom woods. 

„ rotundifolia. Haycock and Scawfell. 

Jasione montana. Nethertown, and Drigg shore. 
Andromeda polifolia. Moresby, near Whitehaven. 
Calluna vulgaris, alba. Weddicar-rig, Cleator. 
Erica Tetralix, plena. Harras Moor. A beautiful variety. 
Arbutus Vva-ursi. Corney Fell ; Bootle. 

„ alpina. Scawfell. 
Vaccinium Vitis-idaa. Iron Crag, Ennerdale. 
Gentiana campestris. Braystones, 
Erythrcea Centaurium. Braystones. 

„ „ var. littoralis. Braystones. 

Menyanthes trifoliata. Sellafield Tarn. 
Villarsia nymphaoides. Sellafield Tarn. 
Polemonium caruleum. St. Bees. 
Convolvulus septum. Gosforth. 

„ Soldanella. Braystones shore. 

Anchusa sempervirens. St. Bees. 
Lycopsis arvenns. St. Bees. 
Echium vulgatum. Coulderton, railway -bank. 
Myosotis palustris. Braystones. 

„ versicolor. Sea-scale. 
LitJiospermum maritimmn. Eskmeals; Ravenglass. 
Borago officinalis. St. Bees. 
Verbascum Thapsus. Coulderton Point. 
Atropa Belladonna. Furness Abbey. 



6 



Hyoscyamus niger. Coulderton. 
Antirrhinum Orontium. Gosforth, hedges. 
Scrophularia nodosa. Gosforth, river-side. 
Melampyrum sylvaiicum. Wilton Haile. 
Pedicularis palustris. Nethertown. 

„ sylvaticus. Gosforth Bottom. 

,j „ var. alha. Wastwater, roadside half-way 

up the lake. 

Lycopus Europceus. Sellafield Tarn. 

Thymus Serpyllum, var. tomentosus. Braystones. 

Scutellaria galericulata. St. Bees Valley. 

„ minor. Gill, Egremont. 

Galeopsis versicolor. St. Bees. 

„ Tetrahit. St. Bees. 

,5 Ladanum. St. Bees. 

Galeobdolon luteum. Crossdale ; Ennerdale. 
Stachys palustris. Sellafield Tarn. 
Lamium album. St. Bees. 

„ purpureum. St. Bees. 
Teucrium Scorodonia. Bleng Fell. 
Verbena officinalis. Irton. 
Pinguicula vulgaris. Cold Fell and Wastdale. 
Utricularia minor. Sellafield Tarn. 
Lysimachia thyrsiflora. Sellafield Tarn. 
„ nemorum. Irton woods. 

„ Nummularia. Irton woods. 

Glaux maritima. Ravenglass, salt-marsh. 
Samolus Valerandi. St. Bees and Waberthwaite. 
Statice Armeria. Sea-shore and mountains, Scawfell, &c. 

„ Limonium. St. Bees Heads. 

„ spathulata. St. Bees Heads. 
Plantago major. Langhorn, Egremont. 

„ media. Langhorn, Egremont. 

„ Coronopus. St. Bees shore. 

„ maritima. Gillerthwaite, Ennerdale. 

Chenopodium maritimum. Coulderton shore. 
Salsola Kali. Coulderton shore. 

„ fruticosa. Ravenglass shore. 
Salicornia herbacea. Ravenglass shore. 
Atriplex laciniata. St. Bees. 
Polygonum Bistorta. St. Bees Valley. 



Polygonum Convolvulus. St. Bees Valley. 
„ amphihium. St. Bees Valley. 

„ Persicaria. St. Bees Valley. 

„ mite. St. Bees Valley. 

Oxyria reniformis. Mickledore ; Scawfell. 
Empetrum nigrum. Lingmell and all mountains. 
Euphorbia Peplus. Egremont. 

„ Helioscopia. Gosforth, cornfields. 

Mercurialis perennis. Eskdale ; Dalegarth. 

„ annua. Eskdale ; Dalegarth. 

Urtica dioica. Calder Abbey. 
„ urens. Calder Abbey. 
Humulus Lupulus. Gosforth, hedges. 
Salix herhacea. Summits of Pillar, Scawfell, &c. 
Myrica Gale. Wastdale, bogs ; common. 
Taxus baccata. Middlefell, Wastwater. 
Juniperus nana. Wastwater screes. 
Alisma Plantago. Braystones Tarns. 
„ nutans. Braystones Tarns. 
„ ranunculoides. Braystones Tarns. 
Sagittaria sagittifolia. Braystones, ditches. 
Butomus umbellatus. Irton, pond. 
Typha latifolia. Irton, pond. 
Sparganium natans. Dubbeck Cleator. 

„ simplex. Harras Moor. 

Lemna trisulca. Wet ditches, Gosforth. 
„ minor. Wet ditches, Gosforth. 
Potamogeton lucens. Calder Gills. 
„ pusillus. Calder Gills. 

„ rufescens. Calder Gills. 

Convallaria majalis. Dalegarth ; coppice near Bridge. 
Paris quadrifolia. Bell House Gill, St. Bees Valley. 
Narthecium ossifragum. Wastdale, common on mosses. 
Juncus trifidus. Hardknot, Eskdale. 

„ compressus. Kinniside, common ; Ennerdale. 
„ acutifiorus. Kinniside, common ; Ennerdale. 
Stratiotes atoides. Ennerdale Lake, near Smithy Beck, 1852, rare. 
Orchis bifolia. Between Sea Scale and Gosforth, very fine. 
„ latifolia. Between Sea Scale and Gosforth. 
„ mascula. Gosforth Bottom. 
„ Morio. Gosforth Bottom. 



8 



Orchis maculata. Gosforth Bottom. 

„ pyramidalis. Gosforth Bottom. 
Gymnadenia conopsea. Muncaster Mill, Ravengiass; Ennerdale. 
Herminium Monorchis. Cleator, Ennerdale. 
Listera ovata. E,avenglass. 

„ cordaia. Ravenglass, 
Epipactis grandifiora. Bleng river, above Gosforth. 
Iris pseud-acorus. Common in marshes. 
Narcissus Pseudo-narcissus. Banks of Irt. 
Rhynchospora alba. Corney Fell ; Ravenglass. 
Eleocharis multicaulis. Ennerdale Lake. 

„ acicularis. Ennerdale Lake. 

Eriophorum vaginatum. Drigg Moor. 

„ angustifolium. Drigg Moor. 

Phalaris arundinacea. Irton. 

Lomaria spicant. Common on heaths and roadsides. 
Pieris aquilina. Common on heaths. 
Allosorus crispus. Wastdale, common on old walls. 
Polypodium vtdgare. Wastdale, common. 

„ PJiegopteris. Laggat, on Cold Fell. 

„ Dryopteris. Dalegarth, below the waterfall. 

„ „ var. calcareum. Scale Force. 

Cystopteris fragilis. Holm Rook, on old wall ; and Mickledore. 

„ dentata. Braithwaite Brow, Egremont. 

Polystichum aculeatum. Irton woods. 
Lastrea Tlielypteris. Irton woods. 

„ Oreopteris. Hawl Gill, Wastwater. 
„ recurva. St. Bees Heads. 
Athyrium Filix-fcemina. Ennerdale. 
Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum. Holm Rook ; Calder Abbey. 

„ Ruta-muraria. Calder Abbey. 

„ Trichomanes. Calder Abbey. 

„ marinum. St. Bees Heads, very fine. 

„ septentrionale . Borrowdale. 

Scolopendrium vulgar e. Egremont, &c., common. 

„ var. with forked fronds. On conglomerate rock 

near Whitehaven, plentiful. 

Grammitis Ceterach. On a wall by the roadside, Gosforth, rare 
in Lake district. 

Hymenophyllum Tunhridgense. Hawl Gill, Wastwater. 
„ Wilsoni. Dalegarth, plentiful. 



9 



Osmunda regalis. Sea Scale, Gosforth, &c., common. 
Botrychiiim Lunaria. Bray stones, and Muncaster Fell. 
Ophiofjlossum vulgaliDii. St. Bees meadows, plentiful. 
Lycopodium clavatum. Wastvvater screes. 

„ alpinum. Wastwater screes. 

„ inundaium. Wastdale, side of lake. 

„ Selago. Ennerdale Fells. 

„ Selaginoides. Ennerdale Fells. 

Isoetes lacustris. Ennerdale Lake, and Lizza. 
Equisetum Jiuviatile. Irt banks. 

„ arvense. Goslbith cornfields. 

J, sylvaiicum. Irton woods. 

„ limosum. Ennerdale, near lake. 

„ palnstre. Thwaites, Cold Fell. 

Pilularia glohulifera. Ennerdale Lake. 
Charajlexilis. Ennerdale Lake. 
„ aspera. Ennerdale Lake. 



Joseph Robson. 



July 4, 1853. 



0)1 preserving the Balance between the Animal and Vegetable 
Organisms in Sea Water. By R. Warington, Esq.* 

In the published notices of my experiments of 1849, to maintain 
the balance between the animal and vegetable organisms in a con- 
fined and limited portion of water, the fact was demonstrated, that, in 
consequence of the natural decay of the vegetation, its subsequent 
decomposition and the mucus- growth to which it gave rise, this 
balance could only be sustained for a very short period, but, if ano- 
ther member were introduced, which would feed upon the decaying 
vegetation and thus prevent the accumulation of these destructive pro- 
ducts — a function most admirably performed by the various species of 
water-snail — such balance was capable of being continuously main- 
tained without the slightest difficulty ; and I may add, that the expe- 
rimental proof of this has now been carried on, in a small tank in the 
heart of London, for the last four years and a half, without any change 
or disturbance of the water ; the loss which takes place by evapora- 
tion being made up with rain or distilled water, so as to avoid any 

* Read at the Hull Meeting of the British Association, and communicated by the 
Author, for publication in the ' Phytologist.' 

VOL. IV. C 



10 

great increase of the mineral ingredients originally present. It follows 
then, as a natural deduction, from the successful demonstration of 
these premises, that the same balance should be capable of being 
established, under analogous circumstances, in sea water. And in a 
paper published in January, 1852,* I stated that I was, at that time, 
" attempting the same kind of arrangement with a confined portion of 
sea water, employing some of the green sea-weeds for the vegetable 
member of the circle, and the common periwinkle as the representa- 
tive of the water-snail." 

The sea water with which the experiments I am about to detail 
were conducted, was obtained through the medium of one of the 
oyster-boats at the Billingsgate fish-market, and was taken from the 
middle of the English Channel. 

My first object was to ascertain the kind of sea-weed best fitted, 
under ordinary circumstances, for keeping the water clear and sweet, 
and in a sufficiently oxygenated state to sustain animal life. And 
here opinions were at variance, for one naturalist friend whom I con- 
sulted, advised me to employ the Rhodosperms ; another stated that 
it was impossible to make the red weeds answer the purpose, as he 
had tried them, and strongly recommended the olive or brown- 
coloured Algae ; while, again, others thought that I should be more 
successful with those which had in theory first suggested themselves 
to my own mind, namely the Chlorosperms. After making numerous 
unsuccessful experiments with both the brown and the red varieties 
of Algae, I was fully convinced that, under ordinary circumstances, 
the green weeds were the best adapted for the purpose. 

This point having been practically ascertained, and some good 
pieces of the Enleromorpha and Ulva latissima in a healthy state, 
attached to nodules of flint or chalk, having been procured from the 
shore near Broadstairs, several living animal subjects were introduced 
together with the periwinkle. Everything progressed satisfactorily, 
and these all continued in a healthy and lively condition. 

My first trials were conducted in one of the small tanks which had 
been used for fresh water ; but as it was necessary, during the unsuc- 
cessful experiments with the brown and red sea-weeds, to agitate and 
aerate the water, which had been rendered foul from the quantity of 
mucus or gelatinous matter generated during the decay of their fironds, 
until the whole had become oxidized, and the water rendered clear 
and fitted for another experiment, it was, therefore, for greater conve- 
nience, removed into a shallow earthen pan and covered with a large 
* ' Giudeneis' Botauical Magazine and Garden Companion,' Jan. 1852. 



11 

glass shade to protect the surface of the water, as much as possible, 
from the dust and soot of the I^ondon atmosphere, and at the same 
time impede the evaporation. In this vessel then I had succeeded 
perfectly in keeping a large number of beautiful living specimens in a 
healthy condition up to the close of 1852. I therefore gave instruc- 
tions for the making of a small tank as a more peiTnanent reservoir, 
and one more adapted for carrying on my observations and investiga- 
tions on the (Economy and habits of the inhabitants. 

From the experience I had obtained in ray experiments with the 
freshwater tank, I was induced to modify slightly the construction of 
this vessel ; thus, at the back, or part towards the light, the framing 
was filled with slate in the same way as the ends and bottom ; for I 
had found that the glass, originally employed, very soon became 
covered with a confervoid growth which had an unpleasing appear- 
ance to the eye, and in consequence of which I had been obliged to 
paint the glass on the exterior to prevent this growth from increasing 
to too great an extent. It was also an unnatural mode of illumination, 
as all the light should pass through the surface of the water. The 
front towards the room and the observer was constructed of plate 
glass, the whole being set in a stout framework of zinc, and cemented 
with what is known under the name of Scott's cement, and which I 
have found to answer for the purpose most admirably. Within this 
tank were arranged several large pieces of rock-work, thrown into an 
arched form, and other fragments were cemented in places against the 
slate at the back and ends, and at parts along the water-line, so that 
the creatures could hide themselves at pleasure ; a short beach of 
pebbles was also constructed in order that shallow water could be re- 
sorted to if desired. The whole tank was covered with a light glass 
shade to keep out the dust and retard evaporation. 

AVith the sea water obtained in January, 1852, I have been working 
without cessation up to the present time, agitating* and aerating when 
it became foul during the unsuccessful experiments on the sea-weeds, 
but since then it has been rarely ever disturbed ; the loss which takes 
place from evaporation being made up, as before stated, with rain or 
distilled water. 

For a considerable period, after commencing these experiments, 
I was much troubled to obtain living subjects in a healthy condition, 
but having alluded to this, and the success of my investigations, 
in a short notice appended to a paper published in the ' Annals ' for 

* It must be decidediy understood that no agitation or so-called aeration is 
required when the balance of animal and vegetable life is properly established. 



12 

October, 1852 (see also Zool. 3683), my friend, Mr. P. H. Gosse, 
who was then sojourning at Ilfracombe for his health, offered in the 
kindest manner possible to supply me with materials, and from that 
period he has always most heartily responded to my wants. It must 
not be imagined for a moment that the beautiful creatures I have thus 
received have been all preserved alive or always quite healthy. In 
experimental investigations this would be unreasonable to expect, as 
the very fact of experimenting implies a disturbance of the then state 
of things. Besides which, from want of a sufficient knowledge of 
Natural History, from want of forethought and experience and other 
causes, I have lost many very fine specimens ; and as the detail 
of these losses may prevent the occurrence of the like annoyances to 
others, I shall venture to occupy your time for a short period with 
their history. 

My greatest loss arose from too great an anxiety to transfer the col- 
lection I had preserved in a healthy condition to the end of December, 
1852, into the new tank. As soon as it arrived from the maker's I lost 
no time in introducing my numerous family to their new abode, and 
dearly I paid for my precipitancy, for on the next morning I found 
many of my most beautiful specimens dead ; thus I lost two fine 
Holothurias {H. Pentactes) , a small freckled goby [Gohius minutus), 
a beautiful little pipe-fish [Syngnnthus Itimhriciformis) , and several 
others, and on opening the door of the case the cause of this mor- 
tality was at once evident, — an iridescent film of oily matter was float- 
ing on the surface of the water, arising from the paint with which the 
angular joints and edges of the small tank had been coloured not 
having become sufficiently hardened. 

Another source of loss arises from the several creatures attacking 
and devouring each other, and it therefore becomes a point of great 
importance — and highly necessary to be carefully observed, where 
their preservation is an object — to ascertain what varieties may 
be safely associated in the same tank ; as, for instance, I have found 
that the shrimps and prawns attack, and very soon devour, all 
the larger varieties of corallines and Polyps, Sabellae, Serpulae, rock- 
boiers, Cirrhipe Is, some of the Annelids, many bivalve and univalve 
mollusks tliat are unprotected by an operculum, or have no power of 
closing their valves. The instances which have come under my own 
immediate observation have been the destruction of the Pholas dacty- 
lus, Saxicava rugosa, Cyprtea Europoea, and several specimens of 
Sabellae, Serpulae, Coryne sessilis, and many others. 

The common crab [Cancer Mcenas) is likewise a most destructive 



13 

agent; and the tribe of rock-fish, the blennies, gobies, &c. are also 
most voracious, devouring all the varieties of Cirrhipeds, corallines, 
Polyps, Annelids, &c. ; they will also attack the shrimps and prawns, 
and even seize upon the horns of the periwinkle, which they bite off. 
If the mollusks do not keep a very firm hold of the rock or tank sides, 
they are rapidly turned over by these fish on their backs and 
lie helplessly exposed to their attacks.* It is doubtless their seeking 
food of this kind which causes these little fish to be so generally found 
in the shallow rock-pools of the coast. In consequence of these ra- 
venous propensities, I have been obliged to establish several small 
tanks and imitation rock-pools, so as to separate these various depre- 
dators from each other : thus in one I have varieties of Actinia, 
shrimps, Nudibranchs, Holothurias, and some Annelids ; in a second 
the rock-fish, as the blennies, gobies, Cottus, with crabs and Actiniae ; 
in a third corallines. Annelids, Polyps, rock-borers, Sabellse, Serpulae, 
Holothurias, and Actiniae. 

Another curious instance of loss I may detail which has quite 
recently occurred, and which may prove interesting ; it was in a small 
rock-pool containing blennies, gobies, crabs, &c. I had procured 
two live oysters for the purpose of feeding my numerous small fry in 
these vivaria, and one of these having proved ample for the purpose 
of one meal, the other was placed on the sandy bottom ; on the second 
day after this the oyster was observed to have opened the valves of 
his shell to a great extent, which were afterwards seen closed, but a 
small Gobius niger, inhabiting the pool, could nowhere be seen. The 
day after this the oyster was opened for the general feeding, when, 
lo ! within the shell was found the unfortunate Gobius, quite dead. 
Whether this little gentleman had been attracted within the trap by 
curiosity or the ciliary motion of the oyster, it is impossible with cer- 
tainty to say ; but that he must have seized on some sensitive part of 
the oyster is more than probable, so as to have caused such a rapid 
closing of the valves of the shell as could entrap so active a burglar. 

* Since the reading of this paper at Hull I have received a blenny of larger size, 
heing about 3^ inches in length, and although it has become so tame that it will allow 
itself to be touched by the hand and takes its food from the fingers, yel its destructive 
propensities are so great, that it very soon killed four small crabs ; and to save three 
others, of rather a larger size, I have been obliged to remove the hlenny to a rock- 
pool in association with his own species and a few Acliniae. The only refuge the poor 
crabs had was to bury themselves in the sand, and whenever they attempted to move 
out of their refuge they were immediately pounced upon and only escaped by burrow- 
ing rapidly again. 



14 

Another important point is the gravity of the sea water ; this should 
be very carefully regulated, for it must be borne in mind that many of 
the marine creatures are supplied by a permeation of water through 
their tissues or over their delicate and beautiful organs. The specific 
gravity should not rise above 1.026 at 60° Fahr., and a small hydro- 
meter should be at short periods introduced to ascertain that this 
point is not exceeded, particularly during the hot months of summer. 
The reduction to this gravity can be readily effected by the addition 
of rain or distilled water. Many of the creatures will of themselves 
afford indications of this increase of density ; some of the Actiniae will 
remain closed and become coated with a white slimy covering within 
which they remain for a length of time, and if the specific gravity of 
the water be lowered this is very soon ruptured by their expansion, 
thrown off, and the tentacula become soon extended. 

All putrescent matter or excess of food or rejecta of the Actiniae 
should be carefully removed from the water, as the noxious gaseous 
compounds generated by the decay of such matters appear to diffuse 
themselves rapidly through the water, act as a virulent poison, and 
speedily destroy the vitality of the occupants. Thus many beautiful 
subjects were lost in a few hours from the introduction, into a small 
glass jar, of a large Pecten shell, encrusted with corallines, which had 
become loaded with putrescent matter by partial submersion in a foul 
muddy bottom. 

Great cai'e should also be taken in moving the Actiniae that the foot 
or sucking disk with which it attaches itself to the rocks, stones, 
or weed, be not injured, as, when this occurs, they rarely survive, but 
roll about without attaching themselves, and gradually waste away 
and die. 

With these exceptions then, everything has gone on very satisfac- 
torily, care being always taken not to overload the water with too 
large a proportion of animal life for the vegetation to balance, 
as, whenever this has been inadvertently attempted, the water has 
soon become foul, and the whole contents of the tank, both animal and 
vegetable, have rapidly suffered, and it has required some time before 
the water could be restored to its former healthy condition. 

In one of the numbers of the 'Zoologist' of last year, I stated that 
besides the Ulvae, Enteromorphae and Cladophorae, I had found the 
Zostera marina a verj' useful plant for oxygenating the sea water; but 
this observation has reference only to the case of a tank supplied with 
a ground where its roots will find a sufficiency of food for its growth, 
as in a clear shingle or sand it soon decays ; and it should be asso- 



15 

ciated with such animals as delight in a ground of this nature, as many 
of the Annelids, crabs, burrowing shrimps, &c. There are several 
interesting observations which have been made from time to time 
connected with this subject, which I hope to lay before the Natural- 
History world as soon as I can find leisiu'e time for the purpose. 

Robert Warington. 

Apothecaries' Hall, 

September 10, 1853. 



Notices of New Books. 



' TJie Microscope, in its Special Application to Vegetable Anatomy 
and Physiology. By Dr. Hermann Schacht ; translated by 
Frederick Currey, Esq., M.A. London : Samuel Highley, 32, 
Fleet Street. 1853.' 132 pp. 8vo ; with numerous Illustra- 
tions on Wood. Price 5^. 

The translator's Preface, which we extract entire, will explain the 
character and objects of this publication. 

" The work of Dr. Schacht, of which a translation is now offered to 
the public, relates to a branch of microscopical science, which has not 
hitherto formed the subject of a separate treatise ; and the high repu- 
tation of the author, and the interesting nature of the subject, have 
induced a belief that the present version is likely to meet with a favour- 
able reception. 

" It has been thought advisable to omit the greater part of the 
description of foreign microscopes and auxiliary instruments contained 
in the original work. These details would, for obvious reasons, be 
uninteresting, if not useless, to the English reader. There is no doubt 
of the superiority of English instruments over those described by Dr. 
Schacht ; and the elaborate and able treatise of Professor Quekett 
affords all the necessary information upon the subject of English 
microscopes, &c. 

" The high price of good English microscopes has hitherto been 
an impediment to the progress of Microscopy, and much attention has 
lately been directed to the production of cheaper instruments. A 
very useful and convenient form of student's microscope is represented 



16 

in the frontispiece, which has been designed by Mr. Samuel Highley, 
jun., of Fleet Street, and may be had at a very moderate price. 

" The figures of the original work, and their descriptions, have been 
incorporated into the text of the translation, by which means the 
inconvenience of constant reference to the plates and their explana- 
tion is avoided. The figures of the foreign instruments, and a few 
other figures, which were not essential for the elucidation of the sub- 
ject, and which would have increased the expense of the translation, 
have been omitted." 



* The Botany of the Voyage of H.M.S. Herald. By Berthold See- 
MAXX, F.L.S., &c., XaturaUst to the Expedition. Part III. 
Flora of the Isthmus of Panama continued. London : Reeve. 
1853.' Royal ito ; 40 pp. Text; 10 Lithographic Plates. 
Price 10s. 

The Part contains, 2 Caryophyllese, 21 Malvaceae, 9 Sterculiaceae, 
9 Buttneriaceae, 11 Tiliaceae, 4 Temstroemiaceae, 1 Olacineae, 6 Auran- 
tiaceee, 3 Hypericineae, 10 Clusiaceae, 4 Marcgraaviace^e, 5 Hippocra- 
teaceae, 1 Erythroxyleae, 14 Malpighiaceae, 12 Sapindaceae, 4 Meliaceae, 
1 TropeolcEe, 2 Oxalideae, 1 Zygophylleae, 2 Anthoxyles, 5 Simaru- 
haceae, 2 Ochnaceae, 2 Rhamneae, 6 Saraydeae, 32 Euphorbiaceae, 5 
Anacardieffi, 119 Leguminosae, 1 Burseraceae, 6 Chrysobalaneae, 3 
Rosaceae, 7 Combretaceae, 1 Vochysieae, 1 Rhizophoreae, 7 Ona- 
graries. 

The novelties are forty-eight in number, and bear the following 
names : — 

Pavonia alba, Seem. ; order Malvaceae. 

Pachira Fendleri, Seem., P. Barrigon, Seem., and Chorisea rosea, 
Seem. ; order Sterculiaceae. 

Kelletia odorata, Seem., Sloanea quadrivalvis. Seem., Heliocar- 
pus arborescens, Seem., Triumfetta speciosa, Seem. ; order Tiliaceae. 

Saurauja montana. Seem. ; order Ternstroemiaceae. 

Hypericum gnidioides. Seem. ; order Hypericineae. 

Reggeria acuminata. Seem., Clusia odorata. Seem., C. pratensis. 
Seem., Calophyllum edule, Seem. ; order Clusiaceae. 

Salacia pruinosa, Seem. ; order Hippocrateacese. 

Tetrapteris Pauamensis, Seem. ; order Malpighiaceae. 

Sergania grandis, Seem., Cupania sylvatica. Seem. ; order Sapin- 
daceae. 



17 

Moschoxylon Veraguasense, Seem. ; order Meliaceae. 

Picramnia umbrosa, Seem. ; order Simarubaceae. 

Cespedesia uiacrophylla, Seem. ; order Ochnaceag, 

Edmonstonia pacifica, Seem. ; order SamydeaB. " Named in com- 
memoration of Mr. Thomas Edmonston, a native of Buness, North 
Britain." The melancholy fate of this young botanist will still be 
fresh in the recollection of our readers. 

Euphorbia apocynoides, Kl. MSS., Euphorbia Morisoniana, Kl. 
MSS., Sapium Moritzianum, Kl. MSS., Omphalia diandra, Linn., 
var. Panamensis, Kl. MSS., Acalypta Panamensis, Kl. MSS., A. See- 
manni, Kl. MSS., A. Alopecuroidea, Jacqiiin, var. glandulifera, Kl. 
MSS., Caperonia Panamensisis, Kl. MSS., Astraea Seemanui, Kl. 
MSS., Barhamia Panamensis, Kl. MSS., Cyclostigma Panamense, 
Kl. MSS., C. denticulatum, Kl. MSS. ; order Crotonese. Phyllan- 
thus diffusus, Kl. MSS. ; order EuphorbiaceEe. 

Crotalaria Guatemalensis, Benth. MSS., Tephrosia nitens, Benth. 
MSS., Stenolobium brachycarpum, Benth., Loncbocarpus velutinus, 
Benth. MSS., Platymischium polystachium, Benth. MSS., Ormosia 
Panamensis, Benth. MSS., Bauhinia parvifolia, Seem., Calliandra 
Seemanni, Benth. MSS., Inga Darienensis, Seem., I. Panamensis, 
Seem., I. QErslediana, Benth. MSS. ; order Leguminosae. 

Licania arborea, Seeni. ; order Chrysobalaneae. 

Lopezia paniculata, Seem. ; order Onagrariese. 

We can only repeat the commendations we have already bestowed 
on this work. Its scientific interest is abundantly maintained in this 
third part. 



Proceedings of Societies, ^c. 



The Phytologist Club. 

0?ie Hundred and Fifty -second Sitting. — Saturday, December 24, 
1853. — Mr. Newman, President, in the chair. 

The President read the following communications : — 

New Irish Equisetum. 

" I wish to call your attention to a very distinct variety, or species, 
of Equisetum, which I found two years ago. You may have probably 
VOL. V. D 



IS 

heard of it through your nuuierous correspondents, as one of the states 
of E. variegatum. It is, however, distinct from any British Equise- 
tum I have seen. E. hyemale is the sjDecies it most resembles, and is 
nearest allied to, though very distinct from that plant, in its normal 
form at least, or, indeed, in any form that ever I have observed 
it assume. The long^ loose, white sheaths, with white setaceous teeth, 
form good prima facie marks to distinguish it from E. hyemale ; 
besides, the stems are longer, much more attenuated, and have fewer 
strice. The latter characters would appear to connect it with E. 
Mackaii, from which it differs, again, in a marked degree, in the 
colour of its sheaths, which have shorter teeth ; and in its stems, 
which never branch. You will, nevertheless, be inclined to say the 
characteristic marks I have pointed out, and even the appearance of 
the specimens accompanying them, do not satisfy you that the plant 
is distinct from the species and varieties described in your last edi- 
tion of British Ferns.' From such an opinion I would beg respect- 
fully to dissent ; and I will tell you why. It is different in form, 
markings, and, above all, in constitution. In this case, W'hen lan- 
guage appears at fault, Nature steps in, and assists us to point out the 
diversity of her objects. The stems of all our British unbranched 
species of Equisetum are persistent, remaining green throughout the 
ivinter. The economy of the plant to which I am now directing 
your attention is the reverse of this : the stems die down annually. 
When I observed this last year, I supposed it might have been an 
accidental occurrence, and consequently resolved on waiting until I 
saw what would take place this autumn before I considered this a per- 
manent character of the plant. The same result has been again 
obtained, and the original observation verified. The stems are now 
as yellow as ripe wheat-straw, lying flat on the ground, though those 
of all the other unbranched Equiseta are erect, and as green as 
rushes. Surely, then, this is sufficient to mark it as distinct. I here- 
with send you fresh specimens of E. hyemale, E. Mackaii, E. variega- 
tum, var. Wilsoni, E. variegatum, and the new plant, which will 
enable you to judge for yourself." — D. Moore ; Glasnevin, December 
2, 1853. 

The President exhibited a series of specimens of the beautiful plant 
mentioned in Mr. Moore's communication. He had referred to Vau- 
cher's ' Monographic des Preles,' in which unusual pains had been 
taken to distinguish the European Equiseta ; and he found nothing 
resembling the plant on the table, to which he proposed to give the 
name of Equisetum Moorei, in honour of the distinguished botanist 



19 

who had discovered it, and who had for many years devoted the most 
assiduous attention to studying the Equiseta and ferns of Ireland. 
This was the third striking form of unbranched Equiselnm which had 
been discovered in Ireland ; and all of these had now received a name 
at his (the President's) hands : E. Mackaii, E. Wilsoni, and E. Moorei. 
He had once ventured on expressing an opinion that all the unbranched 
Equiseta were referrible to a single species ; and he found that conti- 
nental botanists were much inclined to adopt this view : but the ques- 
tion^raust eventually be decided, not by the dictum of any man, but 
by carefully ascertaining whether the characters supposed to distin- 
guish them were constant or exceptional. // constant, it mattered 
little lioiv apparently insignificant ; and if inconstant and excep- 
tional, it mattered not how striking. This principle was sound ; 
it could never be antagonistic to Nature's laws. In the present 
instance, we had a plant apparently intermediate between hyemale 
and Mackaii, but differing in the possession of certain structural cha- 
racters peculiar to itself. Now, this difference, seeing that the plant 
had hitherto been discovered in only one station (although not in very 
limited quantities), might be attributed to the effects of season, aspect, 
or soil ; but then, the stems of the older species, hyemale and Mac- 
kaii, were persistent, while those of the new species were completely 
deciduous ; and Mr. Moore found this difference to obtain equally 
when the plants were cultivated together, and the same conditions 
observed with all. He concluded by^ proposing the following charac- 
ters, as sufficient to distinguish the new plant from those with which 
we were previously acquainted ; and begged to express a hope that 
Irish botanists would endeavour, by diligent search, to extend the 
ascertained range of this interesting and strikingly beautiful species. 

Equisetum Moorei, Neuman. 

Rhizome not noticed. 

Stems annual, completely deciduous, 20 — 30 inches in length, 3 or 
4 united at base, perfectly erect, always unbranched, acuminate, 
gradually tapering throughout their length, with 12 (more or 
less) deep, well-marked striag ; the surface rough and hard to 
• the touch; divided by transverse septa into 12 (more or less) 
internodes, the middle ones of which are longer than those of 
either extremity. 

Sheaths loose, striated like the stem the interspaces between the 
striae having a deep central sulcus, of a beautiful pearly white, 
with a black ring at the base, and black tips to the teeth ; the 



20 

sheath of the spike black, spreading, campanulate, its teeth 
long, acuminate, aristate. 

Teeth rigid, harsh, rounded or truncate at the apex, each having a 
median furrow on the back, the continuation of the intermedi- 
ate furrows of the sheath ; surmounted by loose, flaccid, mem- 
branous, silky, elongate, pointed awns, which are usually whitish, 
but occasionally black towards the apex of the stem ; on the 
lower sheaths these awns appear evanescent, from their extreme 
fragility. 

Spike sessile, black, composed of 35 (more or less) black, roundish 
scales, on which the siriation of the stem is indistinctly conti- 
nued ; surmounted by a solid, conical, acuminate apex. 

Hah. Clay-banks facing the sea at Rockfield, County Wicklow, 
Ireland ; found by Mr. Moore, in company with Professor Mel- 
ville, of Queen's College, Galway. 

Herh. Moore, Newman, &c. 

Mr. Luxford fully concurred in considering the beautiful plant on 
the table perfectly distinct from any described British Equisetum. 

Enormous Plant of Osmunda regalis. 

" In Merivale Wood, at the foot of Leith Hill, is a tump of Osmunda 
regalis, which appears to be but a single plant. It measures thirty- 
six feet in circumference, and has fronds at least eight feet long." — 
William Bennett ; Brockham Lodge. 

Asplenium lanceolatum. 

" Towards the sea westward from Penzance, it entirely puts off its 
shrivelled Welch character. On the road near Sennen Cove, I have 
seen it form the entire covering of a wall most luxuriantly ; and dug 
up a single root, from the bank at the foot of it, on which I counted 
eighty fronds." — Id. 

Staffordshire Locality for Potamogeton Jlahellatus, Bab. 

" To the localities already recorded for this pond-weed, may be 
added the river, and ditches which drain into it, at Stafford. The 
plant has been known to me, as a doubtful form, for several years. 
Although most abundant and luxuriant in growth, it flowers very spar- 
ingly. Its fruit I have not succeeded in obtaining. This year I was 
fortunate enough to meet with the broader and somewhat fugitive 



21 

leaves, so characteristic of the species. A specimen forwarded to Mr. 
Babington has been pronounced by him to be the plant which he has 
described and named as P. flabellatus." — R. C. Douglas ; Forehridge, 
Stafford, Deceniher, 1853. 

Lancashire Locality for Trifolium resupinatum. 

" In the ' Phytologist ' for December (Phytol, iv. 1143), I perceive 
Mr. J. G. Baker gives a Cheshire locality for Trifolium resupinatum. 
I found two small specimens of this ti'efoil on the Lancashire side of 
the Merse}^, about the year 1849, at Everton. One of these I for- 
warded, this year, to Mr. Babington, who kindly named it for me ; at 
the same time observing that it was most probably introduced among 
ballast. From this I beg to differ, as, from the locality, it would be 
almost impossible. The more probable means of introduction is, I 
think, among foreign hay, which is brought to this port in conside- 
rable quantity, and employed for feeding cattle during the winter. 
This may prove the means of introduction to many exotic plants. 
This year a botanical friend has found it growing in considerable 
quantity at Fairfield, a short distance from this town. I think that, 
both at the Cheshire locality and here, we cannot but consider it as 
introduced." — H. S. Fisher ; Scotland Road, Liverpool, December 
12, 1853. 

Lathyrus Aphaca near Liverpool. 

" I had the pleasure of finding a single specimen of the above plant 
at Bootle, about three miles from Liverpool, about two years since ; 
but have been unable to obtain plants since, though I have searched 
for it diligently. This I believe to be the first and only time it has 
been found in this neighbourhood.'" — Id. 

Gnaphalium rectum at Eastham. 

" This season I obtained a plentiful supply of the rare Gnaphalium 
rectum from Eastham. Is this to be considered the G. sylvaticum, 
b. norvegicum, of the ' London Catalogue ? ' I enclose specimens of 
itr—Id. 

Viola lutea at Netherton, near Liverpool. 

" Viola lutea, a plant, I understand, formerly found in this neigh- 
bourhood, though many years ago, I had brought me, this season, 
from Netherton. The specimens were very luxuriant ; some of them 
a foot in height." — Id. 



22 



Thymus Serpylhim and T. CliamcBdrys. 

" Mr. Jorden's remarks on these plants fully agree with my obser- 
vations, made this year, I gathered a few specimens of T. Chamse- 
drys, for a friend, in October, when T. Serpyllum was, withont excep- 
tion, past flowering." — Id. 

Polygala oxyptera on the Sand-hills near Liverpool. 

" In the same locality, the sand-hills on this side the Mersey, I 
found several fine plants of Polygala oxyptera, fully agreeing with the 
description given by Mr. Babington in the ' Phytologist."— /c^. 

Rosa villosa, Viola imherbis^ and V. paliistris near Liverpool. 

" Rosa villosa, not mentioned in our Liverpool Flora, I have found 
in two or three places in the direction of Walton. There, also, I find 
the variety of Viola odorata, Viola imberbis of Leighton ; and, in a 
boggy piece of ground in the same direction, Viola palustris." — Id. 

Hypnum nodijlorum, H. lycopodioides, and Bryant androgynum 

near Liverpool. 

" The new, rare, and very pleasing addition to our British mosses, 
Hypnum nodiflorum, was found in June, this year, by Mr. Harrison, 
on the Crosby sand-hills. Here, also, in 1851, I found, for the first 
lime, growing in great profusion, H. lycopodioides, but was not 
acquainted with its correct name until this year. The little thread- 
moss {Bryum androgynum) I found, last year and this, growing very 
plentifully in a sandy lane at Walton, commencing behind the church." 
—Id. 

Filago spafhulaia in the Isle of Wight. 

" 1 have quite lately been enabled to add Filago spathulata, Presl, 
to the Isle of Wight Flora. I first gathered it in a turnip-field near 
Kingston ; and since that I have found it to be tolerably abundant in 
most of the sandy stubble-fields round Brixton and Lemerston." — 
A. G. More ; Brixton, Isle of Wight, November 21, 1853, 



Botanical Society of Edinburgh, 

Thursday, November 10, 1853, — Eighteenth Session. — Professor 
Balfour, President, in the chair. 



23 

Dr. Balfour, in taking the chair, alluded to the value of the Society 
as a means of keeping up a friendly intercourse among those who 
were prosecuting the science of Botany. He alluded to the recent 
researches in regard to the class of plants called Diatomaceaj, which 
were now exciting the attention of botanists everywhere, more espe- 
cially since the publication of Mr. Smith's work ; stated that a large 
microscopical collection had been made at the Botanic Garden, and 
that the specimens would be exhibited during the session ; and con- 
cluded by urging the young members to communicate their observa- 
tions, and by pointing out the importance of carefully examining even 
the commonest plants which they meet with in their walks. He 
announced several papers to be read during the session. 

Anew part (concluding volume iv.) of the Society's ' Transactions' 
was placed on the table, containing papers by Professor Balfour, Mr. 
Babington, Professor M'Cosh, Dr. Greville, Major Madden, Dr. Wil- 
son, Dr. Macadam, and Dr. Macgowan. The Secretary stated that 
the price of the part had been fixed at 4s. 

Donations to the Society's library and herbarium were announced, 
from the Smithsonian Institution, Washington ; the Cherbourg Natu- 
ral-History Society; the Natural-History Society of Switzerland; 
Mr. Moore, of Chelsea ; Dr. Beilschmied ; M. Auguste Le Jolis ; Mr. 
Edwin Lees ; Mr. Thomas, of Bristol ; Dr. Philip Maclagan ; Lieut. 
Robert Maclagan ; Professor Blytt, of Christiana ; Mr. G. R. Tate ; 
Mr. A. G. More ; Mr. John Sibbald ; Mr. W. M. Ogilvie, of Dundee ; 
Mr. A. H. Balfour ; Mr. John Smith, of Moffat ; Messrs. Veitch & 
Son, of Exeter ; Mr. Thomas Hay, of Prospect Bank, Leith ; Mr. 
George Patton ; Mr. George Wemyss Morison ; the Rev. Dr. Mitchell, 
of Whitburn ; Mr. James Hunter, of Hafton ; Mr. Baxter, of Riccar- 
ton ; Mr. Thomas Cannan ; Mr. Dumbreck ; Professor Chrislison ; 
Dr. Lindsay ; Mr. W. H. Macfarlane ; and the Boston Natural-PIis- 
tory Society. 

Gamboge Plant. 

Dr. Balfour stated that a fine specimen of the gamboge-plant had 
been sent to the Botanic Garden by Dr. Christison. The specimen 
was about two feet in height, and had been sent by Mr. Robert Lit- 
tle, Surgeon, from Kampoot, the leading seaport town of Cambodia, 
in Siam. 

Diatomaceous Loric(B of the Mull Deposit. 

Dr. Balfour read a note from Professor Gregory, in which he stated 
that he had continued the examination of the Mull deposit of Diato- 



24 

maceous loricse, which he described, last winter, as containing 60 spe- 
cies of Diatoms ; and that he had now found in it upwards of 140 
species, which beats all the richest deposits known. Even at 60 it 
was far the richest. Besides the new species doubtfully indicated in 
his former paper, which Smith had named Eunotia incisa, he had 
found another and a very beautiful species, new not only to him, but 
to all those who had yet seen it or a figure of it. It is a Pinnularia, 
which, provisionally, he had named P. hebridensis. It is but scarce 
in the deposit, a large and populous slide rarely yielding more than 
one specimen, and often none at all ; and as yet he has not been able 
to find a trace of it in any other deposit within his reach ; nor is there 
anything like it in any work he had seen. As to Eunotia incisa, it 
occurs in a deposit from Lapland, in that from Lunebeg, and in one 
from the banks of the Spey ; and it seems remarkable that it has been 
so long overlooked. P. hebridensis is small, its length from .00125 to 
.0026 inch, and it has, like P. lata, P. alpina, and P. distans, only 9 
or 10 costae in .001 inch ; but all these are three or four times larger, 
and all on the side view are widest in the middle, whereas P. hebri- 
densis is slightly contracted there ; but it has the general characters 
of these three species, from the fewness and thickness of the costae. 
The following papers were read : — 

Botanical Trip to the Grampian Mountains, 

' Botanical Trip to the Grampian Mountains, in August, 1853 ;' by 
Professor Balfour. 

In this trip Dr. Balfour was accompanied by Messrs. Gilchrist, 
Barclay, Jenner, Lawson, Mustapha, Katib, Soubki, Alex. Cowan, 
Charles Cowan, Cunningham, Young, Wood, Ross, Ogilvie, Cropper, 
and Bayley. He gave a general account of the Clova and Glen Isla 
district which was visited, and noticed the rare alpine plants gathered. 
He offered some observations on the remarkably limited distribution 
of Oxytropis campestris and Lychnis alpina, which were confined, the 
former to a single rocky projection in Glen Fiadh, and the latter to a 
small mountain summit called Little Gilrannoch. These plants only 
spread to a small extent from a centre. Besides the usual alpine 
plants, the party gathered a profusion of Polypodium alpestre, in 
various states. In Glen Fiadh the plant was small, and very little of 
it was in fructification. It this state it is difficult to distinguish it at 
first sight from Athyrium Filix-fcemina. In Glen Dole the plant was 
also seen abundantly, but in most parts sparingly in fructification. 
At the upper part of the glen, near the falls of the White Water, and 



25 

at tlie station where Mulgediiun alpinum was originally found by Don, 
there were fine specimens of the Polypodiuni, two or more feet high, 
abundantly covered with sori. The same thing occurred a little above 
the track called Jock's Road. In these localities the fern was associ- 
ated with fine specimens of Athyrium Filix-foemina. The party 
looked in vain for specimens of Carex Grahami in the old station in 
Glen Fiadh ; and they failed in seeing Fotentilla tridentata on the 
rocks near Loch Brandy, which is the station given for it by Don. 
Dr. Balfour noticed the heights at which the alpine species occurred, 
and exhibited a plan of the alpine district of Scotland, with specimens 
of the plants arranged upon it at their different altitudes. 

Dr. Balfour stated that, through the kind permission of Colonel 
Ogilvie, the party had the use of the large hall at Clova ; and that 
Lord Castlereagh offered every facility for visiting Caenlochan Glen. 

Vegetable Substance formed in a Water-pipe. 

' Note on a Vegetable Substance formed in a Water-pipe, at Haf- 
ton, Argyleshire ;' by James Hunter, Esq. 

" About twelve months ago, having occasion to bring in an addi- 
tional supply of water for the use of Hafton House, I had formed a 
small reservoir, or fountain-head, as it is called, from which to lead 
the water to the then only existing fountain-head, so as to increase 
the supply in the latter. The connexion between the two was by 
means of a burnt clay pipe, two inches in diameter, and in length 
thirty-six inches, securely fastened at the joinings with Roman cement, 
or mastic ; the total length of the piping being three hundred and 
twenty yards, secured at each end by zinc roses, four inches in diame- 
ter, in order to prevent any impurities passing through the pipe. 
When the work was finished, the supply of water was very good ; and 
it continued so until a fortnight ago, when the running of the water 
through the tile piping gradually diminished, and at last almost entii-ely 
ceased ; a mere driblet, indeed, finding its way into the old fountain- 
head. Upon examination as to the cause of this change, by raising 
a considerable portion of the piping, there was found, about half-way 
between the two fountain-heads, the vegetable substance herewith 
sent. It was firmly lodged in one length of the piping, and projected 
an inch or so into another. 

" It is very curious to observe that the colour of the water pressed 
out of this substance, when first taken out of the pipe, and saturated, 
as it was, was deep brown ; whereas the water itself flowing through 
the pipe to the very last was as pure as crystal." 

VOL. IV. E 



26 



Part 2 of Dr. Lauder Lindsay's paper, intituled ' Tour on the Hartz 
Mountains,' was also read. (No report given). 

Several new members were proposed ; and the Society then 
adjourned till the second Thursday of December. 



December 8, 1853. — Professor Balfour, President, in the chair. 

Office-bearers were elected for the ensuing year : — President : Pro- 
fessor Balfour. Vice-Presidents: Professor Fleming, Dr. Seller, 
Hy. Paul, Esq., and James Cunningham, Esq. Council: Charles Jen- 
ner, Esq., John M'Laren, Esq., James M'Nab, Esq., Dr. Lindsay, Dr. 
Matthews, Dr. Priestley, Dr. Lowe, Professor Blackie, William Ivory, 
Esq., and G. R. Tate, Esq. Honorary Secretary : Dr. Greville. 
Foreign Secretary : Dr. Douglas Maclagan. Auditor : William 
Brand, Esq. Treasurer : W. W. Evans, Esq. Curator of Museum : 
Dr. Anderson. Assistant Secretary and Curator : Mr. G. Lawson. 

Donations to the Society's library and herbarium were announced, 
from Miss Bromfield ; the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club ; Dr. Hoff- 
mann, of Giessen ; Dr. Cleghorn, of Madras ; Mr. Polwhele, of Cam- 
bridge ; Mr. Addison, of Gosford ; Mrs. J. Drummond ; Michael 
Connal, Esq., of Glasgow ; Mr. D. P. Maclagan ; Mr. Oliver, of New- 
castle. 

The following papers were read : — 

Botanical Trip to Helvellyn. 

* Notice of a Botanical Trip to Helvellyn, with pupils, in July, 
1853 ;' by Professor Balfour. 

Dr. Balfour stated that he was induced to bring this trip under the 
notice of the Society, in order to show what might be done, in the 
way of botanizing, in a short period. The party, consisting of 45, 
left Edinburgh at noon, on the 21st of July, by the Caledonian Rail- 
way, for the Lake district of England. Reaching Carlisle soon after 
4 p.m., they proceeded to Kendal, where they were met by Mr. Wake- 
field. On the way to Ambleside they gathered an abundance of Sta- 
chys Betonica, Sanguisorba officinalis and Jjactuca muralis, the last 
of which does not occur in the Scotch Flora, while the others are rare. 
The time was too limited to allow of a full examination of the shores 
of Windermere ; and darkness came on ere the party reached their 
inn at Ambleside. Next morning (the 22nd) some of the party were 
up at half-past foui-, eager to commence their rambles. They pro- 
ceeded to Stockgill Force, and in the neighbourhood of that cele- 



27 

brated waterfall gathered a number of rare plants, including Impatiens 
Noli-me-tangere, Festuca sylvatica, and Hymenophyllum Wilsoni, 
besides some more common plants, as Campanula latifolia, Polypo- 
dium Phegopteris, P. Dryopteris, and Scolopendrium vulgare. After 
breakfast thirty- nine of the party started for Rydal ; while six 
remained to examine the country near Ambleside, with the view of 
afterwards going to Patterdale by coach. The walking party, on the 
way to Rydal, gathered a number of species by the waysides, which 
are probably escapes from the garden, although now naturalized on 
the tops of walls and other situations. Among them may be men- 
tioned Sedum album, S. reflexum, S. Telephium, Sempervivum tec- 
torum, and Mecanopsis cambrica. They also picked Tilia parvifolia 
in fine flower. On the banks of the Rydal Water, and the grounds 
in the vicinity, the following plants were seen : — Quercus sessiliflora, 
Carpinus Betulus, Lastrea Oreopteris, and a variety of L. Filix-mas 
with singularly contorted fronds. In Rydal Lake the party gathered 
Nymphaea alba, Nuphar lutea, Lobelia Dortmanna, Myriophyllum 
spicatura, Potamogeton natans and P. oblongus ; and on its 
banks, Carex vesicaria, C. dioica, Lythrum Salicaria, Rhynchospora 
alba, Hypericum Androssemura, and Berberis vulgaris. On the neigh- 
bouring roadside, Staphylea pinnata, Drosera rotundifolia, Anagallis 
tenella, Parnassia palustris, and Narthecium ossifragura were seen ; 
and on the hilly grounds near Grassraere, Jasione montana, Allosorus 
crispus, which may be called the predominant fern of the district, and 
Sedum anglicum. Between Grassmere and Dunmail Raise, Saxifraga 
umbrosa was obtained ; and near Wythburn, Solanum Dulcamara. 
The party then proceeded to ascend Helvellyn, which rises upwards 
of 3000 feet. In the ascent they gathered Saxifraga aizoides, S. stel- 
laris, S. hypnoides, Lycopodium clavatum, L. selaginoides, L. alpi- 
num, L. Selago, Alchemilla alpina, and Oxyria reniformis. The party 
reached the top in a thick mist, cold and wet. They waited patiently 
for a time, in the hope that some favourable change might take place ; 
but, seeing no prospect of this, they proceeded to Swirrel Edge, with 
the view of descending to the rocks below. They had not, however, 
proceeded far down when the mist suddenly began to clear off, and 
the beautiful scenery around became visible. As the clearance con- 
tinued to progress, there was a loud cry, " To the summit ! to the 
summit 1 " Accordingly, they willingly retraced their steps. On 
reaching the top, they were gratified by one of the most splendid 
scenes they had ever witnessed : the thick mist gradually rose, and 
ever and anon displayed some interesting spot, some peaked or 



2B 

rounded summit, some lake or estuary ; until at length the whole cur- 
tain rose, the sun shone in all its brilliancy, and the entire Lake dis- 
trict was illuminated. It is not easy to describe the ecstasy of the 
party as scene after scene opened up to their delighted eyes ; and 
when the whole mountainous district was discerned by them, their 
enthusiasm rose to the highest pitch. Scawfell, Bowfell, Honister 
Crag, Borrowdale, Skiddaw, Saddleback, Windermere, Coniston, 
Esthwaite, Morecambe Bay and its islands, the Solway, and the hills 
of Northumberland were all distinctly seen. It was truly a splendid 
sight, and they felt well rewarded for their toilsome and wet ascent. 
Proceeding to examine the cliffs below the summit, between Swirrel 
Edge and Striding Edge, they spent a considerable time in gathering 
the alpine productions of that locality, among which were Saxifraga 
aizoides, S. stellaris, S. nivalis (gathered by Mr. C. Cowan), S. oppo- 
sitifolia, S. hypnoides, Oxyria reniforrais, Poa alpina, P. vivipara, 
Festuca vivipara, Alchemilla alpina, Juncus triglumis, Carex rigida 
(which was also seen on the summit), Thalictrum alpinum, Hieracium 
alpinum, H. Lawsoni (picked by Mr. Soubki), Cerastium alpinum, 
Vaccinium Vitis-Idsea, Rubus saxatilis. Polygonum viviparum, Splach- 
nnra mnioides, Polytrichum alpinum ; also Cochlearia officinalis, Viola 
sylvatica, Alsine verna (Mr. Bizzett), Sedum Rhodiola, Solidago Vir- 
gaurea, Veronica serpyllifolia, var. humifusa, Armeria maritima, Salix 
herbacea, and Juniperus nana. On the 22nd, after breakfast, the 
party proceeded by the shores of Ullswater to Gowbarrow Park, 
visited the waterfall, and then walked to Pooley Bridge. The follow- 
ing plants were gathered : — Nymphsea alba, Hieracium boreale, H. 
prenanthoides, Senecio aquaticus, Hypericum maculatum, H. perfo- 
ratum, H. hirsutum, H. humifusum, Jasione montana, Stachys Beto- 
nica, Aquilegia vulgaris, Prunus Padus, Lignstrum vulgare, Sangui- 
sorba officinalis, Holcus mollis, Calamintha Clinopodium, Lactuca 
muralis, Spiraea salicifolia, Circaea Lntetiana, Serratula tinctoria, near 
Pooley Bridge ; Quercus pedunculata and Q. sessiliflora, at Gowbar- 
row ; Genista tinctoria, Galium boreale and G. MoUngo, near Pooley 
Bridge ; Mentha rotundifolia, at the same place ; Thalictrum saxatile. 
Geranium phaeum, G. nodosum, and Papaver somniferum, near a 
cottage. The best plants were gathered between two and three miles 
of Pooley Bridge. After passing the bridge, Plantago media was 
gathered abundantly on the roadside. The party walked to Penrith 
by the Round Table and Brougham Hall, gathering Potentilla rep- 
tans, Malva moschata, Galium Mollugo, and Plantago media. At 
Penrith Castle they picked Diplotaxis tenuifolia, and, leaving by 



29 

express at 3.20, reached Edinburgh at a quarter-past seven in the 

evening. 

Plants growing about Dollar. 

' Notice of Plants found in the Neighbourhood of Dollar, in the 
Autumn of 1853 ;' by Dr. Balfour. 

Dr. Balfour stated that, having spent some time at Dollar last 
autumn, he had taken the opportunity of noticing some of the plants 
which grow in its vicinity, and now recorded a few of the more impor- 
tant species. In making up the list of the Flora, he was assisted by 
Mr. Westwood, of the Dollar Academy, who is well acquainted with 
the Flora, and who gave him a list of the plants found in the earlier 
summer months. In the immediate vicinity of Dollar, there grows a 
rare and characteristic plant, Rumex alpinus. It occurs on the banks 
of the Dollar water, and by the roadside near the Rumbling Bridge 
and Muckart. Equisetum umbrosum abounds on the banks of the 
Devon, near Cauldron Linn ; and is likewise found near Castle 
Campbell, on the Dollar water, where, also, occur Rubus saxatilis, 
twelve ferns (including Ilymenophyllum Wilsoni and Cystopteris fra- 
gilis), Festuca sylvatica, Poa nemoralis, &c. On the Ochills the fol- 
lowing plants occur : — Saxifraga stellaris, S. hypnoides, Juncus 
triglumis, Epilobium alpinum, E. alsinifolium, Sedum villosum, Hie- 
raciura prenanthoides, Lycopodium alpinum, L. Selago, L. sela- 
ginoides, and L. clavatum. Near the summit of Ben Cleugh, Gna- 
phalium supinum and Salix herbacea were found ; and at the Cauldron 
Linn, Carex pendula and C. remota. The following were noticed by 
Mr. Westwood : — Arenaria rubra, near Dollar ; Ornithopus perpusil- 
lus, at Castle Campbell ; Paris quadrifolia, Blairhill woods ; Trienta- 
lis europsea. Vicars Bridge and Ben Cleugh ; Lathrea squaraaria and 
Neottia Nidus-avis, Castle Campbell ; Meum Athamanticum. 

Part 3 of Dr. Lindsay's paper, intituled ' Notes of a Tour on the 
Hartz Mountains,' was read. 

A paper by Dr. James B. Balfour, of Kilsyth, ' On the Physiologi- 
cal and Therapeutical Actions of Cannabis indica,' was also read. 

The following gentlemen were elected Ordinary Fellows : — John 
Forrest Dewar, Esq., 52, Great King Street ; Henry Marshall, Esq., 
Edinburgh. 



The Phytological Club 
(In connexion with the Pharmaceutical Society.) 

November 7, 1853. — R. Bentley, Esq., President, in the chair. 

Donations to the herbarium were announced; viz., parcels of Bri- 
tish plants from Messrs. Deane, Muskett, and Reynolds, of London ; 
Mr. A. W. Bennett, of Brockham ; Mr. Payne, of Bridgewater ; Mr, 
Penney, of Swanage; Mr. O. Corder, of North Shields ; Mr. Morgan, 
ofLlandilo; Messrs. Baxter, Moss, Walker, Tovey, Houlton, Med- 
ley, and Gissing, of Worcester. 

Mr, T. Baxter, of Worcester, sent an account of his discovery, in 
August last, of Anachai'is Alsinastrum in the Valley of the Severn ; 
which has already been recorded in the ' Phytologist' (iv, llOi). 

Medical Property of Osmunda regalis. 

R. T, Bywater, Esq., M.R.C.S,, of Coniston, communicated a note 
upon the popular use of Osmunda regalis. In Westmoreland, and 
also the adjoining division of Lancashire known as Lancashire North 
of the Sands, the rhizomes of Osmunda regalis are in high popular 
esteem as a remedial agent. The plant is vulgarly known under the 
name of "bog onion." It is used in the following way, as an exter- 
nal application for bruises, sprains, &c. : — The rhizomes are beaten, 
and being covered with '' cold spring water," allowed to macerate all 
night, the resulting thick starchy fluid is then used to bathe the 
affected parts. 

Impatiens Noli-me-tangere at Ambleside. 

Mr. Reynolds, in presenting specimens of Impatiens Noli-me- 
tangere from its well-known station at Ambleside, took occasion to 
allude to the doubts which have been thrown upon its claim to be 
considered native, both there and in other localities. Botanists who 
have given an opinion upon the Ambleside station for the plant, have 
usually done so in an uncertain manner, and probably have con- 
sidered that the peculiar property of its seed-vessels required the 
exercise of such caution, in the absence of direct evidence proving its 
indigenous character. Such evidence, however, exists in the fact that 
the locality is recorded by Ray upwards of 160 years back. In his 
Synopsis (1690) it is thus mentioned : — the synonymes are given and 
afterwards it is said — "We observed it on the banks of Winander- 
mere near Ambleside. By the cloth-rnill in Saterthwaite parish, 
Lancashire, and in many places of Westmorland, Mr. Lawson," (p. 



31 



209.) This proves that the plant was at that period thoroughly 
established in the district. — R. R. 



LiNNEAN Society. 

Anniversary Meeting^ May 24, 1853. — Kobert Brown, Esq., Presi- 
dent, in the chair. 

This day, the Anniversary of the birth of Linneus, and that 
appointed by the Charter for the Election of Council and Officers, the 
President opened the business of the Meeting, and the Secretary 
read notices of the following Members who had died since the last 
Anniversary. 

John Marten Cripps, Esq., F.S.A. ; Philip Derbishire, M.D. ; the 
Rev. Edward Duke, M.A., F.S.A. ; the Rev. Henry Hasted, M.A. ; 
Charles Morgan Lemann, M.D. ; Gideon Algernon Mantell, LL.D., 
F.R.S., ;F.G.S., F.S.A. &c.; Mr. Donald Munro; Jonathan Pereira, 
M.D., F.R.S. ; James Francis Stephens, Esq.; Thomas Thomson, 
M.D., F.R.S. Lond. and Edinb. ; Frederick Thomas Wintle, M.D. ; 
the Baron Leopold von Buch ; Achille Richard ; Mr. William 
Gardiner. 

The Secretary also announced that fifteen Fellows and two Foreign 
Members had been elected since the last Anniversary. 

Election of Officers. 

At the election which subsequently took place, Thomas Bell, Esq., 
was elected President; William Yarrell, Esq., was re-elected Trea- 
surer ; John Joseph Bennett, Esq., Secretary ; and Richard Taylor, 
Esq., Under-Secretary. The following five Fellows were elected into 
the Council in the room of others going out: Francis Boott, M.D. ; 
William John Burchell, D.C.L. ; William Spence, Esq. ; Francis 
Walker, Esq., and Robert Wight, M.D. 

Portrait of Linneus. 

Among the presents announced was a portrait of Linneus, copied 
by Prof. Pasch from the original by Rosliu, in the possession of the 
Royal Acadaray of Sciences at Stockholm, for Archbishop Troil, by 
him presented to Sir Joseph Banks, and now presented to the Society 
by Robert Brown, Esq., President ; for which the special thanks of 
the Society were directed to be given. 



32 



Vote of thanks to the late President. 

It was moved by Dr. Wallich, seconded by Dr. Boott, and unani- 
mously resolved : — That the most grateful and cordial thanks of the 
Society be offered to Mr. Brown for the admirable manner in which, 
for more than three years, he has conducted the business of the 
Society as its President ; together with the great and sincere regret 
of the Members that advancing years and the infirmities attending on 
them should have induced him to relinquish an oflBce, in which it 
would have been their earnest desire long to have availed themselves 
of his invaluable services. 

Motacilla alba, 

Mr. Borrer, jun., F.L.S., exhibited specimens of a rare English 
bird, the continental white wagtail (Motacilla alba), killed at Lancing 
in Sussex, in April, 1853. 

New British Ferns. 

Mr. Newman, F.L.S., exhibited specimens of two species of ferns 
found in Scotland, and not hitherto noticed as belonging to the 
British Flora : one of which (the Polypodium rhaeticum of the ' Flore 
Frangaise,' but not of Linneus) he believes to be the Polypodium 
alpestre of Hoppe ; the other he considers to be new, and proposed to 
call it P. flexile. (See Phytol. 974). 



Correction of a previous error. 



I am indebted to my friend Mr. Doubleday for pointing out a cleri- 
cal error in the notice of Mr. Moore's Handbook, at line 9 of page 
1158 of last number: the word " uliginosa" should have been written 
" glandulosa." This correction is important to the right understand- 
ing of the notice in question. 

Edwakd Newman. 



33 



Oil Salix acutifolia, Willd. ; and its Discovery in Britain. 
By John G. Baker, Esq. 

Amongst an extensive series of willows collected in diflFerent parts 
of Cleveland, by Wm. Mudd, of Ayton, during the past season, and 
sent to me for examination a fisw weeks ago, were specimens of a 
plant differing widely in character from any species previously 
recorded as an inhabitant of Britain. There was no difficulty in 
deciding that it belonged to the Pruinosae, a group which has been 
supposed to be without any representative in our indigenous Flora. 
So that, upon further investigating the subject, through the medium 
of my valued correspondent, I was much pleased to elicit the fact, 
that the plant in question grows wild (though at present confined to 
a single tree or bush in each station) in three localities in Cleveland ; 
and that it is sufficiently well known to the inhabitants of the district, 
to be distinguished by them under the name of " black sallow." 

Perhaps, when it is sought for more specially, it may be found 
elsewhere in greater abundance. But, though at present only known 
to occur so sparingly, the character and position of its localities, far 
away from the vicinity of any cultivated willows or osier-grounds, 
would seem to prevent the supposition, which might otherwise be 
entertained, of its having been introduced by artificial agency. The 
river Leven is formed by the union of two branches, which unite near 
the town of Stokesley. Of these, the southern and larger takes its 
rise beneath the culminating points of the oolitic moorlands which fill 
up the more considerable part of the North-east of Yorkshire, and 
flows towards the North-west. The northern branch is smaller in 
size, and of lesser elevation. It commences below Codhill Bog, near 
Roseberry Topping, the station for Cyperus fuscus and Carex Per- 
soonii ; and flows down Kildale, amongst woods which produce 
Cypripedium Calceolus, past the villages of Eastby and Ayton. From 
the neighbourhood of Roseberry Topping, along the slope of Ayton 
Moor, to the western extremity of Kildale, extends Airyholme Wood, 
a favourite locality for lichens, on rocks and trees. Through the cen- 
tre of the wood, almost parallel with the Kildale branch of the Leven, 
flows a small tributary stream. Amongst the underwood along its 
margin, not far from where it leaves the wood, occurs the first bush 
of the willow, at an elevation above the sea of about 700 feet. The 
second grows on the bank of the main stream, about half a mile above 
VOL. V. F 



34 

its junction with the x4iryholtne branch, in company with S. alba and 
other species. The third station is on the bank of the same stream, 
considerably nearer the village of Great Ayton, and has been noted 
for the last thirty or forty years as producing the " black sallow." 
Previously to 1840, three well-grown trees were in existence in this 
locality ; but about that date they were each cut down to the ground, 
by a resident labourer, who was, doubtless, unaware of the damage 
he was committing. But, fortunately, from the remains of one of 
them a sucker sprung up, which has by this time grown into a tall 
bush, which flowers periodically ; so that the station was not entirely 
destroyed. From this alone, a stamiuate plant, have flowering speci- 
mens been procured. 

Almost all diversified and intricate genera appear to subdivide 
themselves into groups or sections, each composed of species more 
intimately allied to each other than to the members of any other 
group, which, as it were, radiate from primary or typical species as 
from a centre. Being natural in their character, these may usually 
be understood without difficulty ; and when once appreciated they 
are of infinite assistance in gaining a correct idea of species. But, 
when the species possess a wide range of variation, it is almost impos- 
sible to decide with certainly how many each group contains ; or 
whether a series of forms comprises a group of species, or a single 
species only. This is eminently the case with the genus Salix. The 
group to which the Cleveland willow belongs (Pruinosae, Koch) may 
easily be distinguished. The plants which it comprises are charac- 
terized by sessile lateral catkins, the scales of which are discoloured 
at the tip, by yellow anthers, by the pale yellowish hue of their inner 
bark in the summer and autumn, and by the glaucous bloom which 
usually covers their branches, especially in a dried state. They are 
trees, or tall shrubs, with long, wand-like glabrous or hairy branches ; 
lanceolate-acuminate, glanduloso-serrate leaves, usually downy when 
young, but invariably glabrous and indurated when fully matured ; 
narrow female catkins, with subsessile ovaries, elongate styles, and 
linear-oblong stigmas ; and broad, blunt male aments, the flowers of 
which each possess two free filaments. By Koch this group is placed 
third in order, between the Amygdalinae and Purpureae. In the 
arrangement of Fries it composes, with S. lanata, S. Lapponum, and 
other .species which do not inhabit Britain, the second section of his 
subgenus Vetrix, which also includes the Viminales with S. acumi- 
nata and S. holosericea, Willd. In the Willdenovian ' Species Plan- 



35 

tarum ' four species are enumerated. Koch reduces the number to 
two, which he thus designates and defines : — 

" S. acutifolia (Willd. Sp. iv. p. 688.) — Aments sessile, minutely 
bracteated, capsules ovate-conic glabrous sessile, gland protruding 
beyond the base of the ovary, styles elongate, stigmas linear-oblong, 
leaves linear-lanceolate elongate-acuminate, like the young branches 
glabrous, stipules lanceolate-acuminate. River-banks. March. S. 
violacea, Sinith in Rees' Cyclop, p. 38 (not Willd.) Bark of the 
branches dark red, covered with a dense and caesious bloom." — Koch, 
Synop. Fl. Germ. p. 645. 

" S. daphnoides (Vill. Dauph. iii. 765.) — Aments sessile, minutely 
bracteated, capsules ovate-conic glabrous sessile, gland protruding 
beyond the base of the ovary, styles elongate, stigmas oblong, leaves 
oblong-lanceolate acuminate glanduloso-serrate glabrous, when young 
villose like the young branches, stipules semicordate. In subalpine 
valleys descending into the plains with the rivers and in the marshes 
of Northern Germany. March, April. It varies with the branches 
covered with caesious bloom and destitute of it ; with the young 
branches subglabrous and very hairy ; with the female catkins densely 
villose, the hairs equalling the stigmas, and less villose with shorter 
hairs ; and with the leaves broader or narrow'er. S. prsecox, Hoppe 
in Sturm. D. fl. i. 25. Willd. Sp. PI. iv. p. 670, is the ordinary form 
with glabrous branches. S. cinerea, Willd. Sp. PL 460, after Link. 
H. Berol. ii. p. 414, is the variet}' with hairy branches, S. pomera- 
nica, Willd. Suppl. p. 60, is a variety with narrower leaves and thin- 
ner aments." — Koch, Synop. Fl. Germ. p. 646. 

Fries, in his latest work (Sum. Veg. Scand. vol. i. p. 56), marks 
these two species as doubtfully distinct, and does not regard true S. 
acutifolia as indigenous within his limits ; but he considers that the 
Scandinavian daphnoides (Herb. Norm. vi. 51) somewhat approaches 
it in character. Ledebour (Fl. Altaica, vol. iv. p. 260) mentions that 
Livonian examples of S. praecox, Hoppe, have lanceolate stipules ; 
and that specimens of S. acutifolia collected on Mount Ararat agree 
with the European praecox in the form of their leaves. But Koch 
(Syn. Fl. Germ. 1. c.) says of S. acutifolia : — " It very much resembles 
the following species (S. daphnoides), yet differs in its mode of growth 
and the form of its leaves, and in my opinion it is truly distinct." In 
this view of the case Mr. Borrer, who has studied both under cultiva- 
tion, concurs ; and he adds that S. daphnoides is a more handsome 
shrub than S. acutifolia, and flowers more freely. 

Before I received the willow from Cleveland, my herbarium con- 



36 

tamed examples of S. daphnoides, named upon good authority, both 
from Germany and Scandinavia ; but I was unacquainted with S. acu- 
tifolia, except by descriptions. At first, from its somewhat hairy 
young leaves (the leaves and stipules being scarcely narrower than 
those of the Scandinavian daphnoides), I supposed that the Cleveland 
plant might belong to a narrow-leaved form of that species. But 
upon sending it to Mr. Boner and the Rev. J, E. Leefe, they both 
decided that it was S. acutifolia; the former kindly favouring me with 
a specimen showing that the young leaves of that species are also 
somewhat hairy ; and the latter taking the pains to ascertain its iden- 
tity with authenticated examples from Professor Koch. 

So that with a description of Salix acutifolia, as it occurs in Bri- 
tain, I will conclude. 

S. acutifolia, Willd. — A tall bush, or shrub, moderately branched ; 
inner bark lemon-coloured in the latter half of the year ; branches 
long and wand-like, glossy, glabrous, dark purple, covered with a 
loose, easily disturbed coating of csesious bloom, especially when 
pressed ; stipules large, persistent, lanceolate-acuminate, glanduloso- 
serrate ; petioles glandular like those of the Pentandrae ; leaf-buds 
somewhat downy and villose ; leaves elongate-lanceolate, much acu- 
minated, dark green above, lighter and somewhat glaucous beneath, 
rigid in texture, very brittle when dry, prominently veined, mode- 
rately glanduloso-crenate-serrate. Female flowers unknown. Male 
catkins lateral, subsessile, bracteated at the base, sparingly produced, 
oblong, rounded at the apex ; scales shaggy ; filaments two, free ; 
anthers yellow when matured, afterwards gray. Amongst British 
willows, most resembling the Purpureas in its habit of growth ; the 
Fragiles, in the shape and serrature of its leaves ; and Salix Lappo- 
num (S. arenaria, Auct. Brit.) or S. lanata, in its female flowers ; but 
very unlikely to be mistaken for, or confounded with, any of them. 

John G. Baker, 
Market Place, Thirsk, 

December 12, 1853. 



Contributions towards a History of an Irish Asplenium, considered 
as a distinct Species, and as entitled to a place in the British 
Flora. By Edward Newman. 

It is not presumed that the history of this beautiful fern can be 
worked out from the materials here collected. Their tendency will. 



37 



however, be sufficiently suggestive to induce pteridologists to examine 
the question, for their own satisfaction j and I need scarcely say how 




Asplenium acutum (?). Natural size of a small frond gathered on Turk Mountain, by Dr. Allchin. 



38 

much obliged I shall feel for any evidence on the subject, be its ten- 
dency what it may. 

I have arranged my extracts, &c., under four heads, which I have 
called Geographical, Bibliographical, Botanical, and Cultural; intro- 
ducing scarcely any new matter, but objecting to statements which I 
believe erroneous, and to conclusions which are not in accordance 
with the premises. 

Geographical. 

Asplenium acutum occurs in the Azores (v. s.), Madeira (v. s.), and 
the Canary Islands (Willdenow, Sprengel), Portugal (Wellwitsch), 
Spain (Willdenow, Sprengel), Italy (Sprengel), Illyria (Sprengel), 
Istria, Croatia, Sclavonia, and Hungary (Sadler), and Ireland (Mac- 
kay, V. s. ; Andrews, v. s. ; Allman, v. s. ; Allchin, v. s.) In those 
instances where the v. s. is attached, I have examined the specimens, 
and entertain no doubt as to their belonging to a single species. 
With the exception of size, there is no disparity amongst them : 
the Atlantic specimens are generally larger than the European or 
Irish. 

Bihliograph ical. 

a. Extracts from authors who unhesitatingly treat the species as 
distinct from Adiantum nigrum : — 

1. Ray. 

Filix minor longifolia, tarsis raris, pinnulis longis, tenuissimis et 
oblongis laciniis fimbriatis D. Sherard. Syn. ii. 51. 12 non ramosa 
tenerior, pinnulis vere capillaceis, seu Filicis genus ex Hibernia mol- 
liusculum, foliis tenuissime pennatis. Pluk. Aim. 150. Mant. 78. 
T. 282. f 3. On the Mountains of Mourn, in the County of Down, 
in Ireland. — Synopsis, 3rd edit. p. 127, date 1724. 

2. Willdenow. 

96 Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum. 

Frons plerumque bipinnata, quandoque inferne tri- et superne 
bipinnata. A sequente tamen satis diversum : pinnis nunquam 
caudatis, id est longissime acuminatis, pinnulis non acuminate 
dentatis, et fronde nunquam ex toto triplicate pinnata. — Sp, PL 
V. 347. 



39 



97 Asplenium acutum. 

A. frondibus triplicato-pinnatis, pinnis oblongo-lanceolatis lon- 
gissirae acuminatis, pinnulis pinnatifido-incisis, laciniis apice acute 
subbidentatis, soris demum confluentibus. W. 

Asplenium acutum. Boiy in Litt, 

Asplenium Adiantura-uigrura. Bory ess. sur les isles fortun. 313. 

Spitziger Streifenfarrn. W. 

Habitat in rupibus TenerifFae, inque Hispania 1^ (v. s.) 

Duplo majus pi'secedente et ex to to triplicalo-pinnatum. Apex 
pinnarum lougissirae acuminatus W. — Species Plantar um, v. 347, 
date 1810. 

3. Sadler. 

Asplenium acutum. Bory. 

Radix et stipites Aspl. Ad. nigri : radix quippe dense fibrosa fus- 
cescens. Stipites ex una radice plures primum cum rhacliide virides, 
demum profunde purpurascenti - fuscescentes, nitidi, supra sulcati. 
Frons — siccatione facillime nigvescens — |- — 1 pedalis, acutissime acu- 
minata, inferius perfecte tripinnata, pinnis propriis acute incisis, in 
medio bipinnata, in apice rhachis longe producta, solum acute den- 
tato-incisa est, quod idem de rhachidibus propriis pinnarum oblongo- 
lanceolatarum longe v. longissime produclarum valet. Lacinise omnes 
lanceolatse, acutae, acutissimae et profunde inciso-dentatae. Sori bre- 
ves, solitarii in laciniis, has demum obtegentes. Indusia membrana- 
cea. — Adumhratio Epiphyllospermarum Hungari(B, &c., p. 28, date 
1820. 

4. Sprengel. 

143 Asplenium acutum, Bory. W. 

A. foliis oblongo-lanceolatis acuminatis, foliolis inciso-dentatis, 
dentibus subbidenticulatis. Illyria. Italia sup. Hispania. 
Teneriffa. — Systema. Vegetabilium, iv. (pars 1) 90, date 1827. 

5. SZADLER. 

Asplenium acutum. — Szadler A^ Magyar Plantak szaritott gyujte- 

menye, fasc. xi. No. 9, date . (The fascicuH of this work range 

from 1823—30. I do not know the date of fasc. xi.) 

6. Sadler. 
1 1 Asplenium acutum, Bory. 

Fronde ovato-triangulari longe acuminata, pinnis pinnulisque 



40 

oblongo-laceolatis longe acurainatis, pinnis propriis et laciniis 
lanceolatis, approximatis, acute et profunde inciso- dentatis ; den- 
tibus subbidenticulatis. 

Fructificat Jul. Aug. 

Specimina a nobis et aliis in Hungaria lecta omnino cum illis 
conveniunt quae in herbariis diversis Viennensibus intueri licuit et 
quae cl. Kaulfusz in Teneriffa lecta amice communicavit. Inveni- 
tur hsBC planta quoque in herbario antique eel. Crantz nunc Uni- 
versitatis Pesthanae quin locus natalis notaretur. 

Habitat in Croatia et Slavonia (ubi ? Kit. msc), ad Thermas 
Herculis (Kit. et Rochel), in lauretis ad Flumen, in Breyda et 
Ponsal, tum in laureto ad Abbatiam in adscensu ad Montem 
majorem Istriae, loco — per mare — Flumine hora saltem distante 
(ego). — De Filicihus Veris Hungarics, p. 31, date 1830. 

7. Presl. 

Asplenium acntum, Bory. — Tentamen Pteridographice, p. 107, 
date 1836. 

8. Wellwitsch. 

Asplenium acutum, Bory. — Wellwifschii Iter Lusitanicum In 
rupibus totcB EstramadunB milgare, Nov. 1839. 

b. Extracts from authors who have treated this fern as possibly or 
certainly a variety of Adiantum nigrum : — 

1. DiLLENIUS. 

(In hac planta seminalia nulla observare contigit, unde an species 
vere distincta sit, dubium videtur. Forsitan non nisi varietas est, 
Adianti nigri officinarum J. B. loci umbrositati originem debens, nam 
in spelunca, quam radii solares nunquam illustrabant, nascebatur. 
Sane vero si varietas sit, singularis ea est et valde speciosa). — Dille- 
nius in Rag, Sgiiopsis, 3rd edit. p. 127, date 1724. 

2. Sir J. E. Smith. 

Asplenium Adiantum nigrum /3. 

Sherard's original specimen of the variety B, preserved in his her- 
barium at Oxford, is truly elegant, of a delicate membranous texture, 
the leaflets palmate finely laciniated. Plukenet's figure by no means 
does it justice. No fructification is discernable. — Smith, Eng. Fl. 
iv. 311, date 1828. 



41 



3. Mackay. 

I found in 1805, on the limestone rocks at Mucruss, a beautiful 
and delicate variety of Adiantum - nigrum with fronds tripinnate 
throughout, or with pinnules deeply and finely laciniated. It was 
subsequently found by Miss Hutchins and Dr. Taylor, and Mr. W. 
Andrews lately gave me a specimen collected by him in 1835, on a 
mountain called Cahir Conree, six miles from Tralee. — Flora Hiber- 
nica, p. 343. 

4. Francis. 

Sir J. E. Smith, in conformity with the old authors, makes another 
variety, diflfering only from the common plant in having long fronds 
and distant pinnae ; but I leave any one to say if it be anything more 
than a drawn-up plant of the common species, found, as it was, solitary 
in a dark cave. — Analysis, p. 50, date 1842. 

5. Dr. Allmann. 

There may be some doubt as to the necessity of considering it 
separately from the common form of Adiantum-nigrum, for though the 
extreme forms are so remarkably distinct as to strike the most casual 
observer, yet these extremes are connected by such numerous grada- 
tions, by which they run into each other, that I believe it to be impos- 
sible to say where the common variety terminates and the rarer one 
commences : the great elegance, however, of well-marked specimens 
of the rarer variety, and the facility with which they may be distin- 
guished from the common form, seems to render a separate notice of 
the fern desirable. — British Ferns, p. 260. 

6. Newman. 

Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum, var. acutum. — British Ferns, p. 359, 
date 1844. 

7. Hooker & Arnott. 

A variety of Asp. Adiantum-nigrum with linear pinnules is found 
by Mr. Wilson in Ireland, at Muckruss by Mr. Mackay. — Brit. Flora, 
p. 574. 

8. Moore. 

Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum y. acutum ; fronds tripinnate through- 
out ; ultimate pinnules cut into linear sharply toothed segments. 
Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum var. acutum, Newm. 259. Asplenium 
acutum, Bory. — Asplenium Virgilii, Bory. — Tarachia acuta, Presl. * * 
VOL. IV. G 



42 

The most distinct is acutum, which is a remarkably elegant plant ; — 
chiefly found in Ireland and in the western counties of England, and 
seems raLve.— Handbook of British Ferns, p. 158, date 1853. [I men- 
tion this work simply from a feeling of courtesy, as it would not be 
right to pass over a notice in which my late friend Bory's authority 
and my own are cited. It must, however, be observed that the plant 
has not been recorded as growing in England, and that Mr. Moore's 
figure evidently represents the commoner species. I cannot, there- 
fore, regard Mr. Moore as expressing any opinion on the specific 
identit}' of a fern with which he appears to be unacquainted.] 

Botanical. 

First. — It appears to me that Dillenius, Smith, and Francis exer- 
cise sound botanical discretion in refusing to establish a species on 
the faith of a single frond, and that barren, and grown in a dark cave. 
In these three facts we carmot fail to see strong reasons against such 
a course. But, while admitting the justice of the conclusions which 
these botanists draw from the very scanty materials within their reach, 
we must place greater confidence still in the conclusions which Bory, 
Willdenow, Sadler, Sprengel, Presl, and Wellwitsch have agreed in 
drawing, from materials the most perfect and complete that could be 
desired. Just in proportion as it was right to reject such scanty evi- 
dence, so would it be absolutely absurd to weigh the conclusions 
drawn from that single barren frond against those founded on copious 
series of mature, normal, and highly fructified fronds. It is worthy of 
especial observation, that Bory, Willdenow, and Sadler calmly and 
philosophically consider the hypothesis of uniting the two species, 
and, assisted by their abundant materials, unhesitatingly reject it. 
Sprengel, Presl, and Wellwitsch do not even entertain the question. 
The argument that the peculiarities of the fern are due to situation, or 
want of fruit, falls entirely to the ground when we learn that such con- 
ditions were purely exceptional. Dr. Allmann's opinion is, however, 
of great value, and is not liable to the objection of being formed on 
insufiicient data. It is noticed again below. 

Secondly. — The occurrence of the same plant in Teneriffe, Madeira, 
Portugal, Spain, Italy, Illyria, and Hungary, — countries in most of 
which Adiantum-nigrum occurs, and has never been confounded with 
it, — is a. prima facie argument in favour of its distinctness. 

Thirdly. — In IrelaiwJ, also, it is additional to Adiantum-nigrum, 
instead of replacing it : Adiantum-nigrum is common ; acutum, local, 
and noticeable as a comparative rarity. 



43 

Fourthly. — Although Dr. Allmann speaks of intermediate forms, 
and seems to regard the two species as passing into each other, by 
means of these; I may state that I have carefully searched herbaria 
ibr such intermediate specimens, but have never found them. 

Fijthlij. — If we take a series of acutum, arranged according to size, 
we shall find that certain of them are of the same magnitude as Adi- 
antum-nigrum, while others are abundantly larger, and some are also 
smaller : but all equally differ from Adiantum-nigrum in the multi- 
plicity and acuteness of their divisions ; the smaller specimens being 
equally attenuate, divided, and acute with the larger. In Adiantum- 
nigrum, on the contrary, the smaller fronds are blunted, and less 
divided than the larger ones. 

Cullural. 

Dr. Mackay dissuaded me from giving Asplenium acutum as a spe- 
cies in the second edition of my ' British Ferns,' by stating that it was 
nothing more than a remarkably attenuated, divided, and elegant form 
of Adiantum-nigrum, and returned to the ordinary state under culti- 
vation. I am far from convinced that the facts of the case were 
noticed with sufficient care. I rather incline to regard that eminent 
botanist as having been misled by the unintentional transposition of 
pots or labels. Certain it is that such a disposition to assume a new 
form, or, as it might be termed, to revert to a normal form, has not been 
observed by other cultivators ; the tendency of cultivation being to 
develope and perfect those very characters of greater size, greater 
amount of subdivision, greater attenuation of parts, &c., which origi- 
nally served to distinguish it from its congeners. 



Since I undertook the investigation of this subject, I have obtained 
the valuable assistance of Mr. Watson and Mr. Babiugton ; and this 
will probably lead to a second paper, in the March number of the 
' Phytologist.' 

Edward Newman. 
9, Devonshire St., Bisliopsgate, 
January, 1854. 



44 



Notes on the ' Cyhele Britannica^ Volume III. 
By William Borber, Esq., F.R.S., &c. 

(These Notes were kindly given for my use by Mr. Borrer. And 
seeing that most of them have the valuable recommendation of being 
either additions to knowledge previously on record, or corrections of 
imperfect and erroneous records, I requested Mr. Borrer's permission 
to forward them to the * Phytologist,' which he has allowed me to do. 
—H. a Watson.) 



Page. 

10. Potamogeionflahellatus. Add to the enumeration of counties 
Warwick. Mr. Kirk found it at Coventry, and was the 
first to point out its difference from the true P. zosteraceus, 
Fries. 

14. Potamogeton zosterifoliiis. I have never seen a Sussex spe- 
cimen. It is by mistake, no doubt, that it is said to grow at 
Henfield, 

18. Potamogeton heterophyllus and (p. 22) P. plantagineus. In 
the 'Phytologist' for 1852 (iv. 637) these two species are 
said to occur on the ridge of Tilgate Forest, about a mile 
South of Balcombe. Having never before heard of the for- 
mer as a Sussex plant, and suspecting that the Sussex spe- 
cimens that have been named P. plantagineus belonged, in 
fact, to P. oblongus ; I applied to one of the writers of the 
memoir referred to for specimens of the plant, or directions 
to the spot producing them ; but received no answer. I 
must, therefore, still hesitate to regard them as natives of the 
county. 

84. Eriophorum latifolium. Whatever the E. polystachion of 

Dartmoor may be, this is a native of Devon. It grows in the 
deep valley on the right of the ascent of Haldon, in the way 
from Exeter to Chudleigh : W. B. 

85. Eriophorum gracile. Mr. Woods's specimens, of which I 

possess one, prove his Yorkshire plant to be this species. 
Hagnaby, in the ' Manual,' is no doubt an error of the pen or 
of the press. The Sussex plant, as well as Don's from the 
Highlands of Scotland, has long since been ascertained to be 
a slender variety of E. angustifolium, Roth, E. polystachion, 
Linn. 



45 



Page. 
87. Carex Davalliana. A specimen given me by Mr. Forster 
enables me to vouch for the identity of the Lansdown plant 
with specimens from Switzerland, communicated by Smith 
himself, 
98. Carex elongata. Kent, on the banks of the Medway, at Tun- 
bridge ; shown me by Mr. Jenner. 

152. Phalaris paradoxa. Not extinct in August, 1851 ; but I saw 
but few plants of it. 

161. Alopecurus fulvus. I saw it, last year, in the place near 
Chichester where Mr. Newbould discovered it ; and Mr. 
Woods has observed it near Maresfield. 

169. Agrostis setacea. When a young botanist, I mistook a variety 
of A. vulgaris for this species, which was hence reported as 
growing on wet commons in Sussex. One extensive patch, 
discovered by Mr. Woods and myself, on the forest, near 
Heathj&eld, is all that I have seen of the true plant in this 
county. 

241. Hordeum sylvaticum. River Hill, near Sevenoaks, Kent : 
W.B. 

279. Asplenium lanceolatum grows, or grew, in Kent as well as 
Sussex, in the vicinity of Tunbridge Wells. 

307. Equisetum hyemale. I have specimens from South Kent, 
sent me by the Rev. G. E. Smith. 

312. Bammculus confusus. Somersetshire, Shirehampton ; Hants, 
Hayling Island : W. B. 

313. Ranunculus tripartitus. Shown me, in 1852, by Mr. W. W. 
Reeves, near Tunbridge Wells, on the Kentish side of the 
boundary of the counties, where he had observed it several 
years, but had never found capillary leaves. I have, however, 
the satisfaction of having such produced in plenty in my own 
garden, whither a plant was brought from Esher, in 1849. 

374. Banunculus Jluitans. West Sussex : W. B. 

315. Fumaria micrantha, F. Vaillantii, and F. parvr/lora. I 
have not seen a Sussex specimen of either of these ; but there 
is good authority, Mr. Mitten's, for the first having been 
gathered near Lewes. 

317. Farsetia incana. This species sprung up, about fifty years 
ago, at Lewes (as it is said to have done, somewhat earlier, at 
Weymouth), on ground broken up for building on. I knew 



46 



Page. 



it for a few years as a weed in the recently formed gardens ; 
but I believe it has long since disappeared. 

319. Barharea stricta. Perhaps I too hastily set down this plant 
as growing in Northamptonshire, having only seen what I 
took for it in passing on the railway, in 1842, and not having 
been able to see it on several subsequent occasions. It is 
plentiful in several parts of Yorkshire. The form of B. vul- 
garis with spreading fruit, which has been called B. arcuata, 
is probably not uncommon. I find it in Sussex and Essex. 
B. vulgaris, var. intermedia, of Buxton, in the ' Manchester 
Botanical Guide,' which has been mistaken by some for B. 
stricta, is nearest to B. vulgaris, but presents some remark- 
able diflferences. I have not had the opportunity of cultivat- 
ing it. 

333. Viola stagnina. I cannot account for this plant in Mr. 
Leighton's garden, as from me. I am persuaded that I never 
had it until Mr. Babington sent it me, in 1851, from Bottis- 
ham Fen. 

329. Rubus snherectus. Woods near Lindfield, and by Burton 
mill-pond near Petworth, both in Sussex : W. B. 

333. Trifolium strictum. Downs, and balks of corn-land, in the 
Canton de la Moye, Jersey, 1851 : W. B. 

346. Poterium muricatum. Above the Culvers, Isle of Wight ; 

Eartham, Sussex : W. B. At Eartham it forms part of the 
ancient turf, as I think it does also in one place either in 
Essex or in Cambridgeshire, shown me by Mr. Gibson. Near 
Betchworth, Surrey, near Saffron Walden, and in the Isle of 
Wight, it occupies fields that have been more or less recently 
under tillage. 

347. Pyrus pinnatifida. According to the Ordnance Map, the 

station observed by Mr. Reeves is within the county of 
Hants. There are several plants, among abundance of P. 
Aria and P. aucuparia, between which I cannot but suspect 
it a hybrid. They are cut periodically as underwood. 
349. Epilohium lanceolatum has been a weed in my garden for 
thirty years, at least ; how introduced, I never knew. It has 
recently found its way to some neighbouring hedge-banks ; 
and it will probably become permanently established. I 
have observed the species in Guernsey and Jersey. 



47 



Page. 

349. Clmjfonia perfoliata, Linn. In the ' Phjtologist ' for 1853 
(iv. 982) are some remarks on the tendency of this plant to 
become naturalized. It comes up plentifully every year in 
ray garden, and on a sandy bank adjoining, facing the South, 
but mostly shaded by bushes, to which it escaped previously 
to 1817. It is rather a startling assertion (Phytol. 1. c.) that 
Baxter's figure in ' British Phsenogamous Botany,' vol. iv. p. 
253, of C. alsinoides is a remarkably good one of C. perfoli- 
ata ! I have visited the Derbyshire locality from which Mr. 
Baxter's specimen came, and vv'itnessed the accuracy of the 
account that he has published of the situation. It is a mile 
or more from the Chatsvvorth gardens, in which, moreover, I 
was assured that the plant was unknown until it was brought 
in from the wood. 

349. Seclum siellatum, Linn., is still more decidedly naturahzed 
than Claytonia perfoliala, on the same bank, and others in the 
neighbourhood, where it is found in myriads, either alive or 
dead, at all seasons. It is probable that these two plants 
will keep their ground when I and my garden shall be for- 
gotten ; and it were well, for the information of future bota- 
nists and Cybelists, that their escape, and other such-like 
facts, should be placed on some permanent record, whilst yet 
their accuracy can be ascertained. 

353. Sedum elegans, Lej. The plant that I understand as intended 
by this name is S. rupestre, " Linn^^ 8m. The Sedum said 
to be from Jersey has narrow, upright petals, almost white, 
and leaves as green as those of S. virens. I have another 
Sedum, believed to be from Devonshire, with petals equally 
narrow and upright, but of a pale yellow, and gray leaves, 
remarkably imbricated in rows. I suspect this to be S. ano- 
petalum, DeC, which Koch places among the yellow-flowered 
species. 

376. Helleborus viridis. Truly native in woods and thickets in the 
vicinity of Petersfield, both in Hants and in Sussex, as well 
as in Yorkshire. Its stations in East Sussex (Woodmancote 
and Henfield) are unsatisfactory. 

381. Lepidium Draha. Lake-Lancashire. A patch by the Ulver- 
stone road, at Newby Bridge, 1853 : W. B. 

325. Lychnis alpina. I had the pleasure of visiting this plant in 
Hobcartin, last June (1853). It is indubitably a native there, 



48 

Page. 

on perpendicular walls of rock, mostly inaccessible. I could 
reach one root only. 

401. Geranium sylvaticum. By Coniston Water : W.B. Although, 
my attention not having been called to it, I do not recollect 
it, I suspect it is frequent in that part of Lancashire, as it is 
in the valleys of the rest of the Lake district. 

419. Fragaria elatior. Several years ago, the landlord of the 
High-Force Lin, Teesdale (Mr. Scott, I think), a person well 
acquainted with the plants of his district, showed me there a 
tall variety of F. vesca, not of rare occurrence elsewhere, as 
F. elatior of Baines's ' Yorkshire Flora.' 

419. Agrimonia odorata. Start Point, Devon ; near Gwithian, 

Cornwall, Mr. Joseph Woods, who has given me a specimen. 

„ Rosa hihernica. Cumberland, decidedly native. Between 

Buttermere and Scale Hill, a single bush observed, 1845 ; 

hedges near Lorton, 185-3 : W. B. 

431. Polycarpon tetraphyllum. I gathered this, a few years ago, 
on the Neck of Portland. 
„ Sedum tm-gidum, DeC. I see reason to doubt the accuracy 
of my former idea of this plant, having received from the 
Kew garden a living specimen, so named, with much more 
turgid leaves, and more rounded petals, than the plant af our 
Sussex villages. This I am now inclined to regard as a 
rather enlarged form of S. micranthum, Haw. ; still sup- 
posing it distinct from the Malvern S. album (Haworth's S. 
teretifolium). 

466. Menziesia CiBvulea. I wrote " among the heath and crow- 

berry" [Empetrum nigrum). The misprint is scarcely worth 
correcting, as it is very probable that the Scotch " cranberry" 
{Vaccinium Vitis-Idaa) grows there too, though I do not 
recollect it. 

467. Pyrola minor. Mr. Reeves and another friend have sent me 
this from the neighbourhood of Canterbury. 

478. Thymus Serpyllum and T. Chamcudrys. Mr. Babington, in 
statements now before the public, recognizes both these 
plants as British. I have found both widely distributed, but 
am inclined to think T. Serpyllum the more general of the 
two. 

482, Galeopsis versicolor. I must have omitted from inadvertence 
to mark this as a Sussex plant. I have met with it, however. 



49 

Page. 

only twice in the county, and in both places sparingly. Like 
Mr. Leighton, I find it coming the same from seed, and that 
dming several years, in my garden ; yet I have seen so many 
intermediate forms in Scotland, that T much suspect it not 
truly a distinct species from G. Tetrahit. 

485. Myosotis sylvatica. Certainly a native of Hants. I have 
gathered it at Lyss, three or four miles from Petersfield. I 
have no knowledge of it as a Sussex plant. 

490. Cyclamen hederifolium. Mr. Saunders kindly showed me 
the one large old root that he discovered. It was in a wild 
wood, where it was very unlikely to have escaped from any 
garden, or to have been placed by human agency ; but it is 
now destroyed, by the construction of a reservoir to supply 
the town of Hastings with water. 

50K, Polygonum maritimum and P. Rail. I think the specimens 
that I have the pleasure of sending will prove the Hampshire 
plant to be true P. maritimum, whether P. Rail is truly dis- 
tinct or not. I had, last year, P. maritimum from Sarnian 
seed, preserving its proper appearance, as do also seedlings 
from it this year, as far as can be judged in their present 
imperfect stage of growth. The last year's plants fruited the 
first season, and perished in the winter. I have P. Raii from 
Forfarshire, from W. Gardiner ; and from Galloway, I am not 
certain from whom. I have gathered it myself in Cornwall, 
Devon, Somerset, Hants, Sussex, Merioneth, Lancashire 
(Fleetwood), and the Channel Islands. 

512. Habenaria hifolia and H. chlorantha. I have seen both of 
these, this summer, among the Lakes. 
„ Habenaria albida. I have seen it in plenty, in diiFerent 
years, in its one Sussex station. 



Henfield, August 1, 1853. 



Wm. Borrer. 



Additional Notes {Oct. 1, 1853.) 
Page. 

17. Potamogeton longifolius. Mr. T. Kirk found it, last month, 
in Ballinabrack River, Lough Corrib ; and sent me recent 
fragments. 
VOL. V. H 



60 



^"•r^'fi^^ 



Page. 
17. Agrimonia odorata. I have now seen this plant in Mr. 
Woods's Devonshire station ; and also at Balcombe, Sussex, 
where it was first observed by the Rev. W. H, Hawker. 

276. Asplenium viride. In the deep cracks of an old brick wall at 
Mickleham, Surrey, where I was shown upwards of twenty 
plants, by a gardener of that neighbourhood, who discovered 
it a few months ago, and had taken away several roots. The 
occurrence of the one root at Danny (Hurst Pierpoint), Sus- 
sex, is not very adequately accounted for by the recorded 
fact, that Ray spent some months there in 1667 — 8. (See 
Phytol. iv. 842, 915, 947). Ceterach officinarum grows in 
several places in that part of Sussex. The statement that 
Polypodium Dryopteris has been found in the neighbourhood 
is, I fear, a mistake. 

504. Euphorbia stricia, Koch. Woolmer Forest, Hants, on recently 
reclaimed corn-land, Rev. W. H. Hawker, who has shown 
me specimens. 



Notices of New Books. 



* Species Filicum ; being Descriptions of all known Ferns. Illus- 
trated with Plates. By Sir William Jackson Hooker, K.H., 
LL.D., F.R.A. & L.S., &c., &c., &c., Vice-President of the Lin- 
nean Society of London, and Director of the Royal Botanic 
Garden of Kew.' Part VI., or Vol. 11. Part 2. London : Wil- 
liam Pamplin, 45, Frith Street, Soho Square. 8vo. 64 pp. 
Letterpress ; 20 Plates. Price 10s. 

Having already expressed our opinion very fully on the delay in 
publishing this work, we abstain from any remarks on that head, and 
simply give the contents of the part before us ; premising that the 
previous part concluded with Hypolepis tenuifolia, the first species of 
the genus. 

Suborder IV. Pteride^. 

Genus IH. (IV. ?). Hypolepis, Bernh. 

Sp. Guianensis, Kl. ; dicksonioides (Cheilanthes dicksonioides, 
Kze.); amaurorachis (Ch. id., Kze.) ; setigera (Ch. id,, Blume) ; 



51 

alpina (Ch. id. Blume) ; resinifera (Ch. id., Blume) ; polypodioides 
(Ch. id., Blume) ; pallida (Ch. id., Blume) ; repens, Pre si ; resistens, 
(Ch. id., Blume) ; parallelogramma (Ch. id., Kze.) ; nigrescens, 
Hook. ; anthriscifolia, Presl ; elata, Presl ; aspera, Presl ; Bergiana 
(Ch. id., Schlecht.) ; rugulosa (Pteris id.. La Bill.) ; Millefolium, 
Hook. ; hostilis, Presl ; Purdieana, Hook. 

Frond rather small, hipinnate. 
Sp. distans (Ch. distans, Col. MSS.) 

Fronds small, deltoid, very compound ; segments very acute or 
cuspidate. Aspidotis, Nutt. 

Sp. Schimperi (Ch. id., Kunze) ; Californica (Aspidotis id., Nutt. 
MSS.) 

Adiantoidea. 

Sp. Capensis (Ch. id., Sw.) 

Fronds with tufted roots, no creeping caudex. Cheilanthoideae. 

Sp. radiata (Adiantum id., Linn., Sw., Willd., &c.) ; pedata. Hook. ; 
spectabilis. Link ; perpaucula (Adiantum id., Kze.) ; Gardneri, Hook. 

Genus IV. Cheilanthes, Sw. 

" Adianti, Allosori, Pteridis, Cassebeerae, Notholenag, Hypolepidis 
sp. auctr — P. 75. 

" Vain is the attempt to form any definite character which shall 
decide the proper limits of this genus." — P. 75. So writes Sir Wil- 
liam Hooker : then, tre would ask, why not abandon it altogether ? 

Fronds simply pinnate. 
Sp. micropteris, Sw. 

Pinna or pinnules large for the Genus, hroad ; white and powdery 

beneath. 

Sp. argentea, Kze.; farinosa, Kaulf ; pulveracea, Pr. ; rufa, Don. 

Pinna or pinnules large for the Genus, broad ; not white or 
pulverulent nor scaly beneath. 

Sp. Dalhousiae, Hook. ; pteroides, Sw. 



52 



PinncB or pinnules as in the preceding Group, hut densely clothed 
with imbricated scales. 

Sp. squamosa, Gill. 

Fronds generally decompound, the pinnules small, glabrous or 
hairy or scaly. Eucheilanthes. 

Sp. fragrans, Webb et Bert. ; tenuifolia, Sw. ; Preissiana, Kze. ; 
Sieberi, Kze. ; raicrophylla, Sw. ; Tweediana, Hook. ; Seemanni, 
Hook. ; Moritziana, Kze. ; elongata, Willd. herb. ; obtusata, Pr. 
crenata, Kze. ; Wrightii, Hook. ; subvillosa, Hook. ; bullosa, Kze. 
pygmsea, Kl. ; varians (Pteris variaiis, Wall.) ; Alabamensis, Kze. 
Moluccana, Bl. ; Kleinhoffii, Bl. ; multifida, Sw. ; triangula, Kze. 
Mathewsii, Kze. ; hirta, Sw. ; induta, Kze. ; pubescens, H. B. K. 
MacLeanii, Hook.; Mysurensis, Wall.; Chusana, Hook.; tenuis, Pr. 

Lendigei'a Group. 

* Hairy, rarely scaly or chaffy. 

Sp. lendigeia, Sw. ; tomentosa, Link ; Bradburiij Hook. ; Szo- 
vitzii, Fisch. et Mey. ; vestita, Sw. ? 

Lendigera Group. 

** Very scaly. 

Sp. scariosa, Pr. ; rayriophylla, Desv. ; Lindheimeri, Hook. ; ele- 
gans, Desv. ; Fendleri, Hook. ; speciosissima, Alex. Braun. 

Rachis zigzag. 
Sp. dichotoma, Sw. ; flexuosa, Kze. 

Fronds broad, triangular. 
Sp. viscosa, Link ; leucopoda, Link ; raarginata, H. B. K. 

Involucres continuous. Pteridoidese. 

Sp. deltoidea, Kze. ; Atherstonii, Hook. ; cuneata, Link ; profusa, 
Kze. ; cornuta, Kze. ; pulchella, Boiy ; coriacea, Dcsne. ; viridis, 
Sw.; hu&nidi, Link; canescens, ^^-e. ; aspera, Hook.; caudata, Pr.; 
intraraargiualis (Pteris id., Kaulf.); nitidula (Pteris id.. Wall.) 

Pteroideae. Clothed with yellow powder beneath. 
Sp. cbrysophylla, Hook. ; ochvacea, Hook. 



53 



Genus V. Cassebeera, Kaulf. 

* Fronds digitate or pedate. 
Sp. tiiphylla, Kaulf. 

** Fronds pinnate or bipinnate. 
Sp. pinnata, Kaulf. ; gleichenioides, Gardn. 

Genus VI. Onychium, Kaulf. 

Sp. auratum, Kaulf. ; lucidum, Spreng. ; Japonicum, Kze. ; 
angustifoliura, Kze. ; strictum, Kze. ; melauolepis, Dcsne. 



Proceedings of Societies, Sfc. 



The Phytologist Club. 

One Hundred and Fifti/ - third Sitting. — Saturday/, January 21, 
1854. — Mr. Newman, President, in the chair. 

The President read the following communications : — 

Leucojum astivum, Linn. 

" This plant I saw in a willow-plot near Totnes Weir, South Devon, 
about a mile from the town, in June. It did not come under my 
observation in any of the gardens ; nor could I learn that it had been 
observed before in the neighbourhood. Mr. Syme recorded, in this 
journal, some months since, that the locality for this plant by the 
Thames-side below Greenwich was probably destroyed. I think it 
might be worth remarking, that it was noticed by me, some few years 
since, on the same side of the Thames, growing lower down the river, 
nearer Woolwich ; where, doubtless, it may be found in the ensuing 
spring. In June, 1841, I also observed it by the Thames, near Son- 
ning, Berks ; and by the side of the Lodden, near Reading, where it 
has been observed growing for upwards of thirty years past." — T. B. 
Flower ; Seend, near Melksham, January, 1854. 

Hypericum linarifolium, Vahl. 

" I noticed this plant growing on the banks of the Teign, but whe- 
ther in the same locality before recorded 1 know not. It was not 



64^ 

growing so luxuriantly as I have seen it in the Val des Vaux, La 
Haule, and St. Peter's Valley, Jersey. It would, doubtless, be found 
in other places on the South coast of England, if diligently sought 
after."— Id. 

Vicia lutea, Linn. 

" I do not recollect seeing this recorded in any of the lists for South 
Devon. I found it rather sparingly on the rocks at Black Head, near 
Torquay, during the past summer, together with Geranium purpu- 
reum, Forst. in E. B. S. t. 2648, and a beautiful dark-purple-flowered 
variety of Armeria raaritima, growing with it, in which I could not 
perceive any difference of structure apart from the usual forms of A. 
maritima." — Id. 

Diotis maritima, Cass- 

" This is reported to have been seen on the South Devon coast. It 
formerly grew on the shingles in Babbicombe Bay, where I spent 
some time in searching for it, during the past summer, and in 1850, 
but without seeing the least trace of it. Has any botanist met with 
it on this coast of late years ? " — Id. 

Poa hulhosa, Linn. 

" I noticed this plant growing rather plentifully at Plymouth, on 
rocks under the Citadel, and about the Hoe, in May last ; also in 
abundance on Teignmouth Den. This latter station is, doubtless, 
well known to botanists, as being given in Turner and Dillwyn's 
' Botanist's Guide,' on the authority of the late Dr. Beeke ; but Mr. 
Watson having intimated, in the ' Cybele,' that it would be desirable 
to have the locality confirmed by more recent observation, I thought 
a note might again be recorded for it in Devon." — Id. 

Udora Canadensis^ Sfc, near Bedale. 

*' While botanizing with my friend Mr. Mark Hebblethwaite, of 
Camp Hill, near this place, in the low grounds a few miles West of 
Thirsk, during the month of August last, we were fortunate in meet- 
ing with several interesting plants, not of common occurrence in this 
part of Yorkshire ; such as Butomus umbellatus, Hydrocharis Morsus* 
ransB, Sagittaria sagittifolia, Rumex aquaticus. Ranunculus Lingua, 
Cicuta virosa, &c., &c. In returning homeward we had to cross the 
river Wiske, at the village of Kirby ; and noticed a plant in the water 
with which we were unacquainted. Specimens of it were taken home ; 
and our only guides. Smith and Babiugton ('Manual,' 2nd edit.), could 



55 

give us no information respecting it. The specimens were laid aside, 
and not noticed until lately ; when a thought struck me that the plant 
might be Udora Canadensis. I immediately forwarded specimens of 
it to Mr. Babington, who very kindly informed me that I was right in 
my conjecture. I at the same time received specimens of the plant 
from Mr. Hardy, of Penmanshiels, N. B. ; which he had collected 
in the lakes at Dunse Castle, and with which mine quite agree. 
Mr. Babington suggests that I ought to record the fact in the ' Phyto- 
logist,' in order that its first appearance in this part may be known in 
future. How the plant maj"^ have got there 1 am at a loss to decide, 
but shall make inquiry, and further examine the neighbourhood during 
the ensuing season." — Thomas Simpson; Hopetown, near Bedaley 
Yorkshire f January 16, 1854. 



LiNNEAN Society. 

June 7, 1853. — Thomas Bell, Esq., President, in the chair. 

Election of a Felloio. 
The Rev. Thomas Hugo, M.A., was elected a Fellow. 

Nomination of Vice-Presidents. 

The President nominated Robert Brown, Esq., William Yarrell, 
Esq., Nathaniel Wallich, Esq., M.D., and WilHam Spence, Esq., to 
be Vice-Presidents for the ensuing year. 

Mr. Yarrell, V.P.L.S., exhibited a specimen of the dusky petrel 
{Pufinus ohscurus of modern authors). 

Letters of Linneus and other Naturalists. 

Mr. Westwood, F.L.S., exhibited a volume of letters addressed to 
Philip Miller by Linnaeus and various other naturalists and others, 
the property of Mr. Edward Layton of Watford ; the more interesting 
of which, he stated, will shortly be published in facsimile. The 
volume contained, among others, letters from Dr. Richard Richard- 
son, Charles Alston, Boerhaave, De Jussieu, Gronovius, Du Hamel 
du Monceau, George Clifford, Linnaeus, De Zieten, Lord Petre, 
Hebenstreit, Van Royen, Guettard, Richard, Wachendorff, Garden, 
John Bartrarn, Stephen Hales, Marsigli, Oder, Forskahl, Schmidel, 
Pinard, Dr. John Hope, Sibthorp, Vandelli, and Dr. Tobias Smollet. 



56 



Umbellate Primrose. 

Mr. Hogg, F.L.S., exhibited specimens of an umbellate variety of 
the common primrose {Primula vulgaris, var. &. of Smith's ' English 
Flora'), gathered in Thorp Wood, near Stockton-upon-Tees, on the 
12th of May in the present year. 

Read some Notes ' On the Artificial Breeding of Salmon and Trout, 
with Remarks on the Modes of Fecundating their Ova ;' by John 
Hogg, Esq., M.A., F.R.S., F.L.S., &c. 

Read also ' Notes on the Dipterous Parasites which attack the com- 
mon Earwig and the Emperor Moth ; ' by George Newport, Esq., 
F.R.S., F.L.S., &c. 



June 21, 1853. — Thomas Bell, Esq., President, in the chair. 

Election of Fellows. 

John Samuel Gaskoin, Esq., the Rev. Francis Thomas Macdougall, 
M.A., and S. James A. Salter, Esq., were elected Fellows. 

Note from Nees von Esenheck. 

Berthold Seemann, Esq., F.L.S., laid before the meeting a commu- 
nication which he had received from Prof. Nees von Esenbeck, Pre- 
sident of the Imperial Leopoldino-Caroline Academy of Naturalists, 
congratulating the Linnean Society, in the name of the Academy, on 
its choice of Prof. Bell as President. 

Earthquake at Sea. 

Read the following Extract of a Letter from T. S. Ralph, Esq., 
A.L.S., to Richard Kippist, Esq., Libr. L.S., dated Jan. 4th, 1853 ; 
Brig Marmion, on her passage (from New Zealand) to Port Phillip : — 

" I shall be rather anxious to hear how the Wellington people have 
gone on since my departure, for on the evening of Saturday last (1st 
of January, 1853), while off — some fifty miles west of — Cape Egmont, 
at 8.30 p.m., we, on board the brig, experienced a horrible shock of 
an earthquake, which caused the vessel to shudder and shake, just as 
if she had grounded on a shingle spit ; and indeed, so loud was the 
sound under us, and so great the agitation, that I took it at the time 
to be a case of wreck with us, and knowing the sea was running rather 



57 

high, hardly expected to reach the deck before she might begin to 
break. The shock lasted about twenty seconds, during which I had 
only time to secure my watch and compass and seek the deck, when 
the whole was explained. I had the satisfaction of experiencing 
some eight others of diminished energy during the succeeding forty 
minutes, the last of which I measured, and found it did not exceed 
seventeen seconds. It was about equal in duration to the first, which 
of course I could not ascertain very accurately, except by reference 
to the time occupied by any succeeding ones." 

Vegetation of Wellington, New Zealand. 

Read also a ' Sketch of the Vegetation around Wellington, New 
Zealand ;' by T. S. Ralph, Esq., A.L.S. 

This sketch was prepared by Mr. Ralph, during his voyage above 
alluded to from Wellington to Port Phillip, from his notes made upon 
the spot. He describes the town of Wellington as situated at the 
southern extremity of a large port, of about nine miles in length and 
varying in breadth from four to six miles, surrounded by hills which 
are in many places covered to their summit with trees and shrubs. 
These hills, being composed almost entirely of a claystone rock, pre- 
sent a marked feature of roundness and abruptness without sharpness, 
and precipitous declivities full of channels and gullies from top to bot- 
tom. Wellington itself is built on two flats, with an intervening 
beach-line of houses to connect them, so that the town possesses but 
a small space of level land, which some ten years since is said to have 
been covered with dense bush, in which the settlers had no difficulty 
in losing themselves. But all the hills in the vicinity of the shore 
have had their timber felled, and the ground has since become covered 
with an undergrowth, chiefly composed of Leptospermum scopariura 
and L. ericoides '(together known by the name of Manuka), Friesia 
racemosa (A.ristotelia serrata of Dr. J. Hooker's Fl. Nov. Zel.), Myo- 
porum Igetum, and in some places Myrtus bullata. A few of the deep 
gullies at the back of the first ridge are uncleared, and contain besides 
some arborescent ferns ; but the hills in the rear of the town retain, 
especially on their upper parts, their older clothing of bush, consisting 
chiefly of some trees, such as Fuchsia excorticata, Knightia excelsa, 
Elaeocarpus Hinau, two or three species of Coprosma, Geniostoma 
ligustrifolium, Drimys axillaris, Pittosporum tenuifolium, Brachyglot- 
tis repanda, and a few specimens of Br. rotundifolia. These are, in 
the denser parts of the bush, accompanied by Piper excelsum, Ripo- 
VOL. V. I 



58 

gonura parviflovum (or Supple- Jack), climbing species of Metroside- 
ros, and Dicksonia squavrosa and Cyathea dealbata, which are the 
commonest species of tree-ferns. Cyathea mediillaris, Mr. Ralph 
found but once in this locality ; and of C. dealbata he mentions hav- 
ing found a single specimen with a trifurcate stem, about 12 or 14 feet 
in height, and each of its divisions rising close to each other to a 
height of 4 feet. Smaller ferns, such as Hymenophyllura demissum 
and H. dilatatum, accompany these ; Trichomanes reniforme is occa- 
sionally met with in extensive patches ; and Polypodium Billardieri 
is by far the commonest of climbing ferns. During the winter season 
(generally from May to September) the gullies, being furnished with 
a steady supply of water, produce numerous Cryptogamic plants, 
which Mr. Ralph states that he has closely observed, but of which he 
can at present give only a brief notice. Of most of these he expects 
to be able to obtain the fructification, by subjecting them to a period 
of confinement in Ward's cases, in which with a less moist, but more 
regularly charged atmosphere, they seem well disposed to fruit. He 
has thus succeeded in fruiting Jungermannia hyraenophylloides ; and 
suggests this mode of cultivation to those who are desirous of obtain- 
ing fruiting specimens of mosses, Jungermannise, &c. Of Fungi, Mr. 
Ralph has collected about thirty species, while the list given in M. 
Raoul's work includes only eleven or twelve. He particularly notices 
Ileodictyon cibarium, which makes its appearance in June and July 
soon after heavy falls of rain, and a brick-red Polyporus (P. sanguineus 
of the ' Voyage au Pole Sud' ?) as abundant in some places. He is 
inclined to think that in many instances mere varieties have been 
described as species. Thus he thinks that the two so-called new spe- 
cies of Parsonsia described in M. RaouVs ' Choix des Plantes ' are 
only varieties of P. heterophylla ; he has been unable to distinguish 
the two supposed species of Drimys ; and in other instances he 
believes the differences to depend mainly upon the climate, temperate 
enough in sheltered situations, but severe in places exposed to the 
cold south-easterly gales either of winter or summer. Among the 
microscopic Fungi, Mr. Ralph particularly mentions a species of 
Trichia ; the common Ji^cidium Senecionis which accompanies the 
Senecio vulgaris, and appears to him to extend to a species of Epi- 
lobium ; and Perisporium vulgare ? attacking Aristotelia in winter. 
Of Aristotelia he observes that although it is said to be exstipulate, he 
has met with several specimens in which the stipulse were largely 
developed. Of introduced plants, the common water-cress grows by 
cart-loads in and about the streams for several miles about WeUing- 



59 

ton ; and Miniulus luteus is also spreading itself along the streams 
and over the swampy places behind the town. He adds that he is very 
desirous of introducing some of the British plants which would pro- 
bably thrive, such as Stellaria holostea and Antirrhinum Cymbalaria ; 
and states that he brought out with him from England Vallisneria 
spiralis, of which he has specimens intended for the Botanic Garden 
at Melbourne, from whence it may perhaps make its way to Sydney 
and Hobavt Town. Mr. Ralph concludes his sketch by mentioning a 
species of Nitella (N. translucens }) found in a rapid stream about 
five-and-tvventy miles from Wellington. 

Notes 8fc. of the late Mr. Griffith. 

Read also a Letter from John McClelland, Esq., F.L.S., to R. 
Brown, Esq., V.P.L.S., dated Calcutta, 15lh of January, 1853, and 
accompanying a large packet of notes and sketches by the late Wil- 
liam Griffith, Esq., F.L.S., on the development of the ovulum in San- 
talum, Osyris, Loranthus and Viscum, as well as in several other 
genera belonging to different families of plants. These papers having 
been carefully examined, and compared with Mr. Griffith's memoirs 
published in the ' Linnean Transactions,' it was found that the bulk 
of them consisted of the materials from which he had constructed his 
memoir ' On Santalum, Osyris, Loranthus and Viscum,' printed in the 
nineteenth volume of the Society's ' Transactions.' hi that paper he 
has given from these materials, in greater or less detail, all that he 
himself considered necessary to the elucidation of his subject ; and it 
does not appear (as might indeed be expected) that anything could 
be advantageously added to what he himself communicated to the 
Society. There are, however, some notes on the genus Modeccop- 
sis, of which the characters only have appeared in our ' Proceedings' 
(vol. i. p. 171), and which in some of the sketches is named Dacty- 
lium vagum ; on another plant presumed by Mr. Griffith to belong to 
Santalacese ; and on various Cucurbitaceous plants, affording some 
new and unpublished facts on the development of their several ovula, 
which it was thought desirable to lay before the Society, as supple- 
mentary to Mr. Griffith's communications on that important subject. 



60 



Dublin Natural-History Society, 

Friday, January 13, 1854. — Robert Callwell, Esq., M.R.I.A., in 
the chair. 

Donations. 

Donations were announced from James R. Dombrain, Esq., and 
Mr. Ffennel. 

Adventitious Roots ofJussicea grandijlora. 

Professor Allmann stated some observations he had made on a 
remarkable peculiarity of the adventitious roots of Jussiaea grandi- 
flora. The author described a remarkable condition which he had 
observed in some of the adventitious roots of a specimen of this plant 
growing in the College Botanical Gardens. Some of the roots, which 
proceed from the nodes of the stem, instead of growing downwards, so 
as to fasten themselves iu the mud at the bottom of the water in which 
the plant grows, assume an ascending direction, and grow into the 
air, where they present a very remarkable appearance, looking like 
portions of rush-pith attached to the stem of the plant. When exa- 
mined by the microscope, they are found to have a central, slightly 
developed, woody axis, round which is a peculiar structure, formed of 
exceedingly dehcate stellate cells, having between them large inter- 
cellular spaces, and constituting one of the most regular and beauti- 
ful examples of a system of air-chambers to be found, perhaps, in the 
whole vegetable kingdom. A singular fact connected with these air- 
chambers is, that tliey are not surrounded by any epidermal invest- 
ment, but open directly into the external air. Professor Allmann also 
mentioned his discovery of a remarkable peculiarity of the woody 
fibres of the same plant; namely, the fact of these fibres being filled 
with starch granules, a condition of prosenchymatous tissue almost 
unique iu the vegetable kingdom. 



The Phytological Club, 
fin connexion with the Pharmaceutical Society.) 

December 5th, 1853.— Robert Bentley, Esq., F.L.S., A.K.C., &c. 
President, in the chair. 



61 



Donations to the Museum. 

A donation of some rare plants from Mr. Bentley was announced, 
and some specimens of ergotised grasses from Mr. Blyth. 

Enormous Caudex of Lasirea Filix-mas. 

The President called the attention of the Meeting to the caudex of 
Lastrea Filix-mas, Presl, found by Mr. Shillitoe in Jersey. It was 
growing in a boggy soil and shady position. The specimen was re- 
markable for its great size, being in a dried condition about fourteen 
inches in length, and about a foot in circumference, a size quite 
unusual in temperate latitudes. All the ferns in the same locality 
were stated to be growing in the same luxuriant manner. 

Ergotised Grasses. 

Mr. Blyth read the following paper : — 

" In presenting the specimens of ergotised grasses to the Phyto- 
logical Club, I beg to offer the results of my experience in collecting 
them, so that future observations may either confirm or refute any 
deductions that may be drawn from them. I met with no instance of 
the disease until the middle of the month of August, and then in 
shady rather than in moist places, and found very few indications of 
it (especially directing my attention to marshy and wet places) from 
the sandy soil of Norfolk through the clay of Middlesex, to the marls 
and limestones of the western counties. A month later the disease 
increased so as to become epidemic, first appearing in uncultivated 
grounds, and gradually spreading over the whole country, so that 
towards the end of September, there was scarcely a spot where the 
grasses were not more or less affected. I present eight different 
specimens of grasses so affected, but it appears to prevail most in the 
Lolium and Dactylis ; so abundant was it in these species, that a 
plentiful supply might have been collected from the commons and 
hedgerows, but I could not induce any of the herb-gatherers to collect 
it for me, so that I have had no opportunity of examining its chemical 
properties. Many farmers are acquainted with the disease, and 
according to them, its presence in fields is evidence of bad farming. 
Liming the soil has been found to be the best remedy for the evil. 
That draining alone is of little value to get rid of it, may be inferred 
from its having been more abundant in the Regent's Park than else- 
where, and as if to defy such an enemy, it especially flourished on the 



62 

ridges immediately over the draining pipes recently laid down in that 
soil. 

" Much has been said on the origin and cause of the ergot, but the 
question is still left in an unsatisfactory state. The opinion I am 
induced to adopt from observation is, that moisture has nothing to do 
with originating the disease, although it may promote its development, 
as filth and dirt combined with moisture may promote the extension 
of any pestilence. Let us look at the condition of the atmosphere at 
the time of year it is developed. In the fall of the year, decomposi- 
tion and fermentation are going on at a rapid rate, and the germs of 
dissolution spread throughout the whole organised world. At the 
same time, the physical condition of the atmosphere is in a state 
peculiar to the season. Modern researches into the properties of light 
have proved that there are three distinct classes of rays — the actinic 
or chemical, the luminous, and the calorific rays ; the first prevail in 
the spring of the year and promote germination ; the second prevail 
in the summer and promote the increase of the plant; and the third 
prevail in the autumn and promote the ripening of the fruit. Now we 
have in the fall of the year a diminution of the rays that sustain the 
vital energies of the plant, and render it less able to resist the attack 
of destroying forces. There are no doubt other conditions of the 
atmosphere not yet thoroughly examined or even thought of, which 
play an important part in the propagation or suppression of disease. 
But the fact remains that it is in the fall of the year when fungoid 
diseases become most prevalent or epidemic. 

" It is only by the accumulation of observations that any law can 
be deduced. To obtain such will be interesting, to enable the agri- 
culturist to get rid of the disease from his fields, and permit it to be 
propagated with impunity in waste places for its medical worth. It 
is with this object in view I have laid my recent observations before 
the members of this Club, and hope at a future season to be more 
successful in collecting a sufficient quantity for examining its proper- 
ties, and to obtain the co-operation of members in different localities." 

In connexion with the above subject, Mr. Blyth also read the 
following communication from Mr, Cobb, of Yarmouth : — 

Mr. Cobb thus writes, " The practice of underdraining has become 
so general amongst us as to have changed to some extent the charac- 
ter of our Flora. Several species of marsh plants, once plentiful and 
peculiar to this neighbourhood, have disappeared, whilst their loss has 
been supplied by the introduction of a large number of species com- 
monly found in cultivated districts. Large tracts of wet marshes, 



6*> 
6 

which some years ago bore only a scanty crop of coarse grass and 
abundant Cyperaceae, have been banked and drained, and now pi'o- 
duce remunerating crops of corn. On the borders of such places the 
ergot was plentiful, especially on the Lolium perenne aiid L. arvense ; 
I believe it is now found only in very wet seasons. As an example 
of the effect of this draining, I may state I have for the last three years 
been vainly endeavouring to meet with specimens of the Vibrio Tritici, 
which a few years ago might be gathered in every field." 

The above was written in July. In a recent letter to Mr. Blyth, 
Mr. Cobb states that the ergot had become very prevalent, and might 
be met with almost everywhere. 

Alteration in the Days of Meeting. 

The President then announced that in future the meetings of the 
Club, in accordance with the wishes of the great majority of its mem- 
bers, would take place on the second Wednesdays in the months in 
which they were appointed to take place, instead of the first Mondays 
as heretofore. The next meeting would therefore be held on Wednes- 
day evening, January 11th, 1854. 



On the Germination of the Spores of the UredinecB. 
By M. L. B. Tulasne.* 

The author had previously shown that the spores of the Uredinese, 
like the pollen-grains of phanerogamous plants, had a variable number 
of pores, from which afterwards tubular filaments arose, apparently 
analogous to those which are the first result of the germination of the 
spore of a fungus. 

In addition, he has proved that the so-called ^cidiolum exanthe- 
matum, Unger, may, very probably, be correctly regarded as equiva- 
lent to the spermogonia of the other fungi, so that in all probability 
it is not a sexual. According to new researches the germinal fila- 
ments of the spores do not all retain the simple, continuous condition, 
which was formerly assigned to them, and probably do not represent 
the commencement of the true mycelium. 

When sown, the spores of ^Ecidium Euphorbise sylvestris, D. C, 

* From the ' Comptes Rendus' for June, 1853, and published in the ' Quarterly 
Journal of Microscopical Science' for January, 1854. 



64 

did not retain their continuity, but were subdivided into four or six 
unequal-sized cells, by means of transverse septa ; there then appeared 
upon each of these cells, and particularly of the upper ones, a lateral 
short process (spicula), which soon supported an obovate and rather 
oblique tubular process. These tubes were the last vegetative effort 
of the spores; they became free (?), and produced only very slender 
filaments. Upon the separation of these bodies, the jointed tube 
from which they arose is emptied, and, like the spores, is destroyed ; 
so that this sacculus or filament represents a sort of promycelium, a 
vegetation which intervenes between the primary spore or fruit, and 
those lesser follicles which are either secondary spores, or rather, 
perhaps, the only true and actual producers of the mycelium. 

The same thing takes place in Puccinia, the spores of which are 
capable of germination while yet upon the parent plant. The spores 
of Puccinia graminis throw out tubes by which they lengthen two 
or three times, divide into cells and again produce reniform spores, 
which soon germinate. It is exactly the same in Phragmidium in- 
crassatum, Link. 

The Podisomata, also belonging to the Uredinese, throw out from 
their two-sided fruits {sporidia) as many as eight tubular processes, 
crossing each other in pairs and superimposed one upon the other, 
w^hich invest the fungus with a sort of pile ; each of these produces 
several obovate spores, which may be collected in vast quantity. 

In several Uredinese (U. Roseb suaveolens, Tussilagiuis crassum), 
the tubular processes are capable of branching, and bear a still closer 
resemblance to a normal fungoid mycelium. 

The spermogonia of the Uredineae are highly aromatic. It is to 
them that is due the odour of Uredo suaveolens, &c. 

M. Tulasne has not yet accurately investigated the germination of 
the spores of the Ustilagineae. The elongated cell, which proceeds 
from the spores of Ustilago antherarum, Tal., is probably analogous to 
the secondary spores of ^Ecidium and Puccinia. 

In Ustilago receptaculorum, Fr.^ organs, without doubt analogous 
to these secondary spores, are produced from a slightly-developed 
promycelium, consisting only of a few cells, but resembling that of 
iEcidium Euphorbiae sylvestris, D.C. 



THE NATURAL HISTORY 

OF 

THE TINEINA. 



It had long been a matter of reproach to English Collectors 
of Lepidoptera that they were not observers of the objects 
of their pursuit, and especially that they knew nothing of 
the preparatory states of the Insects they caught. 

This was especially true with respect to the Tineina ; 
but of late years more attention has been paid to their 
larvae, and a considerable quantity of materials towards the 
Natural History of this Group having been collected, it 
is proposed to make it generally useful by publication on 
the following plan, by which the difficulty, hitherto urged, 
of its incompleteness, will, to a great extent, be obviated. 

When it has hitherto been attempted to give the Natural 
History of Insects, in the order of the relation of the 
species to each other, it has followed in consequence of the 
economy of the majority of the species being unknown, 
that nine-tenths of the matter has been dry descriptions of 
perfect insects only. To obviate this serious defect it is 
now proposed to publish a Series of Octavo Volumes, each 
containing the full natural history of Ttoenfy-four 
allied Species; thus the order of the appearance of the 
volumes will mainly depend on the progress made in inves- 
tigating the Natural Histories of the Species of any particular 
Genus. 

One important feature in the proposed work is the Plates, 
of which there will be Eight in each volume; they will be 
coloured, and each will represent on a magnified scale the 
Transformations of Three Species. These Plates will be 
brought out with great care, and the execution of them is 
entrusted to Mr. W. Wing. The Plates to Mr. Douglas's 
"Contributions to the Natural History of the British Micro- 
Lepidoptera," which have appeared in the Transactions of 
the Entomological Society, may be referred to as specimens. 



( 2 ) 

Another important matter will be to introduce in its 
place, and as nearly as possible in the words of the original 
writer, the natural history of any species which has long- 
ago been fully given by Reaumur, DeGeer, &c., and which, 
though long since thus recorded, has been overlooked by 
subsequent writers, from the difficulty of satisfactorily 
identifying the nameless species for which it was intended. 

Where previous authors have mixed together as belong- 
ing to one species observations applying to several species, 
care will be taken to separate these several remarks, show- 
ing to which species each belongs. 

The letter-press will be in Four languages, English, 
French, German and Latin, so that the volumes will be 
intelligible to the collectors of England, France and Ger- 
many, whether linguists or not; the impediment of a foreign 
language in a work of this kind is ever found an obstacle 
to its wide circulation, and he who describes in Latin 
writes only for the scientific few, not for the unlearned 
many, whom it is desirable to attract to the study. 

The price of the volumes will be made as low as possible, 
and little more than the expense of colouring the Plates. 

But as even this moderate sum might put the work 
beyond the reach of many a hard-working Collector, the 
Editor proposes to present a Copy of the entire Series to 
every one who shall first discover and communicate to him 
the Transformations of Twenty Species of Tineina, with 
which the Editor was previously unacquainted. 

The Volumes will be published under the superintend- 
ence of a Committee, consisting of 

Mr. J. W. Douglas, 6, Kingswood Place, Lee; 
Mr. H. T. Stainton, Mountsfield, Lewisham; and 
Mr. W. WiNCx, 17, Priory Road, South Lambeth. 

All Communications to be addressed to the Editor, Mr. 
H. T. Stainton, Mountsfield, Lewisham. 

*^* Parties loisJdng to subscribe to the first Ten Volumes, at 7s. 6d. 
each volume, are requested to forward tJieir names to some Alember 
of the Committee. 

It is proposed to publisli one or two volumes aiimrally; the first 
volume before the close of the present year. 

January l-ilh, 1851. 



05 



Remarks on Sarsaparilla. 
By Berthold Seemann, Ph. D., F.L.S.* 

A PERUSAL of the various treatises on sarsaparilla tends to confirm 
the soundness of a remark made by Sir William Hooker, that those 
plants most useful to mankind are generally the least known botani- 
cally. Even Pereira, with all his industry and research, could give 
in his ' Elements of Materia Medica and Therapeutics ' (London, 
1850) but an unsatisfactory account of the botanical sources of the 
various sorts of sarsaparilla ; and I well remember, that in the 
last conversation which I had with that great pharmacologist, he 
expressed an ardent wish that some competent person might be 
induced to investigate this perplexing subject. I am not vain enough 
to look upon myself as the " competent person " to whom Pereira 
wished to assign the investigation ; and if the settlement of the ques- 
tion depended upon the opinion of great authorities, I would not have 
ventured to meddle with it ; but, as it has solely to be decided by the 
simple elucidation of facts, I have made an honest attempt to cut the 
knot, the untying of which has been so often tried in vain. 

M. de Warszewicz, during his last visit to the Volcano of Chiri- 
qui, in Veraguas, collected specimens of a sarsaparilla, which he 
transmitted to Mr. Daniel Hanbury, who submitted them to me for 
determination. After a careful examination, I pronounced them to 
belong to Smilax officinalis of Humboldt and Bonpland ; but, as 
Smilax officinalis, H. et B., had been described from imperfect mate- 
rials, Mr. D. Hanbury made, during a sojourn in Paris, a tracing of 
the original specimens from which the two botanists drew up their 
description. This tracing agreed in every essential point with the 
specimens from the Volcano of Chiriqui, and left in my mind no 
doubt that I had named them correctly. A fortunate coincidence 
confirmed this view. When M. de Warszewicz lately visited Bajor- 
que, in New Granada, the place where Humboldt and Bonpland 
obtained their Smilax officinalis, he took the precaution to collect 
specimens of the sarsaparilla of that locality (where, by the bye, it 
has now become very scarce), which, in November, 1853, he placed 
in the hands of Mr. D. Hanbury, through whose kindness I was able 
to identify them, not only with Smilax officinalis of Humboldt and 
Bonpland, but also with the specimens collected on the Volcano of 

* Kead before the Linnean Society, December 6, 1853. 
VOL. V. K 



66 

Chiriqui. Having now a thorough knowledge of the Smilax which 
Humboldt and Bonpland named S. ofl&ciualis, I began to examine the 
different species considered allied to it. The first one attracting my 
notice was Smilax papyracea of Poiret. On this species Mr. Robert 
Bentley had, in April, 1853, published an able article in the ' Phar- 
maceutical Journal ;' and applying to that author for additional infor- 
mation, he, like a true man of science, most cheerfully granted my 
request, and willingly allowed me to examine the specimens which 
served as materials for his article. A critical examination of them 
convinced me, what I had already anticipated from comparing Bent- 
ley's description with the specimens of S. oiBcinalis in my possession, 
and Poiret's diagnosis of S. papyracea, that Smilax papyracea and S. 
officinalis were identical. The second species arresting my attention 
was Smilax medica of Schlechtendal and Chamisso. This species 
has been well described, and a tolerably good figure of it has been 
published, by Nees ; a close comparison of which with Smilax papy- 
racea and S. officinalis proved it to be identical with them ; so that 
the three names, S. officinalis, H. et B., S. papyracea, Poir., and S. 
medica, Cham, et Schlecht., are synonymes of one species, a fact easily 
accounted for, when it is considered that the roots, stem, branches, 
and foliage from which the chief characters of these three supposed 
species had been derived are more variable than those who make spe- 
cies in their closets are apt to think. 

Having now shown what number of synonymes belong to the true 
S. officinalis, I proceed to give an account of the plant itself, in order 
to prevent botanists from making similar mistakes to those they have 
already committed. Smilax ofiicinalis grows on the slopes of moun- 
tains, to an elevation of 5000 feet above the sea, and is confined, as 
far as we at present know, to the Continent of South America, where 
it ranges between the 20th degree of North and the 6th degree of South 
latitude, and the 110th and the 40th degrees of West longitude. 
Jamaica, whence so great a portion of sai'saparilla used is annually 
obtained, does not produce any itself, as has been well ascertained ; 
the article known by the name of "Jamaica sarsaparilla " is merely 
imported into that island from the Spanish main, and afterwards ship- 
ped for Europe and the United States of America. Nor are there any 
authentic data for believing that S. officinalis occurs in any other 
island of the West Indies, although such a distribution would be by 
no means an unlikely one. 

The rhizome (chump) of the plant is cylindrical, and the roots (the 
sarsaparilla of commerce), abounding, according to age and the place 



67 

they grow in, more or less in starch, are as rauch as ten feet long, and 
generally furnished with branched rootlets (beards). The plant itself 
is in every part glabrous, and averages fifty feet in length. The stem 
is quadrangular, furrowed or striated, and on the edges clad with flat 
prickles, which are occasionally curved upwards. The branches are, 
like the stem, quadrangular, or often multangular, and either with or 
without prickles. The petiole, sheathing at the base, is furnished with 
two spirally twisted tendrils, which are often ten inches long, and 
either with prickles or destitute of them. The leaves are extremely 
variable ; at times they are broadly cordate, almost trilobed, gradually 
tapering into an acumen ; at others they are ovate-oblong, and even 
lanceolate and rounded at the apex, but always mucronate ; they are 
generally 5-nerved, the two outermost nerves being mostly bifurcated, 
all the nerves being prominent on the under surface of the leaves, 
acutely edged and often furnished with prickles ; the colour of the 
leaves is dark green, the under surface being a shade paler than the 
upper, but never glaucous, like many other species of Smilax ; the 
length of the leaves varies from two inches to one foot, and the breadth 
(at the base) from one to six inches ; in thickness they vary conside- 
rably, being either coriaceous or more or less paper-like, and they 
have, moreover, in the latter case, transparent lineolar dots. The 
peduncles are axillary and solitary, somewhat flattened, and they bear 
an umbella composed of about sixteen flowers. The flowers are still 
unknown. The berries are round and red, and of the size of a 
small cherry, or even smaller than that. Each berry contains from 
two to three plano-convex seeds, of a light brown colour. 

Botanists, competent to judge of the true limits of species, are not 
likely to raise any objection to my uniting Smilax oflScinalis with S. 
papyracea and S. medica ; but pharmacologists, unless supplied with 
the strongest proofs, will probably be disinclined to adopt the views I 
have advanced. They regard the different commercial sorts as essen- 
tially distinct from each other, and lay great stress upon certain cha- 
racters, which, however striking to a superficial observer, are of little 
or no importance, botanically speaking. For instance, the so-called 
Lisbon or Brazilian sarsaparilla, that which comes to us in rolls about 
three feet long, is chiefly distinguished by having fewer rootlets, or 
beards, than that termed " Jamaica sarsaparilla ; " and as the beards 
contain a great amount of matter for extract, it is on that account of less 
value in the market. But, if the roots of the Lisbon sarsaparilla are 
examined, it is plainly seen that the rootlets have been removed by 
some rough mechanical process, and that all the places where the 



68 

rootlets have been are clearly discernible, proving that the roots when 
gathered had as much beard as the sort usually received as Jamaica 
sarsaparilla, and making it probable that if the merchant buying up 
this Zarza in various parts of Brazil, would but inform the collectors 
that by preserving the beard they would not only save themselves 
much unnecessary trouble, but increase the weight and the commer- 
cial value of the roots they dig up, we should soon get all our "Jamaica" 
sarsaparilla from Brazil, and in a few years have difficulty in obtaining 
even a specimen of what is now termed " Lisbon sarsaparilla." 

But the chief distinction which pharmacologists make between the 
various commercial sorts of sarsaparilla is that of " mealy" and " non- 
mealy." Mealy (sarsaparillae farinosse sen amylacese) are called those 
sorts in which there is, just below the outer cortical layer, a mealy 
coat, of greater or less thickness ; and non-mealy (sarsaparillae non-fari- 
nosse seu non-amylaceae), those which [are either wholly destitute of 
any meal, or have a very thin mealy coat. This distinction, it must 
be confessed, is not a nice one, and would not be admitted by a logi- 
cal thinker ; but the very fact that it is adopted by a great body of 
pharmacologists is sufficient to invite criticism. It might be advanced 
as an a priori argument, that roots of two individual plants, though 
they may be mealy in the one and non-mealy in the other, need there- 
fore not necessarily belong to two distinct species; and that he who has 
the misfortune to eat the waxy potatoes of Kamtschatka, is not justi- 
fied in considering them different in species from the mealy ones he 
may have the privilege of tasting at the table of an English gentle- 
man ; but I will dispense with that argument, and merely confine 
myself to stating, that the presence or absence of meal in sarsaparillas 
depends, it would seem, upon age, and the locality in which the roots 
are collected, — that the formation of starch is probably entirely regu- 
lated by physical circumstances. Anybody opening a bundle of 
Jamaica sarsaparilla, may pick out as many roots as he chooses being 
mealy at one end and non-mealy at another. We have here the clearest 
evidence that one and the same root assumes different characters of 
internal structure, and, as a matter of course, external appearance. 
This fact ought to convince any unprejudiced mind that the distinc- 
tion alluded to is not tenable ; but, to furnish still another proof, I will 
allude to Bentley's specimens of Guatemala sarsaparilla.* The roots 
of those specimens are generally as mealy as any that are known ; yet 

* This sort, after having been dyed, is sold by Mr. Keating, No. 79, St. Paul's 
Church-yard, London, under the name of "red Paraguan sarsaparilla ; '' and was 
exhibited in the Great Exhibition, Sub-class II. No. 102. 



69 

not only do we find them at times destitute of starch, but they are, 
without doubt, botanically identical with Smilax officinalis, H. et B. 

I am aware that the form of the cells of the nucleus-sheath of the 
roots has been considered by physiologists as furnishing good marks 
of distinction between 'the sarsaparillas of Central America and those 
of South America ; and Schleiden declares that he can readily distin- 
guish them microscopically. But this theory does not seem to rest 
on any safe foundation. Let Mr. Bentley narrate what he saw : — 

" When examined by the microscope the cells of the inner cortical 
layers are found to contain bundles of acicular raphides, and a large 
number of the starch granules already described. The pith also is 
found commonly to contain a number of similar starch granules. The 
breadth of the pith is usually from one to one and a-half, or perhaps 
a little more, that of the woody zone. Tn this respect it resembles the 
Honduras sarsaparilla, and, according to Schleiden, also all those sorts 
of sarsaparilla which are obtained from Central America. The cells 
of the liber, or, as it is called by Schleiden, the nucleus sheath, are 
elongated radially or from within outwards, and hare walls which are 
thicker on the inner than the outer side. In this respect it resembles 
the South American and Mexican sarsaparillas, which Schleiden says 
always present this peculiarity. This microscopical appearance is 
remarkable, because, according to Schleiden, the Honduras and all 
the Central American sorts of sarsaparilla are characterized by having 
the cells of the nucleus sheath either square or somewhat elongated 
transversely, and all their walls of nearly equal thickness, and he 
believes that he can distinguish Central American from South Ame- 
rican and Mexican sarsaparillas from the appearances thus presented, 
combined with the different relative proportions of the woody layer 
and the pith already alluded to. But if this be true generally (which, 
so far as my experience goes, is not absolutely the case, having 
observed some sorts of Brazilian sarsaparilla in which the cells of the 
nucleus sheath were elongated somewhat in a direction from within 
outwards, and so far therefore agreeing generally with the anatomy of 
South American sarsaparillas according to Schleiden, but yet had 
their outer and inner walls of nearly equal thickness, and thus agree- 
ing with the Honduras variety), it is certainly not true in the present 
sort, for here we have a Central American sarsaparilla which agrees 
with Schleiden's arrangement generally as regards the relative pro- 
portions of pith and woody layer, but diflfers from it in the cells of the 
nucleus sheath being elongated fiom within outwards or radially, and 
having walls which are thicker on the inner than the outer side." 



70 

I may, therefore, safely conclude that the greater portion of sarsa- 
parilla is the produce of one species of Smilax ; and that species is S. 
officinalis, H. et B. (S. papyracea, Poir., S. medica, Cham, et Schlecht.) 
But I do not wish it to be believed that, by showing the identity of 
these three supposed species, I intend to abolish the commercial dis- 
tinctions now so universally acknowledged in the sarsaparilla trade. As 
long as the Brazilians continue to strip the roots of their beard, and 
put them up in the same long rolls as they now do, there will always 
be Lisbon sarsaparilla in the market ; as long as the inhabitants of the 
Spanish main continue to preserve the rootlets, we shall have Jamaica 
sarsaparilla ; and as long as the climate and other physical circum- 
stances of Guatemala remain unchanged, we shall always receive from 
that locality sarsaparilla distinguished by its abundance of starchy 
matter ! 



Additional Note. 

After the foregoing paper had been read at the Linnean Society, an 
animated discussion ensued, which brought to light several interesting 
facts bearing upon the question brought forward. Mr. Wallace 
remarked, that during the whole of his travels on the Amazon and 
Rio Negro he had never seen the sarsaparilla growing ; and he 
believed that that plant was solely confined to the slopes of moun- 
tains, and not to be met with in alluvial soil. " The Indians," he 
continued, " of the region explored by me never employ the sarsapa- 
rilla medicinally ; and they cannot conceive what the Europeans do 
with the enormous quantities of the drug annually passing down the 
Amazon." " The medicinal properties of the sarsaparilla," said Dr. 
J. D. Hooker, " are still a subject open to great discussion. In gene- 
ral, physicians set little or no value upon the drug, while surgeons 
ascribe to it highly beneficial powers. I myself have taken sarsapa- 
rilla when I was ill, and it has done me no good ; and again I have 
taken it when I was quite well, and have experienced no ill effects 
from it. With regard to the synonymes united with Smilax officina- 
lis by Dr. Seemann, I may remark that I do not think they will be 
objected to by botanists who take a broad and comprehensive view of 
the vegetable kingdom. But, unfortunately, the number of such men 
is small, compared with those who, to the greatest disadvantage to 
science, multiply the synonymes by giving new names to every form 
that happens to be so unlucky as to assume periodically a feature 
different from the specimen which served as type of the original 



71 

diagnosis of the plant to which it belongs. I see in my mind's eye 

a state of confusion coming over systematic botany, such as was 

never witnessed in any branch of science ; and I think it is the duty 

of every one who has the advancement of Phytology at heart, to 

oppose, by every means in his power, the lamentable condition which 

threatens to beset us. The opposition to the views advanced in the 

paper read anticipated from pharmacologists, will probably be more 

severe than that which Dr. Seemann has reason to expect from his 

botanical fellow-labourers. I will, therefore, mention a case bearing 

an analogy to the one above described. Pteris aquilina of England and 

Pteris esculenta of New Zealand differ from each other, in the root of 

the former being almost destitute of starchy matter, while that of th© 

latter has an abundance of starch. Believing, as I do, that Pteris 

aquilina is the same all over the world, and that Pteris esculenta of 

New Zealand is specifically identical with P. aquilina of England, I 

account for the abundant development of starch in one locality, and 

its almost total absence in the other, by assuming that the physical 

constitution of New Zealand is more favourable to the development 

of amylaceous matter in Pteris aquilina than that of England ; and in 

a similar manner does Dr. Seemann seem to account for the mealy 

and non-mealy sarsaparillas." 

Berthold Seemann. 
Kew, February 15, 1854. 



An Account of the Lichens of Cleveland, with their Localities. 
By William Mudd, Esq. 

Having perused the pages of the ' Phytologist' for some time, and 
observed the paucity of contributions towards the lichens of this 
country, it has occurred to me that a list of the species found in that 
part of Yorkshire called Cleveland would not be uninteresting. 

Before proceeding with the list, it will be necessary to take a glance 
at the arrangement of the genera. That of Acharius has been gene- 
rally adopted by lichenologists in this country. However, it seems 
probable, from the investigations that have lately been instituted, that 
this celebrated system will, like the more general one of Linneus, be 
wholly abandoned ; and in its room every writer upon lichens has 
proposed a new one of his own, of which, in truth, it may be said that 
it is impossible at present to say which will be adopted. 



72 

Owing to the unsettled state of the nomenclature, I have thought it 
necessary to refer the reader to works where they will find them either 
figured or described. 



Sph(Brophoron coralloides, a. laxum, Turn, and Borr. E. Bot. 
115. Sandstone rocks on Ayton Moor, Kildale Moor, &c. 

Sphceroplioron coralloides, 0. caespitosum, Turn, and Borr. E. 
Bot. 2474. Rocks at High Cliff; Guisbro' Moor. 

Sphcerophoron compressum, Ach. E. Bot. 114. Sandstone rocks, 
Baysdale and Oggeray Gill. The pale and compressed thallus at 
once distinguishes this species from the two preceding. 

Endocarpon smaragdulum, Ach. E. Bot. 1512. With us a very 
abundant species on sandstone rocks, old walls, &c. Ayton Moor ; 
walls near Castleton. 

Endocarpon smaragdulum, Ach., var. rufo - virescens, Leight. 
Leight. Brit. Ang. Lich. plate 4, f. 4. On old walls near Roseberry ; 
walls near Egton. 

Sagedia viridula, Fries. E. Bot. Suppl. after t. 2623, fig. 2. On 
brick walls, Ayton and Eston. 

Sagedia ochrostoma, Borr. MSS. Leight. Brit. Ang. Lich. p. 7, 
fig. 4. On the plastered walls of an old barn, Ayton. 

Sagedia aggregata. Fries. E. Bot. 1752. On old ash-trees, Ayton; 
Newton Wood. 

Pertusaria communis, DC. E. Bot. 677. On old trees, Airy- 
holme Wood, Cliffrigg, &c. A very common species. 

Pertusaria fallax, Hook. E. Bot. 1731. On ash-trees, Airyholme, 
rare. 

Thelotrema lepadinum, Ach. E. Bot. 678. On the bark of old 
trees. Hob-hole, near Castleton ; Mulgrave woods, near Whitby ; 
Airyholme Wood. 

Verrucaria nitida, Ach., var. minor, Leight. Leight. fasc. 1, 28. 
On smooth bark of ash-trees, Airyholme Wood. 

Verrucaria hiformis, Borr. E. Bot. Suppl. 2617, fig. 1. On the 
bark of oaks and ash-trees, Airyholme Wood ; Cliffrigg ; Esk banks, 
near Kuswarp. 

Verrucaria rhyponta, Ach. E. Bot. 2597, fig. 2. On the smooth 
bark of young ash-trees, Airyholme Wood. 

Verrucaria cinerea, Pers. E. Bot. 1891. On holly-bark, Newton 
Wood, Easby Wood, and Baysdale. 



73 

Verrucaria epidermidis, Ach. Leight. Brit. Ang. Lich. p. 17, fig. 
3. On the thin epidermis of the birch and other trees, Lounsdale ; 
Ayton ; near Castleton. 

Verrucaria epidermidis, /3. analepta. Hook. E. Bot. 1848. On 
oak-bark, Cliffrigg ; Airyholme Wood. 

Verrucaria fusiformis, Leight. Leight. Brit. Ang. Lich. p. 18, fig, 
2. On the bark of young ash-trees, top of Cliffrigg, rare. 

Verrucaria gemmata, Ach. E, Bot. Suppl. 2617, fig. 2. Trunks 
of trees, Airyholme Wood, rare. 

Verrucaria umbrina, Ach. E, Bot. 1499. Rocks and stones near 
Ayton, Carlton, and Stokesley. 

Verrucaria mutahilis, Borr. MSS. Leight. Brit. Ang. Lich. p. 24, 
fig. 3. On rocks, Kildale and near Ayton. Several states of this 
variable species may be met with in Cleveland, including the form 
published in E. Bot. as acrotella. 

Verrucaria immersa, Hoffm. Leight. Brit. Ang. Lich. p. 25, fig. 
2. On basaltic rocks, Lanbraugh Rigg, rare. 

Verrucaria rupestris, Ach. Leight. Brit. Angl. Lich. p. 25, fig. 4. 
On sandstone rocks, Newton Wood. 

Pyrenothea leucocephala. Fries. E. Bot. Suppl. 2642, fig. 2. On 
the trunks of old trees (with patellulae), Stogdale, Hob-hole, and 
Oggeray Gill. With us a very abundant species ! 

Pyrenothea vermicellifera, Kunz. Leight. fasc. 3, 102. On the 
bark of ash, holly, and maple, Ayton ; Kildale ; Mulgrave woods, near 
Whitby. 

Sirigula Bahingtonii, Berk. Leight. Brit. Ang. Lich. p. 30, fig. 4. 
On laurel-leaves, Ormesby. 

Arthonia spadicea, Leight. Leight. fasc. 3, 97. On hazel. Airy- 
holme Wood ; Newton Wood ; Cliffrigg. 

Arthonia lucida, Ach. E. Bot. Suppl. 2692, fig. 2. On the bark 
of old oaks, Oggeray Gill ; Newtown Wood. Rather rare. 

Arthonia Swartziana, Ach. E. Bot. 2079. On the smooth bark 
of trees, Airyholme Wood ; Cliffrigg ; Mulgrave woods, near Whitby. 
Opegrapha varia, Pers. var. notha, Ach. E. Bot. 1890. On the 
bark of old trees near Guisbro' ; Easby Wood ; near Stokesley. 

Opegrapha saxatilis, DC. E. Bot. 1790. Sandstone rocks, New- 
ton Wood ; Esk banks, near Egton. 

Opegrapha rupestris, Pers. " Named by the Rev. W. A. Leighton, 
of Luciefield, Shrewsbury." Sandstone rocks, Newton Wood, but 
very rare. 

Opegrapha herpetica, var. subocellata, Ach., subvar. simplex, 
VOL. V. L 



74 

Leight. *' Named by the Rev. W. A. Leightoii." On the barl of 
ash -trees, Easby Wood, Airyholrae Wood, Cliffrigg, &c. 

Graphis scripia, Ach., vsly. Jlexiiosa, Leight. Leight. fasc. 1,18, 
On the bark of ash-trees, Airyholme Wood ; Mulgrave woods, near 
Whitby. 

Graphis scripta, Ach., var. divaricata, Leight. On hazel, Airy- 
holme Wood. 

Aulacographa elegans, Leight. E. Bot. 1812. On the smooth 
bark of trees, Easby Wood, Baysdale, and Stogdale. 

Platygramma Hutchinsi(B, Leight. Leight. fasc. 4, 130. This 
species I first detected, rather sparingly, on rocks in Newton Wood, 
in 1852. Since then I have met with it in abundance on rocks in 
the Beech-bank, Kildale. 

Biatora mixta, Fries. E. Bot. 1735. On the bark of old oaks, 
Airyholme Wood ; ClifFrig ; Esk banks, near Whitby. 

Biatora preusnea, Leight. Leight. fasc. 390. On trunks of trees, 
Airyholme Wood ; Easby Wood ; Mulgrave woods, near Whitby. 

Biatora uliginosa, Fries. E. Bot. 1466. Margins of the moor, 
Baysdale ; sandy places on Eston Moor. 

Biatora muscoruni, Leight. E. Bot. 2217. On mosses and old 
walls, Kildale ; Eston Moor ; Esk bank, near Leatholme Bridge. 

Biatora quernea. Fries. E. Bot. 485. On the rugged bark of old 
oaks, Easby Wood; Guisbro' Spa Wood ; Bridle Gill, near Kose- 
berry. 

Biatora decolorans, Fries. E. Bot. 1185. On the ground, high 
part of Baysdale ; near West House, Kildale. 

Biatora aurantiaca. E. Bot. 948. Sandstone rocks, Newton 
Wood ; walls near Ayton. 

Biatora aurantiaca, yds. Jlavo-virescens, Schser. Leight. fasc. 4, 
119. Calcareous rocks, Broughton bank, rare. 

Biatora aurantiaca, var. irruhata. E. Bot. 2245. Lecidea irru- 
bata, Ach. ? Walls at Ingleby, rather rare. 

Biatora aurantiaca, var. erythrella, Leight. E. Bot. 1993, Ba- 
saltic rocks, Lanbraugh Rigg ; Cliffrigg. 

Biatora vernalis, Leight. E. Bot. 845. On the bark of old elms, 
Easby Wood ; Airyholme Wood ; Esk bank, near Whitby. 

Parmelia calcarea, Fries. E. Bot. 820. On rocks. Buck bank, 
Kildale ; Broughton bank. 

Parmelia scruposa, Fries. E. Bot. 266. On walls and rocks, 
Lanbraugh Rigg ; near West House. 



75 

Parmeliaferruginea, Fries. E. Boi. 1650. On rocks, Howden 
Gill, Roseberry ; trees, near Easby ; Airyholme. 

Pannelia uhnicola, Borr. E. Bot, 1426. On elm-bark, near 
Easby ; and on holly, Airyholme Wood. 

Pannelia sulphurea, Hoffm. Hook. Brit. Fl. ii. 181. Basaltic 
rocks, Cliifrigg ; Lanbraugh Rigg. 

Parmelia cerina, Ach., a., Fries. E. Bot. 627. Ash-trees, near 
Ayton ; Airyholme Wood. 

Parmelia murorum, Ach., var. citrina, Schser. E. Bot. 1793. 
Brick walls, Ayton ; Stokesley ; near Yarm. 

Parmelia ventosa, Ach. E. Bot. 906. Rocks, Ayton Moor, Guis- 
bro' Moor, &c. 

Parmelia Hoematom^na, Ach. Hook. Brit. Fl. ii. 190. Rocks, 
High ClifF; near Cook's monument; Ayton Moor. 

Parmelia Turneri, Ach. E. Bot. 857. Trunks of old ash-trees, 
Airyholme Wood ; ClifFrigg ; Mulgrave woods, near Whitby. 

Parmelia varia, Ach. E. Bot. 1666. On old posts and pales, 
Lanbraugh Rigg ; near Eston. 

Parmelia ostreata. Fries. E. Bot. 1501. On old stumps, Newton 
Wood ; old hollow trees, Oggeray Gill ; Baysdale. 

Parmelia parietina, Duf., var. h. suhstellata, Fries. E. Bot. 1794. 
On old trees, near Ayton ; near Easby. 

Parmelia parietina, Duf., var. i. concolor, Fries. Leight. fasc. 1, 
12. Old trees, near Ayton ; rocks, ClifFrigg ; Kildale. 

Parmelia parietina, Duf., vsiT. polycarpa. E. Bot. 1795, On old 
posts, near Stokesley ; Crathorn ; Yarm. 

Parmelia lanuginosa, Ach. Hook. Brit. Fl. ii. 196. On rocks, 
Broughton bank ; Baysdale, 

Parmelia caperaia, Ach, Hook, Brit, Fl, ii. 198. Trunks of 
trees, near West House. 

Parmelia conspersa, Ach. E. Bot, 2097, On rocks and stones, 
on Battersby bank, 

Parmelia aleurites, Ach, E. Bot. 858. On old trees, Baysdale ; 
Oggeray Gill ; Stogdale. 

Parmelia physodes, Ach. E, Bot, 126. Trunks of trees, old 
walls, &c., Ayton Moor ; with apothecia, on old trees, near West 
House. 

Sticta herbacea. Delis. E. Bot. 294. Trunks of old trees. Bays- 
dale ; on moss, in Oggeray Gill. 

Sticta pulmonaria, Ach. E. Bot. 572. Trunks of old trees, Bays- 
dale ; Stogdale ; Easby Wood. 



76 

Sticta scrohic'ulata, Ach. E. Bot. 497. Trunks of trees, and upon 

rocks, Oggeray Gill. 

Nephroma resupinata, Ach. E. Bot. 305. Mossy trunks of trees, 

Bajsdale ; Oggeray Gill ; Stogdale. 

William Mudd. 

Cleveland Lodge, Great Ayton, 
February 14, 1854. 

(To be continued.) 



Proceedings of Societies, Sfc. 



The Phytologist Club. 

One Hundred and Fi/tr/ -fourth Sitting. — Saturday, February 
25, 1854. — Mr. Newman, President, in the chair. 

The President read the following communications : — 

Epilohiu7n alpinum in Wales. 

" 1 have accidentally overlooked a remark in the ' Cybele Britan- 
nica' (iii. 427), upon my recording E. alpinum and E. alsinifolium to be 
found upon Snowdon. I have no specimen of either of them from 
that place, and do not now know my reason for believing, in 1835, 
that I had found the former on that mountain. As no other person 
has recorded it from thence, I think it most probable that I made a 
mistake in supposing that I had gathered it there." — Charles C. 
Bahington ; Cambridge, February 9, 1854. 

Notes on new or scarce Irish Plants. 

" ' Ranunculus confusus, Godr.' Bab. In pools near Cork. 

MattJiiola sinuata, Br. On steep declivities by the sea at Bally- 
conigar, Co. Wexford, plentiful. First observed by John Morrison, 
Esq., of Enniscorthy, who pointed it out to me in its places of growth. 

Silene anglica, L. Abundant in the sandy soil about Ballyconi- 
gar, J. M. 

Ornithopus perpusillus, L. With the preceding species, but scarce. 

' Hypericum anglicum, Bert.' Bab. in Ann. Nat. Hist. I have long 
observed this plant on walls by the road under Lota Wood, Glan- 
mire, Cork (which is probably Dr. Balfour's station also) ; but do not 



- 77 

think it can be a native. In the ' Flora of Cork,' Lota Wood is 
given as a locality for several species not even naturalized in this part 
of Ireland ; as Atropa Belladonna, Geranium phaeum, &c. ; and our 
' H. anglicum ' is most likely an escape also. 

Melilotus vulgaris, Willd. This plant was found by J. Morrison 
growing in abundance by a newly cut road in Co. Wexford, during 
two successive summers. The plant has not latterly appeared, 
although the station was far removed from suspicion. 

CalUtriche pedunculata, DC, $. sessilis. In a clear pool, Glanses- 
kin, Co. Cork. 

Sedum album, i3. turgidum, Ram. On rocks West of Queenstown, 
also on Hawlbowline Island, Cork Harbour, plentiful ; discovered by 
Dr. Wood, who took it for S. dasyphyllum. In its short, thick leaves, 
' foliis ovatis crassis,' DC, of a yellow-green colour, and its short, 
obtuse petals, this form differs considerably from var. a. It is, at 
least, well established in the above stations. 

Saxifraga stellaris, L. On the wet rocks of Hungry Hill, Co. 
Cork, a var. of this occurs which differs from the usual state, in its 
great size, stouter habit, tall and much-branched panicle, with leaves 
very patent and hirsute. 

Saxifraga hirsuta, Fl. Hib. Hag's Glen and Devil's Ladder, Car- 
rantuel, Co. Kerry, Aug. 1853. Flowers yellowish white, large. 

Galium boreale, L. Bog near Clonmel, Miss S. Gruhb. 

' Hieracium strictum, Fr.' Head of Glenmalur, Co. Wicklow, 
Aug. 1852. 

' Hieracium corymbosum, Fr.' With H. strictum. 

Senecio Saracenicus, L. In two places near Stradbally, Queen's 
Co., apparently wild, Thomas Chandlee. 

Diotis mariiima, Cass. Amongst boulders on the strand at Tra- 
more, Waterford, Aug. 1850. 

Inula crithmoides, L. Rocks at Tramore, abundant. 

Cicendla Jiliformis, Reich. Near Bantry, Gleugariff, and Castle- 
town, Berehaven, July and Aug. 1853. 

Linaria minor, Desf. Waste ground near Carlow, J. Morrison. 
In gardens at Sunday's Well and Summer Hill, Cork, frequent. 

Mentha piperita, L. Roadside near Ballitore, Kildare. Drain in 
Co. Cork, between Carrigaline and the sea, Sept. 1851. 

Statice Bahusiensis, Fr. Common about Cork Harbour, where it 
has been taken for S. Limonium, L. 

Statice binervosa, G. E. Sm., S. spathulata, Aiict. Tramore, 
Waterford, T. Citandlee. 



78 # 

Polygonum Bistorta, L. Woods near Stradbally, Queen's Co., T. 
Chatidlee. 

Polygonum mite, Schrank. Marsh near Ballincollig Castle, Cork, 
Sept. 1853. 

Salix am,higua, Ehrb. Near Glengariff, and at Dunboy, Bere- 
haven. 

Salix herbacea, L. Crevices of the slate rocks, summit of Sugar- 
loaf Mountain, Glengariff, July, 1853. 

Ophrys muscifera, Huds. Bog between Ballitore and Athy, Co. 
Kildare, T. Chandlee. 

Juncus acutus, L. Curacloa, Co. Wexford, J. Moifison. 

Carex extensa. Good. Bantry Bay, July^ 1853. Frequent around 
Cork Harbour. 

Carex punctata, Gaud. Shore at Glengariff, rare ; in greater 
quantity, but dwarfed, near Dunboy, Berehaven ; July and August, 
1853. 

Carex fulva, Good., &. Hornschuchiana,H.oppe. Sugar-loaf Moun- 
tain, near the suinmit. 

Bromus commuiatiis, Schrad. Fields near Fermoy, T. Chandlee. 

Bromus Madritensis, L., B. diandrus, Curt. By the river at Car- 
rick-on-Suir, Co. Tipperary, Miss S. Gruhh. 

Trichomanes radicans, Sw., T. speciosum, Auct. Under a shelf of 
rocks near the summit of Carrigeena, Kildorrery, N. of Co. Cork, at 
an elevation of about 1000 or 1200 feet, May, 1852. 

Isoeies lacustris, L. Lake at Gongaunebarra, July, 1853. 

I searched in vain for Subiilaria aqiiatica, which had been found 
in this locality, as well as the Isoetes, by Professor Harvey." 
— J. Carrol; February, 1854. 

On the Locality for Trifolium resupinatum , L., near Bristol. 

" Sevei'al botanists, during the past summer, having carefully sought 
the neighbourhood of Bristol for Trifolium resupinatum, induces me 
to record the following note in the ' Phytologist :' — 

" Mr. Drummond, while staying in Bristol during the summer of 
1830, discovered, in the marshes about two miles below Shirehamp- 
ton, Trifolium resupinatum, a specimen of w^iich he presented to his 
friend Sir W. Hooker, and also to his friend Mr. Smith, an intelligent 
botanist, residing at Shirehampton ; but previously to his leaving 
Bristol he conducted Mr. Smith to the meadow, in order that he 
might again seek it the following year, but was never able to find 
the least trace of the plant. In 1837, Mr. Smith kindly directed me 



m 79 

to the spot ; and in July, 1839, Mr. Babington and myself carefully 
searched the locality, but were equally unsuccessful ; and, having 
since visited the meadovr every summer for the last ten years, I am 
fully satisfied that the plant is now lost by drainage. Mr. Smith, 
shortly before his death, informed me that it was never found in abun- 
dance, as it had been erroneously reported : but two or three speci- 
mens were all that Mr. Drummond ever met with. He had strong 
reasons for believing the plant to have been introduced." — T. B. 
Flower ; Seend, near Melkskam, February, 1854. 

Coronopus didyma, DC. 

" In the ' Cybele ' a question is asked, whether this plant is native 
or introduced to the neighbourhood of Bristol. I should almost be 
inclined to say it was introduced, having observed it, always near bal- 
last, in the neighbourhood for upwards of twenty years." — Id. 

Laihyrus latifolius, L. 

" Mr. Anderson thinks this plant undoubtedly wild in Stapleton 
quarries, near Bristol. It has recently been stated to be only a broad- 
leaved form of L. sylvestris with smooth, compressed seeds, and not 
the tubercular and wrinkled seeds of L. latifolius. Mr. Swete, who, 
I believe, is compiling a Flora of Bristol and its neighbourhood, will, 
doubtless, ascertain this fact, for future reference. And I may here 
take this opportunity of remarking, that the Flora of Bristol requires 
a careful examination and study, which it will, doubtless, receive from 
the above gentleman, and not, as it frequently happens, be a mere 
compilation from dubious authority, which would only tend to mislead 
rather than instruct the resident and non-resident botanist, and at the 
same time be utterly without value in a scientific point of view." — Id. 

Phleum asperum, Jacq. 

" This is recorded to grow at Kingsweston, near Bristol. I have 
repeatedly sought for this plant, without finding it. Mr. Smith, of 
Shirehampton, who cultivated it for many years in his garden, told 
me that he had frequently looked over every spot of ground in the 
neighbourhood where this grass was likely to be met with, for many 
seasons ; and was fully convinced that it is not now found in the loca- 
lity indicated. It is also stated, in the ' English Flora,' to grow in 
Badminton Park, near the Lodge ; and it would be well if any resi- 
dent botanist would verify this locality during the ensuing summer, 
and inform us near which of the lodges it is to be found, there being 



so w 

several by which the Park can be entered. Mr, H. C. Watson, in his 
* Cybele,' states that this species may, perhaps, have been passed 
over as P. arenarium ; and it wonld be worth while carefully to exa- 
mine any alleged inland localities for the latter, on the chance of find- 
ing P. asperum with it or instead of it." — Id. 

On the Yorkshire Locality for Anacharis alsinastrum, Bab. 

" Perhaps it may be worth while to note, to prevent any chance of 
misapprehension, that the Yorkshire station for this plant mentioned 
in last month's ' Phytologist' (v. 55), viz., a pond below the bridge 
over the Wiske at Kirby Wiske, near Thirsk, is precisely the same 
that was recorded Phytol. iv. 365 ; and that in Phytol. iv. 721, I 
explained when and in what manner it had been introduced. At my 
last visit, about three months ago, it seemed scarcely to have spread 
beyond the limits of the pond in which it was originally planted." — 
John G. Baker ; Thirsk, February, 1854. 

A Supplement to the ' Flora of Yorkshire.'' 

" A Supplement to Baines's ' Flora of Yorkshire ' is in preparation, 
and will most likely be ready for publication in the course of a few 
weeks. Any information relative to the rarer plants of the county, 
especially if they are not included in the original work or the ' Cybele 
Britannica,' will be thankfully received, by either Mr. Baines or 
myself." — Id. 

Oph ioglossum lusitanicum . 

The President made the following communication : — 
" I have much pleasure in being able to add this little fern to the 
British Flora. It has just been discovered, in some abundance, by 
Mr. George Wolsey, in the Island of Guernsey. It occurs, amid short 
and very level herbage sloping towards the South, on the summit of 
rocks on the South coast of the Island, and not far from Petit Bot 
Bay. On this elevated down are a few scattered and stunted furze- 
bushes, and around these the grass is, as usual, somewhat longer ; 
and here the little adder's-tongue is not quite so minute as on the 
level turf, where it scarcely attains an inch in length. It grows in 
company with Trichonema Coluranae and Scilla autumnalis, and on 
the ]7th of January was in full fruit. The very early fructification, 
and the minute size, of this species will readily account for its not 
having been previously observed ; and may also suggest the possibi- 
lity of its existing undiscovered in similar situations on the seacoast 



% 81 

of Cornwall. I am indebted to the discoverer for a supply of living 
and dried specimens." 

Devonshire Station for Lythrum hyssopifolium. 

" I do not know whether any Devonshire station is recorded for 
Lythrum hyssopifolium ; and it may be therefore worth while to 
mention that I met with it early last October, growing, for the space 
of a few yards, on the lower and raoister part of a carriage-drive lead- 
ing to Park House, Budleigh Saltern, South Devon. The plants were 
mostly small, and either had never flowered, or had lost all trace of 
having done so ; they were confined to the left-hand side of the road. 
I had for years earnestly, but vainly, desired to meet with this Lyth- 
rum, and now stumbled upon it by the purest accident. If the ground, 
which has, I believe, passed into new hands, should not have been 
seriously disturbed before next summer, some botanist visiting the 
locality earlier in the season may chance to find it in blossom." [See 
Cyb. Brit. iii. 430,] — Anna Russell ; Clarendon Villa, Kenilworth, 
Fehruary 17, 1854. 

Bijid Ferns. 

" I would also mention, with reference to two notices of bifid ferns, 
by Messrs. Piquet and Gissing, which have appeared in the late 
numbers of the ' Phytologist,' that on crossing the Grampians, last 
June, between Glen Shee and Braemar, I found a most luxuriant plant 
of Aspidium Lonchitis with one bifid frond, and one only, though 
there must have been at least from twenty to thirty others on the 
same root. The specimens were larger than any I had ever seen, 
many fronds, and the divided one among the number, being seventeen 
inches in length. The cleft was about two inches deep." — Id. 

Laminaria longicrnris. 

" A notice of the occurrence here of this plant appeared in one of 
the numbers of the * Phytologist ' for 1851. It appears from the date 
attached to my specimen, that in place of being the third in order 
found upon the British coast, as I then supposed, it must stand as the 
second, and in one sense as ihejirst; which, though in some respects 
of no great moment, is yet of some importance as a matter of accu- 
racy. The following I believe to be the order of dates : — Orkney, 
1838; Gamrie, May, 1850; Ayrshire, July, 1850 ; Ireland, August 
1850." — George Harris ; Gamrie, Banffshire. 

VOL. V. M 



82 ^ 



Adiantum Capillus- Veneris on Cheddar Cliffs. 

" Observing in a late number of the ' Phytologist ' the recorded 
occurrence of Adiantum Capillus- Veneris near Bath, I beg to corro- 
borate the fact of the existence of that fern in Somersetshire, having 
myself, in the year 1851, found a plant or two of it on moist rocks in 
the neighbourhood of Cheddar. I dried a few specimens, but left the 
roots uninjured ; and, as they are in an out-of-the-way situation, I 
trust I may find them still there on my next visit to Somersetshire." 
— William Henry Hawker ; Horndean, Hants, February 6, 1854. 



Botanical Society of Edinburgh. 
January 12th, 1854. — Professor Balfour, President, in the chair. 

Donations to the Society's Library and Herbarium. 

Donations were announced, from Dr. Anderson ; Dr. Senoner, of 
Vienna ; Mr. Moore, of Glasnevin, Irish plants, including Naias flex- 
ilis, Equiestum Moorii of Newman, Potamogeton longifolius, Erica 
mediterranea, var., &c. 

Exhibitions. 

Dr. Balfour exhibited a remarkable specimen of Hypnum cirrho- 
sum, Schw., which had been sent to him by the Rev. Mr. Nisbet, as 
having been gathered in Balur, North Uist, 

Mr. G. Lawson exhibited specimens of Bryura warneum from the 
Tents Muir Sands, on the east coast of Fife, where it was discovered 
by Mr. W. M. Ogilvie, on the 27th of August last. It was associated 
with Brj'um csespititium, to which it bears a resemblance. The spe- 
cies is new to Britain, and appears to be rare on the Continent. It 
is described and figured by Bruch and Schiraper in the ' Bryologia 
Europsea,' fasc. vi. 

The following papers were read : — 

DiatomacecB in the Mull Deposit. 

'On Diatomaceae found in the Mull Deposit;' by Professor Gre- 
gory. 

Having continued the study of this deposit for more than a year, 
Professor Gregory detected in it more than 150 species, a number 



« 83 

three times as large as has hitherto been observed in any other de- 
posit. Of these, he mentioned on the present occasion about 140, of 
which about 120 were known and admitted ah-eady as British species. 

The following species were new to Britain, but figured by conti- 
nental authors : — Epithemia gibberula, Eunoda depressa, Kutz., E. 
Camelus, E. bigibba, Kutz., Himantidiura exigerum, Breb., Navicula 
Trochus, Ehr., N. laevissima, Cocconema gibbum. Figures of these 
species were exhibited, and in the case of Eunotia bigibba nine re- 
markable varieties were figured. 

The following species were described and figured as new to sci- 
ence : — Eunotia incisa, Pinnularia latestriata, P. undulata, P. exigera, 
P. tenuis, P. parva, Stauroneis rectangularis, Navicula apiculata, 
Smitli, Cyrabella lumens, Gomj)honema Brebissonii? G. Hebridense. 

Professor Gregory then directed attention to the remarkable varia- 
tions of a form which had been referred by Mr. Smith to his Pinnu- 
laria divergens, but, as found in the Mull earth, had more than double 
the number of striae which belong to that species. It occurs in 
several very striking varieties, and the conjecture was thrown out, that 
it is in reality not P. divergens, but a distinct species, including P. 
stauroneiformis, P. interrupta, and P. mesolepta of Smith, as well as 
what he took for P. divergens in the Mull deposit. 

Some remarks were then made on the value of generic and specific 
characters in the classification of the Diatoraacese. It was shown 
that the genera Cymbella and Cocconema, Eunotia and Himantidium, 
seem to be respectively separated on insufficient grounds. In regard 
to specific characters, it was pointed out that while certain species 
vary almost ad in/initum, others exhibit a remarkable degree of per- 
manence. Examples of the former are Eunotia triodon, E. bigibba, 
Himantidium bidens, H. undulatum, Pinnularia divergens, and others ; 
of the latter Eunotia tetraodon, E. Diadema, Navicula Trochus, N. 
serians, N. rhoniboides, Pinnularia alpina, and others. It was shown 
that these very characters of permanence and variableness might be 
usefully employed as specific characters, and that viewed in this light, 
both of them afford strong proof of the real existence of species as 
natural divisions. 

Professor Gregory announced that he had still several new forms 
found in this deposit to describe on some future occasion, and that he 
was engaged in the study of other deposits ; in all of which he had 
ah-eady found species hitherto overlooked, and among these several 
of the new forms above named. 



84 

Specimens of the Mull deposit were exhibited under the micro- 
scope, as well as specimens of the deposit in its natural state, and of 
the polishing powder obtained from it. 

Desmarestia Dresnayi on the Coast of Ireland. 

' On the occurrence of Desmarestia Dresnayi on the Coast of Ire- 
land;' by W. Sawers, Esq., Londonderry. Communicated by Dr. 
Greville. 

In a letter to Professor Balfour, Mr. Sawers stated, " I have great 
pleasure in sending you specimens of an Alga, new to the shores of 
the United Kingdom. Specimens having been sent to Dr. Montague of 
Paris, Member of the French Institute, by Dr. Landsborough and the 
Rev. M. J. Berkeley, Dr. Montague writes, that he gathered the same 
plant at Fort St. Sebastian, Spain, in 1823, and published a descrip- 
tion of it, with a plate, in 1842, in the ' Annales des Sciences Natu- 
relles,' naming it Desmarestia pinnatinervia, and that it has been got 
by M. Crouan, at Brest, though rarely. Crouan makes it a variety of 
Desmarestia Dresnayi, but Montagne maintains the distinctness of his 
species, and retains his name D. pinnatinervia. I got the young 
fronds floating early in August at Molville, near the mouth of Loch 
Foyle, and have visited the locality frequently since, always getting a 
number of specimens, the great majority imperfect, being eaten by 
mollusks, &c. When fresh, it has the colour of a Laminaria, but is 
not so glutinous to the feel, and thinner. The root is a disk, and 
sometimes two or three fronds arise from the same disk ; in some 
cases they are slightly proliferous where the margin has been injured. 
The frond is from 12 to 18 inches long, and 2 to 4 inches in breadth. 
The lateral nervelets are forked as in the frond of a fern." 

Dr. Greville was of opinion that the plant must be referred to D. 
Dresnayi. He read a description of it, and exhibited a drawing, 
both of which will appear in the Society's ' Transactions.' 

Flora of the Vosges. 

* Remarks on the Flora of the Vosges ;' by Dr. Dubuc. 

Dr. Dubuc presented a parcel of plants received from Dr. Mougeot, 
to which his remarks had reference. He slated that the principal 
mountains of the Vosges viere about 120 miles in extent, and run 
parallel to the Rhine, consisting chiefly of dome-shaped swelling hills, 
turfed on the top. Formerly they abounded in forests, but many of 
them are now bare. The highest summit of the Vosges does not 
exceed 4693 feet ; their tops are generally formed of red and gray 



86 

sandstone, mixed with red and green argyllo-micaceous schists cover- 
ing calcareous beds. 

The comparatively southern situation of the Vosges on the conti- 
nent, and their distance from the sea, necessarily produce a notable 
difference between their climate and that of the Highlands of Scot- 
land. The winters in the Vosges are generally more severe, but the 
summers are warmer, especially in the numerous valleys by which 
they are intersected. There is also a considerable difference between 
the Flora of the Vosges and that of Scotland. Of 1600 phaneroga- 
mous plants found in the Vosges, 260 are species not found in 
Scotland, whilst in Scotland about 190 species are found which do not 
belong to the Vosges. Ferns are abundant in the Vosges, and some of 
them on the tops of the mountains, as Allosorus crispus, which occurs 
on the summit of the Ballon ; but the total number of species (30) is 
less than that of Scotland (40). Dr. Dubuc read a list of the plants 
sent by Dr. Mougeot, and pointed out the characteristic genera of the 
Vosges and Scotland respectively. 

He also read a letter from Dr. Mougeot, in which he mentioned that 
the fourteenth century of his collection of cryptogamic plants of the 
Vosges was ready. 

Carex pmdiformis, 8fc. 

'On Carex psediformis and other new Austrian plants;' by Dr. 
Adolph Senoner. 

This communication accompanied a large parcel of Austrian plants, 
and contained remarks on some of the more interesting of them. 
Dr. Senoner particularly called attention to Carex paediformis, 
Mayer, discovered during last summer in Hungary by Professor 
Harzliuziky, an interesting addition to the Austrian Flora. It grows 
upon limestone. There were also many new species from Dr. Schrer, 
who had at lenj^th resolved upon publishing a Flora of Transylvania. 
Aldrovanda Fachinia, Saxifraga Fachinia, &c., were among the other 
plants remarked upon. 

Dr. Senoner expressed a wish to exchange land and fresh-water 
shells and ants with British naturalists for which he would be glad to 
return Coleopterous and other insects or plants. 

State of the Society's Herbarium. 

' Report on the State of the Society's herbarium ;' by Dr. Ander- 
son, Curator. 

" Since the last report on the state of the herbarium was read. 



86 

great progress has been made towards the complete arrangement of 
the collection. 

" Last autumn, the cabinets and their contents, with the exception 
of those containing the British plants, were removed to a commodious 
room in the new Museum at the Botanic Garden. 

" The Society's collection of British plants, which still remains in 
the Society's rooms at the University, is now, by the labours of Mr. 
Lawson, in a most perfect state, and will prove a valuable aid to those 
who may be studying critical species, or the geographical distribution 
of plants in the British Isles. The European herbarium is also in a 
most satisfactory condition, but in consequence of the absence of our 
diligent membei', Mr. Blackie, its arrangement is not yet quite per- 
fect. The collection is one of great extent, comprising plants from 
nearly all the countries of Europe. During the last year it has been 
enriched by valuable conti'ibutions from Spain and Portugal, and by a 
very complete set of Scandinavian plants, from Professor Blytt, of 
Christiana, one of the Society's foreign members. The Asiatic por- 
tion of the collection, the most extensive and perhaps the most 
valuable of the whole, is now not far from being finished. This col- 
lection, I have said, is very extensive ; it consists principally of plants 
from the East Indies, with a few from Arabia and Syria, part of the 
collection left to the Society by Mr. Christy. The Indian plants 
have been collected by such illustrious men as Roxburgh, Wallich, 
and Wight, also by the Countess of Dalhousie, Dr. Cleghorn, Captain 
Campbell, and Dr. Jameson, of the Company's Gardens at Saharun- 
pore. By the labours of Dr. Cleghorn and myself, the naming and 
arranging of the species have advanced to the Orchidacese, but still 
much has to be done in the way of revision, &c. The Society's 
collection is rather rich in African plants, of which a considerable 
number of species is from the Cape of Good Hope, some named, but 
the greater part undetermined. They are nearly all glued down. 

" The Society have also a large and good collection of plants from 
America, principally from North America, contributed by Dr. Gavin 
Watson of Philadelphia, Mr. James M'Nab, and Dr. Philip Maclagan. 
Some of them are already glued, and the whole collection is ready to 
undergo this process. 

" The number of South American plants (rarities in all herbaria) is 
small. Within the last two years the amount has, however, been 
increased by very valuable parcels from Mr. Spruce, a collector in the 
northern provinces of South America. Since last report a consider- 



87 

able collection of Australian plants has been purchased. Before this 
there were few plants fi"om that country in the herbarium, 

" As regards the number of species in the herbarium, 1 fear I can 
give almost no correct statement until a catalogue is formed. From 
what I have said regarding the state of the various collections, it will 
be evident to all that it is such as not to admit of a list being drawn 
up at present. 

" In concluding this Report, allow me, Sir, to congratulate the 
Society on the flourishing condition of its herbarium ; and also to 
request that the younger members will come forward and assist in 
completing its arrangement. There is still much to do, and we only 
require workers ; and lastly, I would remind any of our members 
that may go abroad, that though far removed from us and our meet- 
ings, they are still members, and as such they should remember the 
interests of the Society and its herbarium, and as a proof 1 would, 
as Curator of the Museum, request them to send home specimens of 
the plants occurring in their respective localities." 

Election of Fellows. 

The following candidates were balloted for and duly elected : — 
Ordinary Resident Fellows : John Kirk, Esq., 11, Lothian Street; John 
Lowe, Esq., 13, South Frederick Street ; Mohammed Ali Soubki, 
Esq., 46, Minto Street ; Mustapha Mustapha, Esq., 15, Argyll Square ; 
Mohammed Ali Katib, Esq., 9, Argyll Square ; William James Otto, 
Esq., 38, India Street : and A.H. Stonehouse Vigor, Esq., Cambridge, 
as a Non-Resident Fellow. 

Foreign Member : Dr. Adolph Senoner, Vienna. 

Associates : Mr. Alexander Buchan, Blackford, by Auchterarder j 
and Mr. James Ray, Edgehill Nursery. 



February 9th, 1854. — Professor Balfour, President, in the chair. 

Donaiions to the Library and Herbarium. 

Donations were announced, from Professor Balfour ; the Society 
of Natural Sciences at Cherbourg; Mr. Charles Howie ; Mr. Fair- 
bairn ; Dr. Berthold Seemann ; Messrs. Young & Co. ; Mr. Alex. 
Oswald Brodie ; Dr. Philip Maclagan ; Messrs. P. Lawson & Sou ; Mr. 
Henderson ; Messrs. Dickson and Turnbull ; Mr. Isaac Anderson ; 
Mr. Lyon ; Mr. P. Fairbairn ; and Dr. Douglas Maclagan. 



88 

The following papers were read : — 

Anacharis Alsinastrum in Ireland. 

' On the Occurrence of Anacharis Alsinastrum in Ireland ;' by Dr. 
Dickie. 

In a letter to Dr. Balfour, Dr. Dickie observed : — "The accom- 
panying are, I suppose, specimens of Anacharis. If so, we have in 
Ireland the earliest known record of its presence in the United King- 
dom if I mistake not. I have thought, at all events, it might be a 
point of interest to you, and worthy of notice at your Society." The 
specimens were accompanied by the following note by Mr. John New, 
gardener: — "About eighteen years ago, the pond at Waringstown 
was cleared of overhanging trees, when the Anacharis was immediately 
observed after the planting of some aquatics, making it necessary 
several times during the summer to clear it out. It is not known 
whether it existed in the pond previously to the above date, or was 
introduced with the aquatics at that time. For many years its name 
was not known to any person in the neighbourhood." 

Botanical Trip to the Tents Muir. 

' Notes of a Botanical Trip to the Tents Muir, in the north of Fife, 
in July last;' by Mr. G. Lawson. 

The object of these notes was to call attention to a rich locality, 
which, although within easy reach, had not hitherto been much 
examined by Edinburgh botanists. The Tents Muir was described 
as an extensive tract, chiefly of sand dunes, extending along the coast 
from Ferry-Port-on- Craig to the river Eden. The pools and moist 
hollows on the Muir were rich in fresh-water Algae, including Nos- 
tochineae and Desmidieae. The party did not find Isnardia palustris, 
and fancied that the abundance and luxuriance of Peplis Portula might 
have led to some mistake. The Peplis afforded a retreat for myriads 
of Hydra viridis. 

Rare Plants in the Neighbourhood of Edinburgh. 

' Notice of Localities for Rare Plants in the Neighbourhood of 
Edinburgh ;' by G. R. Tate, Esq. 

The following were among the plants noticed : — 

Alyssum calycinum. On debris below the Queen's Drive, near 
Duddingston. "I noticed the plant in this locality in the month of 
May before it was in flower; at that time there were a number of 
specimens. As the season advanced and the locality became more 



generally known, nearly the whole were eradicated. It is hardly pos- 
sible that the Alyssum could have escaped the notice of the numerous 
botanists visiting Arthur's Seat and its neighbourhood, had it existed 
in this locality for any length of time. The probability is, that it had 
been introduced by seed sown, likely at no very distant date, by some 
one anxious to add a species to a Flora already overstocked with 
doubtful natives. Along with Mr. Bryce and Mr. E. W. Cropper, I 
obtained this plant at Burntisland, in very small quantity." 

Sinapis Cheiranthus. In a field near Gullane. Not previously 
found in Scotland, and doubtfully indigenous. 

Drosera longifolia. Obtained, in company with Mr. Ross, in bogs 
at the foot of the Knock Hill, not far from the station of Carex 
irrigua. 

Hypericum Androsaemum. Near Culross. 

HypochaBris glabra. Near Culross. 

Lamium maculatum laevigatum. Banks of the Esk, about two miles 
above Musselburgh. 

Rumex alpinus. In two localities near the Knock Hill, both near 
cottages. 

Tulipa sylvestris. Sides of the Water of Leith, above Currie. 

Zannichellia palustris. Canal, near Fountain Bridge. 

Carex incurva. Sea shore between Longniddry and Prestonpans. 

Nightshade Family. 

* On the Nightshade Family ;' by Peter Fairbairn, Esq. 

Mr. Fairbairn detailed the character and properties of the Solanaceae, 
and alluded particularly to the nature and qualities of the alkaloids 
yielded by different genera and species. iHe remarked that the effect 
produced by such alkaloids as Hyoscyamine, Daturia, and Atropia 
were different from those produced by Solanine, especially as regards 
the dilatation of the pupil. 

Dr. T. Anderson remarked thai Mr. Fairbairn had not adopted the 
division proposed by Miers into Solanaceae and Atropaceae, orders 
which were distinguished by aestivation and other botanical charac- 
ters, as well as by their physiological properties. He did not consider 
that any correct evidence had been adduced of the narcotic properties 
of the species of Solanum. The infusion of S. Dulcamara could be 
given in large quantities without producing any narcotic effects, and 
its berries had been used as a preserve. The effects of the plants be- 
longing to the order Atropaceae did not develope themselves like 
those of opium. They were more of a stimulant character and were 
VOL. V. 



00 

slowly produced, and they were accompanied with marked enlarge- 
ment of the pupil. 

Value of Botanical Histology to the Medical Student. 

* Illustrations of the Vahie of Botanical Histology to the Medical 
Student and Practitioner ;' by Dr. Lindsay, Assistant Physician to the 
Crichton Royal Institution, Dumfries. 

The author stated that the origin of this paper was due to the fact 
that there existed among the medical students of the Edinburgh 
University a strong feeling that they are compelled by the curriculum- 
regulations to learn too much of the collateral sciences of Natural 
History, Chemistry, and Botany, — Botany being, in particular, a 
science, the knowledge of which is regarded as quite unnecessary for 
the practice of their profession. The idea that the study of the scien- 
tific or theoretical disqualifies to a certain extent from the acquire- 
ment of practical knowledge, is a fatal error, and he believed that 
every Professor of the University could bear testimony to the fact that 
those students who had distinguished themselves in one department 
of their academic curriculum, generally did so equally in every other. 
Dr. Lindsay's object in this communication was merely to lay before 
such sceptics the results of the short experience of one but lately a 
student — of one who had been at the same time a scientific and a 
"practical man ;" and to point out more especially by a few illustra- 
tions the value of microscopical Botany to the general practitioner. 

Some considerable time ago, Dr. Lindsay had been applied to by a 
distinguished chemist to make a microscopical examination of some 
raw tobacco, with a view to the detection of any adulteration, the 
question at issue being a charge of adulteration, made at the instance 
of Her Majesty's excise against a wholesale tobacconist, on the 
ground of adulteration. The matter came to a public trial, in which 
Dr. Lindsay gave evidence. He found that the tobacco was genuine, 
from the nature of the hairs of Nicotiana, which have an apical gland, 
from the arrangement in a semi-lunar form of the spiral vessels of 
the leaf-stalk, as seen in a cross section, and from the number and 
appearance of the stomata. The surface of the leaves was covered in 
some places with very minute silvery crystals ; in others with a dark 
viscid gnmmy matter, on the nature of neither of which could His- 
tology, ji:>er se, throw a decided light. Instead of tobacco, the sub- 
stance presented to Dr. Lindsay for examination might have been 
scammony, senna, mustard, or any other drug of vegetable origin ; and 
he thought that, in such a case, the botanist was the only fit person to 



91 

decide whether, how far, and with what the drug had been adulterated. 
Vegetable drugs were especially liable to adulteration, and it was the 
duty of the practitioner to ascertain the purity of those he used ; 
otherwise, in expecting a certain action from a certain drug, he might 
disappoint both himself and his patient. In evidence of the vast im- 
portance of the subject of adulteration of drugs. Dr. Lindsay referred 
to the excellent papers published by the Sanitary Commission of the 
' Lancet.' Dr. Lindsay was of opinion that there ought to be a legis- 
lative enactment rendering druggists responsible for the quality of all 
medicines supplied by them, compelling them to test, and thus to 
ascertain the purity of every drug they sold. 

The next illustration detailed by Dr. Lindsay was a case of sus- 
pected poisoning. During life no symptoms of poisoning appeared, 
and it was obviously of great importance to determine precisely the 
nature of the pultaceous contents of the stomach. These had a strong 
ratafia odour, and consisted of a thick, whitish, pasty matter, inter- 
mixed with the rind and pulp of some succulent fruit. Under the 
microscope, Dr. Lindsay detected, inter alia, abundance of the starch, 
cells of wheat flour, and the sclerogenous cells and portions of the 
epidermis and parenchyma of the pear. Hence he reported the appa- 
rent contents of the stomach to be pudding of the nature of blanc 
mange, made of flour, milk, gelatine of some kind, and spices, and a 
large quantity of pears mostly roasted, and that in his opinion death 
resulted from the effects of a surfeit of food of a most unusual kind, 
flavoured with a large excess of some essential oil, containing as its 
active ingredient hydrocyanic acid. The chemical evidence after- 
wards proved the case to be one of poisoning by " quintessence of 
ratafia," a substance used to flavour puddings. Li giving in his re- 
port of this case, the police authorities informed Dr. Lindsay that it 
was the first occasion on which they had authorised or received the 
report of a microscopic examination in a case of suspected poisoning, 
so that the importance of Histology in medico-legal cases is only 
beginning to be recognised by courts of law. 

Dr. Lindsay then alluded to various observations made by him on 
the Histology of cholera, while resident physician of a cholera hos- 
pital. He mentioned that, by examining the matters vomited, the 
practitioner was often enabled to tell the exact nature of the patient's 
food, which was of especial importance in cases where he was unable 
to detail the history of the seizure, or where he or his friends were 
found to prevaricate or deny, as in the case of a patient using an in- 
terdicted article of diet. Moreover, many entophytes might be dis- 



92 

covered, having either a casual or accidental relation to disease. He 
had seen Sarcina Goodsirii in fire out of ten cases of cholera where 
vomiting was present as a symptom. Dr. Lindsay entered into 
details respecting the so-called " cholera fungi," or " cholera corpus- 
cles," or " cells," &c., about which there had been so much discussion, 
and which he referred to the ordinary articles of food. 

Referring to the parasitic vegetable organisms that attack the 
human body. Dr. Lindsay stated that no part of the human system 
could be considered free, under certain circumstances, from the lia- 
bility to their attacks, the delicate ramose mycelium of Fungi being 
capable of development in almost every situation. Among the lower 
animals they had been frequently noticed to occur to such an extent 
as to constitute distinct disease. The following instances were 
cited : — On the body of the silk-worm. Vibrios, Triton, and frog ; on 
the scales of fishes ; in the abdomen of hens, doves, and other birds, 
and in the trachea and lungs of birds; in the yolk of hens' eggs ; on 
the face of the mouse ; in the nasal mucus of the horse in glanders ; 
and in the contents of the stomach and intestines of rabbits, oxen, 
sheep, and pigs. In the human subject they are familiarly known as 
the cause of some very disagreeable, though not dangerous cutaneous 
diseases, e. g., Favus, Mentagra, some kinds of Porrigo and Pityriasis, 
and are also common in some forms of Aphthge. They have been 
found coating the tongue, the fauces and oesophagus ; also on ulcer- 
ated spots in the intestines ; in vomited matter ; in the faeces in very 
many disorders, e.g., cholera, typhus, dothin-enterite, dysentery, and 
after simple errors in diet ; in the posterior chamber of the eye ; in 
tubercular cavities in the lungs and in sputa ; in the fibrinous casts 
of the smaller bronchi expectorated in pneumonia, in carious teeth, in 
nrine, milk, mucus, and pus, &c. In almost all the instances above 
mentioned, the microscope could alone detect the existence of the 
parasites, and many an obscure and anomalous case of disease has the 
microscope been instrumental in clearing up. Dr. Lindsay remarked, 
however, that he was not prepared to grant it the same supreme im- 
portance in diagnosis which is attributed to it by some observers ; 
but the fact could not be doubted that it was a most important adjunct 
alike to the general medical practitioner, the man of science, and the 
pharmaceutist, in their search after truth. 

Dr. Lindsay alluded to the Torbanehill coal case as one in point, 
which, although totally unconnected with medicine, has called for the 
scientific opinions of medical men. 

He concluded his paper by some interesting observations on the 



93 

subject of medical education. After detailing his own case, and 
pointing out the various ways in which he had been called upon, in 
the course of his professional duties, to avail himself to the utmost, 
not only of his medical knowledge, but of general scientific and lite- 
rary education and acquirements, he proceeded to observe : — " It 
appears to me that Natural History, Botany, and Chemistry ought, 
inter alia, to be compulsory branches of general education, with 
which every medical student ought to be acquainted before he enters 
upon the moi'e purely medical department of his curriculum. Have 
examinations on these subjects prior to the first annus medicus if you 
will. This is merely a matter of arrangement and convenience to be 
adjusted between the professors and students. The thorough know- 
ledge of these subjects furnishes an admirable training for the mind 
of every gentleman who has any pretensions to education; and so far 
from reducing the number of such collateral and accessory branches 
of the curriculum (or rather, as I think, they ought to be of the gene- 
ral preliminary education), or rendering more lenient the graduation 
examinations, I hope the tendency will be found to be greatly to 
increase the former in extent and the latter in strictness, and thus 
endeavour to raise the standard of attainment among the alumui of 
our Alma Mater. Among the classes which might advantageously be 
added to the preliminary education of the medical student, are the 
German and French languages. Natural and Moral Philosophy, Meta^ 
physics, Mathematics, and Drawing." 

Dr. Balfour remarked that Dr. Lindsay had been a distinguished 
student of medicine at the University of Edinburgh, and that he was 
a zealous naturalist. His donations to the Museum of Economic 
Botany indicated his zeal and ability. In recommending Natural- 
History studies as not incompatible with practical acquirements in 
medicine, Dr. Lindsay's own case might have been given as an illus- 
tration of such a combination. Dr. Balfour was satisfied that those 
students who distinguished themselves in Botany were those who were 
also eminent in all their medical studies. Many of them now occupied 
eminent positions in various parts of the world. Among recent 
students of Botany, he alluded to Dr. Lindsay, Dr. Sanderson, Dr. 
Cobbold, Dr. Murchison, and Dr. Priestley, as examples of zealous 
botanists who have shown themselves able practitioners. 

Dr. Balfour was satisfied that Natural History and Botany ought to 
form part of the study of every general student, and that they ought 
not to be confined to the medical curriculum. No student should 
enter on the practical study of medicine without having undergone a 



94 

preliminary examination on these subjects. The degree of M.D. he 
stated was not merely an evidence of medical knowledge, but a Uni- 
versity honour, implying general knowledge and a good University 
education. Medical students often attempted to do too much within 
a short period, and hence the aversion which some of them displayed 
to the study of Natural Science as taking up too much of the time 
required for other studies. He was satisfied that the study of Natural 
History was a most important means of preparation for the pursuit of 
other departments of medicine, inasmuch as it called forth powers of 
observation and of diagnosis which were eminently required by the 
medical practitioner. The present day, he thought, was one for 
enlarging the acquirements of the physician and not for reducing 
them. There must be something naore than a minimum of study for 
one who is to appear with advantage in society. The attention now 
paid by all classes to Natural Science must tend to raise the studies of 
those who enter learned professions. 

In concluding his remarks. Dr. Balfour alluded to a paper in the 
' North British Review,' in which it is observed : — " We have never 
been able to discover any satisfactory reason why Mineralogy, Geo- 
logy, Botany, and Zoology, should be considered requisite to form a 
physician more than a divine or a lawyer. Nor should it be concealed, 
that in consequence of those branches of science being attached to 
the medical faculty, parents are too frequently prevented from direct- 
ing their youth-head to the study of those important departments of 
knowledge with which every one laying claim to a 'liberal education' 
should be acquainted. Let the patrons of the University remove 
these chairs from the medical faculty, and place them, together with 
Chemistry, in their proper position along with the usual classes in the 
faculty of arts. The demand for attendance on such classes by the 
medical faculty need not be altered, while a new and important ele- 
ment would be introduced in reference to the degree of ' Master of 
Arts.' " 

Election of Fellows. 

The following gentlemen were balloted for and duly elected : — 
Ordinary Resident Fellows: Robert Daw, Esq., 21, Albany Street; 
William T. Smith, Esq., 71, Cumberland Street; Thomas James 
Walker, Esq., 31, St. James's Square; John Ross, Esq., 18, Clare- 
mont Crescent. Non-Resident Fellow : Thomas Barclay, Esq., 
Sheriff-Clerk of Fife. 



95 



Foreign Exchange Club, 
fin connexion with the Botanical Society of London.) 

The following is the Prospectus of the above Club : — 

" As the majority among the Members of the Botanical Society of 
London are interested only in the distribution of British plants, the 
Council have determined to limit the general operations of the Society 
to exchanges of British specimens. To meet the requirements of 
those who desire foreign specimens also, it has been considered 
advisable to form a subordinate Club, specially intended for that 
purpose. 

" Rules for Membership and Distribution. 

" I. — The Foreign Exchange Club of the Botanical Society of Lon- 
don is intended to facilitate exchanges of Botanical Specimens 
between British and foreign botanists ; supplying the former with 
foreign, and the latter with British and foreign, plants. 

" II. — Any Member of the Botanical Society of London may be 
admitted a Member of the Club on filling up the annexed form, and 
transmitting it and sixty postage-stamps to the Distributor. 

" III. — No person residing in Britain can be eligible as a Member 
of the Club, if not a Member of the Botanical Society of London. 

" IV. — Any Botanist residing out of Britain may be admitted a 
Foreign Member of the Club on his sending a parcel of foreign plants, 
selected in accordance with lists of desiderata for the Club, obtained 
by application to the Distributor. 

" V. — The Botanical Society of London shall supply such speci- 
mens of British plants as may be required by the Foreign Members 
of the Club. 

" VI. — The Botanical Society shall place at the disposal of the 
Club the whole of its present stock of foreign plants, and all others 
that may be received by it during the existence of the Club ; in 
acknowledgment of which the Club shall pay over to the Treasurer 
of the Botanical Society any surplus funds that may remain after pay- 
ment of the expenses incurred by the Club. 

" VII. — The funds necessary for carrying on the operations of the 
Club shall be provided by making a charge on the specimens sent to 
British Members. 



96 

" VIII. — The charges for specimens shall be made in accordance 
with the following scale ; namely : — 

1st. Miscellaneous specimens, selected by 

the Distributor.,, Id. per species 

2nd. Miscellaneous specimens, selected by 
the Distributor, but from particular Na- 
tural Orders or countries, named by the 
Members 2d. per species 

3rd. Desiderata, marked by the Members on 
lists of species to be forwarded by the 
Distributor 3d. per species 

" IX. — British Members sending foreign plants which are deside- 
rata to the Club shall be allowed to claim an equivalent parcel in 
exchange, without payment under Rule VIII. 

" X. — No charge shall be made on any specimens sent to Foreign 
Members. 

" XI. — The Club shall pay the carriage of all parcels sent to it, but 
not that of any sent out to its Members. 

" XII. — If the funds of the Club prove insufficient to meet its 
expenditure, the Members shall be called upon to make up the defi- 
ciency, by an equal subscription amongst themselves, not exceeding 
5*. in any one year, 

" XIII. — If the funds prove still insufficient, the Club shall be dis- 
solved. 

" XIV. — The Curator of the Botanical Society of London shall 
conduct all the operations of the Foreign Exchange Club, and shall 
do so at such times and in such a manner as may least interfere with 
the business of the parent Society. 

" XV. — Lists of parcels and species received shall be, from time to 
lime, sent out to the Members, to enable them to make their selections 
of species, countries, &c., under rule VIII. 

" XVI, — Further information may be obtained by applying to the 
Distributor, 'J. T. Syme, Esq,, — Botanical Society, — 20, Bedford 
Street, — Covent Garden, — London.' " 



97 



An Account of the Lichens of Cleveland, with their Localities. 
By William Mudd, Esq. 

(Continued from page 76). 

Verrucaria subalbicans, Leight. Leight. Brit. Ang. Lich. p. 25, 
fig. 1. On the mortar of old walls, Ay ton and near Easby. Named 
by the Eev. W. A. Leigh ton. 

Verrucaria epipolcea, Ach. E. Bot. 2647, f. 3. On a large stone 
in Airyholme Wood. 

Verrucaria nigrescens, Pers. Leight. Brit. Ang. Lich. p. 27, f. 1. 
On stones, near Middlesbro'. 

Calicium clavellum. Turn, and Borr. E. Bot. 1465. On old posts, 
Newton Wood ; ClifFrigg. 

Calicium hyperellum, Ach. E. Bot. 1832. On the bark of old 
oak-trees, Easby Wood ; Guisbro' Spa Wood. 

Calicium traclielinum, Ach. E. Bot. 414. On the bark of an old 
tree, near Busby Hall. 

Calicium dehile, Turn, and Borr. E. Bot. 2462. On an old dead 
tree, near Mulgrave Castle, Whitby. 

Calicium curtum, Turn, and Borr. E. Bot. 2503. Common on 
old stumps, Cliffrigg, near Stokesley, &c. 

Calicium turhinaium, Pers. E. Bot. 2520. On the crust of Per- 
tusaria communis, DC, near Guisbro' ; Easby Wood, Ayton. 

Co7iiacarpon cinnabarinum, DC. E. Bot. 2151. With several 
varieties, on ash, oak and hazel ; Airyholme Wood ; Newton Wood. 

Opegrapha herpetica, Ach. E. Bot. 1789. On the bark of trees, 
Airyholme Wood ; Kildale. 

Opegrapha rubella, Pers. E. Bot. 2347. On the bark of trees, 
Airyholme. 

Opegrapha atra, Pers. E. Bot. 1753. On the bark of various 
trees, common near Ayton, &c. 

Graphis serpentina, Ach., var. divaricata, Leight. Leight. fasc. 1, 

21. On trees, Airyholme Wood ; Baysdale. 

Graphis serpentina, Ach., var. tremulans, Leight. Leight. fasc. 1, 

22. On ash-trees, Newton Wood ; near Kiiklealham. 
Vmbilicaria poUjphglla, HofFm. E. Bot. 1282. On rocks. How- 
den Gill ; Battersby Moor. 

Lecidea canescens, Ach. E. Bot. 582. On trees and rocks, near 
Easington ; Guisbro' ; with apothecia, near Ayton. 

Lecidea pinicola, Borr. E. Bot. 1851. On old pine-trees, New- 
ton Wood ; Ayton Moor ; near Stokesley. 

VOL. V. O 



Lecidea leucoplaca, Chev. Leight. fasc. 4, 125. Ash-trees, Airy- 
holme Wood, abundant ; Esk banks, near Whitby. 

Lecidea elaochroma, Ach. E. Bot. 1450. On the smooth bark of 
trees, Airyholme Wood ; Cliffrigg ; Ayton. 

Lecidea dubia, Turn, and Borr. E. Bot. 2347. On old wood, 
Baysdale ; on pine-trees, Kildale, near West House. 

Lecidea silacea, Ach. E. Bot. 1118. On old walls, Ayton Moor ; 
walls near Castleton. 

Lecidea chalybea, Borr. E. Bot. Suppl. 2687, f. 2. On old tiles, 
Ayton. 

Lecidea cotijluens, Ach. E. Bot. 1964. On rocks and walls, Ayton 
Moor ; Battersby Moor ; near Whitby. 

Lecidea atro-alha, Ach., var. concentrica, Fries. E. Bot. 246. On 
rocks and stones, Ayton, Kildale Moor, &c. 

Lecidea geographica, Ach., var. sphcerica, Schaer. Leight. fasc. 3, 
93. On rocks, Cliffrigg and near Cook's monument. 

Lecidea geographica, var. atro-virens, Schaer. Leight. fasc. 4, 128. 
On rocks, Battersby Moor ; lugleby Greenhow ; Eston Moor. 

Lecidea, insularis, Nyl. On rocks, top of Cliffrigg ! " On submit- 
ting a specimen of this species to the Rev. W. A. Leighton for exami- 
nation, he very kindly informed me that it was identical with a speci- 
men which he had received from Sweden." 

Biatora rivulosa, Ach. E. Bot. 1737. On rocks, Battersby Moor ; 
Lanbraugh Rigg. 

Biatora anomala, Ach. E. Bot. 2155. On the bark of old trees, 
Airyholme Wood ; Cliffrigg. 

Biatora icmadophila, Eh. E. Bot. 2, 372. Turfy places under 
the shade of heath, Ayton Moor ; near Castleton. 

Biatora byssoides, L. Hook. Brit. Fl. ii. 137. On rocks and old 
walls, sometimes on the ground, Lanbraugh Rigg; Ayton Moor; Kil- 
dale. 

Beomcyes roseus, Pers. E. Bot. 374. On heaths, upon the ground, 
Ayton Moor ; Kildale Moor ; near Danby Castle. 

Cladonia alcicornis, Schaer. E. Bot. 1392. On mossy rocks, 
Larchbank ; near Ayton. 

Cladonia cervicornis, Schaer. E. Bot. 2574. Moist rocks, How- 
den Gill ; Castleton Moor ; Baysdale. 

Cladonia veniricosa, Schaer. E. Bot. 2362. On decayed stumps 
of old trees, Stogdale ; Sloethorn Park. 

Cladonia pyxidata, Schser. E. Bot. 1393. On heaths and in 
woods, frequent ; Ayton Moor, &c. 



99 

Cladonia gracilis, Hoffm. E. Bot. 1284. On an old wall, on 
Battersby Moor, abundant. 

Cladonia Jimbr lata, Fr. E. Bot. 2438. Hedgebank near Rose- 
berry ; near Stokesley. 

Cladonia deformis, Schaer. E. Bot. 1394. On old stumps, Coat 
Moor, Lounsdale. 

Cladonia bellidijlora, Schaer. E. Bot. 1894. On heaths, Ayton 
Moor ; Westerdale ; near Danby ; Sleddale. 

Cladonia furcaia, HoflFm. Hook. Brit. Fl. ii. p. 236. On the 
ground in heathy places, Kildale Moor ; near Cook's monument. 

Cladonia rangiferina, Hoflfm. E. Bot. 173. On moors, &c. ; 
Ayton, Kildale Moor, &c'. 

Cladonia imcialis, Hoffm. E. Bot. 174. On heaths, near Rose- 
berry ; Guisbro' Moor ; Lounsdale. 

Stereocaulon paschale, Ach. E. Bot. 282. On rocks, and some- 
times on the ground, Battersby Moor, abundant. 

Stereocaulon nanum, Ach. Hook. Brit. Fl. ii. p. 233. On Ayton 
Moor, in turfy places. 

Usneajlorida, Ach. E. Bot. 872. On the branches of old trees, 
Lounsdale ; Sloethorn Park, with apothecia. 

Usnea harhata, Fr. E. Bot. 257. On old pine-trees, top of 
Broughton bank. 

Usnea barhata, var. hirta^ Fr. Leight. fasc. 1, 1. On stunted 
trees, Ayton Moor ; Baysdale ; Oggeray Gill. 

Evernia jubata, c. implexa, Fries. E. Bot. 1880. Trunks of trees, 
Baysdale ; Kildale Moor ; Broughton bank. 

Evernia prunastri, Ach. E. Bot. 859. Trunks of trees : the 
apothecia are frequent in the Larchbank, and in Kildale woods. 

Evernia fuifuracea, Man. E. Bot. 984. Trunks of old trees, 
Ayton Moor ; Sloethorn Park ; near Castleton. 

Bamalina calicaris, vox.fraxinea, Fries. E. Bot. 1781. Com- 
mon on the trunks of trees, Ayton, &c. 

Ramalina calicaris, vox.fastigiata, Fries. E. Bot. 890. Trunks 
of trees, frequent; Stokesley, &c. 

Ramalina calicaris, var. canaliculata, subvar. farinacea, Fries. 
E. Bot. 889. Trunks and branches of trees, Cliffrigg, &c. 

Ramalina polymorpha, Ach. Hook. Brit. Fl. ii. 224. On rocks, 
Roseberry, and Howden Gill. 

Ramalina scopulorum, Ach. E. Bot. 688. On rocks, at Highcliff. 

Cetraria aculeata, Fr. E. Bot. 452. On the ground and on old 



100 

walls, Ayton Moor, Battersby Moor, &c. Several varieties may be 
met with on Guisbro' Moor, so far as regards size and ramification. 

Cetraria cjlauca, Ach. E. Bot. 1066. On rocks and trees, near 
West House ; Battersby Moor ; near Cook's monument. 

Cetraria scepincola, Ach. E. Bot. 2386, On pine-trees, near Kil- 
dale ; near West House ; Ingleby. 

Peliigera horizontalis, Hoffm. E. Bot. 888. About the roots of 
trees, Oggeray Gill. 

Peliigera aphthosa, \loEm. E. Bot. 1119. Shady rocks. Beech- 
bank, Kildale. 

Peliigera canina, Fr. E. Bot. 2229. Upon the ground, among 
moss, &c., very common ; Ayton. 

Peliigera spuria. E. Bot. 1542. On mossy banks, Oggeray Gill ; 
Ayton Moor ; near Roseberry. 

Peliigera rufescens. E. Bot. 2300. On banks, and mossy trunks 
of trees, Ayton ; near Newton . 

Solorina saccata, Ach. E. Bot. 228. In the clefts of rocks, Beech- 
bank ; Kildale. 

Parmelia saxatills, Ach. E. Bot. 603. Frequent upon trees, 
rocks and stones, Ayton Moor, Kildale, &c. 

Parmelia saxatilis, Ach., wax. furfur acea, Leight. Leight. fasc. 2, 
46. Upon rocks, near Cook's monument. 

Parmelia saxatilis, Ach., var. omphalodes, Fries. E. Bot. 604, 
On rocks and stones, Ayton Moor ; Ingleby ; near Castleton. 

Parmelia olivacea, Ach. E. Bot. 2180. On the bark of trees, 
pales, &c., frequent ; Ayton ; Stokesley. 

Parmelia pulverulenta, Ach, E. Bot. 2063. Very common on 
the trunks of trees, Ayton. 

Parmelia stellaris, Ach, E. Bot. 1697. Frequent on the bark of 
trees, Ayton, &c. 

Parmelia ohscura, a. orbicularis, Fr. E. Bot, 1942. On the bark 
of ash-trees, Ayton ; near Guisbro' ; Kirkleatham. 

Parmelia incurva. Hook. E. Bot. 1375. On sandstone rocks, 
Battersby Moor. 

Parmelia saxicola, Ach. E. Bot. 1695, On rocks and stones, 
Ayton Moor ; Lanbraugh Rigg. 

Parmelia saxicola, Ach., var. areolata, Leight. Leight, fasc. 3, 81. 
On rocks, top of Cliffrigg. 

Parmelia viurorum, Ach. E. Bot. 2157. On rocks and walls, 
near Stokesley j Mulgrave Old Castle ; Danby Castle, 



101 

Parmelia vitellina, Ach. E. Bot. 1792. On old pales, near 
Easby ; on walls in Lounsdale. 

Parmelia tartarea, Ach. E, Bot. 156. On rocks, at Highcliff; 
Sloethorn Park ; near Castleton, 

Parmelia pallescens, var. parella, Fries. E. Bot. 727. On rocks, 
Lanbraugh Rigg ; Newton Wood ; walls near Whitby. 

Parmelia glaucoma, Ach. E. Bot. 2156. On rocks, Lanbraugh j 
Kildale ; near Castleton. 

Parmelia subfusca, var. discolor, a.. Fries. Leight. fasc. 4, 115. 
On the bark of trees, Airyholme Wood, Stokesley, &c. 

Parmelia subfusca, var. distans. Fries. Leight. fasc. 4, 116. On 
the bark of poplars. Ay ton ; near Easby. 

Parmelia coarctaia, Ach. E, Bot. 534. On stones, near White 
House ; rocks, Newton Wood ; Esk bank, near Egton. 

Parmelia atra, Ach. E. Bot. 949. On rocks, Lanbraugh Rigg; 
old walls, Ayton Moor ; near Giiisbro'. 

Parmelia pezizoides, Dicks. E. Bot. Suppl. 2801. On mossy 
stones, near Battersby ; rock in Baysdale. 

^Parmelia aurantiaca, Ach. E. Bot. 1305. On the bark of ash- 
trees, near Newton ; Kirkleatham ; Wilton woods. 

Gyalecta cupularis, Ach. E. Bot. 739. On the escarpment of the 
oolitic limestone, top of Broughton bank. 

Gyalecta pineti, Leight. E. Bot. 1863, lower figure. On the bark 
of old pine-trees, Newton Wood ; Cliffrigg. 

Collema HiJiosum, Ach. E. Bot. Suppl. 2704, f. 1. Clay-banks, 
near Eastington. 

Collema cristatum, Ach. E. Bot. 834. Clay-banks, near Easby ; 
Stokesley ; Yarm. 

Collema ceranoides, Borr. E. Bot. Suppl, 2704, f. 2. On banks, 
near Coatham, and Marske. 

Collema fragrans ? Ach. E. Bot. 1912. On the bark of ash-trees, 
near Ayton ; Airyholme Wood. 

Collema palmatum, Ach. E. Bot. 1635. On Coatham sand-hills, 
near Marske. 

Collema crispum, Borr. E. Bot. Suppl. 2716, f. 1. On stones 
near Ayton ; old walls at Pinchingthorp. 



* My friend, Mr. Baker, of Thirsk, informs me that Fries now considers this a 
Biatora, and names B. aurantiaca, E. Bot. 948, y. clava, and places Parmelia auran- 
tiaca, Ach. E. Bot. 1305, as the normal form. 



102 

Collema lacerum, Ach. E. Bot. 1982. On walls, near Mulgrave 
Castle ; old mossy trees, Baysdale, and Oggeray Gill. 

Collema niuscicola, Ach. E. Bot. 2264. On rocks partly covered 
with moss, Lanbraugh Rigg. 

Collema spongiosum, Ach. E. Bot. 1374. Among moss in a 
ravine on Guisbro' Moor ; Battersby bank. 



It must not be considered that the above are all the lichens that 
this district produces : many species are yet under examination ; and 
I hope at no distant period to lay before the readers of the ' Phytolo- 
gist' many additional species. 

It will, no doubt, be observed that I have followed no particular 
arrangement ; my reasons for doing so are, that Fries's ' Licheno- 
graphia Europaea Reformata ' is but little known to British botanists, 
and the works by the Rev. W. A. Leighton are not yet completed. So 
far as they are published, I have followed the names of the latter gen- 
tleman, believing they will be eventually adopted. The remainder 
are from Fries's ' Lichenographia ' and ' English Flora.' 



Errata. — In my article in last month's number, I find two typo- 
graphical errors, which I am desirous of correcting. Page 73, for 
" Arthonia lucida" read " A. lurida, Ach. f and p. 74, for " Biatora 
perusnea" read " B. premnea." 

William Mudd. 

Cleveland Lodge, Great Ayton, 
March 17, 1854. 



Proceedings of Societies, 8fc. 



LiNNEAN Society. 

November 1, 1853. — Thomas Bell, Esq., President, in the chair. 

Election of a Fellow. 
Cuthbert CoUingwood, Esq., M.A., was elected a Fellow. 



103 



Inflorescence of Ci/cas revoluta and Macrozamia spiralis. 

Mr. James Yates, F.L.S., offered some observations on the inflo- 
rescence of Cjcas revoluta and Macrozamia spiralis, illustrated by 
specimens. 

Cycas revoluta. — Prof. Miquel, of Amsterdam, to vrhom we now 
look for the best systematic arrangement and description of Cycads, 
remarks, that male specimens are rarer in Europe than female. 
" Specimina culta," says he, " omnia fere feminea. Masculinum in 
Horto Petropolitano exstat, ubi bis floruit (Otto u. Dietr. Gartenz. vii. 
1839, p. 24)." See his ' Monographia Cycadearum,' 1842, folio, p. 24, 
and his " Genera et Species Cycadearum viventium" in the 'Linnaea' 
for 1843, p. 683. This observation is certainly true in regard 
to Great Britain. Since the first example of the female at Farnham, 
described by Sir J. E. Smith in the ' Linnean Transactions,' vol. vi., 
not less than six other plants have borne fruit, and some of them two 
or three times, viz. at Chats worth, Ravens worth Castle, Laurel Mount 
and Knowsley near Liverpool, Kew, and Lauderdale House, Highgate. 
The plant last alluded to (Mr. J. Yates's) flowered in 1845, and sub- 
sequently produced four magnificent crowns of leaves, the finest of 
them consisting of fifty-three leaves. In October, 1852, the first ap- 
pearance of another cone was indicated by scales, covered with their 
soft yellow tomentum ; but it remained long doubtful whether this 
would turn out to be another crown of leaves, or a head of fruit-bearing 
fronds. In April last the question was determined, as the peculiar 
palmate fronds were clearly seen, and were closely folded over one 
another, having the form of a somewhat flattened spheroid and the 
size of a moderately large melon. In May these fronds or spadices 
increased rapidly and vigorously. They expanded and remained 
open three days, so that the young drupes, also covered with down, 
and nearly the size and form of horse-beans, were easily discernible. 
They then closed again, and the whole spheroid became as compact 
and solid as before. It was conjectured that this temporary disclo- 
sure of the drupes, supposing it to be the habit of the plant, might be 
a provision for their fecundation, admitting of the access of the pollen. 
The fronds, which are crimson, shaded by their thin covering of yel- 
low down, are now spread in all directions and have attained their full 
development, except that the drupes, perhaps in consequence of the 
cold, wet, and dull season, fall without having come to perfection. It 



104 

is also to be observed, that these fronds, about 110 in number, are 
closely set and spirally ai'ranged upon a very short axis. The dis- 
tance between them and the fronds of 1845, is about 8 inches or 20 
centimetres, showing an elongation of the trunk of 1 inch for each 
year. 

Miquel mentions only one male plant, viz. that at St. Petersburg : 
and in this country it cannot be ascertained that more than two 
males have produced cones, to wit, those in the Botanic Garden 
at Sheffield, and that belonging to Henry Ricketts, Esq., at the 
Grove, Brislington, near Bristol. The Sheffield plant has now flow- 
ered thrice. Its first cone, produced in England, is preserved in the 
Museum at York ; its second belongs to the Royal Botanic Society 
in the Regent's Park ; its third appeared this year, and, that it might 
be suitably displayed, the whole plant was transported to York last 
summer and was there publicly exhibited. It is now taken back 
to Sheffield. It appeared that this male was purchased by the late 
Earl of Derby, formerly President of the Linnean Society, about 
A.D. 1825, together with the female already noticed, which is a 
noble specimen, still preserved at Knowsley, and which bore fruit 
in 1850. The Brislington specimen has been in the possession of 
its present owner about half a century, and may be between fifty and 
sixty years old. In 1847 it raised a cone or spike 58 c. {i. e. 23 in.) 
long, which is agreeable to the ordinary size and form of this 
production ; and now it has raised a second, but with a remarkable 
anomaly in its development. This is not half the length of its 
predecessor, and, instead of being drawn to a point, is curtailed and 
terminates abruptly in a tuft of barren scales, resembling those 
which, as intimated above, always precede the rise either of a crown 
of leaves or of a fruit-bearing cone. A check in the development of 
the cone appears to have been sustained, preventing the further 
prolongation of its axis, and at the same time causing its scales to be 
no longer dilated and antheriferous. 

Macrozamia spiralis. — Mr. Yates next exhibited a small, but per- 
fect specimen of the cone of a male plant, which he lately imported 
from Sydney. This is probably the first time that a Macrozamia has 
produced a cone in this countrj. Together with the recent cone 
Mr. Yates showed also two old specimens, which had been sent with 
the living plant, by W. S. MacLeay, Esq., F.L.S., and which that 
gentleman obtained near his own residence at Elizabeth Bay. One 
of these two specimens is very remarkable in consequence of being 



105 

double. At the top of a peduncle of the usual size and appearance 
are fixed two equal, parallel, and perfect male cones. Mr. Yates 
showed that some approach to this double formation is occasionally 
found in the genus Encephalartos, inasmuch as the axis of the cone 
is sometimes bifid near the summit. 

It was also remarked, that the peduncle of Macrozamia bears leafy 
appendages, and that these have not been found in any other recent 
genus, bat are very conspicuous on the peduncles of the fossil Zamites 
gigas, which is found in the oolitic strata near Whitby. 

Parasitism of Rhinanthus Crisla-galli. 

Read some " Observations on the parasitic habits of Rhinanthus 
Crista-galli, and its injurious effects on the growth of Barley." By 
Joshua Clarke, Esq., F.L.S., &c. These observations were made dur- 
ing the last summer in the parish of Debden, in the county of Essex. 
The field contained four acres of barley, the soil a stiffish clay ; the 
Rhinanthus was growing in patches at different parts of the field, some 
of which were much larger than others, and occupying at least half 
the surface, by which about two acres of the barley were completely 
destroyed, and the remaining part of the crop very much injured, both 
in quantity and quality. The farm consisted of 170 acres, principally 
clay soil, such as is usually called heavy land ; thirty acres of it were 
of barley, about ten of which were destroyed by this plant. This loss, 
combined with other causes, induced the occupier to give it up. 

In regard to the mode by which the Rhinanthus effects the injury, 
Mr. Clarke states that the fibres of the roots attach themselves to the 
fibres of the barley, on which they form small round tubers, or what 
perhaps may be more properly called spongioles, which embrace the 
fibres so effectually, that they suck the juices of the plant so as 
to starve it, and in most instances ultimately destroy it ; these 
spongioles are formed of cellular tissue. A correct knowledge of the 
habits and natural history of a plant may lead to its eradication, but 
in this instance it is a matter of considerable difficulty, the ordinary 
method of destroying weeds by a summer fallow being of no avail, as 
the Rhinanthus does not grow in clean earth. Mr. Clarke has 
for some years been trying to raise it from seed in clean earth, but has 
never succeeded. The other method of destroying weeds by green 
crops in rows is equally unsuccessful, as it does not grow among 
green crops. As it is annual, it certainly should be pulled up before 
VOL. V. P 



106 

it seeds ; and as it grows on a clay soil, and to no great extent except 
in a wet season, the land should be effectually drained. 



November 15, 1853.— Thomas Bell, Esq., President, in the chair. 

On the Genus Hodgsonia. 

Read a uotice "On Hodgsonia, Hook. Jil. et Thorns., a new and 
remarkable genus of Ciicurbitaceee." By Dr. J. D. Hooker, F.R.S., 
F.L.S., &c., and Dr. Thomas Thomson, F.L.S., &c. 

A very remarkable plant, one of the handsomest and most curious 
of the whole natural Family, with the inflorescence and flower of 
Trichosanthes, but in fruit widely different from any of the extensive 
natural Order to which it belongs. It has been extremely well 
described by Roxburgh as a species of Trichosanthes, and was 
cultivated many years ago in the Calcutta Botanic Garden, where it 
is now lost. A figure of the female flower is also in the Museum of 
the India House. Root branching. Stem climbing for 80 to 100 feet, 
festooning lofty trees. Wood of very remarkable structm-e. The 
almost axillary conical bodies, referred to buds, but generally described 
as stipules, are most remarkable and deserve careful study. Flowers, 
very handsome, appear in May, and the fruit ripens in autumn and 
winter ; female flowers are rare, and from being solitary, ai-e less 
conspicuous than the males. Ovarium covered with small warts 
that project through the dense, almost velvety, rusty pubescence, 
1-celled, with three parietal placenttE that project into the axis, and 
clearly show the normal structure of Cucurbitaceous fruits to have a 
parietal placentation ; cavity of the ovarium filled with watery pulp, 
that hardens as the fruit advances to maturity and becomes of the 
consistency of a hard turnip, full of watery fluid that escapes in 
large drops when the fruit is pierced. Ovules suberect, in pairs, 
each pair collateral and at right angles to the radius of the ovary ; 
of these the ovule next the axis ripens, and that next the cir- 
cumference of the ovary becomes accrete to the outer one and seldom 
ripens. This position and (Economy of the ovules is quite unique 
in the order. Flower about 4 inches long ; the limb 3 inches in 
diameter, inodorous ; fringes of the petals 5 — 6 inches long. Calyx 
with several deep brown polished tubercles or warts towards each 



107 

angle or tooth. Tube of the calyx lined with a thickened disk, which 
surrounds the style and is in contact with it ; it lines the slaininal 
lube of the male flower. Berry 6 — 10 inches across, of a fine deep 
red-brown colour, covered with a very short tomentura ; pulp whitish. 
Seeds erect, very large, each double, resembling a 2-celled nut, 
covered with an adherent vascular pulpy coat, which penetrates deep 
fissures in the free face of the larger seed. Testa hard, somewhat 
porous ; the free surface of the larger seed deeply grooved in anasto- 
mosing channels ; outer surface rather corky or spongy, inner hard, 
smooth, polished. The testa is slit longitudinally down its base to- 
wards the hilura for one half or one inch in the larger seed, and has 
a smaller corresponding slit on the smaller nut. A compressed pro- 
longation of the endopleurum (which is very soft, thick, and corky) 
projects a little through this fissure, and the radicle points towards it. 
Embryo flat, of the form of the seed, occupying a narrow slit in the 
centre of the endopleurum, nearly as broad as the cavity of the testa, 
surrounded by a delicate membrane. Cotyledons plain, white, very 
oily ; radicle small, conical ; plumule 2-lobed, lobes notched. The 
seeds are eaten by the natives of Sikkim, who call the fruit Kat'hior 
pot. An original specimen is in Sir William Hooker's herbarium, 
from Buchanan Hamilton, labelled as from Penang, with the MS. 
name of " Trichosanthes Theba. " Roxburgh's trivial name of 
heteroclita has been retained, for though it was intended by its illus- 
trious author to imply that the plant varies from its congeners of the 
genus Trichosanthes, it will apply suflBciently well in future for a plant 
which is heteroclite in respect of the natural family (Cucurbitaceae), to 
which it undoubtedly belongs. Blume's descriptions are quite insuf- 
ficient to determine whether it belongs to his M. macrocarpa or 
hexasperma, or either. These plants are no doubt congeners of 
Hodgsonia, and considering that the H. heteroclita ranges from the 
level of the sea at Penang, lat. 6° North, to alt. 6000 feet in Sikkim, 
lat. 27° North, the probabilities are great that it is also found in Java. 
The leaves vary from 2-lobed to 5-lobed, usually the latter, and the 
lobes are much acuminate, rarely blunt, icoarsely serrated towards the 
tips or quite entire. 

The genus is named in honour of B. H. Hodgson, Esq., F.L.S., 
Resident at Dajiling, where the plant was discovered, and whose 
scientific services in the Himalaya justly merit the honour of so splen- 
did a plant. 



108 



Potamogeto)i jiabellaius. 

Read also " Notes on Potamogeton flabellatus, Bah., a new British 
species." By Charles Cardale Babington, Esq., M.A., F.R.S., F.L.S., 
&c. This paper is published, in extenso, in the ' Phytologist,' 



iv. 1158. 



December 6, 1853. — Thomas Bell, Esq., President, in the chair. 

Sarsaparillas of Commerce. 

Read, further, a paper entitled " Remarks on Sarsaparillas." By 
Berthold Seemann, Esq., Ph.D., F.L.S., &c. This paper appears, in 
extenso, in the ' Phytologist,' v. 65. 



December 20, 1853. — Thomas Bell, Esq., President, in the chair. 

Election of a Fellow. 
John Dickinson, Esq., F.R.S., was elected a Fellow. 

Eye-spot of Infusoria and Microscopic Alga. 

Read also, "Remarks on the so-called Eye-spot of the Infu- 
soria and Microscopic Algae." By Arthur Henfrey, Esq., F.R.S., 
F.L.S., &c. 

Mr. Henfrey states, that in the course of an extensive series of ob- 
servations on the microscopic Algae, especially in investigations of the 
effect of re-agents upon the tissues and contents of the cells, he has 
frequently been completely baiBed by the uncertainty which presented 
itself as to the real existence of colours exhibited by objects. The 
decomposition of light taking place in these minute bodies under 
high magnifying powers is such, that even with lenses most carefully 
corrected and fully sufficient for all general purposes of investigation, 
we are left altogether in doubt as to whether or not the phaenoraena 
of colour arise from refraction. He uses lenses made by Ross about 
eight years since, a quarter and an eighth of an inch, the latter of ex- 
cellent defining power, and is convinced that these are not inferior to 



109 



any glasses in use on the Continent. But with them, particularly the 
latter, delicate membranes seen edgeways exhibit a blue tint, under 
certain circumstances, often giving rise to a difficulty in arriving at a 
decided opinion in questions connected with cellulose, when using 
the sulphuric acid and iodine test. Many phaenomena might be 
cited in reference to this subject, but the main point to which he 
wishes to direct attention is, the doubt existing in his mind as to the 
uature of the red spot described by Ehrenberg as an " eye " in the 
Infusoria. He has observed this object chiefly in the unicellular Algae 
and zoospores, and was first led to suspect that the red colour 
depended on unequal refraction, in the cells of Chlamydomonas Pul- 
visculus. In these he has frequently found several red spots on one 
individual cell, which however could not all be brought into focus at 
once, and he has decidedly observed, that when these spots were 
brought into clear and well-defined focus, they appeared as bright co- 
lourless granules. Frequently no red spot at all could be found. 

The idea suggested by this was further confirmed by noticing the 
similar variations of colour according to form in a granule (nucleolus.?), 
in a half-decomposed, colourless, diseased cell. 

Finally, he had recently found that he could bring out the crimson 
colour most beautifully in the central spot or " hilum " of starch gra- 
nules. When the lens is a little too far away from the object, 
the hilum appears like a minute black spot ; then, carrying the lens a 
little nearer, it comes out as a beautiful crimson spot exactly like an 
"eye-spot" in every respect. Adjusting the focus exactly, by bring- 
ing down the lens a little more, the hilum is seen as a well-defined 
spot of a brighter character than the rest of the starch-grain, but 
altogether devoid of any prismatic colour. 

Although dwelling but briefly on this question here, Mr. Henfrey 
states that he has had it under consideration for some time, and he 
thinks it desirable to make known his supposition now, in order that 
other microscopists working with different lenses may direct their at- 
tention to the point, and furnish the results obtained with them, since 
almost all high objectives differ slightly in their correction. 

On the Crescentiace<B. 

Read further, " Notes on the Natural Order Crescentiaceee." By 
Berthold Seemaun, Esq., Ph.D., F.L.S., &c. 



110 



Dublin Natural-History Society. 
March 10th, 1854. — Dr. Croker, M.R.I.A., President, in the chair. 

Fructification of the Genus Desmarestia. 

Mr. Gilbert Sanders read the following paper " On the Fructi- 
fication of the Genus Desmarestia." 

" At the request of my friend Dr. Allman, I beg to present to the 
Dublin Natural History Society a short description of the fructification 
of Desmarestia as observed in the species D. ligulata. Dr. Harvey, 
in both editions of his ' Manual ' and in the ' Phycologia,' as well as 
every other Algological authority I am acquainted with, records the 
fructification of Desmarestia as unknown. I was recently engaged in 
microscopically examining the structure of several specimens of Des- 
maresti ligulata, when I observed some very minute brown spots on 
the pinna I had under the microscope, which were resolved by a 
higher power into small defined tubercles, through the pellucid walls 
of which 1 saw assemblages of angular spores of the usual pink 
colour of the spores of the Floridese. Further examination showed 
that these tubercles were pretty freely distributed over both surfaces 
of the pinna, on the margins as well as on the flat surfaces ; those 
seen on the margins being in profile showed a hemispherical outline, 
the greater part of which projected beyond the margin. I have no 
doubt of these tubercles being the fruit, and that they are to be 
regarded as conceptacula and superficial. I examined pinnae from 
two other specimens of D. ligulata, which 1 had in my possession 
some years ago, and in both I noticed traces of the same appearance 
of fruit, but not nearly so distinct as those on my first specimen. In 
these last the capsules and spores appeared to have discharged their 
endochrome, and which is very probable, as this genus is very im- 
patient of fresh water, or even exposure to the air, decomposition 
commencing almost immediately after they are removed from the sea. 
If the mode of fructification is to guide us in the arrangement of the 
genera under orders, I conceive Desmarestia should be removed from 
the order Sporochnaceae to Dictyotacese, as the fructification I have 
observed in D. ligulata is much more conformable to the latter order 
than to that of the former. I have not as yet perceived any symptom 
of fruit either on D. aculeata or D. viridis, but the scattered single 
spores so very abundant on Mr. Sawer's late important addition 



Ill 

to British Botany, Desmarestia pinnatinervia, cannot but be the 
fruit of that species. These spores have the same pink colour as 
those of D. ligulata, but, instead of being in capsules, they appear on 
every part of the frond like strings of beads or chains. I think it not 
improbable that young spring plants of the two other species, acu- 
leata and viridis, will reward careful examination by a discovery of 
their fructification, and I would recommend search to be made among 
the byssoid fibres with which the young plants are clothed. 

" I take this opportunity to exhibit some specimens of Desmarestia 
pinnatinervia, for which 1 am under obligation to Mr. William Sawers, 
of Londonderry, to whom belongs the honour of adding it to the ma- 
rine Botany of our country. Mr, Sawers sent specimens of his plant 
to the meeting of the British Association at Hull, and to most of our 
best algologists, some of whom pronounced it a mere variety of a 
Laminaria. At length specimens reached Dr. Montague, of the 
French Institute, who recognised it as his D. pinnatinervia, a descrip- 
tion and figure of which he gave in the * Annales des Sciences Natu- 
relles ' for 1842, vol. xviii. As there are some differences between 
the appearances of the Spanish plant, as described by Dr. M., and 
those found by Mr. Sawers, I will refer to a free translation which I 
have made of the article in the ' Annales.' 

" ' Is it truly a Desmarestia } That is a question not easily decided 
in the absence of any fructification. M. Aghardh is inclined to 
believe it is to that genus we should refer it. This Alga requires care- 
ful description, because it has a perfect resemblance to Laminaria 
debilis, collected on the coast of Corsica by my friend M. Solierol. 
The only differences which I have found, though essential differences, 
and which separate our plant from those with which I have compared 
it are — first, the presence of a well-defined stipe, about four or five 
millimetres long — secondly, a midrib, which traverses the entire length 
of the frond, and from which nervures issue to the right and left at 
the distance of five to ten millimetres from one another, forming with 
the midrib angles of about 24°. All these nervures, though strongly 
marked, are of the greatest tenuity. The form of the frond is 
obovate, fourteen millimetres long by eight in width at the widest part, 
which is the summit. It has the same delicate tissue as Laminaria 
debilis. If it is a Desmarestia, as all believe it to be, we must con- 
sider the frond as formed by the fusion of the opposing pinnules, 
which will represent the nervures.' 



112 

"The differences which I find between the Spanish plant as described 
by Dr. Montagne, and the specimens of the Irish plant supplied by 
Mr. Savvers are: — The Spanish plant is dentated at the margin, ob- 
ovate, and widest at the summit ; Mr. Savvers' specimens are entire 
at the margin, very slightly waved, lanceolate, and widest about one- 
fourth of the length of the frond from the base, tapering thence 
towards the summit. The proportions of length and breadth of the two 
plants are very dissimilar ; however, I am inclined to regard them 
at present as identical, merely altered by the circumstances of climate. 
It is singular, that although the figure given in the ' Annales ' exhibits 
an appearance of dots. Dr. Montagne has made no mention of chain- 
like series of spores, such as are contained in the dots in Mr. Sawers' 
plants. I imagine that from these spores on our Irish specimens, the 
exotic ones have them also. By some it has been doubted if the 
plants taken at Lough Foyle are indigenous to that coast, but have 
supposed them to be stray waifs, brought from more temperate 
regions by tides and currents. I cannot subscribe to such ideas from 
the fact of Mr. Sawers having found fronds of his Desmarestia in tole- 
rable abundance during a large portion of last year (1853) even up to 
near Christmas, and as Desmarestia undergoes decomposition so very 
rapidly when dead, I cannot believe it possible those fronds which we 
see here in excellent preservation, could have been knocking about 
on the ocean for months : I therefore conclude they grew not far 
from the spot where Mr. Sawers found them. In conclusion, I would 
wish to remark on the doubt implied in Dr. Montague's paper as to 
the Alga in question being a Desmarestia. The structure certainly 
agrees with that of D. ligulata. As ray specimens were quite dry when 
they reached me, I could not determine if the single-jointed tube men- 
tioned by Dr. Harvey as traversing the fronds exists in pinnatinervia ; 
should it be found there I have no doubt that it will appear in the 
nervures and midrib. Although the question is one of much interest 
to the algologists, and I look forward with expectation that Dr. 
Harvey will investigate the subject on his return, and clear up existing 
doubts ; I think it very evident that if the pinnatinervia be a Des- 
marestia, and if the tubercles I have observed on ligulata be the true 
fruit, then Dr. Harvey will have to construct the genus anew, for the 
diagnosis does not meet the existing facts." 

Mr. Sanders gave very clear explanations of his several micro- 
scopical examinations, which he illustrated by handsomely coloured 
diagrams. He was clearly of opinion that he had detected the spores 
indicative of a true state of fructification. 



113 

The Chairman said that the Society was much indebted to 
Mr. Sanders for the very interesting statement he had given — interest- 
ing, because Mr. Sanders had brought forward an investigation which 
had hitherto escaped the notice of the scientific. He would be 
hap})y to hear any remarks on Mr. Sanders' views. 

Mr. Andrews said, that it would be difficult to comment on the ex- 
cellent statement made by Mr. Sanders, unless the same opportunities 
of investigation had been afforded that Mr. Sanders so perseveringly 
followed out. The highest credit was due to Mr. Sanders in sub- 
mitting views which had not been noticed by any authority in Algo- 
logy. Statements so put forward had frequently influenced fuller 
inquiries, which often resulted in the formation of new alliances or 
genera. In a notice of the discovery of Stenogramme interrupta in 
Cork harbour by Mr. Isaac Carroll, Dr. Harvey, in this Society, gave 
a review of the several discoveries and wide distribution of that plant. 
This genus was established by Dr. Harvey ; Agardh, who had con- 
stituted it a Delesseria, having mistaken the linear conceptacle for a 
nerve. Many of our most commonly distributed lichens and mosses 
are considered rarities when found in fruit, and several species of the 
most frequent occurrence have never been known to fruit in the 
British Isles. Desmarestia ligulata is a plant of common occurrence. 
On the west coast it may be found in the tide-pools of low-water-mark, 
and to the greatest depth that Algae can exist. Mr. Andrews trusts 
that Mr. Sanders may successfully establish the investigations which 
he has so ably commenced. 

Scolopendrium vulgare, var. marginatum. 

Dr. Kinahan exhibited a plant of Scolopendrium vulgare, var. mar- 
ginatum, found by him at Tinnehinch, county Wicklow, March S, 
1854, its first record as Irish. This variety (first discovered in 
England by Sir W. C. Trevelyan) is remarkable for having the epider- 
mis on the back of the frond raised into a membranous ridge or tuck, 
running in a wavy line along it, at some little distance from the edge 
of the frond; the fronds are scalloped and serrated along their edges, 
the sori either continuous over the ridge to the edge of the frond or 
stopping at it, when we find a second set of sori arising outside the 
hem ; or thirdly, the sori are only produced external to the hem : the 
form is further remarkable for having several modifications — first, that 
under consideration ; secondly, a form named bimarginatum, in 
VOL, V. Q 



114 

which there is a hem on both faces of the frond ; thirdly, a form 
named supralineum, whei*e the hem exists only on the upper surface 
of the frond ; and fourthly, a form named dubium by its discoverer, 
G. B. Wollaston, Esq., by whom it was raised from seed, in which we 
find the free margin running along a frond with raultifid apices. Tn 
all these forms we find the serrated margin to the fronds, showing that 
probably the deficiency of the substance at the edge of the frond and 
of the epidermis, or, taking another view of the case, the irregular 
growth of the epidermis and of the venules and apices, proceed from 
the same cause. Dr. Kinahan illustrated his remarks with a series of 
specimens of the forms mentioned. 

Election of Members. 

The Chairman then announced the ballot, when Lord Clermont, of 
Ravensdale Park, and Edward R.Wright, Esq., Trinity College, were 
elected Members ; and Dr. Carte, of the Royal Dublin Society, re- 
joined the Society. Those who were formerly Members, on being 
proposed by the Council, can rejoin the Society without payment of 
the admission-fee. The Meeting then adjourned to the 7th of 
April. 



Botanical Society of Edinburgh. 
March 9, 1854. — Professor Balfour, President, in the chair. 

Donations. 

To the Society's Library and Herbarium: — 'Proceedings of the 
Berwickshire Naturalists' Club,' vol. iii. No. 4, from the Club; 
specimens of Ophioglossum lusitanicum, L. (collected in Guernsey 
by Mr. Wolsey), from Mr. Moore, Chelsea Botanic Garden. 

To the Museum of Economic Botany at the Royal Botanic Gar- 
den : — From Dr. Douglas Maclagan ; Robert Daw, Esq. ; Mr. Waldie ; 
J. M. Hog, Esq., of Newliston ; Charles Cowan, Esq. ; Mrs. Crichton ; 
Mrs. Dr. Simpson ; Dr. Alexander Hunter, of Madras ; Dr. Royle ; 
Mr. By water (per Mr. Kerr) ; Dr. Christison ; Messrs. Dickson & 
Turnbull ; Humphrey Graham, Esq. ; and Messrs. P. Lawson & Son. 



115 



Exhibitions. 

Dr. Balfour exhibited from Messrs. Lawson, a fine cone of Finns 
Sabiniana; also, under the microscope, specimens of porous and true 
punctated tissue in coal : and he noticed the formation of coal by Si- 
gillarias, and the presence of scalariform tissue in such coal. 

Mr. M'Nab exhibited various cut roots of trees which had been 
transplanted by Mr. M'Glashen's patent apparatus a year ago, and 
which showed tufts of fibrils varying from 7 or 8 inches to 18 inches 
in length, produced from the cut extremities. 

Dr. Balfour remarked, that Mr. M'Glashen's plan of transplanting 
had been very successful; and he stated that the cutting of the 
roots did not appear to operate in arresting the growth, and that the 
objection lu'ged by some, that the plants, in place of producing 
wood, were likely, in such circumstances, to exhaust their energies 
in the production of flowers and fruit, had not been verified by the 
results so far as already observed. The plan of at once transplant- 
ing the trees after their roots were cut, and allowing them to form 
young rootlets in their permanent position, seemed preferable to the 
plan of cutting the roots the previous season by trenches to induce 
the formation of roots, and then running the risk of injuring these by 
the after removal. 

Mr. Evans exhibited Tasmannia aromatica, in flower, from the 
Experimental Garden. 

The following papers were read : — 

Pollen of Zamia horrida. 

' On the Pollen of Zamia horrida.' By Dr. Balfour. Dr. Balfour 
drew the attention of the Society to the pollen of some of the Cj'ca- 
daceae, more especially that of Zamia horrida. The pollen he stated 
to be, in its ordinary condition, elliptical, with a groove in one side, 
and to resemble very much a grain of wheat in appearance. The 
gi'oove is formed by the folding inwards of the edges of the pollen- 
grain, which, when fully expanded under the action of water, becomes 
completely spherical. When water is applied under the microscope 
to the elliptical pollen-grains of Zamia, the two edges of the groove 
are seen to unfold and spread out so as to produce the circular grain ; 
when allowed to dry, the grain resumes the elliptical grooved condition. 
It is perhaps difficult to say whether the elliptical or the spherical 



116 

form is to be looked upon as the characteristic one ; the elliptical 
being the dry state of the pollen, while the spherical is the moist con- 
dition. The true structure is rendered more apparent by an applica- 
tion of iodine. The pollen of Cycads is stated by many to be 
angular. This, at all events, is not the form in Zamia horrida. The 
observations on the latter, he stated to have been made by Mr. 
George Morris. Specimens of the pollen were shown under the 
microscope. 

Muscology of the East Coast of Fife. 

' Notice of the Muscology of the East Coast of Fife.' By the Rev. 
Thomas Brown. The author offered some observations on the dis- 
tribution of mosses on the east coast of Scotland, with reference more 
particularly to such stations as the Sands of Barrie, the Tents' Muir, 
Elie and GuUane Links, which, although all situated close to the sea- 
shore, presented several alpine species. He particularly entered upon 
a detail of the mosses found by him in the neighbourhood of Elie, 
which included a variety of Mnium affine, not previously found in 
fruit in Britain, Bryum dealbatum, Hypnum abietinum, Didymodon 
inclinatus, Encalypta rhaptocarpa, and other unusual species. 

Antheridia of the R1ianine(B. 

'Note on the supposed Antheridia of the Rhamneae.' By J. S. B. 
Sandei'son, M.D. Dr. Sanderson, after a careful examination of the 
buds of various species of Rhamnus, particularly of R. catharticus, 
considered that the bodies supposed by Grisebach to be antheridia 
were not so, and that the club-shaped organs described by him, dif- 
fered from antheridia in not being developed from a single special 
mother-cell, in not possessing a central cavity at any period of their 
growth, and in containing a resinous secretion. He could not 
detect the " long-tailed globules enclosed in minute spherical cells," 
described by Grisebach as oscillating in a very lively manner. The 
paper was illustrated by drawings. 

Anatomical Structure of Conifers, ^c. 

' On the Anatomical Structure of Coniferae and other Gymnogeus.' 
By Mr. G. Lawson. The author remarked that he had recently 
been engaged in an examination of the minute anatomy of Gymno- 



117 

gens, and, after alluding to the peculiarities of structure that had 
drawn towards these plants the attention of all physiologists, he pro- 
ceeded more particularly to detail his observations on the anatomy of 
their wood-cells. The structure and development of the wood-cell 
had been well- elucidated by Hugo von Mohl, in various papers in the 
' Annales des Sciences Naturelles,' and in his work on ' The Vegetable 
Cell,' but there was one aspect in which the subject had not been so 
fully viewed as appeared desirable. Mr. Lawson's examinations had 
been undertaken principally for the purpose of ascertaining in how 
far the peculiarities in the minute anatomy of the Coniferse coincided 
with their general structure, and might be depended upon in the de- 
termination of their orders, genera, and species — an inquiry, from 
which fossil Botany and investigations relative to timber were likely 
to derive advantage. After detailing the general structure of the wood- 
cells of Coniferae, and pointing out peculiarities that occurred in va- 
rious plants of the order, he described a remarkable modification 
which had been noticed in the yew, viz. the presence in the wood- 
cell of what appeared to be a spiral fibre, but which had been shown 
by Harting to be a connected pellicle with thickened ridges arranged 
in a spiral manner. Mr. Lawson had found this structure to be bj^ no 
means so rare as had been supposed, and although principally con- 
fined to plants belonging to Taxaceae, it was stated not to be univer- 
sal in that order, nor peculiar to it. He had observed it in the 
following plants : — Cephalotaxus Fortunii C. pedunculata, C. tardiva, 
Torreya taxifolia, T. nucifera, Taxus baccata, T. canadensis, Podocar- 
pus japonica, P. Koraiana, Abies Douglasii, and Fitzroya patagonica. 
It also occurred in a specimen of pine-wood from N. California, which 
presented interesting microscopical characters, but which he had been 
unable as yet to identify. This structure was not to be confounded 
with the faint spiral streaks seen under a high power on the secondary 
membrane of the wood-cells of many Coniferae. It had been long a 
question whether true punctated tissue was strictly confined to Gym- 
nogens. A careful examination of Drimys granatensis and other 
plants had led Mr. Lawson to believe that the disks which occurred 
in aromatic trees were essentially the same as those of Coniferae, and 
indeed accorded in a remarkable manner with those of many Arau- 
cari2e and Taxaceae, in which the central dot was not circular, but 
formed by two elliptical slits crossing each other. The manner in 
which this appearance arose was fully explained by a reference to the 
spiral arrangement of the slits, which also seemed to account for the 
alternation of the disks in Araucaria. In the determination of fossil 



118 

plants and of unknown timbers, Mr. Lawson believed that valuable 
characters were afforded by the peculiarities of the wood-cell, such as 
its general size, presence or absence of a spiral tertiary membrane, 
arrangement of disks (alternate or opposite), their distance from each 
other in different directions, and whether in single, double, treble, or 
quadruple rows on each cell ; absolute size of the disk, and its 
breadth as compared with that of the cell ; form of disk, whether cir- 
cular, elliptical, or angular, or a combination of these forms ; form of 
central dot, and (if not circular) direction of the same. The cells of 
the medullary rays, and the pits in connexion with them, also afford 
useful marks of distinction. By aid of the above characters, to 
which many more might be added, Mr. Lawson had been able to 
mark distinctions between timbers, whose appeai'ances to the naked 
eye presented no definite characters. It was of great importance, 
however, in adopting such distinctions, that we should also retain the 
other means of investigation we possess, and his present attempt was 
meant not to displace, but to supplement these. He is still engaged 
in the prosecution of the subject, and expressed an anxiety to obtain 
additional specimens for examination. The paper was illustrated by 
drawings and by specimens under the microscope. Specimens of 
timber were also exhibited, including Wellingtonia gigantea, which 
Messrs. Veitch, of Chelsea, had kindly sent through Mr. Evans ; 
under the microscope it presented a double row of opposite disks, 
which, as well as their central dot, were elliptical. 

For materials to work upon, Mr. Lawson expressed his great 
obligations to Professor Balfour, Mr. M'Nab, Mr. Evans, and Mr. P. 
S. Robertson. 

Oph ioglossum lusitan icum. 

' On Ophioglossum lusilanicum, Linnasus.'' By Thomas Moore, 
Esq., F.L.S. 

The author remarked : — " The discovery of the Ophioglossum lusi- 
tanicum, Z., within the politico-geographical limits of Great Britain, 
so soon after that of Gymnogramma leptophylla, another South 
European fern, is a fact of much interest ; and I have thought that a 
short account of the plant, drawn up from fresh Guernsey specimens, 
with which I have been favoured by the discoverer, may be of some 
interest to those who are studying either our native ferns or our native 
Flora. 

" Ophioglossum lusitanicum, the Portuguese adder's-tongue, is 



119 

technically distiuguislied by the small lanceolate and somewhat fleshy 
barren branch of its fronds. It is altogether much smaller than the 
common adder's-tongue, and may be at once known from that species 
by this difference of size, as well as by its difference of form. The 
caudex or rhizome forms a short oblong or somewhat fusiform body, 
half an inch to three-quarters of an inch long, buried beneath the soil, 
and producing a few coarse spreading roots chiefly from near its 
upper extremity. At the top it tapers abruptly into a short coni- 
cal crown. From this crown rises the frond, which attains in the 
Guernsey specimens from about one and a-half to three inches 
in height, and is divided above into a barren leafy branch, and a spi- 
cate fertile branch. Occasionally, but as it would seem rarely, a bar- 
ren radical frond of lanceolate form accompanies the two-branched 
frond. In the latter, the barren branch separates from the fertile 
spike at about one-third its height. The stipes is slender, smooth, 
round, and of delicate structure, sheathed at the base by broad taper- 
pointed scales, which are dilated below and envelope the crown. The 
barren branch is spreading, lanceolate, narrowing towards but bluntish 
at the apex, and tapering at the base into a slender petiole ; it 
is from three-fourths of an inch to an inch and a-half long, somewhat 
hollow along the centre from the elevation of its margins, thick and 
fleshy in texture when fresh, so that the very slender veins are not 
seen ; when found, by means of maceration, these are, according to 
Presl, few, very slender, and united in very much elongated areoles. 
The fertile branch or spike is somewhat taller than the barren branch, 
and is supported by a footstalk, which is thickened upwards, becoming 
broad, fleshy, and flattened at the base of the spike. The spike itself 
is about half-an-inch long, linear, rather widened a little above the 
base, with a tapering apex, fleshy, and bearing along each margin 
about six embedded spore-cases, which at length burst transversely. 

" The existence of this curious little plant in Guernsey, was first 
discovered in January of the present year, by Mr. Wolsey, who met 
with it above the rocks bordering on Petit Bot Bay, in that island. 
One remarkable feature of the plant is the very early period of the 
year at which its growth is made. By the middle of January 
Mr. Wolsey found it to be fully developed, and the fronds no doubt 
perish early in the spring. 

" The range of this Ophioglossum appears to be extensive ; for it is 
recorded to inhabit the sandy coasts, both of Europe and Africa, 
washed by the Mediterranean Sea, including those of Sardinia, Sicily, 
Greece, Naples, France, Spain, Portugal, and Algeria ; and to extend 



120 

to the Canary Islands and Madeira in the Atlantic Ocean. It is not 
improbable that a diligent search might be rewarded by its discovery 
in the Western counties of England or in Ireland. Its early develop- 
ment and speedy decay should, however, be borne in mind by those 
who may undertake the search." 



Greenwich Natural-History Club, 

Saturday, October 29, 1853.— George Busk, Esq., F.R.S., Presi- 
dent, in the chair. 

Exhibitions. 

Mr. Spurrell exhibited a lacustrine coralline (Plumatella repens), 
found in the neighbourhood of Bexley. The exact locality from 
where it was obtained was a pond at East Lodge Gate, Baldwin, 
Dartford Heath. 

The President exhibited a series of leaves of the bramble {Rubus 
fruticosns), which he had received from many of the midland and 
Southern counties of England, and from Jersey ; all of which were 
affected by a disease almost as general as the potato-disease. In some 
counties, as Suffolk, not a leaf but was more or less affected. The 
cause of this disease was a microscopic fungus, the Erigma (Phrag- 
midium) bulbosum of Berkeley ; and when magnified it exhibited the 
appearance of a pedicel, supporting sometimes three, sometimes four 
(never more than four) sporidia, surmounted by a kind of button, 
representing an imperfect sporidium. The specimens of Erigma 
found on Rosae, and examined by Mr. Currey, generally possessed 
eight sporidia. It is worthy of remark, that the Herefordshire 
brambles were less affected by the disease than any others. 



November 26, 1853. — George Busk, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the 
chair. 

A paper was read intituled, ' A Comparison between the Quadru- 
mana of the New and Old Worlds, with especial reference to their 
Nasal Peculiarities,' by Cuthbert Collingwood. M.A., F.L.S., Hon. 
Sec. 



121 



Fiuigi of the Neighbourhood of Greemvich . 

A paper was also read by Fred. Carrey, Esq., M.A., on ' The Fungi 
of the Neighbourhood of Greenwich.' 

The author commenced by observing, that as it would not be prac- 
ticable to enter into details of all the difTerent species, he had consi- 
dered that the most interesting way of treating the subject would be 
to select some of the most striking members of the tribe, and to illus- 
trate his observations with drawings. Mr. Currey noticed the diffe- 
rent orders into which Fungi are divided, according to the latest 
English authorities ; and mentioned the distinguishing features of 
each order. He stated that the plants belonging to three out of the 
six orders would not require much observation, being those Fungi 
popularly known as moulds and blights, which are universal in their 
distribution, and can hardly be considered as belonging to any parti- 
cular district. In the genus Agaricus, Mr. Currey called attention, 
amongst others, to Agaricus muscarius, which is remarkable for its 
great beauty, as well as for its poisonous and intoxicating qualities ; 
and to A. rutilans, which is interesting from the beauty of its 
colour, and peculiar from its habit of disappearing for a series of years 
from its ordinary places of growth. He mentioned also Agaricus 
rubescens, A. ostreatus, A. torminosus, and several others, of which 
drawings were exhibited. He next referred to the genus Polyporus, 
of which several species are to be found in the neighbourhood ; and 
produced to the Society a specimen of Polyporus ulraarius, of 
an usually large size, which measured 2 feet across, and weighed 31 
pounds. Of the Clavarise, Mr. Currey stated the following to belong 
to the district; namely, C. insequalis, C. coralloides, C. cristata, and 
C. rugosa. He mentioned C. coralloides as being a rare plant, of a 
pure white colour, resembling branched coral. This genus concluded 
the order of the Hymenomycetes. Amongst the Gasteromycetes, 
Mr. Currey mentioned some of Lycoperdons, the Phallus impudicus, 
and several other genera, too numerous to be mentioned within the 
limits of an abstract. He directed particular attention to two species 
of earth-stars, or Geaster, namely, Geaster fornicatus and G. colifor- 
mis ; the former of which, he stated, was to be found at Hayes ; and 
the latter, in the lane leading from Crayford to Bexley. Under the 
third order of the Ascomycetes, Mr. Currey referred to Helvella lacu- 
nosa and H. elastica, and mentioned that they were both to be found 
in the neighbourhood of Eltham, the latter being a rare plant: He 
VOL. V. R 



122 

entered, also, into some particulars relative to the family of the Geo- 
glossas, or earth's-tongues ; but was prevented by the lateness of the 
hour from taking notice of the genus Peziza, which he had intended 
to have done : and after briefly adverting to a species of Exidia, and 
to a drawing of some plants of Phagmidiura bulbosum, he brought 
this part of his paper to a conclusion. 



Saturday, December 17, 1853. — George Busk, Esq., F.R.S., Presi- 
dent, in the chair. 

Fungi of the Neighbourhood of Greenwich. 

Mr. Currey concluded his paper on ' The Fungi of the Neighbour- 
hood.' 

The author commenced by correcting a statement in his previous 
paper, with respect to a supposed new Agaric, since ascertained to be 
A. campanella. He then called attention to a drawing of a very fine 
specimen of A. conchatus, which had been found on a tree in Lee 
Park ; and pointed out its peculiar mode of growth, and the nature of 
the tomentose stem, which strongly resembles coarse white velvet. 
He then mentioned some specimens of Agaricus personatus, found 
growing gregariously (almost caespitosely) upon a rubbish - heap, 
attached to the debris of the leaves of a cedar-tree, the habitat being 
unusual, as A. personatus is generally found growing in meadows, in 
rings. Some remarks were added upon the difference between the 
early and late stages of growth of A. aureus ; and the following Aga- 
rics were added to those previously stated to belong to the district ; 
viz.. A, nudus, A. lateritius, A. sulphureus, and A. radicatus. The 
author then proceeded to discuss the genus Peziza, with refei*ence, 
amongst other things, to the position of that genus in the natural 
arrangements of the family of Fungi. The following, amongst many 
others, were mentioned as appertaining to the district ; viz., Peziza 
calycina, P. scutellata, P. cochleata, P. macropus, P. aurantia, P. suc- 
cosa, P. humosa, and P. hemispherica. The author then made some 
remarks on the difference in structure of certain species of Sphseria, 
illustrating them with diagrams of the fructification of S. militaris and 
S. digitata. Of the tribe Tremellini, Exidia recisa, Tremella mesen- 
terica, and Tremella intumescens were stated to grow in the neigh- 
bourhood. The author called attention to an interesting fungus which 
he had lately met with at Eltham, viz., Cyphella muscicola ; and 



123 

made some observations upon the germination of Phragmidia, and the 
nature of the fructification of the genus Thelephora, with regard to 
certain bodies similar to asci, which, he stated, are to be found at an 
early stage of growth. The author concluded with some remarks 
upon the different species of Uredines ; he expressed some doubts as 
to the real difference of the numerous named species of that genus, 
stating that he had himself found Uredo Euphorbise growing upon 
the culms and leaves of Alopecurus agrestis. 



Saturday, January 2Sih, 1854. — George Busk, Esq., F.R.S., Pre- 
sident, in the chair. 

Exhibitions. 

Mr. Glaisher exhibited several very beautiful photographic copies 
of the crystals of snow, produced at the Royal Observatory. He 
stated that he had counted upwards of fifty compound forms. 

The President exhibited a series of excellent photographs of 
microscopic objects, principally zoophytes, obtained by means of the 
collodion process from negatives on glass, by gas-light. The average 
time of exposure was nine or ten minutes. 

Mr. Currey exhibited a very beautifully prepared collection of 
Algae, obtained by Mr. Tuwanowicz, at Hastings; accompanied by a 
communication from the same gentleman, descriptive of his method of 
preserving them, which is as follows : — 

Method of Preserving Alga. 

" Algae should be gathered on rocks, either very early in the 
morning, or when the sun is considerably below the meridian. If 
gathered amongst the rejectamenta after a storm, absolutely very 
early, for the sun would scorch them, and the finer and more delicate 
ramuli are distorted by heat and matted together. An oil-skin bag, 
or, still better, a bottle with a large neck, is necessary for collecting 
Algae ; using therefore the latter, fill up part of it with sea-water and 
deposit your discoveries in it. When at home, first cleanse them in 
one or two washes of sea-water, then dislodge all parasites as far 
as possible with small scissors, except those minute Algae which must 
be left parasilically upon another plant. The coarser Algae, as Fuci, 
Halidrys, &c., require to be kept in fresh water for several days to 
deprive them of the salt ; but all the minute or delicate ones, such as 



124 

Callitharania, require to be only a few minutes in fresh water ; and 
the genus Griffithsia cannot endure fresh water at all, but when im- 
mersed in it, dyes it carmine, the plant itself being deprived of its 
colour. Such plants should be laid out in clean sea-water, and as 
speedily as possible after being gathered. 

" Stout cream laid, or hotpressed drawing-paper, of uniform size, 
saturated with sweet oil, by the aid of a broad camel's-hair brush, 
should be used. Lay the pieces one over the other and repeat the 
saturation ; then bake them in an oven not overheated, and it is best 
to leave them for one night or longer, until they are well baked. 
Float out the specimen in fresh water in a broad shallow dish, white 
bottomed, and without any pattern in colours, and bring the oiled 
paper underneath the seaweed, and withdraw it carefully with the 
plant from the water, so as to leave the natural appearance of its 
ramuli. It is best to withdraw it by one corner, and to turn it almost 
round extremely gently, sometimes assisting the development wdth 
the point of a long pen. Lay the paper thus withdrawn on a very 
slightly inclined board, in order to allow the water to drain off; and 
in a kw minutes, or even sooner, when the water has escaped, lay 
the oiled paper with the specimen upon it on white blotting-paper 
folded in quarto. Spi'ead over the specimen most carefully a piece of 
old cambric, or fine muslin, or very fine lawn, and on this lay more 
blotting-paper, and so on. Over all this place a heavj' book or 
weight to press them; but remember to place less weight on the 
finer than on the coarser seaweeds. Change the blotting-paper 
at least every six or eight hours, with great care not to disturb the 
coverings of the specimens, else it would spoil their arrangement. 
Each time the blotting-paper becomes damp, it must be well dried 
and pressed smooth before being used again. After the third change 
of the blotting-paper, you may remove the muslin or cambric with the 
specimen already dried, if a delicate one (coarse ones require six or 
seven changes), and again place it between dry blotting-paper, laying 
aside the oiled paper to be dried for future use. Next, remove the 
specimen most carefully from the muslin or cambric, and fix it 
by means of narrow strips of jiaper to the cream laid paper, adding 
on the outside the name, class, order, family, &c. 

" At first you require to be very careful, but experience will 
familiarize you with the proceedings. This description is derived 
from my own long experience, having tried many plans and found 
none better than the above. Some of the finer and rather gelatinous 
plants are difficult to remove even from the oiled paper, and in this 



125 

manner I have lost many hundreds, among them some of the rarest ; 
it is best therefore to lay out such plants at once on pieces of cream 
laid paper, cut rather larger than the plants, and covering them with 
muslin or cambric, the specimens will adhere firmly to the paper, and 
when dried may be fixed with gum by the corners on to the quarto 
cream laid paper. Confervae and CladophoraB require to be laid out 
as soon as possible, otherwise they lose their characteristics, particu- 
larly by the relaxation of their ramuli, and the brilliancy of their 
colours will turn to yellowish." — C. C. 



The Phytological Club, 
(In connexion with the Pharmaceutical Society. J 

First An?mal Meeting. — Wednesday, January 11, 1854. — ^ Robert 
Bentley, Esq., F.L.S., President, in the chair. 

Donations. 

Donations of ferns from Mr. Daniel Hanbury, and of ergotised 
grasses and specimens of Hymenophyllum Tunbridgense from Mr. 
Blyth, were announced. 

Report of the Committee. 

The following Report was read by the Secretary : — 

" In presenting their First Annual Report the Committee have to 
congratulate the Members upon the flourishing and prosperous condi- 
tion of the Phytological Club. 

" The support and countenance it was received prove that the 
objects for which it was established commend themselves to pharma- 
ceutists, and that an association of this kind is desirable in con- 
nexion with the Pharmaceutical Society. 

" The objects contemplated at the formation of the Club have been 
constantly kept in view. The monthly meetings have been regularly 
held, at which many interesting papers and communications have been 
read, and instructive discussions have taken place upon them. These 
have been from time to time reported in the ' Pharmaceutical Journal.' 
A Branch Association has been formed at Worcester, and the Com- 
mittee hear of others in the course of formation. 



126 

" The list of Members, which numbers seventy-five, is as large as 
the most sanguine could expect, when it is considered that the Club 
has only completed the first year of its existence, and ihat no great 
efforts have been made to induce Members to join. The Committee, 
therefore, confidently believe that during the ensuing year the num- 
ber of Members will be considerably increased. 

" The financial condition of the Club is also satisfactory. After the 
current expenses of the year have been met, a balance of £10 10s. Sd. 
remains in the hands of the Treasurer. 

" The formation of the Herbarium has not been forgotten. 1700 
specimens have been presented, 350 of which form the Herbarium of 
the Club, and will represent about the number of species. 1350 spe- 
cimens remain in the hands of the Curators for exchange or distribu- 
tion among the Members. These duplicates will be distributed among 
those Members who make application for them to the Curators ; those 
who have contributed specimens having a prior claim. 

" In concluding their Report, the Committee would press on the 
Members the desirability of enlisting new Members, and of encou- 
raging a spirit of observation and inquiry on subjects of botanical 
interest. By so doing the practical value of the Club will be 
increased, and each succeeding Annual Report will afford greater 
cause for congratulation." 

Election of Officers. 

The following Officers were elected for 1854 : — President : Robert 
Bentley, Esq., F.L.S. and Professor of Botany, &c. Vice-Presidents : 
Jacob Bell, Esq., F.L.S. , Henry Deane, Esq., President Pharm. Soc, 
T. N. R. Morson, Esq., F.L.S., T. Redwood, Esq., Ph.D. and Profes- 
sor of Chemistry and Pharmacy, P. Squire, Esq., M.R.L Treasurer : 
Daniel Hanbury, Esq. Curators : Mr. J. C. Braithwaite and Mr. 
Edmund Greaves. Other Members of Committee : Mr. Allchin, Mr. 
Greenish, Mr. W. Matthews, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Walker, Mr. William- 
son. Honorary Secretary : Lindsey Blyth. 



The Phytologist Club. 

One Hundred and^ Fifty -fifth Sitting. — Saturday, March 25, 
1854. — Me. Newman, President, in the chair. 



127 



The President read the following comraiinications : — 

French Locality for Ule.v australis. 

" I do not know if any of your correspondents have indicated the 
precise localities of Ulex australis (U. provincialis, Lois.), in the South- 
east of France. Mr. Babington, in the ' Annals,' some years since, 
mentioned that he received it from Marseilles, and indicated what he 
considered the diagnostic marks between U. australis and U. Euro- 
paeus. I spent three or four days lately in Marseilles, and brought 
away a few specimens of U. australis. It is first found between Avig- 
non and Marseilles, about twenty-five miles from the latter place, 
growing abundantly in open, exposed places near the sea, and has 
there very much the facies of U. EuropsBus ; it is found in suitable 
localities, at intervals, all the remaining distance to Marseilles. 
Beyond Marseilles, on the road to Nice, it first occurs very sparingly 
within five miles of the town, increasing in abundance as far as Brig- 
nolles, and about twelve or fifteen miles beyond Brignolles appeared 
to cease altogether. Here it grows on rocks &c. by the roadside, and 
its facies is much more characteristic than between Avignon and Mar- 
seilles. It is slenderer and taller than E. Europaeus ; the flowers 
smaller and more numerous. On a closer examination, the stamina 
and pistil are much more delicate and slender, the bracts, or scales 
at the base of the calyx, much smaller and less highly coloured, than 
in EuropaBus. As to the calycine teeth, they are quite as well marked 
in my specimens of U. Europaeus as in U. australis, and as in the 
figure of the latter plant given by Loiseleur ; although he separately 
and specially represents the calyx, with its teeth, as in some degree 
characteristic of his U. provincialis. In U. Europaeus, the flowers 
spring quite from the axils of the branchlets ; in U. australis, they 
are not axillary, but grow from the branchlet, about a line or more 
from its junction with the main stem. The Ulex was in full flower in 
January, defying the piercing mistral ; though it does not grow on the 
exposed rock to tHe left of the bay overloking the quarantine island, 
Chateau d'lf, &c." — Charles Prentice ; Cheltenham, March 4, 1854. 

Plants at Nice. 

" At Nice, though rather more to the North, the weather was warmer, 
and vegetation further advanced than about Marseilles. I noticed in 
full flower, at the beginning of February, Anemone hortensis. Ranun- 
culus Ficaria (very large), Thlaspi perfoliatum, Globularia vulgaris. 



128 

Rhamnus alaternus, Cylisus sp., Satureia capitata, Centaurea panicu- 
lata, L., Rosmarinus officinalis, Euphorbia dendroides, Andropogon 
hirtus, Geranium molle and G. rotundifolium, and Erodium Bocconi. 
Grammitis Ceterach was the most abundant fern, though Adiantum 
Capillus- Veneris is nearly as frequent. The sea-clifFs are too dry to 
be rich in ferns, and I noticed there only Asplenium Trichomanes 
and A. Ruta-muraria, and Aspidium glandulosum (rare). Asplenium 
Trichomanes and A. Adiantum-nigrum are hardly so luxuriant near 
Nice as we see them in South Devon. The terrace-cultivation of the 
olive-orchards has very much injured the natural vegetation of the 
low but picturesque hills close to the town. T had not lime to pene- 
trate to the loftier summits bounding the landward horizon of Nice, 
and which, covered with snow in winter, would, from their greater 
humidity, furnish more cryptogamic plants than the hills near the 
town. Gymnostomum tortile, Physcomitrium curvisetum (rare, on the 
sea-clifTs only), Tortula fallax and T. rigMa, Grimmia pulvinata and 
G. trichophylla, Dicranum varium, Hypnum striatulum, Spruce, and 
H. molluscum, Mnium affine and M. puuctatum were all the mosses 
I noticed in fructification." — Id. 

Gymnogramma leptophylla. 

" In my note (Phytol. iv. 1096) respecting the Gymnogramma, I 
stated that *it doubtless will be found in other localities, as the cli- 
mate must nearly approach that of the South of France, and of Italy, 
where the Gymnogramma abounds.' 1 have just received a letter 
from my valued correspondent, Mr. Piquet, a portion of which I tran- 
scribe. 'I have now the Gymnogramma growing under a glass shade. 
It is full five inches high, and very beautiful. I had never seen any- 
thing like it ; in fact, it is finer than the specimen you showed me 
from Madeira. It has been found in two or three other localities of 
late ; so that there is not much chance now of its being all taken 
away.'"— A^ B. Ward; Clapham ; March 6, 1854. 

Mr. Newman said, that Mr, Ward also noticed a supposed new 
fern, found in Jersey, by Mr. Piquet, who had obligingly sent him 
(Ml-. Newman) specimens and much information. The subject was 
still in the course of investigation. 



129 



Contributions towards a History of a British Botrychiwn, considered 
as a distinct Species, and as entitled to a place in the British 
Flora. By Edward Newman. 

As on a late occasion (Phytol. v. 36), so on the present, my object 
is rather to invite attention to a neglected plant, and to solicit infor- 
mation respecting it, than to express, much less to enforce, any pecu- 
liar views of my own. I extremely regret the paucity of materials 
collected in a field which seems to promise such an abundant har- 
vest. It appears that there are at least six species of Botrychium 
inhabiting Europe, under the same parallel as own Scottish Highlands, 
and also under a parity of climatal and geological conditions. There 
can be little doubt that these will be eventually ddded to the British 
Flora : but, as an excuse for their having been overlooked, it may be 
urged, and perhaps with justice, that the Botrychiums are remarkably 
inconstant in their appearance, and evanescent in their duration ; and 
therefore that the man who meets with them is often rather fortunate 
than skilful. There is something yet unexplained in the history of the 
species of Botrychium, in common with that of the natural order to 
which they belong. They have all the appearance, and some of the 
characters, of root-parasites : every fact connected with their succu- 
lent nature, brief duration, capricious appearance and disappearance, 
and place of growth, suggests such a conclusion. Who ever has found 
a Botrychium except among herbage ? — who has ever succeeded in 
cultivating a Botrychium except he removed to his fernery the 
undisturbed sod which afforded it a nidus ? It is true that we want 
better evidence than this : we want the working out of the problem 
from facts, and not from probabilities : and I heartily wish that those 
botanists who have the leisure would piu-sue the interesting subject of 
root-parasitism, in this and other instances where we are still com- 
pletely in the dark. 

Two European Botrychiums have long been known to inhabit this 
country. Their nativity, so to speak, has never been called in ques- 
tion ; but a fashion has prevailed of regarding them as identical, and 
of ignoring the very existence of a second name. This is a way of 
solving a difficult problem that appears to me rather superficial than 
satisfactory. The proper botanical standing of the blue Anagallis 
was formerly, and perhaps is still, a moot question ; but no one has 
hitherto ventured to deny its existence. Let us, then, acknowledge 
VOL. V. S 



130 

the existence of a deltoid Botrychium, and glance slightly at its 
history. 

1. Ray, &c. 

" Lunariam minorem ramosam, & Lunariam min. fol. dissectis 
Westmorland. D. Lawson hujus plantae varietates esse ; non distinc- 
tas species opinatur. (Z>. Doody Syn. II. App. 340. Lunariam 
minorem foliis dissectis revera distinctam speciera vult, cum seg- 
menta sen lunulas non solum eminenter sint sectae, sed planta etiam 
elatior sit & botrus racemosior. Est Lunaria botrytis minor pin- 
nulis laciniatis. in Borealibus nostris Pluk. Aim. 288. Mr. Doody 
received it from Sir Th Willuyhby, but hath since seen it several 
times gathered by our Herb-women)." — Rati Syn. 129. 

From this passage I draw the following conclusions : — 

1st. That Ray supposed there were two British species of Botry- 
chium distinct from lunaria. 

2nd. That Mr. Lawson thought them both varieties of lunaria. 

3rd. That Dillenius believed one of them, described as \f\ih foliis 
dissectis, to be a distinct species. 

4th. That this species, or supposed species, was found by or known 
to Ray, Lawson, Doody, Willughby, and the herb-women. 

2. SWARTZ. 

In his ' Synopsis Filicum,' dated 1806, Swartz describes a new spe- 
cies of European Botrychium, under name of Botrychium rutaceum. 

" B. frondibus subsolitariis bipinnatis, pinnis ovatis, incisis." — Syn. 
Fil. 171. 

He cites " Breyn. Cent. t. 94," as representing his plant. 

3. WiLLDENOW. 

In his ' Species Plantarum,' dated 1810, Willdenow also describes a 
Botrychium rutaceum. 

" B. scapo superne unifrondoso, fronde bipinnatifida laciniis emar- 
ginato- bi- seu tridentatis obtusis. W." 

He cites Mor. Hist. iii. p. 594, sec. 14, t. 5, i. 2, 3, as representing 
his plant. 

Side by side with Botrychium rutaceum, Willdenow describes a 
second species ; and this was also known to the pre-Liunean bota- 
nists. This second species is called B. matricarioides ; and from 
Willdenow's days downwards the two names have been almost inex- 
tricably involved. 



131 



4. Smith, &c. 

In his * English Flora,' Sir J. E. Smith cites all these authors, and 
makes the plant in question var. ^. of his Botrychium lunaria. 

" ^, L. minor, foliis dissectis. Rati Syn. ] 29. L. raceraosa minor, 
matricariae folio. Breyn. Cent. t. 94. Moris, v. 3. 594. sect. 14, 
t. 5. f. 3. Botrychium rutaceum, Sw. Syn. Fil. 171. Willd. 
Sp. PL V. 5. 62.''— E. F. iv. 328. 

Here we have the B. rutaceum of Europe identified as a British 
plant, but, although retained as a variety, advisedly rejected as a spe- 
cies, because, although " found occasionally intermixed here and there 
with the plant in its proper or common form ; yet never, as far as" the 
author " could leara, so numerously distinct as to have the appear- 
ance of a diflferent species." 

It would seem, from this passage, that paucity of individuals was 
the only inducing cause with Sir J. E. Smith for rejecting Botry- 
chium rutaceum as a British plant ; but still he retained it as a variety. 
The learned authors of the 6th edition of the * British Flora,' and the 
very careful author of the ' Manual,' go a step further : they ignore 
the existence of such a plant. 

5. Braun, &c. 

Prof. Al. Braun, in the 2nd edition of Koch's ' Synopsis,' has been 
at great pains to make the synonymy intelligible ; but he gives the 
plants two new names, matricarisefolium and rutaifolium ; and^ what 
seems still more unfortunate, his matricariaefolium = Willdenovv's 
rutaceum ; and his rutaefolium = Willdenow's matricarioides. Doll, 
in his ' Rhenish Flora,' adopts this change. 

6. Ledebour. 

Ledebour, in his ' Flora Rossica,' rejects the new names, and 
restores the old ones ; but makes the rutaceum of Swartz synonymous 
with the matricarioides of Willdenow. In support of this view he 
offers no evidence ; and were this transposition of the synonyme 
really required, surely the identification of the rutaceum of Swartz 
with the matricarioides of Willdenow would necessitate the adoption 
of Swartz's name for that plant, since it has a priority of four years. 
Seeing, however, that the characters and synonymes are drawn up 
with great care, and exhibit all that has been done on the continent 
for two plants, which, whether species or varieties, will in all probabi- 



132 

lity ere long hold a station in the British Flora, I shall transfer them, 
without hesitation, to the pages of the ' Phytologist.' 

"2. B. rutacewn [Wllld. Sp. PI. v. 62. excl. Syn. Swartz.) fronde 

sterili solitaria oblonga longitudine sua duplo triplove angustiore 

petiole frondis fertilis ad medium usque v. altius adnata pinna- 

tipartita : pinnis ovatis, v. oblongo-lanceolatis pinnatifido loba- 

lis : lobis 2-3 crenatis obtusis. 
B. rutaceura. Marl. FL Mosq. p. 183. 
B. Lunaria (3., Fries, Novit. ed. 1. p. 88 ; ed. 2, p. 289 ? ; Wahlenb. 

Fl. Suec. p. 681 ; Fries, Siimma Veget. Scand. p. 83 ? Rupr. 

in Beitr. 2. Pflanzenk. d. Russ. R. iii. p. 33, iv. p. 92. 
B. Lunaria forma rutacea, Less, in Linnaa, ix. p. 212. 
B. Lunaria, Kaulf. Enum. Fil. p. 24 partim. 
B. matricariaefolium, Al. Braun in Koch Syn. ed. 2, p. 972 ; Fries, 

Summa Veget. Scand. p. 252. 
Osmunda lanceolata, S. G. Gmel. in Nov. Comment. Acad. Petrop. 

xii. p. 516, t. 11, f. 2. 
Lunaria vulgaris varietas : Lunaria foliis Adianthi Breynii. Buxb. 

in Comment. Acad. Petropol. iii. p. 271. 
/3. tripartitum : fronde sterili tripartita : lacinia media profunde 

trifida ; omnibus ovato-lanceolatis serrato- incisis : lacinulis 

obtusis. 
3. B. matricarioides [Willd. Sp. PI. v. 62) fronde solitaria petio- 

lata,petiolo basin frondis sterilissubvaginante; lamina triangulari 

transverse laliori trisecta : segmentis primariis pinnatisectis ; 

seenndariis inferioribus 2 - 3-v. pinnatipartitis : superioribus 

inciso-crenatis : laciniis rotundatis crenulatis. 
B. matricarioides, Fries, Novit. ed. 2, p. 288. Ej. Summa Veget. 

Scandin. p. 83, 252. Turcz. Cat. Baikal. No. 1339. 
B. rutaceum, Sivartz, Syn. Fil. p. 171. Wahlenb. Fl. suec. p. 681 ; 

Rupr. in Beitr. z. Pjlenzenk. d. Russ. R. iii. p. 33. 
B. Matricarias, Spreng. Syst. Veg. iv. p. 23. Eichw. Skisse, p. 114. 

JVeim. Fl. Petropol. p. 105. 
B. rutaefolium, Al. Braun in Koch Syn. ed. 2, p. 972. 
Osmunda Lunaria var Bdckeana. L. Atnosn. Acad. viii. p. 105. 
Osmunda Matricarise, Schrank ; Baier. Fl. ii. p. 419." — Ledebour, 
Fl. Rossica, xiv. 505. 

Mr. Woods, in his ' Tourist's Flora,' has given the two new or modi- 
fied names, thus : his matricarifolium = rutaceum, Willd., and his 
rutifolium = matricarioides, Willd. 



133 




Botrychium rutaceum of Swartz. 



Of species, or supposed species, of deltoid Botrychium inhabiting 
this country, I will here consider we have but one ; and of this a fair 
representation is given above. With this plant, as British, Ray, Law- 
son, Doody, Dillenius, and Smith were famiUar : the last-named bota- 
nist identified it with the B. rutaceum of Swartz, and abundantly 
proves his knowledge of the plant by his reference to figures. Mr. 
Cruickshank found three specimens of it on the sands of Barry, near 
Dundee, in August, 1839 ; one of them, evidently a monstrosity, is 
figured in ' British Ferns,' p. 348. Mr. Cruickshank particularly 
states that no specimens of Botrychium lunaria were found near 
them. 

The second plant, which I am prepared, with Ledebour, to call 
matricarioides, and of the existence of which in this country there is 
no evidence, appears to me to be perfectly distinct as a species. In 
rutaceum, Willd., the stipes, as in lunaria, ascends undivided until 
near its summit ; it then throws off the barren branch, which is 
almost sessile, deltoid, and pinnate, exhibiting no tendency towards 
a tripartite division, but the pinnae regularly decreasing in length, and 
being sublinear or subclavate, rather broader near the apex than at 
the base. In matricarioides, Willd., the stipes is divided ahnost at 
its base, and below the surface of the ground, the barren branch 
appearing as a root-leaf, and its base evidently sheathing the base of 



134 

the fertile branch, the stipes, or petiole, or scape of which is very long. 
The barren branch, or leaf, also differs in a marked manner from that 
of rutaceum ; its petiole is longer than the leaf; it is distinctly tripar- 
tite, its divisions being stipitate and somewhat tripartite. Comparing 
it primary lateral divisions with the first pair of pinnae in rutaceum, 
they are deltoid instead of linear, broader at the base instead of nar- 
rower, distinctly petiolate instead of subsessile. These differences 
are constant, no intermediate states occurring. 

We have now only to ask on what evidence B. rutaceum is united to 
B. lunaria ; and the reply is, the paucity of specimens. This seems 
plausible, but insufficient. The same argument would erase, and per- 
haps with propriety, Aspleuium germanicum from the list of species. 
But it should be shown that the deltoid or trigonate frond of ruta- 
ceum is a modification of the linear frond of lunaria ; and it should 
also be shown how the elongate pinnae of rutaceum, with their evident 
median axis, are modifications of the flabellate pinnae of lunaria, which 
have no median axis. To myself, there appears no mode of explain- 
ing the phenomenon ; for those examples of lunaria which show a 
disposition to greater division retain the flabelliform outline, but 
become digitate ; while those which evince an opposite tendency 
merely become more entire on the margin. Information is earnestly 
solicited. 

Edward Newman. 



Proceedings of Societies, 8fc. 



The Phytological Club, 
fin connexion with the Pharmaceutical Society.) 

March 8, 1854. — Robert Bentley, Esq., F.L.S., President, in the 
chair. 

Several new members were elected, and a list of candidates read 
and proposed. 

Relation of Meteorology to Botany. 

The Secretary made some observations on the Relation of Meteoro- 
logy to Botany. He thought the weather was a very proper subject 
for discussion in an association formed for the purpose of promoting 
the study of Botany. Man was sensitively alive to every modification 



135 

of the weather, but he could protect himself by artificial means from 
its extreme influences — whilst plants were exposed to all its changes 
— and it was of great importance to become acquainted with the 
causes that so materially affected their constitution. He then, by the 
aid of maps and diagrams, pointed out the principles on which the 
science of meteorology is founded, and gave a description of the phy- 
sical and chemical constitution of the atmosphere, showing the two 
great currents that are constantly flowing from the equator to the poles 
set up by the action of the sun on the surface of the earth between the 
tropics — which, modified by the diurnal and annual rotation of the earth, 
and by the relative distribution of the sea and land, gave rise to every 
variety of climate. Although the whole of organic nature is depen- 
dent on these phenomena, yet meteorology and botany had been cul- 
tivated as distinct sciences, and it had been reserved to M. Humboldt 
to draw out a general plan, indicating the direct bearing that climate 
had on vegetation. He divided each hemisphere into seven belts or 
zones of climate, each of which contained species peculiar to itself. 
The vegetation of mountains presents on a small scale the image of 
that of the earth considered as a whole. The annual mean tempera- 
ture of a place is not, however, the only circumstance which deter- 
mines its peculiar vegetation. The effects of the lowest temperature 
of winter, as well as the highest temperature of summer, have also to 
be taken into consideration. Besides the vivifying influence of heat, 
the chemical action of the sun's rays of light modify many of the con- 
stituents of a plant. Lastly, he drew attention to the conditions of 
the atmosphere which appeared to affect the health of plants. Blights 
in the wheat and in the potato, and mildew on the grape, had appeared 
simultaneously with great electrical disturbances of the atmosphere ; 
but although the subject was involved in great obscurity a more ear 
nest spirit of observation was at present awakened, and no doubt 
valuable resuts would follow. 

A few Remarks on Cotyledon Umbilicus. 

A communication from Mr. Gissing, of Worcester, was then read, 
entitled ' A few Remarks on Cotyledon Umbilicus.' 

" I believe that a work on the popular uses of British plants among 
the lower classes of the English people, would prove both useful and 
instructive. Among other classes, it would, I think, exhibit the fact 
that in many of the new remedies introduced into medicine, the prac- 
tice of the village doctress has furnished the first hint to the supposed 
discoverer of new virtues in various plants. 



136 

" The one plant, or ' herb ' as all wild plants are called by the com- 
mon people, that 1 have now more particularly in view, is Cotyledon 
Umbilicus. This plant, it is well known, is very common in Devon- 
shire, Somersetshire, and the South-west of England, as well as on 
the rocks in Wales and the counties bordering thereon. 

" In the former counties it grows chiefly on banks, and attains a 
much greater height than in its more rocky habitats. From Somer- 
setshire I have seen specimens, the flower-stalks of which were two 
feet or more high, but plants growing in more mountainous situations 
I have seldom seen exceed eight or ten inches. Perhaps I may say 
a few words here upon the shape of the leaf of Cotyledon Umbilicus. 
In Monmouthshire, Gloucestershire, and Worcestershire I have ga- 
thered plants with some of the root-leaves kidney-shaped, and others 
spathulate, and not peltate as is usual. I am unable to state whether 
these leaves would afterwards have assumed the peltate form ; but 
from the fact of several of the other leaves on these plants having their 
stalks at various distances from their edges, I thought there was a pro- 
bability of their having been originally reniform or spathulate. I 
know it is by no means a general rule for the leaf- stalks to be central, 
but the two circumstances united in one plant caused the supposition 
that the peltate leaf might be a development of an earlier form. I 
name this fact because I have never before seen it noticed ; if it be 
general, it is worthy of remark. The leaves of the flower-stalk, I 
know, are generally nearly reniform, but the leaves I have spoken of 
were growing long before the flower-stalk made its appearance. 

" One of the common names of Cotyledon Umbilicus is kidney- 
wort. Now we know pretty certainly that the other vulgar names, 
penny-wort and navel-wort, are given from the shape of the leaves. 
Did the person who added to these names kidney-wort do so for the 
same reason, or from any supposed curative power ? Most likely the 
latter ; but still, bearing in mind the leaves I have spoken of, there is 
a possibility in favour of the former. 

" Respecting the medicinal use of Cotyledon Umbilicus, it is well 
known to most chemists and druggists, that Mr. Salter, of Poole, 
introduced it a few years since as a cure for epilepsy, since which 
time it has been used, although I believe to only a limited extent, 
amongst medical men. 

" In Monmouthshire and Herefordshire I found, on inquiry, that 
the leaves were taken for urinal obstructions and ' fits ;' in Lanca- 
shire, amongst other complaints, they are likewise taken for ' fits.' In 
Herefordshire I find they are used for corns and warts ; in Worcester- 



137 

shire they are used for the same purpose ; hence they are called 

* corn-leaves.' They are likewise used here to make a cooling oint- 
ment, and their juice is expressed and mixed with cream as a cooling 
lotion for sore faces or chaps in children ; in the same manner as the 
juice of the houseleek {Sempervivum tectorum). 

" Whether Mr. Salter knew of its use amongst the common people 
for ' fits,' and examined for what kind of ' fits ' it was used, and found 
it to be epilepsy, of course I am unable to say, but I have no doubt 
it was used for what the people call ' fits,' very many years before Mr. 
Salter introduced it into the regular practice of medicine. For it is 
most unlikely that the people should have recently adopted it, as they 
generally are violently opposed to all innovations upon their time- 
honoured customs. Witness the feeling still prevalent in many parts 
against vaccination. The word of a village doctress is much more 
powerful amongst the ignorant peasantry than that of the qualified 
practitioner. She is a remnant of a bygone age, and I doubt not, as 
surgeons penetrate more into remote districts, the rising generation 
will totally discard the only medical adviser to their forefathers. The 
doctress commenced her practice when it was almost the only mode 
of treatment; and when, if surgeons differed from her, it was only to 
prescribe more absurd and disgusting remedies ; she kept it when 
medical men came to be comparatively frequent ; and her ' occupa- 
tion ' will only be fully ' gone,' when the class that now constitutes 
her patients has become intelligent enough to prefer science to 
quackery. 

" Ray says, that the root and leaves of Cotyledon Umbilicus (or 
Umbilicus Veneris, as it was then named) were used for erysipelas, 
&c., and refers to Dioscorides and Galen. Dr. Hill, in his ' Family 
Herbal,' gives it as a general cooling medicine, internally and exter- 
nally. In the last edition of Gray's ' Supplement to the Pharmaco- 
poeias,' it is said to be used in the same manner ; and in Meyrick's 
' Family Herbal ' it is given as cooling and diuretic, and good for 
burns ; but in none of these are ' fits' named. Whether the authors 
disbeheved^the'utility of the plant in these diseases, or whether they 
were ignorant of its use in such cases, I cannot tell. It is likewise 
very difficult to determine what ignorant people mean by the term 

* fits ; ' apoplexy, paralysis, hysteria, and epilepsy are all ' fits ' with 
them : they have no discriminating eye for the different symptoms 
that denote the difi'erent kinds of ' fits.' 

" The only notice I have seen of Cotyledon Umbilicus being used 
in any of the diseases just named, is in the ' Pharmaceutical Journal' 
VOL. V. T 



las 

for 1849, where Mr. Ince observes, that it has long been a popular 
remedy in ' hysteria.' 

" Anything that alleviates the sufferings of humanity should be 
hailed with satisfaction, and whether Mr. Salter has taken a leaf from 
the prescription-book of the village doctress, or not, is of but little 
consequence, so long as it is useful, but in that case it is not a new 
medicine. 

" I have brought forward these remarks, thinking they may induce 
others, who, perhaps, possess greater advantages than myself, to exa- 
mine the subject of the local uses and names of British plants. 

" In examining the subject, they might eliminate all that is worth- 
less, and adopt whatever they found worthy of support. In doing 
this, they will be just as much assisting truth and progress, as if they 
were engaged in some higher and more ostentatious branch of the 
sciences." 

The President said that in his opinion, whether Mr. Salter was the 
original discoverer of the virtues of Cotyledon Umbilicus in epilepsy, 
or only the introducer of it into the regular practice of medicine, he was 
equally entitled to the thanks of the community at large for any benefits 
that might arise from its use, although, as far as his own experience went, 
he thought that the value of this remedy in epilepsy had been much 
overrated. The President also stated that he was very glad to find, from 
the interesting paper just read, that the local uses of our indigenous 
plants had begun to excite the attention of the members of the Phy- 
tological Club ; as this was one of the prominent objects contemplated 
at its establishment, and one also which he had on several occasions 
impressed the importance of upon the members, he hoped therefore 
that this paper would soon be followed by others on similar subjects. 
Mr. Bentley also called attention to that part of the paper referring to 
the probability of the extract of Cotyledon Umbilicus, prepared from 
plants from different habitats, possessing somewhat different charac- 
ters. He thought that this was very likely to be the case, as he 
believed that climate, soil, &c., had far more influence in modifying 
the properties of plants than was generally supposed, and from the 
importance of the bearing of this subject upon pharmaceutists, who 
had continually to make use of plants and their products in the prepa- 
ration of various medicinal compounds, he urged the necessity of a 
thorough investigation of the matter upon the members of the Club. 

Mr. Blyth observed, that the extract of Cotyledon Umbilicus had 
been largely tried at St. Mary's Hospital, more especially by Dr. 
Sieveking, and the effects had been so satisfactory, in some cases of 



139 

epilepsy, in causing a remission of the attack, as to justify its further 
use. He did not know from what part of the country the plant was 
obtained from which the extract supplied to the Hospital was made — 
but the extract itself was unexceptionable. It was the province of 
the pharmaceutist to prepare a good extract — it was the province of 
the physician to judge of its effects. 

There will be no meeting of the Phytological Club in the month of 
April. The next meeting will take place, therefore, on Wednesday, 
May 10, at 9 p.m. 



Friday^ March 17, 1854. — Edwin Lees, Esq., F.L.S., delivered a 
highly interesting and instructive lecture " On the Geography of 
Plants," to the members of the Worcester Branch of the Phytological 
Club, and their friends, in All Saints' School-room, Worcester. 

Mr. Lees, having been introduced by Mr. J. S. Walker (President 
of the Worcester Branch of the Phytological Club), commenced his 
address by briefly touching upon the various motives that led to the 
love and study of Botany, and vindicated the science from the charge 
of " dryness." Mr. Lees then proceeded to mention the different 
ways in which plants had been regarded at different times. Originally 
they were only valued as furnishing food ; and acorns, chestnuts, and 
beech-mast, had been the first aliment of mankind before the cultiva- 
tion of corn. After that golden age, magical and superstitious 
qualities were ascribed to plants, especially if gathered at particular 
times. The Greeks and Romans considered Pontus, in Asia Minor, 
as a famous place for dire venomous plants, that would change 
the very nature of man ; and the " sacred bean," the fruit of the 
Nelumbium speciosum, was supposed by the greatest philosophers to 
possess a mysterious influence. In our own country the mountain 
ash and service-tree were considered antidotes to witchcraft ; and this 
was the reason the elder-tree was seen at every coltage-door, because 
it had been considered to keep out all unnatural intruders. Agrimony 
and mugwort, as well as many others, were considered " plants 
of power;" the former, placed under a man's head, threw him into a 
state of torpor, while the latter gave him pedestrian powers almost 
equal to the giant's seven-leagued boots ! After the invention of 
printing, and the consequent general spread of knowledge, magical 
herbs began to be regarded with incredulity. But now another phase 
in the history of plants occurred. They became " speed-wells," 



140 

" wound-worts," and " all-heals ; " they were expected to cure every 
disorder in the catalogue of human ills, and every garden became a 
little Apothecaries' Hall. This was the belle dame age of medicine, 
when the old woman doctress had much more to do than the apothe- 
cary, and worked her pestle and mortar to good purpose. About a 
quarter of a century ago, one Mrs. Welton was well known at St. 
John's, near this city, as a doctress, and a " grand compounder " 
of balsams, salves, syrups, &c., and did a wonderful business in the 
"yarb" way. 

" 'Midst leaves and flowers 
She dwelt, and knew all secrets of their powers." 

He now came to geographical Botany, for it was to be observed, that 
plants, being influenced in their development by soil, by latitude, 
temperature, moisture, and elevation, the Flora of one country was 
essentially different from that of another, each region of the land and 
water being occupied by distinct groups. As striking instances of 
diversity in vegetation, no rose had ever been found in the southern 
hemisphere ; equinoctial Africa had no Laurinise, and while more 
than 300 species of Erica, or heath, were congregated in the territory 
of the Cape of Good Hope, none belonged to America, except it was 
the common ling in the far North. The pines and firs, so abundant 
in the northern hemisphere, were replaced in the south by Araucarias 
and Cycadeae. Islands in the wide ocean had generally a peculiar 
vegetation, the Canaries had 510 species, and St. Helena nearly 60, 
that had never been seen elsewhere. So the plants of South America 
were restricted to that continent, and out of 4,100 indigenous to Aus- 
tralia, only 166 belonged to Europe, many of these, too, accidentally 
introduced by settlers. Even marine vegetation was distinct in its 
character, that of the Mediterranean and Red Sea being entirely dif- 
ferent. Reference was then made to many local British plants only 
found in particular spots, as the Helianthemum Breweri, on the rocks 
at Holyhead; the white rock cinquefoil {Potentilla rupestris), on 
Craig Breiddin, in Wales, &c. ; and thus a zest was given to the zeal 
of the exploring botanist in searching out the rare plants thus circum- 
stanced. Heat and moisture were the great instigators of plantal 
vitality, and where these preponderated, as in equatorial regions, the 
largest flowers appeared, as the Victoria lily and the monstrous 
Rafl^esia, whose corolla was a yard across. Here, too, palms and 
bananas abounded, as also in the tropical zone, distinguished by its 
cocoa-nuts and tree-ferns. The earth might, then, be divided into 



141 

zones of vegetation, in parallelism with zones of temperature, till, pro- 
gressing towards the pole, trees became utterly stunted, every trace of 
verdure disappeared, and a few^soli'ary lichens, amongst pyramids of 
ice, or a stain of crimson amidst wastes of snow, alone testified to the 
all but extinguished spark of phy tological existence. These zones of 
vegetation were repeated upon the mountains, with their increasing 
height, in exact correspondence between the decrement of heat from 
the equator to the poles. On the Alps and Pyrenees, at the elevation 
of 8,780 feet, it was as cold as the region of the poles at the level of 
the sea, and though the snow-line was higher at the equator, even 
there all vegetation ceased at an elevation of 15,200 feet. The size 
of plants was much diminished on the sides of mountains ; but the 
beauty of natural Alpine gardens, among black ravines and broken 
crags, was so exciting, that any one who once trod upon such 
an oasis of beauty long remembered it amid the dusty scenes of every- 
day life. Though the distribution of plants on the earth was clearly 
governed by temperature, the " isothermal lines " of mean annual 
heat did not progress uniformly, and thus the eastern countries 
of Europe, Asia, and America had a much lower temperature than the 
western, and plants were affected accordingly. In Norway, the silver 
fir, black alder, and others, grew under the polar circle, while eastern 
Siberia and the vast extent of Labrador, north of 60 deg., was quite 
treeless. The limitation of the cultivated plants was next noticed : — 
nutmegs, coffee, cocoa, and the finest spices, were limited to inter- 
tropical regions ; cotton, rice, and olives grew in lat. 45 deg. ; the 
vine, to 50 deg. ; while in the West of Europe, the cultivation of wheat, 
flax, and tobacco, ceased at 60 deg. ; but hemp, oats, barley, rye, and 
potatoes, progressed into the polar circle. The southern hemisphere, 
from the greater accumulation of ice at the poles, was colder than the 
northern. This was well shown by a comparison of the indigenous 
flowering plants of our little Channel Islands, Guernsey, Jersey, &c., 
with the larger Kerguelen's group, in the same parallel of latitude 
South. The former isles possessed 840 species, but Kerguelen's only 
32. The physiognomy of vegetation was next adverted to, those 
peculiar features of associated plants that the eye at once seized upon, 
in any country, and connected with early recollection, as " the vege- 
table forms of our father-land." Seas, mountain-chains by their inter- 
vention, formed provinces of plants, and thus the greatest diversity 
prevailed in the clothing of the earth's surface. As striking examples, 
the forests of Australia and Van Diemen's Land were composed of ever- 
green Eucalypti ; tree-ferns abounded in New Zealand ; the singular 



142 

tribe of Cacti in Mexico ; Acacias and aloes in Southern Africa ; 
and the Himalayan Mountains were the grand capital of the Rhodo- 
dendrons. Fir-forests extended in Norway and Russia for hundreds 
of miles; while in North America cypresses formed enormous woods 
and vast dismal swamps. These assemblages of plants fixed the 
natural physiognomy of countries by their beauty, singularity, or im- 
posing size. The greatest natural families of plants were next 
detailed in order, but an instance or two of these must suffice. The 
grasses, of which there were 4,000 species, was a most remarkable 
group. These, forming vast natural meadows extending for 60,000 
square leagues in South America, rose in magnitude according to cli- 
mate ; in Brazil, the grasses were 12 feet high, and a reed was men- 
tioned by Schomburg that was 40 feet ; while, in India, the bamboos 
were arboreal, and rose to 100 feet. The palms, the nobles of the 
vegetable kingdom, were confined to the vicinity of the Tropics, but 
were numerous there, as 120 species grew in South America. The 
talipot palm of Ceylon towered to 200 feet in the air, while the little 
Chamgerops, just venturing as far North as the Rock of Gibraltar, was 
in that position as unaspiring as our common male fern under a 
hedge. The lianes, or cordage plants of warm countries, often en- 
tangle the tropical forest in an inextricable maze — they rose to the 
tops of the highest trees and again descended, formed bridges over 
rivers, and extended for miles from their original source. The fern 
tribe was singularly afiected by moisture, for while 1,200 species grew 
in the damp forests of the Equator, only 144 existed in the temperate 
zone, and in Egypt, where rain seldom if ever fell, only one species 
was known. Nations and countries had peculiar features impressed 
upon them by their plants, and romance and poetry were ready to take 
advantage of the bright imagery of Nature, which thus supplied pic- 
tures of a brighter or daiker hue, according as sunny or snowy climes, 
floweiy or arid regions, presented their lights or shadows to the brood- 
ing mind. But plants were in many instances so limited by geogra- 
phical considerations, that their localities were placed within the 
narrowest compass. The Arabs were accustomed to mark their course 
across the Syrian Desert, by the peculiar plants that presented them- 
selves at certain intervals ; and in America the compass-flower of the 
prairies, whose leaves pointed to the North, had been celebrated 
for the aid it afforded the traveller in those boundless wastes. 
The tea-plant, it was well known, was confined to the hilly dis- 
tricts of China and Japan ; but in South America a species of holly 
furnished another kind of tea peculiar to that continent, and equally 



143 

prized by the natives. The Quinquina, or Peruvian bark, was con- 
fined to a small district of the Colombian Andes ; and cocoa and cho- 
colate were the produce of a plant limited to the warmer regions of 
South America. Numerous other instances of plantal limitation might 
be given, as the cow-tree of Venezuela, the tussock -grass {Dactylis 
caspitosa) of the Falkland Isles, the hand-tree of Mexico, whose gory 
flowers were regarded with awe, and of which only two living speci- 
mens were known ; and the double cocoa-nut {Ladoicea Sechellarum) 
of the Seychelle Islands, in the Indian Ocean, which, till those islands 
were discovered, in 1789, had been believed to be produced by the 
sea, and valued as a talisman at a very high price. One more curious 
plant might be mentioned — the Maltese champignon {Cynomorium 
coccineum), which only grew on the little rock of Gozo, near Malta. 
The knights of Malta had a superstitious veneration for it, and 
appointed a custode to guard the spot, and since Malta had been 
appended to England, the salary of this custode had been paid by the 
British Government, and might be an appropriate appointment for a 
botanist. The lecturer observed that the manners and habits of diffe- 
rent peoples were much influenced by vegetable products, and 
the temperature that limited the growth of grain also stopped the pro- 
gress of the human race ; where sustenance was easily procured by 
fruits and rice, as in tropical regions, the inhabitants were indolent 
and apathetic, and really only exhibited the highest amount of intel- 
lect where Rubi and bitter wild berries ofiered little temptation to a 
lazy dweller in the woods. Plants, however, were the children of the 
sun, and luxuriated most in heat and brightness, so that when they 
were transplanted into colder regions they must have additional care 
and attention, because other conditions arose than those Nature had 
originally provided. Mr. Lees concluded with eloquent observa- 
tions on the moral bearings of the subject, resulting from an investi- 
gation of the works of Nature, and the elevation of thought they 
inspired. 

The lecture was profusely illustrated with most excellent diagrams 
of geological formations, tree-ferns, palms, Cacti, and plants of various 
kinds. A beautiful collection of dried plants was placed for the 
inspection of the company, and many were handed about during the 
lecture, amongst which was a dried specimen of the smallest palm, 
brought from Gibraltar. At the conclusion of Mr. Lees's address Mr. 
Gissing, the Secretary, on the part of the Phytological Club, returaed 
thanks to Mr. Lees for his very instructive and entertaining lecture. 
Mr. Baxter returned thanks to the Rev. W. A. Hill for the use of the 



144 

robra ; and that gentleman, in acknowledging the vote of thanks, 
spoke in very high terms of the lecture and lecturer. — Mr. Lees hav- 
ing briefly replied to the vote of thanks the company separated. 



Greenvs^ich Natural-History Club. 

Saturday, February 25, 1854. — George Busk, Esq., F.R.S., Presi- 
dent, in the chair. 

Fungi of the Neighbourhood of Greenwich. 

Mr. Currey made some observations on three new Fungi which he 
had found in the neighbourhood. 

" Since our last meeting, I have met with three Fungi which I had 
not previously found in this neighbourhood, and which are of an inte- 
resting nature. Two belong to the genus Sphaeria, and the third is, I 
believe, a Coryneum. The first of the Sphaeriae to which I wish to 
call attention is a beautiful plant, the species of which is somewhat 
doubtful. It appeared to me to be the Sphaeria ochracea of Greville, 
which is one of the rarest of our English Fungi ; but a friend, whose 
experience in these matters is much greater than my own, tells me that 
it is not the true Sphaeria ochracea, but comes nearer to S. aquifolia or S. 
Sinopica. I have not been able to refer to any description of S. 
Sinopica ; but, with regard to S. aquifolia, my plant differs in having 
the perithecia covered with bright yellow scales, and, moreover, the 
depression of the apex of the perithecium, which in S. aquifolia is to 
be found only in old plants, exist, in my species, indifferently in 
both young and old. I hope this Sphaeria may prove a new species : 
at present it is doubtful. With respect to the description, I would 
add that that the fungus is very minute. A yellow spot, about the size 
of a large pin's head, contains an aggregation of several plants ; so 
that it requires the aid of the microscope to distinguish even the 
external characteristics. If you imagine a flattened Seville orange, 
with a ciater-shaped depression at the top, and well powdered with 
sulphur (or rather with some powder of a brighter yellow than sul- 
phur), it will give a correct idea of an individual of the group. The 
other Sphaeria is S. inquinans. In this fungus the perithecia lie con- 
cealed beneath the bark of trees. The spores are discharged through 
an orifice at the apex of the perithecium, and are spread over the 
external surface of the bark, being enveloped in a sort of gelatinous 



145 

matter. When I first examined this fungus, and before finding the 
perithecia, it appeared to agree almost precisely with Corda's descrip- 
tion of a plant called by him Apotemnoum maculans. His description 
is 'Sporse septato-articulatae gelatina immersse.' It has been suggested 
to me that very possibly Corda's Apotemnoum may be nothing more than 
the present Sphaeria. If so, he must have taken tlie gelatinous mass 
with the imbedded spores to be an independent fungus, overlooking 
the buried perithecium. This Sphaeria inquinans is a highly interest- 
ing fungus, from certain peculiarities connected with its fructification. 
The spores are furnished with a long cirrhiform appendage at either 
end, which is frequently, if not generally, detached before the 
spores are discharged from the perithecium. But a more remarkable 
circumstance is, that the same perithecium has been found to pro- 
duce asci internally, and naked stalked spores externally. These 
naked stalked spores have been supposed to be a distinct fungus, to 
which the name of Stilbospora macrosperma has been applied ; but 
the opinion seems to be gaining ground, that they are, in fact, trans- 
formations of the asci themselves. I would add, that in one of the 
specimens which I examined I found naked spores in the interior of 
the apothecium, mostly intermixed with gelatinous filaments, and 
not attached to long stalks. The third fungus mentioned above 
was a Coryneum, too old for the species to be satisfatorily 
determined ; and I only refer to it to mention, that in connexion 
with one specimen I observed in the field of the microscope, a loose 
cellular hood, or envelope, having just the appearance which a cellu- 
lar covering, carried upwards by the growth of the spores, might be 
supposed to have. The spores in Coryneum grow in such a manner 
as to render this possible ; but I am not aware that any such circum- 
stance has been noticed, and the body in question may have had no 
connexion with the Coryneum. I thought it, however, worth men- 
tioning, as other observers may perhaps be inclined to turn their 
attention to it." 

Elaters of a Trichia. 

Mr. Currey also called the attention of the Club to a preparation of 
the elaters of a Trichia, mounted for the microscope. It was in these 
elaters that Mr. Henfrey had lately announced the existence of spiral 
fibres, analogous to those in the elaters of Marchantia polymorpha ; 
thus contradicting the published observations of Schleiden and 
Schlacht, who declare that the appearance of a spiral fibre is due to a 
VOL. V. U 



146 

twisting of the tube. From a subsequent examination of the speci- 
men by the President, he was convinced that Schlacht's opinion was 
correct ; and that the figure he has given of the appearance is accu- 
rately and faithfully rendered. 



Thursday, April 13, 1854. — George Busk, Esq., President, in the 
chair. 

This was the Second Anniversary of the Club, convened for the 
purpose of electing officers. 

Election of Officers. 

The Treasurer's accounts having been audited, the following gen- 
tlemen were elected as office-bearers for the ensuing year : — Presi- 
dent : George Busk, Esq., F.R.S. Vice-President : J. B. Spencer, 
Esq. Treasurer and Hon. Sec. : Cuthbert Collingwood, Esq., M.A., 
F.L.S. Committee : F. Currey, Esq., M.A. ; J. W. Douglas, Esq., 
Sec. E.S. ; James Glaisher, Esq., F.R.S. ; P. Purvis, Esq., M.D. ; 
Flaxman Spurrell, Esq. 

The President then delivered an address, commencing by a state- 
ment of the number of members, which has more than doubled since 
the last Anniversary, and now amounts to forty-seven. He then 
briefly reviewed the proceedings of the Club during the past year, 
giving an epitome of all the meetings, both in the field and in the 
meeting-room ; and congratulating the Club on the promising aspect 
it had assumed. 

This terminated the in-door proceedings for the winter ; and it was 
announced that the first field-meeting would be held on Thursday, 
April 27.— C. C. 



147 



The Phytologist Club. 

One Hundred and Fifty- Sixth Sitting. — Saturday, April 22, 
1854. — Mr. Newman, President, in the chair. 

The President read the following communications : — 

Statice Dodartii a Native of Ireland. 

" In the ' Phytologist ' (v. 77) ray friend Mr. Carrol, of Cork, men- 
tions that S. binervosa has been found at Traraore, near Waterford. 
As that announcement leaves it doubtful which of two (as I 
believe) perfectly distinct species ought to be added to the Flora of 
Ireland, I applied to him for a specimen. On his kindly sending one, 
I learn that it is the S. Dodartii, Gir., that grows at Tramore. I 
think it right that this should be made known through the ' Phytolo- 
gist.' The S. binervosa, G. E. Smith, includes this and S. occiden- 
talis, but the latter is the more typical of his species. S. spathulata 
of Hooker also includes the same two, but apparently he had S. 
Dodartii in view rather than its ally." — Charles C. Bahington. 

Note respecting Car ex Moenchiana as a British Plant. 

" This species, I believe, has never been mentioned in print as an 
inhabitant of Britain ; so that the following extract from a letter dated 
' Mytholmroyd, April 23rd, 1847,' written by the late S. Gibson, for- 
merly of Hebden Bridge, just before his decease, is worthy of atten- 
tion : — 

" ' In J 843 I found Carex Moenchiana in abundance near Heb- 
den Bridge. The plant I sent to Dr. Boott, and have his authority 
for the correctness of the name.' 

" Not having seen any specimens, I am not practically acquainted 
with C. Moenchiana ; nor have I access at present to Reichenbach's 
original description ; and therefore transcribe the diagnostic charac- 
ters from Woods' ' Tourist's Flora :' — 

" ' Section F. Spikes separate : upper barren : stigmas two. 

ii. Beak round, short, and smooth : or wanting. Fruit hairless. 
Bracts not sheathing, 

b. Barren spikes two or more. 

* * Barren spikes with fertile flowers at the base. 
73. C. Moenchiana. Fertile spikes erect, acute, on short stalks. 
Fruit smooth, ovate, obtuse, shorter than the lanceolate acute 



148 

glume. Root creeping. Lower bracts long, p. 5. Devil's 
ditches at Marburg in Hesse; Reichenbach.' 
— Woods' Tourisfs Flora, p. 389. 

" Its most intimate fallies amongst British species appear to be C. 
aquatilis, C. stricta, and C. acuta. If no other botanist can furnish 
more complete and definite information respecting its occurrence, per- 
haps it will be safest, under the circumstances of the case, to place it 
for the present in the doubtful category, side by side with C. brizoi- 
des, till its rediscovery enables us to receive it with complete confi- 
dence ; but it is not unlikely that if sought for specially it may be 
found to inhabit other localities." — Jolm G. Baker ; Thirsk, April 
17, 1854. 

Another Locality for Salix acutifolia. 

Mr. Baker also forwarded the following, extracted, by permission, 
from a letter sent to him by Mr. James Ward, of Richmond, York- 
shire, dated April 7, 1854 : — 

" I am exceedingly obliged by yourkindness in sending me specimens 
of Salix acutifolia, Willd. ; and beg to inform you that I discovered the 
same species in May, 1831, on the banks of the river Ure, near Wens- 
ley, in Wensley Dale, Yorkshire. I only preserved a single specimen, 
which I now have in my herbarium ; being told it was not a British 
species : at the same time, I thought it must be so, as it appeared as 
perfectly wild as any of the others amongst which it was growing. I 
have no doubt it is still in the same place, but have not been there for 
some time. When I found it, I was not so well acquainted with wil- 
lows, and therefore thought no more about it." 

Chrysosplenium altertiifolium , S^c, near Cheltenham. 

" Crossing the Cotswold Hills the other day, from Cheltenham to 
Stow-on-the-Wold, I gathered on the border of Dowdeswell Wood, 
near Cheltenham, Chrysosplenium alternifolium. It was growing in 
great abundance. Further on, about two or three miles, by the road- 
side, and nearly opposite Sandywell Park, far from any house, I saw 
Helleborus viridis growing most luxuriantly, although only a few 
plants. On one of , the highest hills on my road, I found Cerastium 
arvense sparingly ; and at Naunton, on the border of a field adjoin- 
ing Harford Bridge, that spans the Windrush, Veronica Buxbaumii 
was growing in such profusion as to make, the ground quite blue for 
yards." — T. W. Gissing ; 44, High Street^ Worcester, April 2\, 1854, 



149 



Supposed new Fern. 

" I am happy to forward you a few fronds of a new fern I have dis- 
covered here, hoping you may be able to make it out ; but it is not 
in fructification : yet I am in doubt that when you receive it the 
fronds may have dried too much, and of course be useless, as the 
plant is very tender ; but, if such be the case, I could send you more 
when the plants are more advanced. I discovered it about six weeks 
ago. I had been gathering some Gymnogramma ; and so early in the 
season there is nothing but the radical leaves to be found. I hap- 
pened to be in a very wet lane, in which there were several trees, when 
I saw, under the overhanging part of an old hedge, a quantity of 
leaves, resembling a little those of Gymnogramma leptophylla, except 
that they were of a darker green, and rather more cut; and on comparing 
them with the Gymnogramma I concluded they must belong to ano- 
ther species of the same genus. I therefore took a piece of mould, 
with some of the seedlings upon it, and planted it under a bell glass, 
alongside seedlings of G. leptophylla. After a month's time, I found 
that the new one was different from anything I knew j and I thought 
it had the habit of an Asplenium. I went to the spot again, and 
gathered more ; but the specimens were very small, scarcely a quarter 
the size of those under a bell glass. I now send you one from the 
plant I gathered first. This is a water-loving fern, and grows in 
totally different places from G. leptophylla. A friend of mine is going 
up to London in about a month, and 1 shall send you a nice growing 
specimen by him. I have no doubt of the Gymnogramma being indi- 
genous here." — John Piquet; 14, York Street, Jersey^ March 14, 
1854. 

The President observed, that the fronds which Mr. Piquet had so 
obligingly transmitted with the foregoing note did not exceed an inch 
in length ; the stipes and rachis were extremely fragile and delicate ; 
the fronds respectively consisted of four, five, and six, flabelliform, 
sessile pinnae, indented along their outer margin ; there was no trace 
of fructification ; and he failed to discover the difference which Mr. 
Piquet believed to exist between these fronds and those of G. lepto- 
phylla. * 



150 



Notices of New Books. 



' A Plain and Easy Account of the British Ferns ; wherein each 
Species is particularly described under its respective Genus, 
and the characteristics of those Genera given in words in com- 
mon use : with a Glossary of Technical Terms, serving as a Key 
to larger Treatises. London : Robert Hardvvicke, 38, Carey 
Street. 1854.' 

" Of what vast consequence am I ! 
Not of the importance you suppose, 
Replies a flea upon his nose." 

Gay's Fables. 

Here is a book that must subtract very materially from any inflated 
idea that Mr. Newman may have formed of his own importance as an 
historian of British ferns. He is not criticized ; he is not in any way 
spoken slightingly of; but there is the most clear and unmistakable 
evidence that he is utterly unknown. Francis is regarded as the 
great pteridologist of Britain: Thomas Moore's 'Handbook' is 
too " complicated in its plan of arrangement ; " and the same author's 
' Popular History ' " has the same complicate classification." We 
may, perhaps, venture to coiTcct the author on the latter point, by just 
mentioning that the " complicate classification " complained of is not 
intended as a classification at all : it is an alphabetical arrangement. 
*' In the following pages," says our author, " the subject has been 
more simplified." In order to acquire a knowledge of the British 
ferns without troubling himself with the recondite labours of Francis 
and Moore, the reader is informed, in the opening paragraph, that — 

" As every formal fern comes under one or other of the Heads 
[what Heads ?], it is only necessary in any case to look at its fructifi- 
cation, and then, by casting the eye down the following list, the genus to 
which it belongs will be seen at once." The characters of the genera 
on which the reader is requested to cast his eye are recorded thus : — 
" Sori in entire cups, springing from the branch." 
" Sori oval, on the inner surface of the Indusium." 
It strikes us as possible that not only beginners, but also experts, 
might be found who would stumble even at these curt and simple 
definitions ; but then the remedy is at hand : the glossary's the thing 



151 

wherein the author fully explains all tlie terms which he employs, and 
extends it so that it shall serve also for the " larger treatises " of the 
scientific Francis and the recondite Moore : the veriest tvro cannot 
complain of being left in the dark, however he might have been 
lost for a moment in the technical obscurity of the foregoing quo- 
tations. Here are extracts. 

'* Anther, the vessel containing the fertilising farina affixed to the 

top of the stamen or barren filament of a flower or blossom. 
" Athyriura, a separate class assigned by some writers to the Asplen : 

Filix Foemina. 
" Blechnam spicant, name used by some writers for theboreale. 
" Pistil, the fertile filament or little column in the interior of a 

flower or blossom. 
" Pollen, the fecundating farina of a plant. 
" Pubescent clothed with soft wood. 
" Silicious, composed of hair-like substance. 
" Stamen, the barren filament or thread-like column in the interior 

of a flower or blossom. 
" Stigma, the point of the pistil or fertile filament in the interior of 

a flower or blossom receiving the farina." 

Many of our readers will perhaps be led to infer from some of these 
definitions, that the author intends the " glossary " as a general, not 
as a pteridological one : this we assure them is not the case. We will 
not enquire whence our author derives his profound erudition, but we 
are certain that he believes it explanatory of that restricted branch of 
Botany, of which his work professes to treat : such words for instance, 
as " corolla," " calyx," " sepal," " petal," &c., do not occur in the 
glossary. 

Amongst other peculiarities, we are informed that Aspleniura pal- 
matum, or the mule fern, by some called Scolopendrium Hemionitis, 
grows wild in Essex ; Woodsia Ilvensis is " of no particular beauty 
or interest intrinsically ; " W. hyperborea is " of a little more interest." 
The genus Trichomanes is like the genus Hymenophyllum, " only 
the leaves not prickly, wider, and more rounded." Of Botrychium we 
have these particulars in the " plain and easy account," which we 
compare with those in the "complicate" ' Handbook :' — 



152 



In the ' Plain and Easy Account,^ In the " complicate classification " 
p. 29. of Mr. Moore, p. 217. 

"Difficult of cultivation. "Difficult plant to get esta- 

blished under cultivation. 
Prefers to be kept moderately It rather prefers to be kept mo- 

dry, cool at root,* and with fresh derately dry, cool at the root, and 
air and rich vegetable soil. where there is a circulation of 

pure air. It prefers rich vege- 
table soil. 
The root to be transplanted in The roots should be trans- 

spring, while yet dormant." planted in the spring, when dor- 

mant." 

The similarity of these passages is of high interest, and, of course, 
is purely accidental, for no allusion whatever is made by the " plain 
and easy" author to his having borrowed this information from 
another. Those who chance to read the third edition of Newman's 
Ferns, will find it stated that Botrychium is the easiest of all ferns to 
cultivate ; that it must be kept entirely without rich vegetable "soil; " 
and that it must be taken up when the fi'ond has attained its full ex- 
pansion at Midsummer : the " plain and easy " author, as well as the 
" complicate " one, have totally forgotten the incontestible fact, that 
they could not find the plant " while yet dormant." 



We are glad to announce that ' A Fasciculus of Dried Specimens 
of the Hieracia of North Yorkshire and Teesdale,' by our correspon- 
dent, Mr. J. G. Baker, will shortly be issued. The following is a list 
of species : — H. Pilosella, X., aurantiacum, Z., iricum. Fries, palli- 
dum, Biv., murorum, Z., caesium, Fries, and var. nemorum, Fries, 
H. vulgatum, Fries, and vars. maculatum, Sm., medium, Fries, 
niaculatum-sylvaticum, Sm., sylvaticum, Sm., H. gothicum, Fries, 
tridentatura, Fries, and var. nemorosum, H. umbellatum, i., croca- 
tum, Fries, and var. angustatum, Fries, H. boreale, Fries, and var. 
nemorosum. 

* Probably because " this plant is hot and drie in the third degree." — Ed. Phytol. 



153 



A brief Notice of some Plants observed growing in the Neighbour- 
hood of Streatley, Berks, and of Goring, Oxon, in April, 1854; 
with Additions of such Plants as have been gathered there dur- 
ing several visits in former years, viz., between 1833 and the 
present 1854. By William Pamplin, Esq., A.L.S. 

It would be difficult to find two villages of more rural character, 
or, in every respect, more pleasantly situated, than Streatley on the 
Berkshire, and Goring on the Oxfordshire, side of the Thames. If 
you take a circuit of country, including the adjoining parishes of 
Moulsford, Aldworth, Bassildon, Pangbourn (Berks), and Whit- 
church, Mapledurham, Woodcot, and South Stoke, Oxon, you have 
altogether the greatest variety of beautiful scenery. The silvery, 
winding Thames, with its rich meadows and ozier holts, a gradual, 
in some places a very abrupt rise thence on each side of the river up 
to the high chalk downs, extensive sheep-walk, and fine hanging- 
woods of beech and fir, with here and there distant views over a fine 
open corn country, interspersed with villages and farms, afford a 
most delightful variety of scenery which cannot easily be surpassed. 
The view from the upper part of Streatley Downs, or from the brow of 
the hill, as you approach the village by the Aldworth road down a 
deep-worn hollow lane, is exceedingly pleasing; you have the two 
parish churches, well sheltered with tall trees and orchards, and the 
adjoining country studded with picturesque cottages and old build- 
ings, with the fertile valley of the Thames, all lying spread before you. 

Now for the plants : before giving a regular list of them, it may not 
be amiss just to oflfer some general remarks upon the character of the 
Botany of the district. 

This is the head quarters for Anemone pulsatilla, now (April 21 st) 
in full flower. Cineraria campestris, also in flower (April 27th), 
Orchis ustulata, O. militaris, and O. tephrosanthos, Iberis amara, 
Linaria repens, and in the corn and turnip-fields the beautiful large- 
flowered Veronica Buxbaumii is very abundant and ornamental. 
The Pyrola media also grows in largish isolated patches as you 
go from Goring towards Henley, but I have not noticed it on the 
Berkshire side yet. The chalk hills are studded with juniper and 
yew. Speaking of the yew, reminds me that in Aldworth church- 
yard there is a most remarkable and venerable tree ; this yew-tree 
(noted by topographers) appears to be of extraordinary age, and is of 
VOL. V. X 



154 



enormous size : Loudon, in his ' Arboretum,' gives us some particu- 
lars about it. It is rather early to say much about the two Orchides, 
O. militaris and O. tephrosanthos, but I am sorry to observe that, 
from some cause or other, the number of plants seems to diminish 
annually ; the chief cause of this I was once an eye-witness to, for 
a fine sloping bank (so steep that you would think the farmer could 
derive no great benefit from disturbing it) was actually being stubbed 
up and burnt for manure ; the man and the monkey Orchises being 
both literally roasted and bui'nt alive ; and upon this very bank I had, 
in former years, through the kind direction of my esteemed friend, Mr. 
Baxter, of Oxford, noticed them growing in plenty, Merrett,* in his 
time, and How,f tell us that not only these Orchises, but several of 
the Ophrydes grew abundantly upon the " chalky hills overlooking the 
Thames, both on the Barkshire and the Oxfordshire sides of the river, 
between Cawsham [Caversham] and Wallingford ; " and, as regards 
the Ophrydes, the very spot where I had formerly seen abundance of 
the bee, &c., has been ploughed up and turned into corn-land. There 
is one tribe of plants in which this neighbourhood is quite deficient, 
viz., ferns ; there are scarcely any here, so far as observation goes : I 
find my list contains but four. 



Clematis Vitalba 
Anemone Pulsatilla 

nemorosa 
Adonis auturanalis 
Ranunculus auviconius 
Caltha palustris 
Aquilegia vulgaris 
Chelidonium majus 
Fumaria officinalis 
Capsella Bursa-pastoris 
Iberis amara 
Lepidium campestre 
Armoracia rusticana 
Draba verna 
Cardamine pratensis 

impatiens 
Arabis thaliana 
Barbarea vulgaris 



Nasturtium officinale 

terrestre 
Sisymbrium officinale 
Erysimum Alliaria 
Reseda lutea 
Helianthemum vulgare 
Viola odorata 

b. alba 
hirta 
canina 

a. sylvatica 
tricolor, b. arvensis 

c. Curtisii 
Polygala vulgaris 
Saponaria ofiicinalis 
Silene inflata 
Lychnis Flos-cuculi 
Sagina procumbens 



* Merrett's ' Pinax,' p. 85, (1666). f How's ' Phytologia Britannica,' (1650). 



155 



Sagina apetala 
Spergula arvensis 
Arenaria serpyllifolia 
Stellavia holostea 
Cerastium arvense 
Linum catharticum 
Malva raoschata 

sylvestris 
Hypericum perforatum 

hirsutum 

montanum 
Erodium cicutarinra 
Geranium pratense 

pusillum 

molle 

dissectura 

Robertianum 
Oxalis Acetosella 
Euonymus europaeus 
Rhamnus catharticus 

Frangula 
Spartium scoparium 
Ulex europaeus 
Ononis arvensis 
Anthyllis Vulneraria 
Medicago lupulina 
Trifolium repens 

subterraneum 

fragiferum 
Lotus corniculatus 
Ornithopus perpusillus 
Hippocrepis comosa 
Onobrychis sativa 
Vicia Cracca 

sativa 

sepium 

hirsuta 

tetrasperma 
Lathyrus pratensis 
Orobus tuberosus 
Prunus spiuosa 



Prunus avium 
Spiraia Filipendula 
Geum urbanum 
Agrimonia Eupatoria 
Potentilla anserina 

Tormentilla 
Fragaria vesca 
Rubus fruticosus 

Idaeus 
Rosa rubiginosa 
Sanguisorba officinalis 
Alchemilla arvensis 
Crataegus Oxyacantha 
Pyrus Aria 

Epilobium montanum 
Circaea lutetiana 
Lythrum Salicaria 
Bryonia dioica 
Scleranthus annuus 
Sedum acre 

reflexum 

Forsterianum 
Saxifraga granulata 

tridactylites 
Adoxa moschatellina 
Hedera Helix 
Cornus sanguinea 
Sanicula europaea 
Petroselinum sativum 
Bunium flexuosum 
Pimpinella Saxifraga 
Bupleurum rotundifolium 
Angelica sylvestris 
Pastinaca sativa 
Heracleum Sphondylium 
Daucus Carota 
Scandix Pecten 
Viburnum Opulus 

Lantana 
Lonicera Periclyraenum 
Sherardia arvensis 



156 



Asperula odorata 

cynanchica 
Fedia olitoria 
Scabiosa succisa 
Knautia arvensis 
Lactuca muralis 
Taraxacum officinale 
Lapsana communis 
Cichoriuni Intybus 
Arctium Lappa 
Carduus nutans 

acauthoides 

tenuiflorus 

eriophorus 

acaulis 
Carl in a vulgaris 
Centaurea nigra 

Scabiosa 
Tanacetum vulgare 
Artemisia Absinthium 

vulgaris 
Gnaphalium sylvaticum 
Petasites vulgaris 
Tussilago Farfara 
Solidago Virgaurea 
Cineraria campestris 
Inula Conyza 
Bellis perennis 
Chrysanthemum segetum 

Leucanthemum 
Pyretbrum Fartheniura 
Matricaria Chamomilla 
Campanula rotundifolia 

glomerata 
Specularia hybrida 
Pyrola media 
Monotropa Hypopitys 
Ilex Aquifolium 
Ligustrura vulgare 
Gentiana Amarella 
Erythraja Centaurium 



Chlora perfoliata 
Convolvulus arvensis 

sepium 
Solanum nigrum 

Dulcamara 
Atropa Belladonna 
Verbascum Thapsus 

nigrum 
Veronica arvensis 

serpyllifolia 

officinalis 

montana 

Chamsedrys 

hederifolia 

agrestis 

Buxbaumii 
Euphrasia officinalis 
Digitalis purpurea 
Antirrhinum majus 
Linaria Cymbalaria 

spuria 

Elatine 

repens 

vulgaris 
Verbena officinalis 
Lycopus europaeus 
Thymus Serpyllum 
Origanum vulgare 
Calamintha Acinos 

Clinopodium 
Ajuga reptans 
Ballota nigra 
Lamium Galeobdolon 

album 

amplexicaule 

purpureum 
b. incisum 
Galeopsis Ladanum 

Tetrahit 
Stachys Betonica 

palustris 



167 



Stachys arvensis 
Glechoma hedeiacea 
Nepeta Cataria 
Marrubium vulgare 
Prunella vulgaris 
Myosotis palustris 

sylvatica 

arvensis 
Lithospermum officinale 

arvense 
Symphytum officinale 
Echium vulgare 
Primula vulgaris 

veris 
Lysimachia Nummularia 

nemorum 
Anagallis arvensis 
Plantago major 

media 

lanceolata 
Chenopodium Bonus-Henricus 
Rumex Hydrolapathum 

crispus 

pulcher 
Daphne Laureola 
Thesium Linophyllum 
Euphorbia amygdaloides 
Merculiaris perennis 
Parietaria officinalis 
Humulus Lupulus 
Fagus sylvatica 
Corylus Avellana 



45, Frith Street, Soho, 
April, 1854. 



Alnus glutinosa 
Juniperus communis 
Taxus baccata, 
Spiranthes autumnalis 
Neottia Nidus- avis 
Listera ovata 
Epipactis latifolia 

grandiflora 

ensifolia ? 
Orchis mascula 

ustulata 

militaris 

c. tephrosanthos 

pyramidalis 

maculata 
Gymnadenia Conopsea 
Habenaria bifolia 
Aceras anthropophora 
Ophrys apifera 
Iris foetidissima 

Pseudacorus 
Narcissus Pseudo-narcissus 
Hyacinthus nonscriptus 
Kuscus aculeatus 
Tamus communis 
Alisma Plantago 
Arum maculatum 
Brachypodium sylvaticum 
Polypodium vulgare 
Lastrea Filix-mas 
Asplenium Ruta-muraria 
Pteris aquilina 

William Pamplin. 



158 



Notices of New Books. 



' The Hisioty of British Ferns.' By Edward Newman, Memb. Imp. 
L. C. Acad., F.L.S., Z.S., B.S., Pres. Ent. Soc, &c., &c., &c. 
Third Edition. London : Van Voorst. 1854. 360 pp.; 136 
illustrations on wood. Price 18s., Demy 8vo. ; S6s. Royal. 

The long-made promise is at length fulfilled : after delays and pro- 
crastinations extending through a period of five years, the third 
edition of the ' History of British Ferns ' is fairly on the bookseller's 
counter, arresting the attention of the book-buyer by the magnificent 
covering of green and gold with which Messrs. Cash and Astle have 
been pleased to inv^est it ; and offering an irresistible bait to those 
who 

" Value books, as womeu men, by dress." 

But it is not by the dress that the editor of the ' Phytologist ' must 
estimate a work on science ; neither does he wish the outside to in- 
fluence a single purchaser : he merely mentions the binding, that he 
may have the pleasure of thus publicly thanking the gentlemen who 
have performed their part in the resuscitation of the long-lost ' British 
Ferns ' with such admirable taste and skill : for be it known unto all 
men, that the editor of the 'Phytologist' and the author of the 
' British Ferns ' are one and the same. 

How then can the reader expect a good review ^ Exactly on the 
principle that every man can best explain, if he so please, his own 
doings and his own views ; and if he venture beyond explanation, if 
he be once detected patting himself on the back, and saying " well 
done," why the reader will instantly draw the pen of his mind through 
the passage, and set down the writer as a mere simpleton : the know- 
ledge that this must inevitably be the case, will protect the editor 
from so egregious a blunder. On the other hand, the reader is 
guaranteed against captious criticism ; an author is sure not to vilify 
his own production. He can do nothing but explain and quote, and 
from his explanations and quotations, without a word of praise or 
blame, the reader will draw his own conclusions, much in the same 
way as from the book itself 



159 

The volume contains 360 pages of letter-press and 136 illustrations 
engraved on wood; many of the figures are new, but of these, the fol- 
lowing only require to be noticed : — two forms of Capillus Veneris ; 
a copious and elaborate illustration of Gymnogramma leptophylla, 
exhibiting a variety of forms ; the vernation of Eupteris, contrasting it 
with Pteris; Gymnocarpium Robertianum ; Cystopteris Dickieana; 
Pseudathyrium alpestre ; Pseudathyrium flexile ; Asplenium acutum ; 
Phyllitis Scolopendriura, showing the cordate bases of the fronds, 
not visible in the former illustration; Botrychiinn rutaceum; and 
Ophioglossum lusitanicum : with the exception of Scolopendrium, 
which is reduced, all these are exactly of the natural size. 

The following portions of the second edition are omitted from the 
third: — The genera Equisetum, Lycopodium, Isoetes, and Pilularia ; 
also a great number of the habitats of the commoner species, and a 
large portion of the critical remarks on the bibliography of the 
species. 

The following additions are made : — A short diagnostic character of 
every genus and species ; a synonymic reference to all British and 
the more important continental describers ; and careful directions for 
the cultivation of every species. 

The following alterations have been made: — The history of each 
species is divided into heads, which are thus intituled : — Charac- 
ters ; Synonymes, Figures, &c, ; Geographical Range ; Description ; 
Varieties (if any) ; Culture ; Economical uses : the details of the 
habitats of the rarer species are more minutely given than in 
the second edition, and those which are unsatisfactory, from any cause 
whatever, are inclosed in parentheses. 

The arrangement remains unaltered, but the author's views of clas- 
sification are thus explained at length : — 

" It is impossible for the candid mind to dwell for a moment on the 
fact that Britain produces only about one-fortieth part of the ferns 
already known as inhabiting the globe, without perceiving the im- 
pi-ac tic ability of arranging that fractional part in anything like a con- 
nected series. Select one British species, Capillus -Veneris, for 
instance, and we shall find that there are at least a hundred exotic 
species which approach it more closely than any that occur in 
Britain : therefore, assuming that two thousand ascertained ferns 
constitute a connected chain, it follows that in Britain a hundred 
links are wanting at that part of the chain where Capillus -Veneris is 
situate. There is still another mode of accounting for some of the 
monstrous gaps obsei'vable in the chain of species. The physical 



160 

changes perpetually occurring in the condition of the earth's surface, 
render large tracts of land incapable of sustaining any longer certain 
species which formerly hid the soil with their luxuriant foliage : we 
know that thousands of such species did exist, and do not exist; but 
that their history is preserved for ever in Geology, that glorious book 
whose pages are traced by Nature's own hand upon tablets of ada- 
mant. The hypothesis that Nature is compensating her losses by new 
ci-eations, requires the recommendation of proof. All our Floras tell 
a different tale. The links which once connected Equisetum to Chara 
or to Isoetes have since perished, and no others have been supplied ; 
so that those genera stand alone and insulated, while all around them 
has disappeared : just as solitary specks of uninhabitable land, peep- 
ing up in the boundless ocean, are said to testify of a continent 
submerged. Whoever reads these circumstances aright, will fully 
appreciate the difficulty under which those are labouring who en- 
deavour to build a system of such scanty materials. Deeply im- 
pressed with this difficulty, I have thought it better to preserve 
intact the arrangement which I originally proposed, than to attempt a 
new one ; at the same time giving an outline of a plan which I believe 
more in accordance with Nature. 

" It may here be observed, that in the various systems proposed or 
indicated by general botanists, as Ray, Linneus, Antoine de Jussieu, 
Agardh, Perleb, Dumortier, Bartling, Hess, Schultz, Fries, Endlicher, 
Brongniart, Meisner, Adrian de Jussieu, and Lindley, there is a most 
evident tendency to depreciate, or rather to under- estimate, the flower- 
less plants. Whether they were called simply " flowerless," as by 
Ray; "Cryptogams," as by Linneus; " Acotyledons," as by the 
elder Jussieu and Decandolle ; little has been done beyond the mere 
change of name. All these authors appear either to ignore or to dis- 
regard the extreme fallacy of divisions founded on a mere positive and 
negative. Nothing is more simple than the division of all plants into 
those which liove flowers, and those which have not : but something 
more is required, for positive and negative characters might be made 
the basis of the most unnatural divisions. 

" Cuvier, in his ' Animal Kingdom,' a work unapproached, perhaps 
unapproachable, in its masterly and philosophical grouping, has 
shown the plans on which all animals are constructed. He ignores 
the positive and negative of vertebrate and non-vertebrate, and 
employs positive characters only in defining his divisions ; these are 
Vertebrates, Mollusks, Articulates, and Radiates : and a little reflec- 
tion will convince any botanist that there are four great divisions of 



161 

plants, equally capable of being distinguished by positive characters ; 
these are Exogens, Endogeus, Acrogens, and Thallogens. 

"Acrogens, in common with Thallogens, are without flowers; 'no- 
thing can be found which resembles the stamens and pistils of flow- 
ering plants : ' they have usually distinct roots, stems, and leaves, 
the two halves of the latter being generally symmetrical ; these cha- 
racters serving at once to distinguish Acrogens from Sea-weeds, 
Lichens, or Fungi. Interesting as are the discoveries which Nageli 
and his followers have made on the pro- embryo of ferns, and which I 
had the pleasure of introducing to the notice of British botanists 
(Phytol. iii. 613 and 925), their ^bearing on the diagnostic characters 
of Acrogens has been wholly misunderstood. Abundant evidence 
exists that there is in these discoveries no contradiction to the asser- 
tion, that Acrogens, so far as our researches have extended, are per- 
fectly asexual. 

" Acrogens are either vascular and Pteridoid, or cellular and 
Mnioid : the first including all ferns and their allies, and the last, all 
mosses and their allies. The allies of ferns are Lycopodiums, Quill- 
worts, Pill- worts, Marsilias, Equisetums, and C haras : they have 
sometimes been called Cryptogamic Vasculares ; but I prefer to de- 
fine and divide them in the following manner, which, it will be 
observed, strikingly differs from the most popular and most recent 
arrangements. The division of the Fjlicales splits the universally 
received genera of Pteris, Poly podium, Asplenium, Davallia, and 
many others. 

"ACROGENS PTERIDOID.E, Pteridoid Acrogens, or Ferns and 
their allies, are plants of vascular structure, but which pro- 
duce fruit without preliminary flowers : they may be divided 
thus : — 
FILICALES [or annulate Ferns] have distinct leaves bearing 
one-celled capsules which are encircled by an elastic 
ring : they comprise : — 
R.HIZOPHYLLACE.E, in which the leaves are attached to a rhi- 
zome or root. 
CoRMOPHYLLACEJE, iu which the leaves are attached to a 
cormus or trunk. 
OSMUNDALES [or exannulate Ferns] have distinct leaves 
and one-celled capsules detached from the leaves, and 
not encircled by an elastic ring: they comprise : — 
VOL. V. Y 



162 

OsMDNDACEyE, in which the vernation of the leaves is cici- 

nate and the trunk woody. 
Ophioglossace^, in which the vernation of the leaves is 
straight and the trunk succulent. 
LYCOPODIALES have distinct leaves and capsules divided 
by one or more septa : they comprise : — 
Maesiliace^, in which the capsules are attached to the 

rhizome or root. 
Lycopodiace^, in which the capsules are seated in the axils 
of the leaves. 
EQUISETALES have no leaves, but consist of an articulated 
branched stem : they comprise : — 
Equisetace^, in which the fructification forms a terminal 

spike, 
Charaoe^, in which the fructification is seated in the axils 
of the branches. 

" It will be seen that the divisions Rhizophyllaceae and Cormo- 
phyllaceaB have a great similarity to those proposed by Mr. John 
Smith, of Kew, under the names of Eremobrya and Desmobrya. I 
believe the idea of using this character as one upon which to found a 
primary division of the annulate ferns originated with myself, (see 
Phytol. ii. 273) ; but Mr. Smith was the first to apply the idea, and to 
name divisions founded on the differences pointed out. It must, 
however, be observed, that Mr, Smith, in his primary divisions, lays 
great stress on a character which now appears to me of somewhat 
secondary importance : I allude to the articulation of the stipes to the 
rhizome. My own conclusion, from a careful examination of the 
species within my reach, is, that the grand distinctive characters are 
these : — First, that the rhizome of the Rhizophyllacese, and the cau- 
dex of the Cormophyllaceae, are not the same organ : that the rhi- 
zome is a root ; the caudex a stem : that the rhizome never terminates 
in a frond ; that the caudex always does : indeed, that its apex is 
constituted of fronds undeveloped ; its trunk, of the bases of fronds 
that have decayed. Secondly : that the growing apex of a rhizome 
is always in advance of the fronds ; that the fronds are always in ad- 
vance of the growing apex of a caudex. There are two other and 
possibly less constant diagnostics : the rhizome of the Rhizophyllaceae 
is scaly, the stipes naked ; the caudex of the Cormophyllaceae is 
naked, the stipes densely paleaceous : the formation of the fruit of the 



163 



Rhizopliyllaceae follows the development of the frond ; in the Cor- 
mophyllaceae it precedes it. In some Cormophyllaceae there is a ten- 
dency to approach the Rhizophyllaceae : this is strikingly the case in 
Dryopteris, Phegopteris, and Thelypteris; but it is only necessary to 
examine the growing apex of the rhizomatiform caudex of these well- 
known ferns, in order to ascertain that it is always composed of un- 
developed fronds. There is a plant familiar to every one who has a 
garden, that affords an illustration of the two modes of growth, — the 
common Pyrus japonica. The branches of this beautiful shrub 
always terminate in a bud, composed of undeveloped leaves ; such 
branches, therefore, are analogous to the caudex of a cormophylla- 
ceous fern : the roots, on the contrary, spreading horizontally, and 
near the surface of the ground, never terminate in leaves, but possess 
the power of originating leaves and leaf-branches at any part of their 
surface except the growing apex ; and not leaves only, but flowers 
also : such leaf-bearing roots are striking analogues of the rhizome of 
rhizophyllaceous ferns. Could we therefore divide a Pyrus japonica 
into branches and roots, we should have representatives of these 
divisions of ferns: the branches' would be cormophyllaceous, the roots 
rhizophyllaceous." — P. vii. 

The generic names have undergone considerable change : — 



Lomaria spicant of 2nd edit. = 

Pteris aquilina = 

Polypodium vulgare = 

„ Phegopteris = 

„ Dryopteris = 

„ calcareum = 

Lastrea Thelypteris = 

„ recurva = 

„ multiflora = 

„ spinosa = 

„ cristata = 

„ rigida = 

„ Filix-mas = 

Asplenium Ruta-muraria == 

„ germanicum = 

„ septentrionale = 

Scolopendrium vulgare = 

Ceterach officinarum = 



Blechnum spicant of 3rd edit. 
Eupteris aquilina 
Ctenopteris vulgaris 
Gymnocarpium Phegopteris 
„ Dryopteris 

„ Robertiaimm 

Hemestheum Thelypteris 
Lophodium foenisecii 
„ multiflorum 

„ spinosum 

„ Callipteris 

„ rigidum 

Dryopteris Filix-mas 
Amesium Ruta-muraria 
„ germanicum 

„ septentrionale 

Phyllitis Scolopendrium 
Notolepeum Ceterach 



164 

The new genera Ctenopteris, Eupteris, and Gymnocarpium, became 
necessary in consequence of the primary division of the Fihcales 
above set forth : Hemestheum, Phylhtis and Notolepeum have re- 
ceived names in order that the Linnean names Thelypteris, Scolopen- 
drium and Phylhtis might be restored to the species ; these three 
genera were previously established : Blechnum spicant is a restoration 
of a Linnean name ; Dryopteris Filix-mas is adopted from Schott ; 
no other British fern has the complete reniform involucre of this 
species : Lophodium is new, and instituted because the species have 
been placed indifferently in either of the overwhelming genera Poly- 
podium, Polystichum, Aspidium, Nephrodium or Lastrea, and, as we 
think, with increasing impropriety as we advance chronologically from 
the first to the last. Polypodium is least objectionable because it is 
only too comprehensive; Lastrea is most objectionable, because in- 
stituted by its learned author purposely to exclude them : and he 
has framed his character with such skill and care that this object is 
effectually accomplished : Amesium is a mere division of Asplenium ; 
whether it be desirable to divide that huge genus by a clear and 
unmistakeable character we leave others to judge. 

In specific names we have many changes : Britain is a powerful 
nation, and perhaps withal a little self-satisfied, and there are those 
of its scientific sons who regard it as somewhat dignified to maintain 
a nomenclature of our own, and to be very indifferent as to its 
agreeing with that of our continental neighbours. If the name of 
a worthy man has been attached to a species, or if any name has been 
attached by a worthy man, it matters nothing at all that that species 
had a prior name universally received. All our authors are aware 
that the names unilaterale, Robertianum, and several others are thus 
situated, and yet they preserve the insular names from a feeling of 
nationality; Wilsoni, because Mr. Wilson is a worthy man, and be- 
cause it was given by Hooker, another worthy man ; calcareum 
because it was given by Smith, and so on with the rest. Alas ! shall 
we never admit the catholicity of science ! 



165 



^ First General Report of the Government Botanist on the Vegetation 
of the Colony of Victoria,' dated September, 1853, and Printed 
by order of the Council. 

This very excellent report has been most obligingly placed in our 
hands by Dr. J. M. Barry, of Tunbridge Wells, with permission to 
reprint the whole or any portion in the ' Phytologist.' At a moment 
when we are looking on Victoria simply as the source of unbounded 
wealth, and turning a deaf ear to all merits and demerits that do not 
issue in the magical word " gold," it is really refreshing to find 
science pursued with perseverence, zeal, and ability, even though an 
individual follow his vocation, as in this instance, alone. The ' Phy- 
tologist,' intended for, and almost confined to, the Botany of Britain, 
may, nevertheless, without incurring just censure, extend its scope to 
her colonies, or even to foreign lands ; and we feel persuaded that we 
shall be performing an acceptable service to botanists if we lay before 
them the following " Report " entire. 

" In obedience to His Excellency's command, I have the honour 
to transmit to you my General Report, partly compiled from those 
documents which I forwarded on several occasions during my jour- 
ney, from February until June last, and partly resting on the subse- 
quent examination of the specimens which I brought home. 

" Before I enter into any details on the classification of our indige- 
nous vegetable world, on its relation in comparison with the plants of 
the adjacent countries, and on the practical uses to which we might 
possibly apply many of its productions, it may be considered neces- 
sary to delineate the route which I pursued during my last expe- 
dition. 

" I proceeded, at first, with deviations from the usual road wherever 
it appeared favourable for my pursuits, to Fulter's Range, which rears, 
like some other granitic mountains in its vicinity, a host of very pecu- 
liar plants. Thence I directed my course to May Day Hills, from 
which place I advanced, after a brief stay, to the Buffalo Ranges, 
where I ascended Mount Aberdeen and another peak more than 4,000 . 
feet high, and examined the rich, almost tropical, vegetation which 
borders the rivers rising in these mountains. It was in this locality 
that our exertions were rewarded with the discovery of the high, 
majestic Grevillea Victoriae, and other rarities. Indications of gold 
have been observed here, as well as in some parts of Gipps' Land 



166 

which I subsequently visited. The Superintendent of the Mel- 
bourne Botanic Gardens, who was engaged during this part of the 
journey in collecting seeds, here parted from me, being obliged to 
return homeward to resume his duties at the Botanic Gardens. 

" As Mount Aberdeen offered hardly any plants of a true Alpine 
character, I resolved to ascend Mount Buller, whose summits, at an 
elevation of more than 5,000 feet, are covered throughout the greater 
part of the year vrith snow. Travelling quite alone since leaving the 
Buffalo Ranges, the ascent was not accomplished without consider- 
able danger. But I was delighted to observe here, for the first time, 
this continent's Alpine vegetation, which in some degree presented 
itself as analogous with the Alpine Flora of Tasmania (Ranunculus 
Guiinianus, Euryomyrtus alpina, Celmisia astelifolia, Gentiana Die- 
mensis, Podocarpus montana, Trisetum antarcticum, &c.), and which 
was also by no means destitute of its own peculiar species (Pheba- 
lium podocarpoides, Goodenia cordifolia, Hovea gelida, Oxylobium 
alpestre, Brachycome nivalis, Anisotome glacialis, &c.) Remarkably 
enough, only one of these exhibits any similarity to the singular sub- 
alpine forms discovered by Sir Thomas Mitchell on the Australian 
Grampians. Mount Buller had never before been scientifically 
explored ; and Mount Aberdeen, up to this time, had not even been 
ascended. 

" After some other less elevated mountains in the neighbourhood 
had been also botanically examined, I resumed my journey along the 
Goulburn River and some of its tributaries to the King Parrot Creek, 
whei'e I crossed the Yarra Ranges. The unusually heavy rainfall in 
the autumn would have frustrated any attempt to reach, as I then 
contemplated, the Alpine mountains of Gipps' Land, and I considered 
it therefore more advisable, at the already advanced season, to devote 
my time rather to the examination of the maritime plants which are in 
an almost equal state of development throughout the year. 

" I went, accordingly, for some distance along the La Trobe River, 
to the south-eastern coast of Gipps' Land, passing some rich ravines, 
luxuriantly filled with two species of fern tree, Alsophila Australis 
and Dicksonia antarctica ; the former of which seemingly never 
accompanies the Dicksonia far inland, but remains in those valleys 
which slope towards the sea. Notwithstanding these geographical 
limits, the Alsophila, occupying generally the drier localities on the 
hills, recommends itself better for transplanting. 

" After several weeks' travelling in the neighbourhood of Port 



167 

Albert, and many excursions through Wilson's Promontory, I quitted 
Gipps' Land, returning homeward along the coast. 

" This journey, the lines of which extended over more than 1,500 
miles, enriched my collections formed during the spring so far that 
they comprise probably now more than half the indigenous vegetation 
of this Colony. For, according to the Index which I have annexed, 
including also several plants discovered previously by Sir Thomas 
Mitchell and by His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor, there are 
known to me now already 715 species of Dicotyledoneae, belonging to 
286 genera and 83 natural orders ; 201 species of Monocotyledoneae, 
comprehending 100 genera and 2] natural orders ; and 47 ferns, con- 
taining 27 genera. About fifty other species, however, which I have 
not included in this general account, are not yet so exactly examined as 
to receive their true systematic position, and are consequently not 
enumerated in the list ; while fifty others, not indigenous, but intro- 
duced species, are likewise not taken into account, although they are 
not only naturalized beyond the possibility of extirpation, but even 
overpower the more tender indigenous plants. I regret that I was 
also obliged to omit from this Index all the lower Acotyledoneae 
(mosses, Lichenistra, lichens. Algae, and Fungi), to the amount of at 
least 200 species, of which I could examine this winter too few to 
display them in a systematic arrangement. The full amount of spe- 
cies, therefore, considerably exceeds 1,100, belonging, with exclusion 
of the above-mentioned Acotyledonese and the foreign plants, to no 
less than 430 genera and 108 natural orders — proportions which far 
surpass those of Western Australia, where more than twice this num- 
ber of species (according to the collections of Dr. Preiss) are only 
divided into exactly the same number of genera already discovered 
here (430), and only into 91 families. 

" The Index might have been increased without difficulty to a two- 
fold number of names ; but through a long-continued examination of 
the Australian plants in a living state, I had the advantage of learn- 
ing how great is the uncertainty of many characteristics, which are 
deemed, even by our greatest authorities in science, sufficient for dis- 
tinction. According to the annexed enumeration, the proportion of the 
Dicotyledoneae to the Monocotyledoneae will be found, for that part 
of the country over which my investigations this year extended, nearly 
as seven to two, and corresponds, therefore, exactly with the position 
which these great divisions of the vegetable kingdom hold to each 
other in South Australia up to the thirty-fourth degree South latitude 
(as shown in my observations on the South Australian Flora, lately 



168 

read before the Linnean Society of London), and holds, likewise, the 
mean between the proportions ascertained by Robert Brown for Van 
Diemen's Land and New South Wales ; while in Western Australia, 
as well as in South Australia, including the country there to the thirty- 
first degree South latitude, the number of the Dicotyledonese exceeds 
in the proportion of nine to two that of the Monocotyledon eae. 

" The Cryptogamic plants, however, favoured by a more humid 
atmosphere, are twice as numerous in our province as in the last-men- 
tioned Colonies, being about equal to a third of the Dicotyledonese. 

" Excluding all Cryptogamic plants, not less than 200 species, as 
testified by the Index, are proved to be as yet undescribed. Some of 
these occurred to me in South Australia ; and the descriptions of 
several others will probably find a place in Dr. J. Hooker's forthcom- 
ing ' Flora of Van Diemen's Land.' These novelties enabled me 
already to establish seven new genera (Pseudomorus, Basileophyta, 
Phaeoleuca, Tetrachaeta, Minuranthus, Psoraleopsis, and Rhytido- 
sporiim). 

" The descriptions, not only of almost all the new plants, but also 
critical notes and observations on the phytogeographical range of the 
species already known, will be forwarded to Sir William Hooker before 
my departure for the interior, and will afterwards constitute, together 
with the scientific elucidations of such plants as may be added during 
the ensuing season from the yet botanically unexplored districts, the 
foundation of ' The Flora of Victoria.' 

" That the vegetation of the southern parts of our province accords 
greatly with the Tasmanian Flora may be demonstrated by the fact 
that more than half of all the enumerated species are known to inha- 
bit Van Diemen's Land, amongst them many of great interest, which 
had been considered as belonging exclusively to that island, some 
adding even new genera to the Flora of New Holland (Fagus Cun- 
ninghami, Bauera Billardierii, Tasmania aromatica, Weinmannia 
biglandulosa, Pleurandra monadelphia, Ranunculus Gunnianus, Cap- 
sella Australis, Pittosporum bicolor, Rhytidosporum procumbens, 
Rhytidosporum Stuartianum, Boronia dentigera, Eriostemon verru- 
cosus, Corraea Backhousiana, Meionectes Brownii, Bossioea horizon- 
talis, Brachycome decipieus, Celmisia astelifolia, Scaevola Hookeri, 
Monotoca lineata, Lissanthe monlana, Lissanthe ciliata, Prostanthera 
rotundifolia, Myosotis suaveolens, Wilsonia Backhousii, Gentiana 
Diemensis, Sebaea albidiflora, Hakea microcarpa, Podocarpus mon- 
tana, Phyllanthus Gunnii, Micranthea hexandra, Diplarrhena Moraea, 



109 

Uncinia tenella, Triodontimii Tasmanicum, and a great number of 
ferns). 

" No niUTierical comparison with the Flora of South Australia and 
New South Wales has been instituted, as those localities are not suf- 
ficiently examined which bear, perhaps, in this respect, as great a 
resemblance to the adjacent Colonies as the southern tract of this 
province bears to Van Diemen's Land. 

" Still, there remains yet a considerable number of plants which 
impress on our vegetation a type of peculiarity ; and I may be per- 
mitted, for this reason, to call attention to our remarkable species of 
Panax, resembling mainly those of the Moluccas ; to Trigonella sua- 
vissima, as the only Australian clover ; to the species of Psoralea and 
to Crantzia, as connecting links with the American Flora ; to Pseu- 
domorus Australasica, the indigenous mulberry tree ; to Myrsine 
Howittiana, nearer connected with the New Zealand species than with 
those of New South Wales ; and to the Alpine Anisotome glacialis, as 
a genus from Auckland and Campbell's Islands. 

" With regard to the Phytogeographia of this country, it may be 
deemed worthy of notice that, in the arid steppes beyond the Glenelg 
River, the vegetation undergoes a remarkable change, and a large 
number of such plants as are common to Victoria, New South Wales, 
and Van Dieraen's Land, cease to exist, not even re-appearing farther 
to the westward, where the physical character of the country assumes 
once more equality or similarity to the eastern provinces. Others, 
again, extend the geographical limits of certain genera or species 
which we thought to belong entirely to Western Australia : thus, for 
instance, Thomasia petalocalyx and Coleostylis Preissia range to the 
148th meridian. 

" It may also be worthy of remark, that the order of Leguminosse 
prevails decidedly here, as in Western Australia, over all others ; and 
that the Compositse, far exceeding in South Australia, and almost 
throughout the world, any other groups, rank here as the second 
order. Both, taken together, show such eminent richness^ as to com- 
prise nearly a fourth of all Dicotyledonar plants. The most predo- 
minant natural orders exhibit here, with regard to their number of 
species, the following series : — Leguminosse, Composites, Myrtacese, 
Algae, Filices, Cyperoidese, Graraineae, Musci, Proteaceas, Orchidea3, 
Epacrideae, Fungi, Umbelliferae, Diosmese, Liliaceae, Lichenes, La- 
biatae, Goodeniaceae, Scrophularinae, and Salsolaceae. 

" Finally, and perhaps as to the most important point of my 
researches, I have to reflect upon the practical usefulness of our vege- 
VOL. V. Z 



170 

table creation, either with regard to medicine, manufactures, or in a 
domestic point of view. 

" The inestimable truth, that we may safely deduct the closest affi- 
nities of the medicinal properties of plants from their natural alliances 
— a truth which achieved the most complete triumph of the natural 
system over all artificial classifications — has generally guided me in 
tracing out which plants might be administered in medicine. By this 
guidance I observed, that our Pimeleae are pervaded by that acridity 
for which the bark of Daphne Mezereum is employed ; that our Poly- 
gala veronicea, the only described Australian species of a large genus, 
and in close relation to one lately discovered in the Chinese empire, 
not only agrees, like some kinds of Comesperma, with the Austrian 
Polygala araara, in those qualities for which that plant has been admi- 
nistered in consumption, but also participates in the medicinal virtue 
of Polygala senega, from North America. Gratiola latifolia and Gra- 
tiola pubescens. Convolvulus erubescens, and the various kinds of 
Mentha, are not inferior to similar European species. The bark of 
Tasmania aromatica appears to me to possess the medicinal power of 
the Wintera bark, gathered from a similar tree in Tierra del Fuego ; 
and its fruit is allied to that of the North American Magnolias used 
in cases of rheumatism and intermittent fever. The whole natural 
order of Goodeniaceae, with the exception, perhaps, of a few species, 
contains a tonic bitterness never recognized before, and discernible in 
many plants in so high a degree, that I was induced, for this reason, 
to bestow upon a new genus from the interior the name of Picrophyta; 
this property, which indicates a certain alliance to Gentianeae, 
deserves the more consideration, as the true Gentianeae are so spar- 
ingly distributed through Australia, while the Goodeniaceae form 
everywhere here a prominent feature in the vegetation. Our Alps, how- 
ever, enrich us also with a thick-rooted Gentian [G. Diemensis), cer- 
tainly as valuable as the officinal Gentiana lutea; and in the spring, 
Sabaeaovata, Sabsea albidiflora, and Erythraea Austrahs, might also be 
collected on account of their bitterness. The bark of the Australian 
Sassafras tree {Atherospermum moschatum) has already obtained 
some celebrity as a substitute for tea ; — administered in a greater con- 
centration, it is diaphoretic, as well as diuretic, and has for this rea- 
son already been practically introduced into medicine by one of our 
eminent physicians. Isotoma axillaris surpasses all other indigenous 
Lobeliaceae in its intense acridity, and can be therefore only cau- 
tiously employed instead of Lobelia inflata. The root of Malva 
Behriana scarcely differs from that of Althaea officinalis, and the Salep 



171 

root might be collected from many Orcliiclese. Few may be aware 
that the Cajeput oil of India is obtained from trees very similar to our 
common Melaleucge ; and that even from the leaves of the Eucalypti 
an oil can be procured of equal utility. The Sandarac, exuding from 
the Callitris or pine tree, the balsamic resin of the grass trees, and, 
moreover, the Eucalyptus gum, which could be gathered in boundless 
quantities, and which for its astringent qualities might here at least 
supersede the use of kino or catechu, will probably at a future period 
form articles of export. 

" Several Acacise are of essential service, either for their durable 
wood, or for the abundance of tannin in their bark, which has ren- 
dered them already useful, or for their gum ; but the latter is even 
excelled in clearness and solubility by that obtained from Pittospo- 
rum acacioides. This species, as well as many other plants of the 
same order, is distinguished by a surprising yet apparently harmless 
bitterness — a quality that warrants our expecting considerable medi- 
cinal power, and which deserves so much more attention, as till now 
we know nothing of the usefulness of the Pittosporeag, although this 
order extends over a great part of the eastern hemisphere. 

" The Australian Manna consists in a saccharine secretion, con- 
densed chiefly by the Cicades from a few species of Eucalypti, but is 
chemically very differently constituted to the Ornus Manna, and much 
less aperient. All our splendid Diosmeae — a real ornament to the 
country — approach more or less in their medicinal effect to the South 
African Bucco-bushes. 

" Baeckea utiUs, from Mount Aberdeen, might serve travellers in 
those desolate localities as tea, for the volatile oil of its leaves resem- 
bles greatly in taste and odour that of lemons — not without a plea- 
sant, peculiar aroma. Trigonella suavissima proved valuable as an 
antiscorbutic spinage in Sir Thomas Mitchell's expedition ; and the 
Tetragonella implexicoma, the various Cardamines, Nasturtium ter- 
restre, or Lawrencia spicata, may likewise be used for the same pur- 
pose. The root of Scorzonera Lawrencii — a favourite food of the 
natives — would form, if enlarged by culture, an agreeable substitute 
for Scorzonera Hispanica, or Asparagus ; and Anistome glacialis — • 
a large-rooted umbelliferous plant, from the snowy top of Mount 
Bull(!;r — will be added, perhaps, hereafter, to the culinary vegetables 
of th6 colder climates. Seeds of the latter plants, amongst many 
others, have been procured for the Botanic Gardens. Santalura 
lanceolatum, Mesembryanthemum sequilaterale, Leptomeria pungens, 
and Leptomeria acerba, deserve notice for their agreeable fruit. 



172 

"It would lead too far to enumerate the uumerous modest, but 
lovely, or even the more attractive ornamental plants, which will no 
doubt hereafter contribute to adorn the gardens here and at home. 
Still, in a general sketch of our vegetation, I ought not to pass 
unmentioned, in this regard, the magnificent Grevillea Victoriae ; the 
splendid parasite of the fern tree, Basileophjta Friderici Augusti, 
on which the name of the royal botanist has been bestowed ; and the 
grand Corrsea Latrobeana, — three of the most gorgeous plants dis- 
covered during my last expedition. 

" In accordance with His Excellency's instructions, a collection of 
dried specimens of plants has been commenced for the Government. 
This Herbarium will be at all times accessible to the public, and will 
hereafter contribute, I trust, to diffuse, more and more, knowledge of 
our vegetable world, and excite lovers of natural science to assist in 
my investigations. I began to form, at the same time, a similar col- 
lection for the Royal Gardens at Kew. 

" I am happy to report that the Botanic Gardens ai'e in a very 
prosperous state, and that the establishment does great honour to the 
able management of its Superintendent. The addition of a large 
greenhouse, which His Excellency has been pleased to sanction, 
upon the recommendation of the Committee, will be most useful as a 
receptacle for tropical productions ; and a considerable piece of 
ground has been prepared, this year, to rear all the seeds which have 
lately been collected for the garden, or which were liberally pre- 
sented. 

" The Committee deemed it also advisable that an iron foot-bridge 
for crossing the Yarra should be procured from home, to afford an 
easier access to the Garden for the inhabitants of the eastern part of 
Melbourne; and by this means the number of visitors — already 
(chiefly on Sundays) very considerable — will, doubtless, greatly 
increase. 

" I trust, therefore, that the Botanic Gardens, as an establishment 
so desirable for the diffusion of knowledge, for the experimental intro- 
duction of foreign plants into our adopted country, or for multiplying 
the treasures which our own Flora offers, and as a healthy locality for 
recreation, will continue to receive the support of the Government 
and the Legislature ; and I hope that, by still further extending the 
communications of this establishment with the Botanic Gardens of 
other countries, we shall succeed in keeping pace with the general 
advance of this great and flourishing country." 



173 

A second paper, intituled ' Botanical Report, by William Swainson, 
Esq., F.R.S.,' is also in our hands ; and, we regret to say, is, to our- 
selves, exceedingly unsatisfactory. Mr. Swainson gives a list of two 
hundred and thirteen species of Cassuarinae, of which five only are 
marked as undetermined ; all the rest having Latin as well as English 
names. It would appear, from the heading of the list, that all these 
species are new to science, " List of species of Cassuarinae, or Austra- 
lian Pines, discovered, named, and described by Mr. Swainson." 

Subjoined is Mr. Swainson's report, which we leave without com- 
ment ; being unwilling, on the one hand, to commend what conveys 
with it so little of the appearance of solid information ; and, on the 
other hand, being particularly anxious to avoid prejudging a matter 
of which we confess ourselves to be very ignorant. We sincerely hope 
Mr. Swainson's researches may prove to be as carefully conducted as 
their results appear to be marvellous. We may, perhaps, be allowed 
to remark that the title is scarcely precise : should it not rather run 
thus : — " Report on Eucalyptidse and Cassuarinae" ? 

" I do myself the honour of laying before your Excellency, in the 
enclosed papers, the result of my botanical investigations in this 
province. 

" My chief attention, for the first five months after being located 
here, was directed to the family of Eucalyptidse, or gum trees, among 
which I have discovered five distinct and well-marked genera, hitherto 
unknown as such, and apparently peculiar to Victoria ; together with 
two other new genera, which occur also in the adjacent province. 

" Having had no accommodation for arranging the different species 
for comparison, &c., I have been necessitated to pack them up as fast 
as collected. It is quite impossible, therefore, for me to state, with 
any degree of certainty, the number of new species contained in the 
above genera. The packets of dried specimens, seeds, and capsules, 
will be seen to form a grand total of 1520, I am therefore disposed 
to think, that even if two-thirds may hereafter prove varieties only, 
there will yet remain more than 500 species, bolanically distinct, only- 
two or three of which I have found in New South Wales. 

" My researches, in respect to timber trees (from causes already well 
known), have been quite unsuccessful. The red gum {Canihocarpus, 
La.), and the straight stringy bark {TricantJius, La,), are the only 
genera I have fomid whose wood is useful either for sawing or split- 
ling. Specimens of the former (of an unknown species), have been 
procured and sent to the curator. The latter, of which there are 



174 

numberless species, and a few of that of Microcarpus, or native box, 
are mostly used for fencing. 

" No reasonable doubt, however, can be entertained, that other 
parts of the province are more productive than this seems to be of 
valuable timber ; and as the Colonial Botanist has had the requisite 
facilities at his disposal for ascertaining this fact during his extensive 
excursions, he will doubtless have succeeded far better than myself 
in developing the economical properties of the Victoria timber trees. 

" During the last year 1 have made various attempts and experi- 
ments to discover the principles of variation amongst the Cassuarinae, 
vulgarly called he and she oaks, but which in reality are the true 
pines of Australia- It was only in June last, however, that this dis- 
covery was effected, and the conviction then arrived at that all the 
descriptions now existing were perfectly and essentially defective, and 
therefore quite useless ; and that this and the genus Exocarpus are 
the most extraordinary groups of trees yet discovered in Australia. 
Without being further tedious (as I intend to bring this discovery 
before the public in another shape), I shall merely state to your 
Excellency, that the facts I am prepared to bring forward will esta- 
blish the following propositions : — 

" 1. That the Australian pines belong more to a very remote or 
primeval Flora than to the present. 

" 2. That they are slowly, but surely, disappearing from the face of 
the earth, and giving place to that comparatively recent order of vege- 
tables which springs up in their stead. In this respect they offer a 
wonderful analogy to what we have ourselves witnessed in regard to 
the aboriginal tribes of Australia now giving place to those of the 
Caucasian race. 

" Now, of this remarkable tribe I have succeeded in determining 
more than two hundred species, all still growing within a very short 
distance of this place, besides having met with several others in diffe- 
rent stages of decay, but which, from their bark and other indications, 
convince me were different from all those 1 have met with in a growing 
state. They have, in fact, died from excessive age, and have left no 
successors. 

" In the accompanying paper is a list of all the species found by 
me up to the end of the last month, and an abundance of cones of 
nearly all these have been collected and sent to the curator of the 
Botanic Garden. These your Excellency may now cause to be dis- 
tributed and made known over the whole civilized world : and thus 
the Botanical Garden would probably receive from those established 



175 

at the Cape, Rio de Janeiro, Calcutta, Ceylon, &c., &c., more rare 
and costly plants, in exchange, than would fill five such conservatories 
as that now building in Melbourne. 

" I should also suggest, that as most of the species are handsome, 
and many beautiful, growing trees, half an acre or so of ground be 
appropriated for a seed-bed, by which a large number of young plants 
might be raised, ready to transplant into the projected shrubberies 
round the Government House, and to distribute among such private 
individuals as may wish to possess some few examples of these abo- 
rigines of the vegetable world. 

" To establish these discoveries upon the most solid basis, I have 
given up nearly a month of my engagement with the Tasmauian 
Government, for, without having laboured, I may say truly, both day 
and night, for the last three months, I could not have brought the 
matter to such an unquestionable issue. Without taking too much 
credit to myself, I feel satisfied that these discoveries will be regarded 
with as much surprise and almost incredulity amongst the botanists 
of Europe, as was that of gold in Australia among the geologists of 
Britain. 

" Of all those named in the list I possess elaborate descriptions, 
partly written with the trees before me, and finished before the cones 
had opened, and thus lost their specific characters. As there exists 
no scientific society or other medium for publishing an essay on these 
trees in Melbourne, I think the Royal Tasmanian Society (of which 1 
am an honorary member) will gladly do so in their own Transactions." 



Proceedings of Societies, 8jc. 



The Phytologist Club. 

One Hundred and Fifty- Seventh Sitting. — Saturday, May 20, 
1854. — Mr. Newman, President, in the chair. 

The President read the following communications : — 

Botrychium rutaceum, Sw. 

" At page 131 of the present volume of the * Phytologist' I am in 
effect blamed for taking no notice of B. rutaceum as a British plant. 



176 

The fact is, that I had never either seen or heard of a native specimen 
until the appearance of that number ; and Messrs. Hooker and Arnott 
seem to be in the same position. Smith's remark led me to believe that 
it was only some accidental variation that was intended by him ; and 
Fries's note upon B. rutaceura seemed to show that such was also the 
fact in other countries. Is the figure upon page 133 taken from a 
British specimen ? Ray and Dillenius do not appear to have known 
so much about it as Mr. Newman supposes ; for we learn from the 
2nd edition of Kay's ' Synopsis ' that the part of the quotation enclosed 
in brackets ( ) is not a remark of either Ray or Dillenius, but of 
Doody, with the exception of the sentence beginning ' Est ' and 
ending with ' 288,' which Dillenius added. In the present state of 
the question I shall not venture to give any opinion. — Charles C 
Babington. 

Car ex Mcenchiana. 

" It is many years since I received a considerable number of speci- 
mens of Carices from the late Mr, S. Gibson, who was well known for 
his acuteness in detecting and discriminating plants. Amongst them 
I find two specimens of the plant named by him C. Mcenchiana, on 
the authority, as he supposed, of Dr. Boott. Since receiving the 
plant, I have submitted it to the examination of that eminent bota- 
nist, and find, from the note written upon the paper, that he thinks 

it is — 

* Vulgaris forma. F. B.' 

The specimens are very young, having the anthers only just bursting ; 
and I do not see any reason to doubt the correctness of Dr. Boott's 
last determination. The true C. Mcenchiana is probably a form of 
C. acuta." — Id. 



Botanical Society of Edinburgh. 
April 13, 1854. — Professor Balfour, President, in the chair. 

Donations. 

To the Library : — From the Liverpool Philosophical Institution, 
their ' Proceedings ; ' from Arthur Heufrey, F.L.S., his papers on the 
Reproduction of Ferns from their Spores, and on the Development of 
Marchantia polymorpha; from Dr. Johnstone, Berwick-on-Tweed, his 
' Natural History of the Eastern Borders.' 



177 

To the Museum of Economic Botany : — From Mrs. Miller, Edin- 
burgh Castle ; William Ivory, Esq., St. Roqiie ; W. H. Macfarlane, 
Esq. ; Thomas Hay, Esq., Prospect Bank, Leith ; Miss Yule, Inver- 
leith Row; Dr. Balfour; Professor Treviranus, Bonn; the Oregon 
Association ; Rev. Mr. Waddell ; Dr. Gieville ; Mr. David Kerr. 

Professor Balfour announced the presentation to the Herbarium at 
the Botanic Garden , of a set of the specimens recently received by 
the Oregon Association, from their collector Mr. Jeffray, 

Exhibiiions. 

Professor Balfour exhibited the male cone of a Cycadaceous plant, 
sent by Dr. Stanger from Natal, and named conditionally by Mr. 
Smith, of Kew, Stangeria paradoxa. The cone had been sent under 
the name of Lomaria eriopus, picked by Gueinzius at Port Natal, and 
details in regard to it and the plant have been recently given by Mr. 
Smith in Hooker's ' Kew Miscellany.' The leaves have a fern-like 
appearance, and are very like those of a Lomaria or Danaea. The 
vernation is inflexed and involute, and the forked veins come from a 
true mid-rib. Mr. Smith remarks that the latter circumstance shows 
the untenable nature of the characters distinguishing fossil Ferns and 
Cycads. 

Professor Fleming noticed the occurrence of a remarkable white 
fungoid production on the roof of a dark cavern excavated for 
fire-clay in the sandstone quarry at Joppa, near Edinburgh. It 
seemed to be the mycelium of a fungus originating in the wood which 
propped up the roof of the mine. The white mass was seven feet in 
diameter. Some of the threads were pendant from the roof, and 
others had dropped on the floor of the mine. Dr. Macbean had 
examined the substance with a microscope, and found it to be com- 
posed of numerous cells arranged in a bead-like manner, but he was 
not able to detect fructification or spores. 

Mr, M'Nab exhibited specimens of Lathrsea squamaria collected by 
Mr. Peter Paisley, in a wood about a mile from Galashiels. 

Professor Balfour exhibited, from Messrs. P. Lawson & Son, speci- 
mens of glass labels for plants. 

Mr. G. Lawson exhibited, under the microscope, preparations of the 
colouring matters of the flower of Strelitzia Reginse, and drawings of 
the same. This plant is interesting as presenting examples of both 
the xanlhic and cyanic series in the same flower, but still more 
remarkable in the microscopical peculiarities of its colouring matters, 
which are referred to by Mohl in the ' Vegetable Cell,' (p. 44). Mr. 
VOL. V. 2 a 



178 

Lawson stated that in the blue (or puqDlish blue) part of the flower, 
the colouring matter entirely consists of spherical granules of an 
intense blue or bluish purple colour, with occasionally cells contain- 
ing similar shaped granules of bright crimson. All the granules of 
any one cell appear to be constantly of the same colour. In the yel- 
low part of the flower, the colouring matter appears in a very different 
form. Instead of spherical granules, we have slender filaments, 
which are more or less spirally twisted and rolled up in various ways 
in the cell, resembling in their twisting the more delicate spiral fibres 
in the external cells of the roots of epiphytal Orchids ; but they are 
in many cases short, and form small round coils, giving the outline of 
globular bodies, which likewise, however, occasionally occur. While 
red and blue colouring matters usually occur in the vegetable king- 
dom diffiised in the cell-sap, we find them both in Strelitzia in 
a globular form. Although deceptive appearances often presented 
themselves, Mr. Lawson felt inclined to believe from the examination 
of numerous specimens, that diff"used colour did not at all occur in the 
flowers of Strelitzia. When the flower has attained its maturity, 
however, the cells are often so completely filled with the deep blue 
granules that they appear as a dense mass of blue, apparently homo- 
geneous, matter in the interior of the cell. The flower should there- 
fore be examined in the young state, not only before it has expanded, 
but long before the spathe has opened to expose it to the action 
of the light ; even then the colouring of the flower will be found to 
have far advanced, but the cells not so completely filled with the blue 
globular granules as to disguise their character, and they are therefore 
distinctly seen. The cells containing the yellow filaments are gene- 
rally of larger size and more elongated in form than those containing 
blue or red globules. The flowers examined by Mr. Lawson had 
been obtained (through the kindness of Mr. Evans) from a large speci- 
men in the Experimental Garden. 

Mr, G. Lawson exhibited specimens of Hypnum salebrosum, col- 
lected on an old wall at Baldovan, near Dundee, in March last, 
by Messrs, Ogilvie & Hutton. He stated that the plant had not 
previously been known in the county of Forfar since Drummond's 
time. 

Polypodium alpestre at Clova. 

Professor Balfour stated that Mr. Croall, of Montrose, in a recent 
account of a trip to Clova, published in Hooker's ' Kew Miscellany,' 
had remarked : — " Polypodium alpestre at the head of the glen grows 



179 

side by side with Lastrea dilatata, but I nowhere observed Athyrium 
Filix-femiua associated with, or at the same elevation as Poly podium 
alpestre." This statement was not in accordance with what was 
observed by Dr. Balfour and his party during their trip to Clova at 
the beginning of August last. They found Athyrium Filix-femina and 
Polypodium alpestre growing together, both in Glen Fiadh and 
in Glen Dole. In many instances it was necessary to look at the 
fructification, in order to avoid picking the one for the other. At the 
head of Glen Dole, and above the path called Jock's Road, both ferns 
grew luxuriantly. Polypodium alpestre descends much lower than 
has been supposed. It was found at little more than fifty feet above 
the Dole, on the bank below the Astragalus alpinus cliff. 

Mr. G. Lawson remarked that a statement similar to that of Mr. 
Croall had been made to him last summer, and he was thus led to pay 
particular attention to the point when he visited Clova as one of Pro- 
fessor Balfour's party. Such statements were quite at variance with 
obvious facts, the Athyrium being a frequent associate of Polypodium 
alpestre. This circumstance, together with the variability of both 
plants (whose respective varieties are in some cases very similar 
to each other), rendered it often difficult to distinguish the one from 
the other, without inspecting the sori ; and a collector who allowed 
himself to be guided by the fancy that Athyrium ceases at the eleva- 
tion where Polypodium alpestre begins, would be certain to col- 
lect a mixture ; it was therefore important that the error should be 
corrected. 

The following papers were read : — 

Dyeing Properties of Lichens. 

' Experiments on the Dyeing Properties of the Lichens ; ' by W. 
Lauder"". Lindsay, M.D., Assistant-Physician, Royal Crichton Institu- 
tion, Dumfries. 

The author presented to the Society the tabulated results of between 
500 and 600 experiments made two or three years ago ; the chief ob- 
ject of which was to endeavour to call attention to the fact, that we 
possess, in our own island, lichens capable of furnishing dyes nearly, 
if not quite, equal in beauty to orchil, cudbear, and litmus. He had 
so fully occupied the time of the Society on previous occasions with 
detailed views on this subject, and with various papers on general 
points in the natural history of the lichens, that on the present occa- 
sion he confined himself to a few facts explanatory of the tables : — 



180 

I. Certain genera and species of lichens, which are abundant in 

Scotland, and could be collected with comparative facility, and 
at a very moderate expense, might be tried with advantage on 
the large scale, as substitutes for the foreign lichens used in 
the manufacture of orchil, cudbear, and litmus. I have already 
indicated a favourable result in investigating native lichens on 
the small scale ; but it remains for the manufacturer to test the 
permanence and utility of colours, which may merely look 
brilliant, without having any fixity. 

II. This subject is worthy of being followed out by the manufac- 
turer on the one hand, and the chemist on the other. 

a. On account of scientific interest — the field being comparatively 
new and open, and at the same time most promising of good 
results. 

h. Were it only with the view of further developing the economic 
resources of our own country. 

c. Because the speculation \i. e., the substitution of home for foreign 
dye-lichens], promises to be remunerative, as the Roccellas have 
frequently reached the high price of ^1000 per ton in the 
London market. 

III. The collection and transport of lichens, for the purpose of ex- 
amining their colorific powers is very easy, viz. : — 

a. By simple desiccation and packing. 
h. By drying and pulverizing. 

c. By precipitating the colorific principles from a lime-solution or a 
decoction by acetic or muriatic acids. 

IV. The colour of the thallus and that obtained by the action 
of Stenhouse's or Helot's tests on solutions of the lichen-colorific 
principles do not always correspond in tint ; more frequently 
the reverse obtains : hence, it is impossible from the colour or 
other external character of the thallus of a lichen to predicate 
the nature of the reaction of its alcoholic solution with chloride 
of lime, or the tint it will yield on ammoniacal maceration. 

V. The lichens richest in colorific principles, capaple of yielding 
valuable colouring matters, are crustaceous and foliaceous spe- 
cies, of a pale or whitish colour — whose alcoholic or aqueous 
infusion is nearly devoid of colour, which grow on rocks or 
stones, and in mountainous countries, or on the sea-coast. 

VI. The lichens most devoid of the same principles are species 
having a showy foliaceous thallus, attaining a considerable size, 
whose alcoholic and aqueous solutions are generally of the 



181 

same colour with the ihallus, and which grow on trees and 
woods. 

VII. The colours educible from lichens are liable to be materially 
affected, both as to quantity and quality according to a 

a. Age of the specimen operated on, i. e., length of period that has 

elapsed since collection and desiccation, 
h. The geologic or other nature of its habitat. 

c. The nature of its basis of support, whether moist or dry, rock, 

stone, tree, or earth, &c. 

d. The amount of exposure to sunlight and atmospheric oxygen. 

e. Amount of moisture in the air. 

f. Temperature of the locality. 

g. Elevation above the sea. 

h. Season and vicissitudes of the weather. 

i. Longitude and latitude in the two hemispheres. 

k. Decomposition of organic bodies in vicinity. 

VIII. Westring's triple division of lichens according to the fixity 
or permanence of the colours they yield with or without mor- 
dants, &c., and his quadruple division according as these 
colours ai'e extractable by cold, luke-warm, hot or boiling water, 
aided or not by various accessions, are inconsistent and unna- 
tural, and therefore not to be commended or followed. 

IX. Westring's test of colorific power is inferior to Helot's or Sten- 
house's ; but all are fiequently fallacious, and are far from being 
applicable in all cases. It is probable that different alkalies 
and re-agents are suitable in different cases for the elimination 
of colouring matters. 

X. The same circumstances, which modify the development of 
these colours on the small scale, cause material alteration in the 
results of manufacture. The result, however, is not always 
proportionate to the nature and amount of the modifying cause, 
insignificant circumstances frequently giving rise to most im- 
portant and opposite changes. 

XI. Speaking generally, the same process is equally applicable to 
the evolution of the red colouring matters of all lichens ; but it 
is equally true that a slight modification of the process may 
cause a great variety in the degree or tint in any given species. 

XII. The chief tint educible from lichens, which can be of any 
permanent utility in the arts, is red : brown is also useful in a 
minor degree. 

XIII. Chloride of lime and aqua ammoniae are only suitable for the 



182 

development of a red colour — ^or more strictly of colorific and 
colourless principles, capable of conversion into red colouring 
matters. 

XIV. Chloride of lime is not uniformly to be relied on as a lichen- 
colorimeter for 

Table XII. shows, 

a. That the alcoholic solution of certain species may strike no 
blood-red colour with the re-agent, and still yield beautiful red 
and purple colours on aramoniacal maceration, and 

h. Table XIII. shows that, though tlie alcoholic solution of some 
species do strike this colour [blood-red], it does not follow that 
aramoniacal maceration produces the same or a similar colour, 
or any colour at all. 

XV. Simple maceration in a weak solution of ammonia, aided by a 
moderate heat and moisture, is the surest and simplest means of 
evolving the red colouring matters of the lichens. 

XVI. Alcohol is an excellent solvent of the colorific principles 
of the plants, presenting them in a form readily acted on 
by chemical substances. Its use on the small scale is exceed- 
ingly convenient. The reaction of ammonia on a boiled alco- 
holic solution, allowed to stand for three days, is generally 
the same in tint, though not in degree, as on an aqueous solu- 
tion exposed to the air for very long periods [one to twelve 
months] ; but in some cases they differ essentially. 

This difference is probably, in part, attributable to the small 
quantity of materials operated on, and the short period of maceration 
in the former case, and to the large quantity of materials, and the 
abundant exposure to atmospheric oxygen in the latter. 

XVII. The non-evolution of colour in many cases may arise from 
a. Alcohol or water not being the best or proper solvent men- 
struum of the colorific principles in any particular instance. 

h. Aramoniacal raaceration not being the proper means of convert- 
ing the colorific into coloured substances. 

c. The plant not containing coloi'ific principles having the same 
chemical composition as orceire, &c., or showing similar reac- 
tions with chloride of lime and amraonia. 

XVIII. If we accept, meanwhile, Stenhouse's and Helot's tests as 
sufficiently accurate indicators of colorific value, we should 
arrange the lichen-genera, which contain species yielding co- 
louring matters, according to their value, as follows : — 

Roccella, Lecanora, Umbilicaria, Gyrophora. Urceolaria, Parraelia, 



183 

Evernia, Borrera, Ramalina, Lecidea, Isidium, Sphaerophoron ; spe- 
cies of which yield fine red colouring matters : and Parmelia, Sticta, 
Cetraria, Nephroniia, Solorina, Scyphophorns, Stereocaulon, Borrera, 
Lecidea, Peltidea, Colloma; some of which furnish good brown 
colours. 

XIX. Among the general results of my experiments, it appears that, 
of 540 specimens examined, — 

22 gave rich purple or red colours to ammonia alone (^. e., by 
simple maceration). 
8 gave brown colours to ditto. 
93 alcoholic solutions gave rich purples or reds, on the addi- 
tion of ammonia. 
81 ditto, well-marked brown, ditto. 
127 ditto, ditto orange, ditto. 
42 ditto, ditto greenish yellow, ditto. 
79 alcoholic solution struck a deep blood-red, with solution of 
chloride of lime. 

XX, The whole subject of the intimate chemistry of the lichen co- 
louring matters is in a very unsatisfactory condition, demanding 
reinvestigation, and Dr. Lindsay therefore repeated that the 
branch of the natural history of the lichens, to which, in this 
and previous papers, he had endeavoured to draw scientific 
attention, would form a worthy and remunerative object of 
research to the botanist, chemist, and wholesale manufacturer. 

Potamogeton Jrom Lough Corrih. 

' On a species of Potamogeton from Lough Corrib, and other 
plants;' by J. Kirk, Esq., Coventry: communicated by Professor 
Balfour. 

Mr. Kirk considered the Potamogeton as allied to P. longifolius 
of ' English Botany Supplement,' and remarked : — " My specimens 
differ from the plate in E. B. S. in having most of the leaves on long 
stalks, and in the absence of the apiculus. The specimen there 
figured was picked up floating in Lough Corrib, in July, 1835, 
by Mr. J. Ball, ' whilst sailing between Ma'am and Cong,' and given 
by him to Mr, Babington, and is the only specimen known to have 
been found in the British Islands up to September, 1853. The most 
striking character in my specimen is the singular and prominent mid- 
rib, the central portion of which consists of three longitudinal veins or 
ribs running closely parallel with each other, whilst on either side are 
three to six ribs running closely parallel to them, but rather more 



184 

distant from each other; the whole connected by transverse veins, and 
in the fresh state often more than one-fourth of an inch in width, the 
whole appearing, until closely inspected, a compact solid midrib, on 
either side of which are two to five fine veins, the whole connected by 
numerous secondary veinlets. Some of the submerged leaves were 
eighteen inches in length, and most beautifully pellucid, in this 
respect far surpassing the other British members of the genus. The 
floating leaves were scarcely coriaceous, linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, 
and occurred only in small quantities. The original specimen, in 
Mr. Babington's possession, exhibits traces of this peculiar midrib, 
which, I think, is almost sufficient to identify it with my specimen. 
The differences alluded to in the outset, are not more than may 
be found between specimens of well-known species gathered in^their 
prime, and others gathered, as in the present specimens, where decay 
has actually commenced, witness P. rufescens and P. zostersefolius. 
In the last-named species, the early leaves are invariably apiculate, 
but no trace of an apiculus is to be found in those produced during or 
after flowering time. Whether the plant is identical with P. longi- 
folius, Gay, is a question I am not prepared to answer, but feel much 
disposed to doubt the latter being anything more than a name ; 
at any rate no individual, with fresh specimens of my Lough Corrib 
plant before him, could overlook the prominent midrib, (although in 
the dried state it is not nearly so conspicuous). Mr. Babington, from 
inspection of some of my dried specimens, considers it different from 
his original specimen, on the grounds already stated, and is disposed 
to look upon it as, perhaps, Potamogeton sparganifolius, Fries. Mr. 
Borrer, to whom I sent recent fragments as well as dried specimens, 
considers it identical with the E. B. S. plant." 

Mr. Moore, of Glasnevin, in transmitting similar specimens from 
Lough Corrib, named them P. longifolius. 

Specimens of the Potamogeton were exhibited from Mr. Kirk, as 
well as some other rare plants, such as Rosa Sabini, var. Doniana, 
Potamogeton flabellatus, Naias flexilis, Rubus infestus, W. et A^., R. 
Balfourianus, Blox., Symphytum tauricum, &c. 

Mr. M'Nab communicated a register of the flowering of certain 
hardy plants in the Botanic Garden, as compared with the flowering 
of the same species during 1851 and 1853. 

Also read, ' Illustrations on the application of Nature Printing to 
the copying of Botanical Specimens ;' by W. Lauder Lindsay, M.D. 



185 



A List of the more interesting Plants found lately near Belfast, and 
their latest discovered additional Localities. By Mr. William 
MiLLEN ; revised, with additions, and communicated by W. M. 
Hind, Esq. 

A.T a meeting of the Belfast Natural History Society in April last, 
a paper was read by Mr. William Millen, on ' Some of the more inte- 
resting Plants found near Belfast, with their latest Localities.' At the 
request of the Secretary, Mr. A. O. D. Taylor, Mr. Millen has fur- 
nished me with an abstract of his paper, which I have the pleasure of 
forwarding. I have underlined for italics such of the plants as were 
noticed in the ' Phytologist' for September, 1851 ; and have prefixed 
an asterisk to a few inserted on my own authority. 

*Thalictrum minus, L. Sand-hills, Newcastle, Co. Down. 

*Glaucium luteum, Scop. Sea-shore, Newcastle, Co. Down. 

*Chelidomum majus, L. Derriaghy, Co. Antrim. 

*Coch]earia danica, L. Ardglass, Co. Down. 

*Cardamine impatiens, L. Shane's Castle, Co. Antrim. 

*Barbarea vulgaris, Br. Derriaghy, Co. Antrim. 

Sinapis tenuifolia, Br. Railway-terminus, York Street, Belfast. 

*E,eseda luteola, L. Lisburn. 

*Viola flavicornis, Si7i. Shane's Castle. 

Drosera rotundifolia, L. King's Moss, &c. 

*Polygala calcarea, Schultz. Cavehill, near Belfast. 

Elatine Hydropiper, L. The Lagan, and Holyvvood Bog. 

*Saponaria officinalis, L. Derriaghy, but most likely a garden 
outcast. 

*Silene anglica, L. Newcastle. 

„ noctijiora, L. Terminus, York Street. 

Lychnis vespertina, Sihth. Derriaghy. 

Radiola Millegrana, Sm. The Kinnegar, Holywood. 

Erodium cicutarium, Sm. Terminus, York Street. 
„ moschatum, Sm. Eden, Carrickfergus, 

Geranium lucidum, L. Cavehill, following the debris of the chalk. 

Euonymus europaeus, L. Durpark, Cavehill, in the clefts of both 
trap and chalk. 

Medicago falcata , L. Terminus at York Street. 

*Vicia sylvatica, L. Cavehill, and Derriaghy. 
„ bithynica, L. Terminus at York Street. 

*Geum rivale, L. Cavehill, and Derriaghy. 

VOL. V. 2 B 



186 

*Comarum palustre, L. Derriaghy. 

Rubus saxatilis, L. Colin Glen, Wolfhill Glen, Cavehill, and 
Woodburn. 

Rosa hibernica, S/)}. Tilly's Burn. 

Epilobiiim angustifoliura, L. Wolfhill Glen, Cavehill, and Wood- 
burn. 

,, roseum, Schreb. Glens in the Castlereagh Hill, Co. 

Down. 

Hippuris vulgaris, L. Holy wood Bog. (It has appeared occa- 
sionally on the Kinnegar, despite of unavoidable assaults). King's 
Moss, and bog-raeadovvs. 

Myriophyllum spicatum, L. In many pools and ditches. 

Lythrum Salicaria, L. Lough Neagh, near Shane's Castle. 

Peplis Portula, L. Kinnegar ; Holy wood Bog. 

*Scleranthus annuus, L. Lurgan, Co. Armagh. 

*Sedum Rhodiola, DC. Tor Point, Co. Antrim. 

* „ Telephium, L. Derriaghy. 

* ,5 anglicum, Huds., and acre, L. Bangor, Co. Down. 
*Sempervivum tectorum, L. Derriaghy. 

Cotyledon Umbilicus, L. Woodburn, Knockagh, and Newtownards. 
(Also found on the Copeland Islands, W. M. H.) 

Saxifraga tridactylites, L. On old walls, Lisburn. 
„ hypnoides, L. Cavehill range. 

Parnassia palustris, L. Island Magee. (Plentiful about Fairhead, 
and on the North coast of Co. Antrim.) 

Adoxa moschatellina, L. Deer Park, Cavehill. 

*Sanicnla europaea, L. Cavehill ; Derriaghy. 

*Eryngium maritimum, Z. Bellyholme Bay, Co. Down ; and Red 
Bay, Co. Antrim. 

Conium maculatum, L. Holywood ; Carrickfergus. 

*Smyrnium Olusatiaim, L. Lisburn. 

*Helosciadium nodiflorum, Koch. Cushendall. 

Pimpinella saxifraga, L. Cavehill range of mountains. 

QEnanthe pimpinelloides, L. Bunker's Hill ; Kinnegar. 

* „ Lachenalii, Gmel. Bangor. 

* „ Phellandrium, Lam. The Lagan. 
Sambucus Ebulus, L. Holywood ; Bangor. 
*Sherardia arvensis, L. Derriaghy. 
*Crepis paludosa, Mcench. Cavehill. 
*Bidens tripartita, L. Lurgan. 
*Eupatorium cannabinum, L. Ardglass, &.c. 



187 

Artemisia campestris, L. Terminus, York Street. 

*Gnaphalium dioicum, L. Cavehill. 

*Engeron acris, L. Cavehill. 

*Doronicum pardalianches, L. Ballymaeash, growing in quantity, 
but evidently outcast from an adjoining garden. 

*Pulicaria dysenterica, Gcsrt. Near Larne, &c. 

Campanula rotundifolia, L. Cavehill range of mountains (and 
pretty generally diffused through the northern parts of Co. Antrim. 
This plant I have gathered with white flowers, and of a very compact 
habit of growth.— W. M. M.) 

Jasione montana, L. Cavehill, Knockagh, &c. 

*Erica cinerea, L. {Jloris alhis). Slieve Donard. 

Pyrola rotundifolia, Z. Wolf hill; Colin Glen ; Scrabo. 

*Vinca minor, L. Derriaghy. In profusion about the remains of 
the residence of the celebrated Jeremy Taylor, Lord Bishop of Down 
and Connor ; and Dromore. 

*Villarsia nymphaeoides, Vent. The Lagan. 

Convolvulus arvensis, L. Larne. 

* „ Soldanella, L. Newcastle ; Cushendun. 

*Atropa Belladonna, L. I venture to introduce this plant on the 
authority of Miss Hincks, of Derrykirghan. Locality, Benwarden. 

*VeronJca scutellata, L. Derriaghy. 

„ Buxbaumii, Ten. Camber Railway-station, abundant ; 
Murray's Terrace gardens ; Cavehill ; Tilly's Burn. 

*Linaria Cymbalaria, Mill. Old walls, Lambeg. 

Orobanche rubra, Sm. Cavehill range. 

Lathraea squamaria, L. Colin Glen ; Springfield; Cavehill. 

*Thyraus Serpyllum, L. {va.r. Jloris albis ; the foliage clothed with 
a dense whitish down). Knockagh. This plant retains its character 
under cultivation, and, as it is a good flowerer, answers well for small 
geometric beds. 

*Lamium araplexicaule, L. Newcastle. 

* „ incisum, Willd. Newcastle. 

Prunella vulgaris, L. A white and small variety, found in the 
Deer Park, Cavehill. A specimen has been removed to the Royal 
Botanic Gardens. 

Lithospermum officinale, L. Deer Park, and Derriaghy. 

„ • arvense, L. Whitehouse. 

*Mertensia maritima, Don. Newcastle on the sea-shore. 
Symphytum officinale, L. Cavehill. 

5, tuberosum, L, Carnmoney Hill, above the church. 



188 

Lycopsis arveiisis, L. Sea-shore below Cultra. 

Anchusa senipervirens, L. Terminus, York Sti'eet ; Lisburn. 

*Pinguicula lusitanica, L. Slieve Donard, and northern parts of 
Co. Antrim. 

Utricularia vulgaris, L. King's Moss. 
„ minor, L. Holywood Bog. 

Lysimachia Nummularia, L. Banks of the Whitehouse stream, at 
Maryville. 

*Anagallis tenella, L. Bangor, Ardglass, Fairhead, &c. 

Samolus Valerandi, Z/. Sea-shore at Bunker's Hill ; Cultra; (Bally- 
hohne ; Ardglass), 

Statice spatulata, Desf. (binervosa, G. E. Sm.) Sea-shore, Bun- 
ker's Hill ; Comber. 

Littorella lacustris, L. Kinnegar • (Shane's Castle, Lough Neagh). 

*Atriplex littoralis, L. Sea-shore, Newcastle. 

*Beta maritima, L. Sea-shore, Newcastle. I find a marked diffe- 
rence in the leaves of two specimens of this plant gathered by myself, 
in the summer of 1845. In one the leaves are nearly rhomboidal ; 
and in the other, hastato-cordate. 

*Salsola Kali, L. Ballyholme Bay. 

*Salix pentandra, L. Common, Stony ford and Derriaghy. 

I possess specimens of two willows gathered at Shane's Castle, and 
both seemingly belonging to the group " nigricantes," I have marked 
them doubtfully as S. nigricans, Fnes, S. Forsteriana, Sm. 

*Myrica Gale, L. Slieve Donard ; Shane's Castle. 

Neottia Nidus-avis, Rich. Colin Glen ; (Massareene Park, An- 
trim) . 

*Listera ovata, Br. Bangor ; Derriaghy. 

Epipactis latifolia, Sw. Some distance around Belfast. 

*Orchis latifolia, L. Shane's Castle Park. 

*Gymnadenia conopsea, Br. Conlig, Co. Down. 

Habenaria bifolia, Br. Straid ; Derriaghy. 

* „ chlorantha, Bab. Cavehill. 

„ viridis, Br. Little Knockagh ; Black Mountain. 

„ albida, Br. Cavehill. 

*Allium ursinum, L. Cavehill. 

Scilla verna, Huds. Bangor, (Ballyholme Bay, &c.) 
Anacharis Alsinastrum, Bab. Waringstown, Co, Armagh. 
Alisma ranunculoides, L. Holywood Bog, &c. 
*Potamogeton pectinatus, L. The Lagan. 

* „ pusillus, L. The Lagan. 



189 

*Potainogeton gramineus, L. The Lagan. 

Ruppia rostellata, Koch. In saltwater drains near the railroads on 
both sides of Belfast Bay. 

Nartheciuin ossifragura, Huds. Holywood Bog, &c. 
*SchGenus nigricans, L. Bangor ; Newcastle. 
*Scirpus Savii, S. ^ M.f Bangor. 

* „ maritimus, L. Stranmillis, Belfast. 

* „ sylvaticus, L. Derriaghy. 
*Ammophila arundinacea. Host. Newcastle. 
*Molinia caerulea, Mcench, Newcastle. 
*Triticum littorale. Host. Newcastle. 

* „ junceum, L. Newcastle. 
*Polypodiura Phegopteris, L. Slieve Donard. 
Hymenophyllura Wilsoni, Hook. Cavehill. 
BotrycMum Lunaria, Sw. Cavehill range. 
*Lycopodium clavatum, X., and Selago, L. Divis, &c. 

* „ selaginoides, L. Slieve Donard. 
Equisetam umbrosum, Willd. Wolf hill Glen ; Woodburn. 

„ hyemale, L. Banks of the Forth river, at Springfield. 

„ Mackaii, Newm. Colin Glen, 

* „ variegatum, Schl. Divis. 

The more common plants have been omitted, and a few of those 
mentioned in a former list. I doubt not that further search will not 
go unrewarded, by the discovery of many plants of interest to the 
botanist. 

W. M. Hind. 

Stapenhill Vicarage, 

June 2, 1854. 



Notes on some rare Plants, including Ajuga pyramidalis, in Arran. 
By David Moore, Esq., F.L.S. 

Being in the West of Ireland last month, when the weather was 
fine, my friend Professor Melville, of the Queen's College, Galway, 
and I, made a hasty excursion to the Islands of Arran, where we 
collected most of the interesting plants which grow thereon, in good 
condition. 

From what I then saw, I consider May the best month for bota- 
nizing on those islands. The principal plants are early-flowering 



190 

species ; and the warm limestone debris on which they grow accele- 
rates their blooming. 

The rocks and gravelly pastures were then quite yellow with the 
pretty flowers of Helianthemum canum ; and the lovely Gentiana 
verna must have been gay about the end of April, when in full bloom : 
a few of the brilliant blue flowers were still to be seen, but most of 
them were in seed. Astragalus hypoglottis and the pretty rock-plant 
occurred in considerable quantities in several places, accompanied by 
its fair rival, Arenaria verna, which was in profuse bloom. Arabis 
ciliata was also in full bloom, and Asperula cynanchica showing 
blossom. 

Allium Babingtoni, which grows abundantly in many parts of the 
island, had already reached a height of more than three feet, though 
not nearly full grown ; and the gem of Arran plants, namely, Adian- 
tum Capillus-Veneris, had ventured to protrude its delicate young 
fronds out of the warm limestone fissures, where it grows so abun- 
dantly. 

The foregoing shows that a fair share of our prettiest indigenous 
plants are congregated together on Arran, which affords the only 
Irish habitat for two of them, viz., Helianthemum canum and Astra- 
galus hypoglottis. To these we were fortunate enough to add a third, 
namely, Ajuga pyramidalis. Only two plants of it were observed ; 
but no doubt there are more on the island ; and I further consider 
it reasonable to suppose that it will yet be found on the opposite main- 
land of Connemara, where Eriocaulon septangulare, Arabis ciliata, 
Palmella montana, and other plants occur which grow in the North- 
west of Scotland, in nearly the same geographical range with Ajuga 
pyramidalis. 

We visited the small island called Stran Island, where, in 1805, 
Dr. Mackay found Matthiola sinuata, which is not now growing there. 
It is, therefore, probable that plant is lost to the Irish Flora. 

From the position of Arran we expected to find some scarce Cryp- 
togamic plants, but were disappointed. There are very few species 
of lichens, mosses, or Jungermanniae, and none that we observed rare. 
It was rather curious to see some of the sj)ecies, which seldom grow 
except on trees, adapting themselves to circumstances, and covering 
the faces of rocks, in the total absence of arboreal vegetation. This 
was especially the case with Hypnum trichomanoides, H. complana- 
tum, and Jungermannia complanata. 

Our time (only two days) did not admit of a close examination of 
the marine Algae, which grow in great abundance, and form the prin- 



191 

cipal harvest of the Islanders, who collect them in large quantities for 
sale to the farmers on the mainland, who use them extensively as 
manure. Fine examples of some of the more showy species of the 
Floridae sectioii were observed, affording sufficient indication that 
some of the rarer kinds might be found if properly sought for, 

D. Moore. 
Glasnevin, June 5, 1854. 



Conirihutions to British Lichenology. 
By John G. Baker, Esq. 

During part of the past winter 1 have been occupied arranging my 
collection of lichens, and examining the accumulated stores of the 
Yorkshire Philosophical Society ; and have also been favoured with 
the loan of an e'xtensive series of specimens, belonging to my friend 
I. Brown, of Ackworth. Through the medium of the ' Phytologist ' 1 
propose to describe a few species, or forms, which have either not 
been known before as inhabitants of Britain, or have been in some 
way involved in confusion or misunderstood. 

1. Evernia vulpina (L. vulpinus, L.) — Thallus pale yellow, much 
branched in a divaricate manner, irregularly^ angular and lacinose. 
" Apothecia sessile, disk brownish." 

Lichen vulpinus * L. Sp. 1623 ; Suec. N. 1129 ; Fl. Dan. t. 226 ; 
Ach. Prod. p. 179. Parmelia, Ach. Meth. p. 267 ; SchcBr. Spic. 489. 
Usnea, Hoffm. Evernia, Ach. Lich. Univ. p. 443 ; Fries, Lich. Eur. 
p. 23 ; Summa Veg. Scand. i. p. 103. Comicularia, DeC. Fr. ii. p. 
329 ; Schar. Ennm. p. 6. L. auratus, Vill. L. citrinus, Schrank. 

Exsic. Fries, Lich. Suec. 142; Fl. Deutsch. 70; Schaer. Lich. Helv. 
390. 

On trunks of trees, Killiney Hills, Co. Dublin, 1843, B. Jacobs in 
herb. J. Brown. Several examples are also included amongst an 
extensive series of English specimens, collected by the Rev. J. Har- 
riman, preserved in the Daltonian herbarium, which are not labelled 
with their special stations. This beautiful and conspicuous lichen 
has been well known upon the Continent from the days of Haller and 
Linnaeus downwards. In the ' Enumeratio,' Schaerer marks it as 

* Some of these references are taken on the authority of the ' Lichenographia 
Europea ' and the ' Enumeratio,' as I have not had an opportunity of consulting 
all the works and fasciculi mentioned. 



192 

growing " on logs of wood and the trunks of coniferous trees, espe- 
cially larches, in elevated situations, from Italy to Sweden, and from 
the Pyrenees to Tyrol." Our British species of the genus Evernia, 
as defined by Fries, range themselves under two groups. The first of 
these, to which the plant under notice belongs, is characterized by a 
fruticulose thallus, and is made up of species placed under Alectoria 
and Cornicularia by Acharius. It is also represented in our Flora by 
two widely distributed and variable species, E. jubata and E. ochro- 
leuca, from both of which E. vulpina difiers greatly in habit and 
appearance, and may be readily distinguished by the characters given 
above. In fact, it seems more analogous to E. flavicans (Borrera, 
Ach.), which may be I'egarded as a sort of connecting link between the 
fruticulose and foliaceous groups than to either of them ; but even to 
this species it bears only a distant resemblance. There appear to be 
two principal forms of variation : the first with an elongated filamen- 
tose thallus, light yellow in colour and nearly smooth ; the other with 
a shrubby and somewhat stunted thallus, covered with granular, yel- 
lowish or sublivid, distinct or aggregated soredia. The specimens 
which I have seen from Sweden (coll. Swartz) and Switzerland 
(Scha^rer) belong to the latter variety (the original plant of Linnseus), 
which is much more widely distributed than the other, but is never 
found in a fertile state. The Irish and English specimens belong to 
the filamentose form, but they are also barren. Indeed, Schaerer 
states the apothecia are only found very rarely. I have also had a 
Worcestershire locality reported, which Mr. Lees has kindly under- 
taken to investigate. 

2. Evernia divaricaia (L. divaricatus, L.) — " Thallus glaucous, 
glabrous, lacunose, rough, concolorous ; segments involute, filiform, 
pendulous, branched in a divaricate manner, afterwards cracking 
round. Apothecia lateral ; disk brownish ; border thin, entire." — 
Schmr. Enum. p. 12. 

Lichen divaricatus, Linn. Syst. Nat. 713 ; Ach. Prod. p. 226. 
Parmelia, Ach. Meth. p. 269. Evernia, Ach. Lich. Univ. p. 441 ; 
Fries, Lich. Eur. p. 25 ; Summa Veg. Scand. i. p. 103. Physcia, 
Schmr. Enum. p. 12. Parmelia mollis, y. divaricata, Schcer. Spic. 
491. Usnea flaccida, Hoffm. pi. lich. t. 67, figs. 1, 2 ; DeC. 

Exsic. Moug. and Nest. 545 ; Fries, Lich. Suec. 332 ; Schser. 
Lich. Helv. 392. 

Like the preceding, this species is included amongst a series of 
English specimens, without special localities, collected by the Rev. J. 
Harriraan, in the Daltonian herbarium. Like the preceding, also, it 



193 

has been well known for a long time, haviiig been fignred by Dillenius 
and characterised by Linnaeus. According to Schaerer, " it hangs, 
frequently in great profusion, from the branches of pine-trees in nionn- 
tainoiis and alpine woods throughout all Europe." So that it might 
be expected, with considerable probability, to occur in this country. 
It belongs to the section of the genus distinguished by a more or less 
compressed foliaceous thallus, of which the clearly established British 
representatives are E. prunastri, E. furfuracea, E. intricata, and E. 
flavicans. Of these it is most nearly allied to the first-mentioned ; 
but may, however, be very readily known by the pendulous, filiform 
segments of its thallus, and by its differently shaped and coloured 
apothecia and intricate habit of growth. By age the outer membrane 
of the thallus is ruptured at intervals, and the medullary cord exposed, 
exactly as in the analogous articulate state of Usnea barbata (vide 
Eng. Bot. t. 258, fig. 1). 

3. Cetrariacucullaia (L.cucullatus, Bell) — " Thallus cartilaginous, 
subfoliaceous, sinuato-lacinate, pale yellowish ; margins connivent, 
undulated. Apothecia adnate to the back of the lobes ; disk pale 
reddish." — Frieii, Llch. Eur. p. 37. 

Lichen cucullatus, Bell. Osserv. Bot. 154; Smith, Trans. Linn. 
Soc. i. t. 4, fig. 7 ; Ack. Prod. p. 171. Cetvaria, Ach. Melh. p. 2.93 ; 
Lich. Univ. p. 511; Fries, Lich. Eur. p. 37; Summa, i. p. 103; 
Schcer. Spic. ix. 248 ; Ennni. p. 14. Platisma, Hojfin. pi. Lich. 
Lobaria, Hoffm. Germ. Physcia, DeC. 

Exsic. Fries, Lich. Suec. 173 ; Schajr. Helv. 18 ; Moug. and Nesll. 
544. 

Examples of this species are placed amongst a series of s])eciraens 
of C. nivalis, from the " Cairngorm mountains, Scotch Highlands," in 
the Daltonian herbarium. 

This lichen belongs to the class of species which, like several 
flowering plants, have their head- quarters in Arctic Europe, and are 
also generally distributed throughout the Continent in alpine and ele- 
vated situations, but do not in the South descend into the low grounds. 
With reference to the Continent, Schaerer marks C. nivalis as its "very 
faithful associate;" but in Britain the relative frequency of the two 
species appears to be reversed, and it is C. cucullata that is the casual 
companion of C. nivalis. Besides resembling each other in their geo- 
graphical distribution, they are also closely allied in habit and appear- 
ance. Sir J. E. Smith says, respecting C. cucullata, that it is 
" apparently intermediate between nivalis and islandica ; " but it is 
VOL. V. 2 c 



m4 

the former to which it bears the greater resemblance, both in colour 
and characters. In a fertile state it may be most readily known by 
its curious nephroraa-like apothecia. It is also considerably less 
crisped and laciniated than C. nivalis, and the base is purplish instead 
of golden yellow. 

John G. Baker. 

Market Place, Thirsk, 
June 10, 1854. 



Notice of the Occurrence of Arum Italicum at Steephill, Isle of 
Wight. By Albert Hambrough, Esq., F.B.S. of Edinburgh 
London.* 

Some three or four years ago, when wandering, in company of my 
much-lamented friend, the late Dr. Brorafield, amongst the broken 
rocky ground in the UnderclifF of the Isle of Wight, I recollect our 
attention being attracted by the unusually large size of the leaves of 
an Arum, and also by the peculiar divarication, or divergence, of the 
lobes of its sagittate leaf. This was in either April or May, and the 
plant showed no sign of flower. Dr. Bromfield at the time was much 
struck by its appearance, and requested me to watch it, as he sus- 
pected it might prove to be Arum Italicum. It has, however, so 
happened that until the present year I have not been in that part of 
the island at the time thej plant produces its flower ; and, indeed, the 
circumstances above mentioned had altogether escaped my memory, 
until it was recalled to my recollection, in June last, by the appeai'- 
ance of an Arum, in flower, near the spot where it was first observed 
by Dr. Bromfield. The bright yellow colour of the spadix, so diffe- 
rent from the dull purple of the same part in Arum maculatura, at 
once led me to examine it closely ; and upon comparing it with the 
description of Arum Italicum given by Koch, in his ' Synopsis Florae 
Germanicae et Helveticae,' I found it exactly to correspond, with the 
exception of the time of flowering, which, according to Koch, should 
be in April ; whereas my plant produces its flowers in June ; but the 
warm springs of South Germany and Italy will sufficiently account 
for the greater forwardness of the Arum in the above-mentioned coun- 
tries, of which I believe it is a native. Fearing that the plant might 
be a mere settler, accidently introduced, my next step was to examine 

* Read before the Isle-of-Wight Philosophical and Scientific Society, Feb., 1854. 



195 

the surrounding coppices and rocks for more specimens ; and to my 
surprise I found the yellow-spadix Arum to be the prevalent repre- 
sentative of the family, and abundant everywhere ; whereas 1 had 
some difficulty in finding specimens of Arum maculatum, and those T 
did find were all in fruit, with one or two exceptions. It was not 
until the latter end of August that 1 had an opportunity of examining 
ripe fruit of the other plant, as none matured itself before that time. 
The description by Koch of Arum Italicum is as follows : — 

"Arum Italicum. — Foliis hastato-sagittatis albo-venosis. Spa- 
dice recto. Spatha breviori clavato, clava stipitem suum aequante. — 
In vineis et sylvaticis. Regionibus calidis — April — Spadix Flavus." 

With this description, so far as it goes, my plant accords ; 
and from examination of the fruit and buds I am enabled to 
add, that the fruit of the Isle-of- Wight Arum Italicum is twice the 
size of that of A. maculatum, and produced in much more elongated 
spikes. The buds also are double the size, and fewer in the berry 
than in A. maculatum, seldom exceeding three in each berry ; in A. 
maculatum there are frequently six and eight. The average height of 
the fruit-stalks in my plant is two feet, and they are sheathed by the 
foot-stalks of the leaves to the height of four or five inches from their 
base ; the leaves remain green contemporaneously with the fruit, but 
eventually disappear, though only for a i^short time, as the Arum is 
now (November) again in full leaf 

The plant I have thus ventured to describe is abundant in the cop- 
pices and amongst rocks and ivy at Steephill C astle and the neigh- 
bourhood. It appears to me to be certainly distinct from Arum 
maculatum ; and I only hope that an examination next year, by more 
competent botanists than myself, may establish its title to the name 
of Arum Italicum.* 

* Specimens of the plant were exhibited by the author to the members of the Phi- 
losophical and Scientific Society at the reading of the paper, and compared with spe- 
cimens of Arum Italicum from the garden of St. John's, near Ryde, kindly brought 
for that purpose by Mr. Lawrence, who, many years since, received the plant from Mr. 
Borrer. The slight diflFerence between the plants thus compared appeared to the 
Members present to be only such as the different circumstances of their growth would 
fully account for. For future comparison wild plants from Steephill have been planted 
in St John's garden ; while oflFsets from Mr. Boner's stock have been consigned to 
the rocky banks of Steephill, under the eye of the author of the above paper.— Benj. 
Barrow ; Hon. Sec. Phil, and Sclent. Soc. of I. W. 



196 



A List of the Ferns and their Allies found in the County Dublin^ 
with special reference to the Dodder Valleij. By John Robert 
KiNAHAN, Ai.B., Hon. Sec. Dublin Nat. Hist. Society. 

The following Catalogue does not pretend to be a correct list of all 
the ferns found in the County Dublin, being merely a record of such 
as have fallen under my own observation in my rambles, during the 
last five or six years, in those parts of the county which lie to he 
South-west of the LifFey. This river in its easterly course to the sea 
divides the county pretty fairly in two. Of the district to the South 
of it, it may be advisable to s'.y a few words. From the river the 
country stretches out South with but few breaks till it reaches the 
Dodder ; it then gradually rises, more or less abruptly, till, at the 
extreme boundary close to the head of that river, it attains the height,' 
in the ridge of Keppine, of 25 to 27 feet above the sea-level, being, in 
fact, part of the mountain chain to whose picturesque wildness Wick- 
low owes so much of its fashionable scenery. These hills vary much, 
though they are for the most part one immense bog, barren of every- 
thing except healh and Lycopodiums, and such-like plants ; in some 
of the higher peaks not even these will grow, and you have nothing 
but peat, bare of every kind of vegetation. They are, however, inter- 
sected by stream-glens of surpassing loveliness and richness in bota- 
nical treasures. All these, with six or seven exceptions, run into the 
valley of the Dodder, whose stream they swell with their waters. 
This river, rising close to the butt of Kippine, after flowing through 
an open bog for about a mile, plunges into a romantic clay-slate range, 
from which it emerges at Castlekelly, a little below which it is joined 
by the Middleton Brook, which is made up of the Lot Brook and Slade 
Brook, the first rising from Glas-a-vullawn, and the second from part 
of the Feather-bed range. These streams conjoined flow on in a very 
tortuous manner through Kelly's Glen, between the steep clay bluffs, 
on which is situated the pretty little holy well and graveyard of Kil- 
nasantan, till, having passed through Glenismaul or Thrush Valley, 
beneath and between the breaks of Ballina's Corney, it finally, just 
below Bohemabreena, at Kiltippet, emerges into a comparatively 
level country, through which it winds for about eight miles to the sea. 
Just as it reaches Bohemabreena it receives a tributary rivulet from 
Shane's Glen, remarkable as being the only white water, i. e., stream 
not boggy, which it receives. This rises at the back of Montpelier, 
and flows chiefly through a gravel district, just before its termination 



197 

rushing through a narrow clay-slate gorge well stored with Aspleniura 
Trichomanes, Dryopteris affinis, and Phyllitis Scolopendrium. During 
this entire valley the botanist will find himself in a paradise, especially 
of ferns, as in or about it are found more than two-thirds of the species 
recorded as Irish ; not to speak of other rarities, such as'Listera coi*- 
data, Habenaria viridis, H. albida, and other plants rare in the West 
of Ireland. Of the Musci and Fungi I will not speak ; but if any 
cryptogamist wishes a treat, let him search these glens, and he will 
not repent his labour. 

Lastrea montana, Newm. Local. Abundant in the glen near 
Middleton Brook, whei'e I first met it in June, 1854. Glenismaul, 
more sparingly. 

Lophodium Fwnisecii, Newm. Very rare. A few weak plants in 
the Lot-Brook Glen, at the foot of a cascade ; also in a glen in the 
Feather-bed, very weak and sti-aggling. Hill of Howth, North side, 
very rare. I cannot account for the rarity of this fern, so abundant in 
the neighbouring countries, and so general throughout Ireland. 

„ multiflorum, Newm. Very common, especially on the 

exposed mountain-sides and in the shady glens. All the plants have 
spines on the portion of the stipes next the ground. 

Variety " nanumr Very common. Not always growing in the 
most exposed situations. Kelly's Glen. 

N.B. Further study of this group will doubtless discover other of 
the named forms. These are all I can be certain about. 

Dryopteris affmis, Newm. Very common, frequenting low grounds. 
Very distinct ; earlier in vernation and more robust than the next, 
often growing more than five feet high. Friarstown and Dodder Val- 
ley. 

5, Bo?'reri, Newm. Very common, frequenting for the 

most part the higher grounds. About a month later than the last in 
its vernation. Easily distinguished from that species by its golden 
yellow colour. Dodder Valley. 

Athyrium Filix-fcemina, Roth. Very common. The following 
varieties are found. I cannot convince myself of their distinctness ; 
or, rather, I know several other forms as distinct and not intermediate, 
particularly the two glandulose ones recorded below. 

„ var. convexum (?). What I take to be this form is 

common on the hills, varying much in its size and cutting. A most 
beautiful form, with red stipes, covered over with glands, is found in 
Kelly's Glen. It appears distinct. 



198 

Athyrium Filix-foBmina^ var. incisum. Very common and fine. 
A form of this is also found in Kelly's Glen, with glandulose green 
stipes ; also a crisped, curled subform, analogous to that of Polysti- 
chum angulare. 

„ „ var. molle. Rare. Kelly's Glen. A 

frond so named by Mr. Newman was gathered by me there. Tn Kil- 
lakee woods, rather abundant. 

Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum , Linn. Local. On walls. On a clay- 
bank at Friarstown, near Bohemabreena. 

„ marinum, Linn. Rare. Used to be abundant at Kil- 

liney, but the station is nearly destroyed by railway cutting. Howth, 
North side. I have found it also on Killiney Abbey. 

„ Trichomanes^ Linn. Rare and local. On conglomerate 

rocks at Tilsadin ; sparingly on rocks overhanging Gleuismaul ; in 
Shane's Glen, on walls, very abundant and fine ; Miltown Bridge. 

Amesium Ruta-muraria, Newm. Local, but not rare. Friarstown. 

Phyllitis Scolopendrium, Newm. Common in suitable localities, 
Kelly's Glen. 

Notolepeum Ceterach, Newm. Very local and rare. Whitechurch, 
a very few plants, on walls ; Belgard, do. do. ; (Laram, on North 
side of Liffey, more abundant, TV. H. Luscombe, Esq.) 

Botrychium Lvimria, Swartz. Local. Kilnasantan and bluffs 
along Kelly's Glen, in patches. A fine subform, with deeply incised 
fronds, found here, growing in patches, distinct from the ordinary 
form. Plants from six to nine inches high, growing with the next, 
April, 1854. This fern was found previously in this neighbourhood, 
by Dr. J. Mackay, higher up the glen. 

Ophioglossum vulgatum, Linn. All along the bluffs of the Dodder 
Valley, very abundant ; at Kilnasantan, with the last, April, 1854. 

This includes all the species of true ferns I have myself met with. 
The following are recorded by Mackay as occurring ; but I have not 
been fortunate enough to meet with them. 

Hymenophyllum Wilsoni. Kelly's Glen ; also found there by W. 
Andrews, Esq. 

„ Tunbridgense, Same place, but doubtless an 

error of nomenclature, the two species having been formerly con- 
founded by observers. Thus both are recorded at Powerscourt 
Waterfall : I have searched carefully, and could only find H. Wil- 
soni. Nor do I know of any authentic specimen of H. Tunbridgense 



199 

from this locality : those shown me as such are all H. Wilsoni, which 
I find in its distribution in Ireland is the more northern fern of 
the two, H. Tunbridgense replacing it in the South. All our critical 
practical botanists with whom I have conversed on this subject hold 
the same opinion. 

Osmunda regalis, Linn. Formerly found in Kelly's Glen. The 
station is now drained, which perhaps accounts for its not being found 
there now. 

The fern-allies I have not studied so well ; therefore my list is more 
meagre. Isoetes lacustris and Pilularia globulifera are wanting, owing 
to the absence of suitable localities for them. The Lycopodiums 
are well represented, the only species wanting being L. alpinum, an 
alpine species, and L. inundatum, found, 1 believe, in the Co. Gal- 
way, but I have never seen Irish specimens. In the Equisetums the 
following are wanting : — E. Mackaii, a northern species ; E. umbro- 
sum, also a northern species, though I believe I have met with it in 
Dublin ; and E. Moorei, a new species, lately discovered in Wick- 
low, and described by Mr. Newman. 

Equiseium arvense, Linn. Too common ; a troublesome weed. 
Kelly's Glen. 

„ hyemale, Linn. Rather rare. Near Whitechurch. 

„ limosum, Linn. Local. Common in swamps along 

Grand Canal. 

„ palustre, Linn. Common. Firhouse ; Kelly's Glen. 

The following varieties all occur : — nudum, rare ; alpinum (.?) ; poly- 
stachion, very rare, Kelly's Glen. 

„ variegatum, Weber & Mohr. (Portmarknock Strand, 

North side. I have been shown fresh specimens). 

„ sylvaticum, Linn. Very fine and abundant. Kelly^s 

Glen, and Three-rock Mountains. 

„ Telmateia, Ehrh. Very fine and abundant. Kelly's 

Glen, and the entire valley of the Dodder. 

Lycopodium selaginoides, Linn. Rare. (Howth, North side. 
Plants shown me). 

„ clavatum, Linn. Rare. Cruagh Mountains, Feather- 

bed, and Kelly's Glen. 

„ Selagoy Linn. Common on high bogs. Middleton 

Brook and Kelly's Glen, and over mountains generally. 



20G 

All these species have been found growing by myself, except those 
in parentheses; and of these I have seen original plants. 

I have purposely omitted from this list all monstrous forms (with 
one exception, mentioned for the purpose of clearing up its history) ; 
for these I conceive out of place when treating merely of species, their 
only importance being in the study of Morphology. 

Of the species (recorded as Irish) which are absent from this list, 
Adiantum Capillus- Veneris, Asplenium aculum, Trichomanes radi- 
cans, Hymenophyllum Tunbridgense, Gymnocarpium Dryopleris, 
Allosorus crispus, and perhaps I should add Cystopteris fragilis, are 
absent, owing to geographical causes ; the first four being here 
southern and western species, as far as I can learn. Hymenophyl- 
lum Tunbridgense has been recorded in the Co. Wicklow, but on 
insufficient authority. Gymnocarpium Dryopteris is a rare northern 
species in Ireland, as also is Allosorus crispus, though I believe it 
formerly existed in the Co. Dublin, as Wade, in his 'Planta Rariores 
Hiberniae,' published in 1804, records it, under the name of Pteris 
crispa, as " occurring on very old walls about Rathfarnham, and on 
an old rock or stone as you go into Dalkey." Both these localities 
are now destroyed ; but he is generally very accurate, and the 
parsley-fern is a species that could hardly be mistaken for anything 
else ; so accurate is he, that merely with his book I have now, after 
the lapse of fifty years, found little diflSculty in finding many of his 
stations for plants. Cystopteris fragilis the same author records as 
occurring near Tamlaght Hill. I have not succeeded in finding it 
there, though perhaps it exists. The district is clay-slate : I have 
always, in the West, found this fern on limestone. He may, perhaps, 
have mistaken some form of Athyrium Filix-foemina for it, as I have 
known several persons to fall into the same error. The want of suit- 
able high mountains doubtless deprives this county of Asplenium 
viride, though I think it probable a search among the mountain glens 
behind Tamlaght Hill might discover this fern. Polystichum Lon- 
chitis, another dweller in high mountains, is doubtless absent from the 
same cause ; most of our mountain-ridges being entirely capped with 
bog, on which, in many places, even the heather refuses to grow. 
Hemestheum Thelypteris is absent, from want of a suitable locality, 
our bogs being too much exposed. Lophodium rigidum and L. spi- 
nosura have as yet been recorded only in one county each. L. Cal- 
lipteris has not yet been found wild in Ireland. Gymnocarpium 
Phegopteris is one of the very rarest of Irish ferns. I cannot account 



201 

for the scarcity of Lophodium Foenisecii ; in every other part of Ire- 
land I have been it is abundant, but is entirely absent here from loca- 
lities suited well, one would think, for it. The same remark may also 
apply to Polystichum aculeatum, which in the neighbouring county 
of Kildare is most abundant, as at Tullow. Notolepeum Ceterach is 
a more southern fern, and also a frequenter of limestone or clay-slate ; 
whilst most of the disti-ict from which these remarks are compiled is 
granite or quartz-rock. The Lycopodiums and Equisetums call for 
no remark, further than those in the commencement of this list. 

J. R. KiNAHAN. 

Donnybrook, near Dublin, 
June, 1854. 



Notices of New Books. 



' The Botany of the Voyage of H. M.S. HeraW By Berthold 
Seemann, Ph.D., M.A., F.L.S., Memb. Imp. L. C. Acad. 
Royal 4to. Parts III. and IV., each containing 40 pages of 
letterpress and 10 Plates. Price 10s. each. London : Reeve. 
1854. 

This valuable work is continued with the same spirit, skill and 
learning with which it was commenced. It consists chiefly of a care- 
fully compiled list of the species found during the voyage ; and the 
portion now in course of publication will form a very complete Flora 
of the Isthmus of Panama. The new genera and species are described 
with great minuteness ; and here and there occur critical observa- 
tions, that evince at the same time great knowledge and sound judg- 
ment. Such, for instance, is the following, on the Turneraceae and 
Passifloraceae : — 

" All botanists consider Turneraceae and Passifloraceae as allied 
to each other, but few seem to be aware that these orders ai'e so 
closely related as they really are, that the differences between them 
are merely imaginary, that in fact they constitute one and the same 
family of plants. I was led to this conclusion by the discovery of the 
American genus Erblichia, Seem., figured in Plate XXVII., and by 
the subsequent examination of several Turneraceae. All Turneraceae 
are described in systematic works as 'herbaceous plants, having some- 
times a tendency to become shrubby.' This description however 
applies to only a few Turneras ; T. Salicifolia, ^S"^. Hil. (T. Hindsiana, 
VOL. V. 2d 



202 

Benth. ! Corchorus grandiflorns, Spring. .'), is a real shrub, from 6 to 
8 feet high ; and Erblichia odorata, Seem., is a good-sized tree, often 
attaining a height of 30 feet and more. The leaves are said to be 
exstipulate, — another misstatement, as all Turneracege have stipules. 
In Turnera ulmifolia, Linn, — a common hot-house plant, from which 
most authors seem to have solely derived their knowledge of this 
group, — they are, on account of the hairy covering of the stem, hardly 
visible, but in the more glabrous species, such as T. Salicifolia, St. 
Hil., they are plainly to be seen, and in Erblichia odorata. Seem., 
they are still more manifest. The calyx is, in Turnera and Piriqueta, 
monophyllous ; in Erblichia, pentaphyllous. The latter is doubtless 
the normal state of the calyx of the order, for if the calyx of the two 
former is examined, it will be found that its lobes are in fact true 
sepals, traceable to the very base. The connecting link between 
them appears to be Erblichia, one of those peculiar genera, the dis- 
covery of which will always produce great changes. As no other 
points of difference besides those already disposed of seem to exist 
between the ordeis, I have no hesitation in uniting Turneraceae and 
Passifloreae into one Natural Family, adopting the name of Passiflo- 
raceae for both." 

The following passage is also extremely interesting, not only on 
account of the information it contains, but also as affording a very ob- 
vious and satisfactory explanation of a statement made by Mr. Griffiths, 
who believed he had discovered a non-parasitic Loranthus. While it 
would be most rash to assert that all the species of a genus were 
either parasites or the reverse, still the very evident and very prevail- 
ing parasitism of the species of Loranthus and Viscum fairly induces 
the conclusion that this is the case, and leads one to inquire with 
more rigid scrutiny into all statements having an adverse bearing. In 
the present instance we have no doubt that a very careful and accu- 
rate botanist was deceived by appearances. 

" The three last-named species [of Loranthus] have scarlet flowers, 
more or less tipped with yellow, rendering them very ornamental ; 
indeed there can hardly be finer plants than many species of Loran- 
thus inhabiting tropical and subtropical countries, yet we never find 
them in any of our European gardens. Imagine a dense grove of 
misseltoes bearing, instead of the insignificant green flowers of our 
common Viscum album, Linn., blossoms of the brightest scarlet or 
yellow, and often averaging more than eight inches in length ! Such 
are the species of Loranthus alluded to, which, to render them still 
more worthy of the attention of the horticulturist, do not in most cases 



2oa 

grow on the top of high trees, where their beauty would be ahnost 
concealed to the naked eye, and their charms in a great measure lost, 
but upon low shrubs, and often so near the ground, that several bota- 
nists have been induced to consider them terrestrial plants. But about 
their parasitism there can be no doubt. Griffith once thought that 
he found a terrestrial Loranthus (referred to in his Itiner. Notes, p. 
63, No. 961) ; and writing at Myrung, he says : 'The vegetation of 
the hills about here is much the same as about Moflong. . . The most 
curious tree is one which, with the true appearance of an Elseagnus, 
seems to be a Loranthus, the first arborescent species yet found, 
although, as one or two other exceptions occur to parasitism, there 
is no reason why there should not be a terrestrial arborescent species, 
as well as a fruticose one.' However, when Dr. J. D. Hooker and 
Dr. T. Thomson visited the neighbourhood of Myrung, in the Khasia 
mountains, the locality where that author met with the strange spe- 
cies, they observed an Elaeagnus with a Loranthus upon it, the leaves 
of both resembling each other in a remarkable degree, making it 
highly probable that a parasite growing in a similar manner gave rise 
to the very pardonable mistake of Griffith. Other anomalies of the 
same nature may doubtless be cleared up by a similar course of inves- 
tigation. I have seen several species of Loranthus with aerial roots, 
but never one of the roots penetrating into the ground ; and those 
roots I have only observed in climbing species having very slender 
branches, where they replace in a great measure the cirrhi, or hooks, 
with which climbing plants are generally furnished." 



' A Manual of Natural History, for the use of Travellers ; being a 
Description of the Families of the Animal and Vegetable King- 
doms : with Remarks on the practical study of Geology and 
Meteorology. To which are appended Directions for Collect- 
ing and Preserving.'' By Arthur Adams, M.R.C.S. ; F.L.S. ; 
M.E.S., Stettin ; William Balfour Baikie, M.D., F.B.S.E., 
late one of the Presidents of the Royal Medical Society of 
Edinburgh ; and Charles Barron, Curator of the Royal Naval 
Museum at Haslar. London : John Van Voorst, Paternoster 
Row. 1854. Post 8vo ; 750 pages. Price I2s. 

This might be called the book with the promising title ; but the 
promise is not confined to the title ; and we feel sure that the authors 



204 

will not object to our citing, verhatim et literatim^ the equally pro- 
mising Preface. Here it is entire. 

" The design of the following pages is to endeavour to supply what 
seems to be a blank in the scientific literature of this country, for, 
although numerous treatises exist upon every branch, yet no work has 
hitherto appeared, comprising either succinctly or in detail, a compre- 
hensive outline of Natural History. It may appear be presumptuous on 
the part of the Authors to attempt to grapple with such an extensive 
range of subjects, which, they feel must be, in many instances, ina- 
dequately treated, still they trust that their effort to condense, within 
the limits of a portable volume, the leading features of Animate and 
Inanimate Nature, may prove of service to those at least for whom it 
is more especially intended. Their chief aim has been to render their 
work at once sufficiently popular for the general reader, without, at the 
same time, lessening its scientific value. For this purpose technica- 
lities have been avoided whenever their employment could be dis- 
pensed with, English names have been given to all the Classes, 
Orders, and Families, and the principal divisions have been prefaced 
by brief introductory remarks. The classification adopted is that 
which has seemed most closely to accord with the advanced views of 
the time ; and throughout the Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms a 
uniform system has been employed, so that similar subdivisions are 
designated by a cognate nomenclature.'" 



Proceedings of Societies, S^c. 



Botanical Society of Edinburgh. 
May 11, 1854. — Professor Balfour, President, in the chair. 

Donations. 

To the Library and Herbarium. — ' Proceedings of the Royal 
Society,' from Professor Sharpey ; Norwegian plants from Dr. Ander- 
son ; British plants from Mr. Parker, Torquay ; and Arctic plants 
from Mr. Lithgow. 

To the Museum of Economic Botany at the Royal Botanic Gar- 
den. — From Daniel Oliver, Esq., strip of the bark of the cashaw {Pro- 
sopis juliflora), received from Jamaica, along with a note, stating that 



205 

the plant is one of the commonest trees in ihe Savannahs, and one of 
the hardwood Acacias. It yields a fine bitter, and is used by the peo- 
ple as a substitute for Cinchona. It is employed in certain chronic 
inflammations of the throat, and is said to be superior to Peruvian bark 
in its medicinal effects. The wood is constantly used for fuel. — 
From Messrs. W. & G. Law, merchants, Edinburgh, specimens of 
raw cocoa, ground cocoa, roasted cocoa, rock Trinidad, or navy 
cocoa, cocoa- nibs, Fry's chocolate, and a specimen of tea, known as 
Assam dust, which was stated to be scarcely known in commerce, and 
unnoticed by writers on teas. Messrs. Law remarked that it was a 
substance produced by friction during the process of preparing the 
tea. Leaves that are solid and heavy are the tenderest, and break the 
easiest ; hence the quality of dust in Assam tea. This dust is too 
valuable to be thrown away, as it is often added to give strength to 
tea. — Other donations from Messrs. P. Lawson & Son, Mr. Andrew 
Murray, Mr. Robert Daw, Mr. G. S. Blackie, Professor Christison, 
Mr. George Waldie, Mr. W. H. Macfarlane, and Mr. Grant. 

North-Uist Moss. 

Dr. Greville mentioned that he had been in correspondence with 
Mr. Wilson upon the subject of the North-Uist moss, which had been 
referred by that gentleman to Leucodon Lagurus ; while he himself 
had been disposed to consider it a variety of Hypnum cirrhosum. Mr. 
Wilson had, however, satisfied him that it could scarcely be so 
arranged. In the absence of fructification, Mr. Wilson preferred to 
regard it as a variety of Leucodon Lagurus (although there were cer- 
tainly some differences of character), rather than unnecessarily to 
multiply species. Dr. Greville was still disposed, on the strength of 
the great difference in habit, to doubt of its claim to the place assigned 
to it ; and thought it probable that the fructification, when discovered, 
would remove it altogether from Leucodon. 

The following papers were read : — 

Structure of Diatomacecs. 

' On the Structure of Diatomaceae ;' by E. W. Dallas, Esq., F.L.S. 

The author directed attention to the list of species which follows, 
and which, although imperfect, exhibits great variety in the forms, 
showing the Medway to be very fertile in these organisms : — 



206 



Epithemia Musculus 
Campylodiscus cribrosus 
Surirella striatijla 
„ linearis 
Tryblionella marginata 

„ scutellum 

„ punctata 

„ gracilis 

„ acuminata 

Cymatopleura elliptica 
Triceratium Favus 

„ striolatum 

„ undulatum 

Cyclotella Kutzingiana 

„ operculata 

And three species undetermined 
Actinocyclus undulatus 

„ senarius 

„ septenarius 

„ octonarius 

„ nonarius 

Eupodiscus Argus, two vars. 

„ radiatus 

„ maculatus 

Coscinodiscus radiatus 

,, minor 

„ eccentricus 

„ Thwaitesii 

And an undetermined species 
Cocconeis Pediculus 
scutellum 



Nitzschia sigmoidea 

„ dubia 

„ reversa 

And an undetermined species 
Navicula elliptica 

„ convexa 

„ Westii (?) 

„ didyma 

„ pusilla 

„ punctulata 

„ palpebralis 
Pinnularia divergens 
Stauroneis pulchella 
Cocconeraa parvum 
Pleurosigma balticum 

„ Hippocampus 

„ angulatum 

„ acuminatum 

„ distortum 

Doryphora Amphiceros, vars. 

„ Boeckii 

Achnanthes brevipes 
Grammatophora marina (?) 
Biddulphia aurita 
Zygoceros rhombus 
Dentricella sp. 
Orthoseira sp. 
Dictyocha 

Bacteriastrum furcatura (?) 
„ curvatum (?) 



Some of the species in the foregoing list have been described as 
new to Britain by Mr. Roper, in a late paper, published in the 
* Microscopical Journal.' The Coscinodiscus not named seems from 
the description to be the same with that found at the mouth of the 
Thames, and is an exceedingly beautiful disc. The four species of 
Actinocyclus are those described by Ehrenberg, and are new British 
species. They exhibit the strong sQiceous cellular tissue underneath 
the moniliform structure of the surface, as in Actinocyclus. The 
examples of Triceratium striolatum, and also Zygoceros rhombus, dif- 



207 

fered somewhat from the figures and descriptions given of them, being 
provided with two spines placed close to the projecting terminations 
or angles of the valve, and which were always present in the examples 
that had come under observation. The surfaces of the valves were 
also seen to be dotted over with small nodules, which gave them a 
very remarkable appearance, and might be seen to project from the 
surface when the valve was suitably placed. These appearances 
might be attributable to a more matured developing of the silicious 
structure. 

Among the remarkable forms found, although not considered to 
belong to the Diatomaceae, are the two varieties of Bacteriastrura, the 
disks of which, it may be observed, were three or four times the dia- 
meter of those described by Mr. Shadbolt, from Port Natal, and the 
radiations more numerous. 

Mr. Dallas directed attention to the structure of the Diatomaceae, 
as affording some of the most beautiful examples of geometric arrange- 
ment of cells with which we are acquainted. It was pointed out that 
there are only three of the regular polygons that can be employed 
alone to fill up the space about a point in plane surface, namely, the 
equilateral triangle, the square, and the hexagon : these forms and 
their angles are accordingly found to prevail in the structure of the 
tissues. By constructing the polygons it was shown that they 
arranged themselves in straight lines, determined by the shorter axis 
of the figures, the quadrilaterals having two directions in which the 
lines run, and the hexagons three. With the hexagonal structure, 
when one set of the lines passing through the axis is referred to a 
centre, the cells then appear to radiate in straight lines from the 
centre ; while the other two directions in which they appear to rnn 
will be spiral lines, having a definite character according to the size 
of the cells. Much of the character of the tissue depends on the posi- 
tion of the axis of the polygon, with respect to an axis of the 
valve ; that is, whether the longer or shorter axis is parallel to it. 
Ml*. Smith, in his ' Synopsis,' has noticed this peculiarity ; and, in 
accordance with it, has divided his genus Pleurosigma into two sec- 
tions. 

The above arrangements will be found to prevail in the structure 
of the tissues of the valves ; and the influence of the living principle 
might generally be seen in the repetition of like spaces, about a cen- 
tre in each species, and always in the same numerical relations in 
each individual of the species, multiples of the numbers 2, 3, and 5, 
and also 7, seeming to prevail. 



208 

These divisions are seen very conspicuously in Acdnocyclus and 
Actinopticlus. In the large species of Cosciuodiscus the number of 
sectors appeared to be twelve, from the groups of rows at the centime, 
and in it was shown the very beautiful arrangement of the cells in 
radiating and intersecting spiral lines. Eupodiscus Ralfsii was refer- 
red to as affording an example of the division of the circle into sec- 
tors, within which the lines of cells are arranged symmetrically on 
each side of a single radiating row, to which the rest are all parallel. 
In Eupodiscus maculatus the disk is divided into ten ; but the rows 
of cells do not converge towards the centre, except one at the side of 
each sector, to which the others are parallel. From this may be 
derived the very beautiful construction of the Cosciuodiscus eccentri- 
cus, in which the disk is divided into seven sectors ; the rows of cells 
extending across the valve from each sector, to meet similar rows 
from the second sector beyond. 

Sections of Coal. 

' On the various Sections of Coal, considered in their relation to the 
Block", and the relative views of Histologists thereon ; ' by Mr. Neil 
Stewart. 

The author stated : — 

" Since last July I have frequently been employed in making draw- 
ings of sections of coal, as seen under the microscope by transmitted 
light, and have therefore been obliged to give this subject some 
attention. In the prosecution of this work I have felt great difficulty 
in bringing to my aid the willing zeal so necessary to the spirited 
delineation, and which can only be commanded in proportion to the 
knowledge which the artist has of his subject. This I can only 
account for by stating, that a suspicion passed upon my mind, from 
the beginning, that something was wrong with regard to sections ; 
and this suspicion, which I frequently mentioned to gentlemen 
engaged in the investigation of this subject, increased with my know- 
ledge, until, on reading Mr. Quekett's paper, in the ' Microscopical 
Journal ' for January last, I found that he there expresses a notion 
similar to mine, but immediately contradicts it by again returning to 
the usually received opinion. With a view, therefore, to satisfy my 
own doubts, and, if possible, to make a contribution to scientific truth, 
I have examined cubical blocks of various coals by direct light ; and 
with my own hands have made sections from all the sides of these, 
and again examined them by transmitted light. I have also made 
drawings of such sections which are now before the Society. 



209 

" The first two drawings are representations of what are received 
as longitudinal and transverse sections of common household coal, to 
which, for the present, I shall confine my remarks. 

" Professor Bennett expresses it as his opinion — and I believe he 
holds it in common with others — that the red coloured striae seen in 
the longitudinal section are tubes or ducts ; that the yellow rings seen 
in the transverse section are the ends of those tubes ; and that the red 
colour of the tubes, like blood seen in the veins of the frog's foot, is 
an aggregation of the yellow bodies strewed over the section like 
blood-cells in single file. 

" For a moment let us reflect upon the appearance presented by a 
cell or tube, as seen on the field of the microscope. In order that 
either of these bodies may be seen by transmitted light, a certain 
amount of transparency is necessary : the slightest curvature or undu- 
lation on the surface causes the light thrown from the reflector to be 
diverted from the eye of the observer, and the part so curved appears 
dark ; tliis is invariably the case at the margins : tlie outlines of such 
bodies are distinctly defined and black, whatever may be their colour 
or form, and this blackness is diffused inwards according to tlieir 
rotundity. 

" How is it, then, that histologists have in this case departed from 
an invariable optical law, and have described appearances void of out- 
line as cells and tubes ? But even admitting them to be so, I would 
then ask, why have these not been carbonised like the adjacent struc- 
tures which form the black mass ? Wanting these two characteristics, 
no one need hesitate to say that they are neither cells nor tubes. 

" With regard to the red colour being an aggregation of the yellow, 
it is enough simply to state that that is impossible, from two facts — 
the section is reduced to an equal thickness, and the yellow bodies 
occur within the red spaces, their definition being then as complete as 
when embedded in their usual black matrix. 

" I have said that Mr. Quekett expresses a notion similar to mine, 
but again returns to the usually received opinion; here are his 
words : — ' If a small cubical block of any kind of coal be examined 
under a power of fifty diameters, four of its six sides will exhibit more 
less of a fibrous structure, precisely like that of wood? 

" Now, if a block of wood and a block of coal be examined together, 
with the longitudinal striae of each laid in the horizontal direction, 
they will present very different appearances. In the case of the wood 
it will be seen that only two of its sides, which I shall call the back 
and front, present the striated appearance ; in the other two the ends 
VOL. V. 2 E 



210 

are distinctly transverse sections, and show the ends of organisms. 
But this is not the case with a block of coal, which may be likened to 
a pack of cards, the four sides in question having a similar appearance, 
and, so far as structure is concerned, having each an equal title to be 
called a longitudinal section. Where, then, is the transverse section 
of coal, and where are the yellow rings ? 

" Hitherto our attention has been directed to the sides of the block, 
let us now examine the top and bottom, or horizontal surfaces — there 
the rings are found, and being there, cannot be the ends of the sup- 
posed tubes, nor have any relation to them, seeing that their longitu- 
dinal direction is that of the surface now under examination. 

" I have drawn three sections, as if seen in one perspective view, in 
their natural position. The stripes on one side are seen to extend far 
into the side at right angles, showing themselves to be plates of trans- 
parent matter lying betwixt the carbonaceous layers. 

" The grinding and polishing process is very instructive. On the 
sides of the blocks many series of rings may be ground off without 
much alteration on the appearance of the striae, while in reducing the 
horizontal surface the transparent parts are constantly changing their 
form. The first evidence of transparency which presents itself is a 
deep blood-red spot, beautifully soft at the edges ; grind a little 
farther, and it assumes the appearance recognized as the resinoid cell; 
a little more grinding, and the spore-case makes its appearance ; still 
grind on, the process will be found to be as fertile of form as the frost 
is on the window-pane, or the burning embers of the fire to a musing 
fancy; and when the section is reduced to the last degree of thinness, 
the shallowest of all peep through. These are the yellow rings, with 
their dark centres, on which I shall venture a few observations sugges- 
tive of their origin. 

" A painting of a transverse section, executed by Dr. Adams, of 
Glasgow, and shown by Professor Bennett to the Royal Society, re- 
presents the rings as if they were all in the level, and of a uniform 
colour. This has no doubt been in some measure the cause of their 
having been mistaken for the ends of tubes. Nature shows them dif- 
ferent. Some are distinct and bright yellow, while thin as the section 
is when they come into view, others are still obscured by a layer of 
dark matter, and have a bister-brown colour. Mr. Quekett admits this 
to be the case ; it is therefore a matter of astonishment that, with such 
a high and well-earned reputation for acute observation, he, at the 
same time, describes them as transverse sections of thick-walled cells 
or woody fibre. 



211 

" In the longitudinal section these bodies present their edges, are 
seen strewed all over the sections, and sometimes assume the appear- 
ance of an interrupted yellow line, and individuals now show their 
dark centres flattened. 

" The dark bodies in the centres of the rings seem to me to be car- 
bonised spores. I have figured some of the most distinct ones from 
different sorts. They have the characteristic outline of a cell — are 
some of them still quite spherical — and in Professor Balfour's speci- 
men of Wigan cannel coal, where the edge of the section is reduced 
to a rag, some of them are partially divested of the encircling yellow, 
when the spore is seen to project into the empty field. The remains 
of some are also seen as black circular lines, sticking in the varnish 
with which the specimen had been fixed to the glass. 

" The transparent yellow I suppose to have been pressed out in 
the process of carbonisation, or perhaps gathered round them as 
a pool of water encircles a stone on the sea-beach long after the retir- 
ing tide has left all else dry. 

" In short, living vegetable matter, may with tolerable accuracy be 
considered as a serai-opaque substance. The process of carbonisa- 
tion by which it is changed into coal, seems to separate the structural 
from the non-structural, the opaque from the transparent, and as the 
former is compi*essed and blackened, the latter is insinuated between 
the layers, and into every minute fissure and crevice left vacant 
around the more resistant particles of the carbonaceous mass ; while 
decomposed portions are being constantly carried to the surface of the 
earth, by capillary attraction, there to be thrown off into the atmos- 
phere or taken up by the minute spongioles and rootlets of the exist- 
ing vegetation." 

A paper was read by Mr. M'Nab, ' On the Effects of the recent 
Frosts on Vegetation, in different parts of the Country.' 

Election of Members. 

The following candidates were balloted for, and duly elected : — 
William Falla, Esq., 23, Dundas Street, as Ordinary (Resident) 
Fellow ; Mr. George Morris, Golden Acres Nursery, as Associate. 



212 



Dublin Natural- History Society. 
June 16, 1854. — ^James R. Dombrain, Esq., in the chair. 

Saxifraga geum, S^c. 

Mr. Andrews said, that before commencing the papers for the 
evening, he was desirous of placing on I'ecord some plants that had 
been first noticed in this country at the meetings of the Society. The 
first vvas a very remarkable form of Saxifraga geum, fine specimens of 
which he submitted to the meeting. It was found by Mr. Andrews 
in the Great Blasket Island, in 1842, and noticed in the Society at the 
December meeting of that year. It was remarkable for its strong 
growth and dark hirsute leaves, but more particularly in the glands 
which surround the ovary, and which in the flowering state of the 
plant present a beautiful appearance, the glands being of a deep rose- 
colour. It seemed remarkable in connecting the Saxifragaceae with 
the Painassise and Crassulaceas ; it produces perfect seeds, and 
the seedlings present the same characteristics as the parent plant. 
Dr. Harvey, who took specimens to England, writes : — *' Charles 
Darwin was very much interested in your Blasket Saxifrage, particu- 
larly at the fact of its producing perfect seeds. He is working out 
some observations on the continuability of varieties by seed, and 
wishes much to know whether the seedlings from this Saxifrage pro- 
duce the metamorphic glands of the parent. I told him I thought 
they did, but would get the full particulars from you." My friend, 
Mr. Simon Foot, who cultivated the plant, confirms the fact of the 
seedlings having the same formation of glands as the parent, and in- 
formed me that Dr. Lindley observed to him that he considered 
it would prove to be a plant of great interest. Plants of Saxifraga 
Pedatifida, Arabis Crantziana, and Saxifraga leucanthemifolia were 
exhibited, as originally noticed in the Society ; the two former dis- 
covered by the Right Hon. John Wynne, of Haslewood, the Saxifrage 
in Mayo, and the Arabis on Benbulben, Sligo. The Saxifraga leu- 
canthemifolia, which exhibited numerous foliaceous buds on the flow- 
ering branches, and which, on falling off, became young plants, was 
brought by Dr. Scouler from Portugal. On flowering, the following 
year, this peculiarity in the plant was seen and brought forward, as it 
had not been noticed by any continental botanist. The plants do not 
perfect their seeds. 



213 



Combinations of Varieties in Ferns. 

Dr. Kinahan made the following statement: — "In the paper read by 
me at our last meeting, T stated that on one point I was still in doubt, 
viz., how far varieties combine ijiter se. Since then I have been 
enabled to arrive at the following conclusions on this subject, oppor- 
tunely indeed, as it completes the scheme I was endeavouring to lay 
before you: — I find that these combinations do take place occasion- 
ally, and that they, with a very few exceptions (more 1 am inclined to 
think seeming than real), take place only between the sub-groups of 
the same group, i. e. between variety and variety, and sub-variety and 
sub-variety. These conclusions, as well as those laid before you on 
former occasions, were all confirmed by examinations of, 1 believe, 
the two best collections of the kind in England, viz., that of Dr. H. 
Allchin, in London, and that of G. B. Wollaston, Esq., in Kent. 
Through the kindness of both these gentlemen, I have been much in- 
debted both for information regarding the plants and by the oppor- 
tunity afforded me of examining forms, many of them unique. In Mr. 
Wollaston's collection there is a form of hart's -tongue, raised by him 
from seed, which well illustrates the combination of forms. In 
it the lower portion of the frond represents the var. laciniatum, while 
the apex represents the var. cristatum. In one frond this was shown 
in a remarkable manner, the stipe was cleft, one portion was dimi- 
nished to a fibrous hook, about a quarter of an inch long, the other 
bore a frond, the base marginate serrated and the apex divided into 
two, the one division cristate, the other reduced to a branched lash of 
bare fibrils. The establishment of this fact clears up the only diflS- 
cully in arranging the varieties I met with, establishing an additional 
class of mixed forms. Thus, the Athyrium found in Joyce Country 
by Robert Gunning, and figured by Newman, as well, I believe, as 
the form found by Mr. A. Smith, near Belfast, are to be referred to a 
form laciniato-cristatum, being a combination of laciniatum and 
cristatum," 

Athyrium Filix-foemina. 

Dr. Kinahan exhibited a beautiful form of Athyrium Filix-foemina, 
Newman, obtained in June, 1854, near Castlekelly, County Dublin. 
In it the segments of the pinnae were pinnatifid ; the indentations 
entire at their edges, and bearing the sori in the angle; the spore- 
cases projecting beyond the edge of the frond, which, added to 
the bulging forwards of the substance of the pinnule, gave the plant 



214 

much the appearance of a Davallia, or rather of a Loxsoma, though, 
of course, differing in the shape and position of the indusiura from 
either of these genera. In habit, this plant resembled Athyrium cicu- 
tarium, especially in the remarkable fact of its segments bearing but a 
single vein and sorus, thus corroborating the illustrious Robert 
Brown's opinion, who rejects this as a distinctive character, in oppo- 
sition to Smith and Bernhardi, by whom the genus Darea or Caeno- 
pteris has, owing to this character, been separated from Athyrium. 
This plant is also a beautiful example of the variety laciniatum, Kin. : 
the plant was growing in a shady nook along with a plant of the ordi- 
nary form. It is sparingly fruitful. 

Election of Members. 

The Chairman then announced that the ballot should take place. 
There were the names of some distinguished men, that had been 
approved of by the Council, to be nominated Honorary Members. 
He should mention that it was a rule of the Society that " No person 
residing in Dublin, or within ten miles of it, can be elected as 
an Honorary Member of the Society." 

The Chairman then announced that the following gentlemen had 
been unanimously elected Honorary Members: — Colonel Sabine, 
F.R.S., and President of the British Association ; Thomas Bell, Esq., 
F.R.S., President of the Linnean Society ; Sir William Jackson 
Hooker*, K.H., &c.. Director of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew ; 
Edward Newman, Esq., President of the Entomological Society ; 
J. O. Westwood, Esq., Ex- President of the Entomological Society ; 
Joshua Alder, Esq. ; and — Martin, Esq., Dublin, Ordinary Member. 

The Session was then adjourned to November. 



The Phytological Club, 
(In connexion with the Pharmaceutical Society). 

May 10, 1854.— Mr. Greenish in the chair. 

The candidates proposed at the last meeting were unanimously 
elected Members of the Club ; and a further accession of Members 
from different parts of the country was announced. 

Mr. Greaves announced the receipt of specimens of the rare Draba 
aizoides from Mr. Gissing, of Worcester. 



215 

Mr. Cort exhibited specimens of Hymeuophyllum Tunbridgense, 
and some specimens of pennywort, or Cotyledon. The plant, how- 
ever, not being fully in flower, its further consideration was adjourned 
to the next meeting. 

The Secretary read a communication from Mr. Gissing, of the pro- 
ceedings of the Worcester Branch of the Phytological Club. 

The Rev, J. H. Thomson, Honorary Member of this Branch, had 
discovered another undoubtedly wild habitat for Galanthus nivalis at 
Breedon, in Worcestershire, as well as a genuine habitat for the 
Daphne Mezereum. The early season, although warm, had been very 
dry, and had produced very few spring flowers. The hawthorn has 
been in blossom so early as the 14th of April. 

Edwin Lees, Esq., F.L.S., Honorary Member of the Club, had 
delivered a lecture on ' The Geography of Plants,' to the Members of 
the Worcester Branch, at which there was a large attendance. (See 
Phytol. V. 139) 

The Meeting was then adjourned to Wednesday, June 14. 



The Phytologist Club. 

One Hundred and Fifty -eighth Sitting. — Saturday, June 24, 
1854. — Mr. Newman, President, in the chair. 

The President read the following communications : — 

Carex Davalliana, Sm., near Bath. 

" In reply to several communications recently received respecting 
C. Davalliana near Bath, I can only state that my late friend, Mr. 
Edward Foster, informed me, shortly before his death, that the plant 
had long since been lost by drainage, when the Lansdown property 
came into the possession of the late William Beckford, Esq , of Font- 
hill. I visited the locality in the summer of 1852, and found all 
traces of it destroyed." — T. B. Flower ; Seend, near Melksham, 
May, 1854. 

Draha muralis, Linn., near Bristol. 
" I have recently seen this plant growing at Henbury, near Bristol, 
where it has been observed for many years past by Miss Powell, who 
kindly conducted me to the spot ; not having been recorded before, 
induces rae to note the circumstance," — Id. 



216 



Car ex dioica, Linn., near Bath. 

" This plant was shown me by Mr. Walker, of Bath, a few years 
previous to his death, as being found by him within four miles 
of that city, and recorded on his authority in Babington's ' Flora 
Bathoniensis ;' not being aware of its having been found since in the 
County by any other botanist, induces me to record this fact, from 
observing in the ' Cybele ' a doubt expressed as to its occurrence in 
the Peninsular. And I may here remark that Mr. Walker's au- 
authority could be relied on, having cultivated the rarer British plants 
in his garden, at Bath, for many years." — Id. 

Herbarium of Rhenish Mentha. 

Dr. Philip Wirtgen, of Coblenz, is about to publish a Herbarium 
of the Menthae of the Rhine, to include all the species, varieties, 
forms and hybrids hitherto collected in the neighbourhood of that 
river. The specimens, correctly named and accompanied by various 
critical notes, will be fastened on white paper, and form a thick folio 
volume. Each set is oflfered for 16s., and any person desirous 
of becoming a subscriber is requested to signify his intention to Dr. 
Berthold Seemann, Kew, near London. 

Viola lactea and Viola Jlavicornis (r^) 

" The following may be added to the list of unrecorded localities 
for the Viola lactea ; Mayal's Green, Gower, Glamorganshire, (from 
which place I enclose a specimen). I have carefully noted this plant, 
and also the V. flavicornis (V. canina var. minor, of Hooker), and 
while I cannot but come to the conclusion that the first (V. lactea) is 
a distinct species, I feel convinced, so far as mv present observation 
extends, that the so-called V. flavicornis is the simplest form of 
a variety of V. canina, namely, a form which is respectively trans- 
mutable by corresponding changes of soil and circumstance : and 
which may be met with in the neighbourhood of the supposed lo- 
calities of the V. flavicornis in every intermediate stage of develop- 
ment." — Caroline Catherine Lucas ; Moj/als, May 20, 1854. 



PLATE IV 




217 



The Botany of the Chesil Bank, Portland. 
By W. B. Barrett, Esq. 

The Chesil Banlc, which connects the Peninsula of Portland, in the 
county of Dorset, with the mainland, has long been considered as one 
of the most extraordinary ridges or shelves of pebbles in Europe, and 
is perhaps the longest, except that of Memel, in East Prussia. It ex- 
tends from Abbotsbury to Portland, a distance often miles and three- 
quarters, and its direction is S.E. and N.W. The bank commences 
at Abbotsbury, and in about half a mile meets the Fleet Water, a nar- 
row arm of the sea, varying from a quarter to half a mile in width, 
and running between the Chesil Bank and the mainland, until it 
communicates with the sea just below the Portland Feny Bridge. 
The average width of the bank at low water is 170 yards at Abbots- 
bury, and 200 yards at Portland. The pebbles, which are generally 
known by the name of Portland pebbles, consist chiefly of flints from 
the chalk. They are so loose that horses sink almost knee-deep at 
every step, and walking on them soon becomes sufficiently laborious 
to require a considerable degree of enthusiasm for the careful exami- 
nation of the products of this pebbly bank. 

Much interest has of late been created respecting the formation 
and nature of the Chesil Bank, in consequence of a very excellent 
paper by John Coode, Esq., the resident engineer of the Portland 
Breakwater, which was read at a meeting of the Society of Civil En- 
gineers a short time since. It may possibly not prove uninteresting to 
give some account of the principal plants which are found on this beach. 

We propose to start from the south-eastern part of the beach, that 
part which adjoins the Peninsula, or, as it is more commonly called, 
the Island of Portland ; and we shall beg the reader to accompany us, 
on a fine morning in the middle of August, along the beach to its junc- 
tion with the mainland at Abbotsbury, a somewhat fatiguing ramble, 
it is true, but one which will be well repaid by the many objects of 
botanical interest that will come under our notice. We shall confine 
ourselves almost entirely to the eastern side of the bank, which for 
some distance skirts the Fleet Water, it being by far the firmest and 
easiest for walking, in consequence of the pebbles being somewhat 
bound together by the marine plants growing in patches along the 
water-side, and by the Zostera thrown ashore by the sea ; whilst the 
western side, being fully exposed to the heavy breakers which roll in 
from the Atlantic, is quite bare of vegetation, and very loose. Close 
VOL. V. 2 F 



218 

to Portland one of the first plants we find is by no means a common 
one: it is the bird's-foot trefoil {TrifoHum ornithopodioides), which 
occurs rather sparingly in dry, sandy spots. The rose-pink blossoms 
of the sea-bindweed (Convolvulus Soldanella) and the thrift or sea-pink 
{Armeria maritima) are conspicuous amongst the moss which covers 
much of the ground near the road ; and here, also, we may notice the 
stately sea-holly [Eryngium maritimum), which grows very luxuri- 
antly. The Danish scurvy- grass (Cochlearia Danica) skirts the road 
nearly all the way to the Bridge. The four-leaved all-seed [Polycar- 
pon ietrapliyllum), first found by Mr. Hudson, and afterwards by 
Mr. Lightfoot, in Portland, was also discovered here by Mr. A. B. 
liambert. This, however, is only one of several plants, formerly found 
on this beach, which are now seldom, if ever, to be met with. We 
must not, however, forget to notice the rare Festuca uniglumis, almost 
peculiar to the sandy shores of the South of England, which may be 
seen here by the roadsides, together with the hemlock stork's-bill 
{Erodium cicutarium), the blossoms of which are often almost white; 
and the buck's-horn plantain {Planlago Coronopus), which, with the 
little thyme-leaved sandwort {Arenaria serpyllifolia) are very com- 
mon. 

A narrow tract of sand and shingle stretches out on our right, ex- 
tending someway East of the Ferry Bridge ; and now our attention is 
attracted by the luxuriant profusion of the sea-spurge (Euphorbia 
Paralias). The Portland spurge (Euphorbia Porilandica) also 
occurs, but more sparingly, although in Portland it is very com- 
mon. The handsome blossoms of the yellow-horned poppy [Glau- 
cium luteum) render the sea-shore gay though the summer months. 
Dr. Maton, in his interesting ' Observations on the Western Counties 
of England,' published in the year 1797, vol. i. p. 54, writes, "Just 
after crossing the Ferry, Asparagus officinalis appears, but very 
sparingly, and so diminutive that it may easily escape observation.'* 
We have in vain searched for this plant, and we much doubt whether 
it is now to be found in this locality. The sea-kale (Crambe mari- 
tima) formerly grew abundantly on the Chesil Bank, as appears by 
Hutchin's * History and Antiquities of the County of Dorset,' 2nd 
edit, vol, ii. p. 364; but he states that in his time it was nearly all 
destroyed, and we novr find no traces whatever of it. 

Crossing a broad belt of wet sand and mud on our left, we meet 
with the sea Schoberia (Schoberia maritima)^ and on the beach the 
more rare species, the shrubby Schoberia (S.fruticosa). A sea-shore 
umbel-bearer, the sea-samphire (Crithmum maritimum)^ peeps up 



219 

between the pebbles; whilst the corn sow-thistle {Sonchus arvensis) 
forms a golden fringe along the water's edge, interspersed here and there 
with the sea-rocket [Cakile mariiima) and the prickly saltwort [Salsola 
Kali), both of which are plentiful. The sea-rocket is a hardy plant, 
and is sometimes seen in full bloom on this coast in the beginning of 
January, and is then certainly one of the most beautiful of our wild 
flowers. The sea-feverfew {Pyrethriim maritimum) and the common 
knot-grass [Polygonum aviculare) are amongst the plants growing 
near the water's edge ; whilst higher up the bank, and almost to its 
summit, there is a profusion of the sea-campion {Silene maritima) 
and Glaucium luteum. That very rave plant, Glaucium phceniceunj, 
said to have been formerly found in Portland, is now no doubt 
extinct. 

The chief attractionj however, of this part of the. beach is the rare 
and beautiful sea-side everlasting pea [Latki/rus marilimus). It doe?; 
not grow close down to the water, but prefers the loose pebbles of the 
higher parts of the bank, where it may be seen in large patches along 
the beach almost from the bridge to the village of Fleet ; shortly after 
which it disappears for several miles, but again becomes abundant 
near Abbotsbury, This is the sea-pea of which Gerarde gives an 
amusing account in his ' Herbal.' He says : — " I finde mention in 
Stowe's Chronicle, in anno 1555, of a certain Pulse or Pease, as they 
terra it, wherewith the poors people at that time, there being a great 
dearth, were miraculously helped : he thus mentions it ; in the 
moneth of August (saith he) in Suffolke, at a place by the sea-side all 
of hard stone and pibble, called in those parts a shelfe, lying 
betweene the townes of Oxford and Aldborough, where neither grew 
grasse, nor any earth was ever seene : it chanced in this bairen place 
suddenly to spring up without any tillage or sowing, groai aboundance 
of PeasoR, whereof the poore gathered (as men judged) above an hun- 
dred quarters, yet remained some ripe and some blossoming as many 
as ever there were before : to the which place rode the Bishop of 
Norfolk, and the Lord Willoughby with otliers in great number, who 
found nothing but hard rockie stone the space of three yards under 
the roots of these Peason : which roots were great and lorig and very 
sweet." He also adds, "My Worshipful! friend Dr. Argent hath 
told me, that many yeares ago he was in this place, and caused his 
man to pull away the beach with his hands, and follow the roots so 
long until! hee got some eqnall in length unto his height, yet could 
come to no ends of them." 

The sea-radish (Raphanus mariilmus) has been found sparingly on 



220 

^his part of the beach. Among the sand and firmer pebhles we shall 
not fail to notice the sea-beet {Beta maritima\ the origin of the 
sugar-yielding beet, which is very frequent. Geranium purpureum 
sheds its petals plentifully over the loose stones amongst which it 
grows, forming a striking contrast with Glaucium luteum and Silene 
maritima. A few feet from the shore, on our right, are vast beds of 
the broad-leaved grasswrack {Zosiera marina)^ which extend to Ab- 
botsbury. Just opposite the Coast Guard Station at Fleet we find a 
little plant not unfieqtiently met with in sandy places in some parts, 
but which is rare on this coast : it is the knotted pearlwort [Sagina 
nodosa). It occurs but sparingly, and may be easily overlooked. 
Dr. Pulteney, in his ' Catalogue of the more rare Plants of Dorset- 
shire,' p. 88, states that he had been informed that the marsh-mallow 
{AllhoBa officinalis) grew " about Portland, and by the Fleets of the 
Chesil Bank.' Dr. Maton, in his * Observations on the Western 
Counties of England,* writes, " Lavatera arborea (tree mallow) will 
attract the notice of the botanist among the neighbouring eminences 
at Portland/* Ray, also, records this plant in Bishop Gibson's edi- 
tion of * Camden' as a native of Portland and of Chesil Bank ; and 
Dr. Pulteney adds that in his time it continued to be found there, 
and had been from thence introduced into the gardens of the villages 
of the island and the rjeighbourhood. Neither of these plants, how- 
ever, have we been able to find ; and we much question whether they 
have not now disappeared from this neighbourhood. 

Between Fleet and Langton, in sandy or muddy places overflowed 
at high water, we may notice most of the salt-marsh plants : there is 
the sea-starwort {Aster Tripolium), now in full bloom ; and close by 
is the jointed glasswort {Salicornia kerbacea), and here and there a 
sprinkling of the sea-milkwort [Glaiix mariiima)^ the rose-coloured 
flowers of which have now almost disappeared. The sea arrow-grass 
Triglochin maritimum) grows in company with the sea-plantain 
{Plantago maritima), or with the sea sandwort-spnrrey {Spergularia 
marina)y where the soil is xery wet. Further from the water's edge, 
and in a drier sandy soil, the biting stonecrop {Sedum acre) abounds; 
there, too, we find the kidney vetch {Anthyllis vulneraria) and seve- 
ral composite plants, snch as half-starved specimens of the autumnal 
hawkbit {Apargia autumiialis) and the hairy Thrincia {Thritieia 
hirta), and where the clay appears the colt's-foot {Tussilago Far- 
fara) is found. The prickly twig-rush {Cladium Mariscus) has also 
been found here. 

The most striking feature, however, of the Botany of this part of 



221 

the beach is the abundance of Schoberia fruticosa. It grows to a 
considerable size, and many of the stems exceed three inches in cir- 
cumference. This plant, with the various species of sea-purslanes, 
constitute by far the greater part of the vegetation for several miles. 
Of the sea-purslanes the shrubby orache {Airiplex portnlacoides) is 
the most abundant ; the spreading halbert-shaped orache {A. patula) 
and the spreading narrow-leaved orache {A. angvsHfoUa) are both 
common ; the grass-leaved sea-orache {A. littoralis) occurs much less 
frequently. Triticum junceum is not uncommon, nor are several 
other plants that we should scarcely have expected to find on such a 
beach as this, the seeds of which, however, appear to have found their 
way from the land on the opposite side of the Fleet. Such are the 
bramble, and the docks which crown the higher ridges of the beach, 
and here and there a dwarf willow, sheltering beneath its branches a 
stunted plant or two of the hextHock {Conium maculaium) and the 
rough chei-vil {Ch^rophyllum temulentum). The sea-pea, which we 
had not observed for the last mile or two, now grows more luxuri- 
antly than ever, covering the side of the beach a great part of the way 
to Abbotsbury. Atriplex littoralis, also, occurs more frequently. 
We have now reached the Swannery, and are opposite Abbotsbury ; 
the Fleet suddenly contracts, and we soon reach its narrowest part ; 
and at length it terminates in a broad morass or salt-marsh, where we 
recognise a mixture of the meadow with the sea-shore plants, such as 
the comfrey, the reeds and sedges, Plantago maritiraa occurs so 
plentifully that it forms the principal herbage of one of the adjoining 
fields. 

In conclusion, it may be remarked that we have found no traces on 
the Chesil Bank of Vicia laevigata, discovered by Mr. Hudson on the 
beach at Lodmoor, near Weymouth, and said to have been found 
among the shingles on the Chesil Bank, and in Portland by Sir I. 
Cullum ; nor have repeated searches on the beach at Lodmoor of late 
years been more successful. These were the only stations recorded 
for this species in the whole world ; and there seems now little doubt 
of its being extinct. 

W. B. Barrett. 

Weynoutb, October, 1856. 



222 



Remarks on the New Method of Arranging Ferns. 
By Edward Newman. 

Part I. — History of the New Method. 

Systems in Natural History are the results of methodizing obser- 
vations. The decadence of systems arises either from our having 
assigned too great importance to the facts observed, or from our 
observations having been imperfect. The latter alternative is self- 
evident; the former may be made more clear by the following illus- 
tration: — A naturalist finds himself possessed of a multitude of 
shells ; he makes a thousand observations on their wonderfully and 
beautifully varied forms; he classifies them; form of shell is the 
basis of his classification. Another naturalist goes to the sea-coast; 
he finds the animals that inhabit the shells ; and he finds other ani- 
mals very much like the inhabitants of the shells, but without shells; 
he makes a thousand observations on the forms of the animals ; he 
then constructs a classification of the animals independently of their 
shells. Learned men come forward and say to this second observer, 
" Thou art right : rem acu tetigisii.^'' But what security have we for 
this ? May not there arise a more profound observer than either of 
these ? May not some anatomist examine the intimate structure of 
the animals, the circulation of their blood, their mode of respiration 
and generation : and, founding a system on these, may he not 
supersede both the previous systems ? Linneus, with that wisdom for 
which all his writings are so remarl^able, seized on those organs in 
plants which are developed for the most important of physiological 
functions; but he laid too great stress on number; and on this 
account the most important character of all was superseded hy Jus- 
sieu's appeal to intimate structure and mode of growth. Linneus is 
deposed and Jussieu enthroned, because Linneus made his system 
arithmetical, not because the mode of growth was of more importance 
than the mode of generation. But it must never be overlooked that 
this arithmetical mode is much the easiest both to teach and to learn ; 
and teachers will long be found who are not only unwilling, but un- 
able, to grapple with intimate structure and physiological facts ; and 
these as a matter of course, will pillow their heads on a system where 
the ability to count twenty is the great desideratum ; and this they 
will pretend to do as disciples of Linneus. They load with 
their praises both Linneus and his method, not because of the 
profound wisdom of that method, but because the application of the 



223 

method comes within the range of their capacities. Captivated by 
the readiness with which the Linnean method of counting the organs 
of reproduction could be applied to the phaenogams, it was not illo- 
gical to conclude that the same organs would afford equal assistance 
among the cryptogams : ex uno disce omnes was the motto ; but the 
authors who so unhesitatingly adopted it seemed perfectly unaware of 
the existence of a stumbling-block at the very threshold of the 
inquiry. The sepals, petals, stamens and pistils, so patent, so readily 
countable in the pheenogaras, were either non-existent or undis- 
covered throughout the whole of the cryptogams ; and systeraatists, 
instead of appealing to these parts, appealed to what they supposed 
would answer the purpose equally well. Sepals and petals were not 
to be seen ; but botanists supposed their representatives to exist in 
the monotonously isomorphous gemmules which dot the back of a fern- 
leaf. These, as we all know, are associated in clusters ; and these 
clusters are sometimes round, and sometimes linear ; sometimes 
naked, sometimes covered by a portion of epidermis ; sometimes dis- 
cal, sometimes marginal. On these differences a system was invented 
by Sir James Edward Smith ; and with this system the students of 
ferns are generally satisfied at the present day. * A system which, 
leaving the mere surface, should enter more fully into the inner life of 
the plant is, therefore, day by day growing more requisite and a more 
indispensable desideratum, especially amongst those who perceived 
and were ready frankly to appreciate the brilliant light thrown on the 
study of phaenogams by the observation, that in some the increment in 
bulk was occasioned by the formation of new substance in the centre 
of the stem, and in others by the formation of new substance on the 
circumference of the stem, — a simple observation truly, but one which 
caused the almost immediate division of phaenogams into Endogens 
and Exogens. 

This radical difference, so to speak, in a physiological character, 
can scarcely be confined to the phaenogams; and, inquiry having 
been once diverted from its original channel into one so totally new 
and unlooked for, it was to be expected that an extended application 
of the principle would be attempted in other portions of the world of 
plants. This has been the case. 

* It is not worth while to go back to the pre-Linnean era of Botany, or we should 
find Sir J. E. Smith's system of ferns proposed by Ray. 



224 



Gaudichaud, 1826. 

The first proposition for such an extension of the theory was made, 
in the direction of the ferns, by Charles Gaudichaud, in Freycinet's 
* Voyage autour du Monde execute sur les Corvettes TOranie et la 
Physicienne,' published in 1826. That accomplished botanist ob- 
serres tliat the structure and mode of growth, both of rhizomes and 
stipes of ferns, are of so many and such distinct kinds that they com- 
pel us to divide those plants in the following manner: — 

" Class 1. Fougeres a liges rampantes ou grimpantes seu rameuses : 
elles se subdivisent en deux ordres. 

"Order 1. Tiges rampantes, chamues, tendres, aqueuses et cas- 
santes tant qu'elles sont vivantes, offrant des leur coupe 
transversale plusieurs lignes de vaisseaux fibreux mednl- 
liformes color6s." The examples given are the genera Hy- 
menophyllum, Trichomanes, Polypodium, Pleopeltis, Ade- 
nophorus. 

" Order 2. Tiges rampantes, grimpantes, ou volubiles, ligneuses 
ou fibreuses, s^ches, tenaces, meme a etat frais, souvent 
rameuses el n'ayant, qu'une ligne centrale de vaisseaux 
medulliformes color^s figurant tres bien un canal inedul- 
laire." The examples are Gleichenia, Lygodium, Mer- 
tensia. 
"Class 11. Fougeres a tiges simples, ascendantes: elles se subdi- 
visent aussi en deux ordres. 

"Order 1. Tiges compactes, dures, ordinairement droites, 
chargees exterieurement dMmpressions diverses." This 
order contains the true tree-ferns. 

*' Order 2. Tiges aggreg^s ou fasciculees : elles se composent 
de la base persistante des petioles (stipes) disposee et fixee 
autour d'une axe central qui est la tige r6elle. Le diame- 
tre de cet axe varie selon les especes." Asplenium Riita- 
muraria, Athyiiura Filix-femina, Dryopteris Filix-mas, 
Blechnum spicant and Notolepeum Ceterach are given as 
examples of this order. 

Pkesl, 1836. 

It must also be noticed in this place that Presl, whose linowledge 
of the subject has never been called in question, and whose very name 



225 

conveys an idea of all that is eminent in Pteridology, arrived at the 
conclusion that the involucre did not afford satisfactory characters ; 
and he consequently sought, and believed he had found, in the dif- 
ferent distribution of the veins, diagnostics which would make the 
subject simple and intelligible. After vindicating the importance of 
veins generally in all plants, and comparing them to the skeleton of 
vertebrate animals, he goes on to assert their paramount importance 
in ferns. "Haec vasa in organis foliaceis Filicacearum tanquam 
costae, venae et venjilae palam fiunt, et ex supra allatis causis maxi- 
mum in describendis dividendisque Filicibus possident argumentum. 
Filicaceffi compage venanim anatomica ab omnibus aliis vegetabilibus 
phanerogamis quam maxime differunt ; hac ex causa venae Filicacea- 
rum characterem essentialem et validissimum ex interna structura 
hai-um plantarum desumtura praebent." Presl, also, was well ac- 
quainted with tlie diversified structure of the rhizome, and with the 
previous observations of Link, Mohl, Gaudichaud and Treviranus, 
only one of whom I have cited, because the others have not so me- 
thodized their researches as to render them available for classification. 
Presl writes thus on the " caulis : " — " Caulis Filicacearum, induat 
nunc formam rhizomatis nunc caudicis, componitur e textu celluloso re- 
gulari ac magno parenchymatoso et prosenchymatoso vasain volucrante. 
Vasa hsec constituuntur e vasis scalariformibus et porosis paucis cellu- 
lis parenchymatosis intermixtis, et strato cellularam prosenchymatosa- 
rum pleruraque parietes crassas possidentium in provectiore setate ut 
plurimum fuscarum vel atrarum nitentium includuntur et a parenchy- 
mate adjacente cryptas rubra materie repletas continente dividuntur." 
The entire passage is not germane to the question of employing the 
mode of growth as a character, but is happy in showing that this 
great master fully appreciated the difference between a rhizome and 
a caudex. 

In taking leave of Presl it is necessary to state that his system is 
fi-amed on a combination of characters, the venation being the promi- 
nent feature. He makes five orders, under the names of Filicaceae, 
HymenophyllaceaSj Marattiaceae, Osmundaceae and Ophioglossace®. 

John Smith, 1854. 

Mr, John Smith, of the Royal Botanical Garden at Kew, has for 
many years entertained the idea that the mode of growth in ferns 
should be employed in their classification. Although his views did 
not for some time receive the stamp of authenticity given them subse» 
quently, by publication under his own name, yet it was well known 
VOL. V. 2 G 



226 

that he entertained them ; and they were incidentally mentioned in 
print both by Dr. Seemann and myself. Mr. Smith's matured views 
on the subject were first published in the sixth Part of Dr. Seemann's 
* Botany of the Voyage of H.M.S. Herald,' at p. 236, in the following 
words : — 

"In this enumeration I have followed the arrangement published 
by me in Hooker's 'Journal of Botany,' vol. iv. p. 46 et seq., except in 
such cases where later observations and altered views have rendered 
ehanges necessar)'. In my enumeration of the ferns cultivated in the 
Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew (' Botanical Magazine,' vol. Ixii. 1846) 
I arranged the species of Polypodium under four sections, charac- 
terized by the different modes in which the fronds are developed and 
attached to the axis of growth (vernation). The first of these sections 
contains Polypodium vulgare, which, with its allies, presents a mode 
of growth quite different from that of those species constituting the other 
three sections ; the three latter I now consider as presenting only dif- 
ferent modifications of another and more general mode of growth; 
and although all the species of the four sections agree in the techni- 
cal character of Polypodium, in having punctiform naked sori seated 
on free veins, yet the two different modes of growth found in the 
various species of Polypodium appear to me to be quite sufficient to 
warrant a separation of the .species under distinct genera. I there- 
fore restrict true Polypodium to those species having the same kind 
of vernation as Polypodium vulgare. The genus may then be 
viewed as representing a natural group of ferns having the following 
characters : — The fronds are developed from the sides of a special 
rhizome, which has its axis of growth always in advance of the nas- 
cent frond (excurrent) ; the fronds are produced from nodes more or 
less distant from each other, each node producing a single frond^ 
which, after having arrived at maturity, separates by a special articu- 
lation formed between the node and the base of the stipes ; after the 
frond has fallen, the node remains in the form of a round, concave 
cicatrix, generally more or less elevated ; the rhizome is solid, fleshy 
and brittle, varying from long and slender to more or less short and 
thick, and is always covered with scales, which, unless they are com- 
mon to the whole frond, seldom extend upwards beyond the node. 
This mode of development, which I have termed Eremobrya, is pe- 
culiar to a considerable number of Polypodieae, including genera with 
both free and anastomosing veins; also a portion of Davallia, of 
which D. Canariensis may be viewed as the type, the whole forming 
a truly natural group of ferns. The other mode of development 



227 

to which I have alluded, and to which I have given the name of Des- 
mobrya, is observable in a more numerous group of ferns, bearing the 
following characters : — The fronds form a terminal axis, either in a 
single alternate series, or in a fascicle forming a corona ; each succeed- 
ing frond is produced on the interior side of the bases of the preceding 
fronds, the bases being united and adherent; by the successive evo- 
lution of fronds a progressing accessory stem or cormus is formed, 
which varies in being decumbent or erect, short or more or less elon- 
gated, often assuming the aspect of trees, or, creeping on or under the 
surface of the ground, forming caespitose tufts : in those species pro- 
ducing their fronds in a single series the developing axis sometimes 
elongates before the evident evolution of the fronds, which are then 
more or less distant from each other, and by this mode of growth 
forming a creeping or scandent caudex, which often assumes the cha- 
racter of a sarmentum, and then appears to agree with the mode of 
growth I have called Eremobrya, but it is readily distinguished by 
the epidermis and vascular structure of the stipes being continuous 
and united, forming part of the developing axis, and not being articu- 
late as in Eremobrya. The various modifications of the structure ob- 
servable in the group Desmobrya often mark the limits of what I terra 
natural genera. Desmobrya therefore includes part of the Ctenopte- 
ris, and the whole of the Phegopteris groups of Polypodium ; also 
Gymnogramma, Goniopterisj Meniscium, and other genera of Poly- 
podieae ; the whole of Pteridieae, Asplenieae, and, with a few excep- 
tions, Acrostichiese, Aspidiese, Dicksonieae, and Cyatheae. 

" I have here stated the obvious characters observed on examining 
examples of the two modes of development j the differences become 
more evident on examining their internal structure. I cannot entet 
into details in this place, the present collection not affording sufficient 
materials, nor the work space, to enable me to state the changes in 
aflfinity that will become necessary in consequence of adopting this 
mode of arrangement. I will only further mention, that, although the 
two modes of growth are in general readily determined, yet in some 
cases, especially herbarium specimens, it is a more difficult task. 
The genus Woodsia is peculiar, on account of the stipes of the origi- 
nal species having an articulation at a distance above the axis of ver- 
nation ; nevertheless, as the vernation is terminal, and the bases of 
the stipes adherent, Woodsia must be referred to Desmobrya." 

It may be observed that the Flora of Panama is comparatively poor 
in ferns ; but those who are acquainted with Mr. Smith's catholic 



228 

knowledge of the subject will not assume that the paucity of species 
caused the author any difficulty, or interfered at all with his arrange- 
ment, which I give, exactly, below : — 

« Tribe I. Polypodiese. 

* Desmobrya. Fronds in vemation terminal, their bases adhe- 
rent, united with and constituting the axis of growth. 
Genera. Xiphopteris, Ctenopteris, Gymnogramma, 
Leptogramma, Phegopteris, Goniopteris, Menis- 
cium, Taeniopsis, Pteropsis, Dryomenis. 
** Eremobyra. Fronds in vernation lateral, solitary, and ulti- 
mately separating from the axis by a special articulation. 
Genera. Lopholepis, Lepicystis, Goniophlebium, Pleo- 
peltis, Campyloneurum, Phymatodes, Dicranoglos- 
sum. 
Tribe II. Acrostichiese. 

Genera. Elaphoglossum, Rhipidopteris, Polybotrya, 
Gymnopteris, Acrostichum, 
Tribe III. Pterideag. 

Genera. Notholaena, Cbeilanthes, Adiantum, Litobro- 
chia, Pteris, Blechnum, Lomaiia. 
Tribe IV. Asplenie®. 

Genera. Hemidictyon, Asplenium. 
Tribe V. Aspidiese. 

Genera^ Aspidium, Nephrodium, Lastrea, Polysti- 
chum, Cyclopeltis. 
Tribe VI. Dicksoniese. 
§ Lindseae. 

Genera. Lindssea, Dictyoxiphium, Dicksonia. 
§ Trichomaneae. 

Genera. Trichomanes, Hymenostachys, Hymenophyl- 
lum. 
Tribe VII. Cyalhe®. 

Genera, Hemitelia, Cyathea, Alsophila, Amphides- 
mium. 
Gleicheniacese. 

Genus. Mertensia. 
Schizceaceas. 

Genera. Lygodium, Schizsea, Anemia, Anemidictyon, 
Danaea." 



229 



JRe/lections on these Systems. 

Now, here is the remarkable case of three men, who have made the 
study and classification of ferriS the leading object of their lives, who 
have given these plants in a living state their most attentive consider-* 
ation, independently arriving at the conclusion thai the parts of fruc- 
tification did not afford characters whereby to divide ferns into pri- 
mary and secondary groups, and substituting characters derived 
either from the mode of growth or the distribution of the veins. This 
concord cannot^ surely, arise from any other cause than the fiailacy of 
theory which they agree to ignore ; still It is not a little remarkable 
that all tliree have relapsed into the beaten track, and in their defini- 
tions have mainly depended on the mode of fructification for their 
characters. Presl has no deviation from the ordinary mfetlsod, except 
that in his genera the veins are fully and admirably characterised ; 
Gaudichaud relapsed quite into the old formula, although his primary 
definitions are so strikingly attractive and so apparently inconirover-' 
tible; and Mr. Smith alone remains of the three as having given any 
extended application to a character which he has defined in go mas- 
terly a manner. But even Mr. Smith's extension of the theory is 
ijisufficient : while he acknowledges the importance of considering the 
mode of growth, he confines the application of that character to the 
genus Poly podium, or to those ferns which, to use his own ex- 
pression, " have puncliform naked son seated Oai free veins." I agree, 
then, rather with Gaudichaud in making the application of the cha- 
racter universal, than with Mr. Smiils, who appears to restrict its ap- 
plication to a group which has no existence in nature, and of which 
the very definition is sufficient to show that it is a me e artificial 
assemblage. I would also observe that I scarcely understand the 
rank which Mr. Smith would assign to his groups Gleicheniaces and 
Schizseaceee, which are typographically so arranged as to constitute 
integral portions of the Cyathese, a station for them which I am per- 
suaded is diametrically at variance with nature. But whether 
Mr. Smith intended this, or would constitute them primary groups 
equivalent to those seven which he has called tribes, is of iitUe mo- 
ment : both modes of disposing of them appear equally objectionabJ©. 



Having thus stated, and I trust in a fair and candid manner, the 
views and labours of others in this interesting field of inquiry, I will 



230 

proceed to explain my own, incorporating occasionally the valuable 
observations of the authors 1 have named ; for I believe it impossible 
to study, and appreciate, and accept as true the labours of others, 
without their becoming so engrafted on your own that it is difficult, 
if not impossible, to restore each idea to its original owner. So small is 
ray desire to be regarded a discoverer or innovator on this interesting 
question, that I would have adopted the method of either of the great 
botanists I have mentioned far rather than proposed another, had 
either of them united the two great desiderata— 1st, of making the 
application of the theory general ; 2ndly, of cairying out the same 
theory in detail. 

My own misgivings as to the value of the involucre in classifying 
ferns date from 1837, when I first attempted the study of the British 
ferns. These misgivings first found expression in print in this Jour* 
nal, in 1842, and were systematized with some precision in the Intro- 
duction to the third edition of the ' History of British Ferns,' in 1854. 
Up to that period I was in total ignorance of Gaudichaud's views, 
and was so far mistaken in Mr. Smith's as to suggest that my divisions 
Rhizophyllaceae and Cormophyllaceas were equivalent to his divisions 
Eremobrya and Desraobrya j whereas his subsequently published 
system, as already stated, shows that Mr. Smith's Eremobrya equals 
my genus Ctenopteris, and his Desmobrya my genera Gymnocarpium 
and Pseudathyrium united. I am quite ready to admit that my views 
have undergone considerable alteration and modification during the 
twenty years that I have been applying myself to the subject, and 
therefore that a critic might discover discrepancies in my printed 
opinions ; but I have no more idea of regretting or apologizing for 
these alterations and modifications of opinion than I have far the very 
obvious truth that I am twenty years older now than when 1 began. 



Part II.— The New Method. 

Plants, generally speaking, are composed of four obvious parts — 
rt)ots, stems, leaves and flowers. The roots, stems and leaves seem 
to subserve the offices of support, nutrition and respiration ; in a word, 
to be provided for the preservation of the individual : the flowers seem 
to subserve the office of generation alone, and therefore to be pro- 
vided exclusively for the preservation of the species. Now, these 
purposes are absolute requirements in all created beings, and are as 



231 

obviously the attributes of ferns, which have no flowers, as of pha;- 
nogams, which have. These two objects or purposes are always 
closely connected, often so elaborately interwoven as to be con- 
founded in our short-sighted investigations ; yet are in every instance 
found to be distinct and independent, if the inquiry be carefully and 
skilfully conducted. The frond or leaf, which in fenis normally bears 
the fruit on its back, does not, on this very account, seem, at first 
sight, so distinct an organ as the leaf of a phaenogam, for it appears 
to occupy a somewhat neutral ground between the preservation of the 
individual and the preservation of the species ; this difficulty, how- 
ever, is dispelled by the consideration that those ferns which have 
fronds entirely covered with fructificaEtion have other fronds also on 
which no fructification whatever appears. There can be no doubt 
that such unfruitful fronds perform the office of leaves ; and hence we 
may fairly assume that those leaves which contain the receptacle of 
the fruit also perform the same office. 

Having thus indicated the existence of two classes of functions, 
and the provision of appareils or systems of organs adapted to each, 
it would become necessary to weigh the claims of both, were it not 
obvious that the system of generation or preservation of the species 
must have the greater claim on our consideration ; but no sooner do 
we seek guidance from this than we find the physiological characters 
of generation, as far as we know them, exactly alike in all ferns ; and 
we feel disinclined to regard the slight differences in external form 
and condition of the clusters of capsules as of sufficient importance 
for the establishment of divisions. * We are therefore compelled to 

* In cryptogams we have a succession of individaais somewhat different to tliat 
recognised in phenogams; for each Individual appears to produce its kind without the 
intervention of a second individual : and the definition given to a species in the ani- 
mal world, and which is partially true also in phaenogams, is not true, as far as we 
have yet ascertained, in cryptogams, where each individual appears as the parent of a 
race. This, perhaps, accounts for the extreme difficulty in fixing the limits of a spe- 
cies in ferns, and is likely to lead to the unnecessary multiplication of species; for it 
is quite certain that a homogeneity of appearance will, and does, constantly occur on 
mountain ranges, another homogeneity of appearance in the individuals found in a 
wide range of bog at a lower elevation, and a third homogeneity in individuals occur- 
ring under the shade of a forest ; and in every instance this appearance may be due 
to the isolation, for many centuries, of an individual and its descendants, which con- 
tinue to reproduce their kind under peculiar conditions of soil, altitude, temperature, 
exposure, and so forth. This difficulty appears very often to have been unnecessarily 
magnified ; for, except as a question fur the consideration of speculative theorists, it 
really matters very little whether two individuals grown under diflTerent natural con- 
ditions are representatives of races, local varieties or closely allied species. 



232 

have recourse to a system of organs in which the diagnostic characters 
are more strongly pronounced. This is the case in that permanent 
portion of a fern known under the different names of caudes, cormus 
and rhisoma : the roots are almost uniformly fibrous and similar ; the 
form of frond is infinitely varied ; the caudex possesses an intermediate 
station as to variation, and its variations are such as imply different 
physiological conditions ; it is therefore the organ to which the bota- 
nist must look for permanent and obvious differences. It is impos- 
sible to give this organ a careful examination without being struck 
with the fact that it has two totally dissimilar modes of development 
in those plants which are ordinarily called dorsiferous or annulate 
ferns. And here I may as well state that I am not prepared to 
include in my inquiry the genera Schizaea, Osmunda, Aneimia, Botry- 
cbium or Ophioglossum ; these seem to constitute a parallel and 
equivalent series to the true femsj and a group which I altogether eli- 
minate from the present inquiry, it may possibly be observed that 
this is an incongruous serieSj its constituent members being iso- 
lated, and the whole group resembling a miscellaneous assemblage of 
individuals huddled together by chance ; but to me they possess a far 
higher interest than this, a far greater value in the universal system : 
they appear as the remains of an earlier creation, the extinct members 
of which have been photographed on stone, the impressions alone 
remaining to assofe us that such things were, Mertensia, Gleiche- 
nia and Danaea occupy very debateable ground; and without a far 
more intimate knowledge of them than I have the means of acquiring 
their true position must remain a mere matter of speculation. 

The two modes of gi'owth are so well distinguished by Mr. Smith, 
in the passage already cited, that little remains to be added. For the 
sake of precision I will recite the chief diagnostics : — 

1st, I call by the name of Rhizophyllacese all those ferns which 
possess a succulent, creeping rhizome, the growing extremity of 
which never eventuates in a frond ; and, 

2nd, Cormophyiiaceae, all those which possess an erect or prostrate 
caudex, the growing extremity of which always eventuates in fronds. 

Order RHIZOPHYLLACESE. 

In the Rhizophyllaceae the rhizome is generally densely clothed 
with scales ; it produces fronds at every point of its surface, except 
the growing extremity ; these fronds appear at first on the surface of 
the rhizome, as minute excrescences, displacing a portion of the scaly 
covering ; they are always selitaryj always of very slow evolution, and 



233 

are always fully evolved before the fructification malies its appear- 
ance ; their stipes is almost invariably without scales ; no part of the 
stipes of a frond appears, under any circumstances, to become incor- 
porated with the rhizome and form a portion thereof, the rhizome 
itself remaining succulent until the period of decay, when it dies at 
one extremity while vigorously growing at the other ; these rhizomes 
are generally, but not always, exposed; they sometimes extend to a 
great distance beneath the ground ; their direction is invariably hori- 
zontal. In Europe we have representatives of three very decided 
families of these rhizophyls, and possibly, also, of a fourth ; but of the 
debateable position of certain ferns between the two main divisions 
much remains to be said hereafter, when the microscope shall have 
determined with accuracy the intimate structure of the rhizome. The 
families which call for an especial notice are, Rhizophylleas, Daval- 
lieae and Hymenophylleae ; those which occupy the debateable 
ground are the Hypolepidese, which I shall place provisionally 
between Davallia and Hymenophyllum. 

Family Rhizophylle^. 

In which the rhizome seems divided irregularly by nodes. At each 
node originates a solitary frond, " which, after having arrived at ma- 
turity, separates by a special articulation formed between the node 
and the base of the stipes ; after the frond has fallen, the node remains 
in the form of a round concave cicatrix, generally more or less ele- 
vated." * The capsules are seated on the back of the frond. It will 
be sufficient to distinguish three genera. 

^ Genus Rhizophyllum. 

In which the veins anastomose, forming a kind of net-work. The 
examples are Rhizophyllum aureum (Polypodium aureum of Linneus, 
Pleopeltis aurea of Presl), R. Phymatodes (P. Phymatodes of Linneus^ 
Phymatodes vulgaris of Presl). The whole of the genera Pleopeltis 
of Humboldt and Bonpland, Drynaria of Bory de St. Vincent, and Phy- 
matodes of Presl, appear to be referrible to this genus. The number 
of described species is very large, and they constitute the greatest 
ornaments of our hothouses. The frond is generally pinnatifid or 
entire, and even in this respect there is a striking uniformity through" 
out this vast natural association of species. 

* Smith ut supra. 
VOL. V. • 2 H 



234 



Genus Ctenopteris,* 

In which the veins are simply branched, and the branches free at 
the extremity ; they never anastomose or form a net-work. Example, 
Ctenopteris vulgaris of Newman (Polypodium vulgare of Linaeus). 
The gi'oup is thus characterised by Presl :— " Son aut omnes aut sal- 
tern superiores in apice globuloso venae vennlgeve." In the few spe- 
cies with which I am more particularly acquainted the cluster of 
capsules is seated on the subglobose extremity of the anterior branch 
of a free, branched vein -, this, however, must not be considered cha- 
racteristic of the genus. 

Genus Mavginaria. 

A most interesting genus, in which the venation differs from 
that of Ctenopteris in a striking manner ; one branch of each system 
of veins is free and capitulate, tlie capitulus bearing the cluster of 
capsules ; and the other branches above and below this free branch 
spread right and left, and then, returning, meet beyond the cluster, 
forming a circle around it. I believe there are a great number of 
closely allied species ; the fronds of all are simple or pinnatifid. 

Family DAVALLiEiE. 

In M'hich the rhizome has no obvious division into nodes, and the 
clusters of capsules are not exposed as in the Rhizophylleie, but hidden 
in a marginal or discal cup ; the veins are more or less branched, but 
always free at the extremity. The fronds fall off annually, dehiscing 
at an articulation close to the base of the stipes ; the cicatrix thus left 
is usually covered by the dease scales, and entirely hidden fronrsight. 

Genus Pachypleuria, &c. 

There are three plants known to botanists under the generic names 
Pachypleuria, Huraata and Oolposoria, which appear curiously inter- 
mediate between Ctenopteris and Davallia. The rhizome is exposed, 
rather slender, scandent, and densely scaly ; the fronds simple or pin- 
natifid ; the veins branched, the extremities bearing the clusters of 

* The generic name Ctenopteris appears to have bt'en differently eiaployed by 
Mr. Sojith ; if prior to my using iJ, in the sense now intended, of course my name will 
fall. The name Ctenopteris, as now restricted, is, however, of long stauding', first, I 
think, employed by Blnme, afterwards by Presl. 



235 

capsules on the disk near the margin. The first of these is Pachypleu- 
ria Guimardiana (Nephrodium Guimardianura of Gaudichaud) ; Hu- 
mata pectinata of J. Smith and Davallia pectinata of Sir J. E. Smith 
are the same plant. The second is Humata piunatifida (Davallia 
pinnatifida of Swartz), and the third is Colposoria angiislata of Presl 
(Davallia angustata of Hooker and Greville). 

Genus Davallia.* 

In which the rhizome is extremely stout and the fronds very much 
divided. Example, Davallia canariensis of Smith, under which 
name it appears to me that several Atlantic species have been hitherto 
united ; they are universally cultivated, and familiar to all botanists. 

Family HvpoLEPiDE-fi. 

In which the rhizome extends with great rapidity, sometimes on the 
surface and sometimes under ground ; it is covered with a dense, erect 
down, differing much in appearance from the large, appressed scales 
of Davallia canariensis. The undeveloped frond emerges from the 
rhizome at distant intervals, and, except in its erect position, at right 
angles with the rhizome, it closely resembles that organ, its sub- 
stance and clothing being identical ; it is not articulated at the base, 
and the basal portion of the stipes of many years are often found ad- 
herent to the rhizome. The fronds have long stipes and a deltoid 
outline ; they are of very large size, and are remarkable for the ex- 
tremely rudimentary state when first evolved fi-om the rhizome ; the 
fructification is marginal, and partially covered by the reflexed margin 
of frond. I notice three genera, each containing many species. 

Genus Hypolepis. 

In which the marginal fructification is interrupted or punctiforra, 
and the velvety rhizome exposed. The example is a most familiar 

* The genus Davallia of Sir J. E. Smilh, Presl and Hooker appears to be coBa- 
posed of very heterogeneous species. Even in the fhictificatioa, the only character 
employed as distinctive, I find little or no similarity. Under these circumstances, 
there seems an obvious impropriety in assigning the names Davalliese and Davallia 
to the restricted and altered groups ; bat, on the other hand, it would appear most 
arbitrary to call the familiar Davallia canariensb by another name, 

Incidit in Scyllam qui vull vitare Charybdim. 

The genus now indicated has nothing more to do with the genus Davallia of Smith, 
&c., than that it contains one of the species. 



236 

plant, cominonly known as Hypolepis repens ; but 1 fear the name 
has been changed by recent writers, and probably another name will 
be required for the genus, as many cormophyls, of the genus' Chei- 
lanthes, have lately been mixed up with rhizophyllaceous species, 
under the name of Hypolepis. 

Genus Litolobium. 

In which the fructification is marginal and punctiform, and the 
rhizome subterranean. Example, Litolobium punctilobulum, a plant 
that has received an endless variety of names ; it is very abundant in 
the United States. 

Genus Eupteris. 

In which the marginal fructification is continuous. Example, 
Eupteris aquilina (the Pteris aquilina of Linneus), perhaps the most 
abundant and familiar fern in the whole world. I will not give an 
opinion whether the various forms now associated under the name of 
aquilina constitute a single species or many ; but I observe that an 
extended knowledge of ferns is invariably accompanied by a ten- 
dency to reduce the number of species. 

Family HYMENOPUYLLEiE. 

In which the rhizome is slender and wiry ; tlie frond semidiapha- 
nous, composed of compoundly divided, winged veins ; the stipes 
persistent and not articulated ; the fructification in marginal cups. 
A most natural family, including twenty genera, some of which 1 feel 
disposed to believe it desirable to drop : I believe all the species with 
with which 1 am acquainted may be incorporated in three genera. 

Genus Loxsoma. 

Of which the characters are given thus : — " Sori marginal, pointing 
forward, but partially sunk in the axil of a tooth or lobe from the apex 
of a vein. Involucres suburceolate, coriaceous, the outer apparently 
formed of a changed portion of the frond ; the mouth truncated, en- 
tire." Example, Loxsoma Cunninghami. 

Genus Trichomanes. 

In which the seeds are seated on a naked vein, the basal portion of 
which, to which the capsules are adherent, is surrounded by a cup, 
the apical portion projecting like a bristle. Example, Trichomanes 



237 

speciosum or radicans, a native of the Atlantic Islands and of 
Ireland. 

Genus Hj-raenophyllura. 

In which the receptacle does not project beyond the cup, a trivial 
and seemingly very unimportant character. Example, Hymenophyl- 
lum unilaterale of Willdenow, the smallest of British ferns, very com- 
mon on stones and trunks of trees near waterfalls in the North of 
Europe, some parts of Scotland, and the South-west of Ireland. 
About a hundred other names of species exist. 

Presl, in his beautifijl work intituled * Hymenophyllaceae,' pub- 
lished in Prague, in 1843, has given a complete and masterly digest 
of this previously obscure and little-known family, which he divides 
into nineteen genera, exclusive of Loxsoma. It is the first and only 
instance within my knowledge in which a natural gi'oup of ferns has 
been carefully worked out. The genera in addition to Trichomanes 
are, Feea, Hymenostachys, Lecanium, Cardiomanes, Ragatelus, Ce- 
phalomanes, Neurophyllum, Microgonium, Abrodyctyum, Didymo- 
glossum, Meringium, Heraiphlebiura, Leptocionium, Myrmecostylum, 
Ptychophyllum, Hyraenophyllum, Sphaerocionium and Hymenoglos- 
sum. 

Order CORMOPHYLLACEiE. 

In the Cormophyllacese the caudex is generally erect, but some- 
times prostrate; its growing extremity is always composed of unde- 
veloped fronds ; it is almost invariably without scales; the fructifica- 
cation is formed before the unfolding of the fronds ; their stipes is 
generally densely covered with chaffy scales; the stipes are spatulate 
at the base, sometimes wholly, always partially, clasping the caudex, 
with which they are continuous, and of which their bases eventually 
form a part. There are probably many families : three are very fami- 
liar to botanists. 

Family Coemophylle^e. 

The caudex vertical, developed above the surface of the ground, 
forming a true trunk, much resembling that of phaenogamous trees. 
All the species may be comprised in the 

Genus Cormophyllum, 

the characters of which will of course be those of the family. This 
genus contains the tree-ferns, of which one hundred and forty species 



238 

have been named and described. Of these, Cormopbjllum borridum 
(Polypodium borridum of Linnens, and Hemitelia horrida of Robert 
Brown), Cormophyllum arboreum (Polj^dium arboreum of Linneus, 
and Cjathea arborea of Smith), and Cormopbyllum capense (Polypo- 
dium capense of Linneus, and Alsophila capensis of John Smith), may 
serve as examples. The three genera Hemitelia, Cyathea and Also- 
phila have never been dislin^ished by any natural character ; but 
the genus Coimophyllum may possibly be divided hereafter; the ve- 
nation seems to offer diagnostics. 

Family DRyoPTERiDEiE. 

The caudex Vertical, but subglobose or tufted, never forming a 
trunk, but always exhibiting a crown of undeveloped fronds. This 
family contains all our most familiar ferns. Dryopteris Filix-mas, 
Polystichum aculeatum, Athyrium Filix-femina, Pseudathyrium al- 
pestre, Asplenium i^diantum-uigrum, and Notolepeum Ceterach are 
familiar examples. 

Family RhizocormEjB. 

In which the caudex creeps horizontally in the earth, extending 
itself in various directions; the fronds being solitary and distant; the 
growing point of the root-like caudex is, however, invariably com- 
posed of undeveloped fronds. Examples, Hemestheum Thelypteris, 
(the Polypodium Thelypteris of Linneus), Gymnocarpium Dryopteris 
(the Polypodium Dryopteris of Linneus). 

Family Pterideje. 

Crown less scaly ; stipes less scaly ; fructification marginals Ex- 
amples, Blechnum spicant, Pteris longifolia, Cheilanthes odora, Adi- 
antum Capillus- Veneris. 



That these families do not comprise all the annulate ferns I am well 
aware ; but they comprise all the more conspicuous groups ; and none 
of those which are omitted offer, as far as I am aware, any serious 
obstacle to the physiological arrangement. The order in which they 
are here described is not intended to show anything of the relation- 
ships which exist among them. These cannot readily be expressed 
on paper. Perhaps the following formula may give some idea of my 
views on this subject ; and it must be observed that some of the families 



239 
RHIZOPHYLS CORMOPHYLS 

Davallieae Dryopterideae 

Rhyzophjlleae Cormophylleas 

Hypolepideae — Rhizophylleae 
Hymenophylleae Pteridese 

appear to offer a very obvious dichotomous division, as Dryopterideae 
into the chaffy-stiped Filix-mas and congeners, and the glabrous-stiped 
Asplenium xidiantum-nigrum. Supposing a series of the cormophyls to 
commence with Filix-mas, it passes readily through the Polystichuras, 
Lophodiunis and Athyriuais to the true Aspleniums; leaving these 
by Amesium, we may enter into the next family by Adiantnm ; and, 
quitting it by those species of Pteris which have the habit of the 
Gymnocarpiuras, we pass to that genus, and then to Thelypteris, and 
from this to Oreopteris among the Dryopterideae. Within this circle 
is enclosed the typical family of tree-ferns. The rhyzopbyls appear 
to offer a series somewhat similar — Davallia, Loxsoma, Hymenophjl- 
lum, Trichomanes, Eupteris and Hypolepis, which, again, approaches 
Davallia. Within this second circle is enclosed the typical family of 
Rhizophylleae, now first isolated, but so well marked by Nature that 
no one can mistake them. 

Edward Newman. 



Note on Pseiidathyriumjlexile. By Edward Newman. 

PSEUDATHYRIUM FLEXILE, Neicm. 

Caudex massive, its position erect, its crown gibbons, scaly. 
Fronds produced in succession throughout the summer, at first some- 
what ascending, then elbowed at about one-eighth of their length and 
spreading horizontally, lax, flexile, the flexibility arising from the 
tenuity of the rachisj perfectly estipitate, linear-lanceolate. Pinna 
short, distant, deflexed, blunt, pinnate. Capsules in circular clusters, 
very crowded at the base of frond, gradually decreasing in abundance 



240 

towards the apex, where they are often entirely wanting, always dis- 
tant and scattered. Involucre very distinct at first, its insertion ob- 
lique, its disk almost flat, its tendency rather to concavity than 
convexity, its margin irregular but scarcely lacerated. 

Habitat. Glen Prosen, in Scotland. Found also in Lithuania, 
Siberia, Kanischatka. Extremely local. 

The reader is referred to * History of British Ferns,' pp. 204 and 
205, for a more detailed description. The additions and corrections 
above are — 1st, the elbowed character and spreading habit of the 
fronds ; 2nd, their successive and not simultaneous development j 
3rdly, the crowded fructification at the base, in which this species is 
quite isolated among European ferns ; and, 4thly, the distinct invo- 
lucre, which was at first entirely overlooked. 

Much has been said of the difficulty of distinguishing this species 
from Pseudathyrium alpestre ; but this difficulty is imaginary. In 
many instances botanists have obligingly sent me the supposed 
flexile, the supposed intermediates, and supposed alpestre, in order 
to convince me of the nullity of this species. In these instances 
flexile has never occurred among the contrasted forms, alpestre 
rarely. The fronds in nine cases out of ten have proved Athyriura 
Filix-femina, the seedling forms being supposed to be flexile, and the 
fronds of a few rather older plants, intermediates. In a few instances 
Cystopteris fragilis has been sent as flexile. In the discussions on 
this fern, as well as in those on Fcenisecii and uliginosum, the dis- 
sentient opinions arise from non-acquaintance with the form under 
discussion : it tends to no good pui-pose to discuss the similarities or 
differences of two objects if we have only knowledge of one. I be- 
lieve, in the case of uliginosum, that the disputants have no know- 
ledge whatever of the plant, first described by Doll and afterwards 
by myself. My friend Mr. George Maw, of Brosely, than whom a 
more sincere truth-seeker or a more diligent inquirer never lived, ap- 
pears to me quite to have mistaken the plant intended ; none of the 
specimens distributed as uliginosum by this liberal botanist possess 
the distinguishing character, " pinnules adnate or decurrent," which 
occur in each of the published descriptions, and emphatically sepa- 
rate this plant from Lophodium spinosum. 

Edward Newman. 



Edward Newman, Printer, 9, Devonsiiire Street, Bishopsgate Street, London. 





.\\\\i,^  •«»^'V: 




