Qass , )h^\0 
Book— 



3> 




GjGc? &ti-4 *C 



4^^. ^ -z£Z cP&^Z^ 



A 'l/c^ o re ti^, 



' s^x. / 









ft^-f. S^sCf 










/ ^%f 







^%« 




I 



_yK^: 



THE 



ANNALS OF KENDAL: 

BEING A 

fjistorital anfo gwmjtite Jurani 

OF 

KENDAL AND THE NEIGHBOURHOOD 

WTTH 

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES 

OF MANY EMINENT PERSONAGES CONNECTED WITH THE TOWN 

BY 

CORNELIUS NICHOLSON, F.G.S. 



" The thing that moved me to this study was the natural affection there is in all 
men to hear of the worthiness of their townsmen, which they should be delighted 
to understand." — Verstegan . 



... 



SECOND EDITION. 



LONDON : 

WHITAKER & CO. AVE MARIA LANE. 

KENDAL : 

T. WILSON ;. T. ATKINSON ; W. FISHER ; J. ROBINSON. 
1861. 






LONDON : 
PRINTED BY B. CLAY, SON, AND TAYLOR 
BREAD STREET H LL 



510R 



OE 



TO 

THOMAS HARRISON, ESQ. 

OF SINGLETON PARK, 

WHO 

IN OFFICIATING, WITH SINGULAR ABILITY, FOR THIRTY YEARS 

AS 

TOWN CLERK OF KENDAL, 

HAS THEREBY EARNED THE GRATITUDE OF THE COMMUNITY; 

AND WHO IN FRIENDSHIP WITH THE AUTHOR 

FOR AN EQUAL NUMBER OF YEARS 

HAS INSPIRED HIM WITH SENTIMENTS OF THE HIGHEST ESTEEM, 

CljtS ^Oflli 

IS ON BOTH ACCOUNTS MOST FITLY DEDICATED 

BY HIS SINCERE FRIEND, 

CORN 3 NICHOLSON. 



PEEP ACE 

TO THE SECOND EDITION. 



"A work without a preface (says Sir Francis Drake) 
would look like a house to which the architect had made 
no entrance." So that, if I now make a few prefatory ob- 
servations, and reprint, also, the preface to the first edition, I 
shall have two entrances to my house ; one, connected with 
the original building, raised thirty years ago, and another 
(the posticula), which is part of the new structure. It some- 
times happens (to carry on Drake's simile), when a house is 
partially pulled down, to be altered and enlarged, that the 
superadditions mar the unity of the order of architecture, 
and deform the general appearance. I can only hope that 
I have avoided this evil, and trust that the edifice will do 
no dishonour to the town, which abides in my affections, and 
demands from me every effort and consideration. 

Many of the chapters have been re-written ; many facts, 
previously overlooked, have now been incorporated ; and 
recent events have been recorded, down to the present date. 
I found, on reflection, several matters, as they appeared in 
the first edition, susceptible of amendment. I felt especially 
dissatisfied with the Memoir of John Gough, who was un- 
questionably one of the most extraordinary men that Kendal, 
or the North of England, has produced ; but my friend, Me, 



VI PKEFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 

Thomas Gough, lias removed this cause of dissatisfaction, 
and has brought me and my readers together under obligation 
by contributing the Biographical Memoir of his father, which 
will be found in this volume. I am further indebted to him 
for the classified lists of the productions in Natural History. 
It is doubly grateful to my feelings to acknowledge these 
contributions, because, though our pursuits have not always 
been kindred, Mr. Gough and I laboured long and agreeably 
together in fields of profitable study. 

I scarcely know how, adequately, to acknowledge the 
valuable assistance received, whilst these pages were passing 
through the press, from Mr. Alderman John Fisher, and 
my brother-in-law, Mr. John Hudson. The inscriptions on 
the Monuments in the Church ; the list of Tradesmen's 
Tokens ; and the table of Chronological Events, owe their 
general accuracy and completeness to the great care bestowed 
on them by these gentlemen ; to the former of whom I am 
also indebted for reference to several occurrences hitherto 
unrecorded. 

The Meteorological Tables, constructed from observations 
by Mr. Marshall, will be duly estimated by inquirers in 
this branch of study. It will be difficult to find another 
instance of recorded data, extending over fifty consecutive 
years, in this interesting yet infant Science. 

Other facts and particulars have been cheerfully supplied 
by kind friends, who will be content to be included in this 
general acknowledgment. 

An explanation may be required to justify the appearance 
of the Frontispiece. I should not obtrude on my readers 
" a counterfeit presentment" of myself, if I had not received 



PEEFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. Vll 

from a group of old friends, in Kendal, a complimentary 
requisition, urging that " a portrait of the Author would add 
to the interest with which the book would be received ; " and 
desiring, that they might present the portrait and engraving, 
for the purpose. I was variously associated with the gentle- 
men alluded to, for twenty years, or more, in the promotion 
of public works and public institutions, and that circumstance 
may be regarded as giving value to their proposal. Those 
who will summon to the mind, feelings, associated with the 
most active period of their lives, will not misinterpret such 
an incident. 

C. N. 

Wellfield, Muswell Hill, London, 
July, 1861. 



PREFACE 

TO THE FIKST EDITION. 



The law of custom, says Turner, exacts a preface. It is 
usually the author's apology for his composition. My apology 
has, however, been already made and published. I refer to 
the opinion which so generally prevailed, that a historical 
account of Kendal was a desideratum, and to the anxiety 
which has long been manifested for the appearance of such a 
work. It seems indeed astonishing, that no effort towards a 
history of Kendal has hitherto been made, and that, in the 
course of so many years, while the interest was acknowledged 
with which a topographical description of the town would be 
welcomed, no one could be found to bring forward the earlier 
and more estimable records of its history, before time had 
gathered round them the mantle of obscurity. The origin 
and infant state of Kendal are, and it may be feared, ever will 
be, involved in almost impenetrable darkness. There appears 
only just light enough to show that it possesses the highest 
claims to commemoration. The site of a station, founded and 
commanded by the Eomans " conquerors of the world ;" a 
town of Saxon institution ; the spiritual matron of so many 
churches, scattered throughout an extensive deanery, over the 
whole of which, at the introduction of Christianity, she singly 
diffused " the day-spring from on high ; " the seat and capital 
of a feudal barony of considerable power ; the birth-place of 
royalty ; the parent of one of those staple manufactures 



X PEEFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

which eventually contributed to exalt this nation to pre- 
eminence. All these, it will hardly be denied, are objects of 
high interest to the antiquary and the historian ; and their 
importance, as materials of real history, will be found to be 
fully evinced, although imperfectly elucidated, in the follow- 
ing pages. The facts and incidents, here noted, are, at least, 
based on genuine records ; and I prefer rather to leave them 
subject to the charge of incoherence, than attempt to fill up by 
conjectures, vacuities which have been occasioned by the 
lapse of time. 

There is one important feature of this work which I deeply 
regret should be so imperfectly delineated. I mean that of 
Kendal Castle. But it has been the singular calamity of 
that ancient edifice to be almost entirely neglected by all 
antiquaries and topographers. Speed makes a single, simple 
allusion to it. Camden contented himself with saying, " The 
Castle, over against the town, is ready to drop down with 
age ; " and neither of his learned Editors, who, in most 
instances, added materially to his descriptions, has, in 
this case, added a single observation. Grose has altogether 
overlooked it. Lysons did not extend his survey to West- 
morland, and has therefore treated the castle at Kendal in the 
same manner as the other castles in the county. And Dr. 
Whitaker, who, of all writers, was most eminently qualified 
to do justice to an illustration of it, came, unfortunately, too 
late for the search. So that we have no records of its history, 
except the few fragmentary documents which have been 
found in the mention of the families by whom it was occupied 
in the later period of its glory. 

Much, undoubtedly, has been lost of the history of Kendal. 
But I am proud to hope, that (however ill digested the matter 
may be) I have had access to nearly all that can be available 
in the present day. It would be very ungrateful not to 
confess that I have been favoured with many kind and 
valuable auxiliaries. I have enjoyed the cheering influence 
of a generous and general encouragement The first and 



PKEFACE TO THE FIEST EDITION. XI 

highest degree of obligation I owe to the Eev. John Hudson, 
A.M. the Vicar, whose zeal for the success of the work would 
admit no effort to be withheld calculated to promote it, and 
whose contributions towards the history of the Church, attach 
a real value to the chapter dedicated to that subject. The 
next degree of favour and assistance which I received, was 
from the late John Thomson, Esq:, who offered for my use his 
manuscripts relating to some of the antiquities of the town. 
To Mr. Thomas Gough I am obliged for the Catalogue of 
Plants ; and to many kind friends for much valuable infor- 
mation, and for the loan of books — favours which, from their 
number and diversity, I am thus constrained to embrace in a 
general acknowledgment. From a consideration of these 
services I have, throughout the volume, adopted the use of 
the plural pronoun. It seems unnecessary to say how much 
I am indebted to historical books, because, in all instances, to 
the best of my knowledge, where I have quoted from them, 
an acknowledgment is made, either by inverted commas in 
the context, or by references in the notes. 

It is improbable, if not impossible, that a work like the 
present, comprehending treatises on so many different sub- 
jects, should be interesting to all ; or should be altogether 
interesting even to any one reader. Such multiform collections 
must be perused with different feelings, tastes, and sentiments. 
But I hope that my readers will be candid enough to reflect, 
that those parts which may seem very unimportant to them, 
may, perhaps, be the only points of interest to others. 
Again, I would solicit some lenity, from the consideration 
that, however easy it may be for one person to discover faults 
or omissions in what relates to his own studies, it is not so 
easy for the ordinary faculties of one person to apprehend and 
illustrate, with accuracy, so many different subjects. This 
consideration, and the fact that I could only apply myself to 
the performance during those hours which are usually devoted 
to relaxation and rest, may, I hope, be accepted as an apology 
for the imperfections with which the work may be chargeable. 



Xll PEEFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

It was my original intention to devote one chapter to the 
manners and customs, obsolete and extant, of the inhabitants. 
But the quantity of matter on other topics, which, since the 
announcement of the work presented itself, and the limits of 
the book, which had been prematurely fixed, conspired to 
exclude all observations on that subject. I have been con- 
strained, also, from the same necessity, to abridge most of the 
Biographical Sketches, and other essays in the latter pages of 
the volume. 

C. X. 

KlRKBARROW, KENDAL, 

April, 1832. 






>; 





ttlUOJ! . 




THE 

ANNALS OF KENDAL. 



CHAPTEE I. 

GENERAL HISTORY. 

To convey a clear and connected outline of provincial 
history, from the earliest times, is a task nearly if not quite 
impossible. The reason of this must be apparent to every one 
who considers, that for so many centuries the whole land was 
overspread with the ravages of war, and that most of the 
relics of topography must have been buried in the general 
ruin. In a work like this, all that can be done is to collect 
from the elements of general history the scattered materials of 
topography ; and the reader must be content if, in searching 
through dark and distant ages, he can catch here and there a 
glimpse of the deeds of his ancestors, and the scenes which 
have occurred in or about the place of his nativity. The con- 
vulsions of a civilized state usually compose a most interesting 
part of its history ; but the revolutions incident to a barba- 
rous condition are of such a nature that it may be considered 
fortunate for Letters they are consigned to silence and oblivion. 
Neglecting, therefore, all tradition, and those fables which 
are commonly employed to supply the place of history, 
we shall first briefly consider the state of the inhabitants as 
it appeared to the Komans on the invasion of this country. 

The " aborigines," as Caesar calls the then inhabitants of 
Britain, were a tribe of the Gauls, who emigrated from the banks 
of the Eyder and the Elbe, in Germany, and settled in this 
island five centuries antecedent to the Christian era. The 

B 



fatatatj XSilB i' -I i - i r - j _- _^ g -- jfabiL 




£TO«n-S««Arf 



2 GENERAL HISTORY. 

probable conjecture, as Csesar intimates, is, that the interior 
parts of Britain, to the north and west, and consequently 
Westmorland, were peopled by the earliest inhabitants ; and 
the southern parts by those who crossed over from Belgium, 
in Gaul, for the purpose of invading this island, — all of 
whom had their names from the tribes they sprang from, 
Angles, Jutes, and Saxons. 1 A thorough admixture or amal- 
gamation of the Danish and Scandinavian race with the 
Angles and Saxons had taken effect in the north of England, 
so that Bishop Nicholson, alluding to this admixture, says, 
" Our borderers to this day speak a leash of languages — 
(British, Saxon, and Danish) in one ; and 'tis hard to de- 
termine which of those three nations has the greatest share 
in the motley breed." 2 It is indeed hard to say whether, in 
the Westmorland dialect, and in the names of natural objects 
about Kendal, more words belong to the Scandinavian dialects 
than to the Saxon tongue. 

The habitations of the ancient Britons were hovels, made 
of the trunks of trees, rooted in the earth, and interwoven 
with branches. In these they sheltered during the hours of 
repose, and by day departed into the fields, or into the forests, 
for the purpose of hunting. They were divided into many 
small nations, or tribes ; and their governments, although 
monarchical, were free. 3 Being indeed a military people 
whose sole property was their arms and their cattle, it was 
not possible for their princes or chieftains ever to establish 
a despotic authority over them. 

It may not be uninteresting to insert here the description 
of the Britons, in the northern part of the island, as given 
by Dion Cassius. " They never cultivate the land ; but live 
on prey, hunting, and the fruits of trees ; for they never 
touch fish, of which they have such prodigious plenty. They 
live in tents, naked, and without shoes. They fight in 
chariots, having small fleet horses. They have also infantry, 
who can run very swiftly, and while they stand are very firm. 

1 Hence the designation " Anglo-Saxon." 

2 Letter to Sir W. Dugdale, in Camden's "Britannia" (Gibson's first edit.). 
p. 81. 

3 Diodorus Siculus, lib. iv. 



ANCIENT BRITONS. 3 

Their arms are a shield and a short spear, on the lower part 
of which is a bell of brass, to terrify the enemy by its sound. 
They likewise wear daggers. They are accustomed to brave 
hunger, cold, and all kinds of toil ; for they will continue 
several days up to their chins in water, and bear hunger many 
days. In the woods they live on bark, and roots of trees. 
They prepare a certain kind of food for all occasions, — a piece 
of which, the size of a bean, prevents their feeling hunger or 
thirst." 

Such were the ancient Britons, when Caesar, in his thirst 
for universal empire, in the year 55 before the Christian era, 
turned his attention to these shores. After a spirited resist- 
ance on the part of the inhabitants, he landed, as it is sup- 
posed, near to Deal; and having obtained advantages, and 
obliged them to promise hostages for their future obedience, 
he was constrained by the necessity of his own affairs, and 
the approach of winter, to withdraw his forces into Gaul. 
The next summer he landed with a greater force ; and though 
he found a more regular resistance on the part of the Britons, 
he discomfited them in every action. He advanced into the 
country ; passed the Thames ; took, and burnt the capital of 
Cassivellaunus, one of the petty Princes ; and having obliged 
the inhabitants to make him new submissions, returned with 
his army into Gaul, and left the authority of the Eomans — a 
mere name and shadow — in the island. 

After this, the Britons, during almost a century, enjoyed 
their liberty unmolested. For it was not till the year 44 
after Christ, that the Eomans, in the reign of Claudius, began 
to think seriously of reducing this island. They sent over 
an army under the command of Aulus Plautius, who gained 
some victories, and made considerable progress in subduing 
the inhabitants. He was succeeded by Ostorius Scapula, by 
whom the southern part of the island was reduced to a 
province. The Emperor Claudius himself made a journey 
into Britain, and after a visit to Camelodunum (now Col- 
chester) where he received the submission of several British 
states, he returned to Borne with the title of " Brittanicus." 

Suetonius was the successor of Ostorius, in the reign of 
Nero, and in the 61st year after Christ. He first directed 

b2 



4 GENEEAL HISTOEY. 

his attention towards Mona* as is meant in Tacitus, the Isle 
of Anglesea : the chief seat of the Druids. But though he 
succeeded in cutting down the groves, and placing garrisons 
in the towns, he found that the Britons had taken advantage 
of his absence, and were all in arms under Boadicea, Queen 
of the Iceni. They reduced London to ashes ; put the 
Eomans, and all strangers there, without distinction, to the 
number of 70,000, to the sword ; and seemed determined to 
cut off all prospect of peace, or compromise with the enemy. 
The military discipline of the Eomans, however, at length 
prevailed, and in a great and decisive battle, fought on the 
confines of Epping Forest, they defeated the warrior Queen, 
who, rather than fall into the hands of an enraged victor, put 
an end to her life by poison. In this battle 80,000 of the 
Britons are said to have perished. 

After an interval, Cerealis received the command from 
Vespasian ; and by his bravery greatly extended the terror of 
the Eoman arms. Julius Frontinus succeeded Cerealis, both 
in authority and reputation ; but the general who finally 
established the dominion of the Eomans in this island was 
Julius Ageicola, who governed it under the title of Pro- 
praetor, in the reigns of Vespasian, Titus, and Domitian. 

This great commander formed a regular plan for subduing 
the island, and rendering the acquisition useful to the con- 
querors. He carried his victorious arms northwards ; and 
here we have the first mention of the part of the country 
connected with our present history. According to Ptolemy, 
the inhabitants of the country between the lofty ridge which 
now separates Yorkshire from Lancashire and the Bay of 
Morecambe, were called Setantii, or Segantii ; which district, 
on the second invasion of the Eomans, was included in the 
more extensive province of the " Brigantes" — extending, on 
the east side, from the Humber to the Tyne, and on the 
west, from the Mersey to the Eden, and comprehending the 
five counties of Yorkshire, Durham, Cumberland, Westmor- 
land, and Lancashire. This being the most powerful and 
populous nation in Britain, during the Eoman sway, is most 
distinguished and celebrated in all the best records of history. 

. : The Mona of " Ca?sar " is the Isle of Man. 



THE ROMANS, IN WESTMORLAND. 5 

Tacitus informs us, that Agricola " struck a panic into 
the state of the Brigantes, which was accounted the most 
numerous of the whole country, by attacking them with 
great force ; and after several, and some of them bloody 
battles, he reduced great part of Britain by victory, or 
involved it in war." When he had alarmed the native inhabi- 
tants by his severity, he offered inducements to peace by his 
clemency. By this conduct many of the states, and amongst 
the rest the Brigantes, which till then had stood out, gave 
hostages, and submitted to have a line of garrisons and castles 
drawn round them. This was the origin of our Boman 
stations. Cattle being, as we before said, the riches of the 
ancient Britons, it was their practice to keep their flocks upon 
the uncultivated grounds which skirted the borders of their 
respective kingdoms. These were called "cheangon," "cangii" 
or " cangani ;" which term cheangon signifies " retainers from 
their condition." 1 Baxter affirms that the Cangii were not a 
distinct nation, seated in one particular place, but such of the 
different nations as were employed in pasturage, in feeding 
the flocks and herds of their respective tribes. "This," he 
adds, " is the reason that vestiges of their name are to be found 
in so many different parts of Britain ; but chiefly in those 
parts which are most fit for pasturage." The inhabitants of 
this place, therefore, were the Setantian Cangii, forming a 
part of the kingdom of Setantii, who, possessed a portion of 
Lancashire and the southern part of Westmorland — pro- 
bably about the same which afterwards formed the Barony 
of Kendal. The northern part of this county was annexed 
to Cumberland, and formed the state of the Volant ii. The 
river now called the Kent was anciently written " Can" and 
continued so till after the time of Camden. 



ROMAN ROADS AND STATIONS. 

The Boman roads and chain of camps by which this country 
was held in subjection are traced on the following diagram. 
We are not able in this place to do more than give a general 

1 Mr. Whitaker's "History of Manchester." 



6 



GENEEAL HISTOEY. 



description of the routes, north, south, and east, from the 
station at Kendal. 




C T&Eokgt. del 



Pow.-r <T 



Going northwards or rather north-west, the road leaves the 
station at the ford across the Kent below the foot of Mill 
Lane, from thence it proceeds by Stane Bank Green and 
Boundary Bank to Cunswick Scar and Raderheath} thence to 
Dan Hill 2 and Eestane. About High Bestane the road 
bi-forked, and became two roads, one going by a Borrens 

1 Raderheath : ' jRaidra.' the road over the hill. 

2 Danes Hill, where the Danes may have had a camp, or fought a battle. 



ROMAN ROADS IN WESTMORLAND. 7 

which lies near the line of Bailway, across the Troutbeck, over 
a ford at Troutbeck Bridge, and to the head of Windermere, 
where the station " Dictis" stood. Here was placed a 
company of Servian soldiers — " Prefectus numeri Nerviorum 
Dictensium Dicti." From Dictis the road went np the caasa 
(causeway, in polite phraseology) by Ambleside, forded the 
Stockgill above the Salutation stables, at Hollicar Ford 
(Holy Cairn ford), mounted the hill by Hollicar Lane and 
Seathwaite ; again recrossed the Stockgill near High 
Groves, and winding out of the valley by Woundale into the 
head of the vale of Trouibeck, where it passed over "the 
Tongue " and up the steep of High Street and Froswic by a 
path which still bears its original name of "Scot-raik." The 
other road from Kendal starting at the junction aforesaid, 
near High Eestane, proceeds by another Borrens [good lights 
in a blind road are these names] to Eavenscarth, — originally 
Rafen-sccer — along the edge of Hill Bel (II Baal), and 
Froswic, to High Street. At the shoulder of High Street, the 
two roads from Kendal and Ambleside unite, and thence the 
road proceeds over the table-land of High Street (where we 
laid bare the Eoman pavement in two or three places, a 
foot beneath the turf that now covers it) ; along the ridge of 
Eiggendale (Eiggendun) and down by Martindale, skirting 
for some distance, the river Eamont, to "Brocavum" Brougham. 
Going northwards, from Kendal to Borough Bridge, traces 
of the road, actual and nominal, are nearly all lost. But there 
is an undoubted Eoman name in Whinfell, viz. "Borrens" 
which draws our attention in that direction. We incline to 
the opinion that the road went by the Spital, Laverock 
Bridge, Meal-bank, and Patton (Path-en, plural in Saxon 
u paths," or Padden, Teut. " to tread "), to Borrens aforesaid ; 
thence along what is marked as a bridle road in Hodgson's 
map of Westmorland, over Whinfell common, and the 
Hause, to Borough Bridge. From the station "Alaunse," at 
Borough Bridge, to Kirkby Thor, the road proceeded by 
Castle How, at Tebay, over Orton Fell, down by Wicker 
Street (where there are traces of a British town), past Crosby 
Eafenswath, by Borrens and Caster-rig in King's Meaburn, 
and across the Eden to the Station "Galacum" at Kirkby 



8 GENERAL HISTOEY. 

Thor. Galacum and Brocavum were united by a road 
which the present turnpike road mainly occupies for the 
whole distance. 

Southward, from the Kendal station, the road seems to have 
gone by Low Barrows Green, and Stainton, (Stane-ton) ; there 
it bifurcated, one branch proceeding by way of Kirkby 
Lonsdale to Lower Casterton, where it would join the straight 
road between Borough Bridge and Overborough ; the other 
branch proceeding from Hincaster by Borwic (Burgh- wic), 
where traces of docks were found, and Carnforth (Cairn-ford) to 
Longovicum at Lancaster. The name Warton, which is near 
the line of route, suggests the idea of a battle in that locality. 
At all events names are our best guides in the absence of 
actual remains of roads, and for these we have explored the 
country in vain between Kendal and Lancaster. Many 
persons may, within their own recollection, recall instances of 
a country road diverted, and after less than twenty years found 
the abandoned foundation past all recognition. Why, then, 
should we wonder at the general oblivion of Eoman roads 
after a lapse of fifteen hundred years? The wonder 
rather is that any traces of such works are still extant. 

We must next endeavour to describe the station itself, and 
its general arrangements : 

CONCANGIUM. 

This Eoman Station stands somewhat more than a mile 
south of the town. The situation of the camp is held to be 
decisive evidence of its having been designed by Agricola, 
"When the genius and experience of Agricola marked out 
the line of stations through the country of the western 
Brigantes, he planted them along the banks of considerable 
rivers which empty themselves into the Mare Vergivium, but 
in general above the points at which those streams cease to 
be navigable." 1 The place where Concangium stands -is called 
"Water Crook," from the remarkable bend, or bends, in the 
river at that spot. It is three miles, or so, above the highest 

1 History of Riehmondshire, voL ii. p. 212. 



THE STATION, COKCANGIUM. 9 

point at which the Kent could be navigable, even in the 
Eonian era, when the stream was probably greater than it 
now is ; for one can hardly imagine the Eoman galleys, like 
salmon, successfully surmounting the catadupce below Force 
Bridge. The lines of circumvallation are now but faintly 
marked, so that persons have gone over the ground without 
recognising them. This, however, will not occur to an anti- 
quary acquainted with Eoman castramentation. On the east 
side, the agger is well defined up to its original angles, and it 
still maintains a considerable elevation above the outlying 
ground, as well as the area within. The site of the jpretorian 
gateway, which is on this, the east side, is shown by a de- 
pression in the agger. The ramparts on the opposite side, 
(the decumana), are much obliterated. Eepeated overflowings 
of the river have washed away the fosse at the north-west 
angle, and the agriculturist appears to have assisted the river 
at the south-west angle, so that between those two agencies 
the ditch and rampart on the western side are dislocated, and 
nearly destroyed. The rampart seems to have been con- 
structed entirely of earth without any parapet of wall, for 
there are no traces of mural foundations, and there are few 
sandstones, such as were used by the Eomans, to be found 
in any of the farm buildings. This fosse would therefore 
become an easy prey to the swollen stream, and to the level- 
ling hand of the husbandman. The situation is peculiarly 
advantageous. If the whole valley of the Kent be sought, 
no other spot can be found where an encampment could 
derive such protection from the river. It washes the north 
side in a parallel line, the west side on a curve, and the north 
side also by a devious line. Such a tongue of land is not 
unusual at the confluence of two rivers, (and the Eoman 
architect, under Agricola, appears to have been directed to 
those situations) ; but, as far as we know, no other instance 
can be found of one current flowing in its natural course 
along three sides of a Eoman station. This probably accounts 
for the absence of those strong walls of defence such as were 
deemed necessary at " Alaunse," Borough Bridge, and many 
other stations. Another circumstance, again, enabled the 
Eoman commander here to dispense with extraordinary field- 



10 



GENERAL HISTORY. 



works, viz., the thorough watch and ward which the soldiers 
had who were planted at the mons exploratorium on Helme. 
The Vigilce on Helme stood facing the pretorian gateway of 
the station, and commanded, likewise, the approaches on 
every side, so that any surprise of the garrison seems to have 
been almost impossible. The station is a parallelogram of 
unequal sides, measuring 500 feet from east to west, and 380 
feet from north to south. It ranks in importance, as a 
Castrum Stativum, and being on the usual plan, the following 
drawing will represent the design and general arrangements 
for lodging the troops within : 



Porter Siuistra/ 



?C 



_^ 



<! 



To- a- Ti-cinales 




i [/; [': : ; ; \ 




   '  -.- 




1 ggf m m va & i 




m m m m m m \ 





Via PretoT-ia- 



; I ( -5 



r^rrr- 



i 






According to the c: Xotitia," the soldiers stationed here 
were a company, or companies, of watchmen The entry stands 
thus : Prcefectus numeri vigilum Concangios. If we are entitled 
to infer, with the author of " The Eoman Antiquities," l from 
Caesar and Suetonius, that a Prcefect uniformly commanded 
auxiliary troops, as a Tribune commanded legionaries, these 
watchmen in that case belonged to the allies of Eome, and 
were probably Gauls. What number were here, is left to 
conjecture. By the absence of the word cohort is, which is 
frequently used in connexion with stations of secondary 



1 Adams, p. 371. 



THE STATION, CONCANGIUM. 11 

magnitude, it may be fairly supposed that the garrison here 
comprised more than one cohort. Numeri expresses no par- 
ticular number. Pliny considers that it signified strictly the 
muster-roll. 1 By the usual reckoning, a cohort (480 men) 
required only 21,000 square feet for garrison accommodation, 
and the area of this station comprised 160,000 square feet, so 
that fully half a legion of soldiers could be accommodated, be- 
sides ample provision for baggage, tents, and camp followers. 

What other works and buildings were originally at Water 
Crook, cannot now be told. Horsley visited the place, and 
observes, " the town, I believe, has chiefly stood between the 
fort and the river on the west (south south-west) side, for here 
they still plough up cement and stones." And Dr. Whitaker 
remarks that " the city has contained about fourteen acres." 
There is no such space as fourteen acres "between the fort 
and the river on the west side." Both statements, therefore, 
as to "town" and "city" must be taken with reserve, in 
the absence of all traces of foundations and of domestic 
utensils. Horsley states that Mr. Guy, then living here, 2 
possessed some Eoman coins and seals, and a medal of Faus- 
tina ; but these are all lost, and no other relics have since been 
discovered, excepting a hypocaust, some urns, and the pottery 
works hereafter mentioned. 

The hypocaust was noticed by Machell, on a personal 
visit, and was found, he says, "Underground, being built 
with bricks or tiles on the inside, fixed one into another, run 
over with cement half-a-foot thick ; and the bottom paved 
with bricks one foot broad, and three inches thick. In these 
ruins, too, were reservoirs for water, made with cement, and 
a semicircular course of vacuities, like ovens, divided by 
thin bricks." 

Some Urns were discovered in the year 1813, under the 
left bank of the river, where the stream takes another sweep, 
south of the marble mills (opposite to the mills). The river, 
by its tortuous course, forms a second tongue of land at this 
spot, and on one part thereof stands a conspicuous knoll, 
called Sattury, of pyramidal shape. When the first edition 

1 See Excrcitus, in Smith's " Greek and Roman Antiquities," p. 500. 
About the beginning of the eighteenth century. 



12 GENEKAL HISTOEY. 

of this Book went to press, in 1832, the knoll was crowned 
with a tree ; but, in the meantime, this sylvan ornament has 
fallen, either to the winds or the woodman's axe. Why the 
name of Sattury, which tradition has so long preserved, was 
given to it, is uncertain. Mr. West (the historian of Furness) 
suggests that some altar may have stood there dedicated to 
Saturn. We incline to the opinion that this plot of ground 
— from Sattury to the river — was a tumulus, or general burial 
ground, for the garrison. It would be close by the road 
from the Station southward, and a sufficient (about the 
usual) distance from the encampment. [The Eomans never 
intermingled the dead with the living.] This supposition 
is supported by the discovery of the Urns before-mentioned 
at the tip of this tongue of land. One of these Urns was 15 
inches deep, and 10 inches in diameter, and contained human 
ashes ; but unfortunately it was broken to pieces in being 
taken out of the earth. Another Urn 8-| inches deep, and 6 
inches diameter at the swell, is still in good preservation, 
in the care of our friend George Webster, Esq., of Eller How, 
who, fortunately possessing archaeological tastes, was mainly 
instrumental in the discovery of these sepulchral remains. 
The following is a representation of the Urn at Eller How : 




It contained human ashes, calcined ; together with some 
iron and charcoal. The presence of iron is singular. 



THE STATION, CONCANGIUM. 13 

The pottery works (probably the same that Machell alludes 
to) were discovered about the same time as the Urns just 
mentioned, but in a very different locality. These were 
opposite to the Camp, across the river, just at the foot of 
" Mill Lane," by the edge of the brook before it joins the 
Kent. There were the remains of a kiln, and several pieces 
of (new-made ?) brick. We lately examined some of these, 
and caused one (an angle brick) to be deposited in the 
Museum. It seems to carry evidence, in its structure, of 
being composed of a loamy alluvium, such as may be seen by 
the margin of the brook at the spot, having little resem- 
blance to the compact bricks made of pottery clay. Close to 
the kiln was a pit, with some human skeletons thrown 
loosely and slovenly into it, covered with the dSbris of the 
kiln. Intelligent persons who examined the skeletons sup- 
pose that they had been hastily buried there after the Eoman 
pottery fell into disuse ; otherwise, they argue, the bones 
must have been calcined by their proximity to the kiln. 
The argument might be carried a point farther ; for the 
human skeletons would have mouldered away before the 
lapse of fifteen hundred years. 

The following descriptions of the Monuments and Altars 
are from Horsley : — 

1. A monument of two freedmen of Publius Bassus 
inscribed, 



( iwMTvsubbkher\ 

V\- 'LE6V-JYfCrcCSfC) 

EPVLC-AUVM-MORTj 

IRlTlNTERFD-bNNJ 

L_/vr_rj;' T /• c ]^ r hf\ 



which he reads thus : 



14 



GENEEAL HISTOEY. 



Publius. Aelius. Publii filius Sergia (tribu) Bas- 
sus quaestor designatus legionis vicessimae 

Valentis victricis vixit annos et 

Publius Rivatus liberti et Hero mile 

legionis sextae victricis faciendum curarunt 
Siquis in hoc sepulcruni alium mortuum in- 
tulerit inferet fisco. dominorum nostrorum 

"This monument, I think, has been erected by the care or 
order of two freedmen of Publius Bassus (one of whose names 
is lost with a part of the stone), and by a soldier in the 
sixth legion, part of whose name is also broken off; what 
remains looks like Heron, a name which occurs in another 
inscription in our collection. (Cumberland, No. LII.) 
The latter part of the inscription I believe has contained 
a penalty against any who should presume to deposit 
another dead person in this sepulchre ; obliging them to pay 
a fine into the Emperor's exchequer. The last line, which is 
imperfect, should express the fine." 

2. "A remarkable altar without inscription. It has a 
festoon with clusters of grapes above it, on each side, which 
made me suspect it might be erected to Bacchus : 




3. "A small altar within the house. The word dece is 



THE STATION, CONCANGIUM. 



15 



sufficiently clear and distinct : from which I thought of Dece 
Nympha with reference to the river. But from a character 
partly resembling an m which follows it, (DEEY) Mr. Ward 
thinks it is rather for Minerva. 

4. "A description of Urn, which I found lying in the 
kitchen garden. It is exactly of the same size and shape 
with that in Mr. Gilpin's collection at Scaleby. Mr. G.'s is 
said to have had a cover to it, but I did not hear of any such 
thing belonging to this at Water Crook. (Vide Horsley, fig. 
XI p. 192.) 

5. "An imperfect statue, designed very probably either 
for Silenus or Bacchus. If for the latter, as I rather think, 
it confirms my conjecture that the altar (2,) was consecrated 
to this deity. The corolla (of which he has given a draught), 
was, in the memory of an aged person yet living, placed upon 
the head of the image, though it is now by some unhappy 
accident broken off, and the rest of the image lost : " — 



^/^m 




 Li 



We conceive both this statue and the altar with festoons of 
grapes (previously figured in the woodcut and on the frontis- 
piece), belong to Bacchus, whose British name was Heus 
or Hu, and his surname Cadarn, which last word means 
" mighty." Hu, the mighty, was a popular Deity with the 
Cymry or Cumry, whence comes Cumry-land, or Cumberland. 

The Monument, Altar, and Statue, figured here, are now 



16 GENERAL HISTORY. 

placed in the Museum, at Kendal, having been presented by 
Mr. C. Wilson, the owner of the Water Crook estate. 

It remains only to say a few words respecting the name 
of this Station, and the probable time of its foundation. 

With regard to the name, as it is a Notitia Station, ex- 
cluded from Antoninus' Itineraries, there are none of the 
evidences of sequence and distances, in relation to other 
Stations, to help its identity. But all reputed Antiquaries 
concur in holding it to be Concangium, excepting, perhaps, 
Dr. Gale, who for some unexplained reason places Brovonacis 
at Kendal. Camden, at one time, had some doubts about it, 
but Gough, his last editor, speaks decidedly in favour of 
Concangium. Stuheley and Horsley were also both of this 
opinion, and Dr. Whitaker, adding his powerful testimony, 
fortifies the conclusion. If argument were wanting, there 
is something in the etymology of the name, which it is sur- 
prising none of those learned writers should have noticed. 
The original name of the river Kent was Can, as the old 
name of the county of Kent is Cantium. Con and Can 
are duplicates, signifying "head," or "principal," and the 
Cangii were doubtless the chief pastoral tribe inhabiting the 
district between the Kentmere hills and the estuary of More- 
cambe. The name Concangium, then, was given in honour 
both of the aboriginal inhabitants and the river, to win 
favour with the people brought under subjection. Such, at 
least, is in strict accordance with the general policy of 
Agricola. 

With regard to the date or foundation of this Station, it is 
not possible to define it nearer than to say, that it lies pro- 
bably between the years A.D. 80 and 90. As Agricola 
marched northward by the valley of the Lune, in A.D. 79, 
and continued his operations in Cumberland and Scotland 
till the year 84, he would have to encounter the Brigantes in 
their strongholds, lying between the Solway, through the 
western districts of Cumberland, the shores of Windermere, 
and the valley of the Kent down to Morecambe Bay, on 
his return to head-quarters at Chester. That was doubtless 
the period of the foundation of Concangium. By that time 
the prowess of the Bom an levies was known to the native 



CONCANGIUM. 17 

Britons. They had not only swept the Brigantes before them 
in their upward march, but had driven the Caledonian Picts 
and Scots headlong to the Grampians, routing the armies of 
Golgacus, till then held to be invincible. On the other hand, 
the Brigantes in this neighbourhood were not without their 
advantages, and might oppose considerable resistance to the 
invaders. They might, for instance, be strongly posted on 
Potter Fell, on Cunswick Scar, on Castle How Hill (suppos- 
ing that to be British), on the Castle Hill, and on Helme. 
The conflict, therefore, may have been arduous and prolonged, 
and we have a right to infer that the Eoman commander was 
not too sure of holding his conquest, by the circumstance of 
laying hold of the aid of the river in so remarkable a 
manner, for the protection of his garrison. How long the 
station remained in the occupation of the Eomans may be 
left to the cogitation of the reader. The situation was warm, 
sheltered by the hills on the north and north-east ; the lands 
about it were fertile for grain or pasturage ; and there seems 
to be no reason why the Eomans should have departed from 
Concangium and Castlesteads, till they took their final leave 
of Britain, in the middle of the fifth century. 

Above this station, and nearer to the town, is a place called 
"Watch Field j" 1 the ancient name of which has evidently 
been " Wath-Field" or "Ford-Field." For, in the grant to the 
Church, made by Gilbert, 6th Baron of Kendal, mention is 
made of " Wath-slack," in tracing the boundaries from Stain- 
bank Green, — "usque ad viam de Helsington ;" and according 
to the authority of some persons now living, there is still a 
public way from the Helsington Eoad, and a ford across the 
river, at this very place. Another confirmation of this matter 
is to be found in the practice of the Eomans, who never 
carried their roads over bridges (unless the rivers were 
impassable), but by fords. To these fords they paid the 
strictest attention, and accordingly we always find, at no great 
distance from them, mounds of earth, thrown up for explora- 
tory stations. Nor can there be much doubt but the mound of 

1 Dr Burn seems to have adopted the commonly-received name of Watch 
Field, and assigned it as a Watch to the station without much consideration or 
research. 

C 



18 



GENERAL HISTORY. 



earth in the Vicar Fields has been made for the purpose of 
watching this ford across the Kent. A similar mound is 
found at Halton, near Lancaster, where there has been, and 
still is, a ford across the Lune. 

CASTLESTEADS. 

About a mile and a half from Concangium, on the summit 
of a high hill called Helm, 1 was the castrum exploratorium 
called Castle-steads. 2 It has been a rectangular fort 60 
feet by 120, and had two ditches on the south, three on the 
north, and, on the other sides, was defended by precipices. 
There is no doubt but this was the exploratory fort in 
connexion with the station at Water Crook. It is in sight 
of the beacon on Warton Crag, which communicates with 
Lancaster. The engraving will afford a better idea of the 
form of the castrum than can be given by the pen. 




In 1806, a gold coin, or medal, of Vespasian was found 
within the chapelry of Xatland, in a lineal direction from 
Concangium to this castrum exploratorium. It was found 
some distance below the surface of the earth ; and as no 
remains of works have been discovered between the two 

1 Helm is the original of Helmet, a Saxon word, and signifies the crest or 
apex. There is a round-topped hill in Grasniere called Helm. 

2 Castle-steads, or Castle-steeds, says Richard Gough, is the common name 
given to the castella on the wall of Hadrian. There were two forts near 
Corbridge, in Northumberland, called Castle-steeds.— Vide "Camden's Bri- 
tannia," p 235. 



CASTLESTEADS. — CONEYBEDS. 



19 



stations, it seems probable that it had been scattered by one 
of the soldiers in passing from one place to the other. 
This coin was purchased by the late Mr. Emanuel Burton, 
of Kendal, but is now lost. 



CONEYBEDS. 



Another exploratory fort, or encampment, called Coney- 
beds, 1 is situated on Hay Fell, on the east side of Kendal, in 
the field immediately above the house called High Park, 
belonging to Wm. Wilson, Esq. It is nearly on the summit 
of the hill, and overlooks the vale of Kendal. Before the 




inclosure in 1814, its vallum and fosse were very perfect, 
inclosing a bell-shaped area, the upper end of which was 
128 feet in breadth, its sides 208, and the southern end, 
which was semi-circular, 224 feet in diameter. About ha,if- 



1 "Coney beds" is thought to signify high graves, 

c 2 



20 GENERAL HTSTOEY. 

way down the area, and on its eastern side, were two interior 
entrenchments, having a sort of bending street between them, 
and each of them having the southern end semi-circnlar. 
The less of the two which adjoined the east valhim was 42 
feet on the north, 70 on the east and west sides, and 70 across 
the south. The other was 64 feet on the east and west sides, 
and 80 on the north, and across the south. Both of them had 
pits unequally dispersed (as is represented in the engraving), 
all of which, except the central one, which was round, were of 
irregular shape. The remaining part of the great area was 
smooth. This encampment overlooked the fort on Helm, and 
commanded a view of several hills in Lancashire, Cumberland, 
Westmorland and Yorkshire ; of the estuary of the Kent ; 
and, in clear weather, extended even to the mountains above 
Beaumaris, in Wales. This station was trenched after the 
inclbsure, but nothing was discovered to lead to its history. 
From its form it must have been made in the latter period of 
the Eoman empire ; and probably was a place of temporary- 
retreat for the garrison at Water Crook. 

In the time of the plague which desolated the kingdom in 
1597-8, provisions were brought to this spot by the country 
people, and deposited for the inhabitants of Kendal, which 
was their only intercourse during that destructive period, 
when, according to the following inscription from a stone in 
the Church of Penrith, 2,500 of the inhabitants of Kendal 
were swept away : — 

A. D. 1598, ex gravi pesti quce regionibus hisce incubuit 
obierunt apud Penrith 2260, Kendal 2500, Richmond 
2200, Carlisle 1160. Posteri avortite ros et vkitc. 

CASTLE HOW HILL. 

On the western side of the town, on a rocky hill, opposite 
the Castle, and about the same altitude, is a circular mount of 
gravel and earth, about 30 feet high from the plane on the top 
of the rock. The crown of the mount is flat, and has been 
defended by a breast-work of earth and a narrow ditch. 
There has also been a ditch diametrically through it, from east 
to west. Eound its base is a deep fosse and high dike, 
strengthened with two bastions on the east. The whole car- 



CASTLE HOW HILL. 21 

cumference of the crown is about sixty paces. Dr. Stukeley, 
in his "Itinerary" calls it Saxon. Horsley observes, that it is 
very like the exploratory mounts which are to be found in 
other places near the military ways. But whether it is Eoman, 
and relates to the station at Water Crook, or more modern still, 
he does not take upon him to determine. If it be reasonable 
to conclude that it is Eoman, this, and the hill opposite, on 
which the Castle stands, were no doubt exploratory mounts to 
guard the Eoman way. This hypothesis receives strength 
from the circumstance of a Eoman coin of Marcus Aurelius, 
which is still preserved in Hutton's Museum, at Keswick, 
having been, it is said, found within the walls of the Castle. 
Some persons, however, are of opinion, that the name should 
,be Castle Law Hill, and believe that it has been made by 
the Barons of Kendal, or by one of the Saxon chiefs. 

In 1788, being the centenary of the revolution, the inha- 
bitants of Kendal erected, in memory of that event, a stately 
pillar, or obelisk, on the crown of the mole, bearing the 
following inscription : — 

Sacred to Liberty. 

This Obelisk was erected in the year 1788. 

In memory of the Revolution in 1688. 

In reference to the obelisk, we cannot do better than quote 
the glowing and nervous language of Mrs. Eadcliffe, from her 
" Tour," in 1795 : — " On one of the brows that tower over the 
town, stands a testimony to the independence of the inhabitr 
ants, — an obelisk, dedicated to liberty and to the memory of 
the Eevolution in 1688. At a time when the memory of that 
Eevolution is reviled, and the praises of liberty itself en- 
deavoured to be suppressed by the artifice of imputing to it 
the crimes of anarchy, it was impossible (alluding to her own 
patriotic feelings) to omit any act of veneration to the blessings 
of this event. Being thus led to ascend the hill, we had a 
view of the country over which it presides : a scene, simple, 
great and free, as the spirit revered amidst it !" 

" Immediately below Castle How Hill (says Pennant) is a 
spot called battle-place" Why it was so called he has not 
informed us. We can find no such place now by that name. 



22 GENERAL HISTORY. 



GENERAL HISTORY, CONTINUED. 



We must now again recur to matters of general history. 
In the course of the second century the insurrections and 
inroads of the northern hordes had made such havoc in this 
territory, that the Emperor Severus repaired to Britain, and 
established his court at York (Eboracum), the capital of the 
Brigantes. Advancing from York with a powerful army, he 
drove the Caledonians within their frontiers, and erected a 
stone wall within the vallum of Adrian, and very nearly upon 
the site of that celebrated northern rampart. The loss of the 
Eomans in this expedition was, according to Dion Cassius, 
50,000 men, partly by war, and partly by cutting down and 
draining the mosses. There were eighteen stations on the line 
of Adrian's wall. 

About the year 446-8 the Bomans finally abandoned this 
country; and Britain, now deprived both of the Boman 
soldiers, and of the flower of her youth, who passed over with 
them, became an easy prey to the northern invaders, who now 
appear under the names of Bicts and Scots, two powerful and 
distinct and ferocious tribes, acting in confederacy. 1 AVar was 
their sole pursuit, and slaughter their chief delight. They broke 
through Severus's wall, though fortified and well supplied with 
the munitions of war ; and it is further affirmed sacked and 
burnt all the towns in the north of England. 2 In this deplor- 
able situation, the inhabitants invited over the Saxons ; and 
thus, with a view to protect themselves against an evil which 
was apparent, they fell upon another which they had not con- 
templated. The Saxons peopled several provinces in Germany : 
one of which, and that which now more especially sent out its 
inhabitants into Britain, was called Anglia, or England, as 
the venerable Bede and other historians have related. Hence 



1 Sir Walter Scott, in his " History of Scotland," says, the Picts were so 
called from their habit of staining or painting their bodies; and that they 
were descendants of the ancient British Caledonians. The Scots, " to the'great 
confusion of ancient history," were of Irish origin, who established themselves 
on the coast of Argyleshire. 

2 " History of Manchester." 



BATTLES OF KING ARTHUR. 23 

this country was afterwards, by King Egbert, denominated 
England. 1 

The Saxons having driven the Picts and Scots within their 
own borders, and taken possession of the principal cities, 
they sent for a further supply of troops from the shores of the 
German ocean, and evinced a determination to take possession 
of the country. After numerous battles, fought with various 
success, the renowned Arthur, animated by the wrongs of the 
Britons, took the title of King, and became the leader of their 
wars. In tracing his victories, although we find no mention of 
Concangium, yet we can discover that he must have passed 
through Kendal ; for the first of his battles was fought at the 
mouth of a river not far from Chester ; the second, third, fourth, 
and fifth upon another river, called the Douglas, in Lanca- 
shire ; the sixth upon a river which is called the Bassas; and 
the seventh in " Sylva Caledonis," subsequently called " Ingle- 
wood Forest," in Cumberland. The river Bassas is therefore 
some river between the Douglas and Inglewood Forest ; and 
we find no river at all similar in name directly upon this line 
of march except the Beetha. The principal branch of this 
river is called " Pisa " or " Pesa," on which, by that name, the 
learned historian of Manchester has fixed the sixth victory of 
Arthur ; and it is far from improbable that formerly it retained 
this name to its junction with the estuary. How far up 
the stream it bears now the name of Betha, or Beela, we 
have not been able to ascertain. Hodgson, in his excellent 
Map of Westmorland, calls it by no other appellation to its 
source. This river runs by the village of Beetham, in this 
county ; and that Beetham has been the place of a battle 
appears to be confirmed by the great number of human bones 
which are found in digging in almost every part in and about 
the village. It is indeed to be regretted that further search 
for relics was not made when some of the modern houses 
were erected, on the south side of the stream, where the bones 
are chiefly found. The Saxons being here again defeated, 
formed at last in " Sylva Caledonis," or Inglewood Forest, 

1 In the Teutonic language, eng signifies * narrow," or '  strait ; " therefore 
England seems to describe a neck of land ! — Vide "Restitution of Decayed 
Intelligence in Antiquities." 



24 GENEEAL HISTOEY. 

whither the Britons, under command of Arthur, pursued and 
attacked them. In this battle nearly the whole army of the 
Anglo-Saxons was cut to pieces. 

Within thirteen years, however, of the death of Arthur, the" 
Saxon conquests had so far advanced, that the whole of 
England was considered as subdued, and was erected into 
seven sovereign states, under the name of the Heptarchy. 
This part of the country, which during the Eoman period had 
taken its name from the Brigantes, was changed by the 
Saxons to that of " Northumbria," or Northumberland, the 
territory to the north of the Humber. 

Egbeet, having reduced the Saxon heptarchy into a 
monarchy, and called it England, divided his acquisitions 
into several portions or shares ; and after the preservation 
of peace, set over each of them a Comes to rule them ; 
whence each portion was denominated " comitatus : " a scyre 
or county — that is to say, " an earldome." So that the 
kingdom of Northumbria w T as divided into divers scyres or 
provinces : 

1. The province on the east, from the river Humber to the 
river Tees, he styled Euryckshire, or Yorkshire. 

2. From the Tees to the river Tyne, he called Durohni- 
shyre ; being the province of the Bishopric of Durham. 

3. Erom the Tyne to the river Tweed, Northumbria, or the 
shire of Northumberland. 

4. On the west side of the river Solway to the river Duddon, 
he called Carliershire or Cumberland. 

5. The part on the west of Durham and Lancashire, he 
called Applebyschyre or Westmorland. 

6. From the river Duddon to the river Mersey on the 
south, he called Lancasterschyre. 

" Through the whole of the Saxon period," says Turner, 
"the kingdom of Northumbria was the most perturbed. 
Usurper murdering usurper was the pervading incident ; and 
scarcely had the sword of the assassin been cleansed from its 
horrid pollution, before its point was turned upon its master, 
and he was carried to the sepulchre which he had just closed 
upon another." 1 In the ancient Saxon Chronicle, we are toki 

1 " History of the Anglo-Saxons," vol. ii. p. 119. 



NORMAN CONQUEST. 25 

" This year (a. d. 966), Thored, the son of Gunner, plundered 
Westmorland." And again, a.d. 1000 : " This year the King 
Ethelred went into Cumberland, and nearly laid waste the 
whole of it with his army." We may be assured that the 
country about Kendal shared ]argely in the ravages of these 
unsettled times. 

Scarcely had the shout of the victory gained by Harold 
over the Norwegians, at Eulford, near York, been heard across 
the island from the Humber to the Mersey, when intelligence 
was received of the landing of William of Normandy, after- 
wards called the Conqueror. The English army, under Harold, 
met the army of the invaders near Hastings, and after a 
sanguinary battle, which continued through the day (Oct. 14, 
1066), William joined in the final conflict, secured the victory, 
and with it the crown of England. 

No sooner was the Norman Conqueror seated on the throne 
of England than he began to exercise the power of conquest, 
using his giant's strength with the " tyranny of a giant." To 
guard against a surprise he caused numerous castles to be 
erected in the north of England. He placed all the land in 
the kingdom under the system of feudal tenure, which had 
been partially introduced under the Saxon dynasty. These 
possessions, with very few exceptions, besides the royal 
demesnes, were divided into baronies, with the reservation of 
stated services and payments, and were conferred on the most 
considerable of the Normans. These barons, who held of the 
Crown, shared out a large portion of their lands to other 
foreigners, who bore the name of knights or vassals, and who 
paid their lord the same duty and submission in peace which 
they themselves owed to their sovereign. The whole kingdom 
contained about 700 chief tenants, and 60,215 knights' fees. 
And as none of the English were admitted into the first rank, 
the few who retained their landed possessions were glad to be 
received under the protection of some powerful Norman 
baron, though at the cost of an oppressive burden on his 
estate. 

If the reader of this book would form for himself any con- 
jecture as to the population of Kendal at this time, he must 
bear in mind that the whole population of England, at the 



26 GENEKAL HISTOEY. 

Norman Conquest, is estimated, by the best authorities, at 
not more than a million and a half or two millions of 
inhabitants. 

The turbulent state of the country, in the succeeding reigns, 
served so to increase the Norman castles, that, by the latter 
end of the reign of Stephen, there were the almost incredible 
number of 1,115 castles in England. Every baron, or leader 
of a party, had his castle, wherein it is generally supposed he 
exercised unfeeling tyranny over his vassals, for Matthew 
Paris styles them " very nests of devils." The barons held 
their grants on condition that they should perform castle- 
guard with a certain number of men. In process of time, 
these services were commuted for annual rents, sometimes 
styled ward penny and wayt-fee, 1 but most commonly " castle- 
guard rents," payable at fixed days, under heavy penalties, 
called sursizes. The general military tenure of this county 
was by homage, fealty, and cornage, which last seems to have 
been peculiar to the border service, or knight service. Cornage 
was early converted into a pecuniary payment, and tchite-rent 
was the lord's rent paid in silver? There was also another 
tenure, called drengage, peculiar to these parts, which Dr. Burn 
proves to have been the most servile of all tenures ; for by it 
the tenants were held in " pure villenage," and as common 
drudges — were bound to the lord as members of the manor, 
and usually sold with the farm to which they belonged. 3 

THE BAEONY. 

In tracing the Barony of Kendal, we find the first baron 
to have been Ivo de Talebois, otherwise Taillebois, other- 
wise Talboys, of the House of Anjou, who came over with 
the Conqueror, and who, in virtue of his marriage with Lucy, 
sister of the two Saxon earls, Edwin and Morcar, seconded 
by the favour of the Prince, obtained a large portion of 
the north of Lancashire, and so much of Westmorland as 
still goes under the designation of the Barony of Kendal. 
William, the great grandson of Ivo de Talebois, caused him- 

1 Blount's u Law Dictionary." 2 Gough's " Additions to Camden." 
8 " History of Westmoreland," p. 21. 



BARONY OF KENDAL. 27 

self to be called " William de Lancaster, and Baron of Ken- 
dal," before the King in Parliament. 

In the Kerden's MSS. preserved in the Library at Man- 
chester, the descents of the family are thus given : — 

1. John de Talebois= Lucia 

* I 

2. Ethelbert— 

^ty Chetil — 3. Gilbert de Furnesio — , Reinfred 



Cj^C*-*? 4. William de Lancaster 1st — Roger 



5. William de Lancaster 2nd 



Helwise = 6. Gilbert 

I 
7. William de Lancaster 3rd. 1 

The Castle at Lancaster, which was built by Eoger de 
Poictou, not only served as a military fortress, but was used 
also as the baronial residence ; and it is very probable that 
the title of " de Lancaster " was assumed by the 4th Baron, 
and continued to the 7th, on account of the Barons of Kendal 
residing sometimes at that place and sometimes at Kendal. 
This, we say, is very probable, because it will appear, in 
tracing the history of the residents at Kendal castle (through 
the monuments in the Church), that we cannot go further 
back than to Helwise, eldest sister and co-heiress of William 
de Lancaster 3rd. Nor does it appear that the title "de 
Lancaster " was ever revived in this barony after the Castle 
of Lancaster was conferred upon Edmund Crouchback, by 
King Henry III. 

From that time the castle at Kendal became the constant 
residence of the eldest branch of the baronial family, till 
it at length lapsed to the Crown. 

In the time of Gilbert, the sixth baron, the Scots, under 

1 This William de Lancaster, by will, bequeathed his body to be buried in 
the quire of Furness Abbey, near to the tomb of his grandfather, William de 
Lancaster 2nd. And as William de Lancaster 1st was a great benefactor to 
this Abbey, it is very probable that he also was buried there. 



28 GENEEAL HISTORY. 

Duncan, Earl of Fife, entered and plundered the town of 
Kendal, broke open the church, and put all the inhabitants 
to the sword, sparing neither age nor sex. 1 From that time 
the inhabitants of these parts may be considered to have 
been wholly engaged in the border service. 

In the time of Eobert de Eoss, of Kendal Castle, this 
town must again have been subject to depredations. In the 
21st Edward I. Eobert de Clifford, Lord of Westmorland 
(from whom the office and title of high sheriff of the county 
descended to the Earls of Thanet), was made Keeper or 
Warden of the Marches, in the north towards Scotland, and 
in the year 1298 was summoned to attend with his horse and 
arms at Carlisle. This Eobert de Clifford was slain at the 
battle of Bannockburn, near Stirling, on Sunday, June 24, 
1314, when Edward II. commanded in person against the 
renowned Eobert the Bruce. After the defeat which the 
English sustained in this engagement, the Scots overran the 
whole north of England, down into Yorkshire, partly from 
revenge, and partly from a desire of plunder. After which 
the English borderers rallied again, and made reprisals on the 
territories of the Scots. We may form no incorrect idea of 
the merciless havoc committed in these incursions from the 
borderer's ejaculation in the " Lay of the Last Minstrel : " — 

" They burnd my little lonely tower : 
It had not been burn'd far a year or more." 

The Kendal men are very honourably mentioned in a 
poem descriptive of the battle of " Flodden Field," which is 
reckoned to possess many historical truths : — 

"The left hand wing, with all his route, 

The lusty Lord Dacres 2 did lead ; 
With him the bows of Kendal stout 

With milke-white coats 3 and crosses red." 



" There are the bows of Kentdale bold, 
Who fierce will fight and never flee." 

1 Holinshead's " Chronicles," p. 91. 2 Of Dacre Castle, near Penrith. 

3 It seems not improbable that "White Hall" (originally, perhaps, White 
Cloth Hall ) has taken its name from the manufacture of this " milk-white 
cloth." 



KENDAL ARCHERS. 29 

This battle was fought in the 5th Henry VIII. commanded 
by the Earl of Surrey, on the part of England, against the 
Scottish King, James IV, in person. The signal victory ob- 
tained on this occasion by the English has been attributed by 
historians chiefly to their " unrivalled skill in the use of the 
long bow." * The corpse of James IV. was found among the 
slain, pierced with two arrows. Such was the admitted supe- 
riority of the English in archery, that the Scotch held it as a 
proverb that " each archer bore at his belt the lives of twenty- 
four Scots : " that being the number of arrows with which he 
was usually supplied. 

The following extract from a letter addressed by the Earl 
of Surrey to Cardinal Wolsey, and dated at Berwick, 27th 
Sept., 1523, shows a valorous achievement of the Kendal 
men : 

" The next day I sente my said Lord Dacre to a stronghold 
called Fernherst, the lord whereof was his mortal enemy, and 
with him Sir Arthur Darcey, Sir Marmaduke Constable, 
with 700 of their men, one cartoute, and dyvers other good 
peces of ordynaunce for the field. The said Fernherst stode 
marvellous openly within a greate wood. The said two 
knights with the moste parte of their men, and Strickland, 
your grace's servante, with 300 Kendal men, wente into the 
wood on fote with th' ordynaunce where the said Kendal men 
were so handled that they proved hardy men that went noo 
foote hack for theym ! — And fynally, with long skir- 
mishing and moche difficulty, the house was threwn downe ; 
and above 30 Scottish slayne, and not passing four English 
men, but above sixty hurt." 

Sir Thomas (afterwards Lord) Wharton, of Westmorland, 
became eminent and high in trust with the King (Henry VIII.) t 
as a most active and vigilant Warden of the Marches. He 
first signalised himself when deputy Warden of the Marches 
under Lord Scroop, in the memorable rencontre at Sollom 
Moss, of which there is scarce a parallel in history. In the 
34th Henry VIII. Sir Thomas Wharton called to his aid (by 
letter of proclamation) the gentlemen and their followers 

1 Sir W. Scott's " History of Scotland." 



30 GENERAL HISTORY. 

within the bounds of the West Marches, subject to the 
border service, whose numbers show the proportionable value 
of their respective estates. At that time, among others, were 
mustered by 

Walter Strickland, of Sizergh, 200 horse, 

Sir John Lowiher, 100 horse and 40 foot, 

Sir James Leybume, of Cunswick, 20 horse, 

The son of Sir Jeffrey Middleton, of Middleton Hall, 20 horse. 

Anthony Ducket, of Grayrigg, 20 horse, 

Thomas Sanford, of Askham, 80 horse and 20 foot, 

Lancelot Lancaster, of Barton, 20 horse and 20 foot. 

Some idea of the achievements they performed in this kind 
of warfare may be formed by the following extract from 
Haine's "State Papers ;" the total amount whereof, in one in- 
road or forray, from the 2d July to the 17th November in 
the same year (1544), is thus computed : — 

Towns, towers, stedes, parish churches, &c. cast down 

and burned 192 

Scots slain 403 

Prisoners taken 816 

Nolt (i.e. horned cattle) taken 10,386 

Sheep 12,492 

Nags and geldings 1,296 

Goats 200 

Balls of Corn 890 

Insight (i.e. household furniture) not reckoned. 

The great proportion of archers which Westmorland 
supplied for the Border Wars is ascertained by an abstract 
of the musters of horsemen and footmen within Westmor- 
land and Cumberland, taken in September and October. 
1584. It appears from this, that of a total, for both coun- 
ties, amounting to 8,350 men, Westmorland furnished 4,142 — 
of whom 1,400 were " archers furnished," and 1,300 " billmen 
furnished." Every person from sixteen to sixty years of age 
was liable to be called at a moment's warning, by proclamation 
of the Lord Warden of the Marches. In a Commission issued 
by Queen Elizabeth, to inquire into the lands, tenements, &C. 
of the Barony of Kendal, which her Majesty took of the 
Dowager Marchioness of Northampton in lieu of other lands, 
it is found, " that the tenants of this barony, from the age of 
sixteen to sixty, had always been accustomed, and still owe to 



KENDAL ARCHEES. 31 

be, at all times, in their most defensible array, for the wars, 
ready to serve their prince, on horseback and on foot, at the 
borders, &c, on their own proper cost and charges, being 
warned thereto by beacon, fire, post or proclamation, and 
there so to continue during the Lord Warden's pleasure." 
The beacon hills of Westmorland were Stainmore, Orton Scar, 
Whinfell, Farlton Knot, and Hardknot. 1 

1 Burn's "History of Westmoreland." 



CHAPTER II. 

ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

In tracing the progress of religion, through the ages 
already mentioned, it will be our object to compress as 
much as possible the abundant matter which presents itself, 
and to select only so much as may appear to form a suitable 
preface to our account of the Church. 

When the Romans invaded this island, they found that the 
religion of the Druids formed one of the most considerable 
parts of its government. This appears to have been a most 
extensive species of superstition. Besides' the power which 
it placed in the hands of the priest, to inflict severe penalties 
in this life, it is thought to have inculcated the doctrine of 
the transmigration of souls : and how effectually such a 
doctrine would tend to render the extent of its authority com- 
mensurate with the fears of its votaries, it is quite unnecessary 
for us to say. In fact, no instance occurs in history where 
superior knowledge ever attained such an ascendant over 
ignorance and credulity as is recorded of the Druidical 
worship of the Gauls and Britons. The chief seat of the 
Druids was in the isle of Anglesea ; and against this place 
Suetonius Paulinus determined to direct his main operations. 
The scene of his attack is described, by Tacitus, as one of 
utter despair. The Roman soldiers, at first struck motionless 
with the sight of the Druids, at length rushed forward, bear- 
ing down all before them, and involving a promiscuous mass 
of men and women in their own fires. Many fled before the 
advancing Romans, and took refuge in these northern parts. 
Hutchinson has an hypothesis, which is very probable, that 
the fort of Maybrough, or Mayberie, near Penrith, was a 
temple of the Druids, and that it was fortified by them to 



DKUIDS' CIECLES. 33 

check the pursuit of the Eoman armies. There were some 
circles 1 situate on Potter Fell, near Kendal, which had 
the appearance of being druidical ; and if so, they may with 
propriety be traced to the same period. They were situated 
half way up the fell, on a flat plain, which affords the 
singular advantage of overlooking, without being observed, 
the whole valley, southwards ; fortified in front by a steep 
sloping breast-work, and backed by a precipice, which rises 
immediately in the rear. This place might afford both the 
security of a fortress, and the opportunity of an observatory. 
About a mile below, at a place called Low Groves, tradition 
has placed another druidical altar, but of this altar no traces 
are at present to be found. Low Groves may mean ' wood' 
or 'graves; ' 2 and Potter Feld (Danish) might be " the Potter s 
Field, to bury strangers in." (St. Matthew xxvii 7.) 

So superstitiously attached were the inhabitants of Britain 
to this species of idolatrous worship, that the Eomans, unable 
to reconcile them to their own laws and institutions, were at 
last obliged to abolish it by penal statutes ; a violence which 
had never, in any instance, been practised by these tolerating 
conquerors. 

In the year 1702, a brass medal is said to have been dis- 
covered in the island of Anglesea, (upon removing the rubbish 
from the remains of the chief druidical tribunal), which was 
inscribed in Hebrew, ' This is Jesus Christ the mediator ; ' 
and hence some have inferred that Christianity was preached 
here so early as the first century ; and that the possessor of 
this medal was one of the Christian ministers who had been 
condemned and sacrificed by the druids. But, however that 
may be, certain it is, that Christianity had taken root before 
the arrival of the Saxons : and that it had recommended itself 
even to the Boman legionaries. The invasion, however, of 
the Saxon infidels, for a time obscured, if not extinguished, 
the light of the gospel. For both Gildas and Bede represent 
that nation, as, above all others, the subverters of the altars, 
and the enemies of the priesthood. 3 

1 Partially destroyed when the Fell was inclosed, in Nov. 1841. 

2 The words ' groue ' and ' grsef ' (Saxon), grave, are synonymous. 

3 Gildas Brit. Ep. 23. Bede, lib. i. p. 22. 

D 



34 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

But Providence provided instructors for our ancestors in 
another quarter. Gregory, surnamed the Great, having had 
his compassion excited by the sight of some English youths 
exposed for sale in the streets of Borne, resolved to attempt 
the conversion of their countrymen, who, he was told, were 
heathens. Gregory was advanced to the pontifical chair in the 
year of Christ 590 ; and in the year 596, he appointed Austin, 
or Augustin, a monk of the convent of St. Andrew, at Rome, 
together with several others, to endeavour to bring the 
inhabitants of Britain to the knowledge and profession of 
Christianity. 

About the year 624, an event happened which paved the 
way for the further propagation of the gospel amongst our 
progenitors in the north. This was the marriage of Edwin, 
king of Northumberland, with Ethelburga, daughter of Ethel- 
bert, king of Kent. She, being a Christian princess, had the 
free exercise of the Christian religion secured to her and her 
household ; and was accompanied into Northumberland by 
Paulinus, who had been consecrated a bishop by Justus, 
archbishop of Canterbury. This prelate, who is justly called 
the ' northern apostle,' was not only allowed to perform the 
duties of his sacred functions in the queen's household, but 
also to preach the gospel to as many as were willing to hear 
it. Edwin was a stout pagan when he made proposals for 
marriage to Ethelburga, and succeeded in his suit only by 
allowing her the free exercise of her own conscience in religious 
matters, saying " that ought to be no hinderance, and if upon 
due examination he found the Christian law to be better than 
his own, he would himself embrace it." But Edwin continued 
in his idolatry for some time, till lying sick of a dangerous 
wound, he appealed to Paulinus, and promised that "if 
Christ, whom they (his wife and the bishop) so much extolled, 
would give him cure, and victory over his enemies, he would 
without more ado receive this religion." He recovered his 
sickness, his enemies fell into his hands, and from that time 
worshipped he no more his idols. We can believe in the con- 
version of Edwin without yielding assent to any miraculous 
cure of his ailment, or any other of the miracles which 
Bede has recorded. Dr. Hook excuses them as " Canterbury 



CHRISTIANITY INTRODUCED. 35 

tales," belonging naturally to the credulity of that age. 1 
Edwin was baptized by Paulinus in A.D. 627. Northumbria 
was, at that time, occasionally divided into two provinces, 
under the names of Deira and Bernicia, of which the former 
comprehended the whole tract of country interposed between 
the Tyne, the Mersey, and the Humber. Paulinus commonly 
followed the court, which resided sometimes in Deira, and 
sometimes in Bernicia, preaching, and baptising his converts 
in some neighbouring stream or fountain. 2 His presence at 
Dewsbury is attested by a cross, whereon was once an in- 
scription to that effect. At Whalley there are still three 
crosses, to which tradition has, with one voice, assigned the 
office of commemorating the same event ; and though these 
last have no inscription now remaining, yet the obeliscal 
form, and the ornaments in fret-work, used in common by 
the Norwegians, Saxons, Danes, and other northern nations, 
prove their antiquity to be great ; probably of the date of 
Paulinus. The crucifix upon the obelisk, o^ cross, in the 
churchyard at Penrith, is no doubt a memorial of the same 
kind, and intended to commemorate the same event, as it is 
on record that Paulinus founded the church of Kirkoswald. 
Now, if Paulinus preached both at Whalley and Penrith, he may 
have passed by the banks of the Kent, although there be now 
no relics to prove his having preached or planted Christianity 
here. From Penrith it is probable he turned into Swaledale ; 
for we find it recorded, that in one day he baptized, in the 
river Swale, no fewer than 10,000. 3 Drayton, the poet, 
states the number at 10,000 men, besides women and children, 
in the following lines : — 

" For when the Saxons first received the Christian faith, 
Paulinus, of old York, the zealous bishop then, 
In Swale's abundant stream christen'd ten thousand men, 
With women and their babes a number more beside, 
Upon one happy day, whereof she boasts with pride." 

That the church of Kendal was contemporary with 
Paulinus is indeed too much for us to assert. Por the 

1 See the Introduction to Dr. Hook's "Lives of the Archbishops of 
Canterbury." 

2 Bede. 3 Uennius apud, 15 script, p. 117r 

D 2 



36 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

testimony of Bede (the " candle of the English Church ") is to 
this effect, " Nondum oratoria vel Baptisteria in ipso exordio 
nascentis ibi Ecclesise poterant cedificari ; attamen in Campo- 
dono, ubi tunc villa regia, erat, fecit basilicam." This, there- 
fore, and the church at York, were probably the only places 
of worship in the Northumbrian kingdom, contemporary with 
Paulinus. But the probability is, that all the places where 
Paulinus preached would be held sacred ; that memorials 
would be erected, and that divine offices would be performed 
there, from the very first : and if so, the climate would soon 
admonish the most hardy and zealous congregations, that 
shelter and comfort are indispensably necessary to undis- 
turbed devotion. 

That there was, however, an ancient Saxon church at 
Kendal, and that it was, in all probability, the only church 
in what is now called the Deanery of Kendal, will appear 
a consequence from the following facts. No sooner was 
the Norman conqueror seated on the throne, than his active 
mind suggested to him a great national work, which will 
serve to transmit his name to posterity, with a degree of 
veneration. That work was entitled the 'Domesday Booke j' 1 
and though the exact time of taking it is not sufficiently clear, 
yet the probability is, that it was commenced in the year 1080 ; 
and it is evident, from the insertion at the end of the second 
volume, that it was completed in the year 10'86. The devasta- 
tion made by the conqueror in the northern counties, ren- 
dered it impossible to take an exact survey of some of them ; 
and accordingly we find that the south of Westmorland, and 
a part of Cumberland, (both of which were included in the 
West-Biding of Yorkshire), are the only parts surveyed in the 
counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, and 
Durham. The parts of Westmorland surveyed are as 
follows : — 

" Middletun, Manzerge, Cherchebi, Lupetun, Prestun, Holme, 
Bortune, and Hotune :" viz. Middleton, Mansergh, ELirkby (Lons- 
dale), Lupton, Preston, Holme, Burton, and Hutton, (probably 
Hutton Roof); 



Domesday Booke, tbat is, " Book of Judgment," Domus Dei; because from 
that, as from the Day of Judgment, "there lyes noe appeale." — Lansdoione MS. 



KENDAL CHUECH, SAXON. 37 

And then it is added, 

" Hsec habuit Torsin pro 12 maneriis." 

Again, amongst the possessions of Tosti, earl of North- 
umberland, we find 

"Castertune, Berebrune, and Tiernbi;" that is, Casterton, 
Barbon, and Thrimby: 

And then follows, 

" Omnes hse Villas pertinent ad Witetun, Tosti Comes habuit." 

Again, 

"In Stercaland: Cherchebi, Helsingtun, Staintun, Hotun, 
Patun:" viz. Kirkby (Kendal), Helsington, Stainton, Hutton, 
and Patton. 

And then follows, 

" Hsec habuit Gilmichel." 

Amongst the lands of Eoger of Poicton, we find, 

" Biedun, Fareltun, Prestun, Hennecastre, Eureshaim, Lefu- 
enes:" viz. iBeetham, Farlton, Preston, Hincaster, Heversham, 
and Levens. 

In this part of Westmorland, therefore, we may safely con- 
clude, that Kirkby Kendal and Kirkby Lonsdale were the 
only places in the two vales that had churches, because the 
distinguished name of ' Cherchebi' is there given to them 
respectively. There can indeed be no doubt but many of the 
other places had buildings for worship, either with or without 
a cemetery, or place of burial; but then, they were all 
dependent churches ; places of worship dependent upon the 
great Saxon churches at Kendal and Lonsdale. This appears 
to be confirmed by the circumstance of ' "Warton ' not occurring 
.at all in the Domesday Survey ; from which it may fairly be 
presumed, that the several townships, of which that parish 
now consists, were immediately dependent upon the church 
at Kendal. We may date the subdivision of the great 
Saxon parish of Kendal, into the several parishes of which 
the Barony now consists, from that era after the conquest 
when property first began to be confirmed and consolidated. 1 

1 Vide " History of Bichmondshire," vol. ii. p. 292. 



38 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

Previously to the Norman Conquest the district of country 
comprehending the parish of Kendal was within the dominions 
of Malcolm, king of Scotland. 

But though we cannot trace the date of the Saxon church, 
yet we can trace the date of the building in its present form, 
with great precision. The church was given by Ivo de 
Talebois, before mentioned, to the abbey of St. Mary's at 
York : which grant, together with a munificent grant by 
William de Lancaster II., fifth baron of Kendal, was con- 
firmed by Gilbert, son of Eoger Fitz-Keinfred, who married 
Helwise, daughter and heiress of the aforesaid William de 
Lancaster II. A copy of this confirmatory grant was in the 
possession of the late Vicar Hudson. It appears from the 
boundaries therein described, that a considerable addition 
was then made to the aforesaid grant of William de Lan- 
caster II. This Gilbert, sixth baron of Kendal, had a grant 
from the crown, in the year 1189, of the whole 'Forest of 
Westmorland, Kendale, and Furnesse,' and soon afterwards 
procured a grant for a weekly market at Kendal, on Saturday. 
He died in the fourth year of Henry III. i.e. in the year 
1219. Now it is very probable, that at or about the time 
he made the grant before mentioned, and also exerted his 
interest for the benefit of the town, he was no less attentive 
to the structure of the church. And this appears to be 
confirmed by a discovery which was made in the year 1829 ; 
at which time it was determined to clear the pillars and 
arches from the repeated coatings of whitewash with which 
they had been covered, and to restore the whole of the 
interior to its original state of beauty and grandeur. The 
workmen employed in this restoration, discovered, in the 
pillar on the south side of the altar, a recess which had been 
filled up with stones, and covered with plaster and white- 
wash. It was formed by a Gothic arch of neat workmanship ; 
and over the point of the arch was an inscription, which by the 
then vicar was interpreted ' Salutis nostra?, anno 1201.'   Now 

1 The stone containing the inscription abore alluded to, formed the apex of 
the arch of the piscina which was entirely renewed during the restoration of 
the Church in 1850-52. The stone was in consequence ejected from its position, 
and may now (1861), "be seen lying almost uncared for, in the Bellingham 



THE CHUECH. 39 

the style of the building corresponds, in every respect, with 
this date ; for the Gothic, or Saracenic, architecture was not 
known in this kingdom till the latter end of the reign of 
Henry II., and was partially and gradually adopted in the 
two succeeding reigns of Eichard I. and John. 1 In the time 
of Henry III., Grose says, this style gained a complete foot- 
ing, " the circular giving way to the pointed arch, and the 
massive column yielding to the slender pillar." It is further 
stated, that many of the old buildings, erected in former ages, 
were then taken down in order to be rebuilt in the new taste. 
We may therefore conclude, that the ancient Saxon church, 
consisting of the centre, and, at least, the two adjoining 
aisles, was either wholly rebuilt, or enlarged and beautified in 
the year 1201. The era of the second aisle, to the south, is 
indeed uncertain ; but that of the north aisle, which is very 
wide and spacious, belongs to the reign of Henry VIII. The 
Bellingham chapel, at any rate, in this aisle, is proved by an 
inscription which was on the tomb of Sir Eoger Belling- 
ham, to have been built in the time of Henry VIII. (See 
Inscriptions in a subsequent page.) 

There are some peculiarities which appeared on clearing 
the pillars, and which deserve the attention of Antiquaries. 
One of the massy pillars at the west end of the nave is 
formed of hewn limestone, but the rest are interlarded with 
a mixture of red sandstone. The limestone we conceive to 
have been dug from the place now called " Gillingrove ; * the 
same, most probably, as that described in the grant before 
recited by " Ccecum illius Blindbeck.' But whence came the 
red sandstone ? It is not in sufficient quantity to warrant the 
belief that it was quarried for the church. The probability 
is, then, that it was brought from the ruins of some ancient 
structure ; and the most likely source was the Eoman station 
at Watercrook. If this conjecture be well founded, we may 
conclude that these stones formed part of the ancient Saxon 
church, and were brought by the founders of that church 

Chapel. With all deference to the architects under whose superintendence the 
restorations were effected, we take the liberty to say, that this stone is worthy 
of preservation, and its expulsion was an act of vandalism and desecration. 
1 Grose's Antiquities. 



40 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

from the station at Concangium. In corroboration of this 
hypothesis, we may quote the opinion of Drake, who says 
that, when converted to Christianity, " the Saxons defaced, or 
demolished every Eoman altar, or other votive monument of 
the Eomans, discovered in their time. For their own con- 
veniency, and to eradicate all marks of paganism, they made 
use of the ruins of Eoman buildings in the erection of their 
churches." 1 The same red sandstone is found in the structure 
of the castle, as will be mentioned hereafter. 

In the ecclesiastical survey, commonly called ' The Taxa- 
tion of Pope Nicholas,' the church is stated to be divided 
into two medieties, viz. ' pars Gulielmi et pars Gualteri.' This 
taxation was computed about the year 1291, and the church 
is there stated to be in the diocese of York. 

In 1301, it was appropriated to the Monastery of St. 
Mary's, at York, and the original is still preserved amongst 
the archives of the registry there ; of which the present 
Vicar is in possession of a copy. 

In 1321, the abbot and convent bound themselves and 
their successors to find and maintain a chantry in the 
church, at the altar of St. Mary, for one secular priest, 
and to allow him 51 for the purpose of celebrating mass 
there. 2 

In the general ecclesiastical survey of Henry VIII. the 
living is valued at 99/. 5s.; this is one of the highest valu- 
ations in the king's books. 

In 1553 the following pensions appear to have been paid 

to those who had been incumbents of Chantries in Kirkby 

Kendal, viz. : 

£ s. d.   
St. Mary's Chantry, to Adam Shepard, incumbent ..368 

St. Anthony's Chantry, to Robert Base 3 4 4 

St. Christopher's Chantry, to John Garret 2 14 7 

St. Thomas Becket's Chantry, to Adam Shepard . . . 4 13 4 
St. Leonard's, alias le Spittle Chantry, to Jeffrey Bain- 
bridge 440 

This agrees, in some respects, with the return of the Com- 
missioners appointed to inquire of colleges, chantries, hos- 

1 Drake's "Eboracum." vol. i, p. 28. 

2 MSS. Ebor. 



THE CHUECH. 41 

pitals, and free chapels, in the reigns of Henry VIII. and 
Edward VI. who certified, that there were in Kendal, one 
stipendiary in the chapel, and four other stipendiaries ; 1 bnt 
they further state, that there was the chantry of onr Lady, 
Becket's chantry, and Trinity guild. Probably the last of 
these was then composed of St. Anthony's, St. Christopher's, 
and St. Leonard's. 

In the ecclesiastical survey before alluded to, the deaneries 
of Kendal and Lonsdale are united, and form part of the 
archdeaconry of Eichmpnd, and . diocese of York. But upon 
the consecration of the see of Chester, in 1541, these 
deaneries were separated, and made part of that bishopric- 
In 1856, they were annexed to the diocese of Carlisle, and 
now form part of that see. The deanery of Kendal (part of 
the Archdeaconry of Westmorland) contains the following 
38 churches and chapels ; to which we have annexed a state- 
ment of their respective valuations in the king's books, and 
have also noted whether they now stand charged, or have been 

discharged, from the payment of first-fruits and tenths. 

£ s. d. 

Kendal, Westmorland, Vicarage 92 5 

St. George, Kendal 
Burneside 
Crook 
Grayrigg 
Helsington 
Hugill, or Ings 
Kentmere 
Natland 
Long Sleddale 
New Hutton 
OldHutton  ; 
Selside 
Staveley 
Underbarrow 
Winster 
Beetham, dis. Westmorland, Vicarage ...... 13 7" 6 

Witherslack, do. • „ 

Bolton le Sands, dis. Lancashire, Vicarage ..... 4 15 

Overkellet, do. 
Burton, dis. Westmorland, Vicarage 1517 3| 

Preston Patrick, do. 

1 Burn's "History of Westmoreland." 



42 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

£ s. d. 
Gkasmere, Westmorland, Rectory 28 11 5| 

Ambleside, do. 

Langdale, do. 

Rydal 
Halton, Lancashire, Rectory 20 74 

Aughton 
Heversham, Westmorland, Vicarage 36 13 4 

Crosthwaite 

Crosscrake 

Levens, or Beathwaite Green 

Heysham, Lancashire, Rectory 8 9 2 

Warton, Lancashire, Vicarage 74 10 2^ 

Borwick, in ruins 

Silverdale 
Windermere (Bowness), Rectory 24 6 8 

Troutbeck. 

[Those in small capitals are Parish Churches. The others, as they re- 
spectively follow, are Chapels of Ease under them, and not in charge.] 

Grasmere and Windermere were, anciently, only chapelries 
within the parish of Kendal. But having little or no com- 
munication with the mother church, on account of the 
distance, they have, in length of time, acquired the reputation 
of distinct parishes. Each of the rectors, however, pays to 
the Yicar of Kendal, to this day, the annual pension of 13s. 4td. 
Mortuaries are also paid throughout both parishes, to the 
Kector and Vicar of Kendal, in equal moieties. 

We now proceed to a description of the Church in its 
present form. 

THE CHURCH 

Is a spacious and very striking building, of plain, perpen- 
dicular, gothic architecture, dedicated, as appears from the 
grant of Gilbert, the sixth Baron of Kendal, to the Holy 
Trinity. 1 It consists of the nave, (to which there is a 

1 Concerning this, many erroneous statements have been published. In the 
will of Sir Walter de Strickland, knt. it is required, that " a Prist shall synge 
for me and my ancestors at St. Katiris auter in Kirkby Kendal three years." 
From this recital, the Editor of the Lonsdale Magazine imagined the church to 
be dedicated to St. Catherine ; whereas, it is probable, that the altar within the 
Strickland chapel only was dedicated to that saint. In a topographical account 



THE CHURCH. 43 

clerestory), chancel, and four side aisles, so that it consists 
of five open aisles, like the church of St. John Lateran at 
Eome. The two exterior aisles, north and south, were added 
to the previous three aisles, as before said, about the be- 
ginning of the 16th century. From the capitals of the 
pillars spring high arches, of the pointed or gothic order, 
which altogether produce a grand and imposing effect, well 
calculated to solemnize the ordinances of religion. The 
length is 140 feet, and the breadth 103 feet, interior measure. 
The tower is engaged, and stands on four arches ; the height 
from the floor to the point of the eastern arch is 33 feet ; 
from the floor to the point of the northern and southern 
arches 24 feet; and from the ground to the point of 
the western window 35 feet. At some former period (the 
date of which cannot now be ascertained), the tower appears 
to have been raised ; and at that time the ringers, who had 
previously had their station on the ground, were placed in a 
belfry, made at the height of fifteen feet. 

There appears to have been four altars in the church, 
dedicated as follows :— 

1. The great altar in the chancel, to the honour of the 
Holy Trinity. 

2. The altar on the north side, to St. Mary the Virgin. 

3. The altar on the south side, to St. Catharine. 

4. The altar in the Parr chapel (now the Yestry). 

The piscina was found in a mutilated state, when the 
church was restored in 1829, as before stated. 

The tower is 25 feet wide, and 80 feet high. Till the year 
1774, the peal consisted of six bells ; but in that year (the 
sixth having been burst, and not having been quite tunable 
with the rest), the peal was increased to one of eight. The 
first, second, third, and sixth were re-cast ; and the fourth 
and fifth of the old set, became the seventh and eighth of the 
new peal. In the year 1816 the fifth of this peal was 
cracked, and at that time a subscription was entered into for 

of Kendal, in the Monthly Magazine, for 1801, the church is inaccurately 
said to be dedicated to St. George. And we have somewhere seen it ascribed 
to St. Mary. Our authority, however, that it was dedicated to The Trinity, 
must be admitted to be unquestionable. 



44 



ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOKY. 



adding two new bells to the peal. The sum required Was 
soon raised, and the year 1817 was ushered in by the ringers, 
on the new peal, under the superintendence of Nicholas 
Wilson, one of the first scientific ringers in the north of 
England. It is generally allowed that they now constitute 
one of the most harmonious peals in the kingdom. Perhaps 
the situation of the church may aid in producing the effect 
which establishes this opinion. As the wind may direct, the 
volume of harmony, issuing from the lofty steeple, is borne 
sweetly on the bosom of the stream to a considerable distance, 
or is reflected in other directions, with echoing cadences, 
from the brow of one eminence to another. 
The weight of the peal is as follows, viz : — 

Cict. qrs. lbs. 

Treble 700 

Second 6 3 20 

Third 804 

Fourth 8 1 20 

Fifth 9 10 

Sixth 10 2 11 

Seventh 14 15 

Eighth 15 3 

Ninth 19 3 9 

Tenor 25 15 



Total . 



. .125 10 



The inscriptions on the bells, according to the present 
arrangement, are as follows : 



1 T. Mears of London Fecit 1816, 

These two Treble Bells were, purchased, by subscription, 

; in commemoration of the glorious, achievements of lord nel'son, 

and his, grace the duke of wellington 

Who with Devine assistance gave Peace to surrounding Nations 

and to this, favoured isle 

we,ll sing their praise, and join in glorious harmony this noble peal. 



T Dobson 

J SUART 

T. H. Maude 
W. Berry 
T Harrison 



J Hodgson 
J Pearson 
H Bradshaw 
T Atkinson 



Eev John Hudson M.A. Vicar 
Smith Wilson Esq,* Mayor 
James Wdlson Esq, e Deputy Recorder 
Rob, t Harrison Esq,* 

J0S h SWAINSON ESQ, R 



Sen r . Aldermen. 



THE CHUECH BELLS. 45 

2 T Mears of London Fecit 1816, 

Kendal 29 Oc„ T 1816 This subscription was promoted by 

M„ a Nich„ s Wilson op, this Town, Who by his fervent zeal in the cause, 

assisted by the vlcar, the mayor, aldermen, and his 

Brother Townsmen he carried into effect, the 18,,™ op June 1816 : 

being the anneversary of the ever memorable victory of waterloo, 

that distroyed an inveterate, foe and, gave to europe 

the blessing of peace. 



3. On this Bell there is now no inscription. It is very likely the re-casting 
of a former 3rd bell, which (according to Dr. Burn) contained the following 
distich : 

" Our voices shall with joyful sound 
Make hills and valleys echo round," 



Pack & Chapman of London Fecit 1775 

Such Wond'rous pow'r to Musick's Given. 
It Eleates the Soul to HeavEn. 



Whilst thus we join in chearfull Sound, 
May Love & Loyalty abound 

Pack & Chapman of London Fecit 1774. 



Ye Ringers all that Prize your health & happiness 
Be Sober Merry Wise & You'll the same Possess 

Pack & Chapman of London Fecit 1774. 



In Wedlocks Bands shall ye who join With Hands your Hearts unite 
So shall our tuneful Tongues combine To laud the Nuptial rite 

T Mears of London Fecit 1816. 



8 These Bells were recast from a Peal of Six to eight 1774 
by the direction of Tho s . Strickland Tho s . Scarisbrick Aldermen. 
Bryan Willson Rev d . Jn°. Willson. MA: W M . Strickland 
Jam s . Willson & Hen y . Shepherd, a Committee 
appointed by the Vestry of this Parish Tho s . Symonds D:D: Vicar 

Pack & Chapman of London Fecit 



1631 HAS TRES CAMPANAS IAM TOTA PAR.ECIA SANAS 

REDDIDIT vt qvarta est tertia qvinta simvl 

THIRD FOVRTH AND FIFT AND ALL MAY TOLL 
OTH PARISH CHARGE WITHOVT CONTROLL. 



10 ME SONITVS NOL.E MEMOREM TVB.E FACIT 1631 



46 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

In addition to the aforesaid ten bells, there is a small bell 
which formerly hung on the roof of the Bellingham Chapel, 
and which is sometimes called "the parson's bell;"' sometimes 
also, " the tinkler." It was removed during the incumbency 
of Vicar Eobinson about 1804, and placed in the Tower along 
with the rest, and is now used as the ringing-in bell, after 
the usual peal is ended, at morning and evening services. 

EESTOEATION. 

The church was closed for nearly two years, from 1850 to 
] 852, to undergo renovation and repairs, and was re-opened 
again on the 3rd of June, 1852. 

The chancel had been allowed to fall into dilapidation, and 
all the pillars in that part of the church were out of the 
perpendicular, varying, according to the report of the archi- 
tects, from nine to twelve inches. It is, by the way, singular to 
remark that no vertical settlement had taken place — the 
arches all retaining their true form, and it is difficult to 
account for this remarkable deflection of such massy pillars. 
The Master and Fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge, 
with a liberality which does them credit, determined upon a 
thorough restoration of the chancel. For this object they 
voted a sum of 1,300?., afterwards increased to 1,800?., and 
they must be looked upon as individually subscribing, for the 
sum mentioned was not set apart from an accumulated fund 
for such purposes, but its appropriation was a deduction from 
their own personal receipts. This act of liberality deserved 
high praise, and the inhabitants of the town duly appreciated 
it. The college determined also to put in a new east window, 
of noble dimensions, with intricate tracery. The chancel roof, 
low and unsightly, was replaced by one of elaborate design, 
in harmony with the character of the church. The eastern 
gable of the chancel was also entirely rebuilt, and the old 
Vestry taken away. A timber arch was thrown across the 
central aisle, separating the nave and the chancel, having 
hammer beams and subsidiary braces, all richly moulded, and 
the spandrels resting on angel corbels bearing shields and 
scripture mottoes, filled in with rich tracery. 



EESTOEATION OF THE CHURCH. 47 

The townspeople, to whom their venerable edifice is dear, 
were encouraged by the good example aforesaid to complete 
the work so well begun. Indeed the necessity for renovation 
throughout every part of the church, was equally great as in 
the chancel, and immediate steps were taken in the matter. 
The entire body of the church was repewed, the seats all 
of them being open, on a consistent plan, additional accom- 
modation was afforded to the extent of above 300 sittings. 
The church, it is calculated, will now seat 1,400 persons. 
The beautiful west window was restored, and the door- 
way beneath, closed up as an entrance, by the position 
of the organ in front, was re-opened, and, in fact, rebuilt and 
enlarged. 

From this entrance a very good sight of the interior is 
obtained. The whole length of the edifice, 140 feet, from 
west to east, is opened out in one uninterrupted view ; and 
though there is nothing comparable to York Minster, owing 
to the simplicity of the structure, and the absence of orna- 
mental architecture, yet the effect is very imposing. There 
is, however, extent, massiveness, and lightness, and the com- 
plete and finished appearance of the whole structure, with the 
beautiful east window, so well placed in regard to position, 
and so admirably ordered in all its proportions, together with 
the effect of the rich stained glass window in the Lady's 
Chapel, produce an effect which those who were used to the 
dilapidated appearance and interrupted prospect formerly 
exhibited, could hardly have conceived possible, 
s The organ gallery erected about 1702, occupied the west end 
of the nave till 1847, when it was removed, together with the 
organ which stood upon it, the latter being placed on the 
floor, almost immediately against the main entrance doors, 
which were thus for all practical purposes closed up. In 
1801, two wings were added to the organ gallery, "for the 
accommodation of the inhabitants," as if the space of the 
floor had been insufficient for the requirement of the pews. 
These galleries were anything but elegant in design, and 
impeded the fine general view of the structure obtained 
from the communion rails or chancel. 

The handsome new entrance porch was erected at this 



48 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

period, replacing an old porch of which the only tolerable 
feature was a circular arch of early Norman. 

The font was undertaken by the ladies of the town, and 
private subscriptions enabled them to raise it on a massive 
pedestal, and pave the floor of the baptistry with encaustic 
tiles. 

- The "brasses" previously distributed over the church, were 
collected at the restoration in 1852, and are now laid alto- 
gether in Bellingham Chapel, and a tablet in brass is fixed to 
the adjacent column, stating that "the aforesaid 'brasses' 
are precisely the same as they were found at the time ;" in 
witness whereof the names of the officers of the church are 
recorded, viz. : — 

Joseph Watkins Barnes, Vicar. 
William Chaplin, Curate. 

Churchwardens. 
John Mann, Church Husband. 



Edward Branthwaite. 
Joseph Barrow. 
Rainforth Hodgson. 
Thomas Busher. 
Thomas Brocklebank. 
Joseph Morton. 



Isaac Edmondson. 
Robert B. Hunter. 
Samuel Compston. 
Henry Cragg. 
Anthony Nicholson. 
Christopher Birkett. 



John Washington, Parish Clerk. 

The appropriation of pews and sittings was determined by 
ballot, regard being had to the amount of subscription res- 
pectively made by persons or families. The whole of the 
nave, was, however, left free for the use of the poor, and for 
inmates of 'Sandes's Hospital,' and 'Old Maid's Hospital.' 
This appropriation, though not, we apprehend, ecclesiastically 
legal, is as near an approach as could be made to an arrange- 
ment satisfactory on the whole. Seats in a church are open to 
the parishioners generally, and cannot be set aside by the 
churchwardens, or occupied beyond the service. Usage, how- 
ever, and convenience have assigned fixed seats to those who 
statedly attend on the sabbath ordinances, and so long as no 
undue claims are asserted, or rights arrogated which have not 
existence, we are little disposed to quarrel with anything so 
apparently equitable and convenient. The seats in the west 



THE CHUECH. 49 

end gallery, for which a payment was made, which formed 
part of the organist's salary, were transferred to the east end 
of the second aisle from the north. 

The first act of restoration is due to the Eev. John Hudson, 
M.A., vicar, who, as before said, in 1829, cleared away from 
the pillars and arches the unsightly limewash that covered 
the ashlar-work and marred their beauty. But the crowning- 
work, in 1850-52, was begun and mainly carried through by 
the energy of the vicar of that day, the Eev. Joseph Watkins 
Barnes, M.A. He was a man who united in his character all 
the requisites for the task — considerable knowledge and taste 
in ecclesiastical architecture, determined perseverance in his 
object, and extreme liberality, this last quality having been 
exercised by him on the occasion to the utmost limits of his 
benefice. 

The opening ceremony took place on Thursday, the 3d of 
June, 1852, on which occasion the church was crowded 
throughout. Prayers were read by the Eev. the Vicar, and 
the sermon was preached by the Bishop of the diocese, from 
1 Chron. xxix. 16 : "O Lord our God, all this store that we 
have prepared to build Thee an House for Thine Holy Name 
cometh of Thine hand, and is all Thine own." 

Stained glass windows were presented by the following 
persons : — 

Great East Window, Hilton Halhead, Liverpool. 

The West Nave, James Gandy, Heaves Lodge. 

The Alderman's Chapel, Major Alan Chambre, London. 

The West end of North Aisle, G. A. Gelderd, Aikrigg End. 

Do. Edward Brown, Bath. 

The Baptistry, Executors of the late William Bobinson. 
Belliugham Chapel, Thomas Cooper. 

Clerestory windows : — 

1. Rev. J. W. Barnes. 9. Mrs. E. L. Barnes. 

2. Gerard Gandy. 10. John Fisher. 

3. Thomas Taylor. 11. Edward W. Scott. 

4. Henry Horne. 12. Rainforth Hodgson. 

5. Cornelius Nicholson. 1 3. J. G. J. Ireland and 

6. Anthony Garnett & Brothers. Thomas Rickards. 

7. Rev. G. F. Weston. 14. Mrs. Thompson Bindloss. 



Thomas Gough and 
Samuel Whinerey. 



15. Thomas Webster. 

16. Hilton Halhead. 



50 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

The Tower Clock was given by Christopher Gardner. 

The Nave was restored at the expense of the Parish by a rate of £440. 

The Master and Fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge, rebuilt the Chancel 
and the Great East Window, at a cost of £1,689 6s. lOd. 

The whole Cost of the Restoration was £6,400. 

The Organ. 1 — The original organ was built in 1702, at the 
time of the erection of the west end " Organ Gallery," pre- 
viously alluded to. It had only one row of keys, with nine 
stops. Subsequently a "swell " was added ; and again, some 
time after that, a "choir" was superadded. In 1846, it had 
become so far dilapidated and unworthy of its position, that 
an effort was then made to have it reconstructed. A subscrip- 
tion, set on foot for the purpose, soon procured the requisite 
fund, viz. i, J 600. It was rebuilt under the superintendence 
of Mr. Scarisbrick, the organist, by a firm of organ-builders 
in Manchester, and is now one of the finest instruments in 
the north of England. The old stops available were carefully 
selected and used in the new organ. It consists of the 
following parts or properties, viz. : — 

3 manuals and a pedal-board of 29 notes. 
13 stops in the " great " organ. 

8 stops in the " choir " organ. 

9 stops in the " swell " organ. 
3 stops in the "pedal" organ. 
5 " coupling " stops. 

5 " composition " pedals. 
1,900 pipes in the total. 

Up to the time of this reconstruction in 1846, the organ 
had stood in the gallery. It was then placed on the floor at 
the west end, barring the entrance to the church by the 
western door ! From hence, it was very properly removed, on 
the restoration of the church in 1852, to the Bellindiani 
Chapel, at the east end. 

Mr. Thomas Scarisbrick, the organist, has fulfilled his office 
with great ability for thirty-nine years, having been appointed 

1 The instrument, the Organ, was invented and introduced into the Church 
of England as early as the time of Theodorus, a.d. 6 SO. —Dr. Hook's " Live? 
of the Archbishops of Canterbury,'' vol. i. p. 198. 



THE CHURCH. 51 

organist in 1822, at only eighteen years of age, after a compe- 
tition with several rival candidates. 

We now proceed to a description of some of the Monu- 
ments in this ancient fabric : — 

i. Paer Chapel. — In the quire of the south aisle, which has 
a flat wainscot ceiling, with roses at the intersections of the 
rafters, is a large tombstone, of black marble, without any 
inscription. It adjoins the wall on the south, and on the 
north side are the following arms : 1. Those of Parr (two 
barulets), quartered with Eoos (three water bougets, two and 
one). 2. Brus (vaire, one bar). 3. Fitzhugh (three chevrons inter- 
laced). At the east end, are all the preceding arms quartered, 
viz. 1 and 4 Parr quartered with Eoos (the former without 
the bordure). 2. Parr quartered with Fitzhugh. 3. Eoos 
quartered with Brus. And encircled by the Garter. It will 
appear from our records relating to the castle, that these arms 
give a clue to the history of the residents there. The arms on 
this tomb are a strong proof (and this has long been a 
questionable point) that under it lie the remains of Sir 
William Parr, and very probably some of the families of Eoos 
and Brus, as before mentioned. 

Upon the ceiling of this quire, which is somewhat dilapi- 
dated, are five escutcheons, four of which form a square, 
and the fifth occupies the centre. At the north and south 
angles on the east side are the arms, 

1. North. Parr quartering Eoos. 

2. South. Parr quartering Fitzhugh and Roos. Roos quartering Brus. 

In the centre, 

3. 1 and 4. Parr quartering Green (azure, three stags trippant, or), 

2 and 3. Green quartering Maplethorpe (azure, a chevron between 
three cross crosslets, or ; on a chief or ; a lion passant, gu). 

At the north and south angles, west side, are, 

4. North. Green quartering Maplethorpe. 

5. South. Roos. 

3 and 4 refer to a continuation of the family of Sir Thomas 
Parr, which will be given in our account of the Castla 

E 2 



52 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

"In 1628, we are informed, there was the following inscrip- 
tion on a monument in this quire. On a tomb, a man in 
armour, kneeling ; on his breast, two bars, argent, within a 
bordure, sable (for Parr). On his wife's breast, quarterly, 1 and 4 
Green. 2 and 3 Maplethorpe. And about it was written, 

"Pray for the soul of Thomas Parr, knight, of king's body, Henry VIII. 

master of his wardes, and sher who deceased the 11th day of 

Nov. in the 9th year of the reign of our said sovereign lord, at London 
in the Fryers, as his tomb doth record." 1 

In the glass window over it were these arms : quarterly, 

1 and 4 Parr, without the bordure, a crescent for difference. 

2 and 3 Eoos. And over them was inscribed, " Arma Wil. 
Par militis." 

Strickland Chapel. — In the quire of the second aisle, 
from the south, in a chapel, inclosed by some good screen 
work, is an ancient monument of grey marble, without 
inscription, but with the following coat armour : 

1. 1 and 3. A fesse dancette, between ten billets (for Deincourt). 

2 and 4. Three escalops, two and one. 

2. The same, impaling a saltier, with a mullet pierced (for Neville). 

It would appear, from these quarterings, that this monu- 
ment records two things : 1. The union of the families of 
Deincourt and Strickland. 2. The union of Sir Walter 
Strickland (who died 18th or 19th Henry VIII) with the 
daughter of Sir Ealph Neville, of Thornton Briggs, in York- 
shire. But whether it was erected on the death of the said 
Sir Walter, or whether the second quartering was added at 
that time to the arms previously inscribed on the tomb, we 
have not been able to discover. 

It is somewhat- remarkable that, from that time to the 
year 1656, there are not in this chapel any traces of inter- 
ments, although twelve generations, at Sizergh, can be 
distinctly traced in that interval. But in that year, a raised 
tomb of black marble, resting on four pillars, had been 
erected, in memory of Walter, son of Sir Thomas Strickland 
and Jane his wife. 

Beneath a marble canopy, is a remarkable figure of this 

1 Vide WhitakerV " Richmondshire," p. 327, and our remarks on Sir 
Thomas Parr's burial -place, in the account of " The Castle," at a subsequent 
page. 



THE CHURCH. 



boy, in alabaster, dressed in a loose gown, 
is a representation of this tomb : — 



53 

The following 




Around the margin of the tablet is inlaid a border of white 
marble, containing four lines of English verse, within which 
is inscribed the following Latin epitaph : — 



W 
2 

< 


This Pvre-refined Strvctvre does 


O 

O 

z 

H 

> 

2, 


Memorise Sacrvm 


w 

H 


Spectatifsimse Speratifsimse prolis 


> 


W 


HlC IACET GVALTERVS STRICKLAND, 


Pi 


FlLIVS NATV MAXIMVS 


< 


< 
Q 


Thom,e Strickland 




De Sizergh Militis 


O 


& Iance Vxoris illivs mecstissim/e 


O 


< 


cvm qvatvor alijs Infantvlis, 


►d 


W 


eivsdem Stirpis & Stem ati s; 


> 


CO 


Hie Sepvltis, 


W 


<! 

H 

2 


Iste Gualterus ; 




SlCVTI PRIMOGENITVS, ITA OPTIMIS DOTIBVS 


APPRIME CONSPICVVS ; 


O 


3 


EXIMI.E IN DOLIS, INCLYT.E MENTIS 


Si 


VVLTVS AMABILIS, SVAVISSIM^E CONVERSATIONIS 




£ 


SVIS, QVO NEMO CHARIOR, 




Q 


DOMESTICIS GRATIOR 




2 
2 

w 

CO 
c/3 


CVNCTIS ACCEPTIOR 


Corpus humo memoriam Seculo, anima Deo 
D D D 



> 

> 

CO 


(in 
<! 


Obyt y 20 OF Septem 

1656. 


CINV NOINA SAOI^OIO V "30J 



54 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

He must have died young, for, in the year 1646, there is 
an indenture preserved, containing covenants of an intended 
settlement on the marriage of the said Sir Thomas Strickland 
with Jane, widow of Sir Christopher Dawney, baronet, and if 
the marriage took place in that year, the boy here interred 
could not have been more than about nine years of age, and 
the marble eftigy corresponds well enough with this suppo- 
sition. The said Sir Thomas was made banneret, in the field, 
by the king in person, and was knight of the shire in 1661. 

Against the east wall is a monument in memory of Mary, 
wife of Thomas Strickland, and daughter of Simon Scroop, of 
Danby, Esquire, who died in 1737. This monument bears a 
shield, with three escalops (the Stricklands' arms) impaled 
with azure, a bend, or, (the arms of Scroop,) surmounted with 
the Stricklands' crest, a full-topp'd holly-bush. Motto : 
" Sans mal." 

There is also, in this chapel, a neat, plain monument, to 
the memory of Charles Strickland, of Sizergh, who died in 
1770. And of Jarrard Strickland, of Kendal, who died in 
1795. Also, of Cecilia, daughter of William Townley, Esq. 
of Townley, wife of the above-named Charles, and afterwards 
also of the said Jarrard. She died at Sizergh, in 1814. And, 
also, of Thomas Strickland Standish, son of the aforesaid 
Charles and Cecilia, who is buried in Standish Church. 

Bellingham Chapel. — The stately chapel of the Belling- 
hams of Burneshead, where the organ is now placed, is raised 
an entire story above the rest of the aisle. In 1850-2, this 
chapel was entirely re-roofed, and the old elaborate oak 
ceiling, then much decayed, was replaced with a new one of 
similar design, in imitation of the rich fret work, and stalac- 
tical ornaments of the same period in stone. It is adorned 
with gilt bosses containing bugle horns and other bearings, 
the cognizances of the Bellingham family. Two of the 
windows in the clerestory were, many years ago, in repairing 
the roof, barbarously walled up, and it is to be regretted 
that, at the restoration of the church, they were not again 
opened out. 

In the south east corner of this Chapel, there was formerly 
a box tomb, which contained several brass plates sunk into the 



THE CHURCH. 55 

cover of the tomb. The tomb is now removed, but the top 
flag remains on the level of the floor, and shows where the 
plates had been ; they represented two effigies (a man and 
a woman), and four escutcheons, one at each corner of the 
stone. On a separate plate was the following inscription : — 

" Here under lyeth Sir Roger Bellingham, Knt. (which of his 
own proper costs and charges builded the Chapell of our Lady within 
this church of Kendall), and of Margaret his wife, daur. of Sir Robt. 
Aske, Knight, and of Elisabeth his wife, daur. to the Lord John 
Clifford, now created Earl of Cumberland, which Sir Roger died the 
1 8th day of July a.d. 1533, and the s? Margaret dyed the day of 
, A.D. 15 , whose souls Jhesu pardon." x 

This inscription is of great historical importance, as 
showing that the Bellingham Chapel was built in the time 
of Henry VIII. and that it was dedicated to the Virgin Mary 
(" Our Ladye"). So we understand it. 2 

On the north side of this tomb was a freestone panel, 
which has been carefully inserted in the pillar at the head 
of the tombstone. It bears the following arms, quartered : 
1. A bugle horn, stringed. 2. Three bendlets, and on a 
canton, a lion rampant. 3. Three bugle horns, stringed, 
two and one. 1 and 3 are Bellingham, the latter being the 
Sussex branch. The second is " Burneshead." 

There is an ancient helmet, suspended from an iron rod, 
immediately over this tomb: and, as the seventh in succession, 
viz. Sir Eoger Bellingham, was a knight banneret, and was 
certainly interred here, we conclude, that this helmet either 
belonged to him, or was suspended in memory of his having 
received that most honourable distinction, usually conferred 
by the king on the field of battle. 3 Probably the effigies 

1 Hist, of Richmondshire. 

2 Dr. Burn identifies " Our Ladye's Chapel " with the Alderman's Aisle (see 
" Westmorland," p. 76), but we think this a mistake. 

3 This helmet, commonly called "the Rebel's Cap," forms the theme of a 
popular narrative, which, although we doubt its authenticity, it might perhap 
be considered unpardonable to omit here. In the civil wars of the Common- 
wealth, there resided in Kendal, oue Colonel Briggs, a leading magistrate, and 
an active commander in the Cromwellian army. At that time, also, Robert 
Philipson, surnamed, from his bold and licentious character, Robin the Devil, 
inhabited the island on Windermere, called Belle Isle, which, with the estate 
of Calgarth, and some property in Crook, his family possessed for many years. 
This Col. Briggs besieged Belle Isle for eight or ten days, until the siege of 



5G ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

were those of him and his lady ; and had the escutcheons 
been preserved, they would have enabled us to trace the 
history of the family, and interments, with more precision. 

In a pew which formerly adjoined this quire, and which 
had probably been the ancient family seat of the Bellinghams, 
was a brass monument representing the effigy of Sir Alan 



Carlisle being raised, Mr. Huddleston Philipson, of Crook, hastened from 
Carlisle, and relieved his brother Eobert. The next day, being Sunday, 
Robin, with a small troop of horse, rode to Kendal, to make reprisals. He 
stationed his men properly in the avenues, and himself rode directly into- the 
church in search of Briggs, down one aisle and up another. In passing out 
at one of the upper doors, his head struck against the portal, when his helmet, 
unclasped by the blow, fell to the ground and was retained. By the confu- 
sion into which the congregation were thrown, he was suffered quietly to ride 
out. As he left the church-yard, however, he was assaulted : his girths were 
out, and he himself was unhorsed. His party now returned upon the 
assailants ; and the major, killing with his own hand the 'man who had seized 
him, clapped the saddle upon his horse, and, ungirthed as it was, vaulted into 
it, and rode full speed through the streets, calling to his men to follow him ; 
and with his party made a safe retreat to his asylum on the lake. The helmet 
was afterwards hung aloft, as a commemorating badge of sacrilegious temerity. 
This narrative is still extant in a ballad of the times, entitled " Dick and the 
Devil," now of course extremely rare. The adventure is celebrated, also, by 
Scott, in his poem of Rokeby : — 

" All eyes upon the gateway hung 

When through the gothic arch there sprung 

A horseman arm'd, at headlong speed — 

Sable his cloak, his plume, his steed. 

Fire from the flinty floor was spurned, 

The vaults unwonted clang returned ! " 

Rokeby, Stanza 33, Canto vi. 

In Bowness Church there is an epitaph on a slab of stone, referring either 
to Robin or one of his family — not quite certain. It runs as follows : — 

" The author's Epitaph upon himselfe, made in the tyme of his sickness. 
" A man I was, worme3 meate I am, 
To earth returned from whence I came. 
Many removes on earth I had, 
In earth at length my bed is made : 
A bed which Christ did not disdaine, 
Although it covld not him retaine. 
His deadlie foes might plainlie see, 
Over sin and death his victorie. 
Here must I rest till Christ shall let me see, 
His promised Jerusalem and her felicitie. 
" Veni Domine Jesu veni cito. 
"Robert Philipson gent, xiiij. t0 Octobris an. salutis 1631 anno. 
" ^Etatis sua 63 tio ." 



THE CHURCH. ' 57 

Bellingham, in armour. This monument was removed at the 
restoration of the church, and placed in the north wall, within 
the quire of the Bellingham family. It hears the following 
inscription : — 




&ere Igeii) tlje oofcge of aian BelUngft'm lEssuter, 
toijo tnargett ©ati&erpan Uaugfiter of antfjotije 
©ucfeet lEsQtifer ftp tofjome Je fjaB no Ctfjdoren 
after tofjose trecease f)e tnargeo" IBoroti)te Baugljter 
of stomas SanforU IBsguter of tofjom ije f)a& W 
sonnes & etgfjt Uaugfjters, of tot)(ci) 5 sonnes & 7 
toaugfjters tottf) ge saitr IBorotiite ar geat Igofng ?|e 
teas tfcre score & one gaue of age anB flneo" j?e 7 of JIfiage 
, a. m. 1577 oaes.) 



This Alan was grandson of Alan Bellingham, the eighth son 
of Sir Bobert, son of Sir Boger Bellingham, knight banneret, 
before mentioned. His said grandfather purchased Levens 
and Helsington, Gaythorne, and Fawcet Forest, and divers 
lordships in Lancashire and Northumberland. He was a 
bencher of the Inner Temple, and one of the king's council 



58 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

at York, for the northern parts. In the 13th Eliz. he was 
knight of the shire for Westmorland. - 
Here are found the following arms : 

1. Quarterly, 1 and 4 Bellingham (three bugle horns, stringed, sable). 

2 and 3 Burneshead as before. 

2. The same arms, impaling quarterly : 1, party, per chevron, sable and 

ermine, two boars' heads, couped, or (Sandford). 2, three lioncels 
rampant, argent (English). 3, or, on a chevron, between three 
mullets, pierced, azure, as many fleurs-de-lys of the field 
(Crackenthorpe). 4, argent, two bars on a canton gules, a lion of 
England (Lancaster). 
Motto : " Ains y Test." 

The other part of the court armour in this place does not 
relate to interments, but merely to the transition of the pro- 
perty : viz. from Alan Bellingham to Sir James Graham 
by purchase ; and from his daughter and heiress to Henry 
Bowes Howard, earl of Berkshire, into whose family she 
brought, by marriage, the whole of the inheritance, of which 
we have now given this brief account. The Howard arms 
are, gules, a bend between six cross crosslets, fltchy argent, 
with an augmentation in the midst of the bend, on an 
escutcheon, or, a demi-lion rampant, pierced through the 
other quarters of mouth with an arrow, within a double 
tressure, counter flory, gules. The crest on a chapeau gules, 
turned up ermine, a lion guardant, his tail extended, or, 
gorged, with a ducal coronet, argent. Supporters : on the 
dexter side, a lion guardant, or gorged ducally, argent ; 
on the sinister, a lion, argent. Motto : " Xon quo sed 
quomodo." 

The Bellingham chapel, since the extinction of the family 
whose name it bears, is become the property of the parish, 
at whose expense it is kept in repair. 

On a pillar, at the head of the tomb before mentioned, 
is a small mutilated monument of white marble, inserted in 
grey freestone, to the memory of Dame Thoniasin Thorn- 
burgh, 1 wife of Sir William Thornburgh, of Selside, knight, 

1 During her widowhood she kept a book of accounts of her receipts, 
expenses, and disbursements, whence, in an account " of the holle yeare 
waiges of her servants at Selsatt " (now Selside), it appears, that she had nine 
male servants, whose united annual wages amounted only to 107. Is. id. ; and 



THE CHURCH. 59 

and daughter of Sir Eobert Bellingham, of Burneshead, 
knight (the last of the family at that place), son of Sir 
Eoger Bellingham, knight banneret, before mentioned. Upon 
the monument are the following six coats, quarterly, being 
the arms borne by the Thornburghs : — 

1. Ermin, a frette and chief, gules. (Thornburgh.) 

2. Argent, two bars on a canton, gules, a cross flory of the first. 

(Broughton.) 

3. Argent, two bars, and a canton gules, over all a bend, argent. 

(Copeland.) 

4. Sable, a frette, argent. (Harrington.) 

5. Argent, three bugle horns, sabled, stringed gules. (Bellingham.) 

6. Argent, three bendlets, gules, on a canton of the second, a lion 

rampant of the first. (Burneshead.) 

The inscription is as follows : — 

On earth three score a tene years spent 
OR NIGHETHERABOWTS this lyffe changed 
DAME THOMASIN THORNBVRGH HENCE WENT 
HEAVENLYE ioyes to ioye expected 

WIFFE TO SIR WILLIAM THORNBVRGH KNYGHT 

WHYLST ON EARTH HE WAS REMAYNYNG 

SIR ROBERT BELLINGHAM GENTLE KNYGHT 

HIR FATHER WAS WYTH WHOM ENDING 

SHE DESIRED SEPVLTED TO BE 

AS HERE HIR CORPS, HIR HOPE SERVING 

VNDER LYETH AS YOVE MAYE SEE 

HIR SPIRIT WYTH THE BLESSED BEING 

THE ELEVENTHE OF AVGVST SHE EXPIRED 

A YEARE OF CHRIST ON THOWSAND 

FYVE HVNDRETH EIGHTIE TOO 

THIS WORLD SHE LEFT (THEREOF NOT LOTH) 

ALMIGHTIE GOD HIR SOWLE RECEEVE 

TO HEVENLY BLIS SHE HVMBLYE CRAVED. 

It is remarkable that, in a church of such great antiquity, 
there are so few monuments remaining in memory of the 
vicars. After the dissolution of monasteries, the rectory, 
with the advowson of the vicarage, was granted to Trinity 
College, in the University of Cambridge, by Queen Mary, in 
the first year of her reign, that is in the year 1553. Dr. Burn 
thinks it did not come immediately into the possession 
of the college, for that an indenture is preserved amongst 



eight female servants, whose united wages make no more than 41. 8s. '8d. ! 
This document bears date 1579. — Vide Burn's " Westmorland," p. 119. 



60 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

Lord Lyttleton's evidences, at Hagley, bearing date the 
15th year of James I. 1617, stating, that Thomas Lyttleton 
was then possessed, in right of his wife, among other 
estates, of the advowson of the church of Kirkby-Kendal. 
But it appears that this statement must have been founded 
on some lease granted by the abbot and convent of St. Mary's, 
at York, before the dissolution ; for, in 1562, we find, that 
Ambrose Hetherington was presented by the master and 
fellows of Trinity College, to the vicarage of Kirkby-Kendal ; 
and, in the following year, the vicarage house and premises 
were surveyed, by order of the college. We have taken some 
pains to trace the succession of vicars, and we believe the 
annexed list to be as correct as can be made out, from the 
documents now existing : — 

1. Alan de Esyngwald. 

2. 1301. William de Madestan. 

3. 1312. Eoger de Kirkeby. 

4. Thomas Greenwode. 

5. 1366. Thomas de Leynesbury. 

6. 1432. Richard Garsdale. 

7. 1439. John Bryan. 

8. 1495. William, Abbot of St. Mary's, York. 
9. Thomas Maynes. 

10. 1550. James Pilkington. 

11. 1551. Nicholas Ashton. 

12. 1562. Ambrose Hetherington, D.D. buried July 13th, 1591. 

13. 1591. Samuel Heron, resigned. 

14. 1592. Ravlph Tirer, B.D. died June 4th, 1627. 

15. 1627. Francis Gardener, B.D. 

16. 1640. Henry Hall, B.D. 

17. 1656. John Strickland. 

18. 1658. William Brownsword. 

19. 1672. Michael Stanford, M.A. died March 2d, 1682. i 

20. 1683. Thomas Murgatroyd, M.A. buried April 17th, 1699. 

21. 1699. William Crosby, M.A. died December 7th, 1733, aged 69. 

22. 1734. Richard Cuthbert, M.A. died November 7th, 1744, aged 48. 

23. 1745. Thomas Symonds, M.A. D.D. in 1773, died Feb. 16th, 17S9, 

aged 79. 

24. 1789. Henry Robinson, M.A. died Feb. 25th, 1806, aged 58. 

25. 1806. Matthew Murfitt, M.A. died Nov. 7th, 1814, aged 50. 

26. 1815. John Hudson, M.A. died Oct. 31st, 1843, aged 70. 

27. 1844. Joseph Watkins Barnes, M.A. died May 15th, 1858, aged 51. 

28. 1858. John Cooper, M.A. 



1 [He was never connected with ' Trinity,' as we are informed ; but was 
Fellow of ' Christ's ' at his presentation.] 



THE CHURCH. 61 

Of the above, there are only memorials of nine, viz. 1, Ealph 
Tyrer. 2, William Crosby. 3, Michael Stanford. 4, Bichard 
Cuthbert. 5, Thomas Symonds. 6, Henry Eobinson. 7, 
Matthew Murfitt. 8, John Hudson. 9, Joseph Watkins 
Barnes. The following are copies : — 

1. On a brass plate within the communion rails : 



Herevnder lyeth y e body of M r Ravlph 
tlrer late vlcar of kendall batchler 
of Divinity, who dyed the 4 th day 
of Ivne, An : Dni : 1627. 

London bredd me, Westminster fedd me 
Cambridge sped me, my Sister wed me, 
Study taught me, Liuing sought me, 
Learning brought me, Kendall caught me, 
Labour pressed me, sicknes distressed me, 
Death oppressed me, & graue possessed me, 
God first gave me, Christ did saue me 
Earth did crave me, & heauen would haue me. 



% Also, within the communion rails, on a brass plate : 

H. S. E. 
Willielmus Crosby, A.M. 

DUNELMENSIS 

Collegij S. S. Trinitatis Cantabrig. 

AB : ANNO 1690 

Socius. 

HUJUS ECCLESDE AB ANNO 1699 
VlCARIUS 

Obijt Septimo die Decembris 
) Dom. 1733. 

ANN ° } ^TAT. 70- 

[This vicar, a man of exemplary morals, has the merit of 
having put a stop to the revolting practice of burying the 
dead without coffins.] 



62 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

3. On a marble monument against the north wall, removed 
from over the old vestry door : 

Hie in proximo situs eft 

Michael Stanford. 

Erat omamentum literarum et decus, 

Veritatis cultor eximius, 

Fidei propugnator strenuus, 

Ecclefiae Anglicanae Hookerus alter 

Et Fanaticorum malleus. 

Et quicquid vel cupiunt vel debent esse Viki 

Is adeo, omni laude major, 

Coelo maturus, 

Suum ad triumphum evectus eft, 

Quinto Nonas Martij 

( Salutis Reparatae ) mdclxxxii . 

Anno < /Etatis Suae A > xlviii . 

f Animarum hie Curae \ x m0 . 

Hoc 

WlLLIELMUS RAWLINSON 

de Gilthwaite=Rigge Armiger 

Summus EI Amicus 

In memoriam 

Posuit. 

4. On a flat stone in the church-yard at the east end of 
the church : 

Here lies buried 

The Rev. Richard Cuthbert, a.m. 

Vicar of Kirkby-Kendale : 

In whose Character 

The Christian, the Scholar, and the Gentleman, 

Rendered each other more illustrious, 

His Zeal was happily tempered 

with Knowledge and Moderation, 

His public Labours and private Conduct 

Agreed to demonstrate the integrity of his Life. 

Stranger ! suspect not thig Epitaph of Flattery ; 

His Praises are more fully inscribed 

on the Hearts of all who Knew Him 

And His Master's Presence 

will reward and perfect his Virtues, 

By a more intimate Converse 

with the great Exemplar. 

Ob. Nov. 7. A.D. 1744. iEtat. 48. Cur. huj. Par. 11. 

Here also lieth 

Dorothy his Daughter aged :. 

Richard his Son aged 6. 







THE CHURCH. 63 

5. On a marble monument against the north wall, formerly 
placed in the alderman's aisle : 

Sacred to the Memory of 

The Rev. Thomas Symonds d.d. 

who died 

the i6 t . h Day of February 1789 : 

having been 45 Years Vicar 

of this Parish, 

" Forgive the wish 

that wou'd have kept thee here.'* 

Reader, whoe'er Thou art, 

expect not the florid Epitaph, 

the Modefty of him 

whom it fhould perpetuate forbad : 

He only wifh'd to be remember'd 

by the Virtuous few, 
with whom he lived Refpected 
and died lamented. 

6. A plain flat stone on the south side of the church-yard, 

near the private door to the Vicarage, marks the grave of the 

Eev. Henry Kobinson, vicar, bearing the following initials 

and date : 

H. R. 

1806. 

7. On a small monument against the wall of the north 
aisle, removed from the Bellingham Chapel : 

To the Memory of 

THE REVEREND MATTHEW MURFITT A.M. 

Vicar of Kendal 

and formerly Fellow of Trinity College, 

Cambridge. 

who died Nov r . 7. 18 14 Aged 50 Years. 

He was a pious, learned and eloquent Divine : 

A sincere friend, a kind husband, 

and in every relation of Life 

a most worthy man. 

8. On a marble monument against the south wall near the 
vestry : 

TO THE MEMORY OF 

the rev d . JOHN" HUDSON M.A, 

VICAR OF THIS PARISH FOR 28 YEARS, 

AND LATE FELLOW AND TUTOR 

OF TRINITY COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE; 

WHO DIED OCTOBER 31??, 1843, 

AGED 70 YEARS. 

HE WAS ESTEEMED FOR HIS 



64 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

SINCERE AFFECTION, HIS SOUND JUDGMENT, 

AND STERLING TALENT. 

HIS MERITS AS TUTOR WERE ACKNOWLEDGED 

BY A MEMORIAL GIFT 

FROM HIS GRATEFUL PUPILS. 

HOW HE APPROVED HIMSELF AS YICAR 

IS ATTESTED BY THIS MONUMENT, ERECTED BY 

AFFECTIONATE MEMBERS OF HIS FLOCK. 

9. At the Cemetery, Kendal, is a monumental tomb, of 
mediaeval design, to the next vicar, the Bev. J. W. Barnes, with 
the following inscription, in old English characters : 

" Here rests the body of the Rev d . Joseph Watkins Barnes, M.A. for 
fourteen years Vicar of Kirkby-Kendal, and formerly Fellow of Trinity 
College, Cambridge, who departed this life May 15, 1858, in his 52d year." 

The following suggestions as to the symbols on the tomb 
may be interesting. Within the trefoil of the right gable are the 
cup and paten, indicating the clergyman's office. As the heart, 
the seat of affections, is on the left side, so on that side of the 
monument the initials I.H.S. are inscribed, symbolizing trust 
in Christ. At the head is the emblem of the Trinity, showing 
the assent of the understanding to the truth of Eevelation ; 
and at the foot the Bible, God's written word — " A lamp to 
our feet and a guide unto our path." 

Out of the many remaining neat and elegant monuments 
which adorn this church, we shall only select a few, 
beginning with the next, in point of antiquity, to those of 
the three ancient families before mentioned, and proceeding 
in the order of time. 

At the east end of the south, or Parr's, aisle, lie the remains 
of Sir Augustine Mcolls, knight, one of the Justices of the 
Court of Common Pleas, who, sitting as judge of assize in 
this town (the assizes being held here at that time, on account 
of some differences between Francis, Earl of Cumberland, 
the then sheriff, and the town of Appleby), died August 3, 
1616, in the 57th year of his age. His monument unfor- 
tunately fell down, and was broken ; and when Mr. Hudson 
became vicar of Kendal, the fragments were deposited in a 
box kept in the vestry. He restored it as well as the 
mutilated state of the fragments would permit. The 



THE CHURCH. 



<>. 



following is the inscription (the letters here in italics being 
supplied from the Faxton monument) : — 





f ONE OF THE CARDINALL VERTVES IS HIS NAME ) 
I THE FOVRE TO FEWE TO COMPREHEND HIS FAME / 








TO THE MOST RELLIGIOVS ^ND 




RENOWNED MEMORIE OF 






Sr AVGVSTINE nicolls knight late of faxton in 






NORTHAMPTOSHEIRE (HEERE BVRIED) WHO WAS SECOND 


K 3 

2 w 
M 2 


<-*-, 


SONNE OF THOMAS NICOLLS OF THE SAME COVNTYE 




HE WAS STVDENT OF Y= LAWES IN THE MIDDLE 


o 


TEMPLE LONDON, BECAME READER THEREIN Y* LAST 


W 3 




YEARE OF QVEENE ELIZABETH, OF WHOM HE RECEA 


H O 


2^ 


VED HIS WRITT OF SERIEANT ATT THE LAWE THE 


< Pi 




MICHAELMAS TEARME IMMEDIATLF FOLLOWINGE. 




AFTERW^IEDS SERIEANT TO PRINCE HENRYE OF 


S| 


FAMOVS MEMORIE AND THE QVEENE HIS MOTHER 


B w 


P4 {z; 


THEN ONE OF HIS MAMIES JUSTICES OF HIS COVRT OF 


co w 


gS 


COMMON PLEASE AND KEEPER OF YE GREATE SEALE 


co w 

3 w 

CO fc. 
CO £ 

^ 2 


5) Hi 


TO YE MOST ILLVSTRIOVS AND MIGHTYE PRINCE 


« 3 

Of S 

P3 3 
hi S 


CB. ARLES WHO HAVINGE LABOYREB IN Y^ HIGHE 


> 2 


AND PAINFVLL CALLINGE OF A MOST REVERENDE AND 


a co 


IVST IVDGE FOR THE SPACE OF FOVRE YEARES 


Ed m 




FELL VNDER THE HEAVIE BVRTHEN OF IT (HEERE ATT 


3 ► 
fed j^ 


> < 


KENDALL) x SITTINGE THEN IVSTICE OF ASSIZE AND 


Ed M 
fed co 
2 ^ 


COMMINGE TO GIVE IVDGMENT VPON OTHERS BY 


P3 h 


HIS COMFORTABLE AND CHRISTIAN DEPARTVRE 


H O 


t> O 


RECEAV'D. WEE ASSVREDLYE BELEEVE HIS IVDGME^ 


53 H 


* — ' 


WITH MERCYE- IN THE YE.4RF OF OV* LORD. 1616 


CO H 

Ed 




THE • 3, DAY OF AVGVST IN THE 14™. YEARE OF 


GO 




THE RAIGNE OF OVR SO VERAWNE LORD 






KINGE IAMES, AND THE 57™. 




J 


YEARS OF HIS AGE. 


} 


WEAKE MVSE THAT WOVLDST DISCIPHERE OVT SVCH IOYES 
<• THAT NOW ARE ENDLESSE BY FAST FADINGE TOYES 





He whom no bribes covld blind ; noe terrovr tvrne ; 

noe favovr fawne ; noe covrse compell from right ; 

Whom place did mev'r pvffe vpp ; nor beavtye bvrne ; 

Plenty exceed ; nor poore oppresse with might ; 

Did speake, thinke, find this topp of honovr hye 
Seal'd in this vrne ; HE IN HIS GEERES 2 TO DYE. 



1 It is said that he died in the " Judge's Lodgings," at what was the head 
inn of the town, "Fox's Inn," so called. It stood in the yard next to the 
Commercial Inn yard, south. 

2 This word has evidently been ' YEARES ' originally. 



66 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

There is a cenotaph in Faxton church, Northamptonshire, 
inscribed with this same chief epitaph. The verse here 
superadded, beginning, " He whom no Bribes," is omitted at 
Faxton, and the epitaph at Faxton contains a verse which is 
not here. 

The arms are very perfect, and are : sable, three pheons, 
ar. with a crescent for difference. Crest, a wolf's head erased, 
sable. 

In the chancel, lie the remains of the Plight Eeverend 
Eobert Dawson, bishop of Clonfert, in Ireland ; who, in 
the time of the Irish rebellion, returned with much difficulty 
to his native country, and died at his father's house, in 
Kendal. Over his grave is this epitaph, on a brass plate. 

HIC IACET • REVERENDVS IN CHRISTO 
PATER * ROBERTVS DAWSON EPISCOPVS 
CLONEFERTENSIS ET DVCENSIS HIBER 
NICVS QVI ' OBIIT DIE DECIMA TERTIA ' AP 
RILIS 1643. 

Over the porch door is a very handsome marble monument, 
to the memory of Thomas Sandes, founder of the hospital 
and the school, now known by the name of Sandes's Hospital. 
The inscription is as follows : 

Heus Peripatetice. 
Sifte, difce, et (si pofsis) imitare. 
En pulchrum, tibi virtutis, Specimen, 
Eximium, ingenij et laboris, exemplar. 
Humana, quicquid valuit, solertia ; 
Quicquid magnum, laudabile, utile, 
Honefta, potuit afsequi, vel efficere, induftria, 
Illud totum, optime valuit, afsequutus eft, effecit, 
Prudentia, Charitate, diligentia summa ; 
Illud nempe, 
(Quern nee mirari licet, nee satis dolere) 
Egregius induftrise Fautor, 
Singularis Literarum Patronus, 
Pauperum perpetuus Pater, 

THOMAS SANDES, 

Qui, annis satiatus, Caelomaturus, 

(Charifsimse Conjugi heu ! breve nimis superftes) 

Hinc abijt, 

Vicefimo secundo die Augufti, 

^ nn0 |Salutis humanae^ mdclxxxi. 

\<Etatis Suae ) lxxv. 



THE CHURCH. 



67 



Abijt (inquam) non obijt, nequit enim mori, 

Dum sit hominibus virtus, aut, virtuti hiftoria. 

At-at ! 

Sileat periturum marmor : 

Omni dum marmore Perennius, 

Et vel Memphitica, diuturnius, Pyramide, 

Ipfe, sibi monumentum, struxit, 

Gerontocomium. 



On a brass plate on the floor of Bellingham chapel, formerly 
on the fourth pillar in the second aisle from the south : 



TO THE MEMORY 
OF THE 

Most Religious, and Orthodox Christian 
The most Loyall Subject, and most ancient 6° 
Serviceable Member of this Corporation, wherof 
He was once Alderman, and thrice, MAJOR : 
WILLIAM GVY of Water-Crook Gentleman 
Who dyed the twenty fifth day of December 

( Our Lord Uidclxxxiti 

(His Age Jlxxxvi 



In the Year 



Had Loyalty been Life, Brave Gvy thou'dst Than 

Stood Kendall's Everlasting Alderman 

Nay could thejoynte vnited force of All 

That's good or vert'ous over death prevaile 

Thy life's pure thread noe Time or Fate could fever 

And thou'dst still Liv'd to pray ; KING live for Ever 

But thou art gone ; A proof such Vertue is 

Too Good for Earth, And onely fit for Blifs, 

And blifsfull Seats ; Where, Ifblefst Spirits doe 

Concerne themselves with any thing below. 

Thy prayer's the same, Thou still do'st Supplicate, 

For Charles his Life For England s Church, & State 

WhiFst to Thy just Eternal Memory \ 

Envy and Malice must in this Agree \ 

None better Lov'd, or Serv'd, his Prince then Thee J 



On a brass plate on the floor of Bellingham chapel, which, 
before the restoration of the church, in 1850-2, was on the 
floor of the north aisle, towards the east end of the same : 

f 2 



68 



ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 



Here vnder lyeth the body of Alice 
the wife of roger bateman * of ovld 
hvtton Clothier . davghter of . Richard 
Garthwait of garssdale yeamon who 

DYED THE 25 th DAY OF MARCH 1637 BEING 

aged 26 yeares 5 monthes & od dayes 
and left issve 3 davghters agnes, 
Margaret and Elizabeth. 

Shall we entruft a graue with fuch a gueft, 
Or thus confine her to a marble cheft 
Who though the Indies met in one fmale roome 
Th' are fhort in treafure of this pretious tombe, 
Well borne, & bred, brought vp in feare & care 
Marriage which makes vp women, made her rare 
Matron & maide with all choyfe virtues grac'st 
Loueing & lou'd of all, a foule fo chaft, 
NE're rigg'd for heauen, with whome more dare 
Venture their ftates with her in blliffe to f hare 
She liueing virtues pattern, the poores releife 
Her huf bands cheifeft Ioy, now dead his greife. 



On a brass plate, on the floor of Bellingham chapel, which, 
before the restoration, was placed opposite the present pulpit : 



>J"Igh to this Pillar lyes y e 

Body of M" FRANCES 
Strickland late Wife to 

M r IOHN STRICKLAND of 

Strickland & Daughter 

to EDWARD BACKHOUSE 
of MORLAND Efq '; 



« ( Born 
^ ) Marry'd 
c73 ( Bury'd 



ye 24 th Iune 




Emblem of Temporal Good! The Day that gave 
Her Birth and Marriage, saw Her in the Grave 
Winged zuilh its native Love her Soul took flight 
To Boundlefs Regions of Eternal Light 



Of Blease Hall ? (See a subsequent page.) 



THE CHURCH. 69 

Iii the east end of the north aisle, lie" the remains of Sir 
Thomas Braithwaite, knight, and on a brass plate in the 
Bellingham chapel is the following inscription : 

Here lieth the body of s r thomas 

BRAITHWAITE KNIGHT LATE OF 
BURNESHEAD : WHO DIED THE J 4 th 
DAY OF MAY ANNO DOMINI J 683 
ET /ETATIS SU.E LXVI. 

This Sir Thomas was one of the sons of Eichard Brathwaite, 
author of "Drunken Barnaby," by his first wife, Frances, 
daughter of James Lawson. 

Against a square pillar, at the west end of the church, is 
the following inscription, written on parchment, and framed 
with a narrow oak frame (formerly suspended from a nail 
in the pulpit pillar) : 

M. S. 

Viri vere Generofi 

Plurimisque nominibus defideratnTimi 

Georgij Sedgwick. 

Qui, 

Omnibus cultioris humanitatis dotibus, 

abunde ornatus 

Honorabili D. D. Philippo 

Comiti Penbrochienfi, 

Celeberimae deinde illius Viduse 

Amanuenfis fibi Locum meruit : 

Cujus Familia, 

(qua nemo Famulus non floruit) 

Annis pariter atque opibus auctus 

(monente munificentilfima Domina 

Partis fseliciter fruendis, Sedem 

Senectuti fuse comparare) 

Fundum, huic Municipio vicinum, emit 

dictum Collinfeild. 

Vbi plus tribus Lustris 

Singulari in pauperes charitate, 

Amicitia in proximos, 

Erga omnes benevolentia 

Notis omnibus charus et amabilis vixit, 

Nee paucioribus flebilis obijt 

Decimo Die Iunij 

( Salutis Humana? ) mdclxxxv. 
Anno \ _ . _ 5- 

I iEtatis fuae ) lxvii. 



70 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

At the west end of the church, is the following inscrip- 
tion, on canvas, in a black wooden frame, and in black 
characters on a gold ground : 

Here lyes Frances 

late Wife, of Jacob 

Dawfon Gent, who 

departed this life 1 9 . 

Iune 1700: in y e 25*? year 

of her age. 

Who by a Free, & Chearfull 

refignation of herfelfe 

(even in the midst of 

this worlds affluence) 1 

has left us juft grounds 

to hope fhe is 

now happy. 

In the east end of the north aisle, and against the north 
wall, is a white marble monument, to the memory of John 
Leyburne, of Cunswick, the last of an ancient and very 
considerable family in this county. The inscription on the 
monument is as follows : 

To the Memory of 
Iohn Leyburne late of 
Cunfwick Esq: who died y e 9 th 
of Decern : 1737 : Aged 69. 
In whom that Ancient, Loyall 
& Religious Family is now extinct 
Whofe Example this Infcription 

Recommends to Pofterity, 
For under this Stone lies the 
Remains of a most Affectionate 
Huf band, a Charitable Neigh= 
bour, and a Kind Mafter. 
In Dealings Just, In Words 
Sincere, Was humble in Prof= 
perity, Heroickly refign'd in 
Adverfity, Whofe unaffected 
Devotion, Strict Sobriety, & 



1 This epitaph has given rise to a witticism, used sometimes as a toast on 
particular occasions of festivity, viz. "May we all live as Jacob Dawson's 
wife died." 



THE CHUKCH. 71 

Unwearied practice of Chriftian 
Duties, is worthy y e Imitation 
of All. He had two Sons, who 
died in their Infancy fo hath 
left no Iffue to inherit his Virtues 
And that the Memory of them 
may not perifh with ye Name 
lucy his wife hath Plac'd 
this Monument, as a Memorial 

of her Love and Efteem. 
Miferemini Miferemini mei, 
Saltern vos Amici mei I lob 19 th . 

On the top of this monument are the arms of Leyburne : 
(az. three lioncels, rampant, three, two and one ; argent, 
langued and membred, gules), quartered with Dalston, Lucy, 
his wife, being the heiress of Dalston, (argent, a chevron 
between three blackbirds' heads, sa. bills, or.) 

. On a marble slab, in Parr's chapel, now the vestry, against 
the east wall : 

Here Lyes 
Iohn Archer Efq r . Doctor of Phyfick and 
One of his Majeftie's juftices of the Peace 
for the County of Weftmorland who Departed 
this Life on the fourth of December 1735. 

He was a worthy Man, a skilfull Phyfician, an 
impartial Majeftrate, and an Amiable Friend. 

His mind was Generous, his Temper Sweet 
his Underftanding Extenfive : In Nature 
Compafsionate, in Virtue Severe. 

He adorn'd the Reafonable Being with the 
Dignity of Morality, the True Chriftian with 
the Sanctity of Religion. 

He was a Delight to his Acquaintance, an Honour 
to his Profefsion, and a Happinefs to his 
Country. 

Dear and Deferable is the Memory of Doctor 
archer ; Cruel and Lamentable is the Lofs 
of him ; Every Eye Overflows with Tears, every 
Breaft is fill'd with Sorrow, and every Houfe 
is become the Houfe of Mourning. 

Near the door of the Strickland Chapel lie the remains 
of Mr. West, the learned author of the "Antiquities of 



72 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

Furness," &c. He was particularly honoured with the 
friendship of the late Mrs. Strickland, and died at Sizergh, 
on the 10th July, 1779, aged 62. It k remarkable that 
no lettered stone should have been erected to perpetuate 
his memory. 

In the east end of the north aisle, and against the north 
wall, is the monument of Judge Wilson, with the following 
inscription, writteu by the late Eichard Watson, D.D., bishop 
of Llandaff : 

In Memory of Sir JOHN WILSON, Knt, 

One of his Majefty's Juftices of the Court of Common Pleas, 

Born at the Howe, in Applethwaite, 6*. h of Auguft 1741, 

Died at Kendal, 18 1 * of October, 1793 : 

He did not owe his Promotion to the Weight of great Connexions, 

which he never courted ; nor to the Influence of political 

Parties, which he never joined ; but to his profefsional Merit, 

and the unfolicited Patronage of the Lord Chancellor Thurlow, 

who, in recommending to his Majefty so profound a Lawyer, 

and so good a Man, 

realized the Hopes and Expectations of the whole Bar, 

gratified the general Wifhes of the Country, 
and did Honour to his own Discernment and Integrity. 

In the south aisle, near the S.W. entrance, is a handsome 
monument of black marble, containing the following tribute 
to the genius of Eomney : 

To the Memory of 

GEORGE ROMNEY ESQUIRE, 

The Celebrated Painter ; 

who died at Kendal, the 15. Nov, 1802, 

in the 68. year of his age, and was interred 

at Dalton the place of his birth. 

So long as Genius and Talents shall be 

respected his Fame will live. 

In the Aldermen's aisle is a handsome monument, to the 
memory of the late Judge Chambre, bearing the arms of the 
Chambres, with the following inscription : 



THE CHUECH. 73 

  

IN MEMORY OF 

SIR ALAN CHAMBRE KN T . 

LATE ONE OF HIS MAJESTYS JUSTICES 

OF THE COURT OF COMMON PLEAS 

AT WESTMINSTER 

OB XX SEPT MDCCCXXIII 

M£, LXXXIII. 

At the north-west corner of the church is placed a 
monument, with martial emblems, of white marble, dedicated 
to the memory of "12 officers, 15 sergeants, 18 corporals, 
and 36-t private soldiers, all of the 55th (Westmorland) 
regiment of Foot, who died of disease, exposure, and fatigue, 
during the war with Eussia, in Turkey and the Crimea, in 
the years 1854 and 1855." [This monument, along with other 
similar ones, in different churches in the country, will stand 
as a record of disgrace to the Government Commissariat, 
by whose improvidence so many valuable lives were lost] 

The Communion Plate belonging to the church was 
stolen, about the year 1778, during the incumbency of 
Dr. Syraonds. It consisted of three silver flagons, two 
silver cups (gilt), two silver salvers, and one or two 
smaller cups of silver. This plate (of which no traces 
could ever be discovered), was soon afterwards partially 
replaced. 

The fabric of the church is now sustained by voluntary 
contributions — the question involving the principle of the 
levying of church rates having been negatived at Easter, 
1859, on a hotly-contested division of the parish. 

The church-yard was closed for burials in 1855. Till the 
year 1822, it was exposed to injuries from the children in 
the town, to whom it was a common play-ground. But in 
that year, by the exertions of the vicar, aided by the church- 
wardens, and the public spirited gentlemen of the town (who 
raised a subscription for the purpose), it was enclosed with 
iron palisades, and is now the peaceful and unprofaned 
receptacle of the dead. The tombstones and inscriptions 
are here numerous, and many so entirely decayed as to be 
illegible. The oldest of those now remaining legible, is 
on the south side, not far from the west door leading to the 



74 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

old vicarage ; the inscription on which was some years ago 
renewed, on a brass plate, and is as follows : 

This 

Monument 

is the 

First erected in this Church Yard, 

and is 

TO THE MEMORY OF 

ANTHONY YEATES, 

OF HOOD RIDING in OLD HUTTON, 

Who died the 21 ? July 1723 Aged 72 ; 
also of 

AGNES his WIDOW, 

Who died the 15 * h Dec r . 1758 Aged 81 ; 

also of 

Anthony their SON, 

Who died the 28 ^ Oct r . 1775 Aged 75 ; 

and 

MARY his WIDOW, 

Who died the 19 * h March 1787 Aged 85. 

On a marble tablet, against the south wall of the church- 
yard, near the private door of the old Vicarage : 

IN THE EARTH BENEATH ARE DEPOSITED, 

IN A PIOUS CONFIDENCE IN THE MERCY OF GOD 

THE REMAINS OF 

CATHARINE ROBINSON; 

WIFE OF THE REV. HENRY ROBINSON 

VICAR OF THIS PARISH : 

OF WHOSE UNSPEAKABLE SORROW AND REGRET 

THIS SILENT MARBLE IS A MEMORLA.L. 

SHE DIED MARCH XIX. MDCCXCIX. 

AGED XXXVIII. 

HE DIED FEBRUARY XXV. MDCCCVI. 

AGED LVIII. 

ALSO THE REMAINS OF THE 

REV. HENRY ROBINSON THEIR OLDEST SON, 

VICAR OF OTLEY IN THE COUNTY OF YORK, 

WHO DIED XIV OF AUGUST MDCCCXXXIV 

AGED XLII YEARS. 

The present vicar of the church is the Eev. John Cooper, 
M.A., late fellow and tutor of Trinity College, Cambridga 
He "read hiniself in" on Sunday morning, August 15, 1858, 
introducing and concluding the reading of the Thirty-nine 
Articles with some appropriate remarks. 



THE CHURCH. 75 

The earliest entry of burial in the register of the parish 
church at Kendal (but which is evidently a copy of some 
older document now lost) is that of 

"The wife of John Hodgson. May V. die 1555." 

The fir st original entry is under the heading 

" 1569. The Booke of chnsens, buryalls, and weddygs, a° 1569." 

Funera. 
" Robartus Fyssher. 7. die Aprilis." 

The last entry is as follows : — 

11 James Capstick, Market Place, Sep. 9, 1855. 7 months. J. W. Barnes, 
Vicar." 

The registers having been continued uninterruptedly (with 
slight exceptions) over a period of just three hundred years. 

CEREMONIAL OF THE INDUCTION OF VICARS. 

The following form or ceremonial of induction is usual in 
all parishes, and is always observed at Kendal Church : — 
A deputation of the churchwardens having assembled in 
the porch of the church, await the arrival of the vicar, 
whom having received, they proceed to present with the 
key of the church, with which he immediately opens the 
door, entering the church and taking possession thereof by 
locking himself in and the others out He then ascends to 
the belfry and tolls one of the bells for a short time, then 
coming down and opening the door he admits the "lock-outs," 
upon which they all adjourn to the vestry, where the deed 
of his induction having been subscribed by the vicar, and 
attested by the signatures of those present, the ceremony 
concludes. 

THE CEMETERY. 

The cemetery for the townships of Kendal, Kirkland, and 
Nethergraveship, is situated in Park and Castle Lands, in 
the township of Kendal, and consists of two portions of 
ground, separated by a township road. The plot on the north 
side of the road, nearly six acres, is consecrated, and set 
apart for members of the Established Church. The other 
plot, two acres and a half, on the south side, is appropriated 



76 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOEY. 

to the use of dissenters. Neat lodges and chapels form the 
two (opposite) entrances, and suitable shrubs, with meander- 
ing walks, diversify the grounds. The corner-stone of the 
chapel connected with the Established Church was laid by 
John Hudson, Esq., on the 28th November, 1854. The first 
burial took place on the 14th September, 1855, being that 
of Miss Louisa J. Percival, aged 47 years. 

About half an acre on the west side of the consecrated 
ground is appropriated to the use of the Eoman Catholics. 

The cemetery was consecrated on the 23d August, 1854. 

Subjoined is the number of burials that took place during 
the last year (1860), viz. : 

In Consecrated ground 149 

Unconsecrated ground 22 

Total 171 

In the previous year (1859) 223 

St. Thomas' Chuech. 

The growth of the town, at the north end, which took 
place in the interval between the years 1820 and 1835, 
called for increased church accommodation in that locality — 
farthest removed from the parish church ; and a subscrip- 
tion, munificently headed by Mrs. Thomasin Eichardson, 
widow, for .£1,000, soon realised a sufficient fund for a new 
church, which was built in 1837, and dedicated to St. Thomas. 
It ignores the traditional custom of the middle ages in 
placing what was called " the altar window/' to the east ; 
the tower front, in this case, being to the east, and the 
chancel, with its communion window, facing the west. It is 
designed in the " old English," or lanceolated, style, and the 
proportions are well sustained. The tower, surmounted by 
pinnacles and crockets, rises to a height of ninety-five feet, 
the vestibules being on either flank of the tower. The 
windows are the usual triple and double lancet windows of 
the period of " the order." The interior consists of a nave, 
seventy-five feet long by forty-five feet in breadth, opening 
upon the chancel, twenty-four feet by fifteen feet. The seat 
accommodation is equal to about 850 sittings, of which 500 



ST. THOMAS'. — ST. GEOEGE'S. 77 

are free. It cost only about 3,000Z. Alderman Geo. Webster 
architect. The present incumbent is the Kev. J. A. Latrobe, 
M.A., Honorary Canon of Carlisle, who was appointed in 1839. 
It has an ecclesiastical district, within denned boundaries. 

A handsome parsonage house, for the perpetual use of the 
incumbent of St. Thomas's, was erected in 1854, on elevated 
ground immediately above the church, with funds raised by 
subscription chiefly through the exertions of Mr. Latrobe. 
The cost, including land, was 1,1 00Z, 

St. Geoege's Chuech. 

This church (like St. Thomas's) is a " district" church. It 
stands on what was a piece of waste ground, that extended 
from Stramongate bridge to " Stock beck." The ground was 
generally raised four feet or more, to escape the overflowing 
waters of the Kent. The erection commenced in 1839, and 
the church was consecrated on the 17th June, 1841. The 
endowment was transferred from (old) St. George's Chapel, 
and the funds for the erection were procured by subscriptions 
from the inhabitants, augmented by a grant from the Church 
Building Fund. The church is 118 feet long, by 64 feet 
wide. The style of architecture is what is called "the 
lanceolated,'* or early English (of the 13th century), the 
simplicity of this order being considered best adapted to 
the native material, the Kendal fell limestone. The west 
gable is flanked by two octagonal towers, thirteen feet in 
diameter, which rise to a height of 100 feet, and give striking 
effect to the building, as seen from any point of view on the 
south-west or the north-west. The interior consists of nave 
and chancel, with a spacious vestibule opening on the nave. 
Galleries extend along the north and south sides and the 
west end. The accommodation is equal to about 1,300 sittings, 
of which 900 are free and unappropriated. The cost of the 
church was about 4t,500l} Architect, Alderman George 
Webster. 

A neat parsonage house, for the incumbent, was erected at 
the head of Castle Street, in 1849, at a cost of 8501 raised 
by public subscription. 

1 The organ — a fine instrument — cost £460. 



78 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

EELIGIOUS HOUSES. 

At the head of Capper Lane (a corruption of Chapel Lane), 
there was formerly a chapel, the dedication of which we have 
not been able to discover. Dr. Burn says, it stood near 
"Well-Sike," but it is our opinion that it stood at the head 
of Capper Lane. A quantity of human bones, and a skeleton, 
nearly entire, were dug up, in making the foundation of the 
house belonging to Mr. J. Swainson, at the corner of the 
field called " Little Eoods." This field we conceive to have 
been the cemetery of the chapel. A brass coin, supposed 
to be a Saxon coin, but so defaced that the legend was unin- 
telligible, was some years ago found near the head of 
" Capper," on the north side. The chapel, in this place, may 
have been of Saxon foundation. 

Anchorite House. — On the west side of Kirkland, is a 
house called Anchorite House, which, as the name implies, 
has been formerly the sequestered abode of an anchorite, 
or religious recluse. Tradition reports, that it was originally 
a small hut, the shape of a bee-hive ; and the narrow road 
which conducted to it made two circles round the house : and 
the fences of this road concealed the dwelling from the 
gaze of passengers. Before the house is a fine spring of 
clear, pure water, called "Anchorite Well," which supplies the 
principal part of Kirkland — 

" Wherein the Hermit dewly wont to say 
His holy things each morn and eventide ; 
Thereby a crystall streame did gently play, 
Which from a sacred fountaine welled forth alway." 

Spenser. 

The present dwelling was erected about ninety years ago, 
by the late John Shaw, Esq., one of the magistrates for 
the county of Westmorland, and also for the borough of 
Kendal. 

All Hallows' Chapel 1 stood at the head of the lane 
which still bears that name, opposite to the Black Swan 

1 All Hallows is synonymous with All Saints. For an interesting account 
of the origin of this designation and of the Festival, see Seymour's " Survey 
of London," lib. i. p. 284. 



DOCKWRA HALL. 70 

Inn, at the lower side of the field called Chapel Close. (Vide 
Speed's Plan, letter Q.) Dr. Burn obviously refers to this 
place, as " a chapel at the head of the Bank, upon an hill 
called Chapel Hill, now demolished : and an house erected 
upon the site thereof, where the arms of Eoos are very 
apparent in the front." The chapel is reported to have been 
taken down (we cannot ascertain how long ago), for the 
purpose of widening the road. The armsjDf Eoos are now no- 
where observable. 

Not far from this place, and adjoining the said Chapel 
Close, on the north side, is an isolated cemetery called The 
Sepulchre, where some of the Society of Friends have been 
buried. 

St. Anne's Chapel, Dockwra Hall. — " There was another 
chapel, called   St. Anne's Chapel,' which is supposed to have 
been situate near Dockwra Hall ; and at this place there was 
a house in Mr. Machell's time, which, from the form of the 
windows, and the fabric thereof, seemed to have been this 
same chapel." So far from Dr. Burn. If the reader will 
refer to Speed's Plan, prefixed to this volume, he will find it 
very prominently placed ; representing a spacious fabric, with 
lofty tower, and apparently enclosed by a high wall, like the 
manor-houses of the border counties. It stood on the site 
of an out-house, in a field between the Union Buildings and 
Horncop. Dockwra Hall was formerly the seat of a family of 
its own name. We find, from an inquisition taken at Kendal, 
in the 49th Edward III. on the death of Johan, wife of John 
de Coupland (who, for his services in the battle of Durham, 
had the moiety of the manor of Kendal, afterwards called the 
"Kichniond Fee," granted to him by the crown, it having 
become escheated for want of heirs of the de Lindsay es), that 
Bobert de Docura was one of the jurors on that occasion ; and 
that (doubtless the same) " Bobert de Docura held of the said 
Johan de Coupland, divers tenements in Kirkeby-Kendale, 
by fealty, and the service of 2s. a year, as of her manor 
of Kirkeby." There is an epitaph in the church of Lilley, 
in Herefordshire, to the memory of Thomas Dockwra, the 
elder, Esq., lord of Puckeridge, and " descendant of the 



80 •ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

ancient family of Dockwras, of Dockwra Hall, in Kendal, 
nephew and heir unto the right honourable Sir Thomas 
Dockwra, lord grand prior of the knights of St. John of 
Jerusalem." 1 The chapel spoken of by Burn was probably 
an oratory within the house, and might be dedicated to St. 
Anne. 

St. Leonard's Hospital. — The place called 'Spital, the 
common contraction of hospital, is about a mile from the 
town, on the road to Grayrigg and Appleby. It is now a good 
farm-house, connected with a farm of 300 acres, belonging to 
the Earl of Lonsdale. The hospital, of monachal times, 
stood close upon the site of the present farm-house, and by 
the side of what was, we believe, originally the Roman road 
from Concangium (Water Crook) to Alauna (Borough Bridge). 
Like most of the hospitals for lepers, it was dedicated 
to St. Leonard, and was hence called " St. Leonard's 
Hospital." Unfortunately there is hardly a scrap of positive 
history to be found of this place, and yet there are circum- 
stances of great interest connected with it. This hospital 
appears to have been not a dependency, but a relation of the 
Priory of Coningshead ; for William de Lancaster, who was 
fourth Baron of Kendal, gave the advowson of this hospital 
to the Canons regular of St. Augustine, about the end of the 
twelfth century. The same benefactor founded Conishead 
Priory, first as a hospital, giving it also to the Canons of 
Augustine, and that was some time afterwards erected into a 
priory. At the end of the fourteenth century, this establish- 
ment at Kendal came to Sir William del Parr, and at the 
dissolution of the smaller houses, it was granted to Alan 
Bellingham and Alan Wilson, Esqs., and was valued then 
at 11/. 4s. 3d. per year. But it languished for some time 
after this, struggling for existence, as is proved by the 
following entry, made in the reign of Edward VI : 

" Hospitium S'ci Leonardi prope villam de Kirkby-de-Kendale, nuper 
moiiasterio de Conyshead, pertinent val. il 13s. 4rf." 



" Beauties of England and Wale?." p. 194. 



ST. LEONARD'S HOSPITAL. 81 

The loss of 61. 10s. per annum in so short period (reckoning 
the value of money at that day) shows how spoliation was at 
work. Looking at the vast possessions of the early Barons of 
Kendal, and their great liberality in other cases, it can hardly 
be doubted that this hospital, lying under the shadow of their 
castle home, would in the first instance be richly endowed 
and protected. It had a double office of charity to fulfil, 
namely, to lodge and feed the decrepit, indigent, and lepers ; 
and to relieve the poor wayfaring passengers, who daily called 
for "prog and prayers" on their journey to and from Kendal. 
The endowment, therefore, would include a grant of lands for 
growing oats, for pasturing cows and sheep, so that bread, 
cheese, milk and butter, might be raised on the spot, whilst 
'Spital Woods, which probably extended even as far as " Shaw 
End" (the end of the wood), might supply "fire-elding" 
for the house, and " pannage for the hogs." One of the fields 
belonging still to the 'Spital estate, situated on the west side 
of Far Cross Bank, bears the name of Vineyard, which 
suggests the idea that the monks " lived under their own 
vines," and drank the juice of the grape. In Beezon Fields, 
behind "Castle Dairy," there was a fish-pond, where fish 
had been stored ready for the cook. This pond has been 
gradually filled up ; but there may still be seen a depression in 
Beezon Fields, which is very likely the site of the fish-pond. 

Hospitals like this, comprised, in their household, a master 
and a certain number of "brethren," with a chaplain, and 
license to celebrate divine offices. In our account of the 
church, we mention the Chantry of St. Leonard, alias " le 
Spittle," "with a yearly revenue for the maintenance of a 
priest." It appears to us probable that this chantry was not 
connected with the church so long as the hospital existed, but 
belonged to the priest or chaplain " daily celebrating " within 
the chapel of the hospital. After the destruction of the 
hospital, the chantry and revenues attached to it might be 
transferred to the parish church, and no doubt were so. 

In the summer of 1836, as workmen were sinking the 
foundations of the present farm-house, they dug up a quantity 
of human bones, and fragments of sculls, apparently belonging 
to six or eight corpses. They were found at irregular 



82 ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

distances, and at various depths in the earth — two of the 
corpses within six inches of the surface, the rest from two to 
three feet deep. There were no signs or traces of a coffin 
with the bones, or near them, and no vestiges of vegetable 
earth beneath. A slab of red sandstone conglomerate (such as 
is to be seen in the bed of the " Mint ") was found at the same 
time, with a kind of rude cross upon it ; but this is more 
likely to have been a relic of the hospital than a tombstone. 
The absence of coffins, the irregular assemblage of bones, the 
limited number of sculls, and the fact of drainage works 
having been since carried on over the whole area of this place, 
without discovering other corpses, all tend to the belief that 
there was no cemetery here, and that these remains belonged 
to persons slain in some encounter on the spot, and indis- 
criminately buried in the hurry of the fray. We have the 
clear probability of such an occurrence in what is variously 
called " The Northern Eebellion," the " Ashe EebeUion," and 
" Pilgrimage of Grace," in 1536-37, temp. Hemy VIII. The 
Abbot of Furness and the Prior of Conishead were directly 
implicated by Henry as participes criminis, in this rebellion, 
with Ashes party ; and an anonymous witness, in answer to 
an inquiry instituted by the king, declares as follows : — 

" I say I wrott the sayd Letter to th Prior of Cartmelle 
(or Conishead) at the request of one Collenes, bayliffe of 
Kendal, at whose only niocon requeste and interpellation I 
wrott the same Letter," &c. {Bailies' History of Lancashire). 

Here we have Collenes, the bailiff (the Lord's bailiff, or 
bailiff of the castle estate ?) in treasonable correspondence 
with the Prior of Conishead ; and the king commanded that 
all suspected persons were to await his Majesty's pleasure 
in prison ! 

Now, there is a circumstance of local and domestic character 
not to be overlooked here. Kendal Castle, at the period 
alluded to, was one of the residences of Katherine Parr ; and 
her husband, at the time, (her second husband) was Lord 
Latimer. Latimer is ranked among the leaders of this 
insurrection, and, although there is no reason for identifying 
Katherine with her husband's bigoted or rebellious conduct, 
(rather the contrary), it is quite probable that, through the 



st. Leonard's hospital. 83 

marriage, he would claim to have local connexion with 
Kendal, and influence with that part of the population who 
were, in this movement, defending the monasteries, and resist- 
ing the introduction of the Form of Common Prayer. Fkoude 
says, it was about the 12th of February, 1537, 1 that a rabble 
from Kendal, Eichmond, Appleby, Penrith, &c, collected 
under one of the Musgraves, about 8,000 in number, and 
attacked Carlisle. They were beaten, and driven back by 
Clifford's troops, which contained " a sprinkling of the pro- 
fessional thieves of the Border." What is called " wholesome 
severity" could alone restore order. Martial law was pro- 
claimed in Westmorland, Cumberland, &c. Henry said, 
"The further you shall wade in the investigation of those 
persons that call themselves 'religious,' the more you shall 
detest them. Our pleasure is, . that you cause execution 
to be done upon a good number of the inhabitants of every 
town, village, and hamlet, that have offended, — better that these 
traitors should perish than a slender punishment should not 
be a warning to others. Finally, as these troubles have 
ensued by the monks and canons, you shall cause all them 
that be in anywise faulty to he tied tip without ceremony." 
This order "to tie up" — this "wholesome severity" — was 
observed strictly ; and seventy-four persons, laity and clergy, 
were hanged in various places in Westmorland and Cumber- 
land ! " I find," says Froude, " among the records an entry, 
that "the bodies were cut down and buried by certain women." 
Here, then, we venture to think, is the required explana- 
tion of time and circumstance, when the persons whose bones 
were discovered in 1836, met their fate, and were thrown 
beneath the sod " unhouselled, unanointed, unanealed." 



We now proceed to a description of the Castle, and some 
of those ancient manor-houses and mansions which were the 
residences of the families whose names are recorded in the 
monumental memorials in the church ; together with such of 
the ancient customs and ceremonies as demand notice. 

1 Froude's " History of England," vol. iii. pp. 200—203. 

g2 



84 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 



THE CASTLE 



Is situated on Castle-hill, a verdant knoll, of oval shape, com- 
posed of rounded stones, and gravel. It commands an 
extensive view to the north and south-west. In the near 
ground is the town, with here and there a stately poplar 
waving o'er its azure roofs. About the valley the numerous 
hills are clothed with wood, or smile in verdure, amid a range 
of fertile inclosures, through which, in gleams of real beauty, 
the waters of the river serpentize from their native hills in 
the north, down the shining tract of country, till they become 
lost in the estuary which unites them with the ocean. In 
the distance are magnificent mountains, towering high, which, 
adding to the beautiful, the sublime, and picturesque, con- 
stitute an elegant and striking landscape. 

Here stood the noble Castle, whose remains are scarcely 
now sufficient to tell how vast it was. 

u Where the great lord inhabited : now grass, 
Thin grass, and king-cups grow within the path." * 

It is much to be regretted that we cannot establish the elate 
of this Castle. There is, however, very little doubt, that it 
was raised altogether, or in part, by one of the earliest barons 
of Kendal. And if in part only by one of the first barons, 
the completion of it must be assigned to those who lived in 
the twelfth, or in the earlier part of the thirteenth century. 
Mr. Hallam 2 has acquiesced in the opinion of Dr. AVhitaker 
and Mr. King, 3 that a circular tower, as a keep, was com- 
monly the first structure of ancient castles. To the lower 
chambers of this keep there was no admission of light or air 
except through long narrow loop-holes, and an aperture in the 
roof. In course of time, the barons who owned these castles 
began to covet a more comfortable dwelling. The keep was 
either much enlarged, or altogether relinquished as a place of 
residence, except in a time of siege ; while more convenient 
apartments were sometimes erected in the tower of entrance, 

1 Coleridge. 

2 Vide " State of Europe during the Middle Ages," vol. iii. p. 41(3. 

3 Author of the Essays on Ancient Castles, in the M Archaeologia." 



ran 


-tfllt 1 


^yMill 




! " 15* lift 








if.- ' ; "^:>; ;; 


WS®ME@Mm^ <& > 


It 


 z^.wv'Tij 




.'W' .rlffc 'ill.'.Q 


W^Si 




 g 






^M : -m 


8.4HB»)s1l£ 




s l^^^^^^^W 




6 






'""V (EsSffi'OT 


W '• 


ffi&s 






CJ 








A, 


PW| 


- : iifinfflfiSSS^R 




- 




! 




'"^^V'-ftflEHi 




^jfln^ 




'7. 




i 


1 ' 

• 




K 


BR -     *$wil 


P>3 

Eh 
CO 

O 


O 




 " \ - V VJ 


























;"- ^SEj| 


^pi^' 118SKl«iL. a 


•J 


c 








' ''' M^ 


:&'| ^fcWl 


iiis^k.- ^t««rab? *   


<1 


as 

a) 








i. '.=^^^^ 




^^^4^Hk 




 r. 
v. 






ill 


Tl*3f 




§ ; wIIPIf 












WW 1 


P^1e| 


t : -itJlflll 




| 










'ill 






eg 




i 












(S 


s 

a. 

I 



THE CASTLE. 85 

over the great gateway, which led to the inner ballium or 
court-yard. 

The circular tower (not seen in our partial view of the pre- 
sent state of the ruins) is the most entire part and has evidently 
been the strongest: but the precise time when it was erected, 
and whether the rest of the building be coeval with it, must, 
we fear, for ever remain in obscurity. All that we can say on 
this point is, that the order of architecture and the arrangement 
of the apartments carry a pointed resemblance to some other 
castles which have been referred to the time of the Conqueror. 1 

The material employed in its construction, has been prin- 
cipally the blue "silurian" rock of the neighbouring hills, 
with some freestone for the doors, windows, and quoins; 
and the mode of building has been the same as was gen- 
erally adopted in castles erected immediately after the Con- 
quest. The outsides of the wall were first laid with stones 
as regularly as their shape would admit ; the insides filled 
up with the like materials, mixed with a great quantity of 
fluid mortar, which was called by the workmen grout 
work, 2 

The freestone before mentioned is chiefly the old red con- 
glomerate which strikes across the valley, underlying the 
limestone, but there are also to be found in the building, 
blocks of white or yellow sandstone, and where these latter 
have come from is a mystery to us. The " old red " is seen 
abundantly in the bed of the "Mint" and the "Sprint," and 
has lately been unveiled nearer to the Castle. It was found 
close to Netherbridge, and shown to cross the river there, 
dipping into the Castle-hill. It is quite possible, there- 
fore, that it may have been quarried for the Castle, or even 
for a prior work, in the depression now or formerly occu- 
pied by "Willow- wand Tarn," on the south-east side of the 
Castle-hill. 

The first historical mention of the Castle that we have been 
able to discover, is in the time of Gilbert Fitz-Keinfred, who 
married, in the 1st Eichard I. (1189), Helwise, daughter and 



1 Cockei'Hiouth Castle for a particular instance. 

* A method of building before that used by the Romans. 



86 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

heiress of William de Lancaster the second. He obtained 
from king John a continuation of the honour of Lancaster, 
and executed the office of sheriff of Lancaster from the 7th 
to the 17th of that reign. Gilbert was unfaithful to his pa- 
tron, and joined the rebellious barons ; but William, his son 
(usually called William de Lancaster the third), having been 
taken prisoner, Gilbert accepted the king's terms to pay for 
his ransom, and that of Ealph Deincourt and Lambert de 
Brus, his esquires, twelve thousand marks, and to find host- 
ages for his own and their future fidelity ; besides which, he 
was compelled to deliver into the king's hands his castle of 
Kendal, &c. 1 It is probable that in the reign of Henry III. 
the castle and manor were restored to the immediate successor 
of Gilbert, viz. his son, William de Lancaster the third, for we 
find that he was placed in his father's trust as keeper of the 
honour of Lancaster, the grant of which bears date 25th 
Henry III. He died childless, and his great estates descended 
to Peter le Brus, by Helwise, his older sister, and William de 
Lyndesay, by Alice, his second sister. A partition of the 
estates than took place, when Peter " obtained the castle and 
manor of Kendal as his principal seat. " Alice's portion was 
what is called the Eichmond Fee. 

By an inquisition taken on the death of Peter le Brus, son 
of the aforesaid Peter, and the second who succeeded to a 
moiety of the barony of Kendal, called the Marquis Fee, we 
find that the said Peter died in the 7th Edward I (1279), 
seised " of a moiety of the manor of Kirkeby-in-Kendale, and 
as parcel thereof, of the castle, with the parks, vivaries 
within the parks, and herbage therein of the yearly value of 
ten marks, &c." 2 This inquisition also finds, that the said 
Peter le Brus died without any heir of his body; and that 
Margaret, Agnes, Lucy and Laderine, were his sisters and 
coheirs. The Castle, "with all in Kendal that had been 
Peter's, and whatsoever belonged to Peter in demesnes, villen- 
ages, rents and services of free men and others," fell to the 
share of his eldest sister, Margaret le Brus, who was married 



1 "History of Ricbmondshire," vol. ii. p. 291. 
- " History of Westmorland," p. 41. 



THE CASTLE. 87 

to Eobert de Boss 1 (or, as it was most commonly written, 
Eoos). The said Eobert de Eoss and Margaret his wife had 
a son William, who had a son William, who had a son Tho- 
mas de Eoss (died 1391), whose daughter and heir Elizabeth 
was married to William del Parr, knight, by which the Castle, 
the advowson of the hospital of St. Leonard, and the fourth 
part of the manor of Kirkby-in-Kendal were conveyed into 
this family. We will trace briefly the genealogy of the Parrs 
from this time to their extinction. The jurors, on the inquisi- 
tion of William del Parr, knight (who survived his wife, and 
died 6th Henry IV. 1405), find that John Parr, knt., was his 
son and heir. This John did not long survive his father, for the 
inquisition after his death bears date 9th Henry IV. He was 
succeeded by his son, Thomas Parr, knight, who, in the 6th 
Henry VI. appears, by an inquisition of knights' fees, to have 
held one-fourth part of the manor of Kirkby-in-Kendal, by 
the service of the fourth part of one knight's fee. He died 
in the 4th Edward IV. (1464), leaving two sons, William and 
John. Sir William Parr, knight, heir of Sir Thomas, married 
Elizabeth, one of the three sisters and coheirs of Henry, Lord 
Eitzhugh (whose arms appear on the third shield of Parr's 
monument, and also in the quarterings at the east end of the 
same, as described in our account of the church). He was 
made knight of the garter by king Edward IV. ; and was 
knight of the shire for Westmorland in the 6th, and again in 
the 12th of that reign. He appears to have been living in 
the 22d Edward IV. but in what year he died we have not 
found. 2 He had two sons, Thomas, the elder, and a younger 
son, Sir William Parr, of Horton, in Northamptonshire. 3 

1 He was younger son of Robert, Lord Roos, by bis wife Isabel, daughter of 
the king of Scots. There is an effigy of him in Eastwich Church. 

2 It is this Sir William Parr whom we suppose to be interred beneath the 
altar tomb, at the south-east corner of Kendal church. For the arms thereon 
are encircled with the garter. 

3 He died in 1548, and was buried at Horton, where, says Pennant, there 
is a remarkable monument of him, in alabaster, recumbent, with his lady by 
his side. He left two daughters only, married into the families of Tressam 
and Lane. His relation called him to court, but his age forbade him the 
pleasures, and his own reservedness the freedom of that place ; before which 

„he preferred the pious, peaceable, and hospitable way of the country, where 
popularity affected him more than he affected it, — no man being more 



88 ANCIENT EESIDENCES. 

The eldest son, Sir Thomas Parr, knight, succeeded his father. 
He was master of the wards, and comptroller to Henry VIII. 
He married Maude, daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Green, 
by whom he had issue one son and two daughters, viz. 
William Parr, afterwards Marquis of Northampton, Katherine, 
last wife of King Henry VIII. (of both of whom we shall 
hereafter give biographical memoirs), and Anne, married to. 
William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, concerning whom we 
have been unable to find any interesting particulars. 

Sir Thomas Parr, knight, father of queen Katherine, &c, 
by his will, dated November 7th, the 9th of Henry VIII., 
bequeathed his body to lie in Blackfriars' church, London, 
"if he chanced to die within twenty miles thereof." All 
his manors, lands and tenements, he left to his wife Maude 
during her life. He willed his daughters, Katherine and 
Anne, to have 800Z. between them, as marriage portions, 
except they proved to be his heirs or his son's heirs, and then 
they should not. He willed his son William to have his great 
chain, worth 140?., which the "king's grace" gave him. And 
100 marks to be bestowed upon the chantry of Kendal. This 
will was proved in the year 1517. By an inquisition, after his 
death, of his lands in Westmorland, the jurors find that he was 
seised of the manor of Kendale, with 1,000 acres of pasture, and 
400/. rent, together with the appurtenances in Hutton-Hay, 
Strickland, Hugill, Greenrigge, Ullerthorne, and Kirkby-in- 
Kendal. 

The instruction in the aforesaid will, that his body was to 
lie in Blackfriars' church " if he chanced to die within twenty 
miles thereof," appears to be the only foundation for the 
statement made by Dr. Burn, and quoted by Miss Agnes 
Strickland, 1 that he, Sir Thomas, "was evidently not buried 
in Kendal church, but in Blackfriars' church, in London. 1 ' 
There seems to be no evidence for any positive statement 
on either side. The church alluded to in London is the 

beloved by the vulgar — no man less iu love with them. It being his obser- 
vation, rather than his countryman, Sir Edward Montague's saying, — ' that 
if you do the common sort of people nineteen courtesies together, yet you 
may lose their love/ if you go but 'over the stile before them." — Lloyd's 
" State Worthies," date 1670. 

1 " History of Westmorland," p. 7< r ). Mid " Lite of Katherine Parr,'' p. 179, 



THE CASTLE. 89 

parish church of Blackfriars, St. Anne's, which originally 
belonged, says Stowed to the "Friar Preachers of London, 
where Parliaments often sat, and Noble Personages were there 
harbored." We have taken some pains in the investigation 
of this matter. There is no tomb, nor any monumental record 
of the burial of Sir Thomas Parr, in the church or church- 
yard of Blackfriars. The parish register there is necessarily 
silent as to the fact, for it dates back no further than 1562, 
(and where is there a perfect, continuous register that goes 
beyond this?) The probability as to the place of burial 
turns upon the circumstance whether Sir Thomas " deceased 
at London, " which words are attributed to an inscription 
that was at one time, according to tradition, in Kendal 
church. 2 But tradition also says that the large tomb in the 
Parr chapel, without inscription, belongs to Sir Thomas. So 
here is an even balance of evidence. It may perhaps be con- 
tended, that as his wife, Maud, subsequently bequeathed her 
body to rest in Blackfriars, that favours the supposition of Sir 
Thomas being buried there. And with suppositions on both 
sides, the matter must rest for the present. 

Dame Maud Parr, widow of the above-named Sir Thomas, 
by her will, dated May 20th, 21st Henry VIII., bequeathed 
her body to be buried in Blackfriars' church. In this 
will she mentioned her son and heir, William Parr ; also her 
daughter Anne, and Katherine Borough, her daughter, and Sir 
William Parr, her brother, and Thomas Pickering, Esq. her 
cousin — steward of her house. Her will was proved Decem- 
ber 14, 1531. 

In giving the family history of the Scroops, of Bolton, 
Dr. Whitaker has published a long and interesting cor- 
respondence between Lady Parr, Lord Dacre, and Lord 
Scroop, relating to an agreement for the marriage of the son 
and heir of Lord Scroop with Katherine (destined afterwards 
to a higher station), eldest daughter of the said Lady Parr. — 
Lord Dacre was perhaps chosen as negociator in the treaty, on 
account of his relationship with both families, being father of 
Lady Scroop, and cousin of Dame Parr ; but it would seem, 

1 " Survey of London," book 3, p. 691. 

2 See Epitaphs in the Church, ante, p. 52. 



90 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

from this corresrjondence, that he would fain have taken 
undue advantage of his " righte well-beloved " cousin's anxiety 
to effect the union, and thereby secure to his grandson a 
greater portion of her inheritance than either she considered 
reasonable, or, as she tells him, was consistent with " the cus- 
toms of the countre. " This character will be found evidenced 
in the following letters, which are too full of interest to admit 
of curtailment : 

1. — A Letter from Maud, Lady Parr, to , Lord Dacre. 

Most honorable and my very good lord, I hertly reco'mend me vnto you. 
Where it pleasid you att your last beyng here to take payn in the mater in 
consideracion of marriage between the Lord Scrop's son and my doughtor 
Kateryne, for the whiche I hertly thank you ; at which time I thought the 
matter in good furtherance. Howe bee yt, I perceyve that my seid Lord 
Scrop is nott aggreable to that consideracion, as more playnly may appere vnto 
you by certeyn articles sent to me from my seyd lord, the coppy of which 
articles I send you herein inclosyd. My lord's pleasour is to have a full 
answere from me before La'mas next comyng, wherefore it may please you 
to bee so good to have this matter in yo r remembraunce, for I perceyve well 
this matter is not lyke to take effecte except it be by yo r helpe. The joyntour 
is lytle, for xi c m'rcs whiche I icoll nott passe, and my seyd lord wyll nott repay 
after marriage hadd, and cc marcs must nedys be repayd yf my doughter 
Kateryne dys before the age of xvi yeres, or ells I shuld breke Master Parr's 
wyll, whiche I shold be lothe to doo ; and ther can be no p'fyte marriage 
vntill my lord's son com to the age of xiiii, and my doughter to the age of xii, 
before whiche tyme if the marriage shuld take none effect, or be dissolved, 
either by deth, wardshipp, disagrement, or otherwyse, whiche may bee before 
thatt tyme, notwithstondinge marriage soleinnysed, repayment must nedes be 
hadd of the hole, or ells I myght fortune to pay my money for nothinge. 
As for the daye of payment, I am content with the first day, and the resydue 
of his days of payment bee too shortt for me. Gladd I wold be to have the 
mater goe forthe yf itt myght be convenyently ; yff it please you to call to 
remembraunce the co'icacion before yow at Greenewiche was that I shold paye 
att yo r desyre xi c marcs, whereof c marcs in hand, and every yere after c 
marcs, which is as muche as I may spare, as yow knowe ; and for thatt my 
doughto 1 " is to have c marcs joyntour, whereof 1 marcs I to have for her 
fynding vntil they warre able to lye together, & then they to have the hole c 
marcs, & repayment to be hadd yf the marriage took nott effecte. My lord, 
itt may please you to take so muche payne as to helpe to conclude this matter 
yf it woll bee ; and yff you see any default on my partt I shall be ordred as 
ye shall deme good, as knoweth Jh'u, who preserve your good lordshipp. 
Wrytten at the Rye the xiiii. day off July. My lord, it may please your lord- 
ship to gyff credence to this berer. 

Your cousyn, 

Maud Parre. 
To the Right Honorable and my singulcr 
good lord, my Lord Dacrcc, this lee 
dclyvered. 




THE CASTLE. 91 



2.— Articles for thep'te of Henry, Lord Scrop of Bolton, for Mariage between 
the Son and Heyre apparent of the said Lord Scrop, and Kateryne Parre, 
Doughtor of Dame Maude, Lady Parre. 

Fyrst, the seid Lord Scrop is content for xi c marcs of money to gyffe a xl 1 
ffoefment, whereof x 1 to be taken yere]y for the ffynding of the seid Kateryne 
Parr, daughter to the seid Dame Maude Parre, and the residue of the seid 
ffeoffement to enter to y m when the seid Lord Scrop's son & heire shalbe come 
to the age of xviii yeres, and after the death of the seid Lord Scrop to make 
the ffeofement furth c marcs. 

Item. Yf the Lady Parre wyll pay xii c marcs in money the ffeofment to 
be c 1 after the deth of the seid Lord Scrop, so that the hole ffeofement 
remayne in the seid lord's hands to his seid son & heire come to the age of 
xviii yeres. 

Item. Of the aforeseid xi c marcs vi c marcs to be payed att the synyng of 
the indentures of covenante, & v c marcs to be payed in the ii yeres nexte 
following, by even porcions. And yf the seid Lady Parre wylle paye xii c 
marcs, vi c marcs to be payed at the synyng of the indentures of covenante, 
& vi c marcs to be payed in the 2 yeres nexte followyng by even porc'ons. 

Item. The seid Lord Scrop wyll not agree to repay no money after the 
marriage to be solempnyzed & executed, ne to enter into no covenante 
by especyaltye for the governaunce of the children duryng the nonage 
of them. 



3. — Lord Dacre's Answer to the above Letter and Articles. 

Madame, in right hartie maner I reco'mend me vnto you, and by thande of 
yo r servant, berer hereof, I have receved yo r writing, dated at Rye the 14th 
daye of this instant moneth of July, and to me delivered yesternight, to 
gidres w l copie of certein articles to youe sent fro my Lord Scrope touching 
the marriage to be had betwene his son and your doughter Katheryne, by the 
contents whereof I doo perceyve ye think that the seid mater in communica- 
c'on of mariage, which ye thought had beene in good furtheraunce, is like 
to go bak, bereason that my said Lord Scrope is not agreable to suche 
co'municacion as was had of the same at my last being w* youe, for even so 
and many causes specified in yo r said l're and articles at length. Cousin, sens 
my dep'ture from you I assure you I was not two nights to giddres at myne 
owne house, bereason whereof I had never leisour to labour in thes matres. 
And I do think, seing my Lord Scrope cannot be contente w* the eommuni- 
cac'ons that was had at my last being w* you, whiche w r as thought reasonable 
to me, and as I perceve semblably to his counsell, that this matter cannot be 
brought to no p'f'cte end w l out mutuall communicacion to be had w' my said 
lord, aither by my self, my son, or my brother. Wherfore, as sone as conve- 
niently any of us may be spared this matter shal be laboured, trusting veryly 
that I shall bringe it to a good pointe, and as I shal do therein ye shal be 
advertised at length. . I have promise of my said lord, and of my doughter, 
his wif, that they shal not marie their son w*out my consent, which they shall 
not have to no p'son but vnto youe ; and undoubtedly my said lord must 
nedes have some money, and he has nothing to make it of but onely the marriage 
of his said son, wherefore my full counsaill is, that ye be not over hasty, but 



92 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

suffre, and fynally ye shalbe well assured that I shall doo in this mattre, or in 
any other that is or may be aither pleasure, profitte, or suyrtie, to you or my 
said cousin, yo r daughter, that lieth in my power. 

At Nevxastell, the penult Daye of Julii, A , xvo H. VIII. 



Right honorable and my singular good lord, I recommend me unto you : 
I have receyved your l're dated at Newcastell the penult day of July, and by 
the same I perceye your pleasure, and also what payn ye intend to take in 
the matter betwene my Lord Scrope and me, for the whiche I hartely thank 
you. The Lord Scrope seid to a servant of myne that he wold no longer 
drive tyme in that matter with me, but he would be at large, and take 
his best advantage as with the lord treasurer, whiche had made moc'ons 
to be in communicac'on with him. Therefore it may please you at your 
convenyent ley sour to have this matter in your remembraunce, and thus I am 
alweys bold to put yo r lordship to peyns and busines, which I pray God I may 
some p'te defray, which shuld not be failed if it lyeth in my poure, be the 
grace of Jh'u, who preserve your good lordship. Wrettyn at Esthamsteed, 
this xxij daie of August. 



To the Right Honorable and my syngler 
good lord, my Lord Dacre. 



Your 

Maud Parre. 



[No Address. Apparently from his Mother to Lord Scrope.] 

My lord and son, I reco'mende me unto you in right hartie manner, and by 
thande of yotir servant, bringer hereof yesterday, I reoeved your writing dated 
the x th daye of this instant moneth, I onderstanding therby that for suehe 
communications as has been had and moved betwene my Lady Parr and yowe 
by your counsells concerning the marriage of your sonne and myn according 
to the teno r thereof, ye have now sent w* your servant, this said bringer, the 
articles of the same, wherein ye desire that ye may knowe my aunswer in 
writing ; and, further, that ye wold be sorry for any suche consideracions that 
any long drife were made therein, as further your said writing purporteth. 
My lorde, your son and heire, is the gretest jewell that ye can have, seeing 
that he must present your owue p'son after your deth, vnto whome I pray 
God len long yeares. And yf ye be disposyd to marie him, or he be com to 
full age, when he may have som hym self, I cannot see, w l out that 

ye wold marry him to one heire of land, whiche wolbe ryght costly, that ye 
can mary hym to so good a stok as my Lady Parr, for divers considerations, 
first, is remembring the wisdome of my seid lady, and the god wise stok of 
the Grenes whereof she is comen, and also of the wise stok of the Pars of 
Kendale, for al whiche men doo looke when they do mary their child, to the 
wisedome of the blood of that they do marry w l . I speke not of the possi- 
bilitie of my Lady Parr's daughter, who has but one child betwene her, 
and viii c marcs land to inherit thereof. Such possybilities doth oftyn- 
tymes fall, and I speke it because of the possibilitie that befelle vnto 
my self e by my inariage, and therefor, in myn opinion, the same is to be re- 
garded. My lord, to declare vnto you trewely. I assure you your oopu of 



THE CASTLE. 93 

articles conteyning your demands, which ye have now sent, and my ladi's 
demaunds, is so far in sundre, that in manner it is vnpossible that ever ye 
shall agree in that behalf ; wherefore, if ye can be content to go groundlye to 
work, and go to a short conclusion, I think it best that ye goo after the 
co'mon course of mariage, that is to sey, to geve c marcs joynt' for the payment 
of xi c marcs, that is to sey, iiii or v c marcs to be peyed at the making vp of 
the covenante, and c 1 yerely, vnto suche tyme as the som be fvlly ron, the one 
child to be in the kepinge of my seid lady ; and if it fortune the said p'sons 
one or other of them to die befoer carnall copulation had betwixt them, or 
before thage of consentment, then the som receyved to be repayed at suche 
dayes and after suche forme as it was delivered, w'out new mariage may be 
had w l the yong child, for I think it is not convenient nor prouffitable that c 
marcs should go out yerely of your land to so yong a p'son as my said lady 
eldest doghter, if it fortune, as God defend, that y r said son and myne die. 
And thus, my lord, I assure you thys is theffecte of my opynyons ; and if ye 
can thus be content, the matter shall shortly take effect. Also, I think it 
good, but I wold not have it comprised in the covenante, that during the tyme 
of 3 yeres, by whiche tyme my seid son and yours woll com to consentment, 
that he shold be with my said lady if she kepe her wedowhede, and ye 
to fynd hym clothing, and a servant to adwate vpon him, and she to find hym 
mete and drink, for I assure you he mought lerne w* her as well as yn any 
place that I knowe, as well norture, as Frenche and other language, whiche 
me semes were a comodious thinge for hym. 

[No Signature.] 

At Morpeth the xvii day of December A XV H. VIII. 



Eight honorabull and my syngler good lord, I hertly reco'mend me vnto 
you, thankyng you of your manyffold paynes takyn between my Lord Scropp 
& me, and concernyng the same I have receyved your lettres, and my Lord 
Scropp's also, and right well p'ceyve the contents of the same ; wherein I have 
takyn advice of my Lord of London, and dyvers other of my husband's 
ffriends & myn, who thinke thatt my seid Lord Scropp's offer, as well con- 
cernynge the joynter as the repament off my money, is so littill & so farr from 
the customs of the countre, and his demand is so greatt & so large off me, with 
the shortt paymentt, that my seyd ffrends woll in no wyse thatt I shall medle with 
the seyd bargane after my seid Lord Scropp's offer & demand. 

My lord, seynge this matter hathe beyn so longe in co'itac'on, I am ryght 
sorie on my p'tie it can nott take effecte, for in good faith hetherto I never 
had co'icac'on for no maryage to herr, for thatt I wold haue beyn so gladd shuld 
have goon forward as this, or ells I wold not have made so large offers for the 
forderaunce of the same as I have. My lord, I beseche you to be good lord 
vnto my cousin, the berer, in suche cause as he hath to do in y r p'ties, that the 
rather through your good helpe he may obteyn his right of suche thinges as 
his father gave hym in his bequest, the whyche shalbe hard for him to obteyn 
w l out your favor. And thus the Holy Goost preserve your good lordship 
to his pleasure. 

Your 

Maud Parre. 
From the Court at Greenwiche, this xv Daye of Marche. 

To the Right Honourabell my Lord of Dacres 
thys be delyvered. 



94 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

The praise herein recorded of Dame Maud Parr may be 
fairly esteemed her due; and the "wisdome of the seid 
lady" overcoming her natural inclination, determined that 
she " shuld in no wise medle with the said bargane." — This 
negociation took place in the 15th Henry VIII., when, if 
our date of her birth be correct, Katherine was eleven years 
of age. 

William Parr succeeded his father, Sir Thomas. He was 
thrice married, — first, to Anne, 1 daughter and heir of Henry 
Bourchier, earl of Essex (a family of high antiquity, and 
having immense possessions in the county of Essex) ; secondly, 
to Elizabeth, daughter of George Brook, Lord Cobham ; and 
thirdly, to Helena, daughter of Wolfangus Suavenderg, a 
Swede, who survived him. In the 30th Henry VIII. he was 
created Lord Parr and Eoss, of Kendal ; and in the 35th, Baron 
Hart, of Northamptonshire. In the latter year he was also 
created Earl of Essex, in right of his wife Anne. And, finally, 
in the 1st Edward VI. he was made Marquis of Northampton ; 
and from hence that part of the barony which he held received 
the name of the Marquis Fee. On the 18th of August, 1553, 
he was condemned as a traitor 2 for espousing the cause of 
Lady Jane Grey. However, he was soon afterwards restored 
in blood, but not immediately to his estates. These, it 
appears, were given up to him by favour of Queen Elizabeth. 
He died in the 13th Elizabeth, being the last of the family. — 
In his steward's accounts is the following item : " In money 
paid to the abby and convent of St. Mary's, York, for the 
tithes of corn and hay of all the demesne lands of the castle 
of Kendal, called Myntesfeet, Gallobar, Kirkefield, and 20 
acres of inclosure at Stanecross, lying contiguous 44s. 8d. as 
allowed in account of preceding years." 

This brings us to the conclusion of all that we find impor- 
tant to be said respecting the family ; and now we are 
conducted, by the order of time, to the remaining history of 
the Castle. 

1 Dr. Burn has committed an error in calling her Helen. He seems not to 
have been aware that the Marquis was more than once married ; and so has 
confounded the name of his last wife with the first. 

2 Morant's " History of Essex." 



THE CASTLE. 95 

The date of the Castle's decay, or destruction, may fairly be 
taken from the attainder of the Marquis of Northampton. 
And as only nineteen years — viz. from 1553 to 1572 — inter- 
vened between that event and the time when it is proved to 
have been in ruins, the most plausible conclusion seems, that 
it was dismantled or thrown down in the Marquis's unsuc- 
cessful engagements against the crown in favour of Lady Jane 
Grey. The queen (Katherine) and the marquis are both 
generally represented to have been born here, the former 
in, or about, 1513 ; and suppose we even date the decline 
of the Castle from this period, it requires extraordinary 
credulity to believe, that, in fifty-nine years, it could, from 
mere desuetude and gradual decay, have sunk into a state 
of complete dilapidation. — A report long prevailed, and 
(perhaps for want of a published history) was long credited, 
that it was blown down by Oliver Cromwell from off Castle 
How Hill ; and hence some have been led to believe that the 
mount was at that time purposely constructed for the demoli- 
tion of the Castle. This notion scarcely admits of serious consi- 
deration. The following extract will show, beyond doubt, 
that the Castle was in ruins almost an entire century before the 
time of the Protectorate ! 

By a survey of the Marquis Fee, made by order of the 
dowager Marchioness of Northampton (who had dower 
assigned to her by letters patent of Queen Elizabeth), in July, 
1572, we find the Castle thus minutely described : — 

" The Castle of Kendal is situate on the knowl of an hill, 
within the park there, and on the east side of the town, with 
a fair and beautiful prospect. The out walls are embattled 
40 feet square ; and within the same no building left, saving 
only to the north side is situate the front of the gate-house, 
the hall, with an ascent of stairs to the same, with a buttery 
and pantry at the end thereof ; one great chamber and two or 
three lesser chambers, and rooms of ease adjoining the same ; 
being all in decay, both in glass and slate, and in all other 
reparations needful. Under the hall are two or three small 
rooms of cellars. In the south side is situate a dove cot in 
good repair. The yearly rent of the demesne, and one-fourth 
part of the toll (of Kendal), 64Z. 14s. Yearly rent of the 



96 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

tenants at will in Newbiggin, in Kendal, 4<l 3s. Yearly rent 
of the burgage lands there, 101 5s. 6d. Fourth part of the 
fishing of Kent, \l. 2s. ±d." 

Not long after this, Queen Elizabeth made an exchange 
with the Marchioness for the Marquis Fee, giving her other 
lands in lieu thereof. And in the 23d Elizabeth the said 
queen granted " a part of the demesne lands belonging to the 
castle, by the name of the park of Kendal, with divers 
edifices, buildings, lands, tenements, and other premises to 
the same appertaining," to Ambrose, Earl of Warwick, to hold 
in soccage, as of the manor of East Greenwich. What became 
of the Castle, and other demesne park-lands, we have not 
found, until the reign of Charles II., when they appear to 
have been in the hands of Sir Francis Anderton, of Lostock, 
in the county of Lancaster, baronet. His son and heir, Sir 
Charles Anderton, settled them to the use of himself, for life, 
remainder to his first and other sons, in tail male. Lawrence, 
one of the younger sons, succeeded, after many difficulties, to 
the estate, and sold it in 1723, to John Huggins, Esq. The 
said John Huggins dying in 1735, the same descended to his 
brother and heir, William Huggins, who devised it to his two 
sons-in-law, Sir Thomas Gatehouse, knight, and the Eev. Dr. 
James Musgrave, who sold the property in 17G5, to the late 
Thomas Holme and James Dowker, of Kendal, and Benjamin 
Hall, of Newton, in Cartmel, Esquires. These gentlemen 
after selling part of the lands, divided the remainder amongst 
themselves, and the Castle falling to the share of James 
Dowker, Esq., came eventually to Mrs. Thomasin Eichardson, 
his daughter. And at the death of Mrs. Eichardson it 
was bought by Mr. Alderman Thompson, formerly M.P. for 
Westmorland, and is now held by his executors. 

When Gray (the poet) visited it, in 1769, he says. " almost 
the whole inclosure-wall remains, with four towers, two 
square and two round, but their upper parts and embat- 
tlements are demolished : it is of rough stone and cement, 
without any ornament or arms, round, inclosing a court of the 
ike form, and surrounded by a moat ; nor ever could it have 
been larger than it is, for there are no traces of out- works." 
To this Mr. West replied (1779), "had Mr. Gray ascended 






CASTLE MILLS. 97 

from the end of Stramongate Bridge to the castle, which was 
the only way to it when in its glory, and is the easiest at 
present, he would have observed a square area that had been 
fortified with a deep moat, and connected with the castle by a 
drawbridge, where was probably the base-court." The stones 
are now entirely removed, and the ground levelled, "and 
laughing Ceres reassumes the land/' Dr. Whitaker inclines 
to the opinion that it had no out-works. 

The castle has suffered little injury, and undergone little 
alteration in our time, excepting in the two following in- 
stances. — In 1813, the foundations were strengthened, and the 
walls repaired ; and the banks of the fosse on the western 
side were planted with the trees which are now beginning 
to conceal too much of the ruins. In 1824, a ponderous 
mass of the wall, which many years before had detached 
itself from the north front, and stood, like an inverted cone, 
on the site of the drawbridge, was, by a brisk wind in 
January, blown down, and shattered into fragments. Its 
dimensions were 12^- by 22J yards. 

It is impossible for a contemplative mind to survey these 
time-worn ruins of ancient magnificence, without being inspired 
with some of the melancholy reflections which Hutcheson 
has so finely pourtrayed in his survey of a similar fortress : 
" How fluctuating are the affairs of man ! how changeable are 
all sublunary things ! These towers submit to the destroying 
hand of time ! How are thy honours wasted, and thy pride 
brought low ! Authority and rule are rent from thy hands, 
and thy conquering banners are delivered up to the darkness 
of oblivion. Thy chambers are no longer the abode of secu- 
rity ! Where the jocund guests laughed over the sparkling 
bowl, adders now hiss, and owls sing the strains of melancholy 
to the midnight moonshine that sleeps upon thy mouldering 
battlements !" 

There are two appurtenances of this ancient castle to 
notice, viz. the Castle Mills, and the Castle Dairy. 

Castle Mills are situated on the west side of the castle, not 
far from the river ; and on a stream of water which is turned 

H 



98 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

from the main-course of the river, by a wear or dam. These 
mills appear to have been erected for the purpose of grinding 
corn for the castle : and there is still the remains of an arch, 
which probably formed part of the ancient structure. We 
conclude that the tithes of these mills formed an 'item ' in the 
ancient endowment of the church : for in the general eccle- 
siastical survey of Henry VIII. they are stated to amount to 
6s. 8d. ("Decim molend. Castell vis. vine?. ") 

This property belonged to the Corporation until the year 
1853, when it was purchased by Messrs. J. J. and W T . Wilson, 
for the sum of 50007. (See the Article on Manufactures in 
a future page.) 



( ASTLE DAIRY 




Stands on the north-west side of WTLdman Street, about 
fifty yards from Stramongate Bridge. It appears, from the 
name, to have been the milk farm belonging to the castle. 
In the house, there appears to have been a chapel, which 
was, most probably, appropriated to the husbandmen and 
menial servants under the potent barons, in the plenitude 
of their power. 1 Dr. Bum says, "there was a chapel at 

i It might also be placed here for the purpose of administering divine con. 
solation to the pilgrims who were about to undertake the perilous journey 
over Shap-fells ; just, " as in former times, divine service was pertormed in 
the oratory upon Chapel island, near Ulverstone. to persons crossing the 
pauds."— West's Antiquities of Furness, p. 15. 



CASTLE DAIRY. 99 

the east end of Stramongate Bridge, called All Hallows' 
Chapel." But this appears to have been a mistake, for 
Speed's Plan shows, that All Hallows' Chapel stood at the 
head of the lane which bears its name. The reference in Burn's 
History is evidently to the chapel at Castle Dairy. The follow-. 
ing description of this place is from "Notes and Queries" : — 

On a stone outside, on a shield or escutscheon, are incised the letters 
" a.g.," of an ancient fashion, a cord with sundry knots being intertwined, and 
the date, 1564 : — for Anthony Garnett, then proprietor. 

On the upper bevelled stonework of a window to the extreme left are in- 
cised " qvi vadit plane — vadit sane a.g." This same idea is rendered into 
English on coeval glass in Worlingworth Church, Suffolk, " he yt walke plainly 
— walketh sauely." Entering what is now the kitchen, but which is only a 
portion of the original apartment partitioned off, the clavey, or mantelshelf, 
extends the whole breadth of the house, and is formed of oak in curved 
panels, the moulding battlemented, with which the opposite end, now forming 
part of the entrance passage, corresponds. 

In the south window of the same is a quarrel (No. 1.) with, "1567 — omnia 
vanitas — a.g.," with interlaced cord, " viendra le iovr," a skull. Another 
(No. 2.) with a fleur de lis, within a tasteful border, in cinque cento style, 
surmounted by a crown ; both executed in yellow stain. 

In a bedroom up stairs, is a massive carved-oak bedstead, the head-board of 
which has upon it, carved in bold relief on the top triangular panel, the centre- 
piece gone, first row below-dexter, a mask with horns, after the Roman antique ; 
middle, a scroll, with "OttttUa battttag," a shield, having "a.g." conjoined by 
a fanciful knotted cord, a scroll with " Utentrra Is 10 ur," and skull ; sinister, 

mask in cinque cento style : lower row, three lions' masks in as many panels. 
On a buffett or ambry, upper part, i( oia : vanitas : honor : [a central 

piece missing] divicie : potestas;" lower part, "anno dni 1562." On each 

side "a.g.," as before. The bedstead above named is of the same date, as 

the carving on both, in certain parts, coincides. 

In the window, on a quarrel (No. 1.), " a.g.," and the date ' ' 1565." (No. 2.) 

An oak tree erased, argent, fructed or ; on its branches an eagle and child of 

the second. No. 3. as No. 1. in the room below No. 4., an oak tree erased ; 

on its branches an eagle and child or, the face proper. 

On oak bosses on the ceiling ; that next the window has a shield of four 

quarterings : 1st, two fesses engrailed, on the upper one a mullet pierced, 

Parr ; 2nd, three chevronels in fess braced, Fitzhugh : 3rd, three water 

bougets, two and one, Ross ; 4th, apparently three rabbits, two and one, .... 

On another, farther from the window, a second shield of four quarterings ; 

first and fourth a fess dancette between nine billets, four and five, Dein- 

court ; second and third three cockle-shells, Strickland. 

Some years ago, in an old oak chest, in this house, were 
discovered, a Missal, a MS. Genealogy of some of the Saxon 
kings, and two sets of Beechen Boundels. 1 The genealogy 

1 One set of the Roundels, and the Missal, are in the possession of Mrs. 
Braithwaite, .widow of Garnett Braithwaite, Esq., of Plumtree Hall. 

LoFC - H2 



100 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

is well written, on vellum, and illuminated. It extends from 
Adelwald, the 19th king of Northumbria, in the heptarchy 
(759), to Edward EL, surnamed "the Martyr. " The Missal is 
in very good condition, excepting that it wants the title-page, 
and unfortunately the date. The Eoundels may perhaps re- 
quire some explanation; being, as we conceive, very scarce 
and little understood. The name is descriptive both of their 
shape and substance ; for they are made of beechen wood, 
planed thin, and are circular, about five inches in diameter. A 
set consists of twelve, having distinct borders, six of either, 
uniform. In the centre is represented an animal, existent 
or fanciful, and inscribed with a maxim or motto in rhyme : 

1. 

[The representation of a skull, and below it the following quatrain.] 
" A wyfe yt maryethe husband es thre 
Was neuer wyshed thereto by me ; 
I wolde my wyfe sholde rather dye, 
Then for my death to wepe and cry." 

2. 
[A leopard, as anciently represented in the arms of England.] ('). 
" And he that reades thys verse euer no we, 
May hape to haue a lourynge sowe 
Whose louckes are lyked ( 2 ) nothynge so bad 
As ys hyr tounge to make hym made." 

3. 
[A white greyhound collared, ( 3 ) the collar bezante.] 
" If that a batcheler thou be, 
Kepe thee so sty 11 ; be rulede by mee, 
Lest that repentaunce all to latt 
Re ward e thee wyth a brocken patte." 

4. 

[A red fox.] 
" I shrowe hys harte that maryed mee ; 
My wyfe and I canne neuer agree ; 
A knauy&he quene by Jys I sweare, 
The goodman's bretche shee thynkes to weare." 

(*) A leopard is the correct heraldic term for the English lion, as here drawn, 
lean, gaunt, and savage-looking, with tail and tongue well developed ; a very 
different animal from that depicted now-a-days. 

( 2 ) Libened, or like to. Tounge, in the fourth line, has reference to that 
rubicund member of the royal beast as depicted in the original. 

( 3 ) This was one of the supporters of Henry VIUs mooa 



CASTLE DAIRY. 101 

5. 
[A red squirrel.] 
r: Thys woman may haue husbands fyve, 
Butt neuer whyll shee ys alyve ; 
Yett doth shee hoppe (*) so well to spede ; 
Geue up thy hopp, yt shall not nede." 

6. 

[A red camel.] 
" Aske thou thy wyfe yf shee cann tell 
Whether thou in maryage hast spede well ; 
And lett hyr speake as she dothe knowe, 
For xx pounde she wyll saye no." 

7. 

[A white elephant.] 
" Thou aret the hapeste man alyue, 
For euery thynge doth make the thryue ; 
Yett maye thy wyfe thy master be, 
Wherefore tacke thryft and all for mee." 

8. 
[A white panther spotted.] 
" If thou be younge then marye nott yeat ; 
If thou be olde thou hast more wytte ; 
For young menes wyues wyll nott be taught, 
And old menes wyues be good for noughte." 

9. 

[A white talbot.] 

" Take upp thy fortune wythe good happ, ( 2 ) 
Wythe ryches thou doste fyll thy lappe, 
Yett lese weare better for thy store, 
Thy queytnes yn shal be the more." 

10. 
[A golden leopard or spotted panther.] 
" Rescue thy hape ( 3 ) as fortune sendeth, 
For god yt ys that fortune lendeth ; 
Wherefor yf thou a shrowe ( 4 ) hast goott, 
Thynke wyth thy selfe yt ys thy lott." 

11. 

[A hare.] 

" Thou mayst be poore, & what for yt ? 
Hou yf thou hadeste nether cappe nore hatt ? 
Yett may thy mynde so queyt be, 
What thou mayst wyn as muche as thre." 

(!) Hoppe and Hopp a play of words with reference to the habits of this 
mercurial little animal. 

( 2 & 3 ) Hap and Hape, " luck" Example : " A fox had the hap to fall into 
the walk of a lion." — L'Estrange. (In Johnson.) 

( 4 ) " A shrew has got." Spiteful and indignant, like the shrew field-mouse. 
— (See Brockets " Glossary.") 



102 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

12. 
[A white unicorn.] 
" Thou hast a throwe to thy good man, 
Parhapes anunthryft ( l ) so what than ; 
Kepe hym as lounge as he cann lyue, 
And at hys ende hys passpot geue." 

These roundels are said to be of the time of Henry VIII. 
The letters are similar to those of his day, in half printing, 
half running hand ; the initials at the beginning of each line 
being in red, and what are termed Lombardic. 2 The roundels 
seem to have been used in games of chance. In Xo. 12, 
throwe alludes to the use of dice, and similar allusions 
appear in other places. Mr. Thoresby considers that they 
were " played in the manner of cards." It is supposed 
(says he) that the jSuns of Arthington extracted at once 
edification and amusement from them. 3 

This house is now the property of Mrs. Garnett Braith- 
waite. 



SIZEEGH HALL 

Is a fine old fortified building, and a fair specimen of the 
manor-house, of first respectability and importance. It is 
one of those which, having continued to be the residence of 
one family for a series of years, has never fallen into decay. 
As such we shall give a more particular account of it. 

It stands about three miles south of Kendal, in a pleasant 
park ; and the towers command an interesting and extensive 
prospect to the north and south-east, of fertile fields and thriv- 
ing plantations, bounded by an horizon of majestic hills. 

The etymology of this name carries the appellation back to 
the earliest cultivation of the land. The first syllable is 
from the Saxon sic, " a furrow, " from which comes our word 

0) " A spendthrift." 

( 2 ) "Lombardic" is distinguished by long heads and tails; and is so called 
because it was introduced by the Lombards, in 569; who were the original 
bankers, or money dealers in England, — whence comes w Lombard Street,*' in 
London. 

('•*) Thoresby's Ducatus Leodiuensis. p. 152. 



SIZEKGH HALL. 103 

syke ; and the last syllable (connected in meaning) from the 
Saxon ergh, or the Snio-Gothic arf, signifying "ploughed 
land." 

The house is nearly of the usual form, 1 consisting of a 
centre and two wings. The great tower or peel, at the south- 
east corner, sixty feet in height, remains entire. This tower 
dates from the time of Henry VII. and contains, still, a few 
of the original windows of that date. 

It is the strongest part of the building, and must have been 
designed as a place of refuge or defence. In the corners of 
this tower are closets for watchmen, with apertures obliquely 
made in the wall, so that no weapon or missile could enter 
the apartment beyond. It is embattled, and contains em- 
brasures. The centre, containing the old Hall, was per- 
haps first altered in the time of Elizabeth, and was further 
unfortunately modernized and subdivided about the year 
1770, still remaining unfinished. Its original form (says 
Dr. Whitaker) is described thus : The room extended to both 
fronts, having been nearly a square of forty feet. The 
principal entrance was at the east corner on the north 
side, and on the same side were two deep embayed windows ; 
and opposite, in the situation of the present front door, was 
a vast fireplace with a moulded stone arch. In the lower 
wing, which is very ancient, but not embattled, are a 
modern breakfast-room and a dining-room, wainscotted with 
oak, in ancient panel-work. In the upper stories of the 
great tower, is the Chapel, plain, and modern. 2 Also, the 

1 To the change of architecture introduced in the reign of Edward III. 
succeeded the castellated houses of the fifteenth century. The regular quad- 
rangular houses, not castellated, were sometimes built during the same age, 
and under Henry VII. became universal in the superior style of domestic 
architecture. Of these, the dwelling-house usually took up one side of the 
enclosure, or court-yard, and the remaining three contained the offices, stables , 
and farm-buildings, with walls of communication. — Hallam's " State of 
Europe during the Middle Ages," p. 419. 

2 In the 10th Henry VI., pope Eugenius IV. granted to Sir Thomas de 
Stirkland (the eighth in descent) and Mabel, his wife, license for a domestic 
chapel and portable altar ; which bull is yet extant, with the seal of lead 
very fair, about the breadth, and somewhat more than double the thick- 
ness of an English half-crown ; with a cross on one side, and underneath 
EUGENIUS P. P. IIII. On the reverse, two faces of venerable old men, 
and, above, the letters SPAS E. — " History of Westmorland." 



104 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

drawing-room, finely wainscotted with oak, which opens to 
the north front of the tower. And, opposite, on the same 
floor, the principal bed-room, now called queen Katherine 
Parr's. 

This room seems to have been so named, from a supposition 
that queen Katherine retired to reside here " after the king's 
death." This conjecture is not sufficiently discountenanced 
by Dr. Burn, who merely says " it perhaps may be true, but if 
it were so, the queen could not reside here long ; for she mar- 
ried again so soon after the king's death, that had she then 
proved pregnant, it was said that it would be doubtful to what 
husband the child should belong, and she died the year fol- 
lowing." That the queen may, at some early part of her 
time, have lodged temporarily at Sizergh we can hardly doubt, 
from the intimacy that subsisted between her family and the 
Stricklands ; but it is highly improbable that ever she visited 
it after the death of her royal consort. The king died in 
London, in January, 1547. The queen departed this life in 
September, 1548, at Sudeley, in Gloucestershire. During the 
short interval between these events, her attention must have 
been engrossed, first with the funeral ceremony of the late king, 
then with the hasty and unfortunate celebration of her marriage 
with lord Seymour, and from that moment, as it is repre- 
sented, to her dissolution, with the consequent " accumulation 
of griefs, which her constitution sunk under. " We know, 
moreover, that during the months of her brief widow- 
hood, after the death of the king, she lived at " her fine 
jointure house, at Chelsea, on the Thames. " And after her 
marriage with Seymour, she lived part of the time at Han- 
worth (one of the manors belonging to her dower), and after 
that, till her death, at Sudeley Castle. 1 So it is next to im- 
possible that the queen lived or even visited Sizergh " after 
the king's death." Another error occurs in the appropria- 
tion of this room, from the belief that the arms of Eng- 
land and France, which are carved in oak, and placed over the 
fire-place, are designed to commemorate queen Katherine.' 2 

1 See Agnes Strickland's " Life of Katherine Parr," pp. 257 & 271. 

2 It is said, that these arms were put up by queen Katherine Put, widow 
of King Henry VIII. — " History of Westmorland," p. 103. 



SIZERGH HALL. 105 

Whereas, they are really those of queen Elizabeth, with the 
red dragon and lion as supporters, and as a motto, 'vivat 
regina, 1569.' Katherine, as queen, bore for her arms, quar- 
terly, six pieces, and the quarterings were ensigned with a 
royal crown, with a K. and P. for Katherine Parr. This room 
is hung round with gobelin tapestry of exquisite beauty. In 
the vestibule, also, are hung, three pieces of tapestry, illustrat- 
ing the story of Anthony and Cleopatra. 

It appears, from some notes written by the late Mrs. Strick- 
land, at Sizergh, that Walter de Strickland, the 13th in the 
pedigree, ' put up ' many of the wainscots and carvings in the 
drawing-room and other parts, and built the wing on the 
south-west side, chiefly, as it is said, for his military purposes. 
The time of this gentleman, and the dates in several parts of 
the work attributed to him, agree precisely with this state- 
ment. In the wing alluded to is the date 1558, the 1st of 
Elizabeth, and this Walter died in the 11th of that reign. 

The oak wainscotting of this house is very fine, and is 
nearly all of one period, viz. from Henry VIII. to Elizabeth, 
inclusive. There is indeed a remnant of the old cane-work 
pattern in the library; but all the rest is part of a general 
plan for fitting up the whole house in the same elaborate and 
expensive manner, about the beginning of queen Elizabeth's 
reign. The finest specimen of veneering in wood, is in a 
room called the Inlaid Eoom, in which the panels of 
the wainscot-work of the bed, are, with wonderful labour, 
variegated with holly and fossil oak ; all perfectly undecayed, 
and in colour unfaded as new. The cornice of this bed is 
surmounted with a shield, bearing the arms of Strickland 
quartering Deincourt, elegantly carved in oak. Date 1568. 

In the breakfast-room, amongst others of less consequence, 
is a portrait of Mary, queen of Scots, and in the dining-room 
are portraits of admiral Strickland and Thomas Strickland, 
bishop of Namur. Also, portraits of king James II. and his 
queen ; Charles II. ; Prince Charles, the Pretender, and his 
lady ; and of lady Blount. In the same dining-room, over 
the chimney-piece, on a shield, quarterly, are the following 
arms ; Strickland quartering Deincourt, Neville (with a mul- 
let), and azure, a cross botony, or (for Ward) ; supporters, a 



106 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

stag collared and chained, and a bull with a mullet on his 
breast. 

In the windows of the hall, are the arms of Deincourt 
quartering Strickland, Eoos, and Parr ; these two last are thus 
accounted for ; Katherine, the wife of John de Eoos, was 
daughter of Sir Thomas Strickland, which John de Eoos died 
young. His widow Katherine assigned over to her said father 
the wardship and marriage of her daughter Elizabeth, which 
Elizabeth was afterwards married to William del Parr, knight. 
There are also in the windows of the hall the arms of Dein- 
court, quartering Strickland, Eoos, and Parr. Also, Strick- 
land quartering, or, three fleur de lys, sable (for Beetham) ; 
and argent, a chief indented, azure (for Burton). 

In various apartments are these arms : quarterly, 1, Strick- 
land, 2, Deincourt, 3, Neville, 4, Ward quartering Tempest 
and D'Arcy. Quarterly, Strickland and Deincourt, impaling 
quarterly, Neville and Ward. Quarterly, 1, a fesse between 
three crescents, 2, on a cross, five leopards' heads, cabashed, 3, 
a chevron between three roses, 4, three bars wavy, raided, 5, 
a cross moline, G, a bend, engrailed flory and counter florv, im- 
paling quarterly Tempest, and D'Arcy, differenced by a martlet. 

The whole of this mansion is well worthy the attention of 
the artist, who studies to imitate ancient models. 

On the ancient monument in the church, as has been 
already mentioned, appear the arms of Deincourt, quartered 
with those of Strickland; and in our account of the Castle, it 
is further mentioned, that when Gilbert, 4th baron of Ken- 
dal, sided with the rebellious barons in the time of king John, 
he paid for the ransom of his son and Ealph Deincourt and 
others, 12,000 marks ; and also gave hostages for his future 
fidelity. Amongst these hostages we find the daughter of 
Ealph Deincourt, and the son and heir of Walter de Strick- 
land. With respect to Walter de Strickland, it is clear that 
he resided at Strickland Hall, in the parish of Morland ; for 
he had a license to keep a chaplain in his family at Strick- 
land, about the beginning of the reign of Henry III. on his 
giving juratory caution that his chaplain should not injure, in 
its revenues, the mother church of Morland. 1 

1 Reg. Wetheral. 






SIZERGH HALL. 107 

Iii the 23d Henry III. (1239), we find that Eobert de 
Stirkland, knight, by deed, dated at his manor of Great Stirk- 
land, on the eve of St. John the Baptist, granted to William, 
his son, and Elizabeth, daughter of Ealph Deincourt, knight, 
on their marriage, his whole manor of Great Stirkland, with 
the services of free tenants there, together with the appurte- 
nances, to hold to them and the heirs of their bodies ; remainder 
to his own right heirs. This Eobert we conceive to have been 
the son of Walter, and the same who was delivered to king 
John as a hostage, and if so, the daughter of Ealph Deincourt 
must have been very young when given as a hostage, for the 
date of the aforesaid deed is twenty-three years subsequent to 
the date at which the hostages were given. But however that 
may be, we have now traced the union of the families whose 
arms appear on the monument mentioned in our account of 
the Church. And we may conclude, without fear of error 
(what has never yet been intimated in any account of Sizergh) 
that the Stricklands, at that time, removed to Sizergh, and 
that Sizergh was the residence of the Deincourts, and came 
to the Stricklands by marriage with the heiress of that family. 
For the Deincourt arms are in the chief place on the ancient 
monument before referred to ; and we can trace a succession 
of the Stricklands, at Sizergh, from the time of the said mar- 
riage to the present. In what year Sir William Strickland 
died we have not found, but in the 35th Edward I;, his son, 
Sir Walter de Strickland, had a grant from the king of free 
warren in * all his demesne lands in Helsington and Hevers- 
ham, and all other his lands in the county of Westmorland,' 
for his good services in the parts of Scotland ; consequently 
Sir William must have died in or before the year 1307. 

Dr. Burn has carefully, and at great length, illustrated the 
history of this family at Sizergh, from Walter de Strickland, 
knight, in the time of king John, to Thomas the grandfather 
of the present representative, W. C. Strickland, Esq., being 
twenty-one generations. The plan of this work does not 
admit of our giving the whole pedigree; but we shall set 
down the particulars of the family from the time where 
they are discontinued in the History of Westmorland. 

21. Thomas Strickland. He was twice married. First, 



108 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

to Anastasia Lawson, eldest daughter of Sir John Lawson, 
baronet, of Brough Hall, Yorkshire ; and, secondly, to Kathe- 
rine Gerrard, daughter of Sir Eobert Gerrard, of Garswood, 
in Lancashire. By his first wife he had issue — 1. Charles 
Standish (on whom devolved the Standish estates). 2. 
Thomas. 3. 4. Anastasia and Elizabeth ; both died young. 
5. Monica; married to Sir John Gerrard, baronet, of Gars- 
wood New Hall, Lancashire. 

22. Thomas Strickland, born the 7th September, 1792. 
He married, in 1824, Mademoiselle Ida de Finguerlin Bisch- 
engen, youngest daughter of the baron de Finguerlin Bischen- 
gen. They had issue, two sons, namely, Walter Charles, the 
eldest, who now resides at Sizergh, and Henry Charles, the 
younger, a Lieutenant in the army, who died at Barbadoes in 
1852. 

The name was spelled Stirkland, or Styrkland, until the 
time of Walter, the 9th in descent at Sizergh, who lived in 
the reign of Henry VI. It is derived from stirk-Iand (in 
Morland), — "pasture ground for the young cattle called 
stirhs." 

Mere antiquity is not all that the Strickland family can 
boast. What is far greater praise remains to be said, that 
they have for so many ages been eminently serviceable to 
the state. In the border service, especially, and in the civil 
wars during the commonwealth, the name of Strickland stands 
conspicuously — ever in defence of the legitimate rights of the 
erown and the best interests of the community. At the bat- 
tle of Edgehill, October, 1642, Sir Thomas Strickland (16,) 
was created banneret, 1 by king Charles in person. The same 
Sir Thomas was privy purse to king Charles II. And there 
still exists, at Sizergh, the badge of that office, which is a 
square purse of rich crimson silk velvet, having on it the royal 
arms, with the initials C. E. in gold embroidery. 

From Edward II. to the time of the Bestoration, they served 

1 The ancient title of ' * knight banneret " was generally given as the reward 
of military merit, and conferred by the king in person on the field of battle, 
and under the royal banner. The knight banneret (so created) took prece- 
dence of baronets and knights of the bath, and ranked next after barons. — 
MS. Notes at Sizergh. 






CUNSWICK HALL. 109 

in parliament seventeen * times as knights of the shire for 
Westmorland. 



CUNSWICK HALL. 

This ancient hall stands in a sheltered situation, below 
Underbarrow and Cunswick Scar, and is literally buried in a 
plantation of stately and venerable trees. So that if there be 
as much truth as ingenuity in the opinion of Lucas, that 
" the maintenance of old wood about a family mansion was 
a signal to the country that plenty and economy together 
reigned within," Cunswick Hall, in the day of its pride and 
power, must have been the very residence of 'plenty and 
economy.' The house is fast falling into a state of dilapidation, 
and has lost almost every feature of its original dignity. In 
the interior there was, a few years ago, one piece of furniture of 
ancient carved oak, date 1647. Over a double-arched gateway, 
leading to the court, is a stone, bearing the royal arms, quar- 
tering England and France. 

The first of the family who long possessed Cunswick, of 
whom we have found mention, is Eoger de Leyburne. Fuller 
says, " the first Leyburne, or Leburn, that I find, was Eoger 
de Leyburne, who married Idonea, the younger daughter of 
Kobert, last lord Vipont." But this is somewhat incorrectly 
stated ; for the 'lord Vipont,' to whom he refers, was Kobert 
de Veteripont, to whom king John granted considerable pos- 
sessions both in Westmorland and Cumberland. This Kobert 
de Veteripont had two daughters, Isabella (not Sybil, as Fuller 
states), and Idonea ; who being very young at the time of 
their father's death, were committed by the king, as their ward, 
to the custody of Koger de Clifford, of Clifford Castle, in 
Herefordshire, and Koger de Leyburne, of the county of Kent. 
These custodians married the said two daughters to their two 
sons and heirs, Koger de Clifford and Koger de Leyburne. 
After the death of Idonea, without issue, the whole of the 
Veteripont inheritance, including the shrievalty of the county, 
became vested in the heirs of Isabella, by Koger de Clifford, 

1 Dr. Burn records only fifteen instances of their having served in parliament. 
We have found two more among the family records.' 



110 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

and so afterwards, by marriage, to the Tuftons, present Earls 
of Thanet. William de Lancaster, baron of Kendal, in 
the reign of Henry III., granted Skelsmergh to Robert de 
Leyburne ; but what relation this Robert was of Roger de 
Leyburne, before mentioned, we have not found. This family 
represented the county of Westmorland in 1305, 1314, 1404, 
1410, 1422, and 1541. But when, and who was the first that 
resided at Cunswick, it is impossible to say. The last of the 
family, John Leyburne, having engaged in the rebellion in 
1715, this estate became forfeited, and was purchased of the 
crown by Thomas Crowle, gentleman ; after the death of 
whose son, George, it was purchased by Sir James Lowther, 
and now belongs to the Earl of Lonsdale. 

About a quarter of a mile on the KE. side of the hall, on 
the Cunswick estate, are distinctly visible, the remains of a 
camp, consisting of five mounds of earth, four of which formed 
a square, standing two and two, in juxta-position ; the fifth 
is about 35 yards from the rest, on a little eminence, and 
would seem to have been designed as an advanced post, or 
observatory. It is situated on a low piece of ground, as it 
were in a shallow basin, and is quite unobservable till closely 
approached. The dimensions of the mounds are from 15 to 
20 yards long, by from 6 to 8 yards wide. The enclosure 
has been defended on two sides, by a strong wall, about a 
yard thick, now level with the ground. This wall would 
mark out an area of near an acre of land, having the 
encampment in its centre. We can do little more than con- 
jecture the time to which it maybe referred. The probability 
is that it was a Danish Camp. It is not very far from Dan 
Hill (Dane's Hill), mentioned at p. 6. 



BURNESIDE HALL. 

Burneside, or, as it was formerly called Burxeshead 
Hall, is situate about two miles north of Kendal. It 
stands on a tongue of land formed by the junction of the Kent 
and the Sprint. As it is on the side, and not at the head of 
the burn, we cannot reconcile the ancient orthography of the 



BURNESIDE HALL. Ill 

name with the situation of the hall. It is proved, however, 
by all writings and monumental inscriptions, that it was 
spelled Burneshead during the residence of the families of 
Burneshead and Bellingham, and down to the time of the 
Braithwaites. It seems to have conferred its name on the 
first possessor (unless indeed it may be presumed to be Saxon), 
as, after the Conquest, grantees invariably took the name 
their lands were called by. 1 Of the family ' de Burnes- 
head,' we have only been able to find the last, viz. Gilbert de 
Burneshead, who, in the 11th of Edward I. purchased Lam- 
brigg of Thomas de Chenaye. He had an only daughter and 
heiress, Margaret, who was married to Eichard Bellingham, 
of Bellingham, in Tindale, in the county of Northumberland. 
The Bellinghams thus came to Burneshead in the reign of 
Edward II. and continued in possession of the manor for some 
time. The arms on the tomb in the church, 2 clearly refer to 
this marriage, and we conclude, that whenever that tomb was 
erected, it was intended principally to be in memory of 
Eichard de Bellingham and the heiress of Gilbert de Burnes- 
head. 

Sir Henry Bellingham, of Burneshead, was attainted in the 
time of king Edward IV. for having sided with the house of 
Lancaster in the then civil wars ; and all his lands were 
granted to William and John, sons of Sir Thomas Parr, 
knight, of Kendal Castle. The last of the Bellinghams who 
resided at this place, viz. Sir Eobert Bellingham, sold it to 
Sir Thomas Clifford, and, according to Sir Daniel Fleming's 
papers, Sir Thomas sold it to one Fitzwilliam, who again sold 
it to Machell, of Kendal. Machell sold it to Eobert Braith- 
waite, 3 of Ambleside, and this brought the family of Braith- 

1 Dr. Whitaker. 

2 See page 55. 

3 This family resided at old Brathay, and the circumstance forms another 
probable instance of persons being named after property. Braithwaite was 
very likely the original name of the estate ; composed of bra, q. brae, a sloping 
bank, and ihwaite, (Sax.) land cleared of wood. There is a house or hamlet 
near Hawkshead, which is still called Braithwaite, in full : and the learned 
antiquary of Furness says, that in that part of the county, in the time of 
Henry VIII. there were living Geo. Braithwait, bailiff, and 18 tenants of the 
same name. There is, also, a village two miles from Keswick which retains 
the name of " Braithwaite ! " 



112 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

waite to Bumeshead. These Braithwaites were of a very 
ancient and honourable family : ancestors of the Brathwaites, 
of Warcop, of whom Bichard, alias " Dapper Dick," author of 
Drunken Barnaby, &c, was a member. Thomas Brathwaite, 
who lived temp. Elizabeth, made a rare and valuable collection 
of gold, silver, and brass coins and medals, mostly Bo man, 
which, in 1674, were presented by one of the family to the 
University of Oxford. Most of these coins were found 
in the ruins of the Boman station, at Ambleside. The arms 
of Brathwaite are, gules, on a chevron argent, three cross 
crosslets, fitchy sable. 

Bichard Brathwaite sold the estate of Burneside to Mr. 
Thomas Shepherd, from whom it descended to his son 
Thomas, commonly called Justice Shepherd. 1 This gentle- 
man sold the Hall, and part of the demesne and corn tithe, 
to Christopher Wilson, of Bardsea, Esq. who settled the same 
upon his daughter Sarah, on her marriage with John Gale, 
Esq. of Whitehaven. The present possessor is Stephen Brun- 
skill, Esq. of Lambrigg Eoot. 

In Mac-hell's 2 survey, in 1692, the hall is described as con- 
sisting of a court, with a lodge and battlements, through 
which was an ascent to the hall. Before the court was a 
large pond, on each side of the passage to the gate ; and in 
either pond a little island, with a tree planted in it ; and in the 
windows of the gallery and the dining-room were the Brath- 
waites' arms, with impaliugs of the several families to which 
they were related. 

The hall, although it bears certain evidence of having been 
a strong and spacious fabric, is now, by frequent mutations, 
become uninteresting to the antiquary. The great tower. 1 -5 
yards by 10, has crumbled away nearly to the basement story. 

1 This Mr. Shepherd was born at Natland, aud was esteemed one of the 
most active and useful magistrates of his time. He was chairman of the 
bench, for which he was, in every essential, eminently qualified. He was. 
besides, a clever wit, a polished gentleman, and a benevolent and worthy 
character. He died in 1762, in the house now occupied by the Misses Brumwell, 
in Stricklandgate. 

2 Thomas Machell, of the ancient family at Crackenthorpe HalL He made 
a collection of materials relating to the history and antiquities of this county, 
of which Bp. Gibson and Dr. Burn both made use. 



COLLIN FIELD. 113 

which is slated over, and converted into a shippon. The hall, 
or centre, has been long modernized, and adapted to the 
conveniences of the farmers who inhabit this part. None 
of the arms mentioned in Machell's survey are left. The 
arched gateway, which is very strong, alone stands firm and 
unmoved ; and if left unmolested, will yet outlive many 
generations. 

COLLIN FIELD 

Stands pleasantly situated on an eminence, about half a mile 
from the southern extremity of the town, commanding an 
eastern prospect. It may have received its name from its 
situation, collin being probably a corruption of collis — a hilly 
(high) place. A degree of peculiarity is attached to this house, 
in consequence of its having been the occasional domicile of 
that distinguished lady, Anne, Countess of Pembroke. In 
Whitaker's " History of Craven" (p. 321), it is stated "that, 
from Skipton Castle into Westmorland, the Countess pursued 
the direct way by Settle, Kirkby Lonsdale, Kendal, &c, to 
Brougham." So that, if the evidence which remains in the 
furniture of the house be deemed insufficient to support the 
assertion that the Countess lodged at Collin Field, this addi- 
tional circumstance, we conceive, will be satisfactory. In the 
then bad state of the roads, and comparatively slow operations 
of travelling, the Countess would be unable to accomplish the 
distance (seventy miles) between Skipton and Brougham, or 
the reverse, in one day ; and as this is the only house between 
these places which can furnish her peculiar traces, it seems 
fair to conclude that she made it her halfway house, and 
lodged here with her favourite ex-secretary, on her journeys 
either way. 

Collin Field possesses every feature of the manor-house of 
lesser magnitude. It forms three sides of a quadrangle, the 
fourth having been secured by a strong wall, where was the 
entrance. In cases of assault, during the border raids, the in- 
habitants, having brought in the cattle, were shut up within 
the walls. A good supply of water, which is still found 
under the floor of the first kitchen, would help to sustain a 

I 



114 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

long siege. There are no criteria of architecture about the 
building by which we can ascertain its precise date. Mr. 
George Sedgwick, secretaiy to the Countess of Pembroke, 
bought it about the year 1660, and speaks of it as a house at 
that time. And we should say, that, if not the original 
structure, all else that remains to be admired must certainly 
be attributed to him. He who counted his mistress so 
exemplary in all things, could hardly fail to be inspired with 
her love for repairing and beautifying her residences. 1 

1 Mr. Sedgwick, in a memoir of the Countess, says, " When she came down 
into the north, in 1649 (where she continued till her death, in 1675, a year or 
two in Yorkshire, and a year or two in Westmorland), she found five of her 
castles, viz. Skipton, Appleby, Brough, Brougham, and Pendragon, thrown 
down in the late unhappy wars. She immediately resolved to repair them, 
notwithstanding the malignancy of the times. All these buildings and repairs 
could not be computed at less than £40,000, as she made appear by the yearly 
books of her accounts. A great estate God had blessed her with, and given 
her withal a noble heart, and an open and liberal hand, to do good generally 
to all. In what castle soever she lived, every Monday morning, she caused 
ten shillings to be distributed among twenty poor householders of that place : 
beside the daily alms which she gave at her gate to all that came. All 
groceries, spices, stuffs, and the like, which she used in her house, all wines, 
malt, hay, corn, and straw for her stables, she bought of neighbours and 
tenants near the place of her then residence, paying always ready money 
when they came for it. Seldom had she anything from London, being 
desirous the country might receive benefit by her. She wore, in her latter 
days, veiy plain and mean apparel. A petticoat and waistcoat of black serge 
(q. Kendal manufacture ?) was her constant wear, nor could any persuade her 
to wear others ! " 

This distinguished lady, of whom Dr. Donne said, " that she knew well 
how to discourse of all things, from predestination to slea silk," employed 
Dodsworth to compile her family histories, which comprised three large folio 
volumes, some of which, with the diaries she herself regularly kept, are yet 
extant in Appleby Castle. We think no apology will be required for our 
inserting the following interesting description of this remarkable lady, in 
her own words: — 

"I was very happy in my first constitution, both in my mind and body, 
both for internal and external endowments. For never was there a child 
more equally resembling both father and mother than myself. Mine eyes 
were black, like my father's, and the form and aspect of them quick and 
lively, like my mother's. The hair of my head was brown, and very thick, 
and so long that it reached to the calf of my leg, when I stood upright, 
with a peak of hair on my forehead, and a dimple in my chin. Like my father, 
full-cheeked ; and round-faced, like my mother ; and an exquibite shape of 
body, resembling my father. Now, when I caused these memorials of myself 
to be written, I have passed the sixty -third year of my age ; and, though 
I say it, the perfections of my mind are much above those of my body." 



COLLIN FIELD. 115 

From Mr. Sedgwick's memoirs of his own life (quoted at 
length by Dr. Burn), we select the following passages, pertain- 
ing to Collin Field : — 

" After eighteen years' service with this good lady, she 
began to mind me of myself, and my future well-being in the 
world ; often repeating to me a verse of Mr. Samuel Daniel, 
the famous poet and historiographer, who had been her in- 
structor in her childhood and youth, 

' To have some silly home I do desire, 
Loth still to warm me by another's fire.' 

She further declared her noble intention to me, that when 
I met with some small habitation, she would give me 200?. 
towards the purchase, which she punctually performed. 

" Within awhile God directed me to Collin Field, a small 
estate held under Queen Katherine, as part of her jointure, by 
a moderate rate and fine, convenient for the church and market ; 
freed from all assizes and sessions ; where by God's blessing 
I enjoy a quiet and retired life to my contentment ; having 
oftentimes the society of several of my worthy friends and 
neighbours from the town of Kendal, having lived here above 
14 years at the writing hereof, 1682." 

Over the porch, at the entrance door, is a stone bearing 
this inscription : 

Nvnc mea mox hvivs sed postea nescio cvivs, 1663. 

G. 

I. M. 

This stone is supposed to have been brought from Brougham 
Castle. 

On the hall door is a large wooden lock, which the 
Countess of Pembroke sent here, with her portrait ; as she 
did to all places which she was in the habit of visiting. 
She herself kept the master-key, and could thereby make 
these places her refuge in times of need. 

The principal apartments of present attraction are on the 
second floor, some of which contain the best specimens of 
the Elizabethan windows in this part of the country. One 
of these rooms is furnished with antique chairs, and several 

12 



116 ANCIENT RESIDENCES. 

paintings of first-rate excellence ; viz., portraits of Admiral 
Strickland and Bishop Strickland, copies of those at Sizergh ; 
and unfinished sketches of the Passions, by Eomney, pre- 
sented by the artist to Mr. Yeates. In this room, also, is 
the portrait of the Countess, taken in 1650, and one of Allan 
Pricket, Esq., Eecorder of Kendal, who resided at Xatland 
Hall. In one of the lodging rooms is a fragment of an 
oak carved bedstead, called the "Countess' bedstead." It 
bears no date, but contains the initials "A. P." 

After the death of Mr. Sedgwick, Collin Field became 
the residence of the Chambre's family. Here Walter 
Chambre, Esq., father of Sir Alan (of Abbot Hall), was 
born. About 100 years ago, John Yeates, father of Anthony 
Yeates, Esq., of Kirkland, purchased Collin Field estate of 
Mr. George Sedgwick, nephew to the above named Mr. Sedg- 
wick, who sold it in consequence of removing to Appleby, 
It came by will from Anthony Yeates, to Michaelson Yeates, 
Esq., the present owner. 

The primitive order of this house has fortunately been 
saved from martyrdom, by coming into the possession of 
the Yeates' family ; and it rejoices us, that, amid the ruins 
of time, and the desolating hand of selfishness, there are 
still to be found persons with taste, judgment, and liberality 
inspired, to preserve some of the memorials of antiquity. 

BLEASE HALL. 

Blease Hall, now a farm house, is situated in the town- 
ship of Old Hutton, about four miles from Kendal, on the 
Kirkby Lonsdale (upper) road. It has been for many years 
in the possession of the Wilson family, of Highgate, Kendal, 
and is now the property of Eichard Wilson, Esq., of Lan- 
caster. There is at present nothing remarkable about the 
Hall, except one large room, beautifully wainscotted in oak, 
which has originally been very splendid, formed in square 
panels, with mouldings placed diamond-wise. The whole 
is divided at intervals by carved pilasters with caps and 
bases, and surmounted by a frieze and cornice, reaching to 
within about two and a half feet from the ceiling : this space 



BLEASE HALL. 117 

of two and a half feet being in part an elaborate piece of 
stucco work. The wainscotting at present only extends along 
three sides of the room — the other portion having been 
removed when the side wall was rebuilt some years ago — 
at which time, it is thought, the curious old dagger (now in 
the Museum at Kendal) and several ancient coins, were 
discovered behind the wainscotting. 

The mantel-piece in this room is also of oak, and very 
handsome, though sadly dilapidated like the rest : it is sup- 
ported on two large oaken figures, richly carved, and the 
frieze is divided into compartments by four " graven images," 
the caps of which are also ornamented with figure heads 
above them ; there is an oak panel of inlaid workmanship, 
(now loose) in the room, which has originally occupied the 
centre compartment of the mantel-piece. Another loose panel, 
also of oak, contains the date of "1644," and over one of 
the doorways are the initial letters " H. B." which, as well 
as the date, are incised, and filled in with a black substance. 

The room is of ample proportions, apparently about twenty- 
four feet long, by eighteen feet wide and twelve feet high. 
The ceiling is in stucco, and divided by two beams into three 
compartments, the centre one of which is of very ornate 
workmanship in the style of the period, while the other two 
are at present quite plain, the ornamental work having unfor- 
tunately been destroyed during the repairs of the ceiling. 

The initials "H. B." are no doubt those of Henry Bate- 
man, who resided here, and who is said to have been a 
carrier to and from London and York with pack-horses, 
extensive stabling for which were upon the premises at 
Blease Hall, almost within living memory. The gang of 
pack-horses, with the bells tinkling at their necks, on a 
Sunday evening at Oxenholme, was always sure to be met 
by a goodly number of sight-seers from Kendal and miles 
around, of all ages and of both sexes, in their holiday attire. 1 

There are three brasses in Kendal Church to the memory 
of different members of the Bateman family ; one of which, 
that to Alice, wife of Boger Bateman, will be found copied 

1 Abridged from a paper by Mr. Aid. John Fisher, in the " Kendal Mercury." 



118 ANCIENT RESIDE JSX'ES. 

at page 68. Her "choyse virtues" are set forth in such 
strong light, there is no hiding them under a bushel. 



GILLTHWAITERIGG. 

The name Gillthwaiterigg is composed of three Scandinavian 
words, gill, ' water,' thwaite, ' land cleared of wood,' and rigg, 
1 a hillock ;' a hill, ' essarted,' near the brook. The mansion on 
the estate took this topographical and descriptive name. The 
present house is only a fraction of its original, and has been 
curtailed, altered, and modernized, at different times. It was 
in the Elizabethan order, with stone mullion windows, a gable 
roof, and contained a curious winding stone staircase. It was 
not embattled, nor surrounded by a courtyard, and comes there- 
fore more within the category of mansion than manor-house. 

By an old grant, still extant, it appears that Gillthwaite 
belonged to the Parrs " of Kendal Castle." In the latter 
part of the reign of Henry VIII. it was sold to Thomas 
Duckett, and by one of the Ducketts, was sold, about 
the year 1660, to William Eawlinson, then of Gray's Inn. 
This William Eawlinson is the man Avho put up the monu- 
ment in Kendal Church to Vicar Stanford, and who describes 
himself, in that epitaph, as of " Gillthwaite Bigge." ' He 
purchased the estate, as we are informed, "with his first 
earnings at the bar." He was probably attracted by local 
feelings and associations, for we find that he had received his 
education in Kendal, and here also the early part of his pro- 
fessional training, being, in all probability, articled to an 
attorney in this town. His parents, at the time, were resident 
at Graythwaite, on the banks of Windermere ; and it is worthy 
of notice, that both Graythwaite and Gillthwaiterigg have 
remained in the same family ever since. His father, Captain 
William Eawlinson, was an old parliamentary officer, and had 
fought both at Marston Moor and Eibble Bridge. William, 
now under consideration, was second son of the Captain. He 
was born 1640; was made sergeant-at-law early in his pro- 
fessional career ; and on the accession of William and Mary, 

1 Sec the Church Epitaphs. 






HELSFELL HALL. 119 

in 1688-9, was appointed one of the Lords Commissioners of 
the Great Seal of EnglaDd, on which occasion he was knighted. 
That high office he held till March 1693, when he retired from 
his professional dignities into private life, enjoying his otium 
cum dignitate for ten years, as he died at Hendon, in Middlesex, 
in 1703. 1 He devised Gillthwaiterigg to the eldest son of his 
eldest brother, passing by his own two daughters, for the 
purpose, no doubt, of keeping the name connected with the 
estate. And if so, his intentions have been so far fulfilled. 
Of the two daughters, the eldest was married to one of the 
sons of Sir John Lowther, of Lowther, Baronet, for her first 
husband. The other daughter was married to the Eight Hon. 
John Aislabie, of Studley, Yorkshire. Gillthwaiterigg now 
belongs to John Job Eawlinson, Esq., barrister- at-law. 



HELSFELL HALL, 

Lies nestling under the shadow of Helsfell Nab. 2 It was 
once a place of considerable importance, and belonged to one 
of the Philipsons. But time and circumstance have shorn it 
of its glory. The only remains of the original building are 
some good mullion windows, now walled up. The general 
foundations, however, may be traced, upon strict investigation, 
and the extent of the building thus partially ascertained. 

Some years ago, a bronze cross, two feet in length, was dug 
up among the ruins, with a small crucifix attached to it, 
which was thought to be of gold. It is probable, from this 
circumstance and analogous instances, that there was an 
oratory and altar within the Hall. J 

1 His arms still remain, in painted glass, in the Oriel window of Gray's Inn 
Hall. % 

2 Nab: neb: nape. From cncep (Saxon), "a peak," or "prominence." 



120 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 



CHAPTEK III. 



ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 



It would be absurd to assume any knowledge, or to hazard 
any conjectures, respecting the precise antiquity of the present 
town. It is evident that its founders conceived the situation 
more favourable than that which the Eomans had adopted 
for their station at Water-crook. Protection was, perhaps, the 
chief consideration of the first architects, and the hills on 
either side, Castle Hill and Kendal Fell, would readily suggest 
to them the advantages of the situation. Dr. "Whitaker, 
speaking of Kendal, calls it a Saxon town. This inference is 
satisfactorily obtained from the appellation Kirkby, signifying 
church town, 1 and so applied in " Doomesday," in the time of 
the Conqueror. By this faint ray of light, we perceive a 
few rude habitations, built of wattels, straw and mud, through 
the vista of nearly eight hundred years. The fact of the 
Doomesday Survey not extending to these northern parts, 
deprives us of the opportunity of knowing what was the 
extent of the town in the time of the Conqueror (1066). 
Dr. Whitaker, has, however, suggested an ingenious method 
of estimating at least the number of streets at the conquest. 
He says whatever streets do not bear the name of gate (wliich 
is Saxon) were not then in being. By this rule, Kendal is, at 
the time alluded to, restricted to four streets, viz., Soutergate, 
Stricklandgate, Stramongate, and Wildmangate ; but we 
have no right to fancy them as equal to their present 
extent, either in length or breadth. The principal towns 
were then only like our present villages ; and the very 
circumstance of four streets, with Saxon names, tells very 



1 Kirlcby implies that the place to which it refers was the only Church 
foicn within the valley, "History of Richmondshire." 



' ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 121 

honourably for the ancient character of Kendal. 1 From this 
time, a total eclipse occurs, till we find the town suddenly 
emerging into enviable distinction, by the light of royal 
favour, in the beginning of the fourteenth century. 2 Camden 
and Speed, the cotemporary fathers of English antiquity and 
topography, in the sixteenth century, have furnished us with 
few remarks on Kendal ; and these writers very indistinctly 
defined the magnitude and importance of the towns which it 
was the office of their pens to illustrate. Speed, however, 
although he is lamentably deficient in his text, has shown 
adequately, by the Plan appended to his work, the state of 
Kendal at that time (1614). To supply the want of verbal 
description, we have reprinted this Plan ; and it will be seen 
thereby that Kendal was then become a place of comparative 
significance. 

The houses and streets were built without any regard to 
uniformity. Every front house had, and still very generally 
retains, its proportionate width of ground, diverging at right 
angles, and terminating, on the one hand, at the Kent, and 
on the other, at the declivity of the Fell Side. The ground, 
or croft, as it is called, thus attached to each dwelling, must 
have been originally designed for the purposes of manufac- 
tures. Most of the houses were fronted with large, cumbersome 
galleries, and the shop-windows — many of which were opened 
only on the market days, — were without glass, so that the 
town generally wore a gloomy appearance. These galleries 
continued till an advanced period of the last century. An 
aged friend of ours has heard his father relate, that he could 
walk " dry shod" under the roof of a gallery from New Biggin 
to Stricklandgate end ! 

We find also, that, in the beginning of the last century, the 
town was very ill paved. The author of "A Fortnight's 
Eamble to the Lakes," describing Kendal about the time 
alluded to, says : — 

" The tenter-grounds on the sides of the little hills resemble 
the growth of the vine orchards in Spain ; and from having 

1 The historian of Leeds makes it a boast that that town had three gates at 
the time of the Conquest. . 

2 Vide " History of the Woollen Manufactures," in a subsequent page. 



122 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 

much and many coloured cloths upon them, I should hope 
that trade nourishes. I would wish to say something in 
praise of the town, but it is too ill-paved to mind anything 
but your feet !" 

Mr. Gray, in 1769, complains of the irregularity of the 
houses. In his journal, addressed to Dr. "Wharton, he says, 
" Excepting these (the lines of the two principal streets), all 
the houses seem as if they had been dancing a country dance, 
and were out; there they stand, back to back, corner to 
corner, some up hill, some down, without intent or meaning." 

We are fortunately able to describe some of the irregularities 
and obstructions in the streets to which Mr. Gray refers. 
And we must be allowed to observe, that some of them were 
perhaps, not quite without " meaning." 

NEW BIGGIN. 

New Biggin (New Building) stood in the middle of Souter- 
gate, now Highgate {vide Speed's Plan). It extended thirty 
yards in length, and was nine and a half yards broad. On the 
east side the passage was wide enough for wheeled carriages ; on 
the other, the width was only sufficient for foot passengers. 
This style of building, standing midway in the main street, 
was common to many ancient towns. There was a similar 
one in Newcastle, one in Carlisle, and there is still one at 
Holborn Bars, in London. The building in question was 
mostly of wood, two stories high j the upper floor sup- 
ported by twenty-nine strong beams, without joists, which 
projected beyond the basement story, and supported a gallery 
(originally). On the west side there were some small 
dwellings, and one large room called the " Cordwainers' 
Hall," belonging to the Cordwainers, the last company of 
free-men in the town. It is supposed to have been built about 
1500. In 1572 it was held by the Marchioness of Northampton, 
as parcel of the Marquis fee, and the yearly rent at that time 
paid by tenants at will, appears, from a survey then made, to 
have been £± 3s. Od. (See account of " The Castle." ante 
p. 96.) In 1803, the Earl of Lonsdale and Lady Andover were 



NEW BIGGIN. 123 

the chief proprietors of the New Biggin, and they made a 
donation to the town of their respective interests, for the 
purpose of having it removed, and the ground laid open to 
the street, which was accordingly done at that time. 

It is matter of regret that no sketch or plan of this building 
was made before its destruction. Mr. John Eichardson, archi- 
tect (now living), has produced a drawing from memory, exe- 
cuted in 1845, which is believed to be generally correct, and we 
here present a fac-simile wood-engraving of the said drawing. 

It does not succeed, so well as could be wished, in showing 
what part of the building was " fair to the street," and what 
was set back under a piazza or penthouse. Four of the shops 
in the front exhibited by the drawing retired within a pent- 
house, supported by wooden pillars. These shops had win- 
dows without glass, and with wooden shutters. The other 
two windows, next the butcher's stall, were glazed. The 
probability is, that this last named shop had been renovated 
many years subsequent to the erection of the building, when 
that front was brought forward, and the expensive luxury of 
glass introduced. One can imagine the sensation that would 
be produced in the town by such an innovation ! It is not 
exactly certain when glass came into use for shop windows 
in provincial towns. Bede says, glass windows were first 
introduced into England towards the close of the seventh 
century. But, for many centuries after that, the use of window 
glass was confined to buildings for religious purposes ; and 
we know, from later authors, that, down to the end of the 
fifteenth century, none but the wealthy indulged in glass 
windows, for private houses of the first class. The shop in 
question may have been the very first in the town distin- 
guished by glass windows, and if so, the reader has presented 
to him, in the view of New Biggin, what he may regard as 
the most fashionable and frequented part of Kendal about 
the year 1700. 

The picturesque building seen in the open street, north of 
the New Biggin, will be recollected by most of our readers. 
That penthouse front was removed in 1828, and replaced by 
the present bookseller's and jeweller's shops. These were 
then the modern fashion, and, if compared again with most 



124 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 

recent examples of plate glass, &c, will show the progress of 
improvement in the street architecture. The building with 
square-topped entry belongs not to the past : it is the Horse 
and Eainbow public-house, almost as it now stands. 

butchers' eows. 

The Butchers' xtows were open stalls, or benches, ranged 
along the opposite sides of the street, which was then called 
"Soutergate" (Highgate), from about the Pump Inn, down to 
the " New Biggin." One of these stalls will be seen in our 
drawing of the " New Biggin." They continued till about the 
year 1782, when the Old Shambles (opposite the Commercial 
Inn) were built. Whilst the "Butchers' Bows" remained 
in the main street, as above described, the barbarous 
custom of bull-baiting prevailed in Kendal. On the oth of 
November especially, bull-baiting took place, and the 
butchers rarely ventured to slaughter a bull unless it had 
been publicly baited. If any one did so, he had to pay the 
customary penalty of hanging a sign board out with " bull- 
beef" on it, or burning candles or a lighted lantern over it, 
and keeping the lights burning so long as any unbaited 
beef remained on hand unsold ! This practice continued in 
Kendal until about 1790, when it lapsed on the suppression 
of bull-baiting. The Bull Bing was placed on the High 
Beast Banks, about the centre of the green. This Bing was 
applied to another barbarous custom, fortunately now a 
matter of history. Taking hold of and shaking the bull ring, 
was tantamount to throwing down the gauntlet as a general 
challenge to fight, and was not unfrequently done by pug- 
nacious fellowes, on fairs, and market days. 

The New Shambles, between Finkle Street and the Market- 
place, were built in 1804. 

There appears to have been some fear, by the authorities 
of the town, within a century after the "New Biggin" was 
"sett vpp," that the "lyke or worse (obstructions in the 
streets) shovld hereafter ensewe," and accordingly the fol- 
lowing mandate, in the shape of "An Order for building 
within this Baroughe" was issued : — 



butchers' rows. 125 



An order for Buyldinye w th in this Boroughe. 

5 Decembr The Alderman and Burgesses off this Boroughe off Kirkbie- 
1577 kendall at this pnte [present] not onelye seinge and throughlie 
pceyvinge [perceiving] by sundrye Examples the manyfest hurte 
and Inconvenyence alredye come to this Boroughe by the great 
streitninge off the Markett places within the Same, By reason 
Chefflye off Dyvers howses, shoppes, Taverns, grecis, 1 stayres, 
& buyldinge heartoafore beinge sufferide to bee sett vpp, made, 
& fframyd by sundrye psonns [persons] w^in the Same, But 
also dowbtinge that the lyke or worse heareafter should ensewe & 
be attemptyd & doone by others to the ffurther piudice [pre- 
judice] theroff, Iff spedie remodie, foresight, and redresse 
should not (in tyme) be had & pvided [provided] therin — 
Therfore it is nowe Ordeyned & Constitutid by the Alderman 
& the xij° head Burgesses off the same Boroughe at this tyme 
beinge, That no maner off person or persons whatsover ffrome 
hencfurthe shall or may Improve, Incroche, stopp, streytten, or 
take vpp any ffrout roweme or ground to buyld vpon in any 
parte, place, circuyte, or precincte off the Markett place within 
this Boroughe off Kirkbiekendall withowte the speciall apoyn- 
tem* & assignem*. off the Alderman & Burgesses off the Same, 
or the more pte [part] off them, ffrome tyme to tyme beinge, 
vpon payne to losse & fforfeitte to the Chamber off this Boroughe 
. . . xxl r (yff it be done in any parte or place where any 
m'keth [market] is kepte), And iff it be done in any other part 
or place w^in this borugh owte off the Markett places wher 
m'kethe [market] is not kepte Then . . x 1 . 1 ' 

8 Decembr 1577 Provided Neverthelesse yff any suche buyldinge, In- 
crochem*. or Noysaunce hearafter be made & sett vpp, or to 
be made & sett vpp in any parte or place w*in this Boroughe, 
That then it shalbe at the pleasure off the Alderman and 
Burgesses, or the more pte of them ffor the tyme beinge, The 
Same to pull Dowen or stay at their Discrecons, (The fforfeytour 
off the payns aforesayd or either off them in anywise notw* 
stand). 



1 The word Grecis, we believe, is intended to apply to the stairs of those 
galleries by which most of the houses in Kendal were fronted (as 
before stated). They were flights of stone stairs. The building was con- 
structed of rails of oak timber very rudely "sett vpp, made, & fframyd," 
and firmly bound together by strong wooden pegs or treenels. The word 
"grecis," or "grees," is probably Norman French; as the modern French 
word " Grds" means a paving, or flag stone. " Grees," then, in this case, 
might be the lowest or projecting stair of "the flight." Halliwell in his 
dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, quotes the following illustrations 
of its use — 

" A grese there was of steppes fiftene." 

" Up at a grese scho hym lade, 
To chambir scho hym broght." 



126 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 



WHITE LION INN. 



The clump of buildings, of which the White Lion forms 
the centre, may be regarded as a frontier specimen, which 
separates the past generation from the present ; and, desiring 
to perpetuate its picturesque out-lines, we here present a 
drawing of it as it now stands. 

There is no doubt that the first floor of the front of this 
house was one of the open galleries mentioned before, at p. 121 ; 
and the tinman's ("Gardiner's") shop, which is now beneath 
a penthouse, was under the gallery. Hudson, the botanist, 
was born in this house (vide Biographical Memoir); but 
whether the alteration, which enclosed the gallery, was made 
before or since the time of his birth, we cannot say. The latest 
specimens of the true galleried fronts, were the Elephant 
public-house, below the White Lion, and the pot-shop on the 
opposite side of this street (taken down in 1822). Many 
persons still living may also recollect the half-disguised gallery 
next to the Foot-ball public-house, in the market-place, where 
there formerly was a watchmaker's shop. We regret our 
inability to reproduce all those vestiges of "decayed in- 
telligences." 

I'KOSS HOUSES. 

The Cross House, in Stricklandgate, was the house where 
Mr. Noble lived and died. In Stramongate, a building 
on the site of the house now occupied by Edward 
Crewdson, Esq. And, in Highgate, the house belonging to 
Mr. Miles Thompson, occupied by Joseph Swainson, Esq. 
On the front of the house opposite to this last, there 
was a stone, within living memory, with the arms of Eoos 
engraved thereon. These Cross Houses may have been 
purposely protruded into the street, either for the celebration 
of some ceremony in monastic or catholic times (as the 
Eoman Catholics still halt their funerals opposite them), or 
have been erections where tolls were taken ; or, again, 
stations where watch and ward were kept in troublesome 
times. 

There seem, from the names still attached to the places, to 



town's cross.— the maypole. 127 

have been three crosses erected at nearly equal distances from 
the town, viz., one at Stone Cross Barn, on the road to 
Millthrop ; another at Cross House Close, on the road to 
Burneside ; and a third at Far Cross Bank, on the road 
to Appleby. 

THE TOWN'S CROSS, 

Or Market Cross, stood opposite the Covered Market, and 
was an obstruction in the street. There still remains a 
remnant of it in a stone at the corner, vulgarly called 
" cold stone," where the charters and so forth were usually 
proclaimed. Cold stone is a corruption of " call stone y" an 
appendage common to most ancient towns, where all public 
matters were "called" prior to the "institution" of belman. 

THE MAYPOLE 

Was another incumbrance, but indispensable, according to 
the custom of our forefathers. It stood in Kirkland, oppo- 
site the house of the late Thomas Eeveley, Esq., and was 
suffered to remain till within eighty years ago. In the time 
of our good Queen Katherine, who may fairly be supposed to 
have partaken of the amusements, countenanced by her royal 
consort, 1 the original festivity of maying and morris-dancing 
would be here celebrated, by the annual ceremony of 
"maying" when, immediately after sunrise, on the 1st of 
May, processions, entering the town at various inlets, streamed 
through the streets, with music of horns and flutes; boys 
with their May-gads, 2 and girls with their "brats" full of 
flowers, — young and old alike joining in merry laughter, and 
song, and the customary chorus, "We have brought the 
summer home." 'When the above-named ceremonies became 
less fashionable, 3 the May Pole was made the rendezvous of 
all the milkmaids in the neighbourhood, who came and 

1 Vide Hone's " Every Day Book." 

2 Willow-wands twined with cowslips. — Sir Bulwer Lyttorts " Harold." 

3 The ^semblance of those times continued up to the present century in 
the assemblage of young people in the Vicar's Fields, on Easter Tuesday. 
After spending the afternoon there, they returned in procession through 
the streets, " threading grandy needles." 



128 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 

paraded round it on Easter Mondays. On other occasions of 
rejoicing, afterwards, such for instance, as terminating an 
apprenticeship, and the like, it became customary for young 
men to go and dance around it. 

In those times, as we are informed, there were some 
elegant buildings in the town, which, although they might 
not add to its uniformity, would, at least, preserve it from 
an appearance of poverty : 

BLACK HALL, 

(so called, perhaps, in contradistinction to White Hall), 
in Stricklandgate, was a fine old mansion. It was, for 
many centuries, the residence of an ancient and distinguished 
family of the name of Wilson. Thomas Wilson, of this 
family, married, in 1577, Mary, sister to Sir Richard Fletcher, 
of Cockermouth. He (Thomas) had a brother, Henry, who 
lived here, and was the first Alderman, and chief magistrate 
of this borough, under the charter of Queen Elizabeth, in 
1575. 1 George, son of the aforesaid Thomas, married 
Alice, daughter of Sir Thomas Brathwaite, of Burneside Hall, 
and granddaughter of Richard Brathwaite, alias Dajiper Dick. 
This George had a son and successor, George Wilson, born at 
Black Hall, who, also, had a son George, and he again had a 
son George. These three gentlemen successively inhabited 
chambers, in Symond's Inn, for upwards of 150 years, and 
were eminently distinguished lawyers. The last of this 
family was Mary, lady of the late Sir Hugh Inglis, Baronet, 
of Milton Bryant, Bedfordshire, 

BEOWNSWOED HOUSE, 

(lately the Pack Horse Inn) opposite to Black Hall, was likewise 
an elegant residence, and belonged to a family of the name of 

1 Alderman Wilson presented to the corporation of Kendal two splendid 
silver cups, or flagons, inscribed — ''Presented by Henry Wilson, first Alder- 
man of Kendal, to the Corporation of that town." These cups, together with 
some other plate, were, many years ago, exchanged for a set of candlesticks. 
This Alderman Wilson had a son, Henry, who resided mostly in London. 
He devised a legacy for sending three poor boys to the metropolis, and binding 
them apprentices there ; but, by some mischance, it appears, this legacy was 
never appropriated. 



WHITE HALL. 129 

Brownsword, one of whom was Mayor of this borough in 
1695. King James I. lodged one night in this house, in 
passing between London and Edinburgh. This was possibly 
on the occasion of his going to London, on his accession, in 
August, 1617. There was a fine oak bedstead in the house, 
much carved, called " the king's bed." J 

WHITE HALL 

(abbreviated, as we conjecture, from White Cloth Hall) 
was another stately mansion. It stood upon the site of the 
present Town Hall, and was the residence of the Eobinsons, 
afterwards of Eokeby Park. The front projected with two 
wings : the windows were stone mullioned ; and the stair- 
case was of stone — spacious and circular. The ground 
which now forms "New Street, was a garden, attached to the 
hall. 

RESTRICTION OF NUMBERS AT WEDDING DINNERS. — 1575. 

The " Boke off Eecorde" of the Corporation of Kendal, 
from which we have elsewhere quoted, contains regulations 
respecting bridals, drinkings at churchings, &c. The following 
is the order relating to " Bryddalles : " — 

Brydalles the 
Nomberes Itm it is Orderyd and Constitutyd by the Alderman and 

/ Secundo die \ Burgesses, w th the ffull advise and assennte aforesayd, that 
\ ffebruarij 1575 /no pson or psonns off what estate or callinge so ever he, she, 
or they bee off, whiche either be nowe dwellinge or w ch 
heareafter shalbe dwellinge or resydente w th in this Boroughe 
or Librties hearoff, shall, after the foresayd sevynth daye off 
ffebruarij nexte comynge, provyde, prepair, or make or cause 
or suffer to be provided, prepayred, or made at or w th in his, 
hers, or their howse or howses, or at or in any other 
howse or place w th in this Boroughe or librties hearoff beinge, 
Any Bryddall Dynner or weddinge dynner off or ffor any 
pson or psonns nowe or hearafter beinge and Dwellinge 
w th in this Boroughe or librties hearoff, and marryinge & 
weddinge as is aforesayd in the Sames, above the Nomber 
off Twentye Measses off towen ffolks 2 in all as is aforesaid 
Vpon payne to fforfeite & lesse to the vse off the Chamber 
off this Boroughe for everye suche faulte xx*. 



1 Part of this bed ia now preserved, among other relics of antiquity, at Ivy 
Cottage, in Rydal. 

2 A " meass" was four persons, so the number for a " Bryddalle Dynner," was 

X limited 



130 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 



TRADESMEN S TOKENS. 

Up to the 17th century, there was no regular currency 
authorized by the State, but that of silver, and occasionally a 
•little gold. The smallest coin in use was a silver penny, 
which after a time became divided, by shears, into half-pence, 
and farthings (a "half" and a " fourtli-inf). These pieces 
were so small that they were constantly liable to be I 
still the State failed to provide a larger coin of less valuable 
metal. Hence the trading community were driven to the 
necessity of devising a substitute of their own. In E 
places tokens of lead were cast, which continued to I 
up to the year 1613. Prior to this, tokens of stamped 
leather, issued by private traders, were in circulation. Then 
followed brass 1 and copper tokens, which,. by the tin. 
Charles II, were issued without restriction, and without 
"patent." These small coins contributed materially to the 
benefit and convenience of trade. They were coined by 
incorporations of cities and boroughs, by guild comp 
and by tradespeople and victuallers, at pleasure. E 
community, tradesman, or tradeswoman, that issued this 
useful kind of specie, was obliged to take it again, when 
brought to them, and, where many sorts were current, a 
tradesman kept a sorting box, into the partitions of which he 
put the money of the respective coiners, and at p 
times, when he had a competent quantity of any one person's 
money, he sent it to him, and got it exchanged for silver. 
These coins had most of them the peculiar devices of the 
community or profession of their coiners. The following is 
a complete descriptive catalogue, with engravings, of the 
whole series of the Kendal tokens, which arc at pi 
known to have been issued either by individual tradesmen of 

limited to eighty persons ! For a   WyftVs Kyrkeing," the limit was " three 
measses of ffolk.es," or twelve persons. One cannot imagine a reason for 
these restrictive Bye-Laws, without reference to the indulgence of dissipating 
habits. 

1 From this term has probably arisen the provincial term broMS, which we 
frequently hear given, not only to the copper coinage, but also to wealth 
generally. For instance, it is usual to say, in speaking of a man possessed of 
property, "he is worth a deal o' brass." 



TRADESMEN S TOKENS. 



131 



the town and neighbourhood, or by any of the "Twelve 
Severall Companyes" of incorporated freemen, or fraternities 
of traders which were formerly associated, constituted, and 
recognised, within this borough. 

The catalogue is composed of nine varieties, arranged in 
the order of their respective dates, extending, it will be seen, 
over an interval of thirteen years — viz., from 1656 to 1669 — 
Hadwen's Token (No. 9) being the only one which is not 
dated. 



No. 1. 




Obverse — "thom . sandes . of*" — In the field, A teasel and a wool-hook. 
Reverse — " kendali, . 1656 * "— „ A wool-comb. 

In Mr. Boyne's collection. Thomas Sandes, who was Mayor of Kendal 
in 1647-8, made a fortune as a dealer in " Kendal Cottons," and resided in 
the front house of the "Elephant" yard, (now the Elephant inn, which was 
rebuilt about thirty years ago,) using the back premises as. his warehouses. 
He founded, in 1670, " Sandes' Hospital." (See subsequent page.) 



No. 2. 




n kendal." — In the field, The arms of the 



Obv. — u MERCERS COMPANY 

Mercers' Company. 
R eVt — The arms of the Corporation of Kendal, with " 16 " and 
side of the shield respectively, and " kk " above the same. 



57 " on each 



The token is a neat one, farthing size, and is in Mr. Boyne's collection. In 
Snelling it is engraved without the kk above the shield : probably a variety. 
The original dies, much worn, were found in 1803, among the ruins of the 
" New Biggin," where the cord wainers had their hall, and are now in the 
Natural History Society's museum. 

K 2 



132 



ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 



No. 3. 




Obv.—" Oliver . plat : of * "—In the field, Three Maltese crosses. 
fi ev , — " kiekby = kendall * '* — ,, The date "1659," with three 

stars of five points above and three below. 

Oliver Plat was a gentleman of considerable property, both in Kendal and 
the neighbourhood, and lived on his own estate at Summer How, in Skels- 
mergh. The property, in Kendal, known as the Rainbow Inn, belonged to 
him ; and an oak table and oak panel, bearing the inscription (boldly carved), 
"O.P.* E.P. 1638," were discovered when the house was rebuilt, about 
twenty-five years ago. He was a Roman Catholic ; hence the Maltese cr 

No. 4. 




Obv. — " edmond . adlington * " — In the field, The arms of the 1 1 

Compauy. 
Rev. — "in . kendall : 1659*" — .. The initials ". a . 

>: : i " 

The dyers, as elsewhere" shown, seem .formerly to have been associated 
corporately with the shearmen. The " shearmen-dyers " are mentioned in 
the poetical account of the guild procession in 1759 (printed at page 139). 
The compliment paid in this effusion to Kendal industry, we cannot omit 
twice quoting : — 

" Thus English wool, by shearmen-dyers wrought, 
Equals the finest silks from India brought." 

Edmond Adlington was "sworn" as a shearman-dyer in the year 1649, and 
followed that business in 1655 and 1657, as evidenced in the corporation 
books. The family came originally from Yealand in Lancashire, and carried 
on the above business there, and also at Kendal, simultaneously. They were 
quakers, and tradition says that Edmond was a man of immense bulk, weigh- 
ing upwards of twenty-four stones, and that his wife was of little inferior 
weight, being upwards of twenty-two stones. He retired, and died probably 
at his native place, at a great age. Nicolson and Burn (History of West- 
morland, p. 536), in recording some of the eccentricities of the early quakers, 
as described by Francis Higginson, vicar of Kirkby Stephen, a clerical 
pamphleteer against the sect, in the time of Cromwell, say :— "Some of them 



tradesmen's tokens. 



133 



stood (oddly draped) upon the market cross, on the market days, preaching 
from thence to the people. There is no doubt that persecution drove the 
Quakers to excesses bordering upon martyrdom, which a gentler treatment 
would have prevented, — excesses for which the oppressors and not the 
victims must be held responsible. 



No. 5. 




Obv. — " company . of . shearmen * " — In the field, A pair of croppers 
shears. 



Rev. — "in . KENDALL . 1666 
brush or frame. 



The shearman's teasel- 



Mr. Boyne, whose collection comprises this token (which is also engraved in 
Snelling), observes that, to those who are unacquainted with the woollen manu- 
facture, a description of the use of the two articles represented on the token 
may not be uninteresting, as they are now almost entirely disused, the great 
improvement in machinery, which does the work better and cheaper, having 
superseded them. The large shears were used by the croppers to cut all the 
long hairs off the cloth ; and unless great care and precision were used, there 
was danger of cutting the cloth, so that none but experienced workmen were 
employed, and they earned great wages. During the Luddite riots in the West 
Riding of Yorkshire, in 1812, many of these artisans were implicated, some 
of them having been thrown out of employment by the improvements in 
manufacture, and many by their intemperate habits. The long hairs are now 
removed by a spiral steel blade fixed on a revolving cylinder, which gives a fine, 
even nap to the cloth. The hand teasel brush, which appears on the reverse 
of the token, was used for brushing the cloth — a brush being held in each 
hand — an operation which is now also done by machinery, the teasels being 
placed in a long narrow iron frame, which is worked by steam-power. The 
vegetable teasel ( Dipsacus fullonum), we may add, continues to be used — no 
artificial brush having yet been found to answer the purpose better than the 
natural one. The Bodleian collection contains this token ; and Mr. Alderman 
J. Fisher has the die for the reverse. 

There were formerly twelve free companies in Kendal. The following list 
of them is taken from the ''Boke off Recorde :" — 1. Chapmen, Marchannts, 
& Salters; 2. Marcers and Drapers, Lynnen & Wollen; 3. Shearmen, 
Fullers, Dyers, & Websters ; 4. Taylers, Imbrodyrers, & Whilters ; 
5. Cordyners, Coblers, & Curry errs ; 6. Tanners, Sadlers, & Girdlers ; 
7. Inholders, and Alehowsekepers, & Typlers ; 8. Butchers and Fisshers ; 
9. Cardmakers and Wyerdrawers ; 10. Surgons, Scryvyners, Barbors, Glovers, 
Skynners, Parchement, and Poyntemakers ; 11. Smythes, Iron & Hard- 



134 



ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 



waremen, Armerers, Cutlers, Bowyers, Fletchers, Spuryers, Potters, Panners, 
Plumbers, Tynkers, Pewterers, & Metallers ; 12. Carpenters, Joyners, Masons, 
Wallers, Sclaters, Thatchers, Glasiers, Paynters, Pleysterers, Dawbers, Pavers, 
Myllers, [& Cowpers. These incorporated companies gradually became 
extinct, the last of them (the cordyners or cordwainers) being " broken up " 
in 1800, in consequence of one Robert Moser refusing, most properly, to 
recognise any legal power in the company to impose a fine upon persons, not 
being freemen, commencing business within the borough. 

No. 6. 




Ob C. — "THOMAS 

Kendal. 



wilson * .'—In the field, The arms of the Corporation of 



Rev. — " THOMAS . WAKDE 



" KIKK 
LAND 

. 1666.' 



In the Bodleian Library. Bequeathed to it in a cabinet of tradesmen* 
tokens by Browne Willis, the celebrated antiquary, who died in 1760. 
Whether Messrs. Wilson and Warde were partners in trade, or merely joint- 
issuers of the token, we cannot say ; but instances of joint-issue by neighbours 
in trade are not unfrequent. This token was not known of till the year IS 44. 

Kirkland, being out of the Mayor's liberty, was much resorted to by trades- 
men not free of the corporation. The arms are here engraved as they appear 
on the token in the Bodleian— the fourth quarter appearing more like 
reversed drops (or guttes as the heralds call them) than spindles ; but we can 
only regard the difference as a blunder of the die engraver. 



Xo. 7. 




Obv. — "iAMES * COCKE * IVNIOK 
Rev.— ««01 ' KENDALL * 1667 *' 



' — In the field, A game cock. 

'HIS 
„ HALFE 

PENNY 



This is in Mr. Boyne's collection. Mr. Cock, who is supposed to have I I 
manufacturer, was Mayor of Kendal in 1681-2, He ma    BWOKH   a member 



TRADESMEN S TOKENS. 



135 



of the Mercers' Company in 1655. His residence was in " The Park ; " and 
the property now occupied by Mr. R. Hudson, druggist, in the " Butcher's 
Row/' belonged to his family. There was a figure of a cock in stained 
glass in one of the windows. This token is in the Bodleian Library. 

No. 8. 




Obv.— u ric : rowlandson . of . GRAYRiG *" — In the field, A pair of scales 
and a spade or malt-shovel. 

" HIS 
Rev. — ''IN . KENDALL . PARISH . 1669*" — ,, HALF 

PENT 



Richard Rowlandson was a fellmonger and woolstapler, and lived on his 
own estate at Lambert Ash, Grayrigg, where he carried on his business. He 
had branch establishments at Kendal, Kirkby-Stephen, and Kirkby-Lonsdale. 
It is stated that he walked to London and back on business three times, and 
that he was there in the time of the Great Plague in 1665. This token 
obtained but a small circulation in consequence of the Act of Parliament which 
suppressed the issue of this description of copper currency. The Bodleian 
contains a specimen. 



No. 9. 




Obv— -"lOHN * HADWEN. 
RtV. — " IN * KENDALL * * 



-In the field, A cone resembling a sugar-loaf. 
„ The initials, i * E 



This token is of copper, the rest being of brass. It was found in Kirkland 
in 1853. See List of Mayors in the eighteenth century for Hadwens. 



VISITS OF THE REBELS IN 1715 AND 1745. 

"On the fifth of November, 1715, about 1,600 Scotch and 
Northumberland rebels came and lodged one night in this 
town, where they proclaimed the Pretender, and so took their 
route by Kirkby-Lonsdale and Lancaster, to Preston, in 



136 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 

Lancashire, where they were suppressed by the king's troops. 
It will add to the honour of this borough to say, that not one 
townsman joined the rebellious crew. But, on the other hand, 
the present Mayor, Thomas Scarisbrick, Esq., was in a particular 
manner serviceable to his king and country upon this occasion, 
in hazarding himself to gain a perfect account of the strength 
and design of the rebels. This account he transmitted to the 
commanding officers of the king's troops at Warrington, Liver- 
pool, &c, with so much speed, as gave them notice to prepare 
for the attack, which, by that means, happened to be at 
Preston three or four days sooner than they could possibly 
have had an express by way of London, which loss of time 
must have given the enemy an opportunity to have pene- 
trated further into the kingdom." l 

174*5. — The rebel army, under the command of Prince 
Charles Edward Stuart "the Pretender," reached Kendal, in its 
progress southwards, on the evening of the 22nd of Xovember, 
and halted over the 24th, on which day (Sunday) the prin- 
cipal officers, with three ladies, one of whom was the lady 
Ogylvie, attended divine service in the church. The service 
was performed by Mr. Crackenthorp, master of the grammar 
school ; Dr. Symonds, the vicar, having quitted the town 
through fear. At that time it was customary for the poor 
people to stand in "beggarly array" at the church door, with 
the sexton and other subordinate officers of the church, who 
held pewter plates for alms. The rebel officers, after having 
ascertained the object of the charity, gave liberally, some 
gold and others silver. 

By the time the Pretender and his adherents reached 
Derby, the Royalist army, under the command of the Duke 
of Cumberland, had become strongly reinforced, and were 
marching to meet the enemy ; so that the rebels thought it 
prudent to beat a retreat. About ten o'clock of the forenoon, 
on the 13th of December, a hundred horse, of the Duke of 
Perth's establishment, reached Kendal. The country people 
being at market, mobbed the rear of this troop, and as they 
were turning down the Fish Market, one of the rebels was 

1 Wharton's Chrouclosr. 



VISIT OF THE REBELS. 137 

killed by a musket -shot wantonly fired out of a window, 
whereupon the town's people closed in, and took two other 
soldiers prisoners. The fire was now returned upon the 
inhabitants by the rebels, when John Slack, a respectable 
farmer, was killed on the spot, and Eichard Pindar, a shoe- 
maker, and an ostler (whose name we have not ascertained), 
were seriously wounded. After this, the people dispersed, 
and suffered the troops to proceed on to Shap. In the 
evening of the same day, the main body entered the town, and 
hearing that one of the hussars was slain, they breathed in- 
dignant revenge. The cess and public money were demanded, 
under the severest military execution. It was with the 
greatest difficulty that the magistrates could pacify the 
chiefs, by representing that the inhabitants of the town 
were innocent, and, that in a public market it was impossible 
to detect and punish the offenders. At length their wrath 
was somewhat appeased ; and the contributions were abated 
to (our living author 1 says) 1501 As they were departing 
out of the town, their rear rank plundered some houses, and 
robbed several people of their shoes, one of whom was John 
Askew, a shearman, who had his shoes taken off his feet. 
Such was the distress occasioned to the poor by these ravages 
that the trustees of the Town's charities were induced to 
depart from the instructions of Benefactors, and apply the 
funds at their disposal to the emergencies of the moment: for 
instance, the managers of Prissoe's charity gave the yearly 
rental of their two fields, 61 10s., and their " own allowance" 
of ten shillings, and 30s. out of " accumulations," altogether 
8£ 10s., for the relief of the pillaged sufferers. The proverb 
says, "it is easy to be charitable with other people's money;" 
but Prissoe's Trustees went beyond the proverb, and actually 
gave " their own allowance," as they took care to record duly, 
the magnificent sum of ten shillings ! 2 The Pretender slept in 
the house formerly occupied by Miss Thomson, in Strickland- 

1 First edition of " The Annals." 

2 They were not like an old townsman and cotemporary of ours, on whom 
we called to solicit a subscription for the dispensary, when he said, " No ! you 
print the subscriptions, and I don't like my charities to be advertised ; and 
what I give privately, that is nothing to nobody." The last clause of the 
sentence was known to be literally true. 



138 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 

gate, where, also, lie held a levee. On the succeeding night, 
the same bed he had slept in was occupied by the Duke of 
Cumberland, then in close pursuit of the rebels. Having 
inquired where Prince Charles had slept, he desired to rest 
on the same couch. The next day witnessed the defeat of the 
Scotch at Clifton Dykes, near Lowther. 

THE GUILD. 1 

Formerly this town had its Guild processions, at intervals 

of 21 years, as was the custom of most manufacturing towns. 
The last Guild celebrated here, was on the 4th, 5th, and 6th 
of June, 1759, and was carried to such an extravagant height 
of splendour, that, it was said, many of the tradesmen were 
nearly ruined by the expenses, and the festival has conse- 
quently ever since been discontinued. It will be interesting 
to know in what manner the procession was conducted; and 
we have met with a curious sample of poetry, published on 
the occasion, which conveys this information in more plea^inu 
and faithful terms than we could employ : 

Arise, bright Sol, parent of light and clay, 
Dispel the clouds, thy brightest beams display, 
To gild the scene the muse intends to paint, 
And ev'ry hero justly represent. 

Ingenious Hermes, god of arts and gain, 
Propitious smile, and aid my humble strain ; 
Give me, 'tis thine to give, a tuneful tongue : 
Arts are the subjects of the poet's song. 

Kendal, long famed for trade and useful art^. 
Sends forth her skilful sons with joyful hearts, 
Cloathed -with the product of their native land, 
Wrought with the labour of each artist's hand. 
In order ranked, they march with solemn pace, 
With music, flags, and every martial grace. 

WOOLCOMBERS. 

See Jason first the advent'rous prince appear. 
A chief well skill'd in arms, untaught to fear. 



1 There were of old time among our ancestors, certain companies of eon- 
frerieS of men called Glides, first instituted for exercise of fe:\tes of arms, 
though after they were of other professions, — and these were called Gild- 
brethren; and for shortness of speech a Gild. The word "gild" in itself 
signify eth free and bountiful!.— Veustegax. 



THE GUILD. 139 

Who the wide swelling ocean ventured o'er, 
To fetch the golden fleece from Colchian shore. 
A shepherd too and his fair shepherdess, 
In all the gaiety of rural dress. 
With mitred prelate, reverend for his age, 
His steed on either side led by a page ; 
Precede the Combers, deck'd with softest wool, 
Refined by passing thro' the pointed tool. 

TAYLORS. 

See our first parents next in order go, 
Adam and Eve, who first taught men to sew, 
Cloath'd with green leaves to hide their nakedness, 
Nor knew, nor wanted they a finished dress. 
But Taylors follow who've improv'd the art, 
And cut and suit the cloth to ev'ry part. 
They cloathe the rich, the poor, the young, the old, 
And screen our bodies from the pinching cold. 
Their honour'd brother, Hawkwood too, appears, 
With his brave aid-de-camp and grenadiers, 
Who could not only shape but also fight, 
The favourite of a king, a martial knight. 

SHEARMEN-DYERS. 

In solemn pomp the warlike Edward shines, 
His arts more useful than the Indian mines ; 
He taught the haughty Gaul his arms to dread, 
And trade among his happy Britons spread. 
Our Kendal shar'd the prudent monarch's care, 
And feels the favour both in peace and war. 
With him the joyful Shearmen-dyers come, 
Whose sole dependance is upon the loom ; 
The Weavers find employment for them both, 
These give a colour, those refine the cloth. 
Stuff from the Weavers, yet unfit to wear, 
Of home-spun wool, they tenter, dress and shear, 
And make it like the finest cloth appear. 
The Dyers stain it beautiful to view, 
With crimson, scarlet, never-fading blue ; 
Thus English wool, by Shearmen-Dyers wrought, 
Equals the finest silks from India brought. 

WEAVERS. 

Minerva next appears, a warlike maid, 
The fam'd inventress of the weaving trade ; 
And poor Arachne", who as poets tell, 
Was made a spider but for weaving well.* 
Their train the sons of art, a num'rous band, 
Who guide the shuttle with a nimble hand, 
Most neatly dress'd with labour all their own : 
A prettier sight in Kendal never known. 






140 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 



SHOEMAKERS. 

Lo ! Crispianus comes, of royal race, 
A youth adorn'd with, ev'ry princely grace ; 
An honour to the gentle craft, and still 
Of equal fame in military skill. 
Next Crispin, prince of Shoemakers, appeal's, 
Attended by six stately grenadiers ; 
With him his lovely spouse, a princess born, 
Fair Ursula, more beauteous than the morn. 
To these succeed the brothers of the trade, 
With each a splendid sash and gilt cockade. 

IRONMONGERS AND METTLEMEN. 

Next march the Smiths, inur'd to toil in fire, 
Without whose aid all arts must soon expire ; 
The god of fire, great Vulcan, leads them on, 
Arm'd at all points, and glitt'ring like the sun. 
Not like the limping god whom poets feign 
In bands of wedlock join'd to beauty's queen; 
But like the god of war prepared to charge, 
So broad his shoulders, and his limbs so large. 
His band all men of metal, brisk and gay, 
Their dress bedeck'd with steel as bright as day 
Or those that melt the iron from the ore, 
Or forge the anchor for the sounding shore ; 
Or with the hammer beat the ductil gold, 
Or various forms of shining silver mold. 



Next march the Tanners, fam'd in days of yore 
For tanning hides for shields which heroes bore. 
Who has not heard of Ajax's sevenfold shield, 
Which nor to sword nor missive spear would yield, 
And wont as much admire, as much adore, 
The Tanner as the Chief the buckler wore ? 

BUILDERS. 

The glorious Builders next salute our eyes, 
By whom aspiring domes and temples rise j 
Our splendid palaces, our ample squares, 
Our stately bridges, castles, all are theirs. 
Our Merchant vessels, all our ships of war. 
Are model'd, wrought and finished by their care. 
Britannia's glorious guard ! To them we owe 
Whatever praises Britons can bestow. 

GLOVERS AND SKINNERS. 

Skinners aud Glovers who with nicest 
Provide white kid for the new-married pair, 



THE GUILD. J 41 



Or nicely stitch the lemon-coloured glove, 
For hand of beau to go to see his love. 
Before them see the Conqueror, William, ride, 
Led by a page in buff, on either side. 



MERCERS. 

The Mercers next appear, a goodly train, 
For whom our hardy Sailors plough the main ; 
Fraught with the labour of our artist's hands, 
Thro' hottest climes they roam to distant lands. 
From whence they bring the richest treasure here, 
To pay us well, for what we well can spare. 
Those bring whate'er may please the nicest eye, 
Or the most luscious palate satisfy : 
These bring the kind preservatives of health : 
These are the government's and people's wealth. 



MAYOR, ALDERMEN, AND OTHER 

GENTLEMEN. 

See, last, the sword of justice and the mace 
Are born before the Mayor with solemn grace ; 
Twelve Aldermen his courtly train compose, 
Who, dressed in decent state, the grand procession close. 
These are the guardians of bur liberty, 
The representatives of majesty; 
Who keep the peace and execute the law, 
Reward the good and keep the bad in awe. 
Long may they rule, and each offender bring 
To punishment and shame. God save the king. 



The known number of persons who took part in the 
procession were, Woolcombers, 100 ; Taylors, 150 ; Shear- 
men-dyers, 80 ; Weavers, 300 ; Shoe-makers, 100 ; Iron- 
mongers and Mettlemen, 80 ; Tanners, 60 ; Builders, 100 ; 
Glovers and Skinners, 70 ; Mercers, &c, not numbered. 
Strangers were alio wed. to join if they requested, and were 
furnished with sashes and cockades, "provided they had 
given a fortnight's notice." It is probable that these 
" strangers " were persons not free of the guild, or in other 
words, not free of any of the trade companies. This seems 
to us more like the meaning of the word " strangers," than 
having reference to persons coming from other neighbouring 
towns. 



142 ANCIENT STATE OF THE TOWN. 



POSTAL COMMUNICATION. 



Up to the close of the last century, the postal communica- 
tion was infrequent and snail-paced. About 1780 to 1790, 
one John Jennings, landlord of the Unicorn public-house, 1 at 
Kendal, carried the letters between Kendal and Lancaster, by 
a horse and cart, John going to Lancaster on one day, and 
returning to Kendal on the next, which was thought to be a 
great achievement compared with " former times." The only 
intermediate post-office was at Burton. Country people got 
their letters when they had occasion to visit the towns named, 
by calling for them at the post-office, sometimes once a week, 
sometimes once a month. 



1 The Unicorn stood on the ground which is now occupied by the Odd 
Fellows' Hall. 



SITUATION. 143 



CHAPTEE IV. 



MODEEN STATE OF THE TOWK 

The town of Kendal is often compared with Bath, in its 
natural situation. The comparison is true in this respect, 
viz. that in each case part of the town is built in terraces, 
against a "fell side." Bath, certainly, has the advantage in 
art, the houses being more elegant and commanding : but 
Kendal has the advantage in nature, having hills of striking 
outline on both sides of the valley, 1 with a brotherhood of 
still grander mountains at the head, whilst the bright waters 
of the Kent meander below, in sinuous lines of silver, around 
the bases of numerous hillocks : — 

"It flows through the valleys 
So beauteous and free : 
The land's crystal chalice, 
From mountain to sea ! " 

The Castle hill, with the old Castle crowning its summit, 
is a fine object, to which Bath cannot furnish a parallel. 
This hill, together with Aikrigg hill, north of it, and many 
similar ones, as far as Crooklands, south of it, are so many 
medial moraines, composed of what geologists call boulder 
drift, due either to the action of diluvial currents, before the 
floods were "gathered together into a heap," or else to the 
action of glaciers, under a temperature of perpetual conge- 
lation. Either theory, the diluvial or the glacial, may have 
its advocate, but this is not the place to discuss theories. 

1 " Benson Knot," on the east side, is 1,098 feet, and " Kendal Fell," on 
the west, is 650 feet above the level of the sea. 



1U 



MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 



It is enough to say, that the gravel and boulders composing 
these moraines have in part, at least, been drifted from great 
distances, and been rounded by ice, or water, or both. Pew 
situations present such a variety of geological features. On 
the west side of the town, is a wall of mountain limestone 
(Kendal Fell), full of characteristic fossils : on the east side 
(Hay Tell), a rather higher wall of silurian, with older forms 
of life, in less abundance ; whilst the waters of the river 
interpose to separate the two strata and their inhabitants, 1 as 
if by the law of "natural frontiers." And further, several 
bands of a totally different intermediate rock, an "old red sand- 
stone conglomerate," stretch across the valley as though the 
opposite walls of rock before mentioned required rafters of 
different structure to hold them in their places. These rafters 
of "old red" exhibit, on their surface, proofs of abrasion, and the 
occurrence of primeval storms, which probably swept away the 
overlying limestone, and determined the course of the valley. 
In some places, the thick beds of limestone are interlaminated 
with thin beds of sandstone. These various strata, it is almost 
needless to say, yield diversified products. The limestone 
produces building materials, fertilizing compost for the land, 
and beautiful marble. The silurian rocks produce water for 
domestic uses, free from excess of lime ; and advantage is 
duly taken by the inhabitants of these favourable conditions. 
The name of Kirkby-Candale, taking its ancient ortho- 
graphy, is of very clear derivation. Kirkby is of Saxon 
origin. Can, or con (used variously), is the primitive British 
and Eoman appellation, afterwards continued by the Saxons. 
(See Concangium, p. 16.) The whole is thus explained. Kirk 
(church), by, or bye 2 (a dwelling or village), can (head, or 
principal 3 ), dale (valley). Signifying, therefore, Church town, 
or in its infancy, Church village, in the chief valley of the 
river. Or, the word can may have been applied to the river 
and not to the valley, as there are three streams from the 
northern hills of which can is the head or principal By this 



1 A list of the Fossils, Plants, &c, will be found at the end of the book. 

2 " Bye Laws " are hence derived. The Toicn's Laics, as inferior to General 
(Statute) Laws. 

3 Mr. Whitaker, and Dr. Whitaker. 



STREETS. 145 

adaptation, the meaning will be, Church town, situated on the 
banks of the principal river in the valley. Camden, who, it 
must be remembered, wrote in Latin, calls it Candale. His 
editor, Bishop Gibson, in his additions, writes it Kendale. 
We may therefore pronounce the latter to be the English 
translation of the former. The adjunct Kirkby is now almost 
generally discontinued, and we shall therefore not employ it 
further in this work. 

The river Kent rises out of High Street (the Eoman street), 
above Kentmere, and running by Staveley, Burneside, 
Kendal, Sedgwick, and Levens, falls into an estuary of the 
bay of Morecambe. 

Kendal is the largest and most important town, though 
not the metropolis, of the county of Westmorland. It 
stands 138 feet above the level of the sea, in lat. 54° 15' 
K, and long. 2° 52' W., 260 miles from London. 

It consists of two main streets, in continuity, from north to 
south, from which all the other streets, lanes, alleys, crofts, 
&c. branch off at right angles. The streets generally carry 
their explanation in their names, some of which we shall 
attempt to elucidate : 

Highgate (the principal street from the south), is so called 
from its situation, being the highest street or gate (Sax.) in 
the town. This street had first been named Sowtergate (the 
south-ex street), and is so designated in the first "Boke off 
Kecorde," in 1575. 

Stricklandgate (continuation of the main street), from the 
ancient family of Strickland, or one of the adjacent townships 
called Strickland. 

FinJcle-street (branching N.E.) is derived from the Scandi- 
navian vinkel, which signifies an elbow, a name that has 
frequently been given to a minor street or way, taking a 
crooked direction from a principal one. 1 And certainly this 
street makes an angle resembling the arm in the human body. 
There was an ancient well in Finkle-street, — a draw-well, 
with axletree and bucket ; and we find by an "order," in 1594, 



1 There is a Finkle-street in Richmond, in Sedbergh, in Carlisle, and in 
Newcastle, all of which are places of antiquity. 

L 



146 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

that " twoe sworne men " were " yearelie appointed to see 
the same Well clensed & mainteined," with powers to 
enforce a fine of 2d. for every offence, to be levied "of 
the master or dame's goods," offending against the order. 

Stramongate, or as it was formerly spelled Stramondgate, 
is a continuation of Finkle-street, expanding in its descent to 
the river, and terminating at the bridge on which it confers 
its name. It is said to be called after a person of the 
name of Straman; and Speed has put it Straman's gate. 
But what seems to us a more probable derivation is, that as 
after heavy rains the lower part of the street became fre- 
quently inundated, and the road which conducts by the south- 
west bank was raised by an embankment or mound, to 
defend it from the violence of the waters ; so the street 
obtained the name of stream-mound-gate. Or, it might be 
suggested simply by the stream running on the gate. 

Long Pool (the former appellation of the streets now 
called Wildman Street and Gandy Street) had also, it is 
probable, its name from the same liability to be flooded as 
Stramongate. Wildman Street was "AVildman Gate," in 
Speed's time. Gandy Street is named after the builder of 
the houses in that street. 

All Hallows' Lane, crossing Highgate in an oblique 
direction with New Street, received its name from the 
chapel which stood at its head, dedicated to "All 
Hallows." 

Captain French Lane is said to be called after a gentleman 
of the name of French, who purchased, and perhaps rebuilt 
most of it after the time of Speed's publication, as in his Plan 
it is called Rotten Rowe. Stukely says, this name, Eotten 
Eow, " relates to panegyres (general assemblies) or fairs." But 
another derivation gives it as "Routine Row" because the 
procession of "the Church" (the Host) was taken by that 
route. Something may be said in this case in favour of each, 
but we prefer the latter derivation. This Eotten Eow would 
be the route by which corpses were taken from Sowter-gate to 
the (old) cemetery at Kirkbarrow. 

Cross Bank received its name from one of the Cross Houses 
which stood here. 



STREET IMPROVEMENTS. 147 

Kirkland is so called from being situated on the land of 
the Church. It is a distinct township, divided from Kendal 
by a brook called Blindbeck. 

Blindbeck has its name either from the obscurity of its 
source, — its feeders being lost in the fissures of the lime* 
stone rocks in Gillingrove ; or from the British word 
blaen, signifying a point, extremity, or end : the town-end 
beck. 

New Street obviously asserts its own signification. It is 
also sometimes called Lowther Street, from the family name 
of the Lord Lieutenant of the county. 

Union Buildings are so named from having been erected 
by a society of tradesmen united for that purpose. 



STREET IMPROVEMENTS. 

Little alteration appears to have been made in the streets 
and buildings from the time of Speed's publication, and per- 
haps long before that, till 1782, when New Street was erected. 
Some of the yards, indeed, may have become enlarged, and 
others curtailed, at the frequent exchanges of property ; but 
public improvements were slowly manifested* This town (as 
has before been intimated) suffered much from its exposure 
to the inroads of the Scotch, and from the ravaging plague in 
1598 ; and, it was two centuries before it completely recovered 
the effects of these visitations. The next considerable im- 
provement, in point of time, to the building of New Street, 
was in 1803, by removing New Biggin, and throwing open the 
main street. After which, alterations gradually, but still some- 
what slowly, occurred, until the spirit of improvement fully 
manifested itself in 1818 and 1 81 9. The date of the new town 
may, we conceive, truly be placed here, at the time of the 
opening of the Lancaster and Kendal Canal. 1 This event gave 

1 On Friday, the 18th of June, 1819 — the anniversary of "Waterloo — the 
Lancaster and Kendal Canal was opened by a grand aquatic procession. The 
Mayor and Corporation, having proceeded to the Canal Basin, preceded by 
music and flags, entered a fine barge equipped for the occasion, which, with 
some smaller boats, sailed down the canal, to meet a numerous party of 
gentlemen from Lancaster. The parties joined at Crooklands, whence they 

L 2 



148 MODEKN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

an impulse to the public spirit of the inhabitants, and formed 
the commencement of a new era in the history of Kendal. It 
discovered new channels of commerce— it brought that neces- 
sary commodity of manufactures, coal, at a cheaper rate ; and 
by adding facilities (which had long been desiderated) to the 
exportation of our produce, caused an increase of wealth, and 
an increase of the working population ; and thus contributed, 
at once, all the means of commercial prosperity and public 
accommodation. We shall enumerate a few of the street 
improvements and additions which immediately follow this 
event : 

The old Miller s Close Bridge, which had stood since 1743, 
and was very narrow, and ill adapted to be the general medium 
of intercourse with the canal, was now thrown down, and 
wholly re -built on a wider scale. The large warehouses, 
and other buildings at the canal harbour, were all erected at 
this time ; Kent Lane (which before was very steep, and so 
narrow that two carts could scarcely pass) was thrown open, 
and the ascent considerably diminished ; Long Pool was 
widened ; Gandy Street erected ; Kent Terrace and Castle 
Crescent were built shortly after. The Union Building Society 
commenced operations about this time ; and indeed on every 
side, numerous habitations were superadded to the town 
The National School reared its imposing front over the heads 
of the other buildings ; and in a very short time, the town 
assumed a new and modern appearance, — so very different 
that any person having been absent a few years, could scarcely 
have identified it. In 1822, the principal entrances to the 



proceeded in company towards Kendal. There were in all sixteen boats, 
ornamented with flags of various devices, and containing three excellent bands 
of music. Along the whole line every eminence was crowded with spectators, 
who were highly delighted with the novelty and splendour of the scene. As 
the procession approached the town it was greeted by the firing of cannon, 
placed on the Castle Hill on one side of the valley, and in Chapel Close on the 
other. It was a gratifying and interesting spectacle. A greater number of 
persons had seldom, if ever-, been seen congregated together in Kendal. The 
packets, &c. arrived in the Basin about four o'clock, when the company 
disembarked, and went in procession through the streets to the Town HalL 
where a sumptuous dinner was provided, of which 120 persons partook. John 
Pearson, Esq., Mayor, in the chair. A ball at the Kings Arms, in the evening, 
concluded the festivities of the occasion. 



THE OLD MOOT HALL. 149 

town were widened, and the obstructions at Blindbeck Bridge, 
and afterwards at Nether Bridge, were removed. To this must 
be added, that due attention was given to the condition of 
the streets ; which are in good state of repair. 

The terrace, of most commanding exterior, on the east side 
of the town, is "Kent Terrace." It is built on what was 
formerly called Thorney Hills, from the abundance of thorns, 
long ago uprooted. The houses have the advantage of a fine 
sweep of the Kent immediately in front, and a good view 
of the town at a little distance beyond, crowned by 
Kendal Fell. " Castle Crescent " is an extension of this 
terrace northwards, formed of houses with less pretensions, 
but uniformly neat. The Terrace was built in 1824, and the 
Crescent followed some years afterwards. 

" Cliff-side Terrace " occupies the slope of Kendal Fell, on 
the west side of the town, and commands extensive views to 
the north-east. It was built in the years 1851 to 1853. 

The front houses in the streets are generally three stories 
high, and the back cottages two. They are built of limestone, 
found in great abundance on Kendal Fell, close at hand. 
Some are faced with this stone, hewn smooth ; others are 
roughcasted with lime and sand ; these are every two or three 
years new coated with lime-wash, which gives them a neat 
and clean appearance. 

There are few public buildings, properly so called, in 
Kendal ; and these have been erected chiefly, either by 
subscriptions of the tradesmen, or by the benefactions of 
private individuals. 

THE OLD MOOT HALL 

Stands at the S.W. corner of the Market-place. It is a plain 
building for the purposes to which it was applied. It con- 
sisted of a court-loft, with ante-room for retiring juries, &c, 
which being separated by partition slides, might be thrown 
together as necessity required. It is surmounted with a 
square tower, which contains a clock. The first moot hall, 
which stood on the site of the present building, was erected in 
1592. The present erection was made in 1759, and has 



150 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

gradually fallen into dilapidation and disuse. It was sold 
by auction on the 12th April, 1859, for 280Z., to Mr. Job 
Bintley, Surveyor, when the Courts of Session were removed 
to the Whitehall (now Town Hall). The public clock, pro- 
j ecting from the tower, still remains, and we say, with regard 
to it, esto perpetua. 

THE HOUSE OF COEEECTION. 

This commodious and well built prison-house stands on 
the site of an ancient "house of correction," which, in 1776, 
is thus minutely described in the State of Prisons, pub- 
lished about that time, by Howard the philanthropist : 

" Only one room for men and women, 18ft, by 1 3ft., with 
one window, about 2ft. square ; no chimney ; no court ; no 
water ; no sewer. The keeper has a garden ; salary, 61. 10s. ; 
no fees. The town prisoners are allowed sixpence a day ; 
the country prisoners four-pence. 

" Jan. 23, .... Prisoners 3 — two men and a woman. 
Sep. 18, ... . „ 0— Deserter one" 

Again, in three years afterwards, 1779, Mr. Howard visited 
it, and mokes the following minute : 

" May 11, ... . Prisoners 0." l 

The " one room,'' above described, comprised the whole 
building ; which served to accommodate the keeper, his family, 
and the prisoners, who all lived together. It was an ill-built 
house (now past all remembrance), with a thatched roof, and 
must consequently have been a very insecure and inconvenient 
prison-house. Over the door was a stone, inscribed with the 
following distich : 



o 



" If people woulde be goode and live in feare 
The Justices woulde never send them here." 

The present structure presents a striking contrast to the 
one above described, in magnitude, and in every requisite 



It is worthy of note, that at this latter visit, there was not one prisoner in 
the county Bridewell, at Appleby. 



HOUSE OF COREECTION. 151 

for a prison. It occupies an area of 2,000 yards, fenced by a 
thick wall, in some places 14 yards high. There are 53 night 
cells, about 6ft. by 8ft., fitted up with clean beds, and an 
ample supply of warm clothing. These are distributed 
through nine spacious yards or wards, with day rooms, cooking 
rooms, &c, plentifully supplied with water, which is conveyed 
into recipient cisterns, in different parts of the buildings, 
above and below, by the action of a forcing pump. The 
surplus water, &c, is carried off by a common sewer. On the 
second story, are seven debtors' rooms, having three beds in 
each room, comfortably furnished, and well ventilated. The 
yards and apartments for the different sexes are perfectly 
distinct and disunited. The cleanliness and regularity of the 
prison are admirable throughout ; and the attention paid to 
the bodily comforts of the prisoners is also highly creditable 
to the benevolent feelings of the governor. 

The building has grown to its present dimensions by 
erections at different periods since the year 1817, and is 
estimated to have cost 5,500?. 

Governor: Mr. Christopher Fawcett. 

Salary, 100Z. per annum ; one half of which is paid by 
the borough, and the other by the county. 

Officiating Chaplain : Kev. H. K Collier. 



new town hall. 

The Town Hall stands in the centre of the town, and is the 
most commanding of the street edifices. The front, though 
only thirty-seven feet in width, is effective, consisting of a 
rusticated basement for the principal entrance, which is sur- 
mounted by a balcony fronted with Ionic columns and 
pilasters of fine freestone. The length of the building, 
stretching down New Street, is 148 feet ; but the longitu- 
dinal effect is marred by the narrowness of this street. This 
building was originally called " Whitehall," being erected in 
the year 1827, by a joint-stock association, in shares of 



152 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

551. each, the then Corporation ranking among the share- 
holders. The several apartments, consisting of news-room, 
ball-room, billiard-room, card-room, lecture-room, shops, and 
offices, were rented out to pay interest on the amount of 
capital invested, which was 6,0001 But as in course of time 
new halls sprang up elsewhere for lectures and public meet- 
ings, whilst the taste for county balls declined, the yearly 
income of this building fell off until the shareholders were 
reduced to infinitesimal dividends. Meanwhile, the Old 
Town-hall (at the entrance to the market-place), where the 
Council were wont to meet, and the Quarter Sessions were 
held, became dilapidated and insecure, suggesting the 
desirability of a change in the Hall of Justice. In 1858 
negotiations were set on foot between the authorities and the 
shareholders of the Whitehall Buildings, when this property 
was sold, and formally transferred to the Corporation for the 
sum of 2,250/. The ball-room, retiring-rooms, &c. were then 
converted into the Court of Quarter Sessions ; part of the 
basement was formed into lock-ups, with different cells ; and 
other changes were made with money borrowed by the 
Corporation on mortgage. The County agreed to pay for 
the accommodation of county business, 50/. per annum for 
the Court of Quarter Sessions, and 10/. additional for the 
cells, making 60/. per annum gross rental. The alterations 
above indicated being effected, the New Town Hall was 
formally inaugurated by a public dinner, given by the Mayor, 
John Wakefield, Esq., in September, 1859. This gentleman 
has liberally offered to place a public clock in the front of 
the building at his own cost ; and a suitable tower to contain 
it has been designed by Geo. Webster, Esq., the original 
architect of the building. 



THE BANKS. 

There are two banks, both situated in Highgate ; one a 
private bank, belonging to Messrs. Wakefield, Crewdson. k 
Co., the other a joint-stock establishment, called   The Bank 
of Westmorland." The first banking establishments in the 



BANK FOR SAVINGS. 153 

town- were two, popularly denominated " Wakefield's Bank," 
situated in Stricklandgate, and " the Kendal Bank," begun 
by Messrs. Maude, Wilson, & Crewdson, in Higbgate. These 
opened together on the 1st of January, 1788, and con- 
tinued separately in operation until the 1st of January,. 
1840, when the partners, Wakefields of one house, and 
Crewdsons of the other, united or amalgamated, and "the 
Kendal Bank," in Higbgate, was continued under the ex- 
isting firm of Wakefield, Crewdson, & Co. 

The Bank of Westmorland started in February, 1833, 
in New Street, until the present handsome house was erected 
in 1835. It is a prominent building of the Grecian order of 
architecture, built of the mountain limestone ; from designs 
by Mr. Alderman George Webster. The Doric pilasters of 
the facade carry an entablature on which is represented a lion 
couchant (emblem of strength), life size. 

Both banks issue 51 and 107. notes. The provincial notes 
of 11. were withdrawn from circulation in 1826. 

The " Kendal Bank" (Messrs. Wakefield, Crewdson, & Co.) 
has three branch establishments, one at Ambleside, one at 
Kirkby-Stephen, and one at Sedbergh. 

BANK FOE SAVINGS. 

The Bank for Savings was established in 1816, on the 
principle of Dr. Duncan. No maximum was at first specified 
for deposits, and the interest was fixed at 4 per cent, 
per annum for 12s. 6d., or any multiple of that sum. In 
the following year, the first act of parliament was passed 
relating to banks for savings, and this institution was con- 
ducted under the powers of that and subsequent acts, till 
the 3d February, 1829, when the trustees and managers 
resolved to place it on an independent foundation, giving 
their own personal security for the amount of the deposits. 
From the great facilities afforded for receiving and paying 
small sums, the bank has gradually increased its operations, 
till it has about 3,000 depositors, the sums at whose credit 
vary from Is. to SOL, and the interest allowed is now 
ol 6s. Sd. per cent, per annum. The directors are twenty- 



154 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

four in number, one of whom, in monthly rotation, superin- 
tends the transactions of the bank. The officers are, an 
Honorary Secretary (being one of the Directors), an 
Actuary, and an Auditor. The balance is struck on the 
30th June, yearly. 

THE RAILWAYS. 

The inhabitants of Kendal were among the earliest of 
the dwellers in provincial towns, at the first projection of 
Eailways, to perceive the advantages of the most improved 
mode of internal communication ; notwithstanding which, 
it required great exertions, several years, indeed, of con- 
tinued exertions, to bring railways to and through Kendal. 
Many country towns not merely stood aloof from the 
general movement, but organized the stoutest opposition 
to such "perilous schemes." All kinds of evils were 
predicted of the coming railway system. Horses would be 
thrown out of work, and disappear ! turnpike-roads, and 
cross-country roads would be covered with grass ! vegeta- 
tion would perish from clouds of smoke and steam ! butter, 
and eggs, and poultry would rise to the top price of the 
metropolitan markets (as if that were a calamity to the 
community), and many other "evils" would set in with the 
advent of railways. Only very few, however, of the inhabi- 
tants of Kendal joined in this prophetic clamour, and those 
other towns where it most prevailed soon afterwards bitterly 
repented of their folly. 1 That physical configuration of the 
country around Kendal, which, like Hogarth's "line of 
beauty," is so pleasing to the lovers of natural scenery, 
presented serious obstacles to the efforts of railway en- 
gineers, and also deterred capitalists at a distance from 
investing in the enterprise. Local subscriptions were in- 
sufficient for the work. It was therefore necessary for the 
promoters to supplicate the assistance of the established 
railway companies in the south, whose interests would be 

1 Worcester, Wolverhampton, Windsor, and several towns fir^t opposed 
railways, and not long afterwards subscribed their money in condonation of 
their errors. 



RAILWAYS. 155 

promoted by trie extension of their lines northwards. The 
appeals to the local community were made by calling 
public meetings ; by the publication of letters and articles 
in the newspapers, by pamphlets, 1 and other means ; pointing 
out the advantages which might be expected to result from 
the introduction of railways to the manufacturing establish- 
ments of the town. These efforts were begun in 1836, and 
were not relaxed, at least by some few of the most ardent 
advocates of the system, until the accomplishment of the 
scheme in 1844. The first public meeting was held on the 
19th December, 1837, at the Town Hall, Kendal, Wm. 
Gelderd, Esq., the Mayor, in the chair, when a numerous 
committee was formally constituted. The established railway 
companies in the south, between Lancaster and London, 
after repeated applications made to them, at length agreed 
to subscribe among them 500,000/. towards 1,200,000/., fixed 
upon as the nominal capital of the " Lancaster and Carlisle 
Eailway Company." The remaining part of the capital, 
700,000/., was obtained by persevering canvass in the dis- 
trict ; and the Act of Parliament, authorizing the railway 
from Lancaster to Carlisle, via Kendal, was obtained in May, 
1844. The first general meeting of the Company, duly con- 
stituted, was held in the Town Hall, Kendal, on the 28th 
June, 1844, when the following were elected as the first local 
directors of the board, viz. : Henry Cecil (Col.) Lowther ; 
Edward Williams Hassell ; John Wakefield ; Henry Howard ; 
Geo. Head Head ; John Dixon ; H. D. Maclean ; and Corne- 
lius Nicholson. 

But the direct north and south, or Lancaster and Carlisle 
Eailway, could not, from the nature of the ground, be made 
to approach nearer to the town than the slopes of Benson 
Knot, along which the line runs. Some further scheme 
therefore became necessary, and another company was formed, 
by the original promoters of the before-mentioned undertaking, 
entitled the "Kendal and Windermere Eailway Company," 
whose object was to unite the town of Kendal with the main 
line at Oxenholme, and extend the communication to the 

1 " The London and Glasgow Railway. The interests of Kendal consi- 
dered." — By Cornelius Nicholson. 8vo. Nov. 1837. 



156 MODEEN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

banks of Windermere. The capital of this company was 
125,000Z. It was opposed by a few of the residents in the lake 
district. The objectors memorialised the Board of Trade, and 
met with the following rebuke by the Eailway Commissioners, 
in their report to Parliament : " We are precluded from taking 
into consideration the feelings of individuals who are privately 
interested. But we must state, that an argument which goes 
to deprive the artisan of the offered means of changing his 
narrow abode, his crowded streets, his unwholesome toil, for 
the fresh air, and the healthful holiday, which sends him back 
to his work refreshed and invigorated, simply that some 
individuals may retain to themselves the exclusive enjoy- 
ment of scenes which should be open alike to all, appears to 
us to be an argument wholly untenable." 

The following were the first directors, constituted by a 
clause in the Act of Parliament, viz. : Edward Wilson ; John 
Gaudy ; George Braithwaite Crewdson ; James Bryans ; 
John Hewetson Wilson ; John Jowitt Wilson ; William 
Whitwell ; and Cornelius Xicholson. The Act received the 
Eoyal assent on the 30th June, 1845. 

The Railway was opened from Lancaster to Kendal on the 
21st of September, 1846, which was made a holiday and day 
of general rejoicing. An entertainment was furnished forth in 
the large room of the Whitehall Buildings (now the Town 
Hall), presided over by the Mayor, who was a director and 
projector of both companies. In the year 1859, the two 
railways were leased to the London and Noith-Wes 
Eailway Company, and are now held and worked by that 
company. 

The new Eailway station in Kendal was built in the pre s 
year (1861). 

THE THEATEE. 

The Theatre is a tradition of the past The first tlu 

that we can make out with certainty, was a building in the 
Market-place, approached by a flight of steps which led to 
the dwelling over part of the Foot Ball Inn, and the ad- 
joining premises, mentioned at p. 120. In 1777. when the 



THE COVERED MARKET. 157 

histrionic art was encouraged in Kendal, that building was 
deemed inconveniently small ; and a large theatre, on the 
plan of the metropolitan theatres, was erected in the Wool 
Pack Yard. About the beginning of the present century, the 
drama began to decline in Kendal, and fell so rapidly into 
disesteem, that, by the year 1823, the proprietor of the 
theatre was glad to let it for another purpose, and it was 
converted into a Meeting-house for the Presbyterians. 



THE COVERED MARKET. 

Where the covered market now stands, was a chapel of 
ease (under the parish church), built in 1754, and taken 
down in 1855, having stood one day in excess of 100 years, 
from the date of its consecration. It was dedicated to St. 
George, and therefore called "St. George's Chapel." The west 
end, facing Stricklandgate, presented a basement of shops, 
with wine vaults beneath, and the east end formed an avenue 
which served for part of the market, the chapel being, in 
that part, upheld by pillars of masonry. The shops and wine 
vaults were the property of the corporation ; the patronage 
of the chapel was vested in the Vicar of Kendal for the time 
being ; and the lords of the manor had the right of holding 
a market in the area. All these parties consenting, the 
chapel was removed, and a public subscription set on foot 
to raise funds for erecting a commodious covered market 
on the vacated ground, to supply the want of protection from 
the .weather, which had long been experienced by the vendors 
of butter, eggs, poultry, and vegetables, most of whom were 
females ; for (shame to say it) the limited area under the old 
chapel had been weekly occupied by the corn dealers and 
millers, whilst the butter-women were exposed to the pluvial 
elements. The necessary funds having been raised, the founda- 
tion stone of the building was laid, with great ceremony, 
on the 21st day of July, 1855, by the Mayor, John Whit well, 
Esq., "in the hope that with the blessing of the Almighty 
on the industry of the people and upon the productions and 
fruits of the earth, the building now commenced may tend 
to the advancement of this ancient town, and to the accom- 






J 58 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

modation and prosperity of its inhabitants, and of the neigh- 
bourhood." 1 The building cost about 700?. Architects, 
Messrs. Thompson and Webster. Builders, Alderman John 
Fisher, carpenter, and Eobert Shaw, mason. 

GAS AND WATEE WORKS. 

The conjoint management of gas and water works has 
been recognised in various places. The two operations, 
supplying products to the same premises, and same con- 
sumers, are entirely compatible with the charges of one 
establishment. Kendal was first lighted with gas on the 
25th July, 1825, supplied by the works of a joint-stock 
company, entitled, the "Kendal Gas-Light and Coke Com- 
pany." But when, in 1846, the most active men of the town 
resolved upon securing, what had long been considered 
desirable, an ample supply of water from the Silurian rocks, 
for all the habitable houses, it was deemed expedient to buy 
up the old gas company, and merge it in a new company to 
be called the "Kendal Union Gas and Water Company." 2 
The capital of this company was fixed at 30,000?., and the 
shares of the old concern were merged in the new company, 
being entitled to rank as preference shares, carrying 7J per 
cent, per annum dividend, with an option to convert the same 
into ordinary shares, up to the 1st of January, 1851. This 
option was never exercised, and has now, of course, become 
extinct. The Act of Parliament met with a show of opposi- 
tion (whether genuine or simulated, we cannot say), by. the 
landowner most interested ; but was, nevertheless, passed, 
and received the royal assent on the 26th June, 1846. The 
following were the first directors, as appointed by the Act, 
viz. : — Cornelius Mcholson, Thompson Bindloss, John Ireland, 
William Longnxire, John Hudson, John Thompson the 
younger, John Gandy, John Whitwell, John Jowitt Wilson, 
George Braithwaite Crewdson, and Samuel Marshall. The 

1 Extract of the inscription on vellum, deposited beneath the foundation 
stone. 

2 The water had been submitted to popular analysis, and we took a phial of 
it to London, and induced the members of the Parliamentary Committee to 
taste and admire it. 



THE OLD VICARAGE HOUSE. 159 

company has been highly prosperous, and the public much 
benefited by its operations. Last year's rental was — for Gas, 
2,300/. ; water, 1,000?. = 3,300?. The quantity of gas regis- 
tered for the year at the station meter, was 12,500,000 cubic 
feet ; and the price charged to the consumers is 5s. per 1,000 
cubic feet. The number of public lamps lighted is 132. 

THE OLD VICAEAGE HOUSE. 

By a survey of the Vicarage, taken in 1563 (which is in 
Latin), we find some curious particulars respecting the 
Vicarage House, of which we here present a translation : — 

" The Vicar of Kirkby-Kendal holds there, in right of his 
vicarage, the principal mansion belonging to the said vicarage, 
consisting of a hall, parlour, bed-chambers, kitchen, pantry, — 
with other apartments for servants ; built of stone, and 
covered with slates ; with one barn, one stable, one court, one 
flower-garden, orchard, and kitchen-garden ; with a field 
adjoining, containing by estimation one acre ; situated between 
the church-yard of Kendal aforesaid on the north side, and 
Nether Bridge on the south side ; the common street called 
Kirk Lane on the west side, and the river Kent on the east 
side." 

This proves the great antiquity of the house. The mansion 
above described, was enlarged by a drawing-room, erected 
during the incumbency of Dr. Symonds. The dining-room 
was enlarged, the hall and staircase altered, and many 
alterations and improvements made at the commencement of 
Mr. Bobinson's incumbency, in 1789. When Mr. Hudson 
took possession, the windows in the two wings (which had 
been contracted) were opened to their former size ; and a 
convenient room, for a library, was added to the building. 
The north wing of the house was taken down in 1860, by 
the present vicar, Mr. Cooper, when he built for himself the 
new Vicarage House, and the building now under considera- 
tion was abandoned as a residence for the vicar. 

It is proved by the above survey, that the period when the 
" field adjoining," or the major part of it, was converted 
into tan-yards, was subsequent to the year 1563 ; and from 






160 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

other documents it appears that this was done about the year 
1700. 

Although an improvement was made in the revenues by the 
erection of tan-yards, yet some of our readers, still living, will 
recollect the nuisance at one of the principal entrances to the 
town. In 1826 the tan-yards were removed, and the ground 
again laid to the Vicarage Court. A new carriage road was 
made from the south, which conducts through an avenue of 
lime, birch, elm trees, and acacias, diversified with shrubs in 
great variety and abundance. At the entrance to the grounds 
stands a lodge, in conformity with the classical taste mani- 
fested throughout the improvement. 

We shall readily be forgiven, if we express a wish, that 
the vicarage premises had extended to the ancient boundary 
of Nether Bridge, as in former years, or that the trustees had 
at once converted the space into an improvement of the 
entrance to the town. 

Several years ago, a colony of rooks established themselves 
in the lofty and venerable lime trees that throw their um- 
brageous shadow over the west side of the mansion. 



NEW VICARAGE HOUSE. 

The vicar's residence is a handsome building, in the Eliza- 
bethan order, beautifully situated on part of the glebe lands, 
called "the Vicar's Fields." It was erected in 1859-60, by 
the present vicar, the Eev. John Cooper, from designs by 
Messrs. Bowman and Crowther, Manchester. When the 
trees and shrubs, recently planted, have reached maturity, 
the house and grounds will be a considerable ornament to the 
southern suburb of the town. Close behind the house, on 
the west, stands one of the round hillocks which we believe 
to be factitious, belonging to an early age, either Roman or 
Saxon. It commands extensive views, north, south, and east. 

ABBOT HALL. 

On the north side of the church, and within the boundary 
of the grant of Gilbert, sixth baron of Kendal, was a house 



DISSENTING PLACES OF WORSHIP. 161 

called Abbot Hall. This must have belonged to the abbey 
of St. Mary's, and, we conclude, was either the residence of 
the abbot (the eighth in our catalogue of the vicars of Kendal), 
and afterwards an occasional residence of succeeding abbots, 
or else it was a place where they held their courts. 1 Whether 
the property was sold, together with the greater part of the 
aforesaid grant, at the dissolution of monasteries, or how it 
became private property, we have not been able to ascertain. 
Tradition reports that it stood about the place where the 
stables and coach-houses are now erected. The present 
mansion, which retains the name of Abbot Hall, was built 
in 1759, by Colonel George Wilson, 2 of Dallam Tower, at an 
expense (says Dr. Burn) of 8,000£ It belongs to William 
Wilson, Esq., of High Park, whose father purchased it of Sir 
Alan Chambre, in 1801. It is now the residence of Edmund 
Harrison, Esq., J, P. 

DISSENTING PLACES OF WORSHIP. 

It is generally considered that there are a greater number 
of different denominations of professing Christians in Kendal 
than in almost any other town of equal population. The 
Meeting-house that tradition reports as possessing the 
highest antiquity, was on the Fell Side — a house that has, 
within living memory, been a dwelling, and is now occupied 
by Mr. John Carradus. Here the Presbyterians assembled 
for Divine worship ; and we are informed, that at one time 
that sect were exercising their offices of holiness in the upper 
story, whilst a body of Seceders from the Society of Friends 
were occupying the lower story of the same house, for a similar 
purpose. The dissidents from the Friends reverted again to 
the Society of Friends ; but it was agreed that they, and 
their posterity, should be buried in the Sepulchre, on the Fell 
Side (mentioned at p. 79). 

1 As is represented to have been the case with a place called Abbot Halh 
similarly situated, near the church of Kirkby Lonsdale, which belonged to the 
same abbey. — Vide " History of Westmorland," p. 247. 

2 Colonel Walk, which conducts from the church to the town, by the west 
bank of the Kent is said to have. taken its name from this gentleman, by his 
constant habit of walking there. 

M 






162 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

We will place the Eeligious Societies in the order of 
time. The following are the dates of their introduction, 

respectively : — 

Roman Catholics 

Friends 1645 

Unitarians (originally Presbyterians) 1687 

Inghamites 1745 

Scotch Presbyterians 1763 

Independents 1772 

Wesleyan Methodists 1784 

Primitive Methodists 1822 

Christian Brethren 1837 

Zion Chapel Congregation .... 1843 

ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 

The present Church, erected in 1839, stands on ground 
which has probably been dedicated to the services of the 
Eoman Catholic body since the time of the Eeformation. 
The Church, replaced by the present one, was built in 1793 ; 
but before that time, we only know from tradition, that- 
preceding Eoman Catholic chapels stood on the same spot. 
The existing Church has an imposing appearance, making due 
allowance for the confined space allotted to it, and perhaps 
exhibits, on that account, the skill and taste of the architect, 
George Webster, Esq., more than any other of his numerous 
public buildings. The river front, with its centre gable and 
angle buttresses, surmounted bycrocketed spires, is exceedingly 
striking. Within a canopied niche, there is a spirited piece of 
sculpture, representing St. George and the Dragon. The 
Church is dedicated to the Holy Trinity and St George. The 
present priest is the Eev. James Gibson, who succeeded, in 
1857, the Eev. Thomas Wilkinson. This latter gentleman 
died at the advanced age of ninety-four, and had officiated 
here for sixty-five years ! He was one of the last students 
of the Douay College, was a man of great learning, and most 
conciliatory disposition. 

There is a Eoman Catholic Chapel, also, at Dodding Green, 
a rural retreat on the banks of the Mint. 



DISSENTING PLACES OF WORSHIP. 163 



FRIENDS MEETING-HOUSE. 

The Meeting-house belonging to the Society of Friends, 
or Quakers, 1 stands in Stramongate, on the site of an ancient 
meeting-house, which was taken down in the year 1815. On 
-the door of the old building was discovered the date, 1688, 
and as it is probable that the Society was introduced into the 
town by George Fox, about 1645, it seems fair to conclude 
that the building had been erected in the year of the date 
before mentioned. It was found to have been built with clay 
instead of lime, a practice common in ancient architecture 
for most buildings, excepting castles and places of defence. 
In a volume of testimonies, concerning " the Ministers of the 
Society of Friends," we find a testimony from the monthly 
meeting of Kendal, written on the death of William 
Williamson, a preacher, which is recorded to have taken 
place on the 21st of the Ninth month, 1743. From this 
testimony, it is proved that the burying-ground was at that 
time attached to the Meeting-house ; for it is stated that the 
said minister was interred " in the Friends' burying-ground, 
at Kendal, on the 24th of the same month." 

The present Meeting-house was erected in 1816. It is an 
excellent building, and will contain about 1,200 persons. 
The facing stones are all inlaid with putty, as being superior 
to lime mortar. 

The Society has decreased considerably in numbers within 
the last twenty years. 

UNITARIAN CHAPEL. 

The Unitarian Chapel stands at the east side of the Market- 
place, in quiet seclusion, approached by an arched gateway, 
which is connected with the parsonage-house, occupied by the 
resident minister. The Chapel was built in 1720, from funds 
raised by voluntary subscriptions, added to the absolute sale 

1 The appellation " Quakers," was given to this society, at its outset, in the 
time of Fox, in consequence of that champion having so fiercely defended him- 
self and his cause before two justices at Nottingham, that he absolutely made 
them "quake" or tremble before him. 

M 2 






164 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

of a number of seats, which continue to be freehold (private) 
property. But the congregation dates still farther back, 
there being a register of births connected with it in 1687. 
In 1699, the Eev. Samuel Audland was minister, to whom 
succeeded Dr. Caleb Eotherham, in 1716. Under his ministry 
it was that the congregation outgrew their then chapel ac- 
commodation, and necessitated the present building. 1 In 
June, 1752, Dr. Caleb Eotherham died at Hexham, and, in 
1756, his place was taken by his fourth son, Caleb, during 
whose ministry the parsonage-house was built, viz. in 1777. 
In 1796, Eev. Caleb Eotherham died, and was succeeded by 
Eev. John Harrison ; and on the death of Mr. Harrison, in 
1833, the pastoral charge fell to Eev. Edwaed Hawkes, who 
is therefore in the twenty-ninth year of his ministry. Edward 
Holme, M.D., an eminent practitioner in Manchester, who 
was a native of Kendal, and a lineal descendant of one of the 
founders of this Chapel, bequeathed at his death, in 1847, 
the sum of one thousand pounds, the interest of which is to be 
paid for ever, in aid of the salary of the minister. The Chapel 
will accommodate upwards of 200 hearers. 

INGHAMITE CHAPEL. 

This congregation was among the earliest formed of the 
Society to which it belongs, by the founder, Benjamin Ingham, 
from whom the sect derives its denomination. The original 
Meeting-house of the congregation stood on the site of the 
present Chapel, and was called "Pear-Tree Meeting," because 
of a large pear-tree that stood near it, which was blown down 
in November, 1821. The first regular pastor was Thomas 
Eowlandson, chosen in 1762. He died in 1797, and was 
followed, in succession, by Christopher Batty, William Wilson, 
and John Huck, the last of whom died in 1845. Eobeet 
Dent and Thomas Levens were ordained elders in 1830, 
and the service is now conducted by one or both of those 

Dr. Rotherham conducted, for many years, an academy here, principally 
with a view to qualify his pupils for the ministerial office. The " Monthly 
Repository " contains a list of fifty-six divinity students, some of whom were 
eminent scholars and preachers, educated at this academy. 



DISSENTING PLACES OF WORSHIP. 165 

gentlemen. The Society are Calvinistic in doctrine, and take 
the New Testament alone for their guide, both in faith and 
practice. The chapel is maintained on the "voluntary 
principle/' the sittings being free for all who choose to occupy 
them. The burying-ground was closed in 1855. In it repose 
the ashes of Banks, better known as Philosopher Banks, 
author of a popular " Essay on Mills," and other writings, 
who died in 1806. The present chapel was built in 1844, 
and will accommodate about 250 persons. 

SCOTCH UNITED PEESBYTEEIAN CHAPEL. 

The body of Presbyterians 1 has undergone several changes 
and vicissitudes since its introduction into Kendal. Within 
the period of its existence here, it has thrown off, from its 
sides, two different denominations, the "Independents" and 
the congregation of " Zion Chapel ; " and in its corporate 
capacity it has united successively with the "Burger" and 
" Belief " churches of Scotland, and on this account is now 
styled the United Presbyterian Church. The first chapel 
of this community was built on the Beast Banks, where 
the burial ground may yet be seen, though closed in 
1855, by order of the Health of Towns' Act. In this 
chapel the Rev. James M c Quha3 was ordained by the 
presbytery of Edinburgh in 1764. This gentleman seceded, 
on principles of Church government, in 1772, and became 
an Independent, taking with him several of the congregation, 
and the sum of 100/., being part of the value of the property. 
The next minister was Bev. Thomas Simpson, ordained in 
1774. The chapel, now "Hill House," was finally sold, 
and the proceeds formed the nucleus of a sum which, by 
subscriptions, was raised to 1,000Z. With this fund, the 
theatre in the Wool Pack Yard was purchased, and con- 
verted into a chapel in 1824, and so continues. Bev. 
Alexander Marshall, ordained in 1825, was the first minister 
at this place. He was succeeded, at his death, in 1828, by 
Bev. Bobert Wilson, D.D. In 1834, the Bev. Henry Calder- 

1 From the Greek word irpefffivrepos, signifying "elder," or senior. 



166 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

wood 1 took charge of the flock. After him, Eev. John 
Guthrie, ordained in 1840. Mr. Guthrie, for sentiments 
declared to be contrary to the tenets of the Church, was 
removed by the Synod, in 1843, and he took away with him 
the worshippers, who thence set up Zion Chapel. Next, came 
Eev. John Inglis, in 1845, who resigned in 1858, and was 
followed by the present minister, the Eev. Hugh Geey 
Wallace. The chapel will accommodate about 450 persons. 

INDEPENDENT CHAPEL. 

This body issued fi;om the Presbyterians in Kendal, as 
stated at p. 1C5. The appellation " Independent," appertains 
to the position of the minister, who is not subordinate to a 
presbytery, and also to the Church, which is independent of 
other assemblies. 2 This Society was established in 1772, and 
met for some years in a building which had been the theatre, 
on the north side of the Market-place, next to the Foot-ball 
public-house. The present Chapel, in New Street, was built 
in 1782. It is a handsome stone building, and contains 
sittings for about 400 persons. The ministers, successively, 
have been the Eevs. Luke Collins, James Kay, Thomas 
Gritton, Eobert McLean, "William Colfax, John Jefferson, and 
lastly, the Eev. David Jones (resigned whilst these pages are 
in the press). 

WESLEYAN METHODIST CHAPEL. 

The Wesleyan Methodists were introduced into Kendal in 
the year 1784. The first preachers, by leave of the Mayor, 
addressed the people in the open Market-place. Soon after 
that time a Society was organized, who assembled for regular 
worship in the old theatre, in the Market-place ; from which 
place, a short time afterwards, they removed to a large room 
in The Fold, in Stricklandgate, arid there continued till the 
present Meeting-house, at the north end of Stricklandgate, 

1 This gentleman went out to Caffraria, Cape Colony, as a missionary, in 
1838, and has highly distinguished himself there in the cause of Christianity, 
and in matters of civil government. 

2 The " Independents" arose, in the time of Elizabeth, from among men 
who counted the practices of the Established Clergy too much like those of 
the Roman Catholics. 



DISSENTING PLACES OF WOESHIP. 167 

was erected in 1808. There is a burying-ground attached to 
the Chapel, which is now closed. The Chapel will ac- 
commodate 700 persons. 

PRIMITIVE METHODIST CHAPEL. 

The Primitive Methodists were introduced into Kendal in 
1822. They preached in the open air, on the waste grounds 
in the suburbs of the town, for about twelve months, when, 
having formed a Society, the present Chapel was, in 1823, 
erected for their use. It stands at the foot of Castle Street, 
and contains 250 sittings. 

CHRISTIAN BRETHREN. 

The Christian Brethren, formerly called " Plymouth Breth- 
ren," emanated chiefly from the Society of Friends in Kendal. 
They first assembled in regular congregation about 1837, in 
one of the public rooms of the Whitehall (now Town Hall) 
buildings ; and, growing gradually in numbers and influence, 
they built, in 1858, the present Chapel in Stramongate, which 
will seat upwards of 300 persons. The distinctive principle 
of this community, in Church government, is their rejection of 
formal office-bearers. Their tenets are Calvinistic. 

ZION CHAPEL. 

The congregation at this Chapel has no distinctive religious 
appellation. They issued out of the Presbyterians (as stated 
at p. 166) ; but they are more like the Independents in 
principles of Church government. In the " weightier matters 
of the gospel" they are strictly evangelical. The Chapel, 
situated in the New Inn yard, Highgate, was built and 
opened in 1844. It will seat about 600 persons. Present 
minister, the Eev. William Taylor. 



168 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

We must next introduce short notices. of the local military 
bodies which have arisen in the present century on national 
emergencies. The Volunteers of 1803 came forth on occasion 
of Napoleon I. gathering his armies on the heights of 
Boulogne, with the object of throwing them upon the shores 
of England ; and the Eifle Volunteers of 1859 sprang from 
unusual military and naval preparations in France, at the 
time, by Napoleon III. 



KENDAL AND LONSDALE VOLUNTEERS. 1803. 

When Napoleon I. threatened the invasion of England, 
Government passed an Act, granting certain allowances to 
those Volunteer and Yeomanry corps, throughout the United 
Kingdom, who were willing to associate for the defence of 
their country. This Act was passed on the 27th July, 1803, 
and such was the alacrity with which the loyalty and 
patriotism of the inhabitants of Kendal and the neighbour- 
hood prompted them to assemble, that on the 19th of 
the following month a meeting of the lieutenancy was held 
at Boroughbridge, to make preliminary arrangements ; and 
on the 15th of the next month, September, upwards of 
1,000 men, together with officers, were on parade at Kendal, 
for the purpose of being enrolled and sworn in ! Such was 
the alacrity thus displayed, that when on examination it was 
found there were more than the requisite number of men, 
and it seemed desirable to dispense with some who were over 
and some under an eligible age, no means of persuasion less 
than a bribe could induce such persons to withdraw from the 
service ! 

The Kendal and Lonsdale Volunteers consisted of fourteen 
companies, of 70 men each, with officers complete. The 
first regular return of the corps was made on the 1st of 
December, 1803. 

Participating in the patriotic feeling of the time, the Hon. 
Mrs. Howard, of Levens, bestowed a distinguishing mark of 
her approbation of the corps, by presenting them with 
a pair of colours, which she accompanied with the following 
letter :— 



LOCAL MILITIA. 169 

" To Lieutenant-Colonel Maude. 
" Sir, 
"When I understood that it would be agreeable to the Volunteers of 
Kendal and its neighbourhood, to receive their colours from one of the family 
of Levens, it increased my regret at the necessity I was under of leaving the 
country before the regiment was complete, aod that I could not have the 
honour of delivering them in person. The period for their delivery is probably 
now arrived ; I have therefore to request that you will accept them by the 
only manner I have now the opportunity of offering them. No words of mine 
are necessary to give energy to the exertions of those gallant men who have 
voluntarily come forward in defence of their country. — Animated with a 
spirit of loyalty to their King, with the love of Liberty and the Constitution, 
they will, I am persuaded, to a man, esteem death preferable to the tyranny of 
a merciless invader. 

" I am, Sir, 
"Your obedient, humble servant, 

" Frances Howard." 
"Elf orcl, Bee. 26, 1803. 

On Monday, January 16, 1804, the Volunteers had a grand 
field-day at Kendal, when they received their colours. 

The regiment continued to be assembled once every year 
for training and exercise, sometimes at Kendal, and on two 
or three occasions at Penrith, until the establishment of the 
local militia. 

It deserves to be recorded, in honour of the corps, and in 
testimony of the estimation in which they held their com- 
manding officer, Colonel Maude, that, in 1806, they presented 
him with a service of plate, consisting of a magnificent 
tureen and four salver dishes of massy silver, which cost 
250 guineas, together with a beautiful sabre, and a brace of 
pistols. 

LOCAL MILITIA. 1809. 

The Volunteer regiment gave way to the establishment of 
the regular Kendal and Lonsdale Local Militia, in 1809. 
The first Keturn of this regiment was made at Kendal, by 
Lieutenant-Colonel Maude, on the 9th of June, 1809, and 
consisted of the following : — 

Two lieutenant-colonels, one major, eight captains, seven 
lieutenants, six ensigns, six staff officers, thirty-two sergeants, 
thirty corporals, fifteen drummers, and 650 rank and file. 

In 1816, the Kendal staff assembled, and marched in 



370 MODERN STATE OF THE TOWN. 

procession to the church, when and where the colours were 
deposited which still hang suspended over the north aisle 
of this venerable structure. There, also, are hung the flags 
of the Westmorland, or 55 th, regiment. 

VOLUNTEER RIFLE CORPS. 1859. 

A corps of Volunteers, armed with the rifle gun, and hence 
called "Rifle Volunteers," was established in December, 
1859. It originated in unison with a general volunteer 
movement of the day, the country having suddenly awoke to 
a consciousness of its defenceless condition, which had been 
oracularly declared by the Duke of Wellington a few years 
previously. This corps consists of two companies, each of 
them between 70 and 80 rank and file. It is called the 
" Third Westmorland Volunteer Eifle Corps." The preliminary 
expenses, accoutrements, &c, were paid from a fund raised 
by public subscription, since which it has been chiefly self- 
supported. The first officers of the corps were : 1st company, 
Captain Commandant, William Wilson, High Park ; Lieut. 
G. W. Ireland (manufacturer) ; Ensign, Daniel Harrison 
(solicitor). 2nd company: Captain, John Whitwell (carpet 
manufacturer) ; Lieut. Hany Arnold (solicitor) ; Ensign. 
Cartmell Harrison, Singleton Park (solicitor). 



THE COKPOEATIOK 



171 



CHAPTEE V. 




CORPORATION SEAL.* 



THE CORPOEATION. 



The Charter of Incorporation was first granted to Kendal 
by Queen Elizabeth, in the 18th year of her reign (1575). 
The government of the town was, by this Charter, vested in 
twelve burgesses, out of which number one was annually 
elected and appointed to officiate as chief magistrate, one 
recorder, and twenty-four assistants. Speed says, " Kendal is 
a place of very civill and orderly government, the which is 
managed by an Alderman, chosen every yeare out of his 
twelve brethren, who are all distinguished and notified from 
the rest by the wearing of purple garments /" 

The Charter of Elizabeth remained in operation and 
effect until the 11th of Charles I. (1636), when a further 



1 The seal is made of silver, and is one and a half inch in diameter. The 
device is a view of the town at the time ; with the flag flying from the church 
tower, and signs of life, in smoke, rising from the chimneys. 



172 THE COEPOEA.TION. 

Charter was obtained, confirming the former and granting 
more ample privileges, the substance of which is as 
follows : — 

" That in the town of Kirkby-in-Kendale there shall be a 
body politic and corporate, consisting of one mayor, twelve 
aldermen, and twenty chief or capital burgesses of the borough 
of Kirkby-in-Kendale ; to have a common seal ; with power 
to take lands not exceeding 100/. a year. 

" The mayor to be chosen out of the number of aldermen, 
on Monday next before Michaelmas day yearly, by the mayor 
and aldermen, or the major part of them (of whom the mayor 
to be one), to continue for one whole year, and from thence 
until another be chosen and sworn. 

" The aldermen to be chosen by the mayor and aldermen, 
or the major part of them, to continue during life, or until 
anioval from the office for reasonable cause. 

"The capital burgesses to be chosen by the mayor and 
aldermen, or the major part o£ them (of whom the mayor 
to be one), to continue in the office during their good 
behaviour. 

" One man learned in the laws to be recorder or seneschal ; 
to be chosen by the mayor and aldermen, to execute the 
office during their pleasure. 

"They shall also appoint a clerk of the recognizances 
(or town clerk) ; and a sword bearer, and two sergeants at 
mace. 

" The mayor shall be clerk of the market ; and the 
mayor and senior alderman shall be coroners for the said 
borough. 

" If the mayor die within the year, or be lawfully amoved 
from his office, another shall be chosen for the residue of the 
year. And no mayor shall serve again till after four years 
from the expiration of his office. 

"If an alderman live out of the borough, another shall be 
chosen. 

" There shall be two fairs yearly ; one on the eve, day, and 
morrow of the feast of St, Mark ; the other on the eve, day, 
and morrow of the feast of St. Simon and Jude. 

" On Thursday from three weeks to three weeks, the mayor, 



THE CHARTER. 173 

recorder (or deputy recorder), and two senior aldermen, or 
three of them (whereof the mayor, recorder, or deputy recorder 
in the absence of the recorder, shall be two), shall hold a 
court of record, and view of frankpledge, and shall have 
cognizance of pleas of matters arising within the borough, 
amounting to any sum not exceeding 20 1. 

" And they shall have power to make by-laws, for the good 
rule and government of all officers, artificers, burgesses, 
inhabitants, and resiants in the same borough, so as they be 
reasonable, and not contrary to the laws of the land. 

"And the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses, may appoint 
searchers and inspectors of woollen cloth and cottons, and 
impose fines for offences in the manufacturing thereof. 

" And no petty chapman or artificer, not free of the 
borough, shall, except in open fair or market on the market 
day, put to sale any wares or merchandizes (except victuals), 
without licence of the mayor and aldermen under their 



" The mayor, recorder, and two senior aldermen, shall be 
justices of the peace ; and they, or any three of them (whereof 
the mayor and recorder shall be two), may hold sessions, and 
hear and determine offences ; except treason, murder, felony, 
or any other matter touching the loss of life or limb, in which 
they shall not proceed without the king's special command. 
And the justices of the county shall not intromit, unless in 
defect of the justices of the borough. 

" Provided, that nothing herein shall derogate from the 
right of the hereditary high sheriff of the county, with respect 
to any goods or chattels of felons and fugitives, waifs, 
deodands, estrays, views of frankpledge, tourns, and county 
court, or execution of process. 

"And provided, that the mayor, recorder, aldermen, and 
town clerk, shall not be put or impanelled in any jury at the 
assizes ; and the sheriff shall not impanel them, nor shall 
they forfeit any issues for not appearing." 

With respect to this last clause, the regulations as they 
stand at present by law for serving upon juries, being made 
by acts of parliament subsequent to these charters, without 
any saving of such-like exemptions ; this privilege by charter, 



174 



THE CORPORATION. 



if ever it was legally in force, seemeth now to be vanished 
and gone. 1 

A seal, of which the following is afac simile, representing 
the portrait of King Charles L, appears to have been obtained 
with this Charter : 




These two Charters were surrendered to the crown, amongst 
other charters in many other parts of the kingdom, in the 
latter end of the reign of King Charles II. 

In praying for a renewal of the Charter, about the year 
1683, the Body Corporate and inhabitants of the town took 
the opportunity of soliciting additional privileges and benefits, 
and to this end they addressed a letter to Sir George Jeffreys, 
then lord chief justice, another to Francis, lord Guilford, lord 
keeper of the great seal, and a third to Sir Christopher 
Musgrave, one of the knights of the shire for Westmorland, 
that as each of these distinguished persons had honoured the 
corporation by having become members thereof, so they hoped 
for the favour of their intercession. The matters which they 
desired might be humbly offered to his Majesty's considera- 
tion were these : — 



1. "That his majesty would be graciously pleased to grant us his royal 
charter de novo, humbly submitting to whatever alterations his majesty in his 
great wisdom shall think fit to make therein. 

2. " We enjoy the tolls of the market here, which we hold by lease from 
the crown, under the yearly rent of 151. We have all along managed the said 
tolls to the best advantage we could, and yet never made above 17/. per annum 



1 " History of Westmorland," p. 68. 

2 These letters are all printed in Burn's 
page 69. 



History of Westmorland." 



THE SECOND CHARTER. 175 

of them. So that the yearly profit will not answer the charge of renewing 
our lease (as we ought to do) once in ten years. Wherefore if his majesty 
would be pleased to grant us the said toll in fee farm, under the said yearly 
rent of 15Z., it would be a great ease to the corporation, and not prejudicial 
(we think) to his majesty's interest. 

3. " These tolls have been anciently, almost time out of mind, received by 
us ; yet of .raw hides and apples no toll was ever taken here, in regard (as we 
conceive) that heretofore they were not worth the taking notice of. But now 
the trade in leather and fruit being grown very considerable, if by our charter, 
or otherwise, such power were given us as might justify our taking toll thereof, 
it would be a benefit to the corporation, and no less so to his majesty, nor 
burden to the people, but what they are liable to in other markets. 

4. " There is adjoining to the town a parcel of waste ground, called Dob 
Freer, which is all the common of pasture that is belonging to the town, and 
is no more than a hill full of rocks and stones. The fee and soil thereof doth 
belong to the crown, but is of little or no advantage to his majesty, neither 
is it worth to the town above 51. per cmnvm, but might be of greater use and 
benefit to us, if his majesty were pleased to grant us the soil and inheritance 
thereof. 

5. " We repair and uphold two large bridges, and the half part of a third 
bridge, at our own proper costs and charges, which is a burden too heavy 
for us to bear. But if, in consideration thereof, his majesty would be 
graciously pleased to grant us a thorough-toll of one penny or halfpenny only, 
for each pack of goods passing into or out of the town, it would be some ease 
and benefit to us ; and is no more than what Carlisle enjoys in a much greater 
measure throughout the whole county of Cumberland, for all sorts of goods 
and chattels passing into or out of the said county. 

" These are the things we humbly offer, and if it might not be thought too 
great presumption in us, we would humbly pray in aid the right honourable 
the lord keeper of the great seal of England, and the lord chief justice of 
England ; who as they have done us the honour of being made members of 
our corporation, so we hope will do us the favour of interceding with his 
majesty on our behalf, whilst we shall desire nothing which may be thought 
in the least prejudicial to his majesty's interest, or which he cannot willingly 
and easily grant us, but shall thankfully acquiesce in his majesty's good will 
and pleasure, whatsoever it shall be." 

The common designated "Dob Freer," as aforesaid, was, 
we believe, the whole unenclosed portion of Kendal Fell, at 
the use of the public at the time. Freah is a Saxon word 
from which we obtain "free," "freeman," "freedom," &c, and 
signifies "a liberty," or common right. The prefix Dob may 
be from the Celtic " Dubh," signifying water, and might refer 
to springs of water on the freah lands at the date of 
designation. 

A new Charter was obtained, and on its being brought 
from London was ushered in with much solemnity. On the 
26th of December, 1684, the town clerk, Mr. Eichard Eow- 



176 



THE CORPORATION. 



landson, who brought the Charter, was met at Burton by a 
large number of horsemen from Kendal. And, at the ex- 
tremity of the town liberty he was met by the mayor, the 
aldermen, burgesses, and many gentlemen out of the country ; 
where the mayor, kneeling and bareheaded, received the 
Charter ; from whence it was conveyed to the Town Hall, many 
hundreds of the people huzzaing at the first delivery thereof, 
and all the way through the town, the mayor and aldermen 
being in their robes, with maces, sword, trumpets, music, 
bells ringing, and other rejoicings. After the Charter was 
read, the mayor began the king's health at the cross, com- 
monly called " cold stone ; " and then treated the gentlemen 
handsomely at his own house. 

This new Charter of King Charles II. does not grant any 
of the particulars above petitioned for, but is copied for the 
most part verbatim from that of King Charles 1. with a few 
alterations and additions, viz. 

That the mayor shall be chosen by the mayor, aldermen, 
and capital burgesses ; — that on a vacancy of the mayoralty 
within the year, one of the two senior aldermen shall serve 
during the remainder of the year ; — that they shall hold pleas 
for any matter arising within the borough for any sum not 
exceeding 407. ; — and that the deputy recorder shall be a 
justice of the peace (and may act as such in the absence of 
the recorder). With a clause, as in all the new charters of 
those times, of reservation to the crown of a power to displace 
and remove the mayor, recorder, aldermen, or any other cor- 
poration officers at pleasure. 



LIST OF FORMER RECORDERS OF KENDAL : 



1575. Robert Briggs, Esq. (first recorder), removed 1576. 

1576. Thomas Braithwaite, Esq., of Ambleside, died 1610. 
1610. William Garnett, Esq., sworn 21st August. 

1636. Sir John Lowther, Baronet (nominated in the Charter). 

1648. Thomas Braithwaite, Esq.. of Ambleside, sworn 30th March. 

1673. Alan Prickett, Esq., of Natland Hall. 

1678. Thomas Lamplugh, Esq. 

1685. Thomas Dalston, Esq., sworn 2nd September. 

1691. Roger Moore, Esq. 

1695. Alan Chambre, Esq., resigned. 



CORPORATION REFORM ACT OF 1835. 177 

1699. John Harrison, Esq., sworn Feb. 29, 1699—1700.; 

1715. Alan Chambre, Esq. (2nd time), resigned. 

1738. Walter Chambre, Esq. (son of the last named). 

1752. Richard Crowle, Esq. 

1757. Roger Wilson, Esq. 

1766. Thomas Fenwick, Esq. 

1777. Myles Harrison, Esq., died Feb. 16, 1797, aged 82. 

1797. Richard Howard, Esq., of Levens Hall, Westmorland, and 

Castle Rising, Norfolk. Died in 1818. 
1818. Fletcher Rain cock, Esq., of Liverpool, sworn Dec. 21 

(last Recorder of Kendal). 

The Council appointed under the Corporation Eeform Act, 
in 1835-6, not having deemed it necessary to make applica- 
tion to the king in council to have a Eecorder for this 
borough, in conformity with a discretionary clause in the 
said Act to that effect, the office of Eecorder, as well as the 
right of holding a separate Court of Quarter Sessions for 
Kendal, consequently ceased. 

The Charter of Charles II. continued in force until the 
sixth year of King William IV., when the Municipal Corpo- 
rations Eeform Act passed the Legislature, and received the 
Eoyal assent on Wednesday, the 9th of September, 1835. 
The Corporation, by this Act, still retained its style and title 
of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the Borough of 
Kirkby-in-Kendal, in the County of Westmorland, and 
was directed to consist of one mayor, six aldermen, and 
eighteen councillors — the mayor to be chosen from the 
Council annually on the 9th November. According to the 
new Act, the town was divided into three Wards, viz., the 
East, West, and North Wards, the burgesses being entitled 
to elect six councillors for each Ward. 

These elections accordingly took place on Saturday, the 
26th of December, 1835, and the result was officially declared 
by the old mayor (Mr. Swainson) on the 28th of the same, 
the polling places being in the Town Hall and the Whitehall 
Lecture-room. The eighteen councillors thus elected met for 
the first time on Thursday, the 31st of December, 1835, in the 
Town Hall, and proceeded to the election of six aldermen, five 
of whom were taken from their own body ; the vacancies 
thus caused in the Council were not filled up until the 1st of 
November following, when five additional councillors were 



178 



THE CORPORATION. 



elected to supply them, besides the six to succeed those who 
retired at that time as directed by the Act. On Friday, the 
1st January, 1836, the aldermen and councillors met in 
the Town Hall, and elected for mayor, John Richards (after- 
wards Yeates), Esq., of Kirkland. 

On the 31st of August, 1848, the Health of Towns Act 
passed the Legislature, and on the 19th of July, 1819, the 
General Board of Health in London made a provisional order 
for applying the same to Kendal, and on the 1st of August 
following, this order (together with several others) was con- 
firmed and made law by Act of Parliament. On Tuesday, the 
21st of August, 1819, a meeting of the Council was held, and 
a committee, consisting of the whole body, appointed to 
consider the provisions of the Act ; and the first meeting of 
the Council, as a Local Board of Health, took place accord- 
ingly in the Moot Hall, on Tuesday, the 4th of September, 
1819. The Municipal Corporations Eeform Act of Wil- 
liam IV. with this addition, continues in force and practice 
within this borough. 



CORPORATION OF KENDAL, IN 1861. 
The Mayor — William Henry Wakefield, banker, Prizett. 



J. J. Wilson. 
Wm. Longmire. 



Aldermen. 
Samuel Whinerey. 
John Wakefield. 



W. H. Wakefield. 
John Fisher. 



(The Aldermen are elected for six years .) 



Councillors. 

EAST WARD. 

James Bousfield. 
Charles Wilkinson. 
G. F. Braithwaite. 
George Jackson. 
Samuel Gawith. 
James Thompson. 
(The Councillors are elected for three years.) 
Town Clerk— Thomas Harrison, Singleton Park, Kendal. 
Borough Treasurer — John Mann. 



north ward. 
Thomas Taylor. 
Wm. Wilson. 
Jas. Edmondson. 
J. Baker Barrow. 
Thomas Head. 
James Busher. 



WEST WARD. 

Miles Thompson. 
Thomas Simpson. 
Henry Cragg. 
Samuel Compston. 
Samuel Rhodes. 
Thomas Busher. 



The following "cut" represents the Arms of the Cor- 
poration, engraved on a silver tankard in the possession of 



LAW COUKTS. 



179 



that body. Date, 1629. The emblems are three teasels and 
three wool hooks. 




LAW COUETS. 

QUARTER SESSIONS OF THE BOROUGH. 

These were formerly held before the Mayor, Recorder, or 
Deputy Recorder, and two Senior Aldermen, Justices of the 
Peace, in each of the following weeks, namely : — the first 
whole week after March 31, the first whole week after June 24, 
the first whole week after October 11, and the first whole 
week after December 28. At the passing of the Municipal 
Corporations Act (5 & 6 Will. IV. c. 76) this Court was 
abolished, no petition for a " separate Court " of Quarter 
Sessions for the borough being presented. 

QUARTER SESSIONS OF THE COUNTY. 

Until the year 1830, the Sessions for the Kendal and Lons- 
dale Wards were held at Kendal, by adjournment from Appleby, 
four times a year, namely, on the Friday in each of the above- 
named weeks ; but in the year before mentioned it was agreed 
and ordered by the Magistrates, that the Sessions for the whole 
County should be held alternately at Appleby and Kendal, 
twice at each place during the year, except at the Epiphany, 
when they are holden at Appleby on the Monday, and ad- 
journed to Kendal on the Friday following. None but Counsel 
are allowed to appear in cases before this Court. Those who 
usually attend, at this date, are John M c Oubrey, John Holker, 
Robert Scott, Edward Dawson, and John Henry Fawcett. 

* WoqJ is my Bread. 
N 2 



]80 LAW COURTS. 



COURT OF RECORD. 

Until the year 1835, the Mayor, Deputy Eecorder, and two 
senior Aldermen, or three of them, held on every third Thursday 
a Court of Eecord, and View of Frankpledge, wherein they had 
cognizance of pleas of matters, arising within the borough, not 
exceeding 40/., according to the jurisdiction granted by the 
Charter of Incorporation. For many years, however, it had 
fallen into disuse ; and at the passing of the Municipal Corpo- 
rations Eeform Act, this Court was practically abolished. 

COURT LEET. 

The Court Leet was held on the Monday after Michaelmas- 
day in each year, under the jurisdiction granted by the Charter 
to the Corporation of the Borough, for the appointment of con- 
stables and other public officers of the town, before the Ee- 
corder or Deputy Eecorder, as Steward of the Leet. The Muni- 
cipal Corporations Eeform Act finally abolished this Court, but 
for many years previous to that Act it had fallen into disuse. 

THE COURT OF CONSCIENCE. 

The Court of Conscience, otherwise Court of Bequests, or, as 
it was commonly called, " Wapentake Court," was established 
by Act of Parliament, in the 4th George III. (1764). It ex- 
tended throughout the whole parish of Kendal, for the recovery 
of debts under 405. , which were not to be sued for in any other 
Court ; but its jurisdiction did not extend to rent, nor to any 
contract relating to a freehold, nor to any matter cognizable by 
the Ecclesiastical Courts or the Justices of the Peace. At the 
passing of the Act 9 & 10 Vict. cap. 95, establishing the 
County Courts or courts for the recovery of small debts, this 
Court was abolished. 

THE COUNTY COURT. 

The Act establishing this Court received the Eoyal assent 
on the 28th day of August, 1846, and the first Court at Kendal 
was held in the Town Hall, on the 6th May, 1847, before 
T. H. Ingham, Esq., Judge. Present Judge. T. H. Ingham. Esq. 
of Marton House, Skipton. 



KENDAL FELL TEUST. 181 

THE PETTY SESSIONS. 

The Petty Sessions for the Borough are held by the Borough 
Magistrates, at the Town Hall, in Kendal, on Monday and 
Friday in each week, and for the County on every alternate 
Saturday, before the Justices of the Peace for the County. 

KIEKLAND COUET. 

The Honourable Mary Howard, as Lady of the manor of 
Kirkland (being part of the Lurnley Pee), holds a Customary 
Court twice in each year, viz. — on the last Thursday in Octo- 
ber, and on the Thursday in Easter week, and a Court Leet on 
the last Thursday in October. The Customary Court consists 
of the Steward or Deputy Steward, and customary tenants of 
the manor, at which all transfers of customary estates are 
recorded, and admittances granted, and all forfeitures and 
other acts prejudicial to the interests of the lord presented 
There is also incident to the manor a Court Baron, at 
w 7 hich the freehold tenants of the manor alone are suitors and 
judges, and of which the Steward of the Manor is a con- 
stituent part. It has jurisdiction in all personal actions 
(with one or two exceptions) where the debt or damages is 
under 40s. , also of all pleas of land within the manor. The 
Court Baron, however, has not been held for many years. 



KENDAL FELL TEUST, AND MANAGEMENT OF THE POOE. 

What is called the Kendal Pell Trust, so combines, his- 
torically, the management of the town, in paving, lighting, 
cleansing, &c, vrith the management of the poor, that the two 
subjects cannot be treated separately. This Trust acquired 
its powers under an Act of Parliament, passed in the 7th 
Geo. III. (1767), which is 'entitled, An Act for enclosing 
waste ground, in the borough and township, " for the benefit 
of the poor, and for enlightening and cleansing the streets of 
the said town," &c. It may be sufficient to give the following 
summary of the Act : — 

"Wheeeas there is a common or tract of waste ground, 
called Kendal Fell, lying within the burgh and township, 
by estimation 158 acres or thereabouts, (which is at present 
of very little advantage) — it is enacted, that the same shall 
be inclosed, improved, and divided, in such ways as the 



182 



KENDAL FELL ACT. 



trustees, or any seven or more of them shall think most 
expedient and beneficial (excepting the High and Low 
Tenterfells, which shall not be ploughed up, but reserved for 
the use of the shearmen and manufacturers /whole and 
entire'; and the Bowling Fell, which shall be left open for 
the inhabitants to walk upon). The profits, from time to 
time arising therefrom, to be applied for and towards the 
relief, maintenance, and employment of the poor of the 
township of Kendal, and for erecting or purchasing proper 
buildings and edifices for that purpose, and furnishing such 
buildings. Provided always, that the lands so inclosed and 
improved shall be subject to be rated and taxed to all par- 
liamentary, parochial and other taxes, and be liable to the 
payment of the lords' rents (13s. M. to the earl of Lonsdale, 
for the Eichmond and Marquis Fee, and 6s. 8d. to the Hon. 
Fulke Greville Howard, for the Lumley Fee, yearly), together 
with the tithes. And the trustees are hereby empowered to 
make such rules and regulations for the better governing and 
employing the poor as shall appear to them necessary or 
expedient, to all which rules the churchwardens, overseers, 
and other persons to whom the same may relate, are to 
conform themselves ; provided, that such rules and regulations 
are not repugnant to the law of tins realm. 

" And it is also enacted by the authority of the said Act, 
that the trustees, or seven of them, shall and may, at a 
public meeting assembled once in the year or oftener if they 
think fit, agree or contract with one or more fit person or 
persons for the cleansing and keeping clean all the streets, 
alleys, &c. within the burgh ; and such person so contracted 
with, shall, on every Monday and Friday, in every week, 
well and effectually sweep or cause to be swept and cleansed 
in a proper manner, all the streets, lanes, alleys, open 
passages, and other places within the said town or burgh, 
and remove all the soil there found or swept up ; on pain 
that the contractor, for evjery neglect or default, shall forfeit 
the sum of twenty shillings. 

"And it is also further enacted, by the authority aforesaid. 
that the trustees may order such a convenient and sufficient 
number of glass lamps to be erected in the town, and in 
such manner as they shall think fit, and also, may contract 



KENDAL FELL TEUST. 183 

with any person or persons for enlightening, cleansing, and 
repairing snch lamps, for such time as they shall think fit. 
And for defraying the expense of cleansing and enlightening 
the streets, the trustees have power to appoint two assessors, 
to make and settle a general rate, in the same proportion as 
the poor rates, not to exceed in the whole, the sum of six 
pence in the pound in any one year ; and to nominate and 
appoint so many persons as they shall think proper to collect 
the said rate, every such person so appointed, being subject to 
a penalty of 51 on refusal ; provided nevertheless, that no 
person shall be compelled to Serve the said office of collector 
oftener than once in ten years. 

" The trustees for carrying this Act into execution shall 
consist of the mayor for the time being, and twelve inhabi- 
tants of the burgh, who are owners of property of the yearly 
value of 101, and rated and assessed to that amount ; and 
that an election of three new trustees shall take place yearly, 
in the room of the three who have served four years, in 
rotation, from time to time, on the third of May, or within 
six days after, as appointed, of which time the Mayor is 
required to give notice in writing, which shall be fixed on the 
door of the Moot-hall seven days before such election. The 
Mayor, if present, shall preside at all meetings of the trustees ; 
and in case of the absence of the Mayor then some other 
magistrate for the burgh shall preside. 

" And it is further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, in 
ratification of an order of assize and rule of the court of 
Chancery, that the lands called Park and Castle Lands, and 
the tenements built thereon, shall be held to be within the 
township of Kendal, and shall be subject to pay one-tenth 
part of the rates and assessments to be raised for the support 
and maintenance of the poor of the said township/' 

The management of the poor continued under the operation 
of this Act until the passing of the Poor Law Union Act, 
in 1834 ; and the management of the lighting, cleansing, 
&c, formerly done under its provisions, now devolves upon 
the Local Board of Health. The Act of George III. con- 
tains no provision for selling any of the lands, or for 



184? MANAGEMENT OF THE POOR. 

granting building leases ; and there having recently sprung 
up a desire to extend the limits of the town, and increase the 
number of dwelling-houses, with a conviction, at the same 
time, that the Kendal Fell Lands presented the most eligible 
plots of ground for this purpose, an Act was obtained in the 
24th and 25th Victoria, 1861, which continues the powers of 
the Trust under the authority of the former Act, gives a 
power to grant leases for building not exceeding a term of 99 
years, power, also, to sell lands for a sum in gross, to make 
roads, and improve the approaches to the lands, &c, provided 
that certain lands are thereby "set apart and appropriated for 
the use of the inhabitants for recreation ground, and for the 
purpose of drying clothes ; " and provided, also, that " no part 
of the lands now forming the Serpentine Walks (nearly 18 
acres) shall be sold, or leased, or exchanged under the pro- 
visions of this Act, but the same shall for ever remain appro- 
priated for purposes of public recreation." The Trustees are 
to apply the rents, fees, and other ordinary sources of annual 
income, in aid of the poor rate for the township of Kendal. 
These provisions will release some of the most convenient 
sites for dwelling-houses ; and if the trade of the town flourishes, 
and the population increases, as we trust may be the case, 
advantage will surely be taken of these provisions, and 
new suburbs will spring up in extended streets, or numerous 
villas. 

TRUSTEES OF KENDAL FELL LANDS, IN 18G1 : 

The Mayor. 
G. A. Gelderd. W. Wilson, manufacturer. 

Samuel Rhodes. Thomas Simpson. 

John Ireland. John Hudson. 

John Jowitt Wilson. John Whitwell. 

J. G. J. Ireland. Thomas Harrison. 

James Bousfield. William Wakefield. 

Cleric— Francis Webster, solicitor. 
Superintendent of Lands — H. Hoggarth, land-surveyor, Finkle-street. 

As regards the management of the poor, it is more than 
probable that, previously to the Act of George III., the business 
had not been conducted on any systematic plan. According 
to tradition, the first workhouse was on the Fell-side, and the 
paupers had their weekly pittances doled out. in the overseer's 



THE WORKHOUSE. 185 

office (also placed in that quarter of the town), on the Sunday 
afternoons. Subsequently to this, the in-door paupers were 
lodged at Castle Park, whence they were removed to the 
present Workhouse at the time of its erection. 

The present Workhouse was erected two years after the 
passing of this Act, viz. in 1769 ; but no interest sufficient to 
secure a proper regulation of the affairs of this establishment 
appears to have been manifested by any of the officers, or 
other inhabitants of the town, until the year 1800. A general 
examination of the beds, bedding, and clothes of the paupers 
in the Workhouse was then fully entered upon, and every 
necessary regulation made for their additional cleanliness and 
comfort ; distinct rooms were appropriated for the accom- 
modation of the sick, and a proper nurse provided to attend 
to their necessities ; a more distinct separation of the different 
classes of the inmates was adopted ; a knitting school was set 
on foot, and a school for the instruction of children in the 
first rudiments of education ; the committee were appointed 
to visit the house in rotation, to inspect the different depart- 
ments. Indeed, the foundation of an excellent system of 
management was laid by that committee, in justice to whose 
exertions the least that we can do is to record their names, 
for the veneration of all who may be compelled to seek an 
asylum in this Workhouse. 

Committee for the year 1800 : — 
William Dil worth Crewdson. 



Timothy Crosthwaite. 
William Berry. 
James Sinkinson. 
Edward Ireland. 



James Savage. 
William Fisher. 
Anthony Sharp. 
Nathan Eobinson. 
Richard Clementson. 



By a progressive improvement, until the year 1803, a 
regular code of laws for the government of the Workhouse, 
drawn up by W. D. Crewdson, Esq., was adopted by the 
trustees of the Kendal Fell Inclosure Act. The intro- 
duction of these rules, conveying a summary view of the 
responsible duties of the churchwardens and overseers, is too 
valuable to be omitted here : — 

"To the Churchwardens and Overseers: 
" In presenting the following rules to you, and requiring your attention 
thereto, we have had in view many of the judicious regulations which are 



186 MANAGEMENT OF THE POOR. 

upon your -minutes, and the great improvement that has been made under 
the management of the two last committees. 

tl We wish to give permanency to plans which appear likely to prove so 
advantageous to the community, and have therefore so arranged these rules, 
that they may be carried into effect with little comparative trouble. By 
having frequent reference to them in your collective capacity, you will be 
enabled to point out the particular duties of those who come before you ; and 
when things are out of order, your visitors will be able knowingly to require 
the delinquents to perform all that is expected from them. 

"We also wish you to be well assured, that without a due attention on 
your part to the economy and government of the Workhouse, no contrivance 
of structure, nor any rules, can secure it from being the abode of wickedness, 
disease, and misexw. 

"Your most important duties are comprehensive, yet clear: tbey are, to 
reform the dissolute, to arouse the idle, to punish the refractory, to be in the 
place of fathers to the orphan, husbands to the widow, and to smooth the 
path of declining age, warning such as have lived careless of to-morrow to 
make their peace with God. These are not the labours of a day, a week, or 
a year ; they are subjects for constant exertion, and cannot be accomplished 
otherwise than by a steady personal attendance. In these important stations 
dependence ought never to be wholly placed on servants; for with the very 
best intention, they are liable to be blinded by passion or swayed by prejudice 
until they punish the innocent and let the guilty go free. To those who are 
truly conscientious it will afford satisfaction to have the active superintendence 
and assistance of the committee ; whenever the reverse is observed, things 
are assuredly going wrong, and you ought to double your diligence. 

" The necessity for keeping up your weekly meetings at the house is suffi- 
ciently obvious. Without this attendance all the regulations you may 
endeavour to establish will be of little avail. Every law presupposes an 
attention to its execution, and here you have the executive power concentred. 
By these frequent meetings, your servants are all kept in their proper places, 
their hands are strengthened in the prosecution of their duty, and their 
weaknesses or failures are pointed out before they become injurious. 

" The Act by which we are constituted confers some advantages on you 
peculiar to itself : when misdemeanors are committed you have only to 
acquaint two of the trustees, and the aggressors are brought to speedy 
punishment. 

" The duties of the committee are general, those of the visitors are particular, 
and more interesting. 

" They should visit the house at least three times in the week, varying their 
days, to furnish all who want with proper clothing, to see that cleanliness is 
universally maintained [(for which purpose they should look into every room 
of the house, and visit every part of the premises', to attend to the complaints 
of the poor, and when they cannot redress them, inform the committee, to 
see that all the officers do their duty, and in short, to know that all the rules 
are strictly fulfilled. 

" You who are appointed to this office ought conscientiously to attend to 
its duties, for upon you lies the weight of the order of the house. If the 
young are dissolute, profane, and immoral, if the middle-aged are encouraging 
their juniors in the paths of vice, and pursuiug, as far as they are able, the 
same wayward track, and if the old and infirm are miserably existiug in this 
world without any kind adviser to assist in pointing the way to a better, all 



POOR LAW UNION. 187 

these lie at your door. If the honest and industrious poor who are driven 
hither by calamities which in the perpetual vicissitude of human affairs may 
fall upon any of our heads, are necessitated to herd with the debauched and 
the licentious, and their children with the profligate and profane, what are 
you to expect from such a mixture? That the increase of depression, of 
misery, of vice, and of sin must be multiplied by the number you receive into 
the house. On you it rests to have a proper division kept between the dis- 
solute and idle, and the well-behaved and orderly poor; restraining those, so 
that, at least, their measure of iniquity may not be increased ; and encourag- 
ing these, so as to return them to society again, with spirits as little broken, 
by requiring and receiving this parochial aid, as circumstances will permit. 

" Thus, under the Supreme Director, you may be the means of effecting 
unlooked-for reformation : you will increase the happiness and contribute to 
the pi*osperity of hundreds of your fellow men, you will retire from your 
office with the blessings of the unfortunate, and the inestimable reward of a 
good conscience." 

The Poor Law Union (under the Act of 1834) was brought 
into operation here on the 15th July, 1836, and fifty-eight 
townships were incorporated into " the Kendal Union." No 
great change, however, took place in the management of the 
poor in the workhouses until the year 1849, when the 
manufacture of " harden " (a coarse kind of sacking), which 
had been carried on profitably within the Workhouse since 
the year 1800, was discontinued. A new classification of the 
paupers was made about the time afore-mentioned, by order 
of the Poor Law Board in London, and consists of the follow- 
ing Eegulations or Bye Laws, which are strictly observed, 
viz. : — 

BYE LAWS. 

Kendal, July lith, 1849. 
" Kendal Union. 

"Kendal Workhouse. 

" That not more than 335 poor persons, at one and the same time, shall be 
maintained in the Kendal Workhouse ; and also, that no poor person, who 
shall not belong to one of the following classes, shall be maintained in the 
said Workhouse, viz. : — 

Class 1. Able-bodied men, and youths above the age of 15 years. 
„ 2. Boys above the age of 7 years, and under that of 15. 
,, 3. Girls above the age of 7 years, and under that of 15. 
„ 4. Children under 7 years of age, excepting such infants 
as may be too young to leave their mothers, at the 
Milnthorpe Workhouse. 

" Milnthorpe Workhouse. 
" That not more than 300 poor persons, at one and the same time, shall be 
maintained in the Milnthorpe Workhouse ; and also, that no poor person, who 



188 MANAGEMENT OF THE POOK. 

shall not belong to one of the following classes, shall be maintained in the 
said Workhouse, viz. : — 

Class 1. Men infirm through age or any other cause. 
„ 2. Women infirm through age or any other cause. 
,, 3. Able-bodied women, with their infant children, except 
such of the latter class as are of good character and 
are required for servants in the Kendal "Workhouse. 

THE WOKKHOUSE 

Is a large, uniform building, two stories high, occupying three 
sides of a quadrangle, the fourth, which is the entrance, being 
open to the street. It contains, for the purposes of the 
paupers, one large general dining-room, kitchens, store-rooms, 
sick-rooms, &c. on the first floor ; and on the second floor 
thirty-five well-ventilated lodging-rooms, which contain 
eighty-nine good beds, supplied with sufficient comfortable 
clothing, and capable of accommodating two hundred persons ; 
together with suitable apartments appropriated to the use of 
the governor and his family. In the yard behind the Work- 
house stands a commodious School-room for Boys, and the 
contiguous building, which was formerly the harden manu- 
factory, is, the lower part of it, appropriated as a play-ground, 
and the upper part is used for dormitories. What was 
formerly the Fever Ward is now occupied partly as a school- 
room for girls, and partly as girls' dormitories, with apart- 
ments for the schoolmistress. A productive garden is 
attached to the Workhouse, cultivated by the labour of the 
inmates. 

The present chief officers of the Poor Law Union are — 

Chairman of the Board: James Cropper, Esq. 
Clerk: Me, John Manx. 

Present Number of Paupers in the Workhouse . . .*'*. 160 
Weekly average of Ir-door Paupers, for the year, 1861 . . 141 
Total expenditure of the Kendal Workhouse, for ) 

Maintenance of Paupers, and establishment charges, V 2,355^. 

for the year, 1861 \ 

Nett Cost of Maintenance and Clothing of the Pau- ) 
pers, per head, per week • ( 



3s. 6d. 



Governor and Governess of the Workhouse: John AND 
Elizabeth Jackson. 



PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 189 



PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

We shall now present some account of the Public Schools 
in the town, giving several particulars of their history, and 
the number of pupils under daily instruction, respectively. 

FEEE GEAMMAE SCHOOL. 

On the north side of the churchyard stands the Free 
Grammar School, which is a commodious and suitable build- 
ing, with a dwelling attached to it for the master. It was 
founded in the year 1525, by Adam Pennyngton, of Boston, 
in Lincolnshire, who devised 10Z. a year for the term of 
ninety-eight years, to be paid as " a stipend or waidge " for the 
finding of a priest, being an able schoolmaster, to teach a 
free school in the town of Kendal, to be paid out of certain 
lands in the county of Lincoln. King Edward VI., in the 
second year of his reign (1548), granted 10?. to the school, 
being the perpetuation of Pennyngton' s endowment ; and the 
king's commissioners, under letters patent, appointed that 
Adam Shephard (then Incumbent of St. Mary's chantry, in 
the parish church) should enjoy the situation of schoolmaster ; 
which grant was confirmed by a decree of the baron of the 
Exchequer, in the 4th and 5th Philip and Mary. In 1588, 
the ground on which the School-house stands, together 
with "one house standing thereon," was granted by Miles 
Philipson. It was parcel of the grounds belonging to Abbot 
Hall. 

If this was the first duly constructed School-house (and it 
most likely was), there had been great delay and difficulty 
in providing it. Adam Pennyngton' s endowment dates in 
1525. The public subscription list was open, as is proved by 
Bernard Gilpin's letter, in 1582, and yet the ground was not 
conveyed till 1588. Either, therefore, the projected building 
languished, six years at least, for want of funds, or the school 
was built before the land on which it stands was legally con- 
veyed — a supposition not very likely. We know, from the 
report of King Edward YI.'s commissioners, that the Gram- 



190 PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

mar School " liad been kept in Kirkby-Kendal long before " 
the date of that report, 1548. But between 1548 and 1582, 
the schoolmaster's wage (not paid without interruptions) was 
only 101 per annum. No mention is made of a school-house 
at this time. It is the time when infant Protestantism was 
passing through the fires of falling Popery. Adam Shephard, 
the schoolmaster, was a displaced curate of the parish church. 
He might teach the scholars in his dwelling-house — perhaps 
the " one house " alluded to in Miles Philipson's grant of 
land — or in the aisle of the church (as is, even now, done in 
some of the poor districts in Roman Catholic countries). 
From all which we conclude, that the present School-house 
was not erected till after the year 1588* 

By a decree of the Court of Exchequer, 21th Elizabeth 
(upon a petition being presented by the inhabitants — the 
vicar concurring in preferring the suit), the revenue of the 
school was augmented by two several stipends of 1/. 12s. 10d., 
which had been allowed to curates serving in the parish, and 
the jpint amount, viz. 91 5s. Sd., is now paid out of the 
revenues of the county, by the Pteceiver-General. The 
sum of 19 £ 8s. is also paid to the trustees out of the 
Chamber of Kendal, which arises from certain burgage rents, 
conveyed to trustees in the 1 2th James I. for the benefit of 
the school, and the interest of several donations, which have 
from time to time been made to the school, but of which no 
traces can now be found. 

The indenture of the 12th James I. gives the appointment 
of a master, upon that foundation, to the Corporation. But it 
does not appear from any documents now preserved, in whom 
the appointment is vested upon the old foundation. As the 
Vicar, however, was instrumental in getting the salaries of 
the two curates transferred to the school, there can be no 
question but that he was always a party in the appointment 
of a master, on that foundation. And in practice, he still con- 
tinues to act, on occasions of vacancy, in conjunction with 
the Corporation. 

The following donations (extracted from the " Boke off 
Recorde ") appear to have been made at the time of building 

The Table of Chronological Events gives the date of building 1591-2. 



FEEE GEAMMAR SCHOOL. 19J 

the school, and were chiefly for the building (between 1582 
and 1588?):— 

£ s. d. 

Nicholas Bateman, born in Underbarrow 6 13 4 

Thomas Wilson, D.D., dean of Worcester, born in 

Patton 10 

JSernard Gilpin, professor of divinity, and parson of 

Houghton, Durham, born in Kentmere . . . .10 

Agnes Robinson, widow, for an usher 5 

Edward Swainson, of Kendal, tanner 10 

Margaret Eskrigge, widow of Charles Eskrigge, of 

Kendal 10 

Robert Bindloss, Esq., born in Helsington (towards 

the exhibition) 10 

Katherine Lound, of London, widow, born in 

WhynfeU 10 

Hugh Hyndlaye, of London, draper 10 

Robert Sadler, of London, merchant, born in 

Kendal 10 

John Robinson, of London, born in Kirkland . . .10 

Robert Jackson, of London, silkman, born in Kendal .10 
Thomas Wilson, professor of divinity, born in 

Grayrigg 10 

Richard Fox, of Kendal, shearman 10 

The wife of John Wharton 13 4 

The Chamber gave, in consideration of the purchasing 

of the ground for the school-house 6 

The Aldermen and Burgesses also subscribed, indivi- 
dually, in various sums 12 16 8 

And the following sums were given by the inhabitants 

in the different streets, viz. : — 

Sowtergate (now Highgate) 4 8 2 

Strickland gate ,..731 

Marketstead 1 1 10 

Stramongate 5 1 10 

Making a total of . . . . £159 18 3 



But, in addition to the aforesaid money subscriptions, 
and others, perhaps, there were also donations "in kind;" 
for it appears that Ambrose Earl, and the Countess of 
Warwick, gave towards the building "six fair oke tymber 
trees," and that, amongst the inhabitants, some gave balks 
of timber and planks, and others contributed by leading 
stones ! Part of the above subscription fund was laid out 
in the purchase of burgage rents, which are entered, in the 
corporation books, from the oldest dates to the present time, 



192 PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

under the designation of " Usher lands," and 61, their rent, 
is regularly paid to the schoolmaster. Dr. Airey left 40?. in 
1617, the interest to be given to the schoolmaster. George 
Fleming, in 1627, gave 20s. yearly, towards augmenting the 
salary of the master and usher. In 1680, Mr. Jackson gave 
to the school 100?. These form the endowments of the school. 
The master receives for his stipend as follows : — From the 
receiver-general, 17?. 16s. 4<£ ; from the corporation, as 
master's salary, 9?. 85. ; as usher's, 8?. ; as interest on 40?., 
2?. ; total, 37?. 4s. 4c?. Children's payments in last year 
(1860), 81?. 



EXHIBITIONS : 

TO OXFORD. 

1. Forty Shillings yearly to poor scholars going from the Burgh of Kendal 
to Queen's College, Oxford ; given by Mr. George Fleming, in 1627, to be 
paid by the Mayor and Aldermen, and charged upon two closes of land lying 
in the Lawnd, near Kendal, now in the possession of the Corporation. 

2. The Interest of 1001., given iu 1631, by Heniy Park, Alderman, to the 
Alderman of Kendal and brethren, on trust, to be paid for four years to a 
poor scholar going from Kendal School to the University of Oxford (without 
specifying any College). The scholar to be born within the parishes of 
Kendal, Millom (in Cumberland), and Heversham ; the preference being 
given, first, to those born within the town of Kendal ; next, to those born 
within the parish of Kendal ; next, within Millom ; and last, within 
Heversham. 

3. The Interest of 40?., given by Mr. Christopher Jopson, to be bestowed 
upon a poor scholar going from Kendal to the same College. 

4. The Interest, of 20/., given by Mr. John Smith, to be bestowed upon a 
poor scholar going from this School to Queen's College, Oxford. 

The Annual amount of the above four Exhibitions is payable by the Cor- 
poration of Kendal, who have the appointment of the respective scholars. 

5. Three of 51. a year each, given by Mr. Henry Wilson, of Underley, 
and arising out of the Fareton Tithes, to poor scholars going from this 
School to Queen's College, Oxford. (These exhibitions are for seven years ; 
the Fellows and Provost of Queen's having the appointment.) 

6. Mr. Thomas Sandes, of Kendal, certified to the then Provost of Queen's 
College, Oxford, by letter dated September 8, 1679, the following clause in 
his will : — 

" Item, I give to the Rev. Provost of Qu. Coll. in Oxford, and to the 
Fellows there, and their successors for ever, the sum of 100/. The profit, 
rent, and increase I do in the first place give unto a poor scholar of my own 
name, now at Kendal school, until he, if capable and living, come to be 
chosen Fellow of the same house, or be M.A., and one year after : and then it 
is my mind and will, that the profit, benefit, and increase of the said 100/. 



EXHIBITIONS. ] 93 

shall go and remain for ever to such poor scholar to be entered upon the 
Foundation of the said Coll. as shall come and be sent from the said school 
of Kendal, to be elected by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Vicar of the Parish 
Church thereof, and the Master of the Free Grammar School there, or the 
major part of them for the time being, to continue successively to such for 
and during ye term of 7 years. And if he die before, then the Prov. & Fell. 
to dispose of the same to whom they please for & during ye remainder of the 
said term, and then ye electors to chuse a new one. And I desire the Electors 
(as formerly I have seen) that they chuse not rich men's sons to enter as poor 
children, but yt really and truly they may be such whose parents are poor 
and not able to maintain them at ye University. And when there is no 
such scholar at ye said school, then the Prov. & Fell, to give it to such poor 
scholar as they please." 

TO CAMBRIDGE. 

The sum of 2501. was left in 1674 by Thomas Brathwaite, Esq., of Amble- 
side, formerly Recorder of Kendal, "for and towards the maintenance of two 
Scholars at St. John's College, at Cambridge, going from the Schools at Kendal, 
in Westmorland, and Hawkshead, in Lancashire ; and for want of such two, 
any other going out of either of the said Counties until they be Masters of 
Arts or otherwise preferred." By Mr. Brathwaite' s will, the said sum of 2507. 
is ordered to be paid to the Master and Fellows of the said College, &c, 

[This Thomas Brathwaite we take to have been a nephew of the author of 
" Drunken Barnaby."] 

The famous Bernard Gilpin, "the Northern Apostle/' 
most willingly, in "godlie zeale," as he himself says, bore 
his " parte" in raising this School, as appears by the list of 
donors and by the following letter, written from Houghton- 
le-Spring, in 1582, which we gladly insert : 

u To his verie lovinge freindes in Christe master Alderman of Kendall and his 
" brethren geve these 
" In Kendall 
" Moste due commendacouns premised I am righte glade to heare that your 
godlie suite for a grammer schoole is like to come to a good ende and so soone 
as I shal be certified yt it is well established I shall moste willinglie perfourme 
my promisse wth suche spede as I may convenientlie. But I am so over- 
charged with manye paymentes as this bearer can certifie you that I staunde 
nede to have a quarters warninge to provide for any payment. 1 And although 
your schoole shoulde not come to a perfectioun accordinge to your firste 
determinatioun yete for ye godlie zeale you all beare to Learninge and for ye 
great Charges wch I thinke you have alredye sustayned I will beare a parte 
wth you as shal be thought convenient. And thus trustinge bothe to heare 
from you and to write to you againe shortlie at better Leysure I praye god 
preserve you all and prosper your good and godlie work to his honour. At 
Houghton this xxviiith of June Ao. 1582. Youres alwaye in Christe to his 
p 0wer " Bernard Gilpin." 

1 This doubtless refers to the 101. which is included as Bernard's "pay- 
ment," in the list of donations previously quoted. 








194 PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

The following are the regulations of the school : — 

That the school shall be free to all boys resident in the parish of Kendal, 
for classics alone, excepting a voluntary payment of a cockpenny as aforetime 
at Shrovetide, and the payment of 5s. as entrance fee. 

That in all cases where a boy shall request to be taught (in addition to 
classics) English, reading, writing, common arithmetic, the routine book- 
keeping, geography, English grammar, and history, which branches of learning 
are considered to comprise a general commercial education, the master shall 
be authorized to charge 15s. per quarter. 

That for mathematics (including mensuration) and all the higher branches 
of learning, the charge may be 11. 5s. per quarter. 

That no boy be admitted into the school under eight years of age. 

That it be a regulation of this school, that no boy shall be required to 
learn the Church Catechism contrary to the declared wish of his parent or 
guardians. 

That there shall be a committee of visitors appointed from time to time, 
by the Corporation annually, to act in conjunction with the master, with 
powers to make such arrangements in the management of the school as they 
may deem necessary (always provided that such arrangements are in accord- 
ance with the regulations previously set forth.) 

The School, as originally founded, was to be " strictly 
classical," and was, doubtless, so conducted, in harmony with 
the prevailing sentiments of the times, so long as the dead 
languages were the royal road to learning and preferment. 
And, down to the present time, classics and mathematics have 
been the chief features and chief aim of instruction here. 
But "grammar and other "good learning" were introduced, 
even before the end of the 16th century. Miles Phillipson's 
grant in 1588, and Jopson's in 1590, both contemplate the 
rudiments of education, and there was an usher, perhaps 
appointed at that very time, to take charge of the tyros, who 
had become so numerous in 1641, that the Corporation, in 
solemn court assembled, felt called upon to issue a decree, 
that whereas the usher "being much burdened and sur- 
charged, he should not teach or admit any child not capable 
to read the Psalter, and should disallow such as learnt in the 
A, B, C, &c." 

The Eev. John Sampson was master of the School for nearly 
forty years, up to March, 1843. He " turned out'' many good 
scholars, some of whom are now living, and enjoying places 
of distinction in their respective professions. He was eminent 
both in classics and mathematics : wrote elegant Latin verses, 
and abstruse problems, for the periodicals of the day. 



BLUE COAT SCHOOL AND HOSPITAL. 195 

Among the list of eminent men, formerly educated here, 
were Ephraim Chambees ; Doctor Shaw ; Edmund Law, 
Bishop of Carlisle ; Dr. Fotheegill, &c. &c. 

The present master is the Eev. James Frederick Black, B.A., 
who was appointed on the 9th December, 1845. The number 
of pupils now on the books is 27. 

The ancient ceremony of tarring out, in which the boys 
used to take possession of the school early on the morning 
of breaking-up for the holidays, and defy admittance to the 
master, crying 

" Liberty, liberty, under a pin, 
Six weeks' holiday, or nivver come in." 

(a custom now almost universally discontinued), has here 
become quite obsolete. Tradition says it ceased in the time 
of one Towers, who was master in the beginning of the last 
century. Mr. Towers vigorously opposed his rebellious pupils, 
and in contending with them had one of his eyes put out. 
This calamity put an end to the practice. 

BLUE COAT SCHOOL AND HOSPITAL. 

The Blue Coat School, and Hospital connected with it, 
are so closely related in paternity, means of support, and 
management, that they cannot be separated in history. The 
founder, Thomas Sandes, had the reputation of having gained 
a "considerable estate" in buying and selling wool and cottons, 
called "Kendal cottons." He possessed influence which ex- 
tended beyond the sphere of this locality, and must have been 
a genuine Eeformer in days of close "guilds," and chartered 
monopolies ; for we find him engaged in an action at law, in 
1685, resisting the monopoly of the East India Company in 
their exclusive trading to the East Indies. 1 He was, no 
doubt, largely engaged in the export trade ; and the fact of 
wrestling, in his own strength, with a powerful body like the 
East India Company, shows the extent of his engagements 
and great public spirit. Judgment was given against him ; 
but M c Culloch says, "the decision was ascribed to corrupt 
influence." 

1 Vide M c Culloch's " Commercial Dictionary," 1840, p. 525. 

o2 






196 PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

This Thomas Sandes conveyed, by indenture, dated the 
6th September, 1670, to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses 
of Kendal, the following property, viz. : — 

1. The Hospital premises, in Highgate, containing the 
master's house, school-house and library, and dwellings for 
eight widows, with a croft, and gardens behind the same. 

2. A dwelling house and out-buildings, and about thirty- 
eight acres of land in Skelsmergh, called Eiclge Bank, now 
let for 701 a year. 

3. The premises in Strickland Boger, called Baxton 
Holme, and a close there, called Kettle Croft, consisting of 
a dwelling house, and about twenty -four acres of land, let 
for 40 £ a year. 

4. The moiety of a tenement, called Wasdale Head, which 
has not been in the possession of the trustees for a great 
number of years. The whole of this tenement now belongs 
to the Earl of Lonsdale, by purchase. 

" The trustees are to apply the rents and profits of the said 
premises, after payment of all necessary expenses, towards the 
maintenance, sustenance, and relief of eight poor widows, to 
exercise spinning and carding wool, and weaving raw pieces 
of cloth for Kendal cottons ; and also for the use of a school- 
master there, to read prayers every morning and evening 
before the said widows ; and also there to teach and instruct 
poor children in good literature until they should be fitted 
for the Free School, or elsewhere. The appointment of the 
schoolmaster is vested in the Mayor, Senior Alderman, Vicar, 
and Schoolmaster, whereof the Mayor to be one. The ap- 
pointment of the widows, who are to be fifty-two years of 
age or upwards, and of good reputation, is vested in the 
trustees, and they are ordered to be appointed in the fol- 
lowing manner, viz. three out of Stricklandgate, three out 
of Stramongate and Highgate, one out of Strickland Ketel 
and Strickland Boger, and one out of Skelsmergh and Patton -, 1 
but in case the like proportion could not be had out of the 

1 If there are no widows eligible for the charity in the country townships, 
single women, of the age of fifty or upwards, and of good reputation, inay 
be elected. 



BLUE COAT SCHOOL AND HOSPITAL. 197 

places aforesaid, then the said number to be chosen out of all 
the places above mentioned, indifferently, having respect to 
the proportion as near as might be. The Overseers of the places 
aforesaid, upon notice given them from the trustees, of any 
vacancy, are to nominate double the number to be chosen by 
the said trustees, who, out of the number so nominated, are to 
elect so many as to make up the number of eight, and, in 
default of such nomination within a month of the death of the 
widow, then the vacancy to be filled up by the Mayor, Senior 
Alderman, Yicar, and Schoolmaster, or the major part of them, 
whereof the Mayor is to be one." 

The said Indenture declared, that the widows should have 
each assigned to them convenient rooms and places in the 
Hospital premises for their carding, spinning, &C., 1 and for 
their habitation, and also each a small plot of garden-ground 
behind the same ; and should each receive one shilling every 
Saturday morning and eightpence on the Eves of Ascension- 
day, and Whit-Sunday, so as to make up their several allow- 
ances to four marks apiece per annum out of the revenues of 
the above premises ; and should each have brought for them 
in the week before Christmas a good horse-load of wood by 
the tenants of the premises in Skelsmergh and Strickland 
Roger. The said Indenture also recites, that " Whereas the 
donor at the entrance of the Widows into the said house hath 
bestowed upon every one of them a new gown, which they 
are to wear upon Sabbath and Holy days by the space of 
three years ; therefore, in the meantime, whilst the same is 
in wearing, every widow and their successors shall have kept 
back by the said schoolmaster and his successors every 
quarter of a year, Sixpence, for and towards the buying of 
them new gowns again, then what as wants shall be made up 
by the said schoolmaster and render forth of the overplus of 
the revenues and rents, &c, and at the time of the death, &c. 
of any widow, such of their new gowns shall go to their 
successor." [Nothing is now stopped from the widows 
towards the finding of gowns.] The widows now receive 

1 The carding and spinning of wool, by manual labour, having been super- 
seded by machinery, the widows are not now required to follow any kind of 
profitable employment. 



198 PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

Is. 6d. each per week, and besides having annually paid to 
them eightpence each on the Eves of Ascension-day and 
Whit- Sunday, they receive Is. 6d. each at Christmas in lieu 
of fire-wood. They also receive, on the 5th days of February, 
May, August, and November, 29s. each ; and on the 21st 
March, June, September, and December, 14s. 6d. each, out 
of the proceeds of subsequent donations and bequests to the 
Hospital. 

The said Indenture further declares, that the Schoolmaster 
should have a School-house within the Hospital premises, and 
the use of a chamber for his habitation, and should have the 
custody and care of the library, and be careful to see all the 
orders relating to himself and the widows properly observed 
and kept, and that he and his successors should have all the 
residue of the said premises after the payment of all the 
allowances above mentioned. 

The Library consists chiefly of the ancient Fathers of the 
Church and Ecclesiastical Historians, many of them scarce 
and valuable works. So desirous was the Founder to preserve 
these books from decay, that he not only ordered that they 
should be kept in " the great room," but also that " two good 
horseloads of wood " should be brought, and the Schoolmaster 
should bestow Is. a quarter in peats, for their better keeping 
and preservation. On examining this library, in 1827, some 
volumes appeared to be wanting, of which no traces could 
be discovered. The books were also found to have been 
moved from time to time into rooms not well aired. The 
Mayor and Corporation therefore directed that the library 
should be restored to " the great room," agreeably to the 
Will of the Founder ; and that a new Catalogue should be 
made out by the Master, and strict attention be paid to the 
preservation of the books. Till some time back they used 
to be fastened to the shelves with chains, just long enough to 
allow the reader to reach them down to the table. 

Thus far may be considered the original Foundation of the 
Hospital and School. The following gifts, beside several other 
donations, have since been added, amongst which one may be 
particularized, viz., the donation of Mr. Edward Burrell, off 
Liverpool, banker, who received his education at this School. 



BLUE COAT SCHOOL AND HOSPITAL. 199 

1. Dawson's Gift, consisting of a close of land, called 
Bound Dale, in Natland, containing la. 3r. 6p. and two front 
dwelling houses and back premises in Highgate, which were 
devised by will, dated 8th March, 1722, to the Mayor, two 
Senior Aldermen, and Vicar of Kendal, and their successors, 
upon trust, to dispose of the rents towards the advancement 
of the Charity, and maintenance of the blue-coat boys ; and in 
t?ase that Charity should be discontinued, among twelve house- 
keepers. The premises in Highgate have been rebuilt, and 
are now used as Miss Dowker's Hospital, and a rent is regu- 
larly paid by that institution to the treasurer of Sandes's 
Hospital. 

2. Woodburris Gift. — Christopher Woodburn, by will, in 
1723, charged certain premises in Highgate, and All-Hallow's 
Lane — the Fleece Inn, and property adjoining, in Highgate, 
and a house in All-Hallow's Lane — with the payment of 
40s-. apiece yearly, towards putting out four poor boys to 
be apprentices, to be paid to their masters, and 10s. apiece 
for finding them shirts and cravats at the commencement 
of their service ; to be sons of freemen, and two of them to 
be educated at the Charity School, and to be elected by the con- 
tributors and managers of the School, with the approbation 
of his trustees ; and further, with the payment of 20s. 
annually to the master of the School. These premises were 
conveyed, at the instance of the Trustees of the School, to 
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of Kendal, in 1812. 
The sum of 10/. is annually received out of the said premises, 
but the 20s. for the master has not been received for thirty or 
forty years. 

3. Archer's Gift. — John Archer, M.D., of Oxenholme, in 
1725, devised to the Mayor, two Senior Aldermen, Vicar, and 
Schoolmaster of Kendal, and their successors, a moiety of the 
rents of certain premises called Aikrigg, in Kendal Park, to 
be applied to the maintenance of this School. 

4. Crosbys Gift.— The Eev. William Crosby, in 1732, 
gaye a rent-charge of SI annually, on Sydenham Tene- 
ment, in Underbarrow, to the Mayor, Eecorder, two Senior 
Aldermen, and Schoolmaster, in trust, for the use of the Blue- 
coat Charity ; and if that Charity should be discontinued, to 



200 



PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 



the poor householders in Kendal. This is regularly paid to 
the Master, and accounted for by him to the treasurer. 

5. John Gibsons Gift. — An estate in Brigsteer, called 
Barrow House, now let for 16?. a year, was conveyed 
by John Gibson, by indenture, dated 21st November, 1752, 
to the Mayor, Senior Aldermen, Yicar, and Schoolmaster, 
in trust for the use of the charity boys then and there- 
after to be educated in this School. 

6. Herbert's Gift. — A close of land called Martin Croft, in 
Gilling Grove, was devised by William Herbert, in 1765, to 
the Mayor, Vicar, and Schoolmaster, for the use and benefit 
of the charity boys in Kendal. 

7. Thomas Gibsons Gift. — Thomas Gibson, in 1777, 
charged certain premises, called Balphford Hall (now the 
Mason's Arms), in Stramongate, with the payment of 11. Is. 
annually to Sandes's Hospital. 

In addition to the above, the following donations and 
bequests have been made, at various times, which are ad- 
vantageously invested ; and the funds of the institution are 
further augmented by annual subscriptions. 



DONATIONS AND BEQUESTS : 

£ s. d. 

1723 Mr. William Collingwood, for Boys' School . . 50 

Rev. Mr. Borwick do 5 

Rev. Mr. Lancaster do 2 10 

Mr. Richard Leece do 5 

Mrs. Gibson do 40 

Mr. Robert Simpson do 6 

Mr. Crackenthorp do 16 

1724 Thomas Holme do 20 

1731 Mr. Commissary Stratford do 20 

1734 Mrs. Alice Barrow do 10 

1758 Mr. Jacob Holme do 5 

1781 Mr. Barrington Gibson do 56 

1782 A Person unknown do 20 

The Company of Shearmen Dyers, do. ... 800 

1783 Mr. Alderman Strickland do 20 

1790 Mrs. Isabella Elleray, 200/. for Widows, and | 

100*. for Boys' School j ° ° 

1794 Mr. Thomas Elleray, for Boys' School. ... 50 

1795 Mrs. Elizabeth Cock do 100 

1799 Mr. Thomas Whitwell do 20 

1S03 Joseph Maude, Esq. do 25 



BLUE COAT SCHOOL AND HOSPITAL. 201 

£ s. d. 
1808 Mr. Garnett Braithwaite, for Boys' School . . 21 

1811 Mrs. Knott (annually) do 110 

John Wakefield, Esq. do 50 

1812 Jane Emerson, for Widows 25 12 

1814 John Postlethwaite, Esq., for Boys 250 

Mr. William Sleddall do 150 

1815 Miss Lambert do 10 

• 1816 Mr. Joseph Swainson, for Widows 21 

Mrs. Cock do 21 

1824 James Bateman, Esq., for Boys 50 

1825 Mrs. Jackson Harrison x do 890 1 8 

1827 Mrs. Dorothy Matson do 100 

1838 Miss Mary Robinson do 100 

Edward Burrell, Esq. do 525 

1846 Miss Fisher, Hill Top 20 

1848 Miss Sarah Scott 25 

The Annual Subscriptions amount to 31 14* 6 

Previous to 1838, the number of scholars was limited to 
forty, but at that period the trustees were enabled, from the 
bequest of Mr. Edward Burrell, to admit five additional 
scholars. The system of clothing the boys in blue was only 
introduced about the year 1714, consequently it seems not 
to form a part of the Founder's Will. "When the quaint 
style of clothing was introduced, the parents sending chil- 
dren were required to sign a memorandum of obedience to 
the bye-laws, whereby they " respectfully promised to submit 
the disposal of their sons, as well in their apparell, teaching, 
learning, apprenticeships, as in all other matters," &c. By 
which it is to be inferred, that the "blew knee breeches" 
required arbitrary power to bring them into use, as they 
require extreme tenacity to old " habits " for their retention. 

The instruction at this School does not appear to have been 
restricted in ancient times to boys ; for by a memorandum 
preserved in the records it is stated that "nine poor girls 
were taught there in 1714, by Isabel Fisher." In 1789, it 
was determined to admit thirty girls, to be clothed in blue, 
out of the proceeds of bequests and donations to the institu- 
tion subsequent to the Foundation ; and the number has, since 
1838, been increased to forty. These girls are now selected 

1 2251. more, left by Mrs. Harrison, will be due to this charity at the death 
of Mary Bainbridge. 






202 PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

from the most deserving amongst the girls in the National 
School, and are instructed in reading, writing, arithmetic, and 
needlework. They are taught in the Girls' National School- 
room, and attend the parish church with the other children 
in that Institution. 

The Hospital premises were originally built in the form of a 
square. They were, however, partially rebuilt and altered in 
1852 ; when the widows' dwellings were reconstructed, and 
the master's house renovated The widows' houses now 
extend in a straight line from east to west, with a fore- 
court, or garden, in front of each. There is also a good garden 
on the west side, occupied by the master. 

The present master is Mr. James Whitaker. He was 
appointed on the death of Mr. William Lewthwaite, in the 
year 1837. 

The number of pupils now on the books is 45. 

boys' national school. 

The National School for Boys is a commodious, handsome, 
and stately building, situated in a field called Chapel Close, 
adjoining All-Hallows' Lane, and, standing on an eminence 
above most of the other buildings in the town, presents on all 
sides a striking object of interest. It was founded by sub- 
scription in 1817. A liberal subscription was then entered 
into, by which the committee were enabled to purchase the 
land on which the building is erected. It was endowed 
with the sum of 2,000/. by Matthew Pyper, Esq. of AYhite- 
haven, whose remains are buried in the schooL The deed 
of endowment declares, that the Mayor, Aldermen, and 
Burgesses of Kendal, shall be trustees of the School. And 
that the said Matthew Pyper and his heirs, for ever, and 
Daniel Wilson, Thomas Holme Maude, and John Dowbiggin, 
Esqrs., and their heirs for ever, shall be perpetual visitors 
of the said School. And further, that the Mayor and Alder- 
men, the Becorder and Deputy Becorder for the time being, 
the Vicar of Kendal, and the Clergy of the Established 
Church, officiating within the borough, the Churchwardens 
of Kendal for the time being, the Superintendent, Treasurer, 



girls' national school. 203 

and Secretary of and for the said School, with twelve sub- 
scribers or benefactors (to be elected at the annual meeting), 
shall be also visitors ; and that they, and the other visitors 
shall form a general committee for the management of the 
said School, in conformity with the rules and regulations 
of "the National Society for promoting the education of 
the poor, in the principles of the Established Church 
throughout England and Wales." 

The endowed sum of 2,000?. was invested originally by 
the trustees in the 5 per cent. Annuities. When the reduction 
of that stock to 4 per cent, took place, the money was in- 
vested in the 3 per Cent. Consols, yielding, at the present 
time, 64?. 15s. 2d. per annum. 

The only permanent fund of the School, besides this, is the 
rent of part of the School premises, let off as garden ground, 
for about 3?. a year, and the interest of 100?. left by Miss 
Eobinson, formerly of Highgate. 

But there is annually brought to the support of the school, 
a capitation grant from Government, depending, of course, on 
the number of children at the time, which, however, averages 
about 15Z. per annum; also a subscription throughout the 
town. These together bring about 50?. per annum. Lastly, 
there is the children's pence, 31?. 2s. 9d., which complete the 
ways and means. The present master is Mr. J. J. Hewitt, 
appointed in 1855, whose salary is 100?. per annum. Number 
of pupils on the books, 245. 

girls' national school. 

The National School for Girls was built with funds raised 
by voluntary subscriptions, in 1823, and continues to be sup- 
ported in like manner from year to year. 

A bequest was made, of 500?., by Miss Lambert, of Bower- 
bank, Cartmel, in 1857, for augmenting the salary of the 
schoolmistress ; but Miss Lambert's Will is at present the 
subject of dispute in the Court of Chancery, and the sum in 
question has therefore not yet been appropriated. 

The School-house is very spacious and commodious, and 
is annexed to and forms part of the same building as the 






204? PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

National School for Boys : but the approaches to the two 
schools are quite separate and distinct. A convenient com- 
mittee-room was added to each of the schools, and a plant- 
ation made in front of the buildings. 

The management of the School is under a committee of 
sixteen ladies, who are elected as visitors at the annual 
meetings ; and to whose exertions in so good a cause, the 
discipline, good order, and decent appearance of the children, 
bear ample testimony. By their constant exertions the fund 
for clothing, raised by annual subscriptions, has been so 
augmented as to enable them annually to distribute to each 
of the children some useful article of clothing ; and at the 
same time to excite a laudable emulation in the school. 

The children are instructed in reading, writing, and the 
common rules of arithmetic ; also in knitting and sewing. 

Besides the girls, properly belonging to this school, there 
are forty " Blue Coat Girls" educated here, as is mentioned in 
the account of Sandes's Blue Coat Schools, p. 202. 

The schoolmistress is Miss Heaton, appointed in 1856 ; 
salary, 4oI. per annum. The total number of scholars is 120. 

GIELS' AND INFANTS' SCHOOL. 

The School-house for Girls and Infants stands near Stock 
Bridge, at the foot of Castle Street. It is a remarkably neat 
and suitable building, of hewn limestone, with a small play- 
ground for the children. This school was established by 
voluntary subscriptions from among the Society of Friends, 
in the early part of the year 1830, and is indebted for its 
continued support to annual contributions, added to a small 
weekly payment with each of the children. It is now placed, 
like the National Schools, under Government inspection, and 
the number of children, stated below, tells the story of its 
successful management. Schoolmistress, Miss Peettie ; ap- 
pointed in 1855. Number of scholars on the books, 172. 

beitish school. 

This School, situated near St. George's Church, was built 
in 1835, and enlarged in 1857. The principal school-room. 



KIRKLAND GIRLS' NATIONAL SCHOOL. 205 

60 ft. x 30 ft., belongs to the original structure. The class- 
room and committee-room were added in 1857. The cost 
of the building originally was 610?., of which sum 125?. was 
obtained from the Parliamentary grant of moneys applied to 
building schools on the principles of the British and Foreign 
School Society. It is managed (subject to Government in- 
spection) by a committee of gentlemen, who also appoint the 
trustees. The present trustees are, Messrs. W. D. Crewdson, 
John Jowitt Wilson, and Charles Lloyd Braithwaite. 

The School is open to children of all religious denominations, 
and is conducted on the Lancasterian system. There is no 
endowment fund, and the expenditure, therefore, has to be 
met entirely by voluntary subscriptions, and the small 
payments of the children, 2d. ' and 3d. per week. The 
following is the income of last year (1860) : — 

£ s. d. 

Voluntary Subscriptions 33 15 

Children's Pence 128 18 6 



£162 13 6 



Master: Mr. Thomas Hill, who was appointed in 1835, 
and through whose able management the School has so 
signally prospered. Number of scholars, 312. 

KIRKLAND GIRLS' NATIONAL SCHOOL. 

This School-house, in the old Vicarage grounds, on a site 
which was given by the Vicar with consent of the patron, has 
been built within the present year, 1861. It cost upwards 
of 1,000?., raised entirely by voluntary subscriptions. It is a 
neat edifice, in the Tudor style, with open roof, and stained 
rafters, the windows having stone mullions. The fine porch 
entrance, or vestibule, gives effect to the building. It consists 
of a double school-room, capable of being used together or 
separately, one portion of which is 52 ft. x 18 ft., the other 
39 ft. x 18 ft. ; height of the roof, 25 ft. Besides these, are 
two class-rooms, for evening classes or other purposes. The 
building was designed by Mr. Miles Thompson, architect, and 
constructed by Messrs. John Fisher and Samuel Compstone. 



206 PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

The children of this establishment were taught in a school- 
room in Jennings' Yard, Highgate, from 1845 until the present 
year. In 1858, the School was placed under Government 
inspection, and received grants for the augmentation of the 
salary of the mistress, and for two pupil- teachers. The 
amount of children's pence in last year, 1860, was 311. 8s. ^\d. 
Schoolmistress : Miss Seed ; appointed in 1858. Number of 
scholars on the books, 148. 

ST. THOMAS'S SCHOOL. 

This School, connected with St. Thomas's Church, was 
established in 1841. It comprehends instruction for both 
sexes. The payments with children are very moderate — only 
1 \d. and Id. per week ; nevertheless they amounted, in the 
last year, to 31 1. 3s. 9d. Present number of scholars, 160. 
Schoolmistress : Miss Smallwood ; appointed in 1854. 

st. George's school. 

This School is connected with St. George's Church. It 
was established in 1852, and the present school-house was 
built in that year. The number of scholars now on the 
books is 149. Amount of children's pence, in the last year, 
34?. 14s. lOd. Schoolmistress: Miss Lord; appointed in 
1861. 

FELL SIDE DAY AND SUNDAY SCHOOLS. 

The handsome building devoted to these Schools is well 
placed with regard to the needy population for which it is 
designed. It was erected at three different times : the first 
part in 1852, the second in 1853, and the last in 1859, at a cost 
in the aggregate of 1,170?., altogether raised by voluntary sub- 
scriptions. This is the most successful scholastic institution 
in the town. The Sunday School began in 1833, in one small 
room of a cottage on the Tell Side, on something like the 
" City Mission " principle, excepting that it was worked by 
gratuitous teachers, and instead of being supported by an 
established society, it was succoured by only two individuals. 



SLEDDALL'S GREEN COAT SUNDAY SCHOOL. 207 

the late William Wilson, Esq., of Kent Terrace, and the late 
W. D. Crewdson. Esq., of Helme Lodge, to whose memory it 
now stands, better than a marble monument. 

.The Day School, commenced in 1841, is divided into two, 
a Juvenile School, under Miss Jennings ; and an Infant 
School, under Miss Tayloe. Number of day scholars, 260. 
Children's pence in the last year, 521 

The Sunday School is composed of adults as well as 
children, and the total under instruction on the Sundays is 
790! 

SLEDDALL'S GREEN COAT SUNDAY SCHOOL. 

William Sleddall, by will, dated 11th August, 1801, 
gave 525?., upon trust, that two of the Senior Aldermen and 
two of the Senior Burgesses of Kendal for the time being, 
should purchase Four per Cent. Bank Annuities, or lend the 
same upon real or personal security, and apply the interest or 
dividends in the establishing and for ever supporting a Sunday 
School in Kirkby-Kendal, for the instruction of thirty-five 
boys and twelve girls, the children of the poor people of 
Kirkby-Kendal, to be nominated by the trustees ; and for 
finding and providing a new green coat for each of the boys 
every year, and new hats once in two years ; and for each of 
the girls a green gown every year, and green bonnets once 
in two years. And also, that the trustees should yearly 
treat themselves out of the dividends, when they settled their 
accounts, with a crown howl of punch ; and if any surplus 
should remain in each year, the same to be laid out in pur- 
chasing green baize, to be made into waistcoats or small 
clothes for the most necessitous of the poor boys, at the dis- 
cretion of the trustees. It is ordered by the will that no 
dissenter from the Church of England shall be one of the 
trustees. 

Mr. Sleddall died in 1813, and this legacy was invested in 
the purchase of 625 1. 18s. 7d. Stock in the Four per Cents, 
then at 83f , and the dividends arising therefrom amounted at 
that time to 25 £ 0s. 8d. yearly ; but the interest on the Stock 
having been reduced, the dividend is only 19t 7 . 6s. 4<d. at this 



208 PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

time, which is insufficient to meet the expenditure ; but the 
residue is supplied from a contribution out of the " Farleton 
Tithes," in the management of the Corporation. 

The boys are supplied with green coats and green caps, and 
the girls with green gowns, straw bonnets, and white tippets 
against Easter Day in each year. But as to the " crown bowl 
of punch," we are assured that the managing trustees consider 
that custom "more honoured in the breach than the ob- 
servance," and they omit the beverage. 

The children are instructed in the Schools connected with 
the parish church. 

We will conclude this chapter by presenting summaries 
of the Public Day Schools, Private Day Schools, and Public 
Sunday Schools, which show, by their aggregate of scholars, 
the proportion of the population under daily instruction. 

These returns have been most carefully made for tins 
purpose, by Mr. Thomas Hill, master of the British School, 
and may be relied upon for their accuracy. 



SUMMARY OF PUBLIC DAY SCHOOLS. 



209 





4 




at 

a 


o 


= o n d 


_ 


1 


05 CO 


£ . 


1> 








o --< 


&§ 


£ s 


lis* 


Name of School. 


W e 
u 

o 


CO «J 
as 


"S-J 


is 

SOT 


of Ch 
tedfr 
iceme 
stmas 




 2 
13 


6'u 


2 
2 


bo 
13 

X3 


No. 

dmit 

mei 

Chri 




P 




o 


O 










£ s. d. 






The Grammar School ... 


1525 


27 


81 


15s. p. Qr. 


— (a) 


Blue Coat School .... 


1670 


45 


Free 


— 


1,512 < 6 > 


National School (Boys') . . 


1817 


245 


31 2 9 


Id & 2d 


4,833 


National School (Girls') . . 


1823 


120 


19 


Id 


1,720 "> 


Castle Street Girls' and Infant 
School 


1830 


172 


38 


l§d & 2d 


1,408 <*> 


British School (Boys') . . . 


1835 


312 


128 18 6 


2d & 3d 


3,187 


Kirkland Girls' National 
School 


1845 


148 


31 8 4| 


l\d. & 2d 


1,087 


St. Thomas's School (Mixed) . 


1847 


160 


31 3 9 


lid & 2d 


(a) 


Fell Side School (Mixed) . . 


1849 


260 


52 


lid & 2d 


(«) 


St. George's School (Mixed) . 


1854 


149 


34 14 10 


l±d&2d 


396 


Workhouse School (Boys') . . 


j 


80 








» » (Girls') . 


i 










Roman Catholic School . . . 
Total . . 




No 


returns 






1718 447 8 2h 


  


(a) No account existing. 


(6) Since 1714. 


(e) Including 40 Blue Coat Girls. 


(d) Since 1838. 



SUMMARY OF SUNDAY SCHOOLS. 



Name of School. 


Date of 

Establishment. 


No. on Books, 
Christmas, 1860. 


Blue Coat (Boys') 

Green Coat (Boys' and Infants') . 

Methodist 

National (Boys') 

Inghamite Chapel 

St. George's 

National (Girls') ....... 

Presbyterian 

Primitive Methodist 

Kirkland (Girls') 

Friends' 


1714 

1813 
1816 
1817 
1820 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1824 
1832 
1833 
1833 
1837 
1845 
1853 


45 

135<«3 

174 
110 

54 
241 

90< 6 > 
120 
110 

83 
790«*> 
170 
450 

20 

80 
No returns. 


Fell Side . 


St. Thomas's 

Zion Chapel ........ 

Christian Institute (Adults) . . 

Workhouse 

Roman Catholic 


2787 


(a) Including 35 Green Coat Boys. 
(6) Including 40 Blue Coat Girls. 

(c) Including 12 Green Coat Girls. 

(d) Including a great number of Adults. 



210 SCHOOLS. 



PRIVATE SCHOOLS. 

There are seventeen Private Schools in the town, and the 
number of pupils in these establishments is 560. 

GENERAL SUMMARY. 

No. in Public Day Schools 1718 

„ Private „ 560 

Total Day Scholars 2278 

Or, 1 in 5'28 of the population. 

Total in Sunday Schools 2787 

Or, 1 in 4-31 of the population., 

It thus appears that the education of children in the town 
is progressing at the rate of more than one in six of the 
population in Day Schools, and more than one in five of the 
population in Sunday Schools. When these results are com- 
pared with the general returns given by the Government 
Commissioners of Education, the comparison shows that 
tuition is proceeding in Kendal in a ratio higher than that of 
England and Wales. For England and Wales the number 
under daily instruction is one in 7*7 of the entire popula- 
tion ; therefore, Kendal is upwards of 30 per cent, above the 
average of England and Wales, in this respect. 



CHARITIES. 21 1 



CHAPTEE VI. 

CHARITIES. 

We now come, with pleasurable emotions, to give a sketch 
of the numerous endowed charities which are in operation in 
this town. It has been said, that there is no exercise of the 
mind of man so congenial, so interesting, or affording such 
real and unmixed gratification as systematic and intelligent 
benevolence. With what feelings of just pride, then, must 
all persons connected with Kendal be impressed, on reviewing 
these charities, where so much good is laid up in store for 
future generations. Happy indeed will it be if these ex- 
amples should open out new fountains of future charity, and 
cause the stream of benevolence to flow on, widening and 
strengthening in its course, from one generation to another. 
Such bequests and benefactions constitute fertile means of 
human good, and are among the best uses of the bounties of 
Providence. 

For the information respecting these charities, we are 
indebted to the Eeport of the Commissioners of Inquiry into 
the Abuse of Charities, instituted by Act of Parliament, in 
1817; and to the Eeport of a Committee of the Corporation, 
appointed to inquire into this subject, in 1847. 1 

gilpin's rents. — 1561. 



It is stated, in the History of Westmorland (page 75), that 
"William Gilpin, steward to Alan Bellingham, of Levens, 
Esq., purchased of the said Alan Bellingham, certain jEents 

1 The following were the Corporation Committee, viz. : — John Whitwell, 
John Hudson, Edward Busher, Edward William Scott, John Fisher, and 
Cornelius Nicholson. 

p2 



21 2 CHARITIES. 

belonging to the Chapel of St. Anne, of Si 7s. Sd. a year, at 
thirty years' purchase ; and by his will, dated 1561, be- 
queathed the same to two Gilpins, his relations, and to others' 
the nearest of his kindred, successively to distribute the same 
to the poor in Kendal, of his name and family for ever." 

No documentary evidence relating to this charity can now 
be obtained, but the rents above mentioned were regularly 
collected and distributed till the year 1804. Charles Eooking, 
some time since deceased, collected them for forty or fifty 
years, and his father and grandfather collected them before 
him. Eooking was first employed to collect these Eents for 
Samuel Newby, who was connected with the Gilpin family by 
marriage. 

The Eents arise out of the following premises : — 

£ s. d. 

1. Out of the White Hart Inn or Coffee House . . 1 10 6 

2. Out of a House and two Shops in Butchers') 

Row adjoining the White Hart, the pro- I 
perty of Mrs. Bradley, occupied by Bailie 5-192 
and Hargreaves, ironmongers, and John i 
Taylor, Tea Dealer J 

3. Out of a Shop and Premises, the first House in ) 

Stricklandgate, the property of Mr. Tho- > 8 
mas Robinson, Grocer > 



£3 7 8 



No Eents had been paid from 1804 to the time when the 
Charitable Trustees undertook the collection and distribution 
of them ; but they are now regularly received and disposed 
of. It has not been ascertained whether or not the arrears 
were recovered. 

IANSON'S CHARITY. — 1615. 

This Charity is vested in twenty-seven Feoffees, who were 
to be appointed by the Alderman, 1 Vicar, and Schoolmaster; 
and when sixteen of the said Feoffees are dead, the property 
is conveyed over by a new deed to such persons, inhabitants 

1 There not being "a Mayor" at the time. — (Vide History of the Corpora- 
tion, page 171). 



ALICE DUCKETT'S CHARITY. 213 

of Kendal, as the corporate officer named in lieu of the 
Alderman, Vicar, and Schoolmaster appoint. The Property 
consists of several Burgage Kents, amounting to 2?. 16s. 10c?. 
annually, viz. — 

s. d. 

T. Gough, Esq. Stricklandgate Property 8 

Mr. James Thompson 13 4 

Odd-Fellows' Hall 8 

Rev. M. J. Carter 8 

E. Wilson, Esq 10 

Misses Greenhow (Property in Highgate) 6 

Isaac Braithwaite, Esq. . 3 6 

New Inn Property, viz. — Henry Douglas . . 3s. 7d. J 

William Bousfield . 1 10 V 9 
Joseph Clarke ..37 \ 

£2 16 10 



and three closes of land situate in Park and Castle Lands, 
containing 8a. 3r. 39p., customary measure, let for 44Z. 7s. 
annually. The sum of 3s. 4<£ is ordered to be paid annually 
to the Chamber of Kendal, and 35. 4c?. to the Churchwardens 
for the repair of the church. 10s. to be paid to the Clerk for 
collecting the Eents. 20s. each to be given to six aged and 
impotent men, natives of Kendal, of above the age of fifty 
years, of honest and good behaviour, and " whose endeavours 
and cares have been painful and commendable ;" and in want 
of duly-qualified natives, the Trustees may elect one or more, 
if wanted, who have lived twenty years in the said burgh, 
each of such men to have yearly paid to him 205. on the 
21st of December, at the porch of the parish church. The 
residue to be bestowed in cloth, linen and woollen, for shirts 
and coats, on the day and place aforesaid, to such other 
poor people of the town, and in such manner as the said 
collector, with the consent of the said Trustees, should think 
fit. The Trustees have power to let the premises for terms 
not exceeding ten years. The deeds and papers belonging to 
this Charity are deposited at the Town Clerk's Office. 

ALICE DUCKETT'S CHARITY. — 1616. 

Alice Duckett, by will, dated 27th November, 1616, gave 
out of her tenement called Netherhouse, in Skelsmergh. to 






214 CHARITIES. 

the poor of Kendal, Strickland, and Skelsmergh, 20s. to each 
township, to be paid for evermore ; and after the death of 
William Newby, she ordered Eichard Duckett and Peter 
Mowson to sell the said tenement and dispose of it to the use 
of the poor. 

In 1652, by a decree of Commissioners of Charitable Uses, 
it was ordered that the occupiers of these lands should pay 91 
yearly to the Overseers of Kendal, Strickland, and Skelsmergh, 
to the use of the poor there. 

In 1653 an information was filed in chancery, for adminis- 
tering this Charity, when certain deeds were exhibited, shewing 
that the tenements had been sold in 1729 to one William 
Lickbarrow, by Duckett and Mowson, according to the testa- 
trix's will, for 601 ; that 201. of the purchase money had been 
paid to the Overseers of Strickland Eoger for the use of the 
poor, and a rent-charge of 24s. yearly was reserved, payable to 
the Overseers of Skelsmergh until the like sum of 207. should 
be paid to them ; but no information is given as to the appli- 
cation of the other 20?., nor any mention made of any claim of 
the Overseers of Kendal in respect of it. It is, however, stated 
in the answer, that, in 1701, the same tenement was conveyed 
by persons claiming through the Lickbarrows, and had since 
been divided into two tenements, and variously dealt with, 
subject to the payment of 5Z. 10s. yearly to the Chamberlains 
of Kendal. 

This sum has been received yearly by the Corporation since 
1664, and is entered in the books as a rent due out of Lick- 
barrow tenement. There is nothing to shew on what account 
it is paid. It is open to presumption, that a part of it might 
be in respect of what was payable to the poor of Kendal 
(though that was payable to the Overseers, not to the 
Corporation); but it appears that the Corporation incurred 
costs by being made parties to the proceedings in chancer}' ; 
and it does not appear that the 5?. 10s. was ever distributed 
in charity. This sum is now received in moieties from the 
occupiers of the two tenements called Oak Bank and Eed- 
mayne tenement. 



Fleming's charity. 215 



thwaite's charity. — 1616. 

Ann Thwaites bequeathed, 24th April, 1616, 101. to be 
lent to five poor tradesmen in Kendal, by the Alderman and 
Constables after the rate of Is. 6d. in the pound, amounting to 
15s. yearly; which she directed should be bestowed in shirts 
for old people and young children of Kendal not being able to 
work. This money was laid out in burgage rents, and is 
therefore available, though it has not been lent for many 
years. 

FLEMING'S CHARITY. — 1627. 

George Fleming, in 1627, devised two closes lying in the 
Lawnd, near Kendal, containing nine acres, of the yearly fee- 
farm rent of 38s. 6d. to his wife for life, the remainder to his 
nephew, Miles Fleming, and his male heirs, and, in default of 
such issue, to the Alderman of the burgh of Kendal, and his 
successors for ever, upon trust, out of the rents thereof, to pay 
to poor scholars going forth from Kendal to Queen's College, 
in Oxford, 40s. yearly. He also gave 20s. yearly towards 
augmenting the salary of the master and usher of the free 
school of Kendal, at the discretion of the Alderman and 
his brethren for the time being ; 40s. to poor people within 
Kendal, to be distributed by the Churchwardens and Con- 
stables, or some of them, with the assistance of the said 
Alderman and his brethren ; and 10s. yearly for letting the 
lands and collecting the rents, to such person as the Alder- 
man and his brethren should appoint for that purpose. 
The residue of the said rents to be paid yearly to the Chamber 
of the said burgh, for the good of the burgh. He further 
bequeathed 10?. towards the raising of a stock for a Lec- 
turer in Kendal Church, to be disposed of and preserved 
by the Alderman and brethren for that purpose. 

The 40s. are paid to the Churchwardens for distribution 
every Good Friday. — (See Good Friday s Bole, p. 229.) 






216 CHARITIES. 

FAKLETON TITHES. 

Extract from the will of Henry Wilson, of Underlet/, dated 
29th August, 1639. 

" I give and bequeath unto the Provost or Master, and 
to the Fellows of Queen's College, Oxford, and to their 
successors for ever, for the time being, from time to time 
for ever, the yearly sum of Sol, to be paid unto them by 
my heirs-general for ever, out of the tithes of corn, grain, 
or sheaves, yearly arising and renewing within Farleton, 
Overthwaite, Overforth, and Aikbank, in the County of 
Westmorland, and all other tithes within the parish of 
Beethom, which lately I purchased of Anthony Duckett, 
Esq., and James Duckett, his son, to be by them, the said 
Provost and Fellows, employed and disposed as follows : 
viz : first, to four poor scholars, which shall be sent thither 
from time to time successively for ever out and from the 
Free Grammar School of Kirkby Lonsdale aforesaid, and 
born in that parish ; and also to three poor scholars 
which shall be sent from the Free Grammar School of 
Kendal aforesaid : and they pay to every one of the seven 
poor scholars so to be sent from the said two Free Grammar 
Schools, out of the said 35Z., the sum of 51 apiece yearly 
for ever, for and towards the better help, relief, and main- 
tenance of their studies at Queen's College aforesaid, equally 
to be divided and shared forth of the said 35?. so given in 
trust to the said Provost and Fellows of the said College ; all 
the said scholars so to be sent from the said schools to be of 
perfect gifts and of ingenious disposition of mind, without any 
by-respect to be had of kindred or friendship, but upon desert, 
and according to the ancient statutes of the said College ; and 
the payment of the said yearly sum of 5Z. apiece to continue 
to be paid to every of them during the term of seven years 
next after every of their admittance into the said College, and 
no longer. And then, or upon any of their departure, or going 
away from thence, others to be chosen and sent thither in 
their places from the said schools, as is aforesaid, from time 
to time for ever, and to have and enjoy the several stipends 



FAELETON TITHES. 217 

of ol. apiece forth out of the said tithes for ever, according to 
my true meaning. And for default of any such scholars at 
either of the said schools, then the same to be supplied by the 
other school ; and for default of scholars at either of the said 
schools, then the same to remain to other scholars born in 
other parts of Westmorland and Cumberland, being at the 
said College, or to be sent thither. And for default of pay- 
ment of the said 35?. to the said Provost and Fellows by my 
heirs-general, their heirs and assigns, at two feasts in the year, 
viz. Easter and Michaelmas, or within forty days next after 
in any year after my death, then I do hereby give and be- 
queath all the said tithes of corn, grain, and sheaves unto the 
said Provost and Fellows, and their successors, to the uses, 
intents, and purposes hereinbefore limited, intended, and 
declared; intreating the Mayor and Aldermen of Kendal 
aforesaid, together with the Feoffees of Kirkby Lonsdale School, 
for the time being, to receive and take all the issues and 
profits of the said tithes ; and out thereof pay as well the 
said 35 1, to the use aforesaid; as also the yearly rent of 40s. to 
the said Anthony Duckett, Esq. and his heirs, they retaining 
the overplus thereof, share and share alike, for their care 
and pains therein, if my heirs-general shall not well and truly 
pay the said 35?. and 40s." 

The corn-rent in lieu of these tithes is regularly received 
by the trustees appointed yearly by the Council, and the 
feoffees of Kirkby Lonsdale School. 35?. are paid over to 
the College, and 40s. to the Vicar of Beetham annually, 
and the residue is divided in equal moieties between the 
trustees and the feoffees. The proportion received by the 
Corporation Trustees amounts annually to about 26?. 
This surplus is considered as in strictness the property 
of the trustees, by whom, however, it is always placed at 
the disposal of the Council. 



BAEEOW, FISHEE, WILSON, FOAED, AND HAY S GIFTS FOE 
LECTTJEE. 1641. 

Hugh Baeeow, by will, devised out of his lands in Skels- 
mergh 100?. for procuring a Lecturer in Kendal Church, in the 









218 CHAEITIES. 

afternoon, on every or every other Sunday ; and the lands 
called Must Hill were charged with the said payment. This 
was paid to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Chamberlain in 1641. 

Edward Fisher bequeathed by will, towards the purpose 
of retaining a Lecturer at Kendal Church, the sum of 20/., the 
principal to be laid out in land, as soon as might be, by the 
Mayor and Churchwardens of Kendal, and the yearly profits 
thereof to be paid to such Lecturer ; and so often as there 
should be no such Lecturer, to be distributed to the poor 
householders in Kendal, at the discretion of the Mayor and 
Aldermen. 1 

Henry Wilson, before mentioned, by his will, in 1639, 
bequeathed unto the Mayor and Aldermen of the Corporation 
of Kirkby-Kendal and their successors for ever, the sum of 
50/., "upon this trust and confidence, that they or some of 
them do bestow the same upon lands or a yearly rent-charge, 
and with the benefit and increase thereof, together with supply 
of them and other benefactors, do procure a godly, learned, 
and sober Divine, to preach unto them, at Kendal Church, 
the Word of God, and instruct and catechise them also in the 
principles and fundamental points of Christian religion every 
Sabbath or Lord's Day for ever." 2 

The following entry occurs in the Chamberlains' Accounts 
in the year 1670 : — " Eeceived of Mr. Guy the legacy of Mr. 
Foard to a Lecture, 10/." This is the only record of that Gift. 

It also appears, by the same accounts, that John Hay left 
6s. 8d. yearly out of lands in Kendal Parks towards a 
Lecturer. This is regularly received from the trustees of 
Brian Lancaster's Charity, the owners of the lands in question. 

For many years back these Lectureships have been paid to 
the Yicar of Kendal, who receives annually from the Cor- 
poration 15/. 12s., besides 6s. 8d. for Hay's Gift, making 
together 15/. 18s. 8d. The amount has been uniform since 
the receipt of Mr. Foard's Gift in 1671, previous to which 
it was 15/., the 12.9. being presumed to have been added as 
the interest of Mr. Foard's 10/. The annual payment of 
15/. 12^. originated when interest was much above the present 
rate, and it appears that the Corporation have not thought 

1 C n-poraliou Register. - Idem. 



JOHN prissoe's charity. 219 

proper to reduce it according to the depreciation in the value 
of money. The payment of 151. 12s. was suspended for four 
or five years, but the opinion of Counsel being that it re- 
mained a charge upon the Corporation property, the amount, 
with arrears, was paid to the then Yicar in 1842. 

JOHN towers' charity. — 1677. 

John Towers, in 1677, gave to the Chamber of Kendal 601, 
the yearly interest thereof to be distributed to the poor of 
Kendal on Good Friday. 

This money was secured by land out of part of Mr. 
Thomas Towers' Estate, in 1690. 

BATEMAN AND DUCKETT's USE-MONEY. 1692. 

A sum of 55. 4<£ is annually paid by the Corporation to 
the Churchwardens of Kendal, under this head, and applied 
in aid of the Church Eate. 

Joshua Nealson paid to the Chamberlains of Kendal, in 
1692, 101 the gift of Mcholas Bateman : 3s. 4<£, the consi- 
deration thereof, to be paid annually to the Church of Kendal, 
and the rest of the gift to be lent out to persons qualified, 
according to the Donor's Will, upon good security. 

A memorandum in the Corporation Eegister states that 
Eobert Gilpin paid to the Chamberlains, in 1691, 40s., being 
part of Alice Duckett's Gift, and the interest of this is 
siipposed to make up the 5s. 4>d. 

JOHN prissoe's charity. 1695. 

John Prissoe, by will, dated in 1695, bequeathed to the 
Mayor and others, upon trust, 1301, to be invested in the 
purchase of land, the rents thereof to be distributed every 
Christmas amongst the aged poor sick persons, and poor lame 
and impotent persons living within the corporation of Kendal. 
This money was invested in the purchase of two fields called 
Barn Close and Park Close, lying in Kirk Fields, near Kendal. 
The amount in question, 1301, appears to have been put out 
to interest up to 1735, and 14Z. 10s. of interest was then 
added to the principal, which constituted the purchase-money 






220 CHARITIES. 

of the aforesaid two fields. In 1736, the yearly rental of the 
said fields was 61 It is now (1861) 15 £ 5s. 

JAMES SIMPSON'S CHAEITY. — 1687. 

James Simpson, in 1687, left to the Mayor and Aldermen 
of Kendal, 60Z. upon trust, the interest thereof to be laid out 
in cloth called cotton, for six aged men and six aged women 
of Kendal, free of the town, to make each of them a coat. 

To this is added a note that the yearly interest of 60?. is to 
be paid out of the Great Aynani, lately purchased by the 
town, it being part of the purchase money for the said Great 
Aynam, according to the mind of the donor. 

James Simpson also left one half of the residue of his real 
and personal estate, for the benefit of the poor of Kendal, to 
be distributed according as the Mayor, Aldermen, Vicar, and 
Schoolmaster shall think fit ; and the other half to the poor 
of Flookborough. On the 10th July, 1698, the sum of 
281 18s. Id. was received for this moiety. The interest is 
included in the sums paid by the Corporation. 

WILSON'S CHARITY. — ORGANIST. 1698. 

Jennet Wilson, by Deed-poll, dated 22nd February, 1698, 
appointed that her Trustees therein named should permit the 
Mayor, Recorder, two Senior Aldermen, Vicar, and School- 
master of. Kendal, and their successors for ever, for the time 
being, to hold and enjoy certain closes in Kendal Park, 
called Haverbrack, on Trust, that they and their successors, 
or the major part of them, should employ the rents and 
profits yearly, for and towards a yearly stipend or salary for 
an Organist (to be by them or the major part of them elected 
and approved), to play every Sabbath day upon a pair of 
organs in the Parish Church of Kendal. 

This land consists of two closes, situate on the north 
side of Peat Lane, one of which is retained by the Trustees, 
and is let at an annual rent of 10/. 18s. 6d.; the other was 
sold to the Kendal and Windermere Railway Company for 
1325/., which money is invested in accordance with the Act 
of Parliament. 



STEPHENSON'S CHARITY. 22 J 



whitehead's charity. 1712. 



Peter Whitehead, of Kirkland, by will, dated 3rd Octo- 
ber, 1712, gave a burgage bouse in Kendal, and a bouse in 
Kirkland on tbe west side of tbe street, and a bit of land 
called Little Eoods, in Kirkland, to bis sister for life, with 
devises over as to tbe first and second premises, and be gave 
tbe bouse in Kirkland, after ber deatb, to Bryan Lancaster, 
Elizabeth Walker, Thomas Crosby, and Eobert Wharton, and 
their heirs, in trust to sell the same : and out of the proceeds 
be gave 45?. to the Poor Inhabitants legally settled in the 
township of Kirkland, which sum he directed the trustees 
above named to pay over, after the decease of his said sister, 
to Eobert Shaw, Eobert Wharton, above named, and John 
Simondson, which last three persons be appointed his first 
trustees of the Charity, any two of which should have power 
to choose a third on the death of any one, and so from time 
to time for ever. And he directed the last named Trustees to 
lay tbe same out at five per cent., and out of the interest to 
take 20s. annually and therewith buy cloth or kersey for 
coats for three poor men, inhabitants of and legally settled in 
Kirkland, and such as in their judgment should stand most 
in need, and to distribute the same on the Feast of St. Peter 
and St. Paul. And to distribute tbe further sum of 20s. 
amongst the poor Inhabitants of Kirkland, and especially to 
the ancient, the lame, and blind, widows and orphans, in 
sums not less than Is. nor exceeding Is. 6d, and the remaining 
5s. to be divided amongst the Trustees, and he directed that 
the coats should have the letters P. W. in red cloth upon the 
left arm. 

The interest of this money (21 os.) is given away annually 
on St. Peter's day, nothing being reserved for the distributors. 

STEPHENSON'S CHARITY. — 1716. 

The property of this Charity consists of the house and 
premises called the Horse and Eainbow, in Kendal, occupied 
by Mr. Lipsett, and the house and shop adjoining, occupied 
by John Greenwood, general dealer. These premises were 



222 CHARITIES. 

given by Robert Stephenson, about the year 1716. Mr. 
William Ellison is the acting manager of the Charity, as 
agent for Ralph Riddle, Esq., the trustee. The sum of six 
guineas, out of the rents, is given to the Catholic Priest of 
Kendal, to be distributed at his discretion amongst poor 
Catholics on St. Thomas' day. The remainder is given away, 
under the direction of Mr. Ellison, to poor persons, not pen- 
sioners, in small sums from Is. to 2s. 6d., on St. Thomas' 
day. A part of these premises were rebuilt out of money 
reserved from the rents, but the new buildings are now, it 
appears, clear, and the whole of the proceeds are again avail- 
able for the purposes intended by the donor. 



LANCASTER'S CHARITY. — 1719. 

Bryan Lancaster, by will, dated 8th day of fourth month, 
1719, devised his Estate at Kendal Park to certain trustees, 
for family purposes, which being fulfilled, he directed that, 
on the 1st day of the month called January, 91. should be 
yearly distributed, namely, 20s. each to six poor men, and 10s. 
each to six poor women, they being legal inhabitants within 
the corporation of Kendal, without respect to what society or 
denomination or profession of religion they should go under, 
but chiefly with regard to their age and poverty. The rest 
and residue of the proceeds he gave to such charitable use as 
his trustees should in their discretion think fit. 

The above sum of 9/. has been regularly distributed on 
New Year's day as far back as can be remembered, to poor 
men and women, settled inhabitants within the borough, and 
not members of the Society of Friends. The surplus rents 
are appropriated partly to the fuuds for relieving the poor 
amongst the Society of Friends, and partly to other charitable 
objects. It would appear that the object of the donor was 
not at all restricted, as he devolves the appropriation of the 
trust funds wholly upon the trustees. 

The trustees are three in number, and when a vacancy 
occurs by the death of any one of them, the survivors appoint 
a new one in his place, The property has a rental of about 
280Z. per annum. It consists of the dwellino-house and land 



REV. W. CROSBY'S CHARITIES. 223 

connected with the Friends' School, in Stramongate, the rental 
of which is 30?. per annum ; and of sixteen fields situated in 
Kendal Park, containing 89a. 2r. 35p., yielding about 175?. per 
annum, together with five fields in Mint's Feet, 25a. lr. 30p., 
rent about 75 ?. Four acres, however, of the last-mentioned 
land have been left at sundry times by different individuals 
for purposes connected with the Society of Friends only. In 
respect of these latter trusts, Lancaster's trustees pay out of 
their income about 14?. yearly. 

There is likewise a field called Shaw's Parrock, which is 
the exclusive property of the Society of Friends. 

archer's charity. — 1725. 

John Archer, by will, dated 14th May, 1725, devised a 
tenement or parcel of ground, with the appurtenances, called 
Aikrigg, in Kendal Park, after the death of his sister, to the 
Mayor, two Senior Aldermen, Vicar, and Schoolmaster of 
Kendal, and their successors, upon trust, that they, or any 
three of them, should, every New Year's Day, apply one-half 
of the clear rents towards the maintenance and support of the 
Charity-school in Kendal, and the other half in buying so 
much cotton or other cloth as would contribute towards the 
clothing of six poor and deserving men and six poor and 
deserving women within the town of Kendal, of whom none 
should be under the age of fifty years ; and he directed that, 
in case the said Charity-school should at any time be dis- 
continued, the rents should be laid out towards the clothing 
of ten poor men and ten poor women. 

The property consists of a barn and four inclosures, called 
Aikrigg Fields, situate to the south-east of the Castle, con- 
taining together about 10a. 3r. 13p., customary measure, and 
are let for 58?. 12s. yearly. 

The clerk of the parish is paid 10s. annually for collecting 
the rents ; and the distribution of the Charity is properly 
attended to. 

rev. w. crosby's charities.— 1732. 
The Rev. William Crosby, in 1732, bequeathed to the 
Mayor, Recorder, two Senior Aldermen, and Schoolmaster of 






224 CHARITIES. 

Kendal, for the time being, 60/., in trust, to be paid to each 
new Vicar within three months after his induction, towards 
the payment of First Fruits, such new Vicar giving security 
that the sum be paid again, so as to be available, in a similar 
manner, for his successor. To the same Trustees, also, he 
bequeathed his library, for the use of the Vicar and Curate, 
the new Vicar signing a catalogue within six months after his 
induction, and giving security for the preservation of the 
books. He also desired the said Trustees to view the said 
library every third year. To the same Trustees he also devised 
the annual payment of SI., issuing out of Sydenham Tenement, 
in Underbarrow, to be paid to the use of the Blue Coat Charity 
Boys, and if that Charity should be discontinued, to the poor 
Householders of Kendal. The late Vicar, the Bev. J. W. 
Barnes, at his induction, received the 601, and gave a bond to 
the Trustees for the repayment, as directed. 

There are about 500 volumes belonging to the library, and 
amongst them a few good books. All the books contained in 
the old catalogue are not now to be found- A new catalogue 
has been made. 

The rent-charge of SI. out of Sydenham Tenement is paid 
annually to Mr. Whitaker, master of the Blue Coat School, 
and accounted for by him to the Treasurer. 



BANKS' AND HOLME'S GIFT. — 1709—1771. 

Mks. Banks, of Kendal, by Indenture, dated 2nd February, 
1709, gave to the Mayor, Vicar, two Senior Aldermen, and 
Schoolmaster of the Borough of Kendal, for the time being, 
several small sums, secured on Bonds, amounting altogether 
to 113Z. lis., which sum appears to have been increased to 
125?., by the interest due upon the said Bonds, when paid 
over to the Trustees. A part of this sum was lost by Bichard 
Rowlandson, in 1733, whereby the Fund was reduced 
to 45Z. 

In 1771, Thomas Holme, Esq. gave 5?., by which 
benefaction the eibove Fund was raised to 50/. ; and in 1798 
this sum was laid out in 82Z. Stock Four per Cents., and 
that amount now forms the whole property of this Charity. 



SLEDDALI/S CHARITY. 225 

The Dividends at present amount to 21. 17s. 4td. annually. 
They are divided between six poor widows, appointed by the 
Trustees. 

DR. STRATFORD'S CHARITY. — 1755. 

It appears by an entry in the Corporation books, that, in 
1755, a sum of 50?. was received from Dr. Stratford, for which 
21. interest is carried out. There is no copy of his will, nor 
any account of the trust amongst the Corporation records, but 
the interest has been always applied along with Parks', 
Towers', and Simpson's charities. 

SLEDDALl/S PRAYER-BOOK AND BIBLE CHARITY. — 1801. 

William Sleddall, by his will, dated 11th August, 1801, 
gave to the Rev. H. Robinson, Vicar of Kendal, the Rev. George 
Kendall, Master of the Grammar School, and Christopher 
Fenton, Senior Alderman of Kirkby- Kendal, and to their 
respective successors for the time being, 3001. upon trust, to 
invest the same in the purchase of Four per Cent. Bank 
Annuities, or other proper security, and out of the dividend 
to retain to themselves 10s. 6d. apiece yearly for executing the 
trust after-mentioned, and apply the residue in the purchase 
of Books of Common Prayer of the Church of England, with 
the Companion to the Altar, and the Singing Psalms in the 
Old Version, like the Book of Common Prayer, and to 
distribute and divide the same in the manner following : —   
viz., one book to every poor housekeeper, a communicant of 
the Church of England, who should be resident in West- 
morland, or in any of the parishes of Cartmel, Hawkshead, 
and Warton, in the County of Lancaster, or in the parish of 
Sedbergh, in the County of York, or to such of the poor 
housekeepers and communicants as they should think the 
most proper and suitable objects ; and to give, as often as 
they should think convenient and proper, ten Common 
Prayer Books to the county gaol at Appleby, — five to the 
House of Correction at Kendal, for the use of the prisoners, 
and twelve to the Workhouse in Kendal, for the use of the 
poor inhabitants there ; the books to remain in the said 

Q 






226 CHARITIES. 

prisons and workhouse ; and also, upon further trust, after 
such Common Prayer Books shall have been twice distributed 
through the county of Westmorland, and the several other 
parishes above mentioned, to lay out the interest in the 
purchase of Bibles, and to distribute such Bibles in the same 
manner as the Books of Common Prayer ; and after the 
Bibles should have been once distributed through the County 
of Westmorland and the said several Parishes, upon further 
trust, to distribute twice afterwards, Books of Common 
Prayer, and once Bibles, for ever, in the same manner and 
to the same objects as before ordered. 

This legacy was invested July 30th, 1814, in the purchase 
of 357/. 13«. 6d. Four per Cents., producing a dividend of 
14?. 65. yearly ; and the first distribution of the Charity 
commenced in 1816. On the reduction of the Four per Cents, 
the money was invested in Consols, and now realizes about 
ten guineas annually. The books continue to be distributed 
at irregular intervals, when deemed necessary. 

SOCIETY FOR RELIEVING THE SICK POOR. 1811. 

This charity is supported principally by subscriptions, and 
is altogether under the care and management of the ladies. 
It is due to those connected with it, to say, that while few 
institutions in the town are more efficient in usefulness, cer- 
tainly none is conducted with more energy and discretion. 
The ladies interested in the management of the charity 
constitute a committee of directors, and having the town 
divided into wards or districts, each lady takes a district, 
and visits all the sick poor therein, who may have been 
recommended by any of the subscribers. The relief is not 
given in money, but by a ticket which will procure provisions, 
and by the loan of a general supply of clothing and furniture, 
needful for a sick room. Whitewash brushes are also lent 
out, and the visitors take care that cleanliness is duly observed. 
Many a lesson of domestic economy is at the same time com- 
municated, and habits of prudence and virtue encouraged. 
But all the blessings of this institution cannot here be made 
apparent. The indigent alone can know the effects of sub- 
stantial sympathy; whilst the best earthly reward and the 



DOROTHY KNOTT'S GIFT. 227 

greatest incentives to benevolence, are together conferred on 
the benefactors, by "the vision indistinct of nntold good." 
The society owes its origin to the benevolence of Mrs. 
Thomasin Kichardson, whose heart and hand were in con- 
stant communication in such work. It appears, from the 
report, that during the last year, 801. lis. Od. was distributed 
in provisions and clothing. The amount of subscriptions for 
last year, is 1161. Os. lid., which includes the interest on 
267/. 10s. Od., being the invested fund. 

DOROTHY KNOTT'S GIFT. — 1812. 

Dorothy Knott, in the year 1810, purchased 99 1. 17s. 6d. 
in the Navy Five per Cents, in the names of the Mayor, Alder- 
men, and Burgesses, the proceeds to be applied to the following 
public charities of Kendal ; and in 1812 she purchased another 
sum of 1001. in the same stock, the interest to be paid half- 
yearly to the rector of Grasmere and the sidesmen, to be 
applied for the education of five poor children of Grasmere 
School. These two sums appear to have been sold out in 
1831, and secured upon the Corporation property. The 
interest, at four per cent., is distributed in the following 
manner : — 

£ s. d. 

Blue-coat School, Kendal 110 

Sunday Schools, do 110 

Dispensary, do 110 

Lying-in Charity, do the residue. 

To Grasmere School 4 4 

And she directed that if any of the four first-named charities 
should be discontinued, the proportion applicable thereto 
should be divided amongst the others, or given to other public 
charities of the town ; and if any part of her legacy to Grasmere 
School should not be applied as quarter-pence for the educa- 
tion of five poor children of Grasmere School, so much should 
be withheld and applied to such public charity in Kendal as 
should be most in want thereof, preferring those for the edu- 
cation of the poor. 



Q2 






228 CHARITIES. 

MISS DOWKEE'S HOSPITAL. — 1831. 

Dorothy Dowker, by her will, proved 1st June, 1831, 
bequeathed 3,000/. to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of 
Kendal, in trust, to place the same out in the Three per Cent. 
Consols, upon trust, that the Mayor, two Senior Aldermen, and 
Vicar, for the time being, should nominate six females of good 
and chaste character, born in the borough of Kendal, having 
attained fifty years of age, without having been married, and 
whose situation in life should require some assistance ; and 
should hire or provide a home or building in the said town 
for their reception, and should pay any annual sum not 
exceeding 45 /. in the hiring such building ; and she directed 
that they should permit the six females to reside there so long 
as they should conduct themselves to the satisfaction of the 
trustees, and pay the residue of the dividend (deducting all 
expenses) equally amongst the said six females ; provided 
that, until such house should be procured, the trustees should 
pay the dividends yearly amongst them; and the trustees 
were empowered to make such rules, orders, and regulations, 
as they should in their discretion think fit ; and if any female 
should refuse to observe the same, she should be removed, and 
have no benefit from the said will ; and that, upon the decease 
of any female, the trustees should appoint another. 

The legacy above mentioned was invested in the purchase 
of 3,242/. 12s. 9d. Consols, in the name of the Corporation, 
producing annual dividends to the amount of 97/. 5s. 6d. 

A neat and suitable almshouse was erected in 1833, in the 
the Elizabethan style, on lands in Highgate, belonging to 
the Blue-coat School, upon which the trustees of that charity 
laid out 400/. from their funds. The trustees of Miss 
Dowker's charity pay an annual rent of 40/. to the trustees of 
the Blue-coat School, and keep the premises in repair. — 
Architect, Alderman George Webster. 

Miss Maria Wilson, augmented this charity by indenture, 
made 13th May, 1839, which assigned to the Eev. John Hud- 
son, Vicar of Kendal, Christopher Wilson, gentleman, George 
Gibson, gentleman, and Thomas Gough, surgeon, the sum of 
1,000/. in the Three per Cent, Consols, in trust, that they. 



GOOD FRIDAY'S DOLE. 229 

the said John Hudson, Christopher Wilson, George Gibson, 
and Thomas Gongh, or other the trustees for the time being, 
stand possessed of the said 1,000Z. Three per Cent. Consols, 
and should continue the same in the then present security, 
and should receive the interest arising therefrom ; and after 
paying all expenses incident to the trust, should divide the 
same, or the residue unto and equally between and amongst 
the six females for the time being in the Hospital in Kendal 
founded by Dorothy Dowker. And it is declared that the 
Vicar for the time being should, ex officio, be a trustee. 

It was further declared, that when the number of the 
said trustees should be reduced to two by death, resignation, 
or incapacity, then, in such case, it should be lawful for the 
surviving or continuing trustees to nominate and appoint any 
other person to be trustee in his place ; the costs thereof to 
be paid out of the then next dividends. And that so often as 
the said Vicar for the time being should depart this life, and 
a successor should be appointed, and so often as any new 
trustees should be appointed as aforesaid, the said 1,000Z. 
should, at the cost of the said trust, be transferred in such 
manner as that the same should be legally invested in the 
surviving and continuing trustees. 

good Friday's dole. 

There is a sum annually paid by the Corporation to the 
churchwardens of the township of Kendal, to be distributed 
amongst the poor on Good Friday. For many years previous 
to 1822 this was 61 10s. ; but at that date it was reduced to 
4?. 10s., 40s. being deducted and appropriated to George 
Fleming's Exhibition, in accordance with a suggestion of 
the Charity Commissioners. There is no express record of 
the origin or foundation of this charity. The first trace of 
it is discovered in the Chamberlain's accounts in 1623, 
when the Corporation are found to have newly come into 
possession of certain burgage rents, called " Fleming's Kents," 
amounting to 51 9s. Id. per annum, and the rents are ac- 
counted for as bestowed upon the poor on Good Friday, 
after the deduction of certain charges payable out of them. 






230 CHARITIES. 

The amount distributed has since varied in different years ; 
and for some years it was as much as 10Z., but the variance 
is not accounted for. These payments are entered sometimes 
as "Mrs. Fleming's Gift," and, at others, "Mrs. Fleming, 
of Eydal, her gift to the poor every Good Friday/' Upon 
the Corporation coming into possession of the rents of the 
closes lying in the Lound, devised by George Fleming, this 
payment was increased by 21, charged upon that land for 
the poor, and since that time the payments are entered 
sometimes as "Mr. and Mrs. Fleming's Gifts." From 1699 
to 1821 the payment was uniformly 61. 10s. Nothing cer- 
tain can be said with regard to the origin of this charity, 
but the circumstances seem to raise a probability that it 
consists of the burgage rents called Fleming's Rents (which, 
for many years amounted to 47. 10s. 4d. annually), and of 
George Fleming's 40s. a year; and that the burgage rents 
in question were given by a Mrs. Fleming, of Kydal, to the 
Corporation for this purpose. • 

If this conjecture be correct, it follows that the reduction 
made in 1826 was erroneous, and that the payment should 
be restored to 61 10s. 

The usual mode of distribution of this dole money is for 
the churchwardens of the township of Kendal to take each 
a portion of the money and to give it away promiscuously 
to such necessitous persons as they may select. 

THE DISPENSARY. — 1782. 

The Dispensary was established by voluntary subscription 
in 1782, and was supported in like manner, together with 
SOI per annum as an allowance from the township of 
Kendal, the interest of a legacy of 100Z. left by Mrs. Do- 
rothy Dowker, in 1831, Mrs. Knott's annuity of 11. Is. Od. 
and the interest of Mr. James Gaudy's donation of 5007. It 
was closed in 1848 ; and the wants of the poor in medical 
relief are now supplied by the medical officers of the Poor 
Law Union. A portion of the invested Fund is now applied 
to the public baths and wash-houses. 



THOMAS STEWARDSONS CHARITY 231 



JAMES GANDY'S CHARITY. — 18.44. 

In 1844, James Gandy, Esq., of Heaves Lodge, near Kendal, 
conveyed to three Trustees, viz. his brother, John Gandy, Esq., 
of Oakland, Windermere ; W. D. Crewdson, Esq., of Helme 
Lodge, near Kendal ; and Samuel Marshall, Esq. of Kendal, 
the sum of 500?. in trust ; the interest of which was directed 
to be applied for the benefit of the convalescent poor in 
Kendal, &c, or such poor persons as are not able themselves 
to obtain restoratives needful to recruit their strength, when 
recovering from contagious or infectious disorders, or other 
complaints ; to procure nourishing food, wine, &c, under 
medical direction, during illness or a state of convalescence ; 
to afford additional means of comfort in lingering illnesses ; 
to pay for the cleansing of the dwellings of the invalid poor, or 
for washing their bedding, linen, &c, when they are themselves 
unable to do what is needful for the preservation or restoration 
of their health ; to promote proper ventilation in their houses, 
or in any other way to promote the convalescence of the sick 
poor, and add to their comforts under their afflictions. The 
intention is to watch carefully that the fund should not have 
the effect of relieving the parochial rates, or interfering with 
the benevolent objects of other public charities, but to apply 
it when relief would not be obtained from any of these 
sources ; in fact, to supply additional comforts to the poor, 
and not the necessaries of life. 

Mr. Gandy confimed the above by a deed of settlement, 
dated July 1st, 1852, and his munificent gift is now invested 
in the Bonds of the Kendal and Windermere Eailway ; and 
the interest arising therefrom is efficiently administered by 
the Trustees, in strict accordance with the directions of the 
donor, and, we believe, is very useful in mitigating the 
sufferings of the deserving poor. 

THOMAS STEWARDSON'S CHARITY. — 1858-60. 

Thomas Stewardson, Esq., the celebrated painter, who was 
a native of Kendal, and who died in London, on the 28th of 
August, 1859, aged 78, by his will, dated 27th July, 1858, 



232 CHARITIES. 

gave " 200?. to the Vicar or Incumbent for the time being of 
the Parish Church of Kendal, in the county of Westmorland," 
with a request that he would " have the goodness to distribute 
it in bread or money, or otherwise, as he may think best, 
amongst such of the poor people of Kendal, at Christmas 
next, after he shall receive the same, as he shall, in his 
uncontrolled discretion, think fit." 

The whole sum of 200?. was distributed by the Vicar last 
Christmas (1860), in coals and clothing, to a large number of 
recipients in various parts of the town. 



THE POOR, BREAD MONEY. 

1650. — Eowland Wilson, Esq., by will, dated 5th Feb- 
ruary, 1650, left 52s. yearly, to be distributed in bread to the 
poor of Kendal, charged upon his estate at Grassgarth. — 
Eegularly paid. 

1750. — John Eobinson, of Lane Foot, in Strickland Ketel, 
left the same sum, 52s. yearly, charged upon his estate, called 
Green Biggs, in Underbarrow, for the same purpose. The 
date of this bequest is 1750. — Eegularly paid. 

1811.— Mrs. Catharine Bordley, in 1811, left 100?., the 
interest thereof to be given in bread to the poor. This money 
was invested in the purchase of 119?. 2s. lid. Stock in the 
Five per Cent. Annuities, in the names of the Vicar of Kendal 
and Edward Peddar, and produced at the time a dividend of 
5?. 13s. 4<d. yearly, but has since been reduced. 

1813.— William Sleddall, who died in 1813, by will, dated 
11th August, 1801, left 130?. to the Churchwardens of Kendal 
to be lent out at interest, or invested in the Public Funds, 
and 2s. weekly, laid out in the purchase of bread, to be every 
Sunday divided among such of the poor people of Kendal, 
attending divine service at the parish church, as the church- 
wardens should think fit. This money was laid out in the 
purchase of 156?. 7s. 10c?. Four per cents, and the interest 
received therefrom was about 6?. 5s. yearly. The two gifts of 
Bordley and Sleddall now realize only 9?. 12s. 8d. annually. 

1846. — Mrs. Elizabeth Eigg, of Manchester, left a moiety 



LORD WHARTON'S BIBLE CHARITY. 233 

of the rents of two dwelling-houses in the Woolpack-yard, 
averaging about 51. per annum. 

1852. Eev. George Braithwaite, M.A., Kendal, left the 
interest of 198Z. 15s. 2d. in the Three per Cent. Consols. 

1856. — A gentleman (unknown), residing in Birmingham, 
left the interest of 1087. 5s. Id., in the Three per Cents., 
" in commemoration of the parish church restoration." 

(The proceeds of the aforesaid moneys are duly laid out 
in bread, and distributed by the churchwardens among a 
certain number of poor every Sunday, one loaf to each 
person.) 

POOR STOCK, KIRKLAND. 

Anthony Yeates, Esq., held, until his death, the sum of 
171, which was in the hands of his father, John Yeates, 
but of the particulars of which no account can now be 
obtained, except that the sum was originally 30?., and in 
the hands of a person in Kendal who failed, and 171 was all 
that could be recovered from the estate. Mr. Yeates gave 
17s. as interest of this money to the settled poor of Kirkland 
on All Saints Day yearly, in sums of Is. and 2s. each, and 
the same is continued by Mr. Yeates's trustees. 

BURGAGE RENTS, KIRKLAND. 

There are two Burgage Eents of 5s. 2d. and 10s. 4d., which, 
for a hundred years, have been given away to the poor of 
Kirkland. How these payments arose cannot be clearly 
ascertained. The first is found charged upon premises on the 
east side of Kirkland, now belonging to Messrs. Bindloss ; and 
the other, viz. 10s. 4<£, issues out of a house adjoining the 
former premises, belonging to the executors of the late John 
Thompson. These sums are regularly distributed to the poor 
of Kirkland, annually, by the churchwarden, and are entered 
by him in a book required by the Poor Law Commissioners 
to be kept for that purpose. 

lord wharton's bible charity. 

The Vicar of Kendal receives thirty Bibles yearly, with 
about thirty-six small books. An examination takes place, 



234 



CHAE1TIES. 



and the books are given to such poor children as pass the best 
examination. 



The folio wing are the Trustees of Charities, in Kendal, 
}ed (under the provisions of the Charitable Trusts' 
the present year, 1861, viz. . — 



Gr. B. Crewdson, 
W. H. Wakefield, 
John Fishkr, 
W. Wakefield, 
S. Gawith, 
Edward Crewdson, 



Messrs. James Edmondson, 
„ Daniel Harrison, 
„ Edward Branthwaite, 
„ I. W. Wilson, 
„ S. Whineret, junior. 



[Other Charitable Bequests are included in the account of 
Public Schools, &c] 



WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE. 235 



CHAPTEE VII. 
MANUFACTURES. 

WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE. 

It does not, we believe, admit of controversy, that the 
woollen manufactures of this kingdom were first established, 
by act of Parliament, in the town of Kendal. John Kemp, 
a manufacturer from Flanders, was the person who first 
received "protection" to establish himself in this country. 

The following is a copy of the "Letter of Protection" 
granted by King Edward III. to John Kemp, as translated 
from Rymer's " Fcederaj" vol. ii. p. 283 : — 

"A.D. 1331,5 Edw. III. 
" On behalf of John Kempe, of Flanders, cloth weaver, concerning the exercise 

of his craft. 

" The king to all bailiffs, &c, whom it may concern, greeting. Know ye 
that whereas John Kempe of Flanders, weaver of woollen cloths, hath come 
to dwell within our kingdom of England for the purpose of practising his 
craft therein, and of instructing and informing such as might desire to learn 
it of him, and hath brought with him certain men and servants, and appren- 
tices to the said trade, we have taken the same John, and his aforesaid men, 
servants, and apprentices, and all his goods and chattels whatsoever, under 
our protection, &c. (according to the tenor of similar letters as far as these 
words : viz.) for we promise to cause similar letters of protection to be issued 
to other men of the same craft, and to dyers and fullers, who wish to come 
from parts beyond the seas to dwell within the same our kingdom for the 
aforesaid object. In witness whereof, &c. these letters are to hold good 
during the King's pleasure. Witness the King at Lincoln, the 28th day of 
July." 

This John Kemp settled in Kendal, and, it is said, his 
descendants are still remaining in the town or neighbourhood. 1 

1 There was within living memory, a family of the name of Kemp, who 
dwelt on the Fell Side. — (1st edition.) 



236 MANUFCATUKES. 

He settled here in the time of Edward III. In 1336-7-8, great 
numbers of weavers came over from Brabant. Some say, that 
King Edward solicited them openly : others assert, that he 
secretly invited them. But the most probable account seems 
to be, that, having revolted against their Prince, they were 
banished from their native country, and sought an asylum 
here. 1 Of another and similar, but later event, Dyer says : — 

" Our day arose 
When Alva's tyranny the weaving arts 
Drove from the fertile valleys of the Scheldt." 

Kemp, however, could not be among the number of these 
insurgents, for the insurrection last mentioned did not take 
place till 1560. Till the year 1337, most of the wool of this 
country was exported into the Netherlands. In that year an 
act was passed to prohibit further exportation, but the practice 
still continuing, a tax of fifty shillings a pack was imposed 
upon it, and such was the determined spirit for exportation 
that the sum of 250,000?. (amazing sum, at that day) was 
collected annually by the Customs from this source. 2 Pro- 
bably the wool of Westmorland, and the other northern 
counties, might be of too coarse a staple for exportation, and 
was therefore worked up at home for the use of the inha- 
bitants, cut off by bad roads, and intersected by mountains, 
from the rest of the kingdom. The women, and indeed, 
men also, on wet days, and in the evenings, carded and spun 
the wool, at their homes, for their own use. For many cen- 
turies the buckram or druggets, and bump made here, were 
the common clothing of the poor in London and most other 
towns; and (as early as 1390) they had "grown into such 
esteem," that in 13 Eichard II. c. 10, there was a regulation 
" for the length and breadth of cogware and Kendal clothes." 
Again, in the 9th Henry IV. (1408), there was an enactment 

1 Vide a " History of the Manufactures in the Netherlands," where may be 
found much interesting information. In the city of Louvaine alone, at 
that time, "there were above 4,000 woollen drapers, and 150,000 weavers! 
When these men went from their work a great bell was rung to give notice 
to all the mothers to take children in doors, lest they should be trampled 
under foot by that crowd of workmen." This insurrection ruined the trade of 
Louvaine. 

2 Watson's " History of Halifax." 



WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE. 237 

"touching the sealing of Kendal Cloth." And in the 7th 
James I. c. 16, "An Act for the encouragement of many poor 
people in Cumberland, Westmorland, and Lancashire, to 
continue a trade of making Cogware, Kendals, Cartmels, and 
coarse cloths." It must be remarked that the cloths here 
alluded to were coarse woollens, although generally called 
Kendal cottons, — being, perhaps, a corruption of coatings, the 
use they were applied to, — or derived from cot, latinized in 
old writings to cottam, signifying the worst kinds of wool, of 
which they were made. Real cotton manufactures were not 
known till the middle of the last century. Dr. Fuller, in his 
" History of Cambridge," relates the following anecdote con- 
cerning the origin of Stourbridge fair — once the largest mart 
of woollen goods in Europe. The circumstance occurred about 
the year 1417. "A clothier of Kendal, a town characterized 
(by Camden) to be 'lanificii gloria et industria precellens,' 
casually wetting his cloath in water, in his passage to London, 
exposed it there to sale, on cheap terms, as worse for wetting, 
and yet, it seems, saved by the bargain. Next year he 
returned again, with some other of his townsmen, proffering 
drier and dearer cloth to be sold. So that within a few years 
hither came a confluence of buyers, sellers, and lookers-on, 
which are the three principles of a fair. In memoria thereof 
Kendal men challenge some privilege in that place, annually 
choosing one of the town to be chief, before whom an antic 
sword was carried with some mirthful solemnities, disused of 
late, since these sad times, which put men's minds into more 
serious employments." 

When the trade in Kendal cottons became systematic and 
extensive, country weavers were spread throughout all the 
neighbouring towns, villages, and hamlets. These small manu- 
facturers attended at Kendal on the market days, and sold 
their goods to the shearmen-dyers, who dyed and finished 
them. Upon the river Kent, and indeed upon all the streams 
in this part of the country, there were walk-mills, for the 
" steads " of which, though not a vestige of them now exists, 
mill-rents are paid to this day. As in all manufactures at 
their origin, the mills were small and of rude construction ; 
and as the milling of cloth was, in the infancy of the manu- 



238 MANUFACTURES. 

facture, most probably performed by the feet of men, these 
mills may have had the name of " walk-mills " from that 
employment. We find, from Dr. Burn, that " in the 4th and 
5th Philip and Mary, there was a grant of two fulling-mills 
nigh Sprent Bridge, in Skelsmergh." And again, " that there 
is at Staveley one fulling-mill, and it is worth by the 
year 10s." 

The Kendal cottons which were for home consumption, 
were mostly white, made in pieces 20 yards long. Some of 
them were spotted by the hand with red, blue, or green, and 
were hence called " ermines," or " spotted cottons." Of this 
kind, probably, was the dress of the Kendal bowmen, at the 
battle of Flodden Field, mentioned at p. 26. The spots 
might easily, by poetic fancy, be magnified into " crosses red." 
Or, the "spots" might be designed as the (rude) armorial 
bearings of the several Barons, for the sake of distinguishing 
their respective retainers. There were other cloths of a some- 
what finer description, dyed mostly blue with a mixture of 
green, or altogether green. Of this colour was the clothing of 
Falstaff's "misbegotten knaves," and " Eagged Eobins," in 
Strutt's romance of " Queenhoo-hall." l And as the Kendal 
green was perhaps the first colour of celebrity in the manu- 
factures of this kingdom, it may not be amiss to give a few 
particulars of the process by which it was obtained. A plant 
which is known to have abounded in the neighbourhood of 
Kendal many years ago, though it be now nearly uprooted, 
called by Linnaeus genista tinctoria, and commonly called 
" Dyer's Broom," was brought in large quantities to Kendal, 
from the neighbouring commons and marshes, and sold to the 

1 Vide Shakspeare's " Henry IV." and Sir Walter Scott's conclusion of 
Strutt's romance, " Queenhoo-hall." A fellow, full of queer stories, is thus 
described, in the year 1564, in a tract by William Bulleyn : — " Sir, there is one 
lately come into this hall in a green Kendal coat, with yellow hose, a beard of 
the same colour only on the upper lip ; a russet hat, with a great plume of 
strange feathers, and a great scarf about his neck, in cut buskins. He is 
playing at the tray-trip with our Host's son : he playeth trick upon the 
gittern," &c. — (From C. Knight's "William Shakspbare.") In Hall's 
" Chronicle," we are told that Henry VIII., with a party of noblemen, " came 
sodainly in a mornyng into the queue's chambre, all apareled in shorte cotes 
of Kentish-Kendal — Ky. Kendal (grene ?) like outlawes. or Robiu Hode's 



WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE. 239 

dyers. This plant, after being dried, was boiled for the 
colouring matter it contained, which was a beautiful yellow. 
The cloth was first boiled in alum water, for the mordant, and 
then immersed in the yellow dye. It was then dried, and 
submerged in a blue liquor extracted from woad, 1 which, 
combining with the yellow, produced the solid green so 
much celebrated. 2 About the year 1770, the plant above 
alluded to, fell into disuse, being superseded by the Saxon 
green, — considered to be a brighter colour, and obtained with 
less labour. The art of dyeing was introduced into this country 
about A.D. 1550. From the establishment of manufactures 
to this period, all goods made in England were sent into 
Holland to be dyed, and brought back again for the con- 
sumption of this kingdom. One William Cholmley, having 
mastered the secret of the Flemish dyers, offered his dis- 
covery, through the English government (temp. Edwd. VI.) 
as a free gift to his countrymen ; and urging the Council to 
take advantage of his proposal, he added a remarkable pro- 
phecy, that if England would develope its manufactures, and 
rely upon itself for the completion of them, the trade of 
Antwerp would droop, and London become the mart of 
Europe ! 3 The dye woods manufactured in this town have 
been, and are, at the present day, highly approved in the 
great manufacturing districts. 

The woollen manufactures of Kendal appear to have been 
in highest repute, above those of other towns, about the 
time of Camden and Speed, in the beginning of the 17th 
century. The former writer observes, " this is a place famed 
for excellent cloathing, and for its remarkable industry. The 
inhabitants carry forward an extensive trade for woollen 
goods, known in all parts of England." And Speed says 
" this towne is of great trade and resort, and for the diligent 
and industrious practise of making cloath, so excels the rest, 

1 This dye, it seems, was not unknown to the early inhabitants of this island 
for it is observed, in Sydney's History of England, "that the Celtes stained 
their bodies of a sky-blue colour with the juice of ivoad, and wore no other 
covering than the skins of beasts." 

2 The binding of this Book is about the shade of colour of the true 
Kendal green. 

3 Froude's "Histoid of England," p. 280. 



Z±0 MANUFACTURES. 

that in regard thereof it caryeth a supereniinent name above 
them, and hath great vent and trafficke for her woollen 
cloaths, through all the parts of England." As this was the 
time when Shakspeare lived, the colour " Kendal green " had 
also achieved its popularity. The goods were formerly carried 
periodically on pack-horses 1 by the makers themselves, or 
sent to London to be vended by the warehouse-men, among 
their customers who visited the metropolis from different 
parts of the kingdom. After the rise of the British Colonies, 
North America and the West Indies, the greater part of 
the Kendal cottons were sold to the merchants trading to 
those countries, for the clothing of the negroes and poorer 
planters. As the Colonies increased, and slaves along with 
them, who were employed in the culture of tobacco in Virginia, 
the demand for this coarse manufacture continued to increase, 
till the intervention of the American war caused a total sus- 
pension of the export trade. Upon the cessation of hostilities 
it again revived, but our manufacturers not able to keep pace 
in the improvements in machinery with those of Yorkshire, 
the latter interfered, and were gradually gaining advantage of 
Kendal, till the increase of American duties put a stop to the 

1 Before turnpike roads were made and before wagons came in use, the 
following pack-horses, &c. transported the merchandise of Kendal, viz. : — 

One gang of pack-horses to and from London every week, 

of about 20 

One gang from Wigan weekly, about 18 

One gang from Whitehaven, about 20 

From Cockermouth 15 

Two gangs from Barnard-castle 26 

Two gangs from Penrith twice a week, about 15 each . . 60 

One gang from Settle twice a week, about 15 30 

From York weekly, about 10 

From Ulverston 5 

From Hawkshead twice a week, about 6 12 

From Appleby twice a week, about 6 12 

From Cartmel 6 

From Lancaster, two wagons 64 

Carriages three or four times a week, to and from Miln- 

thorp, computed at 40 horse-load 40 

From Sedbergh, Kirkby-Lousdale, Orton, Dent, and other 

neighbouring villages, about 20 

Total . . . 354 
Besides 24, every six weeks fur Glasgow. 



WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE. 241 

exportation. A specimen of the large trade carried on in 
Kendal " cottons " is ascertained from the custom-house books 
at Liverpool. In the year 1770, there were exported to 
America, from that port alone, between 3,000 and 4,000 
pieces, viz. : — 

To Barbadoes .......... 120 pieces. 

Dominique .............. 30 

Jamaica 810 

St. Kitts 40 

Newfoundland 194 

New York 80 

Virginia and Maryland 2,693 

Carolina, 640 yards — about .... 40 l 

In process of time the change of fashion demanded a 
more elegant fabric of wearing apparel, and the celebrated 
" Kendal cottons " at length became degraded to the use of 
horse-checks, floor-cloths, dusters, mops, &c. Linseys, which 
for a number of years were parallel with cottons, after the 
decline of the latter, became the staple manufacture of 
the place. This article was sent to Holland and Germany, 
excepting a finer sort which was made, and continues to be 
made, in increased quantities, for home consumption. 

The manufacture of knit yarn and worsted stockings was 
also a flourishing trade in Kendal. The hosiers used regularly 
to attend the markets of all the towns, and at stated times all 
the villages and hamlets within twenty miles of the circum- 
jacent country, to give out worsted which they carried with 
them for the purpose, and take in the stockings that had 
been knit during the interval between each visit. 2 On the 
mountain side, in the valleys, and on every hand were to 
be seen 

" The spinsters and the knitters in the sun." 



1 From the Addenda to Burn's "Westmorland. 

2 It is not known by whom, or when, the art of knitting stockings was 
discovered. Savary asserts that the Scotch were the first people in the world 
that knit stockings, because St. Fiacre was the chosen patron of the stocking 
knitters in France, and St. Fiacre was a Scotchman ! "That great and expen- 
sive prince, Henry VIII.," says Howell, " wore ordinarily cloth hose, except 
there came from Spain, by great chance, a pair of silk stockings." See, also 
Smith's " Wealth of Nations," p. 242, as to Queen Elizabeth being the first 
person that wore stockings ; " which were a present to her from the Spanish 
Ambassador." 

E 






242 MANUFACTURES. 

It is supposed that the hosiery business was most flourishing 
about a hundred years ago, but we have been unable to obtain 
any authentic particulars so far back as that time. In 1801 
the average quantity of stockings made for the Kendal 
market, weekly, was 

In Ravenstonedale 1,000 pairs. 

Sedbergh and Dent .... 840 
Orton 560 

Total 2,400 pairs. 

At the present time there are few knit stockings made 
here ; other descriptions of knit woollens, however, are still, 
to some extent, manufactured for this market. These are 
single and double scarlet caps, Kilmarnock and plaid caps, 
made principally for exportation to America and the West 
Indies. 

These manufactures, altogether, furnished employment not 
only for the inhabitants of the town, but also for the working 
population of the surrounding country. By the introduction 
of real cottons, in later years, and the extraordinary cheap- 
ness at which they are manufactured, the linsey trade has 
been compelled to take second rank ; whilst woven hose 
have superseded the handiwork of the fair artist. But 
happily, the skill and enterprise of our manufacturers pro- 
vided, that either the old staple manufactures should be 
replaced with new ones, or so modified as still to compete 
with " the millions of spindles worked by steam." Before the 
almost general introduction of steam engines, and the com- 
bination of machinery, the plentiful supply of water might 
afford some advantages to the manufacturers of Kendal, over 
those of many other places ; but after that, the local situa- 
tion of the town, — so far removed from the first essential of 
modern manufactures — coal ; so entirely shut out from the 
facilities of open navigation ; and so remote from the home 
markets, must be confessed to have been greatly detrimental 
to its prosperity. To what, then, can we attribute the steady 
and permanent success of trade which has never failed to 
provide for the population of Kendal ? Surely, to the 
determined spirit of industry and frugality of its manufac- 



CASTLE MILLS. 243 

turers — to the wise direction of their labour and capital into 
profitable channels ; and, above all, to their habitual attention 
to the manufacture of goods of undoubted utility. We have 
had opportunities of ascertaining the reputation of Kendal 
manufactures, in various parts of the kingdom, and we find their 
characteristic that which is intrinsically serviceable. 

By the introduction of railway facilities, in 1847, the 
woollen trade of Kendal got a fresh stimulus, in having 
the price of coals thereby lowered, in having the cost of 
carriage reduced, and the markets brought nearer. Sir 
Eobert Peel's Free Trade measures, for the removal of " pro- 
tective " duties, operated also beneficially for the manufacturer. 
Thirty years ago the "fell sheep" of Westmorland and 
Cumberland constituted the main supply of wool for the 
Kendal trade. The home grower was " protected," as it was 
called, by an import duty on foreign wools of 6d. per lb. 
at first, and afterwards of Id., and at last \d. per lb. But 
the best commentary on the policy of that "protective" 
system, is given by the confession of the growers themselves, 
that " English wool is now more remunerative to them than 
when it was protected." 

CASTLE MILLS. 

These mills were originally Corn Mills, connected with the 
Castle (see ante, p. 98), afterwards Fulling Mills, and Carding 
and Spinning Mills, for woollens called, by a solecism, "cottons." 
They were rebuilt in 1806, extended, by the erection of com- 
modious sheds, in 1855, and filled with the newest machinery, 
by Messrs. J. J. and W. Wilson, the most spirited and enter- 
prising firm in the trade. The manufacture consists of rail- 
way rugs, coat-linings, tweeds, horse-clothing, &c, and every 
process is carried on within the premises, including carding, 
spinning, dying, power-loom weaving, fulling, and finishing. 
It was here that steam-power had its first application, in the 
district, to the woollen manufactures, Messrs. Wilson having 
erected a thirty-horse engine in 1855. Their machinery is 
now driven by three water wheels, equal to fifty-horse power, 
and thirty-horse power of steam. The " hands " employed by 
them are upwards of 300. 

e2 



244 MANUFACTUEES. 



MEAL BANK WOOLLEN MILLS. 



This is, at the present day, one of the most thriving 
establishments in the trade, carried on by Messrs. Braith- 
waite & Co. It is, indeed, more like a colony than a 
simple manufactory. The mill stands in a beautiful ravine, 
on a crescent of land formed by a bend of the river Mint, 
where the geologist may see traces, strongly marked, of 
the diluvial action of former epochs. Advantage is taken 
of this situation, and a water-wheel is erected for moving 
the machinery, estimated at 80-horse power. In 1854, 
a steam-engine was also put down to compensate for 
diminished water power, in dry seasons. The manufactures 
consist of collar checks, linseys, coat-linings, tweeds and fancy 
trouserings. The last named article, fancy trouserings, was 
introduced in the year 1838, then new to Kendal. The firm 
obtained a medal for the best cloths, of their kind, at the Paris 
Exhibition, in 1855 ; and a still higher compliment was paid 
to them on that occasion by the report of the Huddersfield 
Chamber of Commerce, when it was stated that " the black 
and white tweeds, and shepherd's plaids from Kendal, (Messrs. 
Braithwaites') are superior to any exhibited in purity and 
firmness of colour, and fine, soft, woolly handle. Compared 
with them the Continental manufactures of this class are of 
very inferior quality." About 500 " hands " are employed in 
the manufactory, who reside in neat, healthy cottages, near 
to the works ; and the condition of the children is cared for 
by the establishment of a school, where upwards of sixty 
children have the benefit of a good English education. 

WEAVING SHED IN LONG POOL. 

Messrs. Simpson & Ireland are now (1861) building a large 
" shed," or mill, in Long Pool, for weaving by power-looms. 
Their manufactory, at Staveley, moved by water power, is one 
of the oldest establishments connected with the staple trade 
of the town. 

There are, besides the afore-mentioned, many different kinds 
of manufacture, by which the working population of the 



CARD MAKING. 245 

town is supported. We shall enumerate only a few of the 
seemingly most important, placing them according to 
seniority. 

CARD MAKING. 

The manufacture of wool cards is a business of considerable 
but uncertain antiquity in this town ; and it is affirmed, that 
if it was not originated here, it at least received from the 
ingenuity of our townsmen, so many improvements and 
stimulants, as should fairly entitle them to the honour of its 
invention. The first cardmaker of eminence, that we have 
been able to find, was Mr. John Waide, who served the office 
of mayor, in 1743. This gentleman realized a handsome 
fortune by the old, slow processes of single-tooth making and 
hand-pricking. In 1751, a pricking-engine was invented and 
constructed by William Fothergill, cardmaker, and William 
Pennington, a millwright, of this town ; by means of which 
Mr. Fothergill extended his trade very considerably. Another 
establishment took its rise out of Mr. Fothergill's, by Mr. 
Dover Bayliff, an ingenious mechanic. In 1775, BaylifY 
invented an engine for the facilitating the crooking of wire 
teeth. 1 This invention produced an epocha in card making, 
and, with the assurance of its general adoption, Mr. Bayliff 
commenced a manufactory of the engine. In this new trade 
he admitted, as partner, a person of the name of Lawrence, 
a clock-maker, who, after being initiated in the mystery, 
seceded from the establishment, and departed into Yorkshire, 
to reap the profits of Bayliff 's invention. By that time, 
however, Mr. Bayliff had extended his business, and besides 
supplying . a great portion of the manufacturers of this 
kingdom, did a considerable export trade. 

The present machinery used in card making not merely 
bends and cuts the wire, but it likewise punches the leather, 
and sets the teeth, by a simultaneous and instant operation. 

1 When Mr. Waide, who was one of " the old school/' had the first intima- 
tion of Bayliff 's invention, he exclaimed, " Humph ! he mud as weel attempt 
et pluck 't moon en 't stars frae 't sky." Shortly after this he met Mr. Bayliff 
in the street, with part of his apparatus, in a wrapper, under his arm, " Well, 
Bayliff," he enquired, " what's that you've got there ?" "Nought less than 't 
moon and 't stars," (replied B.), "thou may look for their shining in a few 
nights hence ; at present they are under an eclipse." 



246 MANUFACTURES. 

There is, indeed, scarcely any machinery, in any branch of 
trade, so perfect and so beautiful in its operations. The large 
manufactory of Mr. James Thompson, built in 1860, is replete 
with the newest machinery, and that gentleman now carries 
on a business far more extensive than any of the most enter- 
prising of his predecessors. 

MARBLE WORKS. 

The manufacturing, or chiseling and polishing of marble, 
together with the public profession of architecture, was 
introduced into Kendal by the late Francis Webster, father 
of Messrs. George and Francis Webster, his successors. 
About the year 1800, till which time every branch of the 
art was executed by manual labour, Mr. Webster erected 
machinery at Helsington Laithes, on the Kent, for sawing and 
polishing marble ; and this machinery is now brought to 
such perfection, that all descriptions of mouldings, whether 
straight or circular, are wrought by it in the most finished 
style. Mr. Francis Webster, the present proprietor, has an 
establishment for the exhibition of his manufacture in Preston; 
and his works of art, scattered throughout the kingdom, with 
numerous sepulchral monuments, and specimens of archi- 
tectural skill which adorn this town and neighbourhood, in 
particular, will long bear honourable testimony to his 
merit. In 1830, another manufactory of marble was estab- 
lished by Mr. Edward Bayliff. These works received an 
auspicious commencement, Mr. Bayliff being employed by 
Wyatville, the King's architect, to make two large mantel- 
pieces for Windsor Castle. The larger of these is a most 
superb and finished specimen. It is constructed of Italian 
dove marble, in the Gothic order of architecture, and is 
erected in St. George's Hall. The other is made of Kendal 
Fell limestone, and though less magnificent, is scarcely less 
beautiful than the former ; and shows, that this limestone is 
capable of a very high polish, and possesses a vein of pleasing 
variety. 1 These two mantel-pieces were erected in Windsor 

1 The Kendal Fell limestone was first polished as marble by the late 
Alderman Webster, in 1788. 



LEATHER AND SHOE MANUFACTURE. 247 

Castle, in February, 1831. But Mr. BaylifFs establishment, 
notwithstanding, lasted only a short time. 

COMB MANUFACTURES. 

The horn comb manufacture is of considerable antiquity 
in this town, having been in existence more than a century ; 
and is carried on with great spirit, at the present time, by 
Messrs. John Sisson and Son. This establishment has been 
in the same family since 1794, Joseph Sisson having founded 
it in that year. The firm maintains a high reputation 
for the production of a particular description of combs for 
horses, outrivalling, perhaps, every other house in the trade 
throughout the kingdom, in that article. London, Edinburgh, 
and Glasgow are the chief marts. Most of the combs are 
for domestic consumption ; but some of the wholesale houses, 
in London, export Messrs. Sisson's produce. The manufacture 
is stimulated by a steam engine and machinery of modern 
construction. Formerly, from about the year 1800 to 1845 
there was also a considerable manufacture of ivory combs in 
this town ; carried on, first, by Mr. Alderman Berry, and 
afterwards by Mr. James Conway ; but, on the death of this 
last-named gentleman, the ivory comb trade ceased. 

LEATHER AND SHOE MANUFACTURE. 

The manufacture of leather is part of the industrial history 
of Kendal, and it still adheres to the town, but in a different 
phase from that which it presented a century and a half 
ago. In 1683, the inhabitants, petitioning Charles II. for 
a renewal of the Charter, state that "the trade in leather 
was grown very considerable ;" and such as might then be 
desired "to take toll thereof." (See, ante, p. 175). In 1724, 
says Wharton, " the companies of tanners and tawers have, at 
this day, so great a share of trade as enables them to pay to 
the crown, by way of duty, between 1,600?. and 2,000Z. per 
annum." And, at the last Kendal guild, in 1759, it is recorded 
that there were sixty tanners in the procession who had the 
arms of their trade painted in the front of their caps, and 
were attended by "bold Arthur-a-Bland," properly dressed. 



248. MANUFACTURES. 

The tanners and curriers of those days were occupied in 
producing the heaviest and strongest descriptions of leather, 
and the same manufacture is continued at the present day, 
in limited degree. But, within the past two or three years, a 
new branch of the trade has sprung up which, in extent and 
importance, outrivals the old branch of the leather business 
in Kendal, and has struck a "heavy blow and great dis- 
couragement" to shoemaking, by hand, in Northampton and 
Stafford ; towns formerly noted for the production of shoes. 
This new trade is carried on at Netherfield, by Messrs. 
Somervell Brothers, who employ, in their establishment, 
between 250 and 300 "hands," male and female; but the 
greater number are females, The "hands" are occupied 
principally in preparing the "work" for the sewing-machine 
— each sewing-machine requiring only one operator ; and the 
work consists solely of making what are technically called 
"uppers ;" that is, the upper part of a boot or shoe, ready for 
the sole. The leather used for the purpose is imported, and 
is almost all of fine quality. The only operation remaining 
for the shoemaker is to attach a "sole" to the "uppers" here 
produced ; and we are told that these latter are in some cases 
sold for less money than would be paid in wages for making 
them by hand, apart from the cost of leather. 

PAPER MANUFACTURES. 

The Burneside Paper Mills were started in the year 1833, by 
Messrs. Hudson and Nicholson (Kendal), and Mr. Foster 
(Ky. Lonsdale), for the manufacture of printing papers, by 
" machine." The same parties converted the works at Cowan 
Head (formerly carried on by Messrs. Branthwaite), from 
the old "hand-make" process into the machine-producing 
system. And both mills were conducted under the firm of 
Hudson, Nicholson, and Foster, till the year 1845, when 
they were transferred, by purchase, to Mr. James Cropper, 
who has considerably enlarged the works, and improved the 
machinery at both places. There is water-power, at the works 
combined, equal to 120-horse, besides auxiliary steam-power 
to the extent of 40-horse, making together 160-horse-power. 



CARPET MANUFACTURE. 249 

There are four paper machines, and nineteen rag-engines, 
employing usually about 120 workpeople (male and female). 
The produce of paper is nearly twenty tons per week. 

CARPET MANUFACTORY. 

The manufacture of carpets is entirely modernin Kendal. 
It was introduced in the year 1822, by Messrs. Joseph and 
John Atkinson. Since which time, it has, by progressive 
steps, become an extensive and lucrative business. In 
1828, Messrs. Atkinson adopted some new machinery for 
weaving damask carpeting. In consequence of this improve- 
ment they were able to compete with the first houses in the 
trade ; but the spirit of rivalry was not long in opposing 
their progress. An action was instituted in Chancery, at the 
suit of Messrs. Clark and Sons, of Market Harborough, carpet 
manufacturers, for the alleged infringement of a patent which 
that house had taken out. It appeared on the trial, that a 
loom had been introduced from France about six years before. 
The one adopted by Messrs. Clark was shown to be a modifi- 
cation of this French loom. Messrs. Atkinson's was proved to 
be a still more improved modification of the French apparatus. 
The court therefore decided for the Kendal firm. We have 
been thus particular respecting this proceeding, because the 
success of the carpet trade in Kendal seemed to depend upon 
it. Various descriptions of carpets are made here : Brussels, 
Kidderminster, Venetian, and others. Most of these are for 
home use, and sold chiefly in London. Some are exported, 
generally from Liverpool to America, Canada, &c. Since the 
death of the Messrs. Atkinson, the business has been 
successfully and still more extensively prosecuted by Messrs. 
Whitwell and Co., who have, in their time, adapted steam 
power to the production of carpets, and superadded many 
mechanical and artistic improvements. 

AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENT MANUFACTORY. 

This is a new and flourishing branch of business in Kendal, 
introduced by Messrs. Williamson Brothers, since the esta- 
blishment of railways, and a large number of hands are 
employed in this manufactory. 



250 MANUFACTURES. 



SNUFF MANUFACTURE. 

Kendal has long been celebrated for the production of 
its snuffs. Two descriptions, called respectively, " Kendal 
brown," and " Kendal rappee," are peculiar to the place, and 
are held in great esteem by snuff-takers throughout the 
country. The principal manufacturers, at this time, are 
Mr. Samuel Gawith, Mrs. Allen, Messrs. Noble & Wilson, and 
Messrs. J. & E. Busher. 



FAIES AND MARKETS. 

Gilbert Fitz-Keinfred, 7th baron of Kendal, procured 
from King Eichard I. (we have been unable to find the 
precise year) a charter for a weekly market at Kendal, on 
Saturday. In the 3rd Edward II. (1310), Mamiaduke de 
Thweng, who held the Lumley Fee, obtained a charter for 
a market and fair. And again, a grant of a market and 
fair was obtained by Christian, wife of Ingelram de Gynes, 
in the 7th Edward III. (1333), "or rather," says Dr. Bum, 
"these last were confirmations of the former grant." Con- 
firmations, we feel disposed to add, as to the market, but a 
new privilege as respects the fair ; for we can find no allusion 
to the fair in the mention of the grant of Eichard I. These 
grants were fully confirmed by the Charters of Incorporation 
of Elizabeth and Charles I., in which are definitely appointed 
two fairs yearly, and a weekly market. 

Camden describes Kendal as being, about the end of the 
sixteenth century, " one of the best corn markets in these 
northern parts." This seems almost irreconcileable with the 
fact, which some persons still living can testify, that 75 years 
ago, seldom more than a dozen loads of oats were exposed 
for sale, and not a grain of wheat was brought into this 
market. Such has been the improvement in agriculture, 
however, in the neighbourhood, since the period above-men- 
tioned, that the quantity of grain (principally wheat and 
oats) now, exposed in this market, is very large. 

In the year 1730, potatoes were sparingly used here ; for 



FAIRS AND MARKETS. 251 

the quantity consumed was brought from Kirkby-Lonsdale, 
where a person of the name of Marsden had introduced the 
culture of this useful vegetable. 1 

Large quantities of butter are sold in this market, the 
greatest part of which is bought by dealers, and carried 
for sale to Manchester and other large manufacturing towns, 
in Lancashire. 

Whilst most kinds of agricultural produce appear to have 
increased, the fish market, on the contrary, has been on the 
decline. Dr. Burn has supplied a reason for this decline. 
After enumerating the different kinds of lake fish, he adds, 
" the southern part of this county is also pretty well furnished 
with sea fish, caught near Levens Sands, and other places on 
the sea coast ; which heretofore (1777) were weekly brought 
to Kendal market, insomuch that upon a market day there 
have been sometimes five and thirty different sorts of fish. 
But since the great improvement of the town and port of 
Lancaster, the market for fish is considerably drawn that 
way." Fish was formerly so abundant in Kendal — something 
like two centuries ago — that apprentices had to be protected 
from the excessive use of it by masters in whose houses they 
lodged ; and a clause was commonly inserted in indentures, 
limiting the supply of fish to three days a week. 2 A royal 
commission, which was appointed last year (1860), to inquire 
into the decay of salmon fisheries, visited Kendal among 
other places, and took evidence as to the decline of salmon in 
the river Kent. They reported, generally, that the sensible 
falling off in the quantity of salmon is caused by the building 
of high wears across the rivers, and by poaching with " stake- 
nets/' and " baulk-nets." And they suggest, that river con- 
servators should be appointed, with salutary powers, to protect 
the fish. 

1 "Manners and Customs of Westmorland," an interesting pamphlet, 
written by the late John Gough, Esq., under the signature of a " Literary 
Antiquarian." 

2 We have not been able to find one of these indentures, but there is no 
doubt about the fact. Brockett mentions Newcastle and Kendal as towns 
where the apprentices had this saving clause in their favour. 






252 CLIMATE. HEALTH, MORTALITY. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

CLIMATE, HEALTH, MOETALITY. 

Kendal has attained to an unenviable and undeserved 
notoriety in connection with the rain-fall. When, forty years 
ago, public records of the annual fall of rain were kept at only 
a very few places, and Kendal was one of the few, the returns 
from this place indicated the maximum of rain as for the 
whole kingdom (Epping, in Essex, presenting the minimum). 
But now, when the range of observation is extended, and the 
places where registers are kept are vastly increased in number, 
the fall of rain at Kendal is seen to be nearer the mean than the 
maximum of all England. But it is the chief town of the Lake 
district, and the Lake hills certainly present the maximum 
fall of rain, so that Kendal, by topographical relation, still 
maintains its character of inordinate wetness, and it requires 
a candid examination of the tables to remove this impression. 
That the hilly districts, on the north of Kendal, should be 
remarkable for moisture, is only in accordance with the known 
laws of meteorology. Eising, as these hills do, tier above 
tier, from Whitbarrow Scar, on the shores of Morecambe 
Bay, to the culminating Pike of Scafell, " the last that parleys 
with the setting sun," here are so many magnets to attract the 
rain-clouds, which come sailing up from the western Atlantic 
and the Irish Channel. These rain-clouds, heated by passing 
over the gulf-stream, 1 come into collision with fields of air, of 
much lower temperature, floating around the hills, condensa- 
tion takes place, and down pours the rain ; so that, as the 
phrase goes, "when it rains, it rains!' The average fall of 

1 This oceanic current elevates the temperature of the air of this part of 
Europe to the extent of 10° to 15°.— See " Life on the Earth," by Professor 
John Philips, p. 154 ; and " Physical Geography of the Sea," by Lieutenant 
Maury, p. 48. 



THE KAIN GAUGE. 253 

rain at Scafell exceeds 120 inches ; but, as may be seen 
by the tables subjoined, the average rain-fall at Kendal is 
45^ inches. The United Kingdom presents the mean of 32 
inches ; therefore, Kendal is not now (taking the last 
decade), very materially in excess of the average of the 
whole kingdom, and has no right, as before said, to 
participate with the district of the Lake hills, in pluvial 
notoriety. 

We furnish, herewith, tables of the quantity of rain taken 
at Kendal for fifty years, by meteorologists of unquestionable 
accuracy. The rain-guage was kept from the year 1811 to 
1821 (inc.), by Thomas Harrison, Esq., and John Gough, Esq. 
successively ; and from 1822 to 1860 (inc.), the long period of 
thirty-nine years, solely by our friend Samuel Marshall, Esq. 
We have divided the series into five tables, of ten years 
in each table ; and we have appended to these, a statement of 
the mean fall of rain in each decade of years, which enables 
the cursory reader to compare the results, without travelling 
through the whole of the figures : 



254 



CLIMATE, HEALTH, MOKTALITY. 





o 

00 


wCOOCDGOCOCO^OOOqoOOCD 

SCir- liO^OOOrH-^ICO^lOO 

'gOt^GO.t^OOCDOr- iCO©q©q©q 

£ ©q' cm' r-H d ^' w ^i od o -<** ©q" ^t" 


-«* 
*-* 

id 






o 

1 — 1 

oo 

7— 1 


aJCqOO^COOOCO^OOqO 
©COlOiOOOC500^H-*C50 

^©q^^oocoioocoioooco©* 


o 

CO 
CO* 




o 

© 

CD 
00 
I—I 

o 


00 
1 — 1 
00 
I— 1 


nJCO©q00^HG0©q©q00©q©qcO00 

2o©qco©qcocooorHaociCD^ 

"g00ia^00r-HC01OlOCOO5r-lLO 

^d«i>W(n'(ncoHd>6id ©q' 


oo 

r-H 
O 




00 

1 — 1 


»JO^HC5^©q©q-^C5C©CDCOCO 
£CDi>.CDO00a000OCSC5OC0 
'gO^tMCOOOCiiOOOr-HOiO 

£ co" id ^i" ©q* co" cm" co* ^h co" id -^ co* 


lO 

©q 

oo 
o 


CO 

o 

rd 

O 

i 

•rH 
O 

oo 
o 


CD 
00 

I— 1 


n2i^r-HCrqOCOOrH01>-0000 
2r~ iCO^r- lCOCOCDr-lCDr-<lO©q 

 go^ncoooocoiOT)|iNooo 
,o co' co" ^ 5* w <m" eci « 6 tjJ ^ d 


©q 

00* 


IS 

g 


00 
rH 


liOOCSNNNCSOIMHHiaw 

-gi-nos^cMOcocor-ioooooooq 
J* i-h" co" o i-" id co* ©q' id id co" ^ co" 


CO 

<<* 

^0 


IQ 

CO 
H 

c3 
O 

O 


T— ! 

00 
1 — 1 


w^cocoocsioocoi^iocqoo 

2C5^lOCiiOi0050iOCOiOi— f 

^0©qcD©qco©qi—i©qcoooo^H 

^ h n h ^J d (?q i! •* h id d d 


©q 

lO 
Ci 
^H* 


o 
co 
o 
— 


CO 

s 


CO 

00 

1 — 1 


roOOiOlOiOlOlOCiO^Cq^r-H 

2 r— lO^CO""*T-Hr-HC500COi— 1 t» 

^CiCscoOi-HcrqcMO^Hi—ij^T-H 
^ co* oo* tj" co id ©q" ©q' ©q' ^t" id id ©q" 


CO 

o 

OS 


© 

4 


h- 1 

1 


©q 

1 — 1 
oo 


mCSt^OOCOlOCi'^'OOlOCOCS^ 

2cso-*iocooot--oot-^©q^ 
p gooiooo©qcoco©qooooo©q 

^ ©q" oo" " *" r-i id co"  «* ©q' co" o" co' ph 


00 

©q 
j>* 






i— i 

r-i 

00 
r— 1 


»©qc5cot>-coioi>.iocoi>-©qco 
®©qr-HCOt-r— ico©qcoj>.i^©q^ 

'glOCOCOlOCOOiCO'^^COCOCi 

^ P5 N -^ CO N CO -^ lO i-i 00 C CD* 


oo 

CO 

co 






a 

to 

o 




- - 






• *» s • _§ § 

3 [^ o .^ . © ►- ^ _2 ""^ - 55 





FALL OF EAIN. 



25 



OO 



o 

CO 
00 


02 


O 


^*» 


lO 


CO 


r— i 


as 


7-t oo t- *a 


co 


CM 


O 


 S 


CM 


J>> 


-=H 


*a 


CO 


oo 


co 7— i cm as 


CM 


00 


CO 


-* 


b- 


O 


CO 


00 


CM 


as cm o co 


O 


o 


o 


7—1 


r— 1 


o 


^H 


*o 


»c 


CM 


»o 


^ ^H 00 -^ 


o 


CM 


00 


















7—1 




io 


OS 
CM 

oo 


02 


•fc- 


-* 


b- 


T-H 


b- 


^H 


as co co -rH 


iO 


as 


co 


 s 


^H 


CO 


CO 


T-H 


t"- 


O 


CO 00 ^H 00 


iO 


as • 


b» 


b- 


CM 


oo 


*o 


as 


CM 


JO CO CM CO 


00 


00 


I — 1 


7—1 


d 
i— i 


O 


i — i 


o 


CO 


j— i 


-* 


iq as io co 


co 


CM 


CO 


CO 

cm . 

* 2 


to 


CM 


io 


O 


cm 


T-H 


00 


<M T—i t- co 


CO 


CO 


CO 


 a 


OS 


oq 


^H 


i — i 


CO 


t— 


o oo as 7— i 


00 


CM 


7— 1 


I— 1 


CO 


^ 


o 


as 


o 


lO »0 rH OJ 


j>. 


CM 


oo 


d 


CO 


^ 


<M 


^ 


i—i 


co 


n iq ^ -* 


-* 


as 


-* 
























JO 


it- 
cm 

00 


02 


o 


00 


CO 


CO 


CO 


^* 


o ^i as as 


lO 


io 


CO 


,d 
O 


CO 


as 


b~ 


 o 


oo 


CO 


b- 7-4 CM O 


T— 1 


CO 


o 


CO 


CO 


CO 


*o 


^ 


CM 


7— t <M CO O 


CO 


CO 


o 


J— 1 


d 
i— i 


00 


<M 


oo 


CM 


CO 


 ** 


CO K0 CO CO 


CM 


o 


oo 




















7— 1 


id 


CO 
cm 

oo 


02 


1—1 


lO 


io 


as 


as 


CO 


O O CM CM 


CO 


00 


o 


 S 


CM 


b- 


lO 


^H 


CO 


lO 


iO O io CO 


as 


*- 


CO 


CO 


b- 


CM 


b- 


co 


b- 


io co ^ co 


CM 


o 


o 


i— i 


rH 


l—H 


o 


CM 


<M 


o 


o 


co ^ co ^ 


^H 


-* 


CO 






rH 
















^* 


CM 

00 


02 


CM 


^ 


(M 


O 


CO 


CO 


7—i oo •** co 


00 


CM 


CO 


 S 


CO 


CM 


CO 


j— I 


as 


co 


o io cm as 


CM 


7—1 


t- 


©i 


lO 


as 


CM 


o 


co 


b- io co as 


O 


o 


OS 


7— 1 


a 

7— 1 


ip 


lO 


CM 


cm 


"* 


CO 


O ^H CO co 


o 

7 1 


•^j 


OS 


<M 


82 


GO 


CO 


7— t 


t- 


7—1 


^H 


H N Oi CO 


CO 


b- 


CM 


05 

 a 


O 


o 


O 


b- 


00 


CO 


<m t- 7— i as 


CO 


O 


CO 


OS 


as 


CO 


co 


CO 


o 


b- as co io 


-* 


CM 


*>. 


i—t 


£ 


CO 


CM 


CO 


CM 


o 


<M 


rH CM lO b- 


CO 


CO 


CM* 


















7—1 


T-H 


CO 


CO 
CM 

CO 


1 

oo* 


o 


CO 


CO 


00 


CO 


^H 


00 O CM 00 


CO 


-* 


OS 


o 


o 


T— 1 


*a 


CM 


-* 


T-H 


lO *0 •-* t— I 


o 


CM 


^H 


OS 


lO 


o 


CM 


o 


^H 


00 i- i^ CM 


-# 


CO 


i^ 


1 — 1 


HH 


CM 


lO 


CO 


CO 


t- 


co 


t> N » CO 


co 


CO 


CM 

CO 


cm 
cm 




»>. 


^H 


CO 


 * 


1^ 


^H 


o b- as b- 


co 


»o 


CO 




** 


a) 


T— 1 


 -* 


*— 


00 


H Oi CO 00 


h- 


O 


CM 




fO 


<M 


o 


CO 


CM 


iO 


CO CM 00 -* 


oo 


00 


^ 


I— 1 


d 


i — i 


b- 


as 


CM 


<M 


7— 1 


00 -vH (M 00 


o 

7— 1 


CO 


CM 

CO 


T— 1 

cm 


BQ 


CM 


-* 


<M 


co 


CO 


CM 


-H4 CO ^ CO 


^+1 


OO 


-^ 


,d 

o 


*h- 


CO 


^ 


as 


lO 


as 


Jc— CM ^JH Jb-. 


CM 


00 


VO 


-RjH 


T— 1 


^ 


-«* 


!>. 


lO 


CO ^H CM iO 


<M 


CM 


CO 


i— i 


d 

rH 


t*I 


O 


lO 


io 


<M 


o 


CM ^ t- CO 


as 


CO 








* (? : 








  -9 * 


CD 




— ^ 


O 




I 

1-3 


1 


1 


rH PT> rj 

<l E £ 


-+3 H CD 

£? & % $ 

q o o 
i-s <\ w. O 


> 
o 


<D 
CO 

CD 

P 





CD 

| 

CO 
CO 
CO* 
lO 

CQ 
rH 
C3 

CD 



CD 
'CD 
S3 

CO 



256 



CLIMATE, HEALTH, MOETALITY. 



o" 

CD 

x 



x 






5S 



^ ^ 



2 <?q CO r- iJt^lO-t-t^OCDr-Hr-HCO 
^r-H<Oi-*X©q*-CO^*-XCCO 

^ od ^h o r-5 co ©q eo »q ed r-5 »q i-h 



J- 
<N 

©1 
X 

— 



os 

CO 
x 


8 *° 


»o 


m 


CO 


co 


CC 


l-H 


i^ 


fr- 


!>  


»o 


r-H 


»o 


-g co 


CO 


cc 


m 


l-H 


C 


CO 


J>. 


CC 


C5 


>-: 


-<* 


CO 


t- 


c 


cq 


t- 


i— < 


^t 


©q 


^* 


©q 


CO 


OS 


C5 


r— i 


hh ^ 


IO 


CD 


'— ' 


o 


C~ 


X 


t^ 


i^ 


CO 


•^ 


>* 




X 
CO 
X 


S *° 


1— 1 


05 


X 


co 


T1 




© 


X 


©1 


co 


i^ 


CJ 


IS 


I— 1 


OS 


^ 


CO 


O: 


!>. 


CO 


o 


CO 


CO 


1- 


ec 


o 


C5 


o 


F— ' 


X 


O 


CO 


I- 


o 


© 


lO 


t- 


1— 1 


° --; 


1 ' 


r~ 


©q 


©q 


oq 


CO 


t> 


©q 


t^ 


^ 


co 


•O 


CO 
X 


OB i— I 


o 


<© 


© 


ut 


o 


© 


CO 


^ 


CO 


o 


i—* 


sq 


2 co 


^ 


X 


1— 1 


C5 


— 


co 


l-H 


X 


1-H 


 J. 


© 


OS 


-g -* 


X 


OS 


CO 












-~ 


I-H 


©q 


CO 




£ w 


lO 


'" H 


i— i 


1—4 


CO 


^* 


CO 


^ 


LO 


CO 


t^ 


X 


CO 

CO 

X 


w X 


»o 


^ 


CO 


CO 


oc 


©q 




© 


t^ 


Ci 


_ 


 ^ 


2 co 


I-H 


— 


CO 


i". 


o. 


IQ 


CO 


© 


CO 


o 


." 


©q 


•S os 


o 


ec 


X 


© 


Ci 


o 


w 


OS 


03 


o 


IO 


'-. 




o CO 




CO 


cq 


° 


1- 


Ci 


:o 


iO 


w 


X 


X 


— 
•-o 


co 
X 


TO Ci 


o 


OS 


~ 


CO 


-H 


O 


k- 


K5 


CO 


I-H 


95 




o CO 


cq 


— 


X 


CO 


1- 


.- 


= 


l-H 


X 


r-H 


X 


OS 


X 


= 


o 


o 


Ol 


©q 


i—i 


X 


co 


CO 


X 


X 




o »ri 


X 


IO. 


l-H 


CO 


1—1 


CO 


co 


t- 


^ 


CO 


©q 


lO 


CO 




CO 




CO 


fr- 


OS 


X 


t- 


X 


to 


CO 


i^ 


©T 


S >o 


©q 


l~ 


^ 


CO 


05 


— 


CO 


^ 


?-H 


o 


— 


©q 


-g *> 


t^ 




= 


CO 


cc 


© 


r— 


O 


l>- 


©1 


© 


— 


r-H 


A 3 


lO 


o 


1—1 


1—t 


co 


UO 


CO 


^f 


^*" 


-<*• 


IO 


UO 

CO 




K X 


©q 


<*5 


-* 


"* 


kfi 


co 


CO 


!>. 


©q 


X 


OS 


X 


CO 


S "M 


X 


i- 


SO 


CO 


— 


rf 


co 


©q 


lO 


cc 


l-H 


1-H 


-S » 


lO 


^r 


t- 


lO 


I- 


©q 


05 


IO 


t^ 


^f 


©q 


-* 


I— 1 


pS - 


^ 


N 


CO 


OS. 


1- 


©q 


i— l 


CO 


co 


I- 


— 


lO 


©q 


S °o 


(SO 


os 


Ki 


sq 


rt 


OS 


CO 


>o 


CO 





t^. 


X 


o ©q 


in 


— 


CC 


o 


— 


T? 


CO 


OS 


'H- 


fr- 


r - ; 


X 


X 
I— 1 


©q 


>o 


©q 


CO 


CO 


CO 


"* 


->) 


cc 


ee 


C 


CO 


« ©q 


^ 


ec 


©q 


rH 


^ 


©q 


^ 


©q 


X 


iO 


X 


os 






rr 


ran 


BO 




eq 


i— i 


o^ 


co 


©q 


o 


© 


CO 




2 i-H 


r—> 


fsq 


r~ 


©q 


X 


X) 


OS 


OS 


I-H 


CO 


X 


— 


x 

1— 1 


•s » 


©q 


o 


 >* 


t- 


co 


© 


X 


CO 


X 


o 


oc 


^ 


d - 


X 


CO 


©q 


O 


eq 


^ 


ec 


CO 


r— i 


X 


-* 


CO 


00 

W 

o 


p 
3 


rO 


ro 

1 

s 


p-. 
< 


- 


i 
p 


p 

(-3 


-4-3 
X 

- 

- 
< 


f-> 
o 

rO 

5 

<D 

->^ 

S> 


— 

IS 

O 


— 
S 
— 

B 
s 

> 


- 
s 

rO 

E 
- 
O 
X 


- ~ 
E ?. 



g 

- 



FALL OF EAIN. 



257 



© 

00 


02 


o 


OS 


CO 


00 


o 


CO 


co 


CO 


l-H 


lO 


CM 


CO 


CO 


 3 


«* 


^ 


CO 


co 


o 


o 


00 


co 


CO 


iO 


CM 


as 


t- 


lO 


OS 


OS 


T-H 


CM 


00 


CO 


t^ 


o 


CO 


t- 


o 


lO 


T— I 


a 
i— i 


CO 


*~ 


o 


iO 


CM 


CO 


^ 


lO 


CM 


CO 


lO 


7* 


as 


00 


m 


OS 


W 


^ 


o 


00 


as 


as 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


t^ 


1 

00 


o 


GO 


kO 


^H 


l-H 


l-H 


CO 


l-H 


o 


l-H 


CO 


as 


-* 


CO 


T* 


co 


OS 


CM 


CM 


1-H 


^* 


00 


CM 


co 


00 


o 


o 


j— 1 


a 

hH 


00 


<M 


o 


T-H 


CM 


1-H 


*0 


«* 


^ 


*- 


CO 


CO 


00 


oo 

00 


02 


CO 


*^ 


1—1 


^H 


O 


CM 


CM 


oo 


as 


l-H 


*^ 


*- 


-* 


.4 


I— 1 


co 


l-H 


(M 


O 


O 


CM 


o 


a) 


as 


o 


o 


l-H 


I— 1 


CM 


OS 


l-H 


** 


CM 


lO 


r— 1 


l-H 


as 


-^ 


i-H 


co 


I— 1 


a 


CO 


O 

1-H 


^ 


l-H 


i— i 


lO 


^H 


-rH 


CO 


CO 


^H 


1^ 


CO 


00 


no 


OS 


o 


>o 


h- 


l-H 


as 


CO 


CO 


CM 


00 


CM 


»o 


J^ 


 s 


^H 


<M 


CM 


oo 


CO 


*o 


lO 


CM 


O 


Y—\ 


o 


as 


as 


CO 


OS 


I-H 


CO 


CM 


00 


o 


co 


CO 


i^ 


o 


lO 


i—i 


1-H 


d 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


lO 


CO 


co 


CO 


CO 


CO 


00 


00 


CM 


CO 

00 


02 


OT 


CO 


O 


*^ 


CM 


CO 


CO 


i-H 


CO 


CO 


o 


CO 


\o 




tJH 


o 


00 


^H 


CO 


CM 


^ 


lO 


CO 


-* 


as 


CO 


CO 


00 


•^ 


1-H 


CO 


CO 


00 


-* 


^ 


lO 


00 


00 


CO 


co 


1— I 


a 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


r-H 


CM 


t* 


"tf 


T-H 


J^ 


co 


CM 


CM 

lO 


00 


00 


CO 


-rH 


o 


oo 


l-H 


CO 


as 


CM 


1-H 


iO 


CO 


as 


co 




o 


00 


CO 


»— 


O 


CM 


CM 


^H 


r-H 


i-H 


00 


co 


^ 


o 


CJ 


1—1 


00 


CM 


^H 


y— 1 


00 


l-H 


*o 


^ 


CO 


o 


co 


i— I 


rt 


CO 


cm 


"«* 


CO 


l-H 


-=* 


CM 


-* 


^ 


1^ 


VO 


as 


co 


00 


02 


TH 


o 


WO 


1—( 


CO 


*- 


as 


00 


iO 


CM 


as 


as 


CM 


1 


o 


^H 


1-H 


CO 


^ 


iO 


^H 


TfH 


a> 


1 — 1 


CM 


CO 


l-H 


CO 


»o 


o 


00 


1-H 


t- 


CM 


^ 


co 


CM 


I-H 


•** 


o 


i— 1 


a 
i—i 


vo 


^* 


CO 


CM 


o 


CO 


CO 


co 


lO 


•^ 


CO 


o 


CO 


CO 

"«* 

00 


02 


CM 


CO 


t- 


lO 


o 


CM 


as 


00 


l-H 


co 


as 


XO 


t>. 


 8 


OS 


co 


as 


i— 1 


o 


CM 


lO 


CO 


o 


00 


o 


CM 


o 


CM 


o 


00 


t» 


t- 


i — I 


CM 


CO 


^ 


00 


T-H 


iO 


co 


1—1 


a 

1-H 


*Q 


1-H 


l-H 


t- 


CO 


VO 


*o 


CO 


o 


i^ 


as 


CM 


CO 




02 


CO 


zo 


co 


r-H 


lO 


*-- 


l^ 


o 


00 


^ 


CM 


CO 


CM 


•z 


o 


1 — 1 


00 


lO 


*o 


t^ 


J>- 


CO 


o 


CM 


CO 


i-H 


i>- 


lO 


1^ 


as 


lO 


CM 


co 


00 


l-H 


lO 


as 


CM 


o 


O 


i— i 




CO 


CM 


*o 


o 


co 


^ 


lO 


CO 


1-H 


CM 


t^ 


i^ 


00 




m 


C7S 


^ 


1-H 


CO 


CM 


w 


00 


vo 


CO 


o 


as 


o 


 ^ 


^ 


© 


JO 


i—i 


cq 


"* 


r-H 


i-H 


00 


"* 


1^- 


CO 


as 


o 


in 




-* 


o 


io 


^* 


00 


lO 


*o 


o 


as 


CO 


-* 


CO 


00 


i— " 


a 

h- 1 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CM 


^ 


CM 


"* 


t- 


-^ 


CO 


CO 


i^ 


co 






















fH 








_^ 


m 
W 

to 

o 




I 


1 

CD 
PR 


 3 


f 
< 


£ 
S 


i 


1-3 


-t-= 
m 

g> 

S3 


1 

CD 
•+= 

CO 


CO 

o 

o 


CD 
CD 


CD 

1 

O 
CD 

P 


§1 



CD 



258 



CLIMATE, HEALTH, MORTALITY. 



<cs 



o 

CX> 



T-( 

CO o 

n 

M 
-S 










r^. 


CO 


93 


o 


00 


*0 


r— 


h- 


CM 


CO 


CO 


I-H 


^ 


o 


?! 


© 


o 


03 


OJ 


T-H 


OS 


*- 


cs 


ttH 


co 


© 


IO 


© 


00 


M 


1- 


IO 


i- 


o 


t~ 


w 


~T 


1-H 


t- 


a 


TTH 


fc- 


© 


T— 1 


t-l 


x 


CM 


IQ 


CM 


cm 


£~ 


Tl 


CO 


co 


X 


CO 


co 




CS 

»o 

00 


EC 


r* 


CM 


1- 


o 


CO 


* * 


 >- 


^ 


co 


© 


IO 


I-H 


© 


<o 




<M 


1 — 1 


o 


cm 


CM 


IO 


CM 


^ 


CO 


1^ 


co 


cs 




IO 


O 


CO 


Oi 


T-H 


© 


i- 


CM 


CO 


t- 


© 


CS 


CM 


r— 1 


a 


CC 


-«* 


IO 


CO 


© 


CM 


T-H 


*o 


t^ 


OI 


»o 


CO 


00 


00 
»0 

00 


ro 


cc 


co 


CO 


»o 


os 


"* 


i-H 


00 


^ 


cs 


1-H 


t- 


CO 




BO 


i^ 


03 


cs 


IO 


i-H 


— 


CO 


^ 


Ir- 


CO 


CO 


CM 


— 1 


^ 


80 


T— t 


T-H 


^ 


TO 


CO 


CM 


QO 


l-H 


^* 


CM 


1— < 


a 

- 


eo 


o 


T1 


CM 


co 


1-H 


•Q 


CO 


t- 


iO 


CO 


^ 


© 


»o 

00 


m 


»o 


T-H 


-*f 


«o 


CO 




0CJ 


CO 




co 


X 


IO 


T-H 


 g 


1-H 


co 


"C 


IO 


CM 


OS 


5 


CM 


r— i 


— 


© 


00 


© 


*o 


OS 


CO 


CO 


^ 


o 


~ 


CM 


CS 


33 


t- 


^ 


IO 


l-H 


a 
1— 1 


"* 


co 


TO 


»-H 


cm 


co 


co 


CM 


CM 


OI 


CM 


** 


00 

TO 


CO 
IO 
00 


oo 


O 


^ 


CO 


CM 


© 


T-H 


C 


X 


00 


1-H 


OI 


© 


OI 


•8 


to 


-* 


'O 


oc 


I-H 


w 


— 


^J 


LO 


— 


CS 


CO 


00 


co 


CO 


CO 


CO 


1-H 


IO 


© 


co 


T— 


lO 


1—1 


T-H 


"*  


T-H 


CI 
M 


^ 


*o 


3 


CM 


CO 


-^ 


-n 


CO 


co 


© 


1-H 


-o 


cs 


IO 

IO 

00 


00 


t~ 


o 


I- 


BQ 


00 


1-H 


— 


T-H 


CS 


»c 


CO 


© 


© 


 8 


co 


cm 


CI 


o 


CS 


00 


•Q 


© 


© 


t- 


CM 


00 


^* 


IO 


I-H 


-* 


CO 


IO 


t- 


C 


9B 


^ 


co 


-* 


CM 


IO 


1—1 


£ 


o 


T-H 


CO 


T~* 


MH 


co 


^ 


^ 


— 


b- 


Tl 


CM 


T~ 


IO 
00 


00 


o 


t~ 


^ 


-^ 


b- 


CM 


TO 


1^ 


TO 


© 


O 


CS 


co 


^3 


IC 


00 


IO 


CS 


"* 


1-H 


1- 


CM 


I- 


I~ 


Ol 


Ol 


CO 


— 


cs 


CO 


CO 


CM 


"^ 


1~ 


i — i 


CM 


^ 


CM 


1-H 


T— • 


T— 1 


a 


IO 


CM 


Ol 


o 


CO 


^ 


O) 


l-O 


TO 


Tt- 


TO 


oo 


CO 


CO 
IO 
00 


CO 


co 


t^ 


ro 


T-H 


^f 


"^ 


S3 


© 


^ 


•rt" 


00 




IO 


 g 


OJ 


t^ 


^ 


CO 


© 


00 


Ol 


00 


CM 


~ 


CS 


CO 


IO 


IO 


o 


— i 


© 


oo 


© 


X 


vr 


IO 


o 


en 


CO 


— 


i-H 


a 


B0 


T-H 


Ol 


CO 


© 


CO 


cr 


CM 


CO 


iO 


CO 


© 


oa 

TO 


CM 

IO 
00 


OQ 


cc 


t~ 


o 


CM 


<M 


 ^ 


X 


X 




K 


Ol 


CO 


" * 


o 


X 


o 


T-H 


T-H 


IO 


00 


— 


i-^ 


aq 


CD 


00 


cr 


IO 


X 


CS 


"M 


T-H 


© 


cs 


•^ 


cr 


r^ 


-o 


IO 


t> 


TO 


T-H 


p 


63 


fr- 


o 


T-H 


^ 


'-r 


TT 


t^ 


BC 


TO 


t- 


Ol 


>o 

- 




tr' 


l^ 


t~ 


IQ 


Jt^ 


CM 


IO 


X 


t^ 


-* 


to 


IO 


X 








IC 


CO 


ec 


^ 


»o 


CS 


I- 


c 


CM 


T-l 


BO 


'HH 


co 


00 


C 


t^ 


EC 


OS 


T-H 


© 


X 


IQ 


T-H 


T-l 


*~ 


co 


IO 


l-H 


a 


o 

1-H 


co 


SO 


T-H 


1-1 


IC 


^ 


<<* 


CM 


© 


r* 


CM 
























t-, 




- 

— 

> 
ft 




/ _ A _ > 


MONTHS 




4 


Ph 


— 

i 


ft 




o 

o 
= 


- 
Ha 


r. 

3 

- 

< 


1 

- 


«H 

i 

a 
O 


— 

o 

a 

P 


-r 

j! 

< - 



- 
X 

> 

< 






FALL OP RAIN. 259 



The mean ' fall ' (in decades of years) is, for the 



1st ten years (from 1811 to 1820) . 
2nd „ ( „ 1821 to 1830) . 
3rd „ ( „ 1831 to 1840) . 
4th „ ( „ 1841 to 1850) . 
5th „ ( „ 1851 to I860) . 



50.580 inches. 
56.365 „ 
55.218 „ 
51.311 „ 
45.654 „ 



It is thus seen that there has been a gradual decline in the 
fall of rain during the past forty years. How far this corre- 
sponds with results in other places, we have not the means of 
knowing ; but it will hardly be doubted, that the cause is to 
be ascribed to the removal of ' tarns,' and the general drainage 
of lands in the valley of the Kent, within the time stated. 
There have been no changes in forestry, within the period, to 
affect the fall of rain either more or less. It is probable that 
more timber has been planted than felled ; whilst nume- 
rous 'tarns,' and innumerous swampy meadows, have been 
drained off, and evaporation has thereby been proportionately 
diminished. 

The largest fall of rain, in any one month within these fifty 
years, was in January, 1834 : quantity, 14*758 inches ; and 
the least fall in any month within the fifty years, was in May, 
1836 : quantity 0-053 inches. 

The wettest month of the year, on an average of the months 
in the fifty years in question, is December ; and the driest 
month of the year, on an average of the fifty years, is May. 

The following tables of the number of rainy days, and of the 
variations of the Barometer, and the Thermometer, for thirty- 
eight years successively, are from the sole register of our 
friend, Samuel Marshall, Esq., whose care and pains cannot 
be exceeded by any living meteorologist : 



s2 



260 



CLIMATE, HEALTH, MORTALITY. 



O 
co 

CO 



CO 
(71 

co 



£ 

(X) 
CO 



H 
ft 

O 

<5i 






525 



i-H 


CO 


CM 


GO 


CM 


X 


CM 


r-H 


CM 


»o 


r-H 


CO 


oq 


as ' 
as 

T—i 


00 

I— 1 


l-H 


rH 


r-H 


i — i 


r-H 


?— 1 


CM 


CM 


1 — 1 


CM 


r— < 


CM 


o 


CO 


co 


W 


C5 


CO 


CM 


U0 


t^ 


r-H 


O 


a 


CO 


as 

00 
r-H 


qo 

r-H 


CM 


l-H 






-H 


CM 


CM 


T—i 


71 


r-H 


71 




Os 
CO 


CO 


GO 


CO, 


i— 


IO 


CO 


CO 


CM 


CO 


CM 


X 


IO 


00 

T-i 


00 

i-H 


r-i 


7" 1 


l-H 






1-1 


r-H 


CM 


71 


T—i 


 ^ 


^ 


00 
CO 


GO 


iO 


t~ 


CO 


o 


Os 


O 


as 


CO 


as 


CO 


GO 


r-i 


GO   
r-H 






l-H 


r-H 


1 — 1 


r-H 


CM 


r-H 


rH 


l-H 


1 — 1 


T—i 


1^ 

CO 


r— t 


o 


o 


r-H 


as 


co 


i^ 


00 


CO 


O 


co 


CO 


T-i 

r-H 


00 

i — i 


r—i 


CM 


r-H 


r-H 




r-H 


l-H 




i — 1 


CM 


71 


r—i 


CO 

CO 


00 


CO 


CM 


00 


r-H 


*- 


o 


IO 


93 


as 


CO 


as 


1^ 

o 

GM 


GO 
l-H 


r-H 


i-H 


CM 


r-H 




r-H 


CM 


l-H 


l-H 


""• 


71 


rH 


CO 


»o 


t^ 


00 


GO 


00 


O 


•<* 


CM 


o 


as 


0) 


xo 


>o 

o 

71 


00 


r-i 


CM 


r-H 


r-H 


1 — 1 


r-H 


r—i 


r— 1 


71 


r-H 


T—i 


r-H 


CO 


00 


CO 


CO 


CO 


l-H 


CO 


CO 


GO 


CO 


CO 


_ 


i-H 


00 

l-H 


GO 

T— i 


CM 


CM 


T-H 




















CO 
CO 


i<0 


CM 


CM 


CM 


r— 1 


o 


-* 


r-H 


co 


IO 


,__, 


t^ 


CO 

as 


00 




<M 


l-H 


CM 


— 1 


CM 


r-H 


l-H 


i-H 


l-H 


71 


71 


r—i 




























CM   

CO 


^* 


O 


^ 


O 


00 


CO 


O 


l-H 


GO 


CM 


CO 


GO 


^7 


00 

i-H 


i-H 


l-H 


l-H 


r-H 




r-i 


l-H 


CM 




CM 


— 


r—i 


i-H 

co 


CO 


t^ 


t- 


_, 


GO 


CO 


W 


^ 


K3 


CO 


GO 


T—i 


CO 
GO 

l-H 


GO 

l-H 




r—l 


l — 1 


i-H 




r—i 


T—i 


r-H 


•"• 


CM 


T-i 


71 


o 

CO 


CO 


l-H 


UO 


r-H 


^ 


_ 


Os 


OS 


eq 


CO 


^* 


as 


o 

l-H 


00 

l-H 




r-i 


l-H 


CM 


l-H 


CM 


r-H 


r-H 


71 


r-H 


71 




OS 

CM 


co 


l-H 


^H 


00 


OS 


h- 


( _ | 


o 


71 


as 


'7 


CO 


o 

l-H 


00 

r-H 




l-H 




r *~ ' 




 "* 


CM 


CM 


71 


1-1 


i — 




00 
CM 


b- 


liO 


00 


,_, 


o 


i-H 


CM 


^ 


77 


co 


1- 


i-O 


as 

00 

r-H 


GO 

l-H 








CM 
















CM 


CM 


^H 


iO 


CM 


-* 


IO 


W 


IO 


CM 


CO 


w 


as 


CO 


as 

r-i 


GO 
i-H 


r-H 




CM 


















CM 


CO 
CM 


iO 


o 


O 


CO 


*o 


^* 


^ 


co 


C7 


as 


— 


b- 




GO 




CM 


r—i 


l-H 






l-H 


T—i 


T—i 


i — i 


l-H 


r-H 






























ON 


CO 


Os 


l-H 


CM 


cc 


^ 


^H 


co 


X 


-* 


a 


-o 


•o 


00 


T— 1 




r*H 


l-H 


1H 


r-H 




i— i 


I-H 


CM 


— 


l-H 






























CM 


*o 


l-H 


O 


O 


X 


00 


O 


t^ 


t> 


CO 


^ 


^ 


GO 


GO 


r—i 


l-H 


CM 


r-H 






r-H 


l-H 





CM 


71 


CM 


r-H 




























CO 

GM 


CO 


^ 


O 


It- 


X 


CM 


"^ 


t^ 


1- 


GO 


T7 


CM 


00 


GO 




l-H 


l-H 


i— t 


T— 


r-H 


CM 


CM 


l-H 


T—i 


l-H 


CM 


l-H 






















































- 




























I 






















































































m 


























— 


w 


















f-l 








a 


o 


1 

I 

H3 


3 
1 

P=H 


 a 


i-H 

Ph 




►"5 


r»* 


-t-3 

Fc 


- 
►O 

1 
— 1 

IT 


— 

- 

r-7 

-£  

o 

o 


1 

- 
> 


- 

rD 

B 
s 

a 

p 


- 

d 

- 



EAINY DAYS. 



261 



o 

CO 


o 


o 


T-H 


co 


CO 


*C 


o 


cq 


-* 


l-H 


CS 


co 


CO 

co   

l-H 


GO 

i— l 


CJ. 


l-H 


Cq 




T-H 


cq 


1 — 1 


cq 


I-H 


cq 




T-H 


oa 




























>o 


Ir- 


CO 


O 


cq 


l-H 


cq 


co 


o 


r— 1 


cq 


t— 


CO 


CO 


CO 

1—1 


1 — 1 


l-H 


CI 


l-H 




T-H 




i—< 


cq 


l-H 


l-H 


l-H 


co 


CM 


CO 


CS 


CO 


>0 


co 


CS 


cq 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CS 


co 
co 

T-H 


CO 
1 — 1 


l-H 








1 — 1 






l-H 


T-H 


T-H 




T-H 


*>- 


lO 


i-H 


^ 


CO 


cq 


OS 


cq 


l-H 


l-H 


CO 


o 


co 


CS 
l-H 


CO 
1— 1 
























cq 


co 


CO 


-* 


cq 


l-H 


lO 


t- 


o 


i>- 


CO 


^H 


cs 


io 


CO 

i-H 


GO 

l-H 


l-H 


l-H 




l-H 


l-H 


T-H 


i — i 


T-H 


T-H 






l-H 


lO 




























lO 


CO 


CO 


cq 


GO 


GO 


*o 


CO 


CO 


1^ 


cq 


Jr^ 


l — 1 


CO 
i-H 


CO 

1 — 1 






l-H 






T-H 


l-H 


l-H 




cq 




1 — 1 


CO 

l-H 


CO 


CO 


CO 


^H 


t- 


CO 


cq 


CO 


CI 


lr- 


CO 


cq 


cq 

GO 
l — 1 


CO 
JO 


cq 


IG> 


CO 


*- 


>0 


l-H 


l-H 


CS 


cq 


CO 


CO 


-sfl 


o 

l-H 


CO 
r— 1 


Cq 




l-H 


1-1 




l-H 


cq 




i — i 


T-H 


1-1 




cq 


TH 


co 


CO 


CO 


lO 


T-H 


^H 


*^ 


-* 


lO 


^H 


l-H 


CS 

T-H 


CO 

l-H 


Cq 


l-H 






T-H 


cq 


l-H 


T-H 


T-H 


T-H 


cq 


CO 


I— 1 


l-H 


cq 


CS 


cq 


cq 


CO 


^ 


OS 


CO 


co 


CO 


T-H 


co 

T-H 


CO 

i-H 


Cq 


T-H 


T-H 


l-H 


r_l 


l-H 


T-H 


1 — 1 




cq 




1—1 


o 

lO 


o 


T 1 


lO 


CO 


cq 


co 


co 


J^ 


CO 


i>- 


o 


CS 


-GO 
CO 


• CO 


T-H 


Cq 




T-H 


T-H 




T— 1 


1— i 




l-H 


cq 


l-H 


l-H 




























cs 


,_, 


»o 


CS 


CO 


cq 


CO 


t- 


lO 


o 


^ 


o 


cq 


CO 


CO 


cq 


I-H 




l-H 


T-H 




T-H 


l-H 


l-H 


T-H 


cq 


T-H 


r— 1 




























GO 


o 


^H 


1^ 


T-H 


cs 


cq 


^ 


CO 


o 


cs 


i^ 


CS 


o 

CS 


CO 

l-H 


T-H 


Cq 


i-H 


T-H 




CI 


T-H 


1-1 


l-H 


l-H 


T-H 


l-H 




T-H 


O 


T-H 


lO 


GO 


cq 


o 


CO 


CS 


CO 


l-H 


GO 


i-H 


CO 


T-H 


T-H 


T-H 


T-H 


l-H 


l-H 


l-H 


l-H 


l-H 


r * H 


cq 


i— 1 


CO 


cq 


lO 


l-H 


co 


CO 


cs 


CS 


CO 


o 


 ^JH 


j^ 


o 


CS 


CO 


cq 


T-H 


<N 


l-H 


T-H 




T-H 


T-H 


l-H 


cq 


l-H 


T-H 


l-H 






























J^ 


co 


CS 


T-H 


cq 


iO 


co 


Ir- 


-^ 


T-H 


i^ 


^ 


CO 


CO 


l-H 


















cq 


l-H 


cq 


l-H 




























tP 

^ 


*o 


CS 


1^ 


CS 


T-H 


CO 


cq 


CO 


o 


J^ 


id 


•<* 


o 


CO 


l-H 


J— 1 


T— 1 






T-H 


r-H 


T-H 


l-H 


l-H 


l-H 






l-H 




























co 


co 


CS 


<?q 


cq 


lO 


CS 


CO 


CO 


co 


CO 


o 


CS 


ir- 
es 


GO 


cq 




l-H 


cq 


l-H 




cq 


l-H 




cq 


cq 


T-H 


l-H 




























cq 


T-H 


lO 


o 


CO 


CO 


^ 


*o 


o 


o 


CO 


j>- 


>o 


cs 
»o 


GO 


l-H 


l-H 


cq 




l-H 


l-H 


T-H 


l-H 


l-H 




r-4 


cq 


1 — 1 






















































u 




























CD 




























*s 


EH 

o 


pi 

1 




rd 
§ 


't-< 

3 




CD 
Pi 





CO 

p 

to 
pi 


<D - 

CD 
CD 

m 


.- 

CD 

o 

H-= 
O 

o 


a 

CD 
> 


CD 

rQ 

CD 

O 

CD 

ft 


1 

1 
pi 

-5J 



262 



CLIMATE, HEALTH, MOKTALITY. 



•<s> 



o 

GO 



cn 

CO 


o 


O 


1— 1 


o 


^H 


co 


OS 


CO 


CO 


OS 


GN 


CO 


CO 


JC~ 


GO 


CO 


X 


^ 


co 


X 


CO 


X 


1- 


CO 


CO 


fc- 


CO 


CS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


Cs 


OS 


OS 


OS 


sa 


Cs 


OS 


Cs 


r-i 


gn 


cn 


<M 


GN 


GN 


04 


GN 


CM 


GN 


CM 


GN 


CN 


GN 




i—i 


CS 


CO 


^H 


CO 


OS 


CO 


CO 


CO 


c 


lO 


fc» 


CN 


CO 


t- 


lO 


CO 


lO 


CO 


CO 


t- 


t- 


CO 


** 


lO 


^H 


CO 


X 


o 


CS 


CS 


OS 


OS 


oa 


OS 


OS 


Os 


CS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


r— 1 


GN 


CM 


GN 


CN 


GN 


cm 


GN 


GN 


GN 


Gl 


cq 


GN 


CM 


o 


CD 


CO 


o* 


O 


OS 


to 


"* 


co 


t— 1 


X 


m 


i^ 


J^ 


CO 


CO 


CO 


X 


lO 


CO 


co 


i^ 


CO 


lO 


oa 


lO 


 * 


CO 


00 


OS 


CS 


CS 


os 


OS 


05 


OS 


OS 


CS 


oa 


OS 


CS 


OS 


r-i 


gn 


GN 


CM 


GN 


GN 


oi 


GN 


GN 


GN 


Ol 


GN 


GN 


CN 


OS 


CO 


oo 


OT 


"* 


OS 


m 


OS 


CS 


lO 


X 


O 


CO 


CN 


GN 


CO 


00 


t> 


CO 


X 


oc 


lO 


CO 


m 


t^ 


X 


OS 


*~ 


CO 


CS 


OS 


Cs 


OS 


OS 


05 


OS 


CS 


os 


CS 


CS 


OS 


CS 


j— 1 


cq 


GN 


Gl 


GN 


GN 


sq 


GN 


GN 


GN 


"M 


GN 


GN 


CN 


CO 


t*. 


1>» 


OS 


-* 


OS 


X 


O 


lO 


X 


co 


lO 


^ 


CO 


GN 


CO 


lO 


•o 


lO 


CO 


fc- 


ift 


CO 


t^ 


X 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


cs 


OS 


03 


OS 


OS 


— 


OS 


CS 


OS 


CS 


CS 


cs 


OS 


Ht 


cq 


GN 


-M 


GN 


GN 


-M 


CM 


GN 


CM 


Gl 


GN 


CN 


CN 


!>. 


r— 1 


i—i 


CO 


l— 


CO 


9a 


os 


i— i 


X 


^*- 


X 


!>• 


CO 


CM 


CO 


lO 


bo 


.b- 


XO 


•o 


t- 


X 


t~ 


IQ 


t- 


-* 


CO 


co 


OS 


OS 


35 


OS 


OS 


05 


OS 


CS 


CS 


oa 


CS 


Cs 


OS 




CM 


GN 


-M 


GN 


CM 


Ol 


GN 


GN 


GN 


GJ 


GN 


CN 


GN 


CO 


i— 1 


CO 


^* 


CO 


h-» 


sq 


CO 


CO 


X 


CO 




T—< 


CO 


CN 


GO 


o 


fc- 


t^ 


GO 


o 


t^ 


*~ 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


b- 


CO 


CS 


OS 


03 


OS 


OS 


o 


OS 


CS 


CS 


35 


OS 


o 


cs 




GN 


GN 


-M 


GN 


GN 


CO 


GN 


GN 


GN 


CM 


GN 


GN 


CN 


lO 


i— 1 


*^ 


W 


CO 


i— i 


s 


CO 


m 


CS 


CO 


r— 1 


X 


^ 


GN 


CO 


lO 


X 


fc~ 


t- 


**  


X 


CO 


in 


CO 


^ 


CN 


CO 


CO 


as 


OS 


05 


OS 


OS 


S3 


03 


CS 


CS 


CS 


OS 


CS 


oa 




GN 


gn 


'M 


GN 


GN 


CM 


GN 


GN 


GN 


-M 


CM 


GN 


CN 


^ 


lO 


oo 


xO 


^ 


os 


CO 


os 


CO 


X 


•o 


X 


^H 


CO 


GN 


"tf 


GN 


W 


co 


CO 


M 


CO 


co 


GN 


^ 


CS 


i— ( 


CN 


CO 


OS 


OS 


CS 


CS 


OS 


05 


CS 


o 


CS 


CS 


CS 


CS 


CS 


r—l 


gn 


GN 


GN 


GN 


GN 


CM 


GN 


GN 


GN 


CM 


GN 


CN 


CN 


CO 


i— I 


00 


lO 


lO 


^ 


M 


00 




i—i 


tq 


CS 


O 


CO 


GN 


lO 


i—t 


W 


1Q 


CO 


*^ 


lO 


CO 


t~ 


iC 


X 


^ 


lO 


00 


CS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


cs 


os 


CS 


CS 


oa 


CS 


cs 


CS 




<M 


GN 


CM 


GN 


GN 


Cfl 


GN 


GN 


GN 


M 


GN 


cq 


CM 


00 

1 

O 


>•* 


© 


 a 


i—i 
<1 


3 


ha 


>> 


-1-3 
03 

5 

P 

< 


© 
© 

to 


O 
O 

B 

C 


© 

1 


1 

I 


a ^ 



THE BAEOMETEE. 



263 



CM 


SO 


xO 


CD 


I-H 


00 


i—i 




as 


CD 


XO 


o- 


T« 


r— 1 


^ 


t^ 


CD 


xO 


OS 


CD 


00 


i^ 


^ 


CD 


fc* 


^H 


t^ 


t- 


00 


OS 


as 


as 


OS 


Os 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


as 




CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 




XO 


O 


as 


1—1 


1—i 


O 


O 


O 


O 


CO 


OS 


oo 


IO 


•** 


xo 


CD 


XO 


CD 


CD 


fe* 


CO 


CD 


xo 


CO 


"* 


co 


XO 


00 


as 


as 


as 


Os 


OS 


OS 


OS 


Os 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


as 




CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


o 


Os 


«* 


CO 


OS 


"# 


xO 


co 


t^ 


oo 


^H 


^H 


CM 


00 


"*l 


CO 


CD 


o 


JC~ 


CD 


CO 


XO 


OS 


^ 


J>- 


CO 


OS 


CD 


00 


as 


as 


o 


OS 


OS 


Os 


OS 


OS 


OS 


Os 


OS 


Os 


as 


J—< 


CM 


<M 


CO 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


OS 


as 


CO 


*- 


as 


1—1 


r— 1 


CM 


^H 


CM 


co 


CO 


r— i 


CM 


co 


xo 


CD 


XO 


00 


oo 


JO- 


CO 


t~ 


co 


jo- 


^H 


""# 


CO 


00 


as 


as 


as 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


Os 


OS 


as 




<M 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


00 


T— ( 


<M 


-* 


co 


CO 


CO 


CO 


r— 1 


XO 


O 


O 


co 


CM 


co 


JP- 


-* 


XO 


XO 


JO. 


CO 


!>• 


CD 


1^ 


fc~ 


CO 


t~ 


CD 


00 


as 


as 


as 


Os 


Os 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


Os 


OS 


as 




CM 


<M 


CM 


<M 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


1>- 


00 


T— 1 


xO 


JN- 


CM 


00 


1^ 


W 


CO 


as 


CO 


OS 


as 


co 


CD 


CD 


t- 


id 


JO- 


l>- 


JO- 


fc*- 


CD 


JO- 


IO 


CD 


CO 


00 


as 


a> 


as 


OS 


Os 


Os 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


as 




CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CD 


as 


CD 


as 


CM 


CO 


CO 


Os 


O 


CO 


CM 


O 


CO 


as 


co 


IB 


XO 


r— 1 


CD 


o 


CO 


CO 


00 


CD 


XO 


CO 


xo 


xo 


00 


as 


as 


as 


OS 


o 


Os 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


as 


OS 


as 




CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CO 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


<M 


CM 


«a 


JO- 


i— < 


as 


00 


CM 


xO 


rH 


*- 


^H 


r— 1 


1^ 


o> 


CD 


CO 


*«* 


^* 


CD 


00 


CD 


oo 


xo 


1^ 


^ 


IO 


CD 


oo 


CO 


GO 


as 


as 


as 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


Os 


OS 


OS 


as 


as 




cm 


<M 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


<M 


CM 


CM 


CM 


cm 


rfl 


t~ 


r- < 


O 


xH 


O 


CM 


CO 


^ 


i— ( 


id 


OS 


O 


fc~ 


CO 


CO 


00 


as 


OS 


00 


fc- 


*~ 


CD 


00 


t~ 


CD 


O 


t^ 


00 


as 


as 


as 


OS 


Os 


Os 


OS 


OS 


OS 


Os 


OS 


o 


as 




CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


<M 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


co 


CM 


CO 


CM 


1—1 


as 


CM 


OS 


CO 


Os 


co 


00 


OS 


i— i 


CO 


-^ 


CO 


O 


CM 


CD 


XO 


00 


XO 


JO> 


t- 


CD 


XO 


CD 


co 


CO 


00 


O 


as 


as 


Os 


Os 


OS 


Os 


OS 


OS 


Os 


OS 


OS 


as 


1—1 


CO 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


<M 


CM 


CM 


<M 


02 

m 

H 

O 


I 


g 

o 


•3 


< 




1 


>"5 


m 
P 

< 


U. 

P. 
03 

3Q 


o 
o 

O 


1 

> 
O 


Pi 

<X> 

09 

a 

0> 

P 


S* 05 

<3^ 1 



264 



CLIMATE, HEALTH, MORTALITY. 






o 

CO 

CO 





lO 


lO 


iO 


CM 


O 


CO 


O 


h- 


i— i 


O 


i— I 


Ci 


i— I 


10 


CO 


t^ 


Ci 


Ci 


fc- 


^ 


00 


IQ 


*~ 


CO 


co 


CM 


CO 


00 


Ci 


Ci 


o 


Ci 


oa 


Ci 


Ci 


OS 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


I— 1 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


cn 


CM 


CM 


CH 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 




1— 1 


r— 1 


co 


"* 


r-J 


T— ( 


CM 


00 


00 


o 


CM 


O 


00 


lO 


-**i 


t^ 


1C 


CO 


1- 


t^ 


CO 


t> 


Ci 


CO 


1^ 


o 


CO 


00 


OS 


Ci 


oa 


Ci 


£35 


Ci 


Ci 


oa 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


o 


Ci 


T— 1 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


~1 


CM 


CM 


~» 


CM 


CM 


CM 


co 


CM 


o 


*- 


00 


CO 


CO 


OS 


t^ 


co 


ir. 


o 


*~ 


co 


CM 


00 


t^ 


SO 


o 


-<*< 


IQ 


t^ 


fc<- 


EC 


00 


lO 


iO 


I— 


CO 


00 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


O 


Ci 


Ci 


OS 


Ci 


ca 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


I— 1 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


Tl 


CM 


CM 


cs 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


Ci 


lO 


CM 


i— 1 


CO 


OS 


Ci 


t^ 




xo. 


^ 


CO 


CM 


t^ 


XO 


Ci 


00 


^ 


w 


t~ 


CO 


fc» 


t~ 


CO 


kQ 


1^ 


CO 


00 


o 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


OS 


Ci 


Ci 


os 


Ci 


os 


os 


OS 


Ci 


r— 1 


cm 


CM 


CM 


CM 


-M 


CM 


CM 


eq 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


00 


I— 1 


O 


^H 


CO 


SQ 


CO 


i— < 


DC 


<* 


ta 


co 


o 


Ci 


t^ 


CO 


CO 


XC 


QC 


in 


tr~ 


IG 


Jt^ 


M3 


CO 


CO 


IO 


00 


OS 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


oa 


os 


OS 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


1— t 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


eq 


CM 


CM 


?1 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


i^ 

"^ 


o 


CO 


00 


"^ 


CO 


r— 1 


*- 


Ci 


DC 


00 


t^ 


CM 


00 


so 


CD 


fc- 


lO 


CO 


fc- 


00 


I- 


CO 


CO 


CO 


»o 


CO 


00 


oa 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


Ci 


0a 


I— 1 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


^J 


CM 


CM 


Tl 


CM 


CM 


CM 


C* 


CM 



-^ 00 t- >— lOCifc^COt^t^CiO 

^ o rji c s s o n n c: c "o 
dcicidddddcicicid 

CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM 



COCMCiiOOOOt-i— lOOOi— ' J>» 
10t>-t^COI>.COCOCOt0 1^^'* 

ddcidddddctcicid 

CMCMCMCMCMCMiMCMCMCMCMCM 



 <*NNC5C!Wh00SCO 
NWCQOCJNNICCO-* 



O 00 

co oo 



CiCiCiCiOCiCiCiCiCiCiCi 
CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM 



xOCiCiiOOxCCMCOi>.l>.CO^ 
-^^COlOCOCOb-t^-Ci-^XOO 
CiCiCiCiCiCici'ciCiciciO 
CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCO 



b b i \ ': i : : I J J g 



- 3 

I § 



THE BAROMETER. 



265 





eq 


CO 


o 


iO 


OS 


IO 


co 


^H 


T— 1 


-* 


^ 


00 


XO 


o 


co 


CO 


o 


-* 


co 


-* 


o 


T— 1 


00 


00 


*- 


1— 1 


^ 


5C 


"»* 


oo 


CO 


00 


t^ 


IO 


OS 


CO 


£- 


Ir- 


t- 


IO 


co 


00 


OS 


en 


Os 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


OS 


as 


OS 


OS 


as 




CM 


<M 


CM 


<M 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 





co 


CM 


i— I 


^ 


CM 


^H 


j— I 


*^ 


*— 


CO 


as 


CM 


CO 


Os 


IO 


i—i 


o 


OS 


CM 


IO 


CM 


co 


t- 


CO 


CO 


\n 


CO 


IO 


oo 


1^ 


t~ 


CO 


as 


00 


O 


00 


CO 


iO 


*- 


IO 


J^ 


. 00 


OS 


OS 


OS 


as 


as 


as 


O 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 




CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CO 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 




CM 


iO 


^ 


CM 


as 


CM 


IO 


iO 


i— i 


as 


CO 


as 


CO 


00 


o 


t^- 


o 


CM 


IO 


as 


CM 


00 


CO 


CM 


CM 


00 


iO 


IO 


1— 1 


00 


00 


00 


i^ 


as 


oo 


00 


00 


00 


00 


CO 


00 


oo 


o 


OS 


os 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 




CO 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 





CO 


*- 


CO 


 -* 


as 


CO 


CO 


r^ 


co 


CO 


CO 


CO 


as 


t— 


co 


h- 


O 


^H 


as 


7—1 


tH 


-* 


as 


00 


o 


CM 


co 


IO 


CO 


00 


1^ 


CO 


00 


as 


00 


as 


*- 


i^- 


o 


o 


00 


00 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


o 


o 


as 




CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CO 


co 


CM 



CO ^ r— I 

IO CO CM 

^ 00 T— I 

as as o 

CM CM CO 



CO CO 

CO CO 

CO 1— 

as as 

CM CM 



-* T— I 

as ^ 

oq oo 

as as 

CM CM 



00 xo 

1— I 00 

00 CO 

as' as" 

CM CM 



b« ^ C5 

CO CO 00 

o as vo 

© as* as 

CO CM CM 



IO 


CM 


t^ 


CO 


IO 


CM 


t— 


00 


i—i 


 ^H 


CO 


oo 


co 


O0 


as 


IO 


^ 


00 


CO 


4^ 


CO 


t- 


as 


CO 


Ir- 


IO 


CO 


oo 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


i— i 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


"* 


CM 


h- 


CO 


CO 


CM 


co 


i— i 


oo 


O 


7—1 


CM 


iO 


-* 


^* 


00 


CO 


as 


IO 


co 


1^ 


*r- 


as 


CO 


CO 


IO 


1^ 


00 


as 


as 


o 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


as 


1— t 


CM 


CM 


CO 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 


CM 



COOOOsOOOOiOlr-OCMCOCOiO 

as'ososososascsosasosasas 

CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM 



if §* j : : : : -b 1 » 1 1 



3 B 



a 



266 



CLIMATE, HEALTH, MORTALITY. 



«2 



o 

CO 

CO 



cm 

CO 


o 


co 


*- 


CO 


CO 


o 


1-H 


CO 


CM 


-cr. 


CO 


o 


X 


i-H 


OS 


^ 


*~ 


oo 


*Q 


^ 


1 — 1 


CO 


t* 


GO 


iO 


CO 


CO 


«o 


CO 


CM 


CO 


en 


1^. 


CS 


X 


^H 


CQ 


CJ 


CQ 


*^ 


r-H 


CO 


CO 


^1 


-* 


-hh 


to 


id 


IQ 


»o 


-H 


co 


CO 


Tp 




o 
b- 


^+1 


o 


CM 


i— i 


CO 


o 


«* 


CM 


wa 


CO 


X 


o 


CO 


co 


1-H 


CM 


GO 


r— 


o 


o 


X 


CTi 


DO 


t^ 


CO 


CO 


GO 


co 


oo 


CO 


W 


1 1 


30 


o 


o 


^ 


CO 


CTi 


i-H 


X 


i—4 


co 


CO 


-** 


-* 


^ 


IO 


CO 


S3 


»o 


iO 


CO 


"* 


«* 


o 


o 


^ 


w 


o 


W 


o 


cs 


•^ 


1-H 


1- 


o 


o 


Ci 


CO 


b- 


CM 


TpH 


CO 


Ci 


CM 


AO 


CD 


o 


CO 


»— 1 


i-H 


t^ 


GO 


O 


^M 


CO 


CO 


rH 


CM 


00 


^H 


CM 


X 


co 


^* 


1£S 


r-H 


co 


CO 


^* 


^ 


i-o 


iO 


.*« 


LO 


iC 


— 


^* 


co 


^ 


<5i 


o 

GO 


GO 


H< 


w 


eo 


00 


CO 


so 


o 


Mi 


o 


CO 


X 


CM 


T-H 


o 


co 


*~ 


oj 


t- 


CS 


b- 


CO 


o 


CM 


i-H 


1-H 


GO 


CM 


CO 


GO 


CM 


BC 


1^ 


w 


»c 


o 


LO 


Ci 


»rs 


XQ 


i—i 


CO 


CO 


CO 


^ 


IQ 


Mi 


iO 


BC 


NO 


^ 


CO 


co 


"^ 


GO 


o 
*>> 


CO 


cs 


XO 


oi 


t^ 


CM 


IQ 


iO 


CO 


^ 


o 


t^ 


CM 


H 


Ci 


o 


^ 


i— i 


o 


CO 


Ol 


o 


X 


CO 


CM 


X 


oo 


Ci 


00 


CM 


M5 


CO 


Ci 


00 


X 


iO 


t- 


^*< 


<* 


X 


I-H 


CO 


CO 


-* 


^H 


M5 


ms 


m 


IQ 


IO 


^ 


-* 


X* 


"«* 


b* 


o 
Cs 


CM 


CO 


co 


t- 


00 


1-H 


— 


»o 


'0 


o 


CO 


CO 


CM 


M5 


cs 


Ci 


CM 


90 


CS 


o 


CD 


»c 


03 


co 


ITS 


o 


GO 


«* 


CO 


CM 


t^ 


Ol 


CO 


CS 


to 


IO 


1 — 1 


CM 


CM 


X 




CO 


CO 


^t 


-<* 


IQ 


»o 


HO 


LO 


»o 


it: 


^ 


 <* 


-* 


s© 


o 

O 


t^ 


CO 


lO 


I- 


 ^ 


CM 


^ 


00 


Ci 


MS 


^ 




CM 


m 


CO 


i— i 


00 


X 


b- 


o 


oa 


CO 


^D 


1-H 


CM 


X 


GO 


o 


I— 1 


r-H 


lO 


r— < 


l-H 


1-H 


os 


CO 


K 


r^. 


o 


b- 


i— 1 


CO 


^ 


^* 


^ 


tO 


CO 


CO 


IQ 


IO 


^ 


co 


^ 


^ 


VO 


o 
CM 


CO 


CM 


T-4 


i-H 


o 


CS 


i-O 


MS 


a 


CM 


Mi 


Ci 


CM 


W 


CO 


^H 


lO 


-N 


MS 


CO 


t^ 


CM 


t- 


X 


OS 


-»* 


co 


82j 


t- 


Ci 


ms 


—| 


*o 


o 


c: 


*^. 


ga 


00 


X 


l> 




CO 


CO 


CO 


-* 


IQ 


iO 


co 


 a 


o 


"• 


CO 


co 


•«* 


tH 


& 


^1 


CO 


o 


c; 


IO 


1-H 


Cj 


oo 


89 


1-H 


t^ 


X 


CM 


Ci 


GO 


!>. 


cs 


— < 


00 


t^ 


t^ 


1-H 


— 


1-H 


C5 


X 


co 


co 


oo 


00 


CO 


o 


CO 


00 


X 


>* 


to 


,_! 


b- 


CO 




CO 


CO 


CO 


 ^ 


4 


in 


m 


•ft 


m 


— 


^ 


co 


H< 


CO 



GO 


o 


o 


^ 


CO 


o 


o 


» 


o 


o 


M5 


^0 


o 


CM 


co 


^1 


*o 


iO 


O 


oo 


** 


b- 


^1 


X 


CO 


CO 


o 


co 


I— 1 


*o 


os 


1-H 


_ . 


CM 


*o 


— 


CM 


^ 


CM 


X 


tfS 




CO 


CO 


co 


 ^ 


UO 


IO 


tfS 


»Q 


JO 


-^1 


^ 


CO 


^ 




















Fh 




i- 


u 


; 


1 

O 
3 


1-8 


- 

rO 




April . . 
May . . . 


a 


IS 


-^3 

1 


1 

IS 

J/2 


1 

o 

c 


1 


a 

s 

o 
o 

ft 


— H 
2 >H 

a - 



THE THERMOMETER. 



267 



CM 




XO 


H 


CO 


O GM 


OS 


OS 


OS 


CO 


oo 


as 


T-H 


^H 


•O 


00 


xO 


 ^ 


^H O 


00 


00 


•^f 


00 


co 


CO 


o 


00 


r— 4 


CO 


r— 1 


xo 


r-H 00 


CO 


o 


^H 


CM 


o 


^5 


b- 


r— 1 


CO 


CO 


«# 


^f 


lO AQ 


AO 


CO 


lO 


-* 


-* 


-tl 


tH 




o 

I-H 


CM 


XO 


OS 


CM O 


o 


CO 


T-H 


i^ 


x* 


xo 


b- 


< * 


Jt— 


XO 


CSS 


o 


00 r-l 


o 


o 


^ 


1>» 


CM 


CO 


T-H 


00 


CM 


CO 


CO 


XO 


CM ^H 


CO 


b- 


^ 


XO 


00 


t- 


CO 


r-i 


CO 


CO 


*# 


"^ 


XO XQ 


XO 


AO 


XO 


^ 


CO 


co 


x* 


o 


o 
CO 


XO 


as 


CM 


CM CO 


T—l 


1— 1 


oo 


t^ 


XO 


CM 


CO 


 <* 


CO 


co 


 <* 


^ 


CO O 


b- 


CM 


CM 


CO 


r— t 


CO 


o 


00 


b- 


w 


oo 


oo 


r-H CO 


XO 


OS 


O 


CO 


OS 


xo 


CO 


i-H 


CO 


CO 


CO 


 «* 


XO xo 


XO 


XO 


o 


•^ 


CO 


co 


X* 


Oi 


co 


CM 


xo 


co 


b- as 


co 


o 


CO 


co 


O 


b- 


C3 


co 


r— 1 


00 


o 


CM 


r-i O0 


*o 


CO 


*~ 


T—l 


OS 


J>- 


o 


00 


XO 


CO 


oo 


co 


as co 


b- 


XO 


CM 


w 


CO 


CO 


CO 


r— 1 


CO 


CO 


CO 


-* 


^ xo 


XO 


AO 


iO 


X* 


^H 


CO 


^H 


00 


xo 


OS 


i — i 


-=H 


^ 7— * 


OS 


CO 


o 


IO 


O 


CO 


1-i 


co 


CO 


-«*• 


o 


b- 


^H r-H 


AO 


CO 


o 


•^H 


00 


o 


00 


GO 


o 


r-l 


Si 


i— ( 


as xo 


b- 


CO 


CO 


1^. 


1^ 


00 


^ 


i— I 


CO 


CO 


CO 


-* 


^ xo 


xo 


XO 


iO 


^ 


CO 


co 


^H 


b- 


o 

CO 


Oi 


oo 


CO 


CO 00 


CO 


1C 


CM 


-^ 


^ 


^H 


b- 


CO 


o 


Jb- 


CO 


-* 


CO CO 


CM 


00 


r-H 


^h 


o 


r-H 


o 


00 


 TH 


b- 


"9M 


as 


as b- 


O 


b- 


CM 


as 


o 


o 


co 


I-H 


CO 


CO 


co 


CO 


-* xo 


CO 


AO 


IO 


^* 


-* 


X* 


*tf 


CO 


o 
CO 


o 


CO 


i— t 


as ^ 


iO 


b- 


00 


t>- 


CO 


•>#. 


 rH 


CO 


*a 


XO 


7— 1 


r-» 


b- 00 


OS 


•rH 


'^H 


CO 


GM 


o 


i—i 


oo 


t- 


b- 


o 


^* 


O CO 


CO 


iO 


r— i 


xo 


OS 


00* 


CO 


r— 1 


co 


CO 


-«* 


^ 


XO XO 


AO 


iC 


xo 


^ 


CO 


CO 


•^ 


1© 


O 


XO 


Si 


oo 


cm as 


^H 


«—* 


O 


*«- 


X* 


.b* 


XO 


co 


b- 


co 


o 


ONI 


o ^* 


-* 


CM 


GM 


•rH 


00 


r-H 


CO 


00 


1 ^H 


o 


1— 1 


CO 


O b- 


00 


O 


co 


CO 


I— ( 


00 


b- 


r~ 1 


CO 


^n 


T* 


^ 


XO to 


XO 


CO 


XO 


 «♦ 


X* 


CO 


X* 


^H 


a 

XO 


CO 


00 


-tH 


b- CO 


.b- 


<n 


O 


IO 


CO 


T—i 


T-H 


CO 


CO 


CO 


Ki 


tH 


co xo 


CM 


b- 


00 


Os 


-# 


CM 


oo 


00 


CM 


o 


CM 


^ 


CO CO 


T-H 


00 


x* 


00 


CM 


O 


oo 


T— t 


.*# 


-* 


^ 


•*H 


XO XO 


co 


lO 


xo 


-* 


x** 


-t* 


X* 


co 




GO 


co 


r— ( 


b- CM 


CM 


lO 


XO 


CO 


1— f 


XO 


CO 


CO 


^t 


b- 


CO 


as 


co b- 


b- 


CO 


CO 


Jt- 


CM 


t>- 


o 


00 


i—i 


OS 


oo 


-* 


-^H xo 


as 


*o 


CM 


t- 


CM 


T-H 


b~ 


r— 1 


co 


CO 


CO 


-* 


XO XO 


XO 


XO 


XO 


-* 


^ 


^ 


^ 


ad 
M 


>- 


tr 














f-t 


£ 
•£ 


u 

CD 


• 


O 


s 

1 


1 

CD 


1 
1 


4 


May . 
June. 


1-3 


CO 

<5 


CD 

% 


CD 

o 

o 


i 

o 


CD 
S 

P 


is 

41 



268 



CLIMATE, HEALTH, MORTALITY. 






o 

CO 

co 



a" 

 i 

00 

CO 



3 3 



M 
w 

H 
W 

o 

w 
W 
H 



CO 

to 

I 

1 

to 



to 
o 

a 



CM 


c 

CO 


CO 


1—1 


CM 


^* 


^* 


o 


CO 


I- 


o 


to 


^* 


IQ 


lO 


CM 


© 


CO 


(M 


o 


^* 


00 


I— 1 


CO 


^* 


X 


^ 


IQ 


00 


00 


X 


CS 


IQ 


o 


IQ 


^+1 


C: 


(M 


CM 


OT 


CM 


1>- 




co 


CO 


CO 


"* 


IQ 


iq 


CO 


IQ 


id 


^ 


-r 


^ 


"«* 




o 
OS 


~¥ 




o 


1—1 


o 


o 


o 


1— 1 


CO 


eo 


CO 


IQ 


IQ 


CO 


CO 


cm 


co 


CO 


CO 


o 


o 


I— 1 


CO 


iO 


t^ 


CO 


00 


o 


x 


J-H 


co 


OS 


IQ 


1^ 


X 


CM 


t^ 


~r 


i^ 


CO 




^ 


CO 


"* 


-* 


 * 


iq 


o 


±o 


IQ 


-* 


CO 


CO 


^ 


o 


IQ 


o 


CM 


co 


da 


cs 


CO 


CO 


CS 


*— 


CO 


CO 


^H 


IQ 


•* 


^o 


T-H 


IQ 


1— 1 


CO 


1^ 


— 


rH 


t^ 


Tl 


X 


CO 


00 


pH 


I— 1 


cs 


1^ 


CS 


00 


o 


»o 


CM 


co 


CO 


CO 


CO 




co 


^ 


co 


^* 


-T 


iq 


CO 


IQ 


»Q 


^ 


^* 


co 


^ 


cs 


I— 1 


CO 


CO 


^H 


CO 


^ 


1^ 


cs 


o 


CO 


CO 


CM 


CM 


 <* 


co 


I— 1 


t^ 


iq 


CO 


00 


t^ 


^o 


^ 


o 


IQ 


^ 


CO 


GO 


co 


o 


rH 


CM 


Ol 


CO 


1^ 


fc- 


*<* 


^ 


i — 


CO 


CO 


rH 


CO 


^ 


"* 


^ 


iq 


iq 


«a 


IQ 


IQ 


^ 


"f 


co 


"<* 


00 


o 

CO 


 ^ 


IQ 


co 


rH 


CM 




h- 


*^ 


00 


X 


^* 


CM 


"<* 


T— 1 


^ 


o 


1— 1 


^* 


CO 


CO 


co 


1— t 


CM 


CS 


CM 


CO 


00 


1— 1 


CD 


o 


IQ 


— 


CO 


00 


CO 


CM 


*^ 


X 


CS 


CO 




CO 


w 


 ^ 


Tj< 


IQ 


|Q 


iuO 


o 


IQ 


^ 


co 


CO 


^ 


t>. 


o 


^ 


I— 1 


CM 


»-H 


CO 


^o 


1- 


o 


CO 


B* 


o 


t^ 


""* 


OS 


o 


CO 


cs 


'O 


I— 1 


CM 


X 


IQ 


00 


^ 


CO 


ec 


oo 


co 


<<# 


o 


(M 


1—1 


*^ 


CM 


cc 


CS 


t^ 


— 


cs 


CO 


7— t 


co 


co 


"* 


^* 


iq 


id 


o 


IQ 


^ 


"* 


^ 


co 


"*# 


co 


b 


^* 


iq 


CO 


CO 


<M 


^ 


o 


o 


Cs 


IO 


CS 


^* 


^ 


CS 


IQ 


ON 


lO 


08 


CN 


CO 


^ 


CS 


o 


CO 


cs 


 "* 


00 


o 


1 — 1 


1— 1 


 «* 


r— t 


CM 


cs 


1 — 


CO 


00 


-M 


CS 


X 


I— 1 


^H 


^* 


-* 


"* 


IQ 


CO 


lO 


co 


IQ 


"* 


^ 


CM 


-* 


iq 


o 
IQ 


OT 


CM 


1- 


^ 


CM 


^ 


- 


l-H 


t^ 


— 


*^ 


b- 


-* 


T— 1 


1 — 1 


1^ 


CO 


o 


^H 


CO 


oa 


cs 


"* 


— 


^h 


•«* 


00 


iq 


^ 


"* 


CO 


cs 


CO 


CO 


-* 


o 


t^ 


Ol 


l>- 


IQ 


1— ( 


CO 


co 


CO 


^* 


-r 


o 


IQ 


»Q 


o 


^ 


— 


CO 


^ 


-* 


o 

r— 1 


CO 


o 


o 


iq 


r— 1 


co 


CO 


CO 


t- 


09 


t^ 


X 


^ 


00 


00 


rH 


in 


iq 


I— 1 


t- 


1— I 


CO 


CM 


^ 


I—" 


LO 


00 


CO 


oi 


00 


co 


c 


CO 


b- 


^* 


^ 


o 


-M 


rH 


lO 




co 


w 


co 


•<* 


iq 


lQ 


iO 


lO 


IQ 


^ 


"* 


co 


-* 


co 




o 


r^ 


00 


1— 1 


lO 


CS 


CO 


T 


^ 


IQ 


o 


o 


CO 


** 


00 


^ 


t- 


CM 


— 


CS 


LO 


IQ 


r— 1 


CM 


OS 


CO 


X 


00 


CO 


^ 


cs 


CO 


r— 1 


^* 


t^ 


I- 


co 


CO 


CS 


"* 


CO 




CO 


CO 


co 


^ 


IQ 


iO 


o 


IQ 


XQ 


^ 


CQ 


-<H 


"* 




















N 




u 




; 


02 

w 


>i 


b 














o 




X 


<D 

J5 


^-^ 


H 

o 


3 

d 

i-a 


3 


g 






o 
d 

»-9 


- 
ha 


-4-3 

n 


I 


o 




> 

b 


5 

3 

I 

P 


A r 1 1 1 1 1 ; i 

Means 



THE THERMOMETER. 



269 



s 

CJ 



I* 

o 



o 


o 


o 


i— 1 


as 


CO 


i— 1 


O 


VO 


1—1 


CO 


O 


00 


o 


CO 


T— 1 


o 


O 


o 


^ 


as 


OS 


1-H 


ISO 


OS 


OS 


t^ 


OS 


00 


00 


lO 


 ^ 


CO 


CM 


^ 


OS 


It- 


CM 


00 


O 


co 


irf 




CO 


CO 


CO 


^ 


O 


id 


lO 


O 


o 


^ 


-* 


CO 


^H 


OS 


o 
CO 


^ 


T— 1 


i— i 


CO 


1-4 


CO 


oo 


CO 




T+< 


o 


CO 


lO 


^* 


as 


I— 1 


^ 


lO 


<M 


^ 


o 


fc- 


r-H 


lO 


o 


<«* 


00 


o 


o 


-* 


CO 


-* 


as 


CO 


i—i 


co 


00 


OS 


CO 


00* 




^H 


^ 


^1 


^H 


lO 


lO 


CO 


CO 


»ra 


^ 


CO 


CO 


 -* 


00 


o 


co 


as 


iO 


CO 


VO 


00 


CO 


o 


h- 


lO 


OS 


1^ 


lO 


O 


i— i 


CM 


£- 


^ 


io 


oo 


^H 


oo 


i—l 


1-H 


CM 


1— i 


oo 


00 


CO 


O 


lO 


r— 1 


cm 


00 


o 


r^. 


1^ 


o 


OS 


00 




co 


CO 


-* 


^ 


lO 


co 


XO 


CO 


ica 


-* 


^ 


co 


"^ 


tr- 


o 
lO 


oo 


i— i 


1^- 


as 


vo 


co 


lO 


OS 


as 


co 


CO 


as 


lO 


i— i 


00 


-* 


00 


-* 


^ 


lO 


CO 


^H 


OS 


CO 


OS 


1^ 


00 


CO 


r^ 


o 


iO 


co 


j— i 


o 


co 


h- 


i—i 


co 


^H 


OS 




co 


CO 


^ 


^H 


lO 


co 


CO 


CO 


lO 


lO 


-* 


"* 


^ 


CO 


o 

T— 1 


"*" 


CO 


iO 


lO 


CO 


o 


00 


OS 


CO 


00 


MH 


Id 


lO 


O 


as 


00 


i—i 


o 


-* 


o 


CM 


4- 


OS 


i^ 


co 


o 


00 


t- 


as 


o 


r^ 


1—1 


^. 


o 


cm 


CO 


O 


00 


*- 


00 


7—1 


CO 


CO 


-Hi 


^ 


lO 


lO 


CO 


CO 


lO 


iO 


CO 


co 


^ 


lO 


o 
CO 


co 


h- 


co 


as 


CO 


^H 


co 


1—1 


^ 


co 


1—1 


00 


lO 


T— 1 


cm 


00 


i— i 


o 


1—1 


o 


CO 


CM 


co 


^ 


-^ 


OS 


oo 


lO 


00 


lO 


CO 


r^ 


oo 


^t< 


O 


lO 


00 


1—1 


^ 


iO 


1—1 


co 


CM 


co 


^ 


-* 


iO 


co 


CO 


iO 


-* 


-* 


co 


^ 


^H 


o 


1^ 


id 


CO 


o 


00 


co 


lO 


OS 


CM 


J>- 


1^ 


00 


iO> 


-rH 


O 


CO 


as 


XO 


as 


^ 


lO 


CO 


co 


co 


-* 


CO 


00 


lO 


^ 


T— 1 


CO 


as 


lO 


oo 


r^ 


^H 


iO 


OS 


00 


CO 


1— 1 


co 


co 


^ 


-<* 


^ 


»o 


iO 


io 


lO 


^H 


CO 


CO 


^H 




o 

00 


o 


as 


i—i 


-co 


00 


CO 


lO 


-* 


oo 


00 


CO 


CO 


lO 


t- 


J^ 


as 


r-H 


as 


i£> 


£^ 


OS 


CO 


OS 


o 


T—i 


lO 


oo 


1>- 


, 1 


\o 


"* 


o 


00 


oo 


CO 


CM 


CO 


OS 


co 


ICO 


I— 1 


co 


CO 


CO 


tH 


to 


o 


io 


o 


O 


^* 


co 


co 


^ 


02 

w 

Eh 

o 


S3 
Ha 


3 


M 

r-Q 

CD 


O 

u 


I— 1 
P. 


CO 


Ha 


Ha 


CO 

to 

4 


CD 

1 

Pi 

CD 
QQ 


f-, 

•8 

 s 

o 


-a 

> 


CD 

1 

CD 

CD 

p 


ri CD 

.4s 



270 CLIMATE, HEALTH, MORTALITY. 

The climate of Kendal is less salubrious than the rural 
districts of the parish, or of the " Union," but more so than 
many of the manufacturing towns in England. This is con- 
clusively proved by comparison of the Bills of Mortality. 
Taking the average of the last seven years, the rate of 
mortality in Kendal is 1 in 48 of the population ; whilst 
in the districts comprised in the whole Poor Law Union of 
Kendal, the average mortality is 1 in 61. It must be 
further observed, however, that this rate of mortality in 
Kendal is decreasing ; for at the time of publication of the 
first edition of this book (1832), the rate was 1 in 39. It is 
now 1 in 48, as aforesaid — a considerable amelioration. There 
were several diseases which took off the population, arising 
from secondary causes, that have been removed. Agues 
and scrofulous disorders abounded here half a century ago. 
Typhoid fevers were also very prevalent, especially in the 
autumn months. These cases are now comparatively rare. 
Improved drainage, improved ventilation of houses, more 
cleanliness among the poor, less intemperance, and, lastly, 
the substitution of water drawn from the silurian rocks, in 
place of water impregnated with lime, 1 have unitedly raised 
the general standard of health. Phthisis pulmonalis prevails 
still, in degree, but less extensively than in former years. Of 
the artisan class, the weaver is the most sallow and unhealthy 
in appearance ; but this may be attributed to his sedentary, 
in-door employment, and not to any local causes. 

The sanitary condition of the town was made the subject 
of official investigation in 1849, by a Government officer, 
connected with the General Board of Health ; aud the result 
of this investigation was given in a carefully-drawn Report, 
by the Superintending Inspector, on the state of the town. 
We subjoin a brief abstract of this Report. Since that time, 
however, many improvements have been effected in the 
houses, " crofts," and back lanes (suggested by this Eeport), 
and the description here given is, consequently, not strictly 
applicable to the present condition of drainage and clean- 
liness : 

1 See establishment of Gas aud Water Works, ante p. ] 58. 



SANITARY CONDITION OF THE TOWN. 271 

" Report of the Superintending Inspector to the General Board of Health, on a 

Preliminary Inquiry into the Sewerage, Drainage, and Supply of Water, and 

the Sanitary Condition of the Inhabitants of the Borough of Kendal, dated 

May 9, 1849. 

" I have the honour to inform you that, in accordance with your instruc- 
tions, I have inspected the Borough of Kendal. 

u I found that the Corporation, in conjunction with the Board of Guardians, 
had formed a Local Health Committee, and had applied the provisions of the 
Nuisances Removal Act very vigorously as far as these could go. 

"The natural drainage of the town has three directions : one from the 
eastern side of the ridge, direct into the river, a second directly into the 
valley, and thence northwards into the river, a third also directly into the 
valley, but falling southwards into the river. The whole of the Fell drainage 
is also divided between the two portions of this valley. As the river flows 
from north to south, and the outfall of the northern portion of the valley is 
above the town, its contents are carried by the current quite past the town, 
and produce a serious nuisance in their progress. 

" The Kent is broad and shallow, rippling over a pebble bed, and held up 
by three considerable, and very many smaller weirs ; of the three, Dockwray 
Hall weir is quite above the town, the Castle Mill abreast of it, and the 
Lound weir quite below it. The fall from the tail-race of the Dockwray weir 
to that of the Lound weir is 15 feet and the distance about 2,200 yards. This 
is within the limit of the fall of the lowest and most level portion of the town. 

" Tributary to the Kent are three streams, one on the right bank above or 
just within the town, drains the west side of Stricklandgate, and falls into 
the river 350 yards above the Stramongate Bridge, under the name of the 
Dyer's Beck. The second^ stream rises on the Fell-side, in the limestone, 
flows across a part of the town as the Blind-beck, and reaches the river about 
350 yards above the Nether-bridge, and 500 yards below Miller-bridge. Close 
below this is a second limestone spring, the Anchorite's Well, which is capa- 
ble of turning a small mill 50 yai'ds below its source. The third principal 
stream rises on the Hay Fell, flows across the suburb, and enters the river as 
the Stock-beck, a little below Stramongate Bridge. This spring takes the 
waste of the water- works. Thus much, then, of the general disposition of 
the surface of and about Kendal. 

" Government. — In Kendal township a Board of twelve to twenty is 
elected, and appoints a sub-surveyor, who attends to the roads and sewers. 
The expense of scavenging, however, is borne by the Fell Trustees, who 
allowed at the time of my inspection 50/. per annum for Kendal, and 101. for 
Kirkland township, and contracted with the Board of Surveyors to attend to 
both. These sums have since been reduced, in consequence of the deficiency 
of the cleansing rate, to 251. and 51. 

"Under a Local Enclosure Act of 1767, power was given to enclose 158 
acres of common lands, called the Kendal Fell. The administration of the 
lands was placed in the hands of trustees, and the surplus rents were directed 
to be employed in reduction of the poor-rate. These trustees were also 
empowered to light and cleanse the township of Kendal, and to levy a rate for 
such purposes, not exceeding Qd. in the pound annually. Afterwards, by an 
order of the Town Council, under the Municipal Act, certain other districts, 
completing the present town, were added. Also the Act confirmed a previous 
agreement between the owners of the Park and Castle lands, and the rest of 
the township of Kendal, whereby it was settled that the former should pay 






272 CLIMATE, HEALTH, MORTALITY. 

one-tenth and no more of the whole joint poor-rates for ever. The effect of 
this enactment has been to encourage building operations within the Park and 
Castle area, which lies on the eastern side of the river, around the Castle, and 
thus to cause the poor's-rate to fall with undue weight upon the remainder of 
the town. 

" The tables of mortality tend to show the excessive mortality of Kendal as 
compared with that of the adjacent country. Nor is there anything in the 
natural position of the town, or in the density of its population, to account 
for it. This excess is attributable, in my opinion, to the defective drainage 
and ill-constructed receptacles for filth which are allowed to remain unemptied 
for an unjustifiable length of time, throwing out their pestiferous exhalations, 
and thereby generating fevers of a low typhoid character, chronic affections 
of the chest and bowels, which are so frequently prevailing epidemically here. 
During my inspection, I had frequent opportunities of observing that the 
localities unhealthy, were those in which local nuisances were most offensive, 
and the absence of drainage most marked. 

"Water Supply. — Kendal affords a very strong example of how little a 
private company, founded on a good principle, and with a liberal and zealous 
direction and officers, can do to effect a complete distribution of the water 
supply.! 

" Besides the pumps, of which the water is, in a sample taken at random 
of 50° of hardness, and the Anchorite's Well, of which the water is of 14°, 
Kendal is supplied with water by the Kendal Water Company, incorporated 
for water and gas, 26th June, 1846. 

" The supply is by natural pressure commanding the whole town. On the 
side of Hay-Fell a reservoir has been formed, into which, by catch-water and 
natural drains, the water from the hills above is led. This water is of 3° of 
hardness only, very pure, bright and tasteless. Flood-waters are excluded. 
The quantity stored is 2,000,000 cubic feet, which, at four cubic feet daily 
for each person, would supply Kendal for about forty-three days. 

" This reservoir has only been open about half a year, and the company 
have purchased land and are about to provide storage for a sixty day's supply. 
From the reservoir an 8-inch main descends into the town, and gives off 
branches which are already laid in the principal streets. The mains are in 
some instances laid along the sides of the streets, in others down the centre ; 
and in some of the widest parts, down both sides. The width of the main 
streets varies from eighteen feet to sixty-eight feet, and probably averages 
forty feet. The company, as a matter of course, lay the service pipes from 
the main to the margin of the private premises, if the distance does not 
exceed twenty yards. All beyond that limit is the subject of special agree- 
ment. As a general rule, the company lay a distinct branch-pipe to each 
house, and the average length of such branches is twenty feet. They are of 
lead or iron, as the consumer pleases. The charge is about Sd. a-foot, exclu- 
sive of the cocks, which vary from 3s. to 6s. each. 

" The supply is constant, at high pressure, of excellent quality, charged at 
a rate but a trifle above a penny a-week upon the lcwest class of houses, 
and the company have shown great anxiety to keep down the expense of the 
service-pipes as low as possible, and yet they supply but a small fraction 
of the population. 

1 The distribution of water, throughout the town, is [much more general 
now than it was when this Report was published. 



SANITARY CONDITION OF THE TOWN. 273 

"Street Paving and Scavenging. — The highways and thoroughfares in 
Kendal are by no means in very good ^order. The main streets have mac- 
adamized carriage ways, and pitched footways. There is but little flagged way 
in the town. In Kendal township, by very much the principal division of the 
borough, there are about ten or eleven miles of road-way, kept in repair by 
the sub-surveyor, at a cost, including scavenging, of about 3501. per annum. 
Broken stone varies according to its quality from Is. lOd. to 2s. id. per ton. 
The material at the latter price is excellent. 

"Public Nuisances. — There are ten slaughter-houses in the town, and the 
greater number of them are in its most crowded parts. They form, perhaps, 
after the private cess-pools, the most pressing evil in the town. ' They are 
all,' says the Inspector of Nuisances and Police, 'attached to inns or public 
houses, closely surrounded with dwellings in the centre of the town, and 
chiefly in confined and improper places.' 

" The brooks or becks, crossing the town, have already been mentioned. 
These, which ought to adorn and purify the town, rank at present among its 
public nuisances. 

"Common or Public Lands. The only public lands are those on Kendal 
Fell and a few detached fields belonging to local charities, but these are all at 
an elevation of from 200 to 400 feet above the sewage outfalls, and, therefore, 
beyond the reach of the fluid manure. 

u REMEDIES. 

" Sewerage. — It is in all cases objectionable to turn sewage matter into a 
river, more especially within a town ; but where the river is shallow, and 
frequently leaves a large portion of its channel dry, such a practice is quite 
inadmissible. The first requisite, therefore, in the arrangement of a plan of 
drainage for Kendal, is to carry all the outfalls below the town, and, if possi- 
ble, to combine them upon one point. This I find to be practicable. The 
main sewerage divisions will be four, the Fell-side valley north ; the same 
south ; the eastern side of the town between the ridge and the river, including 
Stramongate ; and the suburb beyond the river, as far as the railway station. 

" Sewage Distribution. — The proposed drainage arrangements, by concen- 
trating the sewage upon one outfall below the town, will render its distribution 
as a manure extremely easy. It appears, from a plan and section prepared by 
Mr. Watson, that a lift of from thirty to forty feet will place within reach of 
this manure a tract of land, chiefly laid down in grass, of about 600 acres, 
and at a sufficient distance from the town to prevent any possible annoyance 
from bad smells. The Corporation have recently received offers, from private 
parties, to rent the sewage of the town, and there can be no doubt but that it 
will become a considerable source of revenue. 

" General Remarks. — Kendal has suffered severely from its long-continued 
neglect of attention to the public health or convenience. Its ill-paved, close, 
and crowded alleys, its deficiency of all proper drainage, and until very re- 
cently, the absence of a supply of any but hard water, are causes which have 
tended powerfully to lower the condition of the working classes ; to produce 
sickness, and an excessive rate of mortality ; and, as a direct consequence, to 
load the town with heavy annual expenditure. 

" The direct money expense of all these evils falls, no doubt, chiefly upon the 
rate-paying class ; but the evils themselves, and their indirect expenses, press 
far more heavily on the poor. The expenses produced by want of soft water 
and proper drainage weigh heavily on the poor ; their homes are rendered 

T 



274 



CLIMATE, HEALTH, MORTALITY. 



comfortless ; they are driven to the public-houses ; and medical evidence has 
shown that a state of lassitude is pi'oduced, which renders those stricken by it 
careless of consequences, and leads directly to pauperism. 

" The present condition of Kendal is, in my opinion, to be attributed solely 
to the want of the powers and facilities now afforded by the Public Health 
Act. The town possesses, in an unusual degree, persons of station and in- 
fluence, who have long been actively engaged in attempts to amend the 
condition, and add to the comforts of the labouring poor ; and their hands will 
be materially strengthened by this measure. I advert to these circumstances 
because they appear to me to augur well for the formation of an efficient 
Local Board, and, therefore, for a full measure of success in the application of 
the remedies. 

" Summary. — I have then to report : — 

" 1. That the mortality of Kendal is absolutely high, being 32£ in the 1,000, 
and high relatively as regards that of the registration district, which is 
about 24 in the 1,000 ; and this, notwithstanding that the greater part of the 
town is on high and open ground, in a climate usually regarded as healthy. 

" 2. That this mortality, and the sickness which it represents, are greatest 
in certain close, filthy, undrained, and damp quarters of the town. 

" 3. That the position of the town admits of the economy of the employment 
of its sewage under the form of fluid manure, and that a revenue may be 
confidently expected under this head." 
May, 1849. 

Since the date of the above Eeport the Local Board of 
Health, as before said, have been very active in removing 
many of the nuisances, and causes of sickness, deprecated in 
that Eeport. 






POPULATION. 

The following returns of the population, from 1784 to 1861, 
show the variation in the number of inhabitants from time 
to time, within that period. We believe the returns, up to 
and including that for 1821, did not include the district of 
Nethergraveship, but the inhabitants of that district, at the 
time, were inconsiderable : 

Males. Females. Total. 

1784. Kendal and Kirkland .... 3,267 4,304 7,571 

1793. Kendal 3,142 4,012 ) g 0g9 

Kirkland 391 544 J ' 

1801. Kendal 2,950 3,942 \ - g7g 

Kirkland 441 645 J ' 

1811. Kendal 3,311 4,194 ) g Kg9 

Kirkland 550 704 ) ' 

1821. Kendal 4,139 4,845 | 1Q BQO 

Kirkland 638 740 ! ' 

1831. Kendal 4,656 5,359 j n 61g 

Kirkland and Nethergraveship . 745 853 



PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION. 



275 



Males. Females. Total. 
1811. Kendal 4,788 5,437 ) n 770 

Kirkland and Nethergraveship . 742 803* ' 

1851. Kendal 4 ; 931 5 > U6 \n^29 

Kirkland and Nethergraveship . 673 779 / 

1861. Kendal 4,939 5,478 ^ 12 02g 

Kirkland and Nethergraveship . 772 839 J ' 

The following is the number of dwelling-houses, within 
the borough, in the present year, 1861, taken from the Census 
returns, viz. : — 





Inhabited. 


Un- 
inhabited. 


Building. 


Kendal 


2,208 

278 

96 


91 

11 

2 


6 
3 

2 


Kirkland 

Nethergraveship 

Total of houses 


2,582 


104 


11 



Superintendent Registrar, Mr. John Mann. 



PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION. 

The Act of Parliament, popularly called the "Parlia- 
mentary Beforrn Bill," by which many towns in the United 
Kingdom, not previously represented in Parliament, had 
representative powers conferred upon them, passed the 
Legislature in June, 1832. By the operation of this Act 
Kendal became entitled to return one Member to the House 
of Commons. The following list presents the Members suc- 
cessively returned from that period to the present time : 

1832. James Brougham. [Died, in Dec. 1833.] 
John F. Barham. 

„ „ re-elected. 

George Wm. Wood. 

„ „ re-elected. [Died, 1843.] 

Henry Warburton. 
George Carr Glyn. 

re-elected. 



1834. 

1835. 

1837. 

1841. 

1843. 

1847. 

1852. 

1857. „ 

1859. 

Present number of voters on the register for the Borough, 432. 

T 2 



276 LITERAEY INSTITUTIONS. 



CHAPTEE IX. 



LITEKARY INSTITUTIONS. 



It is conceived that very few, if any, of the provincial 
towns exceed Kendal, relatively, in literary institutions and 
literary exercises. Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and Thomas 
De Quincey, resided within a distance that gave them the 
opportunity of observing this characteristic of the Kendal 
people ; and it is but fair to put their unquestionable 
testimony on record in this place. " I can add my attestation 
(says De Quincey) to that of Mr. Coleridge, that nowhere is 
there more elasticity and freshness of mind exhibited than 
in the conversation of reading men in manufacturing towns. 
In Kendal, especially, in Bridgewater, and in Manchester, 
I have witnessed more interesting conversations, as much 
information, and more natural eloquence in conveying it, 
than usually in literary cities, or in places professedly 
learned." ' 

Several works, in science and literature, have proceeded 
from Kendal, or from authors connected with it (other than 
those alluded to in the subsequent biographical sketches), 
but as we are unable to make a perfect catalogue, it is 
thought better to omit them. Our notices, under this head, 
must therefore be limited to the periodical publications and 
public societies. 

It has been asserted that Kendal was one of the earliest 
places to issue a provincial weekly newspaper. The first 
newspaper published here was entitled "The Kendal 
Courant." It commenced on the 1st of January, 1731, 
and was printed by Thomas Cotton. In size it was a medium 

1 '• Autobiographic Sketches," Vol. II. p. 157. 



NEWSPAPERS. 277 

4to, containing four pages, and bearing a half-penny stamp. 
The second newspaper was called "The Kendal Weekly 
Mercury." We are in possession of a copy, November 5, 
1737, which is marked No. 149. This carries the date of its 
establishment back to January 4, 1734, and proves that 
" The Courant " had been but short-lived ; for it can hardly 
be supposed that Kendal could at that time support two 
newspapers, even at a penny apiece ; nor is it probable, 
indeed, that there were then two printing presses in the town. 
"The Weekly Mercury " was a post folio, with a halfpenny 
stamp. It was printed and published by Thomas Ashburner, 
in the Fish Market, who perhaps succeeded Cotton in 
business, and continued the newspaper, only changing the 
title when he took it into his possession. Before 1745 or 6, 
" The Mercury " seems to have been discontinued, and Mr. Ash- 
burner instituted in its place a small pamphlet-like periodical, 
8vo size, entitled " The Agreeable Miscellany, or something 
to please every man's taste." The series for 1749 of this 
publication contains a full account of the rebellion of 1745, 
and the passing of the rebels through Kendal. From that 
volume we obtained many of the particulars of this occur- 
rence, described at p. 135. 

In 1777, a sheet almanack, called the "Kendal Diary," 
was established by Mr. Ashburner, and was continued until 
the year 1836. It would perhaps be difficult to find a pro- 
vincial almanack of greater antiquity than this. 

The " Kendal Chronicle," a folio, weekly newspaper, was 
established in 1811, the title of which was altered to " The 
Kendal Mercury" in May 1834. In 1818, another weekly 
paper was commenced, called " The Westmorland Gazette and 
Kendal Advertiser." These newspapers are both still continued. 
The " Lonsdale Magazine," a monthly publication, which had 
two years before been printed and published atKirkby-Lonsdale, 
was, in 1822, brought over to Kendal, by its talented editor 
and publisher, the late Mr. John Briggs, who was engaged to 
conduct " The Gazette " newspaper. But the patronage be- 
stowed on this magazine was unequal to its merits ; and 
after the short and sickly term of twelve months' existence, 
in Kendal, it was suffered to die for lack of support. 



278 LITEEAEY INSTITUTIONS. 

The oldest book society in the town is the " Kendal Book 
Club." It was instituted in 1761, and is, therefore, now in 
the centenary year of its existence. Connected with this 
society there are two feasts annually ; the Venison Feast, 
which is held in September, and the Epiphany Dinner (which 
has not been held for two years). On the former occasion 
many of the influential gentlemen in the county, who are 
mostly members of this club, assemble, though of late 
years the interest that attached to it is somewhat abated. 
The Epiphany Dinner is eligible only to members residing 
in the town. Librarian, Mr. TV. Eishee, Bookseller. 

The "Kendal Library" was established in 1794, since which 
time it has gradually increased, till it is now computed to 
contain upwards of 5,000 volumes. Librarian, Miss Eishee. 
In 1797, a library was instituted, called the " Economical 
Library," designed principally for the use and instruction of 
the working classes. The terms of this society were so 
extremely moderate, that the library never attained much 
usefulness. In January, 1825, an arrangement was made 
between the committee of the Mechanics' Institute and the 
remaining members of the Economical Library, that whatever 
books the latter contained, which were deemed eligible by the 
committee for the Mechanics' Library, should be added to it, 
and the members of the Economical Library were incorporated 
with the Mechanics' Institution. 



NATUEAL HISTOEY AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 

This Society was instituted in the year 1835. It originated 
in the conjoint efforts of Mr. Thomas Gough and Cornelius 
Mcholson, for the declared purpose of exploring and eluci- 
dating the Natural History and Antiquities of the County of 
"Westmorland. There had been, fifteen years previously, an 
attempt made by a select number of literary men. to establish a 
Society for the objects above stated : but this was frustrated by 
the divisions consequent on the outbreak of party polities, in 
1818. That circumstance, still fresh in the recollection of the 
inhabitants, hindered the first efforts of the projectors of this 
Society, and when they assembled, at the Commercial Inn. at 






NATUEAL HISTORY AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 279 



a preliminary meeting, convened by circular, they found 
the meeting to be comprised of three persons only — one 
gentleman besides the two projectors! The fact is here 
recorded, for the sake of encouraging enterprising persons, 
who may have natural obstacles to overcome in their incipient 
projects. A second attempt, after a personal canvass, brought 
together a few gentlemen, and, by dint of perseverance, the 
Society was established ; Lord Brougham, Wordsworth, the 
poet, Southey, then poet-laureate, Professor (John) Wilson, 
Dr. Birkbeck, the originator of Mechanics' Institutes, Dr. 
Dalton, Professor Sedgwick, and other men eminent in 
science and literature, being ranked among the honorary 
members, within the first year of the Society's existence. 
The scheme comprised the reading of papers and discussions 
once a month ; and the formation of a Museum. The dis- 
cussion meetings began with spirit, in 1835, and have never 
flagged from that time to this. The Museum, starting with 
the nucleus of a few stuffed birds, and one or two relics of 
antiquity, has grown gradually, in objects of value, every 
succeeding year. The specimens of fossils, illustrating the 
palaeontology of the Cambrian, Silurian, and Carboniferous 
rocks of the district, are most complete, being all carefully 
arranged in classes, orders, genera, and species, in accordance 
with modern zoological classification. In this particular, 
perhaps, the Museum stands above all other local collections. 
In the birds of the district, the Museum is also nearly 
complete. The Society's rooms, for meetings and the Museum, 
were originally in New Street, in a house that had been 
temporarily occupied as the " Bank of Westmorland ; " from 
thence, outgrowing that accommodation, the Museum was 
removed to the old Eoman Catholic chapel (contiguous to 
the existing chapel). Still increasing, and requiring more 
space, it was finally, (in 1854), transferred to the existing 
premises in Stricklandgate. Mrs. Harriman Walker, a most 
obliging and efficient keeper of the Museum, has held that 
appointment for twenty-four years. Professor Sedgwick, the 
permanent President, has greatly promoted the success of the 
Society, by occasional lectures and illustrations of the geology 
of the district, assisted by the labours of John Kuthven, a 






280 LITERARY INSTITUTIONS. 

local geologist, who, like Hugh Miller, proves how a man may 
overcome the want of education, and render important services 
to science, by the bent of natural genius. 

The Kendal Library (formerly an independent establish- 
ment), was united with the Scientific Society in the year 
1854, when the Museum was removed to Stricklandgate, and 
the library is now kept in one of the rooms of this Society. 
Miss Fisher, as before stated, is the librarian. 



THE MECHANICS' INSTITUTE. 

The formation of Mechanics' Institutes, in the United 
Kingdom, originated with George Birkbeck, Esq., M.D., then 
living at Glasgow. He removed to London, about the year 
1821, and the design there took root and germinated under 
the fostering hand of Henry Brougham, who gave to it life 
and energy. The Kendal Mechanics' Institute was one of the 
first, if not the very first, provincial Institution in England ; 
and its origin was somewhat singular. A public meeting was 
called, by anonymous handbill, to consider the formation of a 
" Co-operative Society," which was to retail meal and flour, 
and provide a news-room for the members. Curiosity brought 
together a considerable number of persons, the meeting being 
held in one of the upper rooms of the White Lion Inn, where 
William Hudson, the botanist, was born, of which house we 
have given an engraving. (See ante, p. 126.) The scheme of 
the Co-operative Society was propounded with laboured detail 
by its projector, but it was coldly received by the meeting, 
and the opportunity was seized, by one present, of proposing 
instead a Mechanics' Institute, and that proposal was hailed 
with approval. This was in March, 1824;. A committee was 
then and there named ; the most active gentlemen of the town, 
in favour of educational institutions, Mr. Marshall, Mr. John 
Thomson, Mr. Edward W. Wakefield, and others, soon joined 
the promoters, and the Institution has proved itself to be 
eminently successful, and useful. 

Lectures are given on subjects connected with literature 
and science, which are generally well attended ; and cla 



CHRISTIAN AND LITERARY INSTITUTE. 281 

of young men, for instruction in various branches of knowledge, 
are held in the evenings. 

The present number of reading members is 150. And the 
number of volumes in the library is 1,800. 

President— J ames Cropper, Esq. 

Secretary — Mr. Jones Taylor. 



WORKING MEN'S READING ASSOCIATION. 

This Society was established in 1841 ; but was remodelled, 
and placed under its present constitution, in the year 1844. 
It unites the advantages of a library with that of a news- 
room. Its annual income and expenditure is about 80 1. 
At the last general meeting, the number of members was 
declared to be 357; and the number of books in the library 
1,524 volumes. The taste for reading is found to be more 
in the departments of science, history, and travels, than in 
works of fiction. The subscription for ordinary members 
is only 6d. per quarter, or one halfpenny per week ! Long 
may it flourish. Mr. William Longmire is the present 
Secretary. 

CHRISTIAN and literary institute. 

This Institution was founded in 1852. It has some points 
of resemblance with the Mechanics' Institute and the Working 
Men's Eeading Society, and yet differs from these in a dis- 
tinctive quality. As its title imports, it is " Christian" as 
well as " Literary." It seeks to disseminate religious truths, 
based on the revealed Word of God. The library is selected 
with consistent reference to this principle ; and the lectures 
delivered before the members, generally by men of position 
and influence, are characterised by a high moral and religious 
tone. The committee of management are, for the most part, 
young men, who themselves minister to, and are benefited by 
the Institution, which, like mercy, thus blesses "them that 
give and those who take." Young men, under twenty-one 
years of age, are admitted to all the privileges of the Institute 






282 PEERAGE TITLES. 

at two shillings per annum. The income of last j^ear was 
103?. 16s. 7d. The library contains upwards of 800 volumes. 
Honorary Secretaries: — Mr Chaeles IRELAND and Mr. 
Eobert Webster. 



PEERAGE TITLES. 

The title of Baron of Kendal was enjoyed by the Barons, in 
succession, from Ivo de Talebois, in the time of the Conqueror, 
to William Parr, Marquis of Northampton, in the reign of 
Henry VIII. 1 There have been four Earls of Kendal, a Duke 
of Kendal, and a Duchess of Kendal. The title of Earl of 
Kendal was conferred on John de Lancaster, Duke of Bedford, 
by King Henry IV. (1414) ; on John Beaufort, Duke of 
Somerset, by King Henry VI. ; on John de Foix, of France, 
by Henry VI. ; and on George, Prince of Denmark, husband 
of Queen Anne, who had the Earldom of Kendal, along with 
other honours, conferred on him in 1689. Charles Stuart, 
third son of James II, was, in 1664, entitled Duke of Kendal. 
Erengard Melusina Schuylenberg, who came over to England 
with George I., was created Duchess of Kendal. This lady 
was tall, and lean of stature, and hence was irreverently 
nicknamed "the Maypole." She was lean, also, in another 
sense, for at her departure from Germany, she could hardly 
escape from her own country -on account of her debts. But 
she repaired her fortunes in England ; and after her death, at 
Twickenham, "all her jewels, her plate, her plunder, went 
over to her relations in Hanover." Finally, the old title of 
" Baron of Kendal " was given to the Earl of Lonsdale, in 
May, 1784. 

There was to have been another creation of Duke of 
Kendal, in the present generation, but it miscarried. The 

1 It is only a few weeks since the world heard of the decease of the List 
descendant of the Tatebois, the ancient barons of Kendal. The last of that 
old house was a young girl, Emily Tailbois, who, at the age of eighteen, died 
a casual pauper in the workhouse at Shrewsbury ! — Sic transit gloria, Ac. 
(From " Ups and Downs in the House of Peers ;" in the Comb ill Magazine for 
May, 1861.) 



PEERAGE TITLES. 283 

Prince Eegent (George IV.) made a promise to Prince 
Leopold (afterwards King of Belgium), that, on his (Leopold's) 
marriage with the Princess Charlotte, he should be Duke of 
Kendal. The wedding was once or twice postponed, by the 
caprice of the Eegent ; and though the marriage was 
eventually celebrated, the dukedom was abandoned. 1 On 
these occurrences, Peter Pindar wrote a lampoon, of which 
the following lines are part : 

•' Though wedding days have twice been named, 
Yet how can the poor Prince be blamed ? 
And tho' our Regent, great, to end all, 
Declares he shall be Duke of K 1." 



1 Thackeray's " Four Georges.' 



284 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE; 




CHAPTER X. 



A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 

Of the Chief Magistrates of the Borough of Kendal, from 
its first incorporation, in 1575, and of the most remarkable 
events, chiefly in the town and neighbourhood. 

anrermen : 

A.D. 

1575-1576 Henry Wilson, of Blackhall, Stricklandgate, nominated first 
Alderman of Kendal, by the Charter of Incorporation, granted 
to this Borough by Queen Elizabeth, dated November 28, 
1575. 
Robert Briggs, Esq., nominated Recorder, 1575; Thomas Braith- 
ii § waite, Esq., of Ambleside, elected Recorder, 1576. 

— -v The first meeting of the Corporation was held January 8th, 1576. 

1576-1577 Henry Fisher. 

1577-1578 Myles Fox. 

1578-1579 Robert Jopson. 

1579-1580 Christopher Bindloss. A dealer in Kendal cottons, afterwards 

knighted. 
1580-1581 Myles Bracken. 
1*581 -T582 i Edward Swainson. Died during his Officiate. 

( Edward Potter, elected for the remainder of the year. 
1582-1583 Henry Dixon. A great dearth; oatmeal sold for 21s. per Win- 
chester bushel. 
1583-1584 William Wilson. The boundaries and privileges of the Corpora- 
tion ascertained by a jury of inquiry. 
1584-1585 Thomas Potter. 
1585-1586 John Armer. 

1586-1587 Anthony Pearson. Oatmeal sold for 16s. a bushel. 
1537-1588 James Wilson. 
1588-1589 Henry Fleming. 
1589-1590 Edward Wilkinson. 
1590-1591 Roger Dawson. 

1591-1592 William Swainson. Moot Hall built. Free Grammar School built 
by subscription. Ravlph Tirer, BD., inducted Vicar, in the place 
of the Rev. Samuel Heron, resigned. 

1 First published to the year 1724, by Robert Wharton, and continued to 
the year 1802, by William Pennington. From thence, to 1S23, by Mr. John 
Taylor. (The whole subsequently revised and corrected.) 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 285 

A. D. 

1592-1593 John Thwaites. 

1593-1594 William Wilson (second time). 

1594-1595 John Smith. 

1595-1596 Edward Potter (second time). 

1596-1597 Henry Dixon (second time). Died during his Officiate. 

1 5Q7 1 ^QS \ J° nn Armer (second time). Died during his Officiate. 

( James Wilson elected for the remainder of the year. The plague 
began in this town about Whitsuntide, and there died in June, 
in Kendal, 2,500— in Penrith, 2,260— Carlisle, 1,196— Eichmond, 
2,200. 
1598 -1599 Edward Wilkinson (second time). 
1599-1600 Roger Dawson (second time). 

1600-1601 John Thwaites (second time). July 1st, 1601, Heversham Church 
" utterly consumed with fire, and all implements, ornaments, 
books, monuments, chests, organs, bells, and all other things 
were perished. . . . fortuned through negligence of a careless 
workman, being a plumber." 
1601-1602 John Smith (second time). 

1602-1603 Robert Wilkinson. King James I. began his reign, March 24. 
1603-1604 Francis Gibson. Gunpowder Plot, November 5th. 
1604-1605 Richard Seile. 
1605-1606 Nicholas Rowlandson. 
1606-1607 James Dixon. 

1607-1608 George Fleming. Hard frost from November 3rd, 1607, to March 
6th, 1608. 
fi 1«OQ \ Mti cnae l RowlandsoD. Died during his Officiate. 

I Edward Wilkinson (third time), elected for the remainder of the 
year. 
1609-1610 Thomas Wilson. William Garnett, Esq., elected Recorder, August 

21st, 1610. 
1610-1611 Thomas Green. 

1611-1612 Edward Fisher. A great drought from May 1st to August 8th, 1612. 
1612-1613 John Smith (third time). 
1613-1614 Edward Wilkinson (fourth time). Speed's Topography of Kendal, 

published. 
1614-1615 Thomas Wilson. 
1615-1616 James Dixon (second time). August 3rd, 1616, Sir Augustine 

Nicolls died at Kendal. 
1616-1617 John Robinson. King James I., on his progress from Scotland, 
August 8th, lodged in a house in Stricklandgate, called Brown- 
sword House. He had been entertained for three days at 
Brougham Castle on this journey. 1 
1617-1618 Thomas Sleddall. 

1618-1619 Richard Pearson. A dear year, being the first of three. 
1619-1620 Stephen Newby. Oatmeal 21s. per Winchester bushel. 
1620-1621 Rowland Dawson. Oatmeal 18s. per Winchester bushel. 



1 The only animal ever known to return to Scotland, from England, was a 
cow, that broke through the " debatable land," to and fro, in the time of this 
King James, who, being a wit, observed that " she was a brute, and knew no 
better." 



286 



CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 






A. D. 

1621-1622 Walter Becke. A Wednesday market begun. 

1622-1623 Michael Gibson. 

1623-1624 William Banke. 

1624-1625 James Cocke. King Charles I. began his reign, March 27, 1625. 

1625-1626 James Dixon. 

1626-1627 Henry Parke. The Rev. Francis Gardener, B.D. inducted Vicar. 

1627-1628 James Rowlandson. 

1628-1629 Lawrence Parke. 

1629-1630 Robert Crosfeild. 

1630-1631 Edward Fisher (second time). 

1631-1632 James Bateman. 

1632-1633 Richard Forth. 

1633-1634 William Guy, of Watercrook. 

1634-1635 Thomas Sleddall (second time). October 18th, 1635, the river 
Kent rose into the vestry. On the following day, Thomas 
Miller, boatman, drowned in Windermere, together with forty- 
seven men and women, and nine or ten horses, having been at a 
wedding. 

1635-1636 Rowland Dawson (second time). Sir John Lowther, Baronet, no- 
minated Recorder by the new Charter, dated February 4, 1635-6. 



jHagors : 

1 636-1 637 Thomas Sleddall, nominated by the Charter in these terms : " Our 

welbeloved Thoma3 Sleddall gent, to be y e first and moderne 

Maior of y e Borough of Kendal." 
1637-1638 Walter Becke. 
1638-1639 Edward Fisher. 

1639-1640 William Banke. The Rev. Henry Hall, B.D. inducted Vicar. 
1640-1641 Rowland Dawson. October 23, 1641, the Irish rebellion. 
1641-1642 Lawrence Parke. 
1642-1643 Robert Crosfeild. 
1643-1644 William Guy. 
1644-1645 Gervas Benson. 
1645-1646 Richard Prissoe. 
1646-1647 Allan Gilpin. 
1647-1648 Thomas Sandes. Thomas Braithwaite, Esq., of Ambleside, sworn 

Recorder, March 30, 1648. 
1648-1649 John Archer. King Charles I. beheaded. Sir M. Langdale marched 

with Kendal men out of the Miller's Close, to besiege Appleby 

Castle. 
1649-1650 Giles Redman. 
1650-1651 Anthony Preston. Test Act passed, by which Dissenters were 

precluded from municipal appointments. 
1651-1652 John Towers. 
1652-1653 Edward Turner. 
1653-1654 James Cocke, late of Birckhagg. 
1654-1555 William Jennings. 

1655-1656 Robert Jackson. The Rev. John Strickland inducted Vicar. 
1656-1657 Thomas Fisher. 






CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 287 

A. D. 

1657-1658 John Washington. The Eev. W. Brownsword inducted Vicar. 
1658-1659 George Archer. Sandes's Hospital, School-room and Library built. 
1659-1660 William Potter. King Charles II. restored, May 29. 
1660-1661 Richard Towers. 

1661-1662 Thomas Jackson. Hard frost from Nov. 1st, 1661, to March 8th, 
1662, during which time it was common to draw timber upon the 
ice over Windermere water. A market was kept on the Thames. 
1662-1663 William Guy (second time). 
1663-1664 John Parke. 

1664-1665 Edward Turner. 100,000 persons died of the Plague in London. 
1665-1666 John Becke. May 29th, Mayor and Inhabitants rode the boundaries. 
1666-1667 Thomas Turner. 
1667-1668 John Towers. 
1668-1669 Thomas Jennings. The Mill bridge built with stone pillars, the 

old wooden one having been carried down by a flood. 
1669-1670 Thomas Fisher. Hospital, in Highgate, and School, endowed by 

Thomas Sandes. 
1670-1671 James Simpson. 
1671-1672 William Potter. 

1672-1673 Stephen Birkett. The Rev. Michael Stanford inducted Vicar. 
Alan Prickett, Esq., of Natland Hall, elected Recorder. Sep- 
tember 11, the river Kent swept over the wall of the churchyard, 
where it left behind it much fish. 
1673-1674 William Collinson. 
1674-1675 James Troughton. 
1675-1676 John Jefferson. 
1676-1677 Robert Kilner. 
1677-1678 William Guy (third time). Thomas Lamplugh, Esq., elected Re. 

corder. 
1678-1679 Thomas Jackson. 

1679-1680 Christopher Redman. A comet appeared, which caused great con- 
sternation. 
1680-1681 Thomas Turner (second time). 
1681-1682 James Cocke, jun. 
1682-1683 James Simpson (second time). The Rev. Thomas Murgatroyd 

inducted Vicar. 
1683-1684 Robert Hutton. 

1684-1685 Launcelot Forth. Nominated Mayor by the new Charter, which 
was ushered into the town with great ceremony, December 26, 
1684. Thomas Dalston, Esq., nominated Recorder. King James 
II. began his reign, February 6, 1685. 
1685-1686 Richard Washington. 
1686-1687 John Ingerson. 

1687-1688 Thomas Towers. The Prince of Orange landed November 4, and 
the Revolution was effected on the day following. The Posse 
Comitatus assembled in Miller's Close, in this town, from whence 
they marched to Kirkby Lonsdale. 1 Friends' Meeting-house built 
in Stramongate. 



1 After the abdication of James II. in the year 1688, a rumour was spread 
in the north of England, that the abdicated monarch was laying off the York- 



288 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

a. D. 

1688-1689 William Wilson. King William and Queen Mary began their 
reign, February 13th, 1689. 

1689-1690 John Garnett. 

1690-1691 Giles Redman. Roger Moore, Esq., elected Recorder. 

1691-1692 Joseph Symson. 

1692-1693 William Cocke. The boundaries ridden, February 28, 1693. 

1693-1694 Edward Fairbank. 

1694-1695 William Brownsword. Alan Chambre, Esq., elected Recorder. A 
late harvest ; corn to shear on the 18th of October, 
j Christopher Redman ) The Mayor, two Aldermen, and one bur- 
( Robert Kilner. ) gess having refused to sign the Association, 

at the Midsummer Sessions, according to a late Act of Parlia- 
ment, were discharged from their offices, and Robert Kilner was 
elected Mayor for the remainder of the year. 

1696-1697 William Curwen. 

1697-1698 Jonathan Thompson. 

1698-1699 Richard Lowry. The Rev. William Crosby, MA. inducted Vicar. 
7 j Thomas Middleton ; died during his Mayoralty. 

( William Wilson (second time) ; elected for the remainder of the 
year. Tan-yards made in the fields adjoining the Vicarage. 
John Harrison, Esq., elected Recorder, on the resignation of 
Alan Chambre. 

1700-1701 Henry Cort. 

1701-1702 Joseph Dawson. A new organ erected in the church, built by 
" Father Smith," and a gallery built expressly for the same at 
the west end of the church. Queen Anne began her reign, 
March 8, 1702. 

1702-1703 Thomas Bowes. 

1703-1704 Robert Wilson. 

1704-1705 John Hadwen. 

1705-1706 Thomas Holme. 

1706-1707 John Archer, M.D., of Oxenholme. The Union with Scotland. 

1707-1708 Robert Kilner (second time.) 

1708-1709 Launcelot Forth (second time). 

1709-1710 Joseph Symson (second time). 

1710-1711 William Cocke (second time). The great bell in the church re-cast. 



shire coast, ready to make a descent with a numerous army from France, in 
hopes of regaining his lost throne. This report gave the Lord Lieutenant of 
Westmorland an opportunity of showing his own and the people's attachment 
to the new order of things. He accordingly called out the Posse Comitatus 
comprising all able-bodied men from sixteen to sixty. The order was obeyed 
with a'acrity ; and the inhabitants met armed in a field called Miller's Close, 
near KendaL from whence they marched to Kirkby Lonsdale. This historical 
fact explains the following popular rhyme, the meaning of which is, at this 
day, not generally understood : 

" Eighty-eight was Kerby feight, 

When niwer a man was slain ; 
They yatt their meatt, an' drank their drink, 

And sae kom merrily haem again." 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 289 

A. D. 

1711-1712 William Wilson. 
1712-1713 Richard Lowry (second time). 

1713-1714 Henry Cort (second time). The Blue-coat school commenced by 
subscription, and the boys clothed in M blew." King George I 
began his reign, August 1, 1714. 
1714-1715 Joseph Dawson (second time). Alan Chambre, Esq., elected 
Recorder second time. About 1600 Scotch rebels lodged one 
night in this town on their march southward. Boundaries 
ridden, March 22, 1714-15. 
1715-1716 Thomas Rowlandson. May 9, peace with France proclaimed in 

Kendal. 
1716-1717 Thomas Bowes (second time). 
1717-1718 John Strickland. 
1718-1719 William Herbert. 

1719-1720 Thomas Winter. Unitarian chapel built. 
1720-1721 Edward Whitehead. 
1721-1722 John Hadwen (second time). 

1722-1723 Thomas Holme. In this and the two following years the church 
was new glazed with large square crown glass, and the best of 
the old painted glass carefully preserved. 
1723-1724 Bryan Philipson. 

1724-1725 Thomas Scarisbrick. November 5, 1724, Robert Wharton's sheet 
list of Aidermen and Mayors, &c, published at Manchester, 
by Roger Adams ; price, upon Royal paper, 6d., upon common, 
4d. per sheet. 
1725-1726 Giles Redman. 

1726-1727 John Dodgson. King George II. began his reign, June 11, 1727. 
The Corporation made an attempt to obtain an Act of Parlia- 
ment to have " coles imported duty free at Milthrop." 
1727-1728 William Hutton. 
1728-1729 Simon Moore. 
1729-1730 Thomas Scarisbrick (second time). Till this year potatoes were 

very sparingly used in Kendal. 
1730-1731 William Symson. January 1, 1731, the first newspaper published 

in Kendal — called " The Kendal Courant." 
1731-1732 John Miller. The boundaries ridden. 
1732-1733 John Fairbank. 

1733-1734 Edmund Foster. The Rev. Richard Cuthbert, M.A., inducted 
Vicar. January 4, 1734, "The Kendal Weekly Mercury" com- 
menced by Thomas Ashburner. 
1734-1735 Christopher Brown. 
1735-1736 James Baxter. 
^ T7Q>7 I John Holme; died in his mayoralty. 

( Richard Lowry ; elected for the remainder of the year. 
1737-1738 William Mackreth. Walter Chambre, Esq., elected Recorder, on the 
resignation of his father. Common Garden commenced in Kendal. 
1738 17391 J ames Shaw. Died in his mayoralty. 

( John Hadwen, elected for the remainder of the year. 
1739-1740 James Fisher. A hard frost began in December, and continued 

for thirteen weeks. The fire-engines purchased, 
1740-1741 Joseph Birkett. 

U 






290 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A. D. 

1741-1742 Thomas Holme. 

1742-1743 John Waide. The Mill Bridge built all of stone. 

1743-1744 John Hadwen, Jun. 

1744-1745 Jonathan Wilson. The Rev. Thomas Symonds, M.A., inducted Vicar. 

1745-1746 John Shaw. About 6,000 Scotch rebels passed through the town. 

November 2 2d, and three following days. 
1746-1747 John Braithwaite. 
1747-1748 Francis Drinkell. 

1748-1749 Edmund Foster (second time). May 13, 1749, the first number of 
a small magazine, called the " Agreeable Miscellany," published 
in this town, by Thomas Ashburner. 
1749-1750 Christopher Redman. 

1750-1751 Richard Serjeantson. Engines for pricking the leather of wool- 
cards, invented by TV. Pennington (see card-making, p. 245). 
1751-1752 Robert Rutson. Richard Crowle, Esq., elected Recorder. The 
Acts of Parliament passed for turnpike roads from Kendal 
to Keighley, and from Heronsyke to Eamont-bridge, being the 
first to or from this town. 
1752-1753 William Gurnal. 

1753-1754 James Godmond. The first post-chaise kept for hire in this town. 
1754-1755 Thomas Kenady. June 24, 1755, St. George's Chapel consecrated 

by Bishop Keene. 
1755-1756 Thomas Holme (second time). Brewery, in Wildman Street, 

established. 
1756-1757 Wilson John Robinson. Roger Wilson, Esq., elected Recorder. 
The first stage-wagons from London, in the place of pack-horses. 
A new oak pulpit and reading desk erected in the Parish Church, 
in the Roman Doric style. 
1757-1758 John Hadwen (second time). 

1758-1759 John Shaw (second time). The Town-hall rebuilt. March 26, 

1759, the boundaries ridden. Kendal Guild, June 4, and two 

following days ; exceeding any former one in splendour. Abbot 

Hall built. A snow shower fell in this town, June 4, 1759. 

1759-1760 Francis Drinkell (second time). 

1760-1761 Christopher Redman. King George III. began his reign, October 

25, 1760. 
1761-1762 Christopher Redman re-elected. The Book-club established. 
1762-1763 Richard Fell. The first stage-coach from London to this town, 

drawn by six horses, called the u Flying Machine." 
1763-1764 Thomas Wilson. Act of Parliament obtained for the Court of Re- 
quests, and the first meeting of the Commissioners held, May 3, 
1764. 
1764-1765 Thomas Strickland. 
1765-1766 William Gurnal (second time). Thomas Fenwick, Esq., elected 

Recorder. 
1766-1767 James Godmond (second time). Act of Parliament obtained for 
enclosing Kendal-fell Lands, &c, and the Trustees elected July 
1, 1767. The greatest snow-storm ever known; no carriers 
arrived in the town for a fortnight or three weeks. 
1767-1768 Thomas Kenady (second time). Kendal first lighted with oil lamps. 
Norman Newby, Robert Tailford, and William Stidman were the 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 291 

A. D. 

first lamp-lighters. The new Workhouse built on the "Waste, 
near the House of Correction." Mr. Richard Pedder, the archi- 
tect, received two guineas for his plans and model. 

1768-1769 Christopher Fenton. Oatmeal first sold by the stone in Kendal 
market. Gunpowder works erected at Sedgwick, by John Wake- 
field, Esq. 

1769-1770 John Hadwen (third time). 

1770-1771 William Baxter. 

1771-1772 Thomas Scarisbrick. Nether-bridge enlarged. 

1772-1773 William Rutson. The Society of Builders instituted March 1, 1773, 
being the first benefit society in Kendal. 

1773-1774 Thomas Strickland (second time). The bells of the parish church 
recast, from a peal of six to eight. 

1774-1775 Christopher Fenton (second time). 

1775-1776 Francis Drinkell (third time). An additional wing to the work- 
house built. 

1776-1777 Thomas Miller. Myles Harrison, Esq., elected Recorder. "The 
Kendal Diary," a sheet almanack, first published by James Ash- 
burner. Theatre built in Woolpack yard : the previous theatre 
was on the north side of the market-place. The Friends' school- 
house built. 

1777-1778 Jackson Harrison. 

1778-1779 William Baxter. The News-room opened. 

1779-1780 Thomas Scarisbrick (second time). 

1780-1781 Thomas Miller (second time). 

1781-1782 Christopher Fenton (third time). The Dispensary established by 
subscription. The river the highest ever known, June 15, 1782. 
Lowther-street built. The May-pole, which stood in Kirkland, 
removed about this time. 

1782-1783 William Petty. Corn to reap at Martinmas. 

1783-1784 Robert Harrison. The Wesleyan Methodists first introduced into 
Kendal. 

1784-1785 Thomas Gandy. Church Sunday-schools established in Kendal. 
Umbrellas first seen in the town about this time ; they were 
made of oil-cloth, and had long sticks to walk withal. 

1785-1786 David Jackson. The House of Correction built. The first mail- 
coach from London. Shock of an earthquake felt in Kendal in 
August, 1786. 

1786-1787 William Pennington. John Todd's Plan of Kendal, from actual 
survey, published. The boundaries ridden, April 10, 1787. 

1787-1788 Jonathan Dawson. The Obelisk, in memory of the Revolution in 
1688, built on Castlehow-hill. Kendal-fell stone first polished 
as marble, and made into chimney-pieces. The two Banks 
opened. Destructive fire on the west side of Stricklandgate, 
caused by an explosion of gunpowder, July 11, 1788. 

1788-1789 Joseph Swainson. The Rev. Henry Robinson, M.A., inducted 
Vicar. The Blue-coat girls' school begun. Independents' Sun- 
day-school commenced in Kendal. 

1789-1790 Batty Hodgson. Kendal fell lands planted this year. 

1790-1791 Thomas Dobson. Bull-baiting suppressed in Kendal by the 
Corporation. 

u2 



292 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A. D. 

1791-1792 Richard Braithwaite. The Act of Parliament obtained for making 
the Lancaster canal. 
/ William Petty (second time) died in his mayoralty. 

1792 -1/93 j Christopher Fenton (fourth time) elected for the remainder of the 
year. 

1793-1794 John Suart. Stramongate bridge enlarged and greatly improved. 

1794-1795 William Baxter. The Lying-in charity begun. The Kendal Library 
established November. 

1795-1796 William Berry. October, 1796, The Museum opened at the 
corner of the Fish Market, by Mr. William Todhunter, and con- 
tinued till 1832. 

1796-1797 Jackson Harrison (second time). Richard Howard, Esq., elected 
Recorder. The Lancaster canal opened from Tewitfield to 
Preston. Richard Howard, Esq. elected Recorder. 

1797-1798 Robert Harrison (second time). Thirty persons were interred this 
year in Kendal church, whose united ages amounted to 2,520 years, 
averaging 84 each ; the frost penetrated so far into the ground as 
to render it impracticable to dig graves in the churchyard. 

1798-1799 Christopher Wilson. The Schools of Industry established. No 
vegetation in the fields, nor blossoms upon the fruit trees, on the 
7th of May, 1799. The skins of upwards of 10,000 lambs, which 
perished in the spring, were sold in this town. The weather 
was cold and wet all through the year. August 24, 1799, 
Kendal Agricultural Society instituted. 

1799-1800 Thomas Holme Maude. The last of the Free Companies of 
Kendal (the Cordwainers) broken up. Oatmeal sold for 8s. a 
stone of sixteen pounds. From 1800 to 1S06 the main timbers 
of the Parish Church underwent thorough repair, and Divine 
service was suspended several weeks. July 10, a faculty was 
granted to the Mayor, Recorder, Sec, for erecting galleries in 
Kendal Church, the expense of which was 193/. 6s. 3d. 

1800-1801 William Briggs, M.D. Provisions continued at extremely high 
prices till after the harvest, which was most abundant. At 
Michaelmas, oatmeal fell to 2s. 3d. a stone. Union with Ireland, 
January 1, 1801. 

1801-1802 William Briggs, M.D., re-elected. The boundaries ridden on the 
12th April, and again on the 26th July, 1S02. by William Briggs, 
Esq., Mayor. (The reason of the boundaries being ridden twice 
this year was in consequence of a mistake having been made 
on the first occasion.) 

1802-1803 Thomas Hurd. The New Biggin sold by auction, in lots, on May 
30, 1S03, and taken down immediately afterwards. A corps 
of volunteers raised. 

1803-1S04 William Pennington (second time). The Butchers' Shambles 
opened in the market-place. The Society of " Glassites " intro- 
duced into Kendal ; now (1861) extinct. 

1S04-1S05 Joseph Swainson (second time). The organ in the Parish Church 
repaired and enlarged. 

1805-1806 Thomas Harrison. Castle Mills built for the manufacture of 
woollens, by William Braithwaite and Son. and Isaac and William 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 293 

A. D. 

Wilson. Low-mills built by John and Thomas Ireland. The 
Rev. Matthew Murfitt, M.A., inducted Vicar. 
1806-1807 Smith Wilson. 
1807-1808 John Suart (second time). The Methodist Chapel finished, October 

1, 1808, and opened in the same month. 
1808-1809 Jonathan Hodgson. Thunderstorm, 26th July, 1809, which con- 
tinued from 10 a.m. till 6 p.m., accompanied with torrents of 
rain and awful darkness. October 25, grand national jubilee 
his majesty George III. having this day entered on the fiftieth 
year of "his reign. 
1809-1810 John Pearson. January 15, 1810, Kendal Auxiliary Bible 

Society instituted. Workhouse established in Kirkland. 
1810-1811 Henry Bradshaw. Riot in the streets between the country and 
townspeople, and a portion of the 55th Regiment of Foot, on Whit- 
Monday, June 3d, 1811. The " Westmorland Advertiser and 
Kendal Chronicle" first published on Saturday, June 29. 
1811-1812 Thomas Dobson (second time). Gibson's-place in Stramongate, 
built by Mr. Edward Gibson (builder). April, 1812, "Mint's 
feet" surveyed, and divided amongst the several proprietors, by 
virtue of a late Act of Parliament. 
1812-1813 William Berry (second time). The Green-coat Sunday school en- 
dowed by Mr. William Sleddall, who died July 25, 1813, at the age 
of 92. The manufacture of carpets introduced into this town 
by Mr. Rowland Cookson. The Church Missionary Society 
established in Kendal. 
1813-1814. Thomas Holme Maude (second time). Society for Promoting 
Christianity among the Jews established. A hard frost from 
Christmas Day, 1813, till the beginning of March, 1814, which 
penetrated upwards of eighteen inches into the churchyard, and 
caused great mortality amongst old people. May 17, 1814, a 
grand festival, consisting of a procession of the Corporation and 
Trades, and a general illumination, concluding with a ball on 
the following evening, in celebration of Peace. The potato- 
market removed from the Market-place into Stramongate, to 
make room for the oat-market, which was brought from the 
front of the Globe Inn into the Market-place. The Market- 
house was appropriated for wheat. 
1814-1815 Thomas Atkinson. The Rev. John Hudson, M.A., inducted Vicar. 
1815-1816 Thomas Harrison (second time). October 17, 18, 19, and 20, 1815, 
grand musical festival held in the parish church. January 1, 
1816, Bank for Savings established. January 15, Mark Thornton 
whipped through the town for begging and using abusive lan- 
guage. The Friends' Meeting House rebuilt on the site of the 
former Meeting House. Society for Promoting Christian 
Knowledge established in Kendal. Wesleyan Methodist Sunday- 
school established. 
1816-1817 Smith Wilson (second time). Four chests of new coinage arrived 
in Kendal for the use of the town and neighbourhood, January 
29th, 1817. Dockray-hall Mills built by James Gandy and 
Sons, for the woollen and drysalting businesses ; F. Webster, 
architect. September 3, 1817, an association of tradesmen 






294 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A.D. 

formed to patrol the streets. October 22, a destructive fire 
on the west side of Highgate, at the shop occupied by Mr. Dent 
(draper), the property of Mr. Alderman Berry : damages esti- 
mated at 2,000£. Sunday morning, November 9, the shock of 
an earthquake felt in Kendal, this being the fifth or sixth shock 
here since June, 1668. December 16, foundation stone of the 
Boys' National School laid by Rev. John Hudson (Vicar). 

1817-1818 Jonathan Hodgson (second time). February 11, 1818, serious 
riot in Highgate on the arrival of Lord and Colonel Lowther to 
canvass for the forthcoming county election, in opposition to 
Henry (now Lord) Brougham. May 20, foundation stone of 
the Mill Bridge laid by the Mayor ; Alderman F. Webster was 
the architect of this bridge, which cost 888?., two former ones 
had each stood seventy-five years. May 23, "The Westmor- 
land Gazette and Kendal Advertiser" first published. Kent- 
lane widened by subscription. August 27, the bridge over the 
Castle Mills dam finished. December 7, 1818, Fletcher Rain- 
cock, Esq., of Liverpool, elected Recorder. 

1818-1819 John Pearson (second time). February 22, 1819, Kendal Union 
Building Society established. The canal warehouse, basin, and 
wharfs, built by the Corporation. June 18, the canal opened 
from Tewitfield to Kendal, by one of the most splendid aquatic 
processions ever witnessed in the north of England ; two sailing 
packets for passengers, drawn by horses, were subsequently 
placed upon the canal, which went at the rate of four miles an 
hour. August 11, National School for boys opened. October 
21, County Meeting held in Stricklandgate, at which it was 
estimated 4,000 persons were present, occasioned by the "Peter- 
loo massacre." 

1819-1820 Joseph Braithwaite. February 17, King George IV. proclaimed in 
Kendal, with a procession, on which occasion the poor inhabi- 
tants of the age of 70 and upwards, had half-a-crown each given 
them by the Corporation; 118 men and 198 women (four of 
whom were 90 and upwards) received the half-crown. Septem- 
ber 12, 13, and 14, Kendal Races revived, in a field near 
Burneside, after a lapse of thirty years, having previously been 
held on the " heights" of Kendal-fell. November 20 and 21, 
illuminations in Kendal in honour of Queen Caroline (wife of 
George IV.) November 21, Tradesmen's News Room in the 
market-place opened. Caroline-street, Union-street, Cross-street, 
and Strickland-place built. Society of Odd Fellows established 
in Kendal. Shaw's Brow built, by Mr. Thomas Shaw, Senior. 

1820-1821 John Harrison. April 3, boundaries ridden, and the boundaries 
marked by mere stones (placed August 24. 1821) on the new 
enclosures on Hay-fell. April 24, severe thunderstorm, which 
in ? extent and duration surpassed the memorable one of July 
26, 1809. July 19, the coronation of King George IV. celebrated. 
New race-course on Fisher's Plain opened, August 7. A regi- 
ment of Yeomanry Cavalry raised in this county, Kendal 
supplying one troop. Provisions reasonable, oatmeal 2s. and 
flour 3a. per stone. 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 295 

A. D. 

1 S21 -1 822 \ benjamin Hunter ; died in his mayoralty. 

( Robert Harrison (third time) ; elected for the remainder of the 
year. A most abundant year; wheat 395. and oats 16s. per 
quarter — oatmeal Is. 10d„ and flour 2s. per stone of 161b. — beef 
2>\d., and mutton Zd. per lb. — potatoes 2d. per stone of 141bs. 
The churchyard inclosed with iron palisades by subscription. 
Ladies' Bible Association established. 

1822-1823 William Pennington. October, 1822, Edward Tatham, Esq., ap- 
pointed Deputy Recorder, vacant by the death of John Barrow, 
Esq. November 4, 1 822, Kendal Samaritan Society (Wesleyan) 
established. The Primitive Methodists, or Ranters, introduced 
into Kendal, preaching in the open air for about twelve 
months. Ordination in Kendal Church, by the Bishop of the 
Diocese, of 11 Priests and 8 Deacons. Blindbeck bridge rebuilt. 
Twelve stage-coaches leave the town daily ; the first commenced 
in 1763. Primitive Methodists' chapel in Castle-street built 
and opened. 

1823-1824 Francis Webster. November, 1823, the Theatre in Wool-pack yard 
converted into a place of worship. April 12, 1824, the Wesleyan 
Missionary Society organised. April 14, Dockray-hall Mills, 
belonging to Messrs. James Gandy and Sons, destroyed by fire ; 
the most destructive that ever occurred in this neighbourhood ; 
nearly 700 packs of wool were destroyed, besides the whole of 
the valuable machinery, which had but recently been erected ; 
the total loss was estimated at from 15,000?. to 20,000Z. The 
mill was rebuilt, fire-proof, and the works were again in 
full operation by the end of the "year. April 19, Kendal 
Mechanics' and Apprentices' Library and Institute formally 
established at a meeting in the Moot-hall, Edward Tatham, Esq. 
(Deputy Recorder), in the chair; Samuel Marshall, Esq., ap- 
pointed President. June 21, Church Missionary Society organized. 
September 13, Girls' National School opened. New chapel for the 
" Glassites " built in the Windmill-yard. This society was dis- 
solved a few years ago (1861), and the chapel sold. The first 
steam-engine erected in Kendal by Mr. Alderman Berry, for 
cutting ivory combs. Rydal Chapel opened. 

1824-1825 Michael Branthwaite. October 24, 1824, the organ in the parish 
church underwent thorough repair and enlargement by Bewsher 
and Fleetwood, of Liverpool. From January to March, 1825, a 
great mortality in this town, 54 males and 77 females (chiefly child- 
ren) having been buried in the churchyard wdthin three months. 
April 1, Sprint Mill (near Burneside), belonging to Messrs. James 
Gandy and Sons, destroyed by fire. July 1, the foundation- 
stone of the White-hall Buildings laid by the Mayor on the site 
of " Leaden-hall," (Leather-hall, originally, no doubt) at the head 
of Lowther-street. One of each of the Kendal newspapers, a fac 
simile of the corporation seal, printed on satin, with a memoran- 
dum of the date of this celebration, and the name of the architect 
(Francis Webster, alderman), were inclosed in glass and deposited 
beneath the stone. Helm Lodge, the residence of William Dill- 
worth Crewdson, Esq., erected, F. Webster, architect. July 18 
and 19, extreme heat ; on the former day the thermometer rose 















296 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A.D. 

to 83° Fahr. in the shade, and on the latter to 85° ; haymakers 
were obliged to retreat from the burning sun ; one old man 
died in a field from a coup de soleil, and three horse3 in one of 
the coaches died in the road between Kendal and Lancaster. 
Gas-works built, and the town of Kendal first lighted with 
gas, July 25 ; the event was celebrated by a public proces- 
sion and spirited acts of rejoicing. Natl and chapel rebuilt. 
August 9, the Right Hon. George Canning passed through Kendal 
on his way to Storrs-hall, the seat of John Bolton, Esq., on which 
occasion the distinguished statesman was met at the King's Arms 
by the Mayor and Corporation, and partook with them of a 
hospitable entertainment. August 16. Messrs. G. and W. Green 
ascended in their balloon from an enclosed area contiguous to 
the Gas-works, amidst a vast concourse of spectators. August 
30, Mr. George Green made another ascent from the same place, 
accompanied by Miss Dawson, and descended at the foot of 
Murton-pike, twenty -nine miles from KendaL Cattle-market re- 
moved from Highgate to the New-road. Scotch Seceders' Sunday- 
schools established. Low-mills rebuilt. 

1825-1826 George Forrest. November, 1825, the Independent chapel in 
Lowther-street lighted with gas. November 14, Kendal new 
Union Building Society established (dissolved November 19, 
1827). December, a great run on the metropolitan and pro- 
vincial Banks, many of which were obliged to suspend payment. 
It was called the " paper panic," and caused great distress in 
the manufacturing districts. The banks at Kendal stood the 
issue of \ the pressure amidst unshaken confidence. March 
15, 1826, a meeting held in the Town-hall to devise means for 
the relief of those out of employment in the township of Kendal, 
when 141Z. was collected, and the amount distributed in meal 
and potatoes. The Rev. J. Hudson, vicar, removed the tan- 
yards near the vicarage, built a neat lodge, and adorned the 
grounds. July 29, wheat and oats sold in the market (Saturday), 
proof of an early harvest. August 6 (Sunday), the new chapel 
at Burneside, built by subscription, opened. A drought pre- 
vailed in the months of June and July this year, which had no 
parallel since 1762. 

1826-1827 John Moffett. October 5, 1826, Mail coach between Kendal and 
Whitehaven, via Ambleside and Keswick. November, 1526, 
Lowther-street and Stricklandgate first macadamized. January 
14, 1827, Joseph Garnett, clerk of the parish church, died, aged 
78, having fulfilled the duties of that office for the lengthened 
period of forty-five years. A most abundant year for fruit ; 
apples 2d. per pannier of sixteen quarts. 

1827-1828 Joseph Swainson. October 4, 1S27, died Robert Harrison, Esq., 
senior Alderman and Magistrate, at the advanced age of eighty- 
eight. He had served as a member of the Corporation fifty-two 
years, and as a magistrate twenty-two years. December 31, 
1S27, the Whitehall assembly -room opened with a splendid 
ball. February 14, 1S2S, severe suowstorm in Kendal, lasting 
from about 6 a.m. to 5 p. M. ; the streets, the next day. were 
banked up on each side by snow, having the appearance of 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 297 

A. D. 

breastworks, as if to defend the houses from the attack of an 
invading army. August 1, Hodgson's Map of Westmorland 
published. August 8, severe thunderstorm from 2 to 10, 
p. m. ; three coach-horses killed. The Independent chapel, in 
New-street, fronted with hammered limestone, and otherwise 
improved. 

1828-1829 Thomas Harrison (third time). January 18, 1829, New Hutton 
chapel opened. February 22, 1829, Divine service suspended in 
Kendal church, in consequence of the improvements going on 
there. June 22, 1829, the new theatre, in the "Shakspeare" 
yard (built by Thomas Simpson, Esq., of Wath Field), 
opened, John Richardson architect. (The theatre continued 
till 1834, when it was converted into stables for the use of the 
Inn.) 

1829-1830 George Webster. October 14, 1829, the river Kent the highest 
known for twenty or thirty years. Infants' School established, 
and built by voluntary subscriptions, chiefly from amongst 
the Society of Friends ; John Richardson, architect. April 5, 
1830, the mail coach between Kendal and Whitehaven dis- 
continued. July 9, Proclamation of King William IV. at 
Kendal : the proclamation was read, in different parts of th e 
town, by Edward Tatham, Esq., deputy recorder, on horse- 
back. There was a large procession, consisting of the Mayor 
and other members of the Corporation dressed in their 
robes, and carrying the insignia of office, together with 
a numerous train of gentlemen, and the different trades and 
societies, accompanied by music and flags : in the evening, 
an entertainment took place at the King's Arms. July 
30, awful thunderstorm, Christopher Fletcher, gardener, aged 
53, killed by the lightning. The summer of 1830 was re- 
markably cold and wet in Kendal. October 11, 1830, opening 
of the beer trade ; upwards of a score of beer-houses opened in 
Kendal, at each of which there was more or less feasting and 
drinking The price of ale fell from 8d. to 6d. per quart, on the 
premises, and from Id. to 5d. off the premises. 

1830-1831 Jonathan Hodgson (tbird time). February 9, 1831, a great flood 
of the river Kent ; it inundated all the lower part of Stramon- 
gate to a great depth, reaching up as far as the Nag's Head 
yard. In the Vicarage Library the water was a foot deep ; and 
on Colonel-walk it was nearly seven feet deep. The arches 
of Nether bridge were full to within a few inches of the key- 
stones, and the ground-floors of the cottages at Castle-mills were 
filled nearly to the ceilings : the water passed between the 
78th and 79th palisades, from the south, at the bottom of New- 
street. September 8, coronation of their Majesties, King 
William IV., and Queen Adelaide. This event was celebrated in 
Kendal with every possible demonstration of loyalty, and the 
spirited rejoicings here surpassed, it was said, those of any pro- 
vincial town in the kingdom. Several arches of different orders 
tastefully decorated with flowers, evergreens, and flags, and 
bearing appropriate mottoes and devices, were thrown across 









298 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A. D. 

the streets, in various parts of the town : these were mostly 
transparent, and in the evening were brilliantly illuminated 
with gas. The day was observed as a complete holiday. 

1831-1832 Isaac Wilson. October 26, a ladies' bazaar held in the Whitehall 
Assembly Eoom, in aid of the Sunday-schools, and for pro- 
curing warm clothing for the aged poor in Kendal and Kirkland. 
January 6, 1832, a police force, consisting of one superintendent 
and three police-constables, established in Kendal. February 1, 
Temperance Society established. (E. W. Wakefield, Esq., 
chairman.) April : Thomas Harrison, Esq., surgeon, appointed 
one of the Senior Aldermen (and Magistrate), vice William 
Berry, Esq., resigned. May : " The Annals of Kendal," first 
edition, published ; price 7s. 6d. July, the cholera made its 
first appearance in Kendal. Mr. Green ascended in his balloon 
from the Gas works, and alighted on Helsfell. August 25, Thomas 
Harrison, Esq., solicitor, elected Town Clerk, vice William Berry, 
jun., resigned. September 6, a splendid procession this day to 
celebrate the passing of the u Parliamentary Reform Bill," and 
to welcome to Kendal, James Brougham, Esq., the designate 
Borough member. Dinner at the King's Arms ; Jacob Wakefield* 
Esq., in the chair. "Birklands," the seat of E. W. Wakefield, 
Esq., built; G. Webster, Esq., architect. Town View, built by 
Mr. William Wilson ; John Richardson, architect. 

1832-1833 Richard Rawes. November 22, 1S32, Temperance Coffee and 
Reading Room opened. December 11, James Brougham, Esq- 
(brother of the Lord Chancellor Brougham\ elected, without 
opposition, the first representative in Parliament for Kendal. 
He was chaired through the streets, and afterwards dined with 
200 of the electors at the King's Arms. The number of regis- 
tered electors at this time, 310. December 18 and 19, 
Westmorland Election. Polling places for the first time at 
Kendal, Kirkby Lonsdale, Kirkby Stephen, Ambleside, and 
Shap, in addition to the county town of Appleby. Serious 
rioting at Kendal, on the first day of Election, when many 
persons were wounded, and many lives were put in jeopardy. 
December 27, a fire in the Town Hall, which originated in 
the justices' room ; an oaken book-case, full of valuable law 
books, in great part destroyed. February 19, 1833, founda- 
tion stone laid of the Odd-fellows' Hall, in Highgate. March 
15, Bank of Westmorland (Joint- Stock Company) established, 
capital £250,000. July 9, a swift sailing packet-boat 
(called " The Water-witch ") commenced on the Canal, at 
about eight miles an hour. The manufacture of paper by 
machinery commenced in IS 33, at Burneside Mills, by Messrs. 
Hudson, Nicholson, and Foster. 

1833-1831 George Forrest (second time). December 22, 1S33, died, James 
Brougham, Esq., M.P. for Kendal, aged 54. He was buried 
at Brougham Church. Old Maids', or Dowker's Hospital, in 
Highgate. built. 

1834-1835 Joseph Swainson (second time). Served up to 31st December, 1835, 
when the new (Reformed) Corporation came in. May 7 to 12, 
1S35, Richard Wilson, Esq., solicitor, elected Coroner for the 
Kendal and Lonsdale wards, after a hard contest at Appleby 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 299 

A. D. 

with Thomas Wardle, Esq., of five days' duration and much 
excitement, there were polled : 

For Mr. R. Wilson .... 762 
„ Mr. Wardle 569 

Majority .... 193 

July 4, died, Thomas Harrison, surgeon, Senior Alderman 
of the borough, aged sixty. He had been three times Mayor ; 
was a mau of varied acquirements, and highly esteemed. August 
4, foundation stone laid of St. Thomas's Church. August 
20, the shock of an earthquake felt in Kendal and neighbour- 
hood ; bells in the houses were set ringing, and fence-walls 
were thrown down in great lengths. August 20, Natural 
History and Scientific Society established. The " stocks " re- 
moved from the Market-place. August : Alderman John 
Harrison, of Hundhow, appointed one of the Senior Aldermen 
(and Magistrate) of the Borough, in place of Alderman Thomas 
Harrison, surgeon, deceased. September 9, Corporation 
Reform Act passed (5 & 6 William IV. cap. 76). October 1835. 
British School opened ; built chiefly by subscription. 
1836 January 1, to November 9, 1836. John Richards (afterwards 
Yeates). First Mayor after the passing of the Municipal 
Corporations Reform Act. Mr. John Mann appointed Borough 
Treasurer. May 15, 1836, a visible annular eclipse, the greatest 
solar eclipse since 1794 ; at Kendal the sun presented a lumi- 
nous segment equal only to three-quarters of the annulus ; the 
thermometer fell to the temperature of January. July 15, 
1836, first election of Guardians of the Kendal Union; first 
meeting of the same on the 16th. Regular police force with 
office and new lock-ups, established in Finkle- street. The old 
" black hole " under St. George's Chapel, added to the front shop 
under the same. September 29, deep fall of snow on the 
Kentmere hills. The severest winter since 1816; potatoes 7d. 
and 8d. a stone throughout the winter. 
1836-1837 John Wakefield. April 3, 1837, repeated snow showers. A 

— year of mercantile disasters, together with numerous bank 

tg failures. July 3, proclamation of her Majesty Queen Victoria 

,a *^ (aged 18). There was a splendid procession in Kendal, com- 

"^ Js posed of the Mayor and Corporation, and the various clubs ; 

Jd o proclamation was made from the " cauld stean," and other places. 

go A banquet was given at the King's Arms Hotel, by the Mayor, 

who presided on the occasion. July 5, St. Thomas's Church, 

^H in Stricklandgate, consecrated by the Right Rev. J. B. Sumner, 
D.D., Bishop of Chester (Kendal being still in the diocese of 
Chester). June 25, George William Wood, Esq., Whig, elected 
M.P. for Kendal, vacancy by Dissolution of Parliament, on the 
demise of the crown : Edward Wilson, Esq., of Abbot Hall, Tory, 
was an opposing candidate, but was withdrawn before the time 
of polling. September 13, new Roman Catholic Church, on 
New-road, opened for Divine Service, by the Right Rev. Dr. 
Briggs, the sol-dlsant Bishop of the northern diocese. 






300 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A.D. 

1837-1838 William Gelderd. January 21, 1838, first interments at St. 
Thomas's Church. February 16, fire in the belfry of St. George's 
Chapel. June 28, coronation of her Majesty Queen Victoria, 
celebrated at Kendal with great rejoicings; there were five 
triumphal arches, of tasteful design, thrown across the streets 
in various parts of the town ; there was also a splendid 
procession, consisting of the Mayor and Corporation, the Vicar 
and Clergy, the Yeomanry Cavalry, the several benefit societies, 
and Sunday-schools ; a sermon was preached for the occasion 
by the Rev. J. Hudson, the Vicar, the church being " choke full" 
even to standing room. Superintendent Registrar's Office and 
Fire-engine Station-house in Finkle-street, built by the Corpora- 
tion, 1838. Service finally discontinued in St. George's Chapel. 
Foundation stone of the Roman Catholic Church laid, by Mr. 
Strickland, of Sizergh. 

1838-1839 Thompson Bindloss. January 6 and 7, 1839, the greatest 
storm of wind ever remembered ; chimney-stacks fell and 
houses rocked to their foundation ; the destruction of timber 
was everywhere great, but especially in Lowther Park. 
January 22, 23, the north warehouse at the Canal head totally 
destroyed by fire, and the south warehouse injured ; at the 
time the fire broke out there were in the warehouse 100 quarter- 
| barrels of gunpowder, which were providentially removed in 

time, by four courageous men, whilst the warehouse was still in 
flames. April 8, foundation stone of St. George's Church laid, 
without formalities. August, names of the streets painted and 
fixed up. November 2, extensive fire at the warehouse of 
Messrs. Isaac and "William Wilson, in Stramongate ; damages 
between 2,000Z. and 3,000/. 

1839-1840 Richard Wilson. January 1, 1840, the two Kendal Banks amalga- 
mated. January 10, penny postage commenced. February 
10, marriage of Queen Victoria. April 11, slight shock of an 
earthquake felt in Kendal. August, the dials of the Town 
Clock made to project forward from the tower. August 17, 
Fletcher Raincock, Esq., F.S.A., last Recorder of Kendal, died 
at Liverpool, aged 71. 

1840-1841 James Machell. June 17, 1841, St. George's Church consecrated 
by the Lord Bishop of Chester. St. Thomas's School, Strick- 
landgate, built. 

1841-1S42 John Wakefield (second time). September 4, 1S42, Firbank 
Chapel (rebuilt) opened this day. September 11. Crosscrake 
Chapel re-opened. A year of great depression in trade, and suffer- 
ing amongst the labouring classes ; this town felt its effects 
severely. 

1842-1843 Richard Wilson (second time). March 17. 1S43, the shock of an 
earthquake felt in Kendal, accompanied with a rumbling noise. 
May 16, first interment in the new cemetery, head of Castle 
street. October 3, George William Wood. Esq., M.P. for Kendal, 
died at Manchester, aged 62. October 31, the Rev. John Hudson, 
A.M., Vicar of Kendal, died at Haverbrack, aged 70. November 
8, first contested election for Kendal, Henry Warburton, Esq., 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 301 

A. D. 

Whig, being returned by a majority of 63, over George Bentinck, 
Esq., a Tory. 

1843-1844 Samuel Whinerey. "Working-men's News-room in the Market-place 
opened. March 19, Earl of Lonsdale died, aged 86. April 14, 
the Rev. Joseph Watkins Barnes, M.A., inducted Vicar. 
July 27, Dr. Dalton died, aged 77. September : first sod of the 
Lancaster and Carlisle Railway cut. October 16, Zion Chapel, in 
New Inn-yard, opened this day. Inghamite chapel, at the head 
of Beast-banks, re-built. 

1844-1845 Thompson Bindloss (second time). June 30, 1845, Kendal and 
Windermere Railway Act received the royal assent. July 21, 
Kendal Reservoir Bill received the royal assent. July 23, "Lady 
of the Lake" steamer launched on Windermere, being the first 
steam-boat on that lake, or in the lake district : grand banquet 
given in the saloon to Professor Wilson, and other distinguished 
guests. 

1845-1846 Cornelius Nicholson. April 13, 1846, Steam-power first applied in 
Kendal for cutting timber into boards with vertical saws by Mr. 
John Fisher. June 26, Kendal Union Gas and Water Com- 
pany's Act received the royal assent. July 7, Grand Festival 
in Kendal to celebrate the passing of the Corn Law Repeal Bill ; 
Mr. Warburton, M.P. for Kendal, the Mayor and Corporation, 
and all the Societies joined in a procession, which was a mile in 
length : the Mayoress, assisted by several ladies, distributed in 
front of the Mayor's house in Stricklandgate more than 3,000 
loaves of bread, to the Sunday-school children, and to the aged 
poor, on the presentation of tickets. September 21, the Lan- 
caster and Carlisle Railway opened from Lancaster to Kendal, 
and celebrated by a banquet in the Whitehall Buildings, the 
Mayor in the chair. Passenger packets ceased plying on the 
canal, the same day.' 

1846-1847 John Wakefield (third time). December 15, 1846, the Lancaster 
and Carlisle Railway opened from Kendal to Carlisle. January 
31, 1847, the organ of the parish church removed from the 
gallery to the floor, having been considerably augmented and 
improved, was reopened this day. April 20, Kendal and Winder- 
mere Railway opened. May 6, first "County Court" held in 
the Town Hall. September 14, first fortnightly fair for the 
sale of fat cattle and general stock, held on the New-road ; re. 
moved to near the railway station in November. September : 
Wesley an Day and Sunday-schools built. 
1847-1848 James Machell (second time). February 5, 1848, the town clock 
first illuminated with gas. May 27, Fire at Town View, the 
property of Mrs. Wilson. June : Kendal reservoirs and water- 
works completed. August 31, Health of Towns' Act passed. 
1848-1849 Samuel Whinerey (second time). The Serpentine Walks thrown 
open to the public by the Trustees of Kendal-fell, at Easter, 
1849. August 6, Procession of the Mayor and Corporation and 
other gentlemen on horseback, &c. to meet G. E. Wilson, Esq., 
of Heversham, the newly appointed High Sheriff of the county ; 
the high-shrievalty having been till now hereditary in the Earls 












302 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

of Thanet, for upwards of 600 years. September 4, first meeting 
of the Council as a local Board of Health. Hartley Coleridge 
died, at Rydal, aged 53. 

1849-1850 George Braithwaite Crewdson. April 23, 1850, "William Words- 
worth died, at Rydal Mount, aged 80. May 3, Colours of the 
55th Regiment of Foot deposited in the parish church. July 2, 
Sir Robert Peel died, aged 62. July 17, Storm of thunder and 
lightning, with heavy rain ; house set on fire in Kirkland by the 
electric fluid. September 1, service suspended in the parish 
church till June 3, 1852, during the restoration. Working-men'a 
public baths, &c. in Market-place opened. 

1850-1851 Jacob Giles Jame3 Ireland. December 2, 1850, Yagrant Wards 
brought into use for vagrants this day. January 13, 1851, 
county meeting held in" the White-Hall, the High Sheriff (G. E. 
Wilson, Esq.) chairman. June 9, Low Mills, near Kendal, 
destroyed by fire, the property of Messrs. John Ireland and Co. 
June 17, widening of Branthwaite-brow commenced. July 1, 
foundation stone laid of Fell side schools. 

1851-1852 Jacob Giles James Ireland re-elected (second time). February 
2, 1852, very high flood of the Kent, second only to that of 
February 9, 1831. February 22, Kendal new Horse Fair 
established. April 13, Fellside Schools opened. June 3, the 
Parish Church re-opened by the Lord Bishop of Chester, after 
its restoration. September 1, Electric Telegraph brought to the 
town along the Kendal and Windermere Railway. September 
14, died the Duke of Wellington, aged 83. October 13, the 
Queen, Prince Albert, and suite, halted a short timeatOxenholme, 
on their journey from Balmoral southward 

1852-1853 John Hudson. November 18, 1852, the Duke of Wellington 
buried in St. Paul's, London. November 28, Preston Patrick 
Church (rebuilt, by subscription, at a cost of about 1,400/.) 
opened this day. December 25, violent stonn of wind from the 
S.W., nearly equal to that of January 7, 1839 ; a lady killed in 
Highgate, by the falling of a chimney, December 27, again a great 
storm of wind from the same quarter, accompanied by heavy rain ; 
serious and extensive damage caused by the flood at Foulshaw. 
January 13, 1853, first marriage at St. Thomas's Church. Feb- 
ruary 21, Procession of the Mayor and Corporation, and a large 
number of the inhabitants in carriages, &c, to escort the High 
Sheriff (John Wakefield, Esq.) through the town, on his way to 
the Assizes at Appleby. April 6, two Receiving Houses for 
letters opened at Kendal, viz., one in Stricklandgate. and one in 
Stramongate. June, the Magnetic Electric Telegraph laid 
through Kencal. June, the river Kent considerably widened 
sotith of Mill Bridge. August 9, first Wool and Cheese Fair 
in Kendal (held in the Market-place). October 10, penny receipt 
stamps came into use. October 14. Her Majesty the Queen, 
Prince Consort, Prince of Wales, and suite, sojourned at Oxen- 
holme, on their return from Balmoral ; the Mayor, Corporation, 
clergy, and a large number of the inhabitants, went to pav 
homage. St. George's Schools built. 1S53. Lithographic plan 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 303 

A. D. 

of Kendal by H. Hoggarth, published. The " High front" in 
Kirkland, reduced to the level of the street. The Widows' 
Houses, at Sandes's Hospital, rebuilt. 

1853-1854 John Jowitt Wilson. February 27, 1854, Burial Board esta- 
blished for the united townships of Kendal, Kirkland, and 
Nethergraveship. March 10, Alderman Thompson, M.P. for 
Westmorland, died, aged 61. May 25, St. George's Sunday- 
school opened. June 14, Ambleside Church opened by the 
Lord Bishop of Chester. Wesleyan burial-ground closed. 
1854, the windows on the north side of Kendal Church 
re-glazed with diamond quarries, instead of the old "square 
crown." Kendal Natural History and Scientific Society, 
removed to Stricklandgate House, and a new Lecture Room 
built. 

1854-1855 John Whitwell. November 28, 1854, Corner stone of the Cemetery 
Chapel laid, by Mr. John Hudson. 1855, from February 20, 
Windermere Lake frozen completely over for several days, and 
bearable its whole length ; again on March 8 and 9, and 
frozen over also on March 26. July 21, foundation stone of 
the Covered Market Hall laid, by the Mayor. August 23, the 
New Cemetery Chapel and burial-ground consecrated by the 
Right Rev. John Graham, D.D., Lord Bishop of Chester. Sep- 
tember 14, first interment in the New Cemetery. A second 
reservoir, at Bird's Park, in course of formation. The new 
sheds and drying stoves at Castle Mills built by Messrs. J. 
J. and W. Wilson. 

1855-1856 William Longmire. March 29, 1856, Kendal new Butter-market 
first occupied ; the first pound of butter sold for Is. 2>\d. May 
29, on this day the Mayor entertained at dinner the Corporation, 
Magistrates, and Clergy, and the day was observed as a holiday 
in commemoration of the return of Peace. July 1, severe frost 
this morning. The potato tops all killed on the low lands in 
the neighbourhood of Kendal. Again, frost on the morning of 
July 10. August 1 to 8, Heat unequalled for thirty years. 
Thermometer stood at 84° in the shade on the 4th. August 8, 
Birthwaite (Windermere) Church, dedicated to St. Mary, and 
Bowness Cemetery, both consecrated by the Lord Bishop of 
Carlisle. 

1856-1857 John Whitwell (second time). January 12, 1857, new painted 
window placed in the Baptistry of the parish church; the 
bequest of the late Mr. Joseph Robinson. February 9, the 
Kendal Chamber of Commerce formed. April, new clock 
placed in the Tower of Kendal Church, the gift of Mr. Chris- 
topher Gardner. May 11, the Prince of Wales and suite 
visited the Lake District. June 25, the thermometer higher 
by 6g° than it was ever registered in Kendal. It stood at 
90|° in the shade, and at 1231° hi the sun. July, Wooden 
Bridge over the Kent, at the north end of Colonel-walk, built, 
at the cost of E. W. Wakefield, Esq., and prolonged across the 
Mill Race shortly afterwards, by subscription. October 4, 
Chapel in Sand Area for the Christian Brethren, opened. 












304 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A. D. 

1857-1858 John Jowitt "Wilson (second time). November 10, 1857, Inaugura- 
tion of the premises in Highgate (late Odd-fellows' Hall) for the 
Mechanics' Institution, by the Right Honourable Lord Brougham, 
who was afterwards entertained at the King's Arms by the ex- 
Mayor (Mr. J. Whitwell), and had an address presented to him 
by the Mayor and Corporation. Dec. 14, Pillar Letter Boxes 
erected in Stricklandgate, Stramongate, and Kirkland ; the re- 
ceiving houses being discontinued. January 25, 1858, Marriage of 
the Princess Royal celebrated at Kendal, with considerable 
rejoicing; the Mayor presented about 1,300 scholars with 
a currant bun each, in front of his own house on Kent Terrace. 
April 29, a public drinking fountain erected in Crock-lane, 
near the Fish-market, by subscription ; the fountain bears date 
1857. May 3, Amalgamation of the Lancaster and Carlisle and 
Kendal and Windermere Railway Companies. May 15, the Rev. 
Joseph Watkins Barnes, M.A., Vicar of Kendal, died at the 
Vicarage, aged 51. August 15, the Rev. John Cooper, 
M.A., inducted Vicar. September 1, the Local Government 
Act came into operation in Kendal, having received the royal 
assent August 2. October 29, extensive conflagration at Castle 
Mills, the property of Messrs. J. J. and W. Wilson ; damages 
from 1,200Z. to 1,500Z. Pale Ale Stores built, in Mints Feet, 
for Messrs. William Whitwell, and Co., brewers. 

1858-1859 John Wakefield (fourth time). December 5, 1858, Helsington 
Chapel re-opened by the Rev. G. W. H. Taylor. December 14, 
a boulevard of trees planted, by Rev. J. Gibson, along the New- 
road. December 14, Exhibition of paintings, articles of virtu, 
&c, opened in the large hall of the Mechanics' Institution, in 
Highgate, and continued open till January 22, 1S59. March 
5, foundation stone of the new Vicarage laid, by the 
Vicar. April 8, the Quarter Sessions held for the first time in 
the new Town Hall. April 12, the old Town Hall sold by 
auction, to Mr. Job Bintley. July 16, first steamer on Ullswater. 
August 24, Association for the protection of ancient footpaths, 
established. September 22, Dinner given by the Mayor, to the 
Corporation, Magistrates, &c, in the new Town Hall, to celebrate 
the inauguration thereof. 

1859-1860. John Wakefield re-elected (fifth time). December 8, 1S59, 
Volunteer Rifle-Corps formed, at a meeting held in the Town 
Hall. August 23, 1S60, ornamental pillar and lamps erected in 
the Market-place. September 25, the first steamer on the 
canal, arrived at Kendal. Card-making Steam Mill built, in 
Potter's Close, by Mr. James Thompson. 

1860-1861 William Henry Wakefield. December 21, 1S60, destructive fire 
of the warehouses of Messrs. John Ireland and Co., in "Rose- 
mary-lane," Stramongate ; the building was completely des- 
troyed, together with a large quantity of manufactured goods, 
damages, 3,000?. to 4,0001 December 24. 25. the ther- 
mometer during this night fell to 1|° below zero, as indicated 
by a self-registering thermometer, placed a few feet from the 
ground. February 11, 1861, Mr. C. 0. Thomson , solicitor, Kendal. 



CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS. 305 

elected Coroner for the Kendal and Lonsdale Wards, vacant by 
the resignation of Richard Wilson, Esq. March 28, Burneside 
Chapel re-opened by the Lord Bishop of Carlisle. April 21, 
Troutbeck Chapel re-opened by the Rev. Mr. Graves, of " Dove's 
Nest." May 17, the Kendal Fell Trust (Amendment) Act 
received the Royal assent. May 26, Ordination held in the 
parish church by the Lord Bishop of Carlisle (Waldegrave), 
when five priests and six deacons were ordained; it is forty 
years since the last Ordination at this place. Kendal new 
Railway Station built this year, S. B. Worthington, Esq., of 
Lancaster, architect. June 11, Yacht capsized in a squall on 
Windermere, when two out of the three gentlemen sailing in her 
were drowned, viz. Captain Parke, of the 55th (Westmorland) 
Regiment, and Captain Forde, of the 2d Lancashire Militia; G. 
R. Rawlinson, of Graythwaite, the third party, swam ashore, 
and thus saved himself. 



306 NATURAL HISTORY OP THE LOCALITY. 



CHAPTER XI. 

NATURAL HISTORY OF THE LOCALITY. 

It seems compatible with the history of the town, to put 
on record a catalogue of the various productions in the several 
departments of Natural History found in this locality. "We, 
therefore, herewith present a selected list of Quadrupeds, 
Birds, Reptiles, Amphibious Animals, Land and Fresh-water 
Shells, Fossils, and Plants, which belong to a circuit within 
six or seven miles of KendaL If this were done in all topo- 
graphical works, the naturalist might be materially aided in 
forming sound conclusions as to the geographical distribution 
of plants and animals. But, probably, few towns are so 
fortunate as Kendal at this time, in having a naturalist 
competent to present a synopsis of the Flora and Fauna 
of the district, extinct and existent. Mr. Thomas Gough, 
who has furnished these catalogues, is eminently conversant 
with the various branches of Natural History : 

Kingdom— AN I M ALIA.— ANIMALS {rec< 
Sub-Kingdom— YERTEBRATA (Vertebrated animals). 
Class— MAMMALIA (Mammals). 

Order I. — Cheiroptera (Bats). 
Long-eared Bat (Plecotus auritus), not uncommon. 
Notch-eared Bat (Vespertilio emarginatus), rare; Garnett-bridge Mill. 
Common Bat (Scotojihilus murinus). common. 

Order II. — Insectivora (Insect iroroics qwxdnqx 
Hedgehog (Erinaceus curopevus), common. 
Common Shrew (Sorex i^usticus), common. 
Water Shrew (Sorex fodiens), not unfrequent ; ditch banks. 
Oared Shrew (Sore.v remifcr), rare ; ditch banks. 
Mole (Talpa curopaa), common. 



ANIMALIA. 307 

Order III. — Carnivora (Carnivorous quadrupeds). 

Badger (Meles taxus), rare ; formerly in Hawes Wood. 

Polecat (Mustela Putorius), not unfrequent. 

Ermine (Mustela erminea) not uncommon ; brown in summer, white in winter. 

Weasel (Mustela vulgaris), common. 

Marten (Martesfoina), rare; rocky woods. 

Otter (Lutra vulgaris), occasionally on the banks of the river Kent. 

Fox ( Vulpes vulgaris), not unfrequent. 

Order IV.— Rodentia (Gnawing quadrupeds). 
Squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris), not uncommon. 
Dormouse (Myoxus avellanarius), not unfrequent. 
Black Rat (Mus rattus), rare ; formerly common. 
Brown Rat (Mus decumanus), common. 
Domestic Mouse (Mus musculus), common. 
Wood Mouse (Mus sylvaticus), not uncommon. 

Water Vole (Arvicola amphibius) not uncommon ; black and brown varieties. 
Field Vole* (Arvicola agrestis) not uncommon ; occasionally in houses in winter. 
Common Hare (Lepus timidus), common. 
Rabbit (Lepus cuniculus), common. 

Class— AVES (Birds). 

The following abbreviations are used : S.M., Summer Migrator from south ; 
W.M., Winter Migrator from north ; O.V., Occasional Visitor. 

Order I. — Raptores (Birds of Prey). 

White-tailed Eagle (Aquila albicilla). This bird formerly bred in the Lake 
hills, but has disappeared within the last forty years. The latest authen- 
ticated instance of its being seen was by Cornelius Nicholson, Esq., above 
Low Wood, in 1822. 

Sparrow Hawk (Accipiter FringillaHus), common. 

Peregrine Falcon (Falco Peregrinus), rare ; Whitbarrow. 

Kestrel (Falco Tinnunculus), common. 

Merlin (Falco uEsalon), not uncommon ; breeds on Hay Fell. 

Common Buzzard (Buteo vulgaris), not frequent ; Benson Knot, Rowlaud Edge. 

Marsh Harrier (Circus rufus), rare ; Hay Fell. 

Short-eared Owl (Otis Brachyotos), O.V., rare ; on moors. 

White Owl (Strix flammea), common. 

Tawny Owl (Ulula stridula), common in woods. 

Order II. — Insessores (Perching Birds). 

The Great Grey Shrike (Lanius excubitor) must be looked upon as a rare 
visitor in this part of the north, one specimen only having been met 
with, which was killed in Middleton, a few miles beyond the limits of 
our area. 

* Field Vole. — We have occasionally observed a small reddish variety of 
Vole on swampy ground. This may probably turn out to be the Meadow 
Vole (A. pratensis), a species first discovered in England by Mr. Yarrell, and 
subsequently found as well in Scotland and Ireland. 

x2 



308 



NATURAL HISTORY OF THE LOCALITY. 



Red-backed Shrike (Lcmius collurio), S.M., not frequent, hedges near the Castle. 
Spotted Flycatcher {Muscicapa grisola), S.M., common, arrives May 11. 
Pied Flycatcher {Muscicapa atricapilla), S.M., rare; arrives May 8. 
Common Dipper (Cinclus aquaticus), common on the rocky parts of Kent, 

Mint, and Sprint. 
Missel Thrush {Turdus viscivorus), common. 

Fieldfare {Turdus pilaris), W.M., common, arrives October 30 to November 13. 
Song Thrush {Turdus musicus), common. 

Redwing {Turdus iliacus), W.M., common, arrives September 30. 
Blackbird {Merula vulgaris), common. 

Ring Ouzel {Merula torquata), S.M., on the " Fells ;" arrives March 24 to 30. 
Hedge Accentor {Accentor modularis), common. 
Redbreast {Erythaca rubecula), common. 
Redstart {Phcenicura ruticilla), common, arrives April 18. 
Stonechat {Saxicola rubicola), not common ; on Helm, Reston Scar. 
Whinchat {Saxicola rubetra), S.M., arrives April 24. 
Wheatear {Saxicola cenanthe), S.M., arrives March 29 to April 3. 
Sedge Warbler {Salicaria phragmitis), S.M., arrives May 5 to 9. 
Blackcap Warbler {Curruca atricapilla), S.M., arrives April 19. 
Garden Warbler {Curruca hortensis), S.M., arrives May 5 to 18. 
Common Whitethroat (Cui'ruca cinerea), S.M., arrives May 3 to 12. 
Lesser Whitethroat {Curruca garula), S. M., not common ; Kent Terrace, 

arrives May 11. 
Wood Warbler {Sylvia sibilatrix), S.M., common ; Spital Wood, arrives April 

26 to May 12. 
Willow Warbler {Sylvia trochilus), S.M., common ; arrives April 16. 
Golden-crested Regulus {Rcgxdus auricapiUun), common. 
Great Tit {Panis major), common. 
Blue Tit {Parus cairuleus), common. 
Cole Tit {Parus ater), common. 
Marsh Tit {Parus pal ustris), common. 
Long-tailed Tit {Parus caudatus), common. 
Bohemian Waxwing {Bombycilla garrula), O.V. in winter; killed at Low-groves 

and Gilling-grove. 
Pied Wagtail {Motacilla YarrcUii), common. 
Grey Wagtail {Motacilla boanda), common. 

Ray's Wagtail {Motacilla ilava), S.M., common ; arrives April 16. 
Tree Pipit {Anthus arboreus), S.M.. common ; arrives April 19. 
Meadow Pipit {Anthus pratensis), common. 
Skylark {Alauda arvensis\ common. 

Woodlark {Alauda arborea), formerly not uncommon, now rare. 
Snow Bunting {Plectrophanes nivalis) O.V., in winter, on Kendal Fell. 
Common Bunting {Emberiza miliaria), common. 
Biack-headed Bunting {Emberiza schoenirfus), common. 
Yellow Bunting {Emberiza cifrinclla), common. 
Chaffinch (Frmgilla caiebs), common. 

Mountain Finch {FringiUa montifringilla), O.V. in winter. 
House Sparrow {Pawr domesticus), common. 
Greenfinch Coccothraustts chloris), common. 
Goldfinch {Cardvrlis elegans), common. 
Siskin {Carduelis spinus), O.V. in winter. 
Common Linnet {Linaria cannabina), common. 



ANIMALIA. 309 

Lesser Bedpole (Linaria minor), S.M., not uncommon. 

Mountain Linnet (Linaria montana), common. 

Bullfinch (Pyrrhula vulgaris), common. 

Common Crossbill (Loxia cwrvirosiris), O.V., Cowan-head and Crosthwaite. 

Common Starling (Sturnus vulgaris), common in summer, rare in winter. 

Baven (Corvus corax), not uncommon. 

Carrion Crow (Corvus corone), common. 

Hooded Crow (Corvus comix), 0. V. in winter ; killed at Forest Hall. 

Book (Corvus frugilegus), common. 

Jackdaw (Corvus monedula), common. 

Magpie (Pica caudata), common. 

Jay (Garrulus glandarius), common. 

Wryneck ( Yunx Torquilla), S.M., not common ; Crosthwaite. 

Creeper (Certhia familiaris), not uncommon. 

Wren (Troglodytes europceus), common. 

Hoopoe (Upupa epops), O.V., rare; killed May 1, 1859, at Selside. 

Cuckoo (Cuculus canorus), S.M., common ; arrives April 14 to May 3. 

Kingfisher (Alcedo ispida), not uncommon. 

Swallow (Hirundo rustica), S.M., common ; arrives April 18. 

Martin (Hirundo urbica), S.M., common ; arrives April 24. 

Sand Martin (Hirundo riparia), S.M., common ; arrives April 13. 

Common Swift (Cypselus apus), S.M., common ; arrives April 30 to May 12. 

Nightjar (Caprimulgus europasus), S.M., not uncommon; arrives May 30. 

Order III. — Basores (Gallinaceous Birds). 

Eing Dove (Columba palumbus), common. 
Turtle Dove (Columba turtur), O.V. in summer, rare. 

Common Pheasant (Phasianus Colchicus), common ; ring-necked variety also. 
Black Grouse ( Tetrao tetrix), not uncommon ; occasionally on Kendal Fell. 
Eed Grouse (Tetrao Scoticus), common. 
Common Partridge (Perdix cinerea), common. 

Common Quail (Perdix coturnix), O.V., rare; formerly a regular summer 
visitor. 

Order IV.— Grallatores (Wading Birds). 

Golden Plover (Charadrius pluvialis) , not uncommon on its way to the hills. 

Lapwing ( Vanellus cristatus), common in summer. 

Common Heron (Ardea cinerea), common. 

Common Bittern (Botaurus stellaris), O.V. in winter; several on Brigsteer 

Moss in 1829. 
Common Curlew (Numenius arquata), common in summer. 
Green Sandpiper (Totanus ochropus), O.V. in autumn ; rare, on the Kent. 
Common Sandpiper (Totanus hypoleucos), S.M., common; arrives April 16 

to 22. 
Buff (Machetes pugnax), O.V. in autumn on Lyth Moss. 
Woodcock (Scolopax rusticola), W.M., common. 
Great Snipe (Scolopax major), O.V. in autumn ; rare. 
Common Snipe (Scolopax gallinago), common ; breeds on the bogs. 
Jack Snipe (Scolopax gallinula), W.M., common. 
Landrail (Crex pratensis), S.M., common ; arrives May 9 to 22. 
Spotted Crake (Crex porzana), O.V. in autumn ; one taken June 5. 



310 NATURAL HISTORY OF THE LOCALITY. 

Water Rail (Rallus aquaticus), W.M. ; not uncommon. 
Moor Hen (Gallinula chloropus), common. 
Common Coot (Fulica atra), common in summer. 

Order V. — Natatores {Swimming Birds). 

Grey-legged Goose (Anser palustris), O.V. in winter. 

Bean Goose (Anser ferus), O.V. in winter. 

Whistling Swan (Cy 'gnus ferus), O.V. in winter. 

Common Shelldrake (Tadorna vulpanser), O.V. in winter. 

Shoveler (Spathulcea clypeata), O.V. in winter on Brigsteer Moss. 

Wild Duck (Anas boschas), common. 

Teal (Querquedela crecca), not uncommon; formerly bred in Dubb's Moss, 
Lambrigg. 

Wigeon (Mareca Penelope), winter visitor. 

Common Scoter (Oidemia nigra), O.V. in spring on the Kent. 

Pochard (Fuligula ferina), winter visitor. 

Scaup Duck (Fuligula marila), O.V. in winter. 

Tufted Duck (Fuligula cristata), winter visitor. 

Golden Eye (Clangula vulgaris), winter visitor. 

Smew (Mergus albellus), O.V. in winter on Lyth Moss. 

Red-breasted Merganser (Mergus serrator), O.V. in winter ; rare ; near Miln- 
thorpe. 

Goosander (Mergus merganser), winter visitor ; adult male killed in March, 1859. 

Great-crested Grebe (Podiceps eristatus), O.V. in winter, on Tarns. 

Eared Grebe (Podiceps auritus), O.V. in winter; rare; killed on Whinfell 
Tarn. 

Little Grebe (Podiceps minor), not uncommon on the Kent and Tarns. 

Great Northern Diver (Colymbus glacialis), O.V. in winter; killed on Whin- 
fell Tarn. 

Black-throated Diver (Colymbus arcticus), O.V. in winter ; rare. 

Red-throated Diver (Colymbus septentrional is), O.V. in winter. 

Common Guillemot (Uria troilc), O.V. ; rare ; on Lyth Moss. 

Little Auk (Mergulus melanoleucos), O.V. ; rare ; Helsington and Crosthwaite. 

Gannet (Sula bassana), O.V.; rare; taken alive on Hutton Common. 

Common Tern (Sterna hirundo), O.V. in winter. 

Masked Gull (Larus capistratus), O.V. ; rare ; taken near the town. 

Black-headed Gull (Larus ridibundus), winter and spring visitor. 

Kittiwake Gull (Larus rissa), ditto. 

Common Gull (Larus canus), ditto. 

Herring Gull (Larus argentatus), ditto. 

Lesser black-backed Gull (Larus fitscus), ditto. 

Great black-backed Gull (Larus marinus), ditto. 

Richardson's Skua (Lcstris Richardson ii\ O.V. in winter; very rare. 

Fork-tailed Petrel (Thalassidroma BullochiiX O.V. in winter; taken alive in 
the town. 

Storm Petrel (Thalassidroma x>clagica), O.V. in winter; taken alive in the 
town. 

Class— REPTILIA (Reptiles\ 

Order — Squamata (Scaled). 

Viviparous or Common Lizard (Zootoca ravtpara), heaths and mossy walls. 
Blind-worm (Anguis frag ills), meadows and copses. 



ANIMALIA. 311 

Ringed Snake (Natrix torquata), peat bogs ; not common. 
Common Viper (Pelias Berus), woods and heaths ; common. 
Var. 0. Red Viper, ditto. 

Class — AMPHIBIA (Amphibious animals),, 
Order — Anoura (Tailless). 

Common Frog (Rana temporaria), common. 

Common Toad (Bufo vulgaris), common. 

Natter Jack Toad (Bufo calamita), in quarries at the limekilns on Kendal-fell. 

Order — Urodela (Tailed). 

Common Warty Newt (Triton cristatus), in ditches. 
Common Smooth Newt (Lissotriton punctatus), in ditches. 

Class— PISCES (Fishes). 
Order — Acanthopterygii (Some of the Jin-rays spinous, others flexible). 
Perch (Perca fluviatilis), in most of the tarns. 

(+) With hard cheeks. 
River Bull-head (Cottus gobio), in the Kent and Mint. 
Smooth-tailed Stickleback (Gasterosteus leiurus), in brooks. 

Order — Abdominal Malacoptertgii (soft-finned). 
Gudgeon (Gobio fluviatilis), in the canal. 
Tench (Tinea vulgar is), in Whinfell Tarn. 
Roach (Leuciscus rutilus), in Skelsmergh and Grayrigg tarns. 
Rudd (Leuciscus erythropthalmus) , in Whinfell Tarn. 
Minnow (Leuciscus phoxinus), in the rivers and brooks. 
Loach (Cobiiis barbatula), in stony parts of the Mint. 
Pike (Esox lucius), in some of the tarns ; rare in the Kent. 
Salmon (Salmo salar) in the Kent at Levens. 
Sea Trout (Salmo trutta) ditto. 

Common Trout (Salmo fario), in the rivers and brooks. 

Order — Apodal Malacoptertgii (no ventral fins). 
Sharp-nosed Eel (Anguilla acutirostris), in tarns ; Whinfell Tarn. 
Broad-nosed Eel (Anguilla latirostris), in brooks and tarns ; Hood Tarn. 

Sub- Kingdom — MOLLUSC A (Molluscous animals). 

Land and Fresh- Water Shells. 

Class— GASTEROPODA (Foot on the gastric surface). 

The Elegant Circle Shell (Cyclostoma elegans) occurs on Arnside Knot ; and 

in the wood near Blawith Cottage, Grange. 

Bithiniad.® (Bithinia Family). 
Tentacled Bithinia (Bithinia tentaculata), canal : Brigsteer Moss. 

ValvatiDjE ( Valve-shell Family). 
Stream Valve-shell ( Valvata piscinalis), Brigsteer Moss ; large in Castle Mills 

Race. 
Crested Valve-shell ( Valvata cristata), Brigsteer Moss. 

Arionid.* (Land-sole Family). 
Black Arion (A rion ater), abundant. 






312 NATURAL HISTORY OF THE LOCALITY. 

HELiciDiE (Snail Family). 
Spotted Slug (Limax maximus), in gardens and outhouses. 
Milky Slug (Limax agrestis), in gardens. 

Transparent Glass Bubble (Vitrina pellucida), not uncommon under stones. 
Garlic Snails (Zonites alliarius), Serpentine Walks. 

Cellar Snail (Zonites cellarius), Serpentine "Walks ; and in many other places. 
Dull Snail (Zonites nitidulus), Serpentine Walks. 

Crystalline Snail (Zonites crystallinus), Serpentine Walks ; Hyning Wood. 
Top shaped Snail (Zonites fulv us), Serpentine Walks. 
Common Snail (Helix aspersa), in gardens. 
Garden Snail (Helix hortensis), in gardens and hedges. 
Girdled Snail (Helix nemoralis) , in gardens ; large on Kendal-fell. 
Shrub Snail (Helix arbustorum), Canal banks, and about the Castle. 
AVhite Snail (Helix pulchella), on old walls. 

Var. with raised cross bands (costata), among moist moss near 

Sizergh-fell-side. 
Black-tipped Snail (Helix fasciolata), on Kendal-fell, rare : abundant above 

Sunny Brow, Staveley. 
Heath Snail (Helix ericetorum), common on Kendal-fell. 
Rufous Snail (Helix rufescens), common : large in Serpentine Walks. 
Neat Snail (Helix concinna), under stones on Kendal-fell. 
Prickly Snail (Helix aculeata), near Beckmills : Low Groves : Oxenholme. 
Radiated Snail (Helix rotundata), common under stones; large on Kendal-fell. 
Open Snail (Helix umbilicata), abundant on Kendal-fell, beneath stones, and 

on walls 
Comoion Amber Snail (Succinea putris), in the Canal. 

Dusky Twist Shell (Fulimus obscurus), on Kendal-fell; and at Sizergh-fell-side. 
Common Varnished Shell (Zua lubrica), common under stones. 
Glassy Trident Shell (Azeca tridens), on Kendal-fell ; rare. 
Umbilicated Chrysalis Shell (Pupa cylindracea), common on Kendal-fell. 
Margined Chrysalis Shell (Pupa muscoi'um), Kendal-fell. 
Juniper Chrysalis Shell (Pupa secale), abundant on Kendal-fell. 
Toothless Whorl Shell ( Vertigo edentula), scarce ; on Kendal-fell. 
Pygmy Whorl Shell (Vertigo pygmcea), common on Kendal-fell, and old walls. 
Alpine Whorl Shell ( Vertigo alpestris), Kendal-fell ; not common. 
Six-toothed Whorl Shell ( Vertigo subst7*iata), scarce; in Serpentine Walks. 
Wry-necked Whorl Shell ( Vertigo jyusilla), Hawes Bridge ; Serpentine Walks, 

and Mint Cottage ; not common. 
Fragile Moss Shell (Balca perversa), on a wall near Fowl Ing. 
Laminated Close Shell (Clausilia bidem), Kendal-fell, Helsfell Wood, and 

Madgegill. 
Dark Close Shell (Clausilia nigricans^, on the Castle walls, Serpentine Walks ; 

common. 

AiRici'LiD-E {Ear-shell Family). 

Minute Sedge Shell (Carychium minimi', in), Hyning, Cumwick, and Helsfell 
Woods. 

Limx^aD-E (Pond-snail Famih/\ 
Wide mouthed Mud Shell (Limn&us auricularim:), scarce: in the Canal. 
Puddle Mud Shell (Limnceus pcrcger), common in the Canal. Kent, and brooks. 
Var. 1. subovate [ — ovatus], and var. 3. spire very short 
[ — hi'tut], in ditches. 



FOSSILS. 313 

Marsh Mud Shell (Limnceus palustris), Brigsteer Moss, and near Water Crook. 
Ditch Mud Shell (Limnceus truncatulus), Brigsteer Moss, Lime Kilns, and Mint 

Cottage. 
Eight- Whorled Mud Shell (Limnceus glaber), rare ; Eller-flat Tarn, near Docker 

Garths. 
Common River Limpet (Ancylus fluviatilis), common in streams ; large in the 

Canal. 
Oblong Lake Limpet ( Veletia lacustris), in pools' on Benson Knot ; scarce. 
Stream Bubble Shell (Physa fontinalis), Canal, and Brigsteer Moss. 
White Coil Shell (PlanorMs albus), Canal, Brigsteer Moss, and Mill-dam at 

Cowan Head. 
Nautilus Coil Shell (Planorbis nautileus), Brigsteer Moss ; formerly in Coppy 

Tarn, Tenter Fell. 
Carinated Coil Shell (Planorbis carinatus), Brigsteer Moss. 
Margined Coil Shell (Planorbis complanatus), Brigsteer Moss. 
Whorl Coil Shell (Planorbis vortex), Brigsteer Moss. 
Rolled Coil Shell (Planorbis spirorbis), Brigsteer Moss and Aikrigg Tarn. 
Twisted Coil Shell (Planorbis contortus), Brigsteer Moss and many other places. 

Class— CONCHIFERA BIVALVES or LAMELLIBRANCHIATA 
(Respiratory apparatus of two pairs of gills). 
CyclaDjE (Cycle Family). 
Horny Cycle (Cyclas cornea), Brigsteer Moss ; in a ditch near Helm Lodge. 

PisiDiADiE (Pera Family). 
Minute Pera (Pisidium pusillum), Brigsteer Moss and Kent. 

UNiONiDiE (Fresh-water Muscle Family). 
Swan Fresh-water Muscle (Anodon cygneus), shell large and thin ; Canal. 

Var. Shell small ; var. anatina. Brigsteer Moss. 
Pearly Alasmodon (Alasmodon margaritiferus), in the Mint, Kent, and Gowan. 



FOSSILS OF THE UPPEK PALAEOZOIC SYSTEM. 

CARBONIFEROUS SERIES. 

Mountain Limestone. 

Kingdom— AN I MALIA.— ANIMALS (extinct). 

&vz-l*LwG l T>QU—VERTEBRATA (Vertebrated animals). 

Class— PISCES (Fishes). 

Cladodus striatus, Brigsteer. Helodus planus, Kendal-fell. 

Cochiliodus magnus, Kendal-fell. Pristi cladodus Goughi, Kettle well, 

Sub-Kingdom— M OLLUSCA (Molluscous animals). 
Class -CEPHAL APOD A (Feet around the head). 




Orthoceras insequiseptuin, Kendal- 
fell. 
cornu-vaccinum, ditto. 
lateral©, ditto, 

giganleum, ditto. 



Orthoceras Gesneri, Kendal-fell. 

* cinctum, ditto. 

Aganides vinctus, ditto. 

Nautilus Trochlea, ditto. 

sulcatus, ditto, 



314 



NATURAL HISTORY OF THE LOCALITY. 



Nautilus goniolobus, Kendal-fell. 

ingens, ditto. 

globosus, ditto. 

discus, ditto. 

cariniferus, ditto. 
Bellerophon tangentialis, Halhead 
Nab. 



Bellerophon Larcomi, Kendal-fell. 
hiulcus, ditto. 

Phillipsii, ditto, 
costatus, ditto, 

cornu-arietis, ditto, 
sp. (?) Kettlewell. 



Class— GASTEROPODA (Foot on the gastric surface). 



Dentalium ingens, Kendal-fell. 


Straparollus crotolostomus, Kendal- 


Macrochilus curvilineus, ditto. 


fell. 


Loxonema tumida, ditto. 


pileopsideus, ditto. 


tenuisti'ia, ditto. 


catillus, ditto. 


scalaroidea, ditto. 


acutus, Brigsteer Scar. 


rugifera, Barrowfield- 


Platyschisma Tiara, ditto. 


wood. 


Jamesi, Kendal-fell. 


Naticopsis plicistria, Kendal-fell. 


glabrata, ditto. 


ampliata, ditto. 


Murchisonia Verneuilana, var. Ken- 


lirata, ditto. 


dalensis, Kendal-fell. 


Encyliomphalus cristatus, Halhead 


Pleurotomaria Yvanni, ditto. 


Nab. 


decipiens,rar.)3,ditto. 


8equalis,Kendal-fell. 


tumida, ditto. 


Straparollus pugilis, ditto. 


cirrifonnis, ditto. 


tabulatus, ditto. 


callosa, ditto. 


nodosus, ditto. 


Capulua auricularius, Kendal-fell. 


Dionysii, ditto. 


M et optoma imbricata, B rigsteerScar. 


Class— LAMELLIBRANCHIATA (Re 


spiratory apparatus of two pairs of gills). 


Conocardium aliforme, Kendal-fell. 


Aviculopecten Ruthveni, Kendal- 


Sanguinolitessulcatus,BrigsteerScar 


fell. 


subcarinatus, Kendal- 


concavus, Brigsteer 


fell. 


Scar. 


variabilis, ditto. 


Unknown Bivalve, Kendal-fell. 


Edmondia unioniformis, ditto. 


Perna sp. ditto. 


sulcata, ditto. 


Pecten fimbriatus, ditto. 


Pinna spatula, ditto. 


arenosus, Brigsteer Scar. 


costata, ditto. 


anisotus, Kendal-fell. 


Lithodomus Jenkinsonii, Stonebank 


Ambonychia vetusta, ditto. 


Green. 





Class— PALLIOBRANCHIATA (Respiratory apparatus on the surface of the 

mantle). 

Order — Brachiopoda (A long arm-like foot on each side of the mouth). 

I 



Producta pustulosa, Kendal-fell. 
punctata, ditto, 
mesoloba, ditto. 
Martini, var. concinna 
Kendal-fell. 



Producta margaritacea, Kendal-fell. 
lirata, ditto, 

hemispherica, ditto. 
oval is, Brigsteer Scar, 
gigantea. ditto. 



FOSSILS. 



315 



Producta fimbriata, Kendal-fell. 

Flemingi, var. pugilis, do. 

var. sulcata, do. 

var. lobata, do. 

elegans, ditto. 

corrugata, ditto. 

Chonetes papilionacea, ditto. 

Leptagonia analoga, var. multiru- 

gata, Kendal-fell. 

Strophomena senilis, ditto. 

Sharpii,BrigsteerScar. 
crenistria, Kendal-fell. 
Camerophoria sulcirostris, Kettle- 
well. 
Orthis gibbera, Kendal-fell. 



Pentameruscarbonarius, Kettlewell. 
Athyris gregaria, var. paradoxa, Ken- 
dal-fell. 
var. trapezoidalis, 
Kendal-fell. 
expansa, ditto. 

Spirifera symmetrica, ditto. 

glabristria, Brigsteer Scar, 
similis, Kendal-fell. 
imbricafca, ditto, 
cuspidata, Kettlewell. 
duplicata, Kendal-fell. 
virgoides, ditto, 
filiaria, Brigsteer Scar, 
rhomboidea, Kendal-fell. 



Sub-Kingdom — ART1CULATA (Articulated animals). 

Class— CRUSTACEA (Crustaceans). 

Phillipsia seminifera, Kendal-fell. | Phillipsia gemmulifera, Kendal-fell. 

Sub-Kingdom — RADIATA (Radiated animals). 

Class— ZOOPHYTA (Zoophytes). 



Cyathaxonia cornu, Kendal-fell. 
Lithostrotion sexdecimale, ditto, 
affine, Cunswick. 
junceum, Kendal-fell. 
fasciculatum, ditto, 
aggregatum, Kettle- 
well. 
Stylastraea basaltiformis, Kendal- 
fell. 
Lonsdaleia stylastrseiformis, ditto. 
Nematophyllum ax*achnoideum, 

Helsington Bar- 
rows, 
minus, Kendal- 
fell. 
Clysiophyllum multiplex, ditto. 



Cyathopsis fungites, Kendal-fell. 

cornu-copise, ditto. 

Caninia subibicina, ditto. 

gigantea, ditto. 

Cyathophyllumpseudo-vermiculare, 

Kendal-fell. 

Syringopora geniculata, ditto. 

reticulata, ditto. 

ramulosa, ditto. 

Stenopora inflata, ditto. 

tumida, Kettlewell. 
Chsetetes septosus, Kendal-fell. 
capillaris, ditto, 
radians, Helsington Bar- 
rows. 
Michelinea grandis, Brigsteer Scar. 



Note. — In the lower beds of mountain limestone occurs a coarse conglome- 
rate, containing the shells of small Mollusca ; and in about the same position 
are to be found deposits, of a more or less arenaceous character, in which are 
several fossil plants, consisting of species of Sigillaria, Calamites, Lepidoden- 
dron, and, probably, Caulopteris. 

OLD RED SANDSTONE, OR DEVONIAN SERIES. 

No characteristic fossils of this series have been met with in this locality 
among the Old Red Conglomerate, which occurs in the valleys of the Kent, 
Mint, and Sprint, as aheady noticed in the general observations on the natural 
situation of the town, at p. 144. But many of the angular fragments and dis- 
jointed pieces of which the rock is here made up do contain fossils from the 
Upper Ludlow formation. 



316 



NATURAL HISTORY OF THE LOCALITY. 



FOSSILS OF THE LOWER PALAEOZOIC SYSTEM. 

SILURIAN SERIES. 

Upper Ludlow Rocks. 

Sub-Kingdom — MOLLUSC A (Molluscous animals). 

Class— CEPHALAPODA. 



Hortolus Ibex, High Thorns, Under- 

barrow. 
Cycloceras tracheale, Benson Knot. 

subannulatum, Brigsteer. 

tenuiannulatum, ditto 

Ibex, Benson Knot. 

Orthoceras tenui-cinctum, ditto. 

dimidiatum, Brigsteer. 



Orthoceras sub-undulatum, High 
Thorn, 
bullatum, Laverock- 
lane, 
baculiforme, Brigsteer. 
angulatum, ditto. 
Bellerophon trilobatus,Benson Knot, 
expansus ditto. 



Class— GASTEROPODA. 



Litorina octavia, High Thorns. 

corallii, Benson Knot. 

Holopella obsoleta, ditto. 

gregaria, Underbarrow 

common, 
intermedia, High Thorns, 
conica, Benson Knot. 



Holopella cancellata, Lambrigg-fell. 
Naticopsis glaucinoides, Benson 

Knot. 

Trochus heli cites, ditto. 

Murchisonia torquata, ditto. 

Lloydi, ditto. 

Pleurotomaria crenulata, Brigsteer. 



Class— PTEROPODA (a wing-like foot on each side of the neck). 

Conularia subtilis, Benson Knot 
cancellata ditto, 

ornata (Fossils of Rhenish 



provinces, Tab. xxix. fi, 
5), Benson Knot; rare, 
Theca Forbesii, High Thorns. 



Class— LAMELLIBRANCHIATA. 



Tellinites affinis, Benson Knot. 
Nucula anglica, Brigsteer. 
Cucullella ovata, ditto, 

coarctata, ditto, 
antiqua, Benson Knot. 
Area primitiva, ditto. 

Edmondiiformis, ditto. 
Cardiola interrupta, ditto and 

High Thorns. 
Grarnmysia rotundata, ditto, 
extrasulcata, ditto, 
cingulata, war. o, ditto. 
var. |8, triangulata, 
ditto. 

var. y, obliqua, 
High Thorns. 



Leptodomus undatus, Benson Knot. 
truncatus ditto. 
vars. long and short, 
[ditto, 
globulosus, ditto, 
amygdalinus. ditto. 
Sanguinolites decipien3, ditto, 
anguhferus, ditto, 
very rare. 
Orthonotus semisulcatus, ditto. 
Anadontopsis securiformis, ditto, 
angustifrons, ditto. 
Modiolopsis solenoides, ditto. 
complanata, ditto. 
Pterhiea tenuistriata, ditto. 

rotroflejUL ditto. 



FOSSILS. 



317 



Pterinea pleuroptera, Benson Knot. 

lineata, ditto. 

demissa, ditto. 

Pterinea Boydi, Brigsteer. 



Pterinea Sowerbyi, Helm. 

Avicula Danbyi, Benson Knot. 

orbicular var. ditto. 

elongate var. ditto. 



Class— PALLIOBRANCHIATA. 
Order — Brachiopoda. 



Lingula lata, Benson Knot, 

cornea, var. minima, 

Benson Knot, 
^honetes lata, ditto, 

uthis lunata, ditto. 



Orthis nucula, Benson Knot. 
Hemithyris Wilsoni, Helm. 
Spirifera sub-spuria, Benson Knot. 
Discina striata ditto, 

rugata ditto. 



Sub-Kingdom— ARTICULATA , 
Class— CRUSTACEA. 



Pteregotus problematicus, Benson 

Knot. 
Forbesia latrifons, Underbarrow. 
Homolotonus Knightii, Tenter-fell, 

Endmoor, and Benson Knot. 
Calymene tuberculosa, High Thorns. 
Phacops Downingise, Benson Knot. 
Odontochile caudata, ditto. 



Odontochile caudata, var. minor, 

Underbarrow and Benson Knot. 

Ceratiocaris solenoides, Benson 

Knot. 

inornatus, ditto. 

ellipticus, ditto. 

Three or four species of unknown 

crustaceans, Benson Knot. 
Beyrichia Klodeni, Underbarrow. 



Class— ANNULATA. 



Trachyderma squamosa, 
Knot. 



Benson 



Serpuiites dispar, Benson Knot and 
Brigsteer. 



Zoological position uncertain, probably Echinodermata or Annulata. 

Tentaculites tenuis, Benson Knot. Comulites serpularius, Benson Knot 

Undetermined fossil, ditto. and Brigsteer. 



Sub-Kingdom— RA DIA TA . 
Class -ECHINODERMATA. 



Tetragonis Danbyi, Underbarrow 

Low Common. 
Protaster Sedgwickii, Benson Knot 

and Docker Park. 



Uraster primsevus, High Thorns. 
Uraster Ruthveni, ditto. 

Icthyocrinus pyriformis, ditto. 
Tasocrinus Orbignii, ditto. 



Class— ZOOPHYTA. 



Spongarium interruptum, Benson 
Knot, 
interlineatum, ditto, 
seqiiistriatum, ditto. 



Cyathaxonia siluriensis, Underbar- 
row and north end of Hayfell. 
Nebulipora papillata, Brigsteer. 
Undetermined coral, Benson Knot. 



318 NATURAL HISTORY OF THE LOCALITY. 

Lower Ludlow Rocks. 

Sub-Kingdom— M OLLUSCA. 

Class— CEPHALAPODA. 

Cycloceras tracheale, Shepherd's Quarry, Patton. 

Class— PALLIOBRANCHIATA. 
Order— Brachiopoda. 

Spirigerina reticularis, Cowan-head, 



Chonetes lata, Potter Fell. 
Strophomena filosa, Tullithwaite 

Hall. 
Hemithyris Wilsoni, ditto and Un- 
der barrow, 
navicula, Cowan-head, 
Ratherheath and Res- 
ton Scar. 



Capplerigg "Wood, and Rather- 
heath. 
Spirifera sub-spuria, Potter FelL 
Discina rugata, ditto. 

Atrypa didyma, Ratherheath. 



Sub-Kingdom— A RT1CULA TA . 

Class— CRUSTACEA. 

Asaphus caudatus, Ratherheath and Beyrichia Klodeni, Cowan-head and 

Shepherd'? Quarry. Reston Scar. 

Class— ANNULATA. 
Spirorbis Lewisii, Tullithwaite Hall. 

Sub-Kingdom— RA DIA TA . 

Class— ECHINODERMATA. 



Protaster Sedgwickii, Shepherd's 

Quarry. 
Uraster hirudo, Potter Fell. 



Actinocrinus pulcher, Ratherheath 

and Shepherd's Quarry. 
Stems of Encrinites in Reston Scar. 



Class— ZOOPHYTA. 

Cyathaxonia Siluriensis, Cowan- Stenopora fibrosa, Ratherheath 

head. Graptolites latus, Reston Scar. 



PLANTS. 

Ranunculacea. — Thalictrum minus, Scout Scar, Cowan Head. Anemone 
nemoposa, common. Ranunculus hederaceus, watery places. R. Fiearia, 
common. R. Flammula, peat bogs. R. auricomus, shady lanes aud 
thickets. R. bulbosus, meadows. R. sceleratus, Brigsteer Moss. Trollius 
europaeus, damp pastures. Helleborus viridis, near Scartoot Mills. 
Aquilegia vulgaris, Brigsteer and Peat Mosses. 

Nymphceacece. — Nymphaea alba, tarns. N. lutea, tarns and pools. 

Papaveracece. — Papaver Rhaeas, cornfields. Mecanopsis cambrica, Oxenhohne, 
Peat Lane, Sprint Bridge. Chelidonium majus, near Natland. 



PLANTS. 319 

FwmariacecE. — Corydalis claviculata, Spital Wood. Fumaria officinalis?, 
common. 

Cruciferce. — Coronopus Ruellii, Beast-banks. Thlaspi arvense, Crook, Staveley. 
Draba verna, common. Cardamine amara, Laverock and Burneside Lanes, 
C. hirsuta, common. Arabia thaliana, common. A. hirsuta, Scout Scar ; 
wall near Castle Mills. Barbarea vulgaris, common. Nasturtium offici- 
nale, common. N. terrestre, Aikrigg Tarn. Sisymbrium officinale, 
common. Erysimum Alliaria, common. 

Resedacece. — Reseda Luteola, Lime Kilns. 

Cistacece. — Helianthemum vulgare, common. H. canum, Scout Scar; Burn 
Barrow Nab. 

Violacece. — Viola palustris, marshy places. V. odorata, Helsington, Gilling- 
grove. V. hirta, Barrowfield and Cunswick Woods. V. tricolor, 
common. 

Droseracece. — Drosera rotundifolia, common. D. intermedia, common. D. 
anglica, Foulshaw Moss ; rare. 

Polygalacece. — Polygala vulgaris, common. 

Silenacece. — Saponaria officinalis, Force Bridge. Silene inflata, common. 
Lychnis vespertina, Peat-lane. L. Githago, occasionally in cornfields. 

Alsinacece. — Sagina nodosa, Kendal-fell. Arenaria serpyllifolia, Kendal-fell, 
Thorny Hills. A. verna, Kendal-fell. A. trinervis, Spital Wood. 
Stellaria nemorum, Laverock and Burneside Lanes, common. S. holostea, 
common. S. graminea, common. 

Linacece. — Linum usitatissimum, occasionally in cornfields. Radiola mille- 
grana, Foulshaw Moss. 

Malvaceae. — Malva moschata, in pastures. M. sylvestris, Heversham, Cros- 
thwaite. M. rotundifolia, Underbarrow Scar. 

Hypericacece. — Hypericum Androssemum, Barrowfield Wood, Brigsteer. 
H. perforatum, dry banks. H. dubium, near Heversham. H. quadran- 
gulum, common. H. humifusum, dry banks. H. hirsutum, Cunswick 
and Scout Woods. H. montanum, Cunswick and Scout Woods. H. Elodes, 
Underbarrow Common. 

Aceracece. — Acer campestre, near the Lound. 

Geraniacece. — Geranium sylvaticum, woods and shady lanes. G. pratense, 
meadows. G. dissectum, common. G. columbinum, Canal banks, Lime 
kilns. G. lucidum, rocks and old walls. G. Robertianum var. flore albo, 
lanes near Jenkin Crag, and the Castle. G. sanguineum, Scout Scar. 

Celastracece. — Euonymus europaeus, Cowan Head, Hundhow. 

Ehamnacece— Rhamnus catharticus, Scout and Cunswick Woods. R. Frangula, 
ditto. 

Leguminiferce. — Spartium scoparium, common. Genista tinctoria, high pas- 
tures and commons. Ononis arvensis, common. Anthyllis vulneraria, 
common on limestone. Medicago lupulina, Kendal-fell. Melilotus 
officinalis, Fowlshaw Moss. Trifolium medium, Cunswick Wood. T. ar- 
vense, sandy pastures. T. fragiferum, near Low Levens. T. procum- 
bens, Kendal-fell. T. minus, Kendal-fell. Lotus corniculatus, common. 
Ornithopus perpusillus, Tenterfell, near the Workhouse. Hippocrepis 
comosa, Scout Scar. Vicia sylvatica, Laverock Bridge, Barrowfield Wood. 
V. angustifolia, occasionally on sandy pastures. Orobus tuberosus, hedge 
banks. 
Rosacea^. — Prunus insititia, hedges. P. Padus, moist woods and hedges. 
P. cerasus, woods. Spiraea filipendula, Barrowfield Wood and top of 



320 



NATURAL HISTORY OF THE LOCALITY. 



Unlerbarrow Scar. G. urbanum, common. G. intermedium, damp 
woods. G. rivale, sides of brooks. Agrimonia Eupatoria, Laverock 
Bridge. Potentilla verna, wood on E. side of Whitbavrow. P. reptans, 
roadsides. P. Fragariastrum, common. Fragaria vesca, common. Coma- 
rum palustre, Cunswick Tarn. Rub us saxatilis, Cunswick Wood. 
R. idaeus, hedges and woods. R. csesius, Cunswick Wood. Rosa spinosis- 
sima, Barrowfield Wood. R. villosa, woods. R. tomentosa, woods and 
hedges. R. arvensis, between Beathwaite Green and Brigsteer. Sangui- 
sorba officinalis, meadows. Poterium sanguisorba, Kendal-fell. Alche- 
milla arvensis, sandy pastures. Crataegus Oxyacantha, common. Pyrus 
malus, hedges. P. aria, Scout and Cunswick Woods. P. aucuparia, 
woods. 

Onagracece. — Epilobium hirsutum, banks of Mint and Kent. Circaea lutetiana, 
common. 

Haloragiacece. — Hippuris vulgaris, Brigsteer Moss. Myriophyllum spicatum, 
river Kent, Brigsteer Moss. Callitriche verna, common. 

Lythracecn. — Lythrum Salicaria, Stock-beck. Peplis Portula, Brigsteer Moss. 

Scleranthacece. — Scleranthus annuus, sandy pastures. 

Grossulariacece. — Ribes Grossularia, woods and hedges. R. nigrum, damp 
hedges. R. alpinum, Docker Brow. 

Crassulacece— Sedum Telephium, common S. anglicum, Underbarrow, Crook, 
Staveley. 

Saxifragacece. — Saxifraga granulata, Gilling-grove, banks of the Mint. S. tridac- 
tylites, old walls and rocks. Chrysosplenium alternifolium, near Benson 
Hall gate. 

Araliacece. — Adoxa moschatellina, common. 

CornacecB. — Comus sanguinea, hedges near Levens. 

Umbelliferce. — Hydrocotyle vulgaris, common. Sanicula europaea, common. 
Conium maculatum, waste places. Apium graveolens, Fowlshaw Moss. 
Helosciadium nodiflorum, Stock-beck. H. inundatum, Brigsteer. Pim- 
pinella Saxifraga, dry banks. Sium latifolium, Stock-beck. QEnanthe 
fistulosa, Endmoor. QE. Crocata, Stock'beck iEthusa Cynapium, 
common. Silaus pratensis, Cunswick Tarn. Meum athamanticum, 
Docker Garths, The Green, and Lambrigg Fell-gate. Daucus Carota, 
Kendal-fell. Torilis Anthriscus, common. Scandix Pecten-veneris, 
occasionally in cornfields. Anthriscus sylvestris, common. Myrrhis 
odorata, near Spital. 

Loranthacece. — Viscum album, on apple trees in Lyth and Crosthwaite. 

CajprifoliacecB. — Sambucus Ebulus, Bradley- field ; lane near Staveley Church. 
Viburnum opulus, common. 

Rubiacece. — Galium cruciatum, common. G. uliginosum, moist places. G. 
Mollugo, Spital, Skelsmergh. G. sylvestre, Kendal-fell. G. Aparine, 
common. Sherardia arvensis, sandy fields. Asperula odorata, common. 
A. cynanchica, Kendal-fell. 

Valerianacece. — Valeriana dioica, marshy places. V. officinalis, damp hedge? 
Fedia olitoria, dry banks. 

Dipsacece. — Scabiosa columbaria, Kendal-fell. Knautia arvensis, common. 

Compositce. — Tragopogon minor, meadows near the town. Apargia hispida, 
common. Hypochasris radicata, common. Lactuca muralis, Scout and 
Cunswick Scars. Sonchus arvensis, Peat Mosses. Crepis virens, com- 
mon. C. paludosa, wet meadows. Serratula tinctoria, Barrowfield 






PLANTS. 321 

wood ; near Ings. Carduus heterophyllus, Peat Lane. Carlina vulgaris, 
Kendal-fell. Centaurea nigrescens, common. Centaurea scabiosa, 
Kendal-fell. Bidens cernua, Crosthwaite ; near Underbarrow Toll-bar. 
Bidens tripartita, Stock Beck ; Burneside Hall. Eupatorium canabinum, 
Cunswick Tarn; peatmosses. Tanacetumvulgare, JenkinCrag; Toad Pool. 
Gnaphalium sylvaticum, common. G. uliginosum, peat mosses. Filago 
minima, Crosthwaite. F. germanica, sandy places. Antennaria dioica, 
Kendal-fell. Erigeron acris, Foulshaw-moss. Aster trifolium, Fowl- 
shaw moss. Solidago Virgaurea, common. Senecio sylvaticus, Pine Crags. 
S. saracenicus, Stock Beck ; Hay Fell ; Mill Bridge. Inula helenium, Fell- 
side Farm, Crosthwaite. I. conyza, Cunswick Scar. Pyrethrum parthe- 
niuni, the Castle. P. inodorum, waste places. Anthemis nobilis, 
Brigsteer. 

Campanulacece. — Campanula latifolia, hedges. C. Trachelium, near Park Head 
and Hyning. Jasione montana, dry banks. 

Ericaceae. — Andromeda polifolia, Levens-moss. Vaccinium oxycoccos, bogs. 
Monotropa hypopitys, Barrowfield-wood. 

Gcntianacece. — Gentiana pneumonanthe, Foulshaw-moss. G. Amarella, Ken- 
dal-fell. G. campestris, Kendal-fell. Erythrsea centaurium, Brigsteer. 

Convolvulacece. — Convolvulus arvensis, near Heversham. C. sepium, hedges. 

Solanacece Hyoscyamus niger, near Levens Church. Solanum niger Dulca- 
mara, damp hedges. 

Scrophulariacecs. — Verbascum Thapsus, Brigsteer Scar. Veronica scutellata, 
Brigsteer-moss. V. montana, between Greenside and Heversham. V. 
agrestis, common. Melampyrum sylvaticum, Barrowfield-wood, on east 
side of Whitbarrow. Digitalis purpurea, common. Linaria minor, rail- 
way banks between Staveley and Ings. 

Orobanchacece. — Lathrsea squamaria, Laverock-bridge, Cunswick-wood, Levens 
Park. 

Lamiacece. — Lycopus europseus, sides of tarns. Mentha rotundifolia, near 
Eeston Hall. M. aquatica, common. M. arvensis, corn-fields. Origanum 
vulgare, Cunswick-wood. Calamintha officinalis, the Castle. Lamium 
album, Lound. Galeopsis ladanum, foot of Scout Scar. G. versicolor, 
near Sprint-bridge. 

Boraginacece. — Myosotis palustris, common. Lithospermum officinale, Barrow- 
field wood. L. arvense, occasionally in corn-fields. Anchusa semper- 
virens, near Tolson Hall gate. Cynoglossum officinale, near Levens 
Church. Echium vulgare, occasionally in corn-fields. 

Pinguiculacece. — Utricularia vulgaris, Brigsteer-moss. U. minor, Brigsteer-moss. 

Primulacece. — Primula veris, common. P. farinosa, damp meadows and pas- 
tures. Hottonia palustris, Brigsteer-moss. Lysimachia vulgaris, ditches 
on peat bogs. L. nummularia, near Levens. Anagallis tenella, bogs. 
Samolus valerandi, Brigsteer-moss. 

Plantaginacece. — Plantago media, Kendal-fell. P. maritima, Foulshaw moss. 

Polygonacece. — Polygonum bistorta, meadows. P. Persicaria, common. P. 
Hydropiper, common. P. amphibium, canal. P. convolvulus, cultivated 
ground. 

Thymeleacece. — Daphne laureola, North Spring-wood, Staveley. 

Empetracece. •-  Empetrum nigrum, Benson Knot, Reston Scar. 

Urticacece. — Humulus lupulus, Hawes-bridge. 

Conifer. — Juniperus communis, Kendal-fell. Taxus baccata, Scout Scar. 

Orchidacece. — Neottia nidus-avis, foot of Cunswick Scar. Listera ovata, 

Y 



322 NATURAL HISTORY OF THE LOCALITY. 

woods. Epipactis latifolia, Cunswick-wood. E. palustris, Cunswick 
tarn. Cephalanthera ensifolia, Barrowfield wood, rare. Orchis mascula, 
common. 0. latifolia, damp meadows. Gymnadenia conopsea, Cunswick. 
G. bifolia, pastures. G. chlorantha, Cunswick-tarn edge. Habenaria 
viridis, Helsfell Nab. G. albida, Barrowfield wood. OpLrys muscifera, 
Barrowfield wood, east side of Whitbarrow. 

Amaryllidacece. — Narcissus pseudo-narcissus, woods, Pine Crags. 

Liliacece. — Allium scorodoprasum, near "Water Crook. A. schcenoprasum, 
Rusmittle, Lyth. Gagea lutea, wood near Greenside. Convallariamajalis, 
Hels-fell Nab, Cunswick wood. C. polygonatum/ Barrowfield wood, rare. 

Trilliacece. — Paris quadrifolia, woods and hedges. 

Tamacece. — Tamus communis, in hedges. 

Melanthiacece. — Colchicum autumnale, Mint's-feet, Greenside. 

Alismacece. — Alisma plantago, Kent. A. ranunculoides, Brigsteer-moss. 

Fluviales. — Potamogeton crispus, Kent. 

Aracece. — Sparganium natans, Foulshaw-moss. S. ramosum, Stock Beck. 

Cyperacece. — Cladium mariscus, Cunswick-tarn. Scirpus maritimus, Foul- 
shaw-moss. 

Gramina. — Sesleria cserulea, Kendal-fell. Melica uniflora, shady banks. 
Festuca bromoides, Kendal-fell. Brachy podium sylvaticum, Cunswick- 
wood. 

Filices. — Ceterach officinamm, Kendal-fell. Polypodium phegopteris, common. 
P. Dryopteris, common. P. calcareum, Barrowfield; Helsfell Nab. 
Allosorus crispus, Peat-lane ; Reston Scar. Cistopteris fragilis, Kendal- 
fell. Polystichum aculeatum, Gilling grove ; Gillbanks, near Staveley. 
Lastrsea oreopteris, on the north side of the town. Lastraea rigida, Kendal 
fell, scarce. L. spinulosa, near Ings. L. dilatata, common. Asplenium 
trichomanes, common. A. viride, Kendal-fell. A. adiantum-nigrum, 
Barrows Green. A. rutamuraria, Kendal-fell. Scolopendrium vulgare, 
common. Osmunda regalis, damp hedges and woods. Botrychium 
lunaria, wood near Singleton; Benson Knot. Ophioglossum vulgatum, 
near Singleton. 

Lycopodiacece. — Lycopodium clavatum, Benson Knot. L. alpinum, Benson 
Knot. L. selago, Benson Knot. 

Equisetacece. — Equisetum hyemale, banks of the Mint, near Old Field-wood. 



QUEEN KATHERINE PARE. 323 



CHAPTEE XII. 
BIOGKAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

QUEEN KATHEEINE PARE. 

Of those natives who, by their lives and character, have 
conferred honour npon Kendal, undoubtedly the first place 
belongs to Katherine Parr, the sixth and last wife of King 
Henry VIII. Not because she was elevated to royalty, 
but because she "achieved greatness" by the exercise of 
noble qualities, and a cultivated understanding. She was 
born at Kendal Castle, about the year 1513. No question 
is made of the place of her birth, but the exact date is 
uncertain. Her parents were Sir Thomas Parr, knight, and 
Matilda, who rejoiced still more in the name of " Maud " 
Green, daughter and co-heiress of Sir Thomas Green, of 
Boughton, in Northamptonshire. Katherine was a precocious 
child, and gave promise of future distinction, both by her 
natural aptitude and by the divination of the astrologer, 
whose vocation then obtained credit. " Shee was told by an 
astrologer that did calculate her nativitie, that she was borne 
to sett in the highest of Impiall majestie : which became 
moste true. Shee had all the eminent starrs and planetts in 
her house : this did worke such a loftie conceite in her that 
her mother coulde newer make her serve or doe any small 
worke, saying her handes were ordayned to touch crownes and 
scepters, not needles and thymbles." 1 Although she lived only 
thirty-five years, yet she was married four times, and so fair a 
prize was she reckoned that an alliance with her was sought by 

1 Joannes Ball's "Scriptorum Illustrium." 

y2 







324 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

the Lord Scroop, of Bolton, 1 when she could be no more than 
eleven years of age ! Her first husband was Edward Burgh, 
or Borough, the eldest son of Lord Borough, of Gainsborough. 
He was a widower, with children, older far than the new- 
made bride. Edward Borough died in 1529 ? (as it is said.) 
If so, Katherine was a widow at sixteen. How long she re- 
mained so, we cannot find. Nor can we discover the date of 
her second marriage, which was with Sir John Neville, Lord 
Latimer. He also was a staid widower, with children, so that 
Katherine had maternal cares of no ordinary kind to bear at 
an early age ; and according to all accounts, she performed 
these duties with exemplary circumspection and con- 
scientiousness. She herself had no children to either of the 
fore-named husbands. Lord Latimer was a bigoted Roman 
Catholic, and took part in the rebellion called the "Pil- 
grimage of Grace," as we mention in the account of St. Leo- 
nard's Hospital, p. 82. On the 12th July, 1543, Katherine 
was married to King Henry VIII. with great pomp and splen- 
dour, at Hampton Court. 2 Nash says, she enjoyed but little 
happiness or quiet with him, yet " as she was ever esteemed 
a lady of much integrity and worth, and some maturity of 
years (aged thirty ?), so the king lived apparently well with 
her for the most part." Katherine narrowly escaped the 
martyrdom of royalty, which most of the former queens of 
Henry had suffered. Her mother had bestowed on her a 
learned education, and taught her from her infancy to in- 
quire into the principles of religion. Her fine parts and 
great application enabled her to make improvements equal to 
her opportunities. Her piety, humility, and love of wisdom, 
rather increased with the increase of dignity, and she became 
in all respects a pattern to her subjects. 3 She was a stout 
favourer of the gospel, and the Protestant cause, and could 
not help arguing with the king, — what he could never bear, 
especially in matters of religion, in which he thought every 

1 See the curious history of this transaction, ante pp. $9— 93. 

2 Herbert's Life of Henry Till. 

8 " She was a woman of great beauty, adorned with many excellent 
virtues, especially humility — the beauty of all others." — Hat/ward's <k Life of 
Edward TI." 



QUEEN KATHEEINE PAKR. 325 

one should conform to his ideas. He deemed it the highest 
presumption that " Kate should turn doctor, and pretend to 
instruct him ! " She had the courage to contravene the 
memorahle six acts, and the proclamation against the reading 
of forbidden books ; and the Eomanists of the court and 
council began to consider her a formidable enemy, and were 
determined to compass her ruin. By the instigation of 
Bishop Gardiner, articles were drawn up against her, and 
signed by the king ; and her enemies expected only a war- 
rant for carrying her to the tower, from whence, undoubtedly, 
she would have been conveyed to the scaffold, if her adroit- 
ness had not appeased the wrath of her husband. " Some 
believe," says Herbert, " it was not so much the king's in- 
tention herein to use the rigour of the law, as to deter her 
from reading forbidden books. Howsoever, if he were not in 
earnest, it was thought a terrible jest, especially to a queen 
that had the reputation of a virtuous and observant wife." 

" With the tyrant king/' says Nash, " she lived three years, 
six months, and five days ; " but she never was crowned queen. 
Lastly, she was married to Lord Seymour, of Sudley, uncle to 
King Edward VI., and brother to the Lord Protector. 
Latimer sums up Seymour's character in words which look 
like sending him to perdition, saying that he " was furthest 
from the fear of God that ever he knew or heard of in 
England ! " 1 They were first privately married, and were 
alike suspected of deceitful manoeuvres, in order to obtain the 
consent of the Protector and the Privy Council to an open 
marriage, which Katherine feigned to object to. The dowager 
queen lived at that time in Chelsea Palace, and Seymour paid 
her clandestine visits. " When it shall be your pleasure to 
repair hither (says the queen), ye must take some pains to 
come early in the morning, that ye may be gone again by 
seven o'clock, and so I suppose ye may come without suspect. 
I pray you let me have knowledge over-night at what hour 
ye will come, that your porteress may wait at the gate to the 
fields for you." It has been a disputed question as to how 
soon after the death of Henry VIII. the queen was married . 

1 Latimer's Sermons before King Edward. 






326 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHED 

to Seymour. Fronde says within two months ; and " the in- 
decorous haste had nearly added a fresh difficulty in the 
succession to the crown." l The queen died within a very few 
days after the birth of the child (a daughter), on the 5th 
September, 1548, and in the Act of Attainder of Lord 
mour, it is imputed to him that " he had holpen her to her 
end." But Fronde, arguing by inference of character, considers 
this allegation unfounded. Seymour, he thinks, had greater 
interest in the queen's life than in her death, and from this 
circumstance he concludes that she died a natural death. The 
child was christened Mary, and there is considerable uncer- 
tainty as to her life and destiny. The only thing quite certain 
is that, if she long survived her royal mother, she lived without 
state ; for an Act of Parliament was passed in 1549 "for dis- 
inheriting Mary Seymour, daughter and heir of the late I 
Sudley, Admiral of England, and the late Queen.*' Thi~ 
of disinheritance must have been one of the consequent 
her father's (treasonable t) conduct against the Lord Protector, 
for which Seymour was beheaded on Tower Hill, March 20th, 
1549 ; and a most vindictive thing on the part of SOM 
against an infant yet without speech, who could have done him 
no despite. Mi— Agnee Strickland follows the mention of the 
act of disinheritance, referred to above, by allusion to an act 
"for the restitution of Mary Seymour, passed in January, 
1549." But there must be an error here, either in fact or 
date ; for the " restitution " spoken of is prior to the attainder 
of Lord Seymour ; and moreover, the Marquis of "North- 
ampton, uncle of the " destitute " child (who obtained Sudley 
on Lord Seymour's attainder), is found in the enjoyment of 
Sudley Castle long after this reported act of restitution, 
making no provision for the orphan child, his niece. 

The queen was buried in the interior of the little church of 
Sudley, and the funeral solemnized according to Protestant 
rites, or, more strictly speaking, according to a transition rite 

1 " You married the late queen so soon after the king's death, that if she 
had conceived straight after, it should have been accounted a great doubt 
whether the child born should have been the late king's or yours, whereby a 
marvellous danger might have ensued to the quiet of the realm." — A rtl 
Impeachment against Lord Seymour. 



QUEEN KATHERINE PARR. 327 

between Papal and Protestant ; for Bishop Coverdale, who 
preached the sermon, had to make an apology for the 
presence of the alms-box and the candles, saying that the 
" offering was not done to benefit the dead, but for the poor 
only ;" and the lights, which stood about the corpse, " were 
for the honour of the person, and none other intent, nor 
purpose." Lady Jane Grey officiated as chief mourner on 
the occasion. 

Strype has given us an epitaph, written by the Queen's 
chaplain, Dr. Parkhurst, afterwards Bishop of Norwich, which 
perhaps was engraved on the monument erected for her at 
Sudley. It is Englished thus, — 

In this new tomb the royal Katharine lies, 

Flower of her sex, renowned, great, and wise ; 

A wife by every nuptial virtue known, 

And faithful partner once of Henry's throne. 

To Seymour next her plighted hand she yields ; 

(Seymour who Neptune's trident justly wields;) 

From him a beauteous daughter bless'd her arms, 

An infant copy of her parent's charms. * 

When now seven days this tender flower had bloom'd, 

Heaven in its wrath the mother's soul resum'd. 

Great Kathrine's merit in our grief appears, 

While fair Britannia dews her cheek with tears, 

Our loyal breasts with rising sighs are torn, 

"With saints she triumphs — we with mortals mourn. 

Queen Katherine Parr was not only a patron of learning, 
but was herself a w 7 ell-informed author ; and wrote many 
letters, prayers, and pious meditations, both in. Latin and 
English. 1 Dr. Nash quotes one prayer of hers, written during 
the king's expedition in the French war, which he says, 
" breathes the true spirit of humanity and Christianity, and 
seems preferable to the prayer directed by our liturgy to be 
used in time of war." It runs thus, — 

" O Almighty Kinge, and Lorde of hostes ! which, by thy 
angells thereunto appointed, doest minister both warre and 

1 She published, "The Lamentations of a Sinner." Also, a volume of 
"Prayers and Meditations," collected, as it is expressed in the title, " out of 
holy woorks." Some of those, by the queen, were re-published in a volume 
entitled w The Lady's Monitor." 



328 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

peace ; and which diddest give unto David both courage 
and strength, being but a little one, unarmed, and unexpert 
in feats of warre, with his slinge to sette uppon and over- 
throwe the great huge Goliath ; our cause being just, and 
being enforsed to entre into warre and battaile, we most 
humbly beseche thee, Lord God of hostes, sooe to turn the 
hearts of our enemyes to the desire of peace that no Christian 
bloud be spilt ; or els graunt, Lorde, that, with small 
effusion of bloud, and to the little hurt and dommage of inno- 
centes, we may, to thy glory, obtayne victory ; and that, the 
warres being soone ended, we may all with one heart and 
minde knitte together in Concorde and unitie, laude, and 
prayse thee, which livest and reignest world without end. 
Amen." 

"In the summer of the year 1782, the earth in which 
Qu. K. Par lay inter'd was removed, and at two feet, or little 
more, her leaden coffin or chest was found quite whole, and 
on the lid appeared an inscription, of which the following is a 
copy :— 

  K. P.* 

vi th and last wife of King Hen. th VIII th 

1548.' 

11 Mr. John Lucas (who occupied the land of Lord Pavers), 
had the curiosity to rip up the top of the coffin, expecting to 
discover within it only the bones of the deced, but to his 
great surprize found the whole body wrap'd in 6 or 7 seer 
cloths of Linnen entire and uncorrupted, altho' it lain there 
upwards of 230 years. His unwarrantable curiosity led him 
also to make an incision through the seer cloths which covered 
one of the Arms of the Corps, the flesh of which at that 
time was white and moist, I was very much displeased 
at the forwardness of Lucas who of his own head operid the 
coffin." » 

A stone slab was afterwards placed over the grave to 
prevent any future improper inspection. 

In the " Archaeologia," vol. V., there is a fine engraving of 
Queen Katherine's great seal, representing the armorial 

1 From " Notes and Queries," by J. R. Brockett. 



QUEEN KATHERINE PAKE. 329 

ensigns of this lady, with supporters. It is encircled with 
the inscription, " Magnum sigillu Dne Katharine Kegi^e 
Aglle, Francis et Hibeeni^." It contains quartering^ 
of Parr, Boos (of Kendal), Marmton, Fitzhugh, and Green 
(Dame Maud's three bucks at gaze, for the last), together with 
the augmentation granted to Katherine by Henry VIII. 
With regard to this augmentation, it is observed by J. C. 
Brooke, Heralds' College, that " the king was exceeding kind 
in giving arms to his wives, though he deprived them of 
their heads" 

In summing up the life of Katherine Parr, it may be 
observed, that she was especially an instrument in the hand 
of God, suited to the great work first set in motion by her — 
the Eefoemation. She had naturally a mind of great 
capacity, which had been early well grounded, under the 
direction of a devoted mother. She passed through many 
vicissitudes of life, and had numerous secret sorrows, even 
before the time when she came to realize the proverb, 
" uneasy lies the head that wears a crown." If these trials 
were sent to chasten, they produced that result. Finding 
very little of truth and goodness on earth, she turned her 
thoughts towards Him who judges with his truth, who is 
the Giver of all good. The light that now beamed in her 
soul became intensified at the critical time when Henry had 
been fairly sated with pleasure and power, and when the 
spectre of death flitted across his vision. Some of the re- 
flected rays of that light fell on the sinking heart of the king, 
— that heart of stone which had hitherto resisted all influences, 
both moral and spiritual. His previous rejection of the 
Pope's supremacy was an act of temper. His suppression 
of the religious houses was an act of rapacity. But it is 
possible, that his latest acts, licensing a translation of the 
Scriptures, and so forth, influenced by the delicate and dis- 
creet counsels of Katherine, were the result of faint suggestions 
of principle, self-accusation, and secret acknowledgment of 
errors which he did not care any longer to tolerate. Kathe- 
rine's enlightened principles, religious convictions, and pious 
example, would, moreover, impress the court, and all the 
court's attendants ; and in this way, the cause of the Keforma- 




330 BIOGEAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

tion must have been effectually advanced. She had taken 
Gardiner in his own foils, and he who had no mercy for 
others was now in her power, who was truly merciful. 
She had a party round her impressed, like herself, with 
sentiments of religious toleration ; and that liberty of con- 
science, she so highly prized, allowed Gardiner and his co- 
conspirators to escape the penalty of their last signal crime. 
Contemporary records are too scanty to be able to shew to 
posterity all the particular acts and benefits that Katherine 
conferred on the cause of true religion, and the dawning prin- 
ciples of the Eeformation ; and this is the reason, no doubt, 
why her memory has been so insufficiently esteemed. We 
agree with part of the concluding words of Miss Agnes 
Strickland, in her Memoir, that " some grateful respect is due, 
in the shape of a national monument, to the memory of this 
illustrious English-born Queen," who may be called the 
nursing mother of the English Eeformation ! 



WILLIAM PAER, MARQUIS OF NORTHAMPTON. 

William Parr, son and heir of Sir Thomas, and brother of 
Queen Katherine, was born at Kendal Castle, in 1515. His 
father died, as appears by the proving of his will, when 
William was four years old. We have been unable to find 
any particulars of his infancy or youth. He succeeded to the 
barony and manor of Kendal. In the 30th Henry VIII. 
(1539), he was created Lord Parr and Boos, of Kendal ; and 
in 1543, Baron of Hart, in Northamptonshire, " to him and 
his heirs male." He was three times married. His first wife 
was Anne, only child and heir of Henry Bourchier, Earl of 
Essex, in right of whom he was, in 1543, honoured with the 
title of Earl of Essex. They were married in 1541 ; and this 
proved a very unhappy match. The Lady Anne having been 
found guilty of incontinence, an act was passed (after a lengthy 
discussion in Parliament), in 1551, for disannuling their 
marriage, and ratifying his union with Elizabeth, daughter of 
George Brook, Lord Cobham, and legitimating their issue. On 
the 17th of February, 1547, he was advanced to the further title 
of Marquis of Northampton, which caused the fourth part of 



WILLIAM PARE. 331 

the barony of Kendal to be called the Marquis fee. In the 
first year of Philip and Mary, 1554, he was attainted of treason, 
for espousing Lady Jane Grey's interest, with Dudley, Earl 
of Northumberland, for which his estates were forfeited. 
However, in the next year, he was restored in blood by Act 
of Parliament, but not to his honours, and to only part of his 
estates. By a charter bearing date Jan. 8th, in the 2d Philip 
and Mary, the said king and queen grant to William Parr, the 
whole demesne, manor, castle, and park of Kendal, parcel of 
the possessions of Thomas Parr, Knight, father of the said 
William Parr, late Marquis of Northampton. And all those 
free rents of the free tenants of the fourth part of the barony 
of Kendal, parcel of the possessions aforesaid. And all those 
demesne lands without the walls of the said park of Kendal, 
and the mill and burgages in the vill or burgh aforesaid, 
parcel of the said manor of Kendal. And all those improve- 
ment rents, as well nigh Kendal as in the country, extending 
to the clear yearly value of 50s. 5d. Also, the tallage, 
market, fairs, toll, stallage, weights and measures in Kendal, 
demised to Christopher Sadler. And also, Cargo in Cumber- 
land (with divers other possessions elsewhere), parcel of the 
possessions aforesaid. To hold to him the said William, late 
Marquis of Northampton, and the heirs of his body lawfully 
begotten, of the king and queen in capite, by the service of 
one knight's fee. 

In 1559, Queen Elizabeth, "for favouring the Protestant 
religion," 1 granted him all his honours and former possessions, 
including the lordships of this town, and he kept court here 
in 1561. He married to his last wife, Helen or Helena, 
daughter of Wolfangus Suavendurg, a Swede, who survived 
him. In consequence of the divorce of his wife Anne — by 
whom only of his three wives he had children — he died, 
without legitimate issue, in 1571. Bishop Parkhurst 
(Bishop of Norwich), writing to Henry Bullinger, speaks of 
this Swedish lady as " very beautiful," and the Bishop was a 
friend of the family ; for he had by his own testimony been 
chaplain to Katherine Parr. He says, "The Marquis of 

1 Lloyd's State Worthies. 






332 B10GEAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

Northampton (brother of Queen Katherine, ray most gentle 
mistress, whom I attended as chaplain twenty-three years since) 
died about the beginning of August (1571). [He does not 
say where he died.] "When I was in London he married a 
very beautiful German girl, who remained in the Queen's 
Court, &c. Our Marquis was sixty years old, and I believe 
much more." 1 If our dates be correct, the Bishop was rather 
out in his calculations as to c our Marquis's ' age : he was only 
fifty-six when he died. He was buried at the upper end of the 
quire of the collegiate church in Warwick. Sir William 
Dugdale says, his body was dug up in the reign of King 
James I. to make room for the burial of an ordinary gentle- 
woman. It was found perfect, with the skin entire, dried to 
the bones ; with rosemary and bays lying in the coffin, fresh 
and green. All which were so preserved by the dryness of 
the ground wherein they lay, it being above the arches of that 
fair vault which is under the quire, and of a sandy condition 
mixed with rubbish of lime. He says, all this was related to 
him by those who were eye-witnesses thereof. 2 

The delight of the Marquis was musick and poetry, 
and his exercise war ; being a happy composure of the 
hardest and softest discipline, equally made for court and 
camp, for delight and honour. But his skill in the field 
answered not his industry, nor his success his skill. King 
Edward called him his 'honest uncle,' and king Henry 'his 
integrity ! ' Active men were recommended by him to Henry's 
busy occasions, and virtuous men to Edward's pious inclina- 
tions. So much solid worth he had, that he had no use of 
ambition ; so much modesty, that he made little use of his 
worth. Mean thoughts he entertained of himself; and as 
mean thoughts did he suggest of himself, by his downcast 
though grave looks, his sparing though pertinent discourse, 
and his submissive though regardful carriage. A sober and 
moderate man may be in fashion once in an age ; and so it was 
with the Marquis of Northampton. He brought up many a 
courtier, yet had not the face to be one himself ; until queen 
Elizabeth, who balanced her council in point of religion in the 
beginning of her reign, as she did her court in point of hit 

1 Zurich Letters Parker Society^ p. 2 - Dugdale Bar. 



RICHARD BRATIIWAITE. 333 

throughout, called him to the council-board first, and then to 
her cabinet, — where none more secret to keep counsel, none 
more faithful to give it, and none more modest to submit. 
A sincere, plain, direct man ; not crafty nor involved. 1 

BARNABY POTTER 

Was born at or near Kendal, in 1578. He was educated in 
Queen's College, Oxford, where he was afterwards elevated to 
the dignity of Provost. He held this situation for ten years, 
when he was chosen chaplain to King James I,, and by his 
interest, his nephew, Christopher Potter, succeeded to the 
provostship. Prom the university he resorted to the court, 
where he at first attended on Prince Charles, and was ac- 
counted the penitential preacher there. When Charles 
ascended the throne (1625), Potter was made Bishop of 
Carlisle, " notwithstanding there were other suitors for it, and 
he ne'er sought for it." He was consecrated at Ely House, 
in Holborn, London ; and being a constant preacher, and a 
devout man in his family, was commonly called " the puri- 
tanical bishop." Puller remarks, that " it was said of him, in 
the time of King James I., that organs would blow him out of 
the church, which I do not believe, the rather because he was 
loving of, and skilful in, vocal musick, and could bear his part 
therein. He was of a weak constitution, melancholy, lean, 
and a hard student/' He died in London, January, 1641, 
and was the last bishop that died a Member of Parliament 
before the Commonwealth ; for, soon after, the rest of the 
bishops were excluded from the House of Peers. He wrote 
and published two volumes of Lectures, and one book of 
Sermons. 



Of Burneside, Esquire, was born in 1588. He was of the 
ancient family of the Brathwaites, of Ambleside, and after- 
wards of Warcop and Burneside. His ancestors, as given by 
Dr. Burn, were, 1. Thomas, 2. Bobert, both of Ambleside, 3. 
Thomas, of Burneshead. He (Thomas) married Dorothy, 

i Lloyd's Worthies, 1670. 



334 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

daughter of Robert Bindloss, of Borwick, Esq. 1 By her he 
had issue, two sons and five daughters. Thomas, the elder 
son, removed to Warcop. Richard, the subject of this memoir, 
remained at Burneshead, and afterwards succeeded to the 
estate, whether by the death of his elder brother, or by some 
act of favouritism, we are left uninformed. It has been 
asserted, in Wood's "Athense Oxoniensis," that our author 
was born at Warcop. If the authority of Burn could be 
doubted, we have the poet's own testimony in favour of 
Burneside being the place of his birth, in some lines addressed 
" To the truely worthy the Alderman of Kendall and his 
brethren." After lamenting the prevalence of drunkenness, 
he says — 

" How happy should I in my wishes be 
If I this vice out of request could see, 
Within that native place tckere I was borne 
It lies in you, dear townsmen, to reforme." 

Again, we have an allusion to this as the place of his nativity, 
in a poem in his "Strappado for the Divel." Addressing 
" the Cottonneers of Kendal," he says — 

" Let me exhort you in respect I am 
Unto you all both friend and countryman 
"Whose ayre I breathed, oh ! I were worthy death 
Not to love them who suckt with me one breath," &c. 

We have no account of his early education. In 1604, at the 
age of sixteen, he was, according to Wood, entered a commoner 
of Oriel College, Oxford, " where he avoided as much as he 
could the rough paths of logic and philosophy, and traced 
those smooth ones of poetry and Boman history, in which at 
length he did excel. Afterwards he removed to Cambridge, 
and then, receding to the north of England, his father 
bestowed on him Barnside," miscalled for Burneside. He 
does not appear, as some of his Editors have asserted, to have 
been a graduate of either University. 

Richard Brathwaite was twice married ; first to Frances, 
daughter of James Lawson, of Xesham, near Darlington, by 

1 This Dorothy had a brother, Sir Eobert Bindloss, knight, who married 
to his second wife Alice Dockwray, of Dockwray Hall, Kendal. 



EICIIAED BEATHWAITE. 335 

whom he had nine children ; and secondly, to Mary, daughter 
of Eoger Croft, of Kirtlington, in Yorkshire. By her he had 
issue Sir Strafford Brathwaite, Knight, who was killed in the 
ship Mary, commanded by Sir Eoger Strickland, in an 
engagement with an Algerine man-of-war. 

It was in 1633 that his first wife died, and in veneration 
of her memory, in the following year, he wrote and published 
"the Anniversaries upon his Panarete:" from which we 
quote only two lines to confirm the place of her nativity : — 

" Near Darlington was my deare darling borne 
Of noble house, which yet beares honour's forme." 

On his second marriage, says Wood, he removed to Apple- 
ton, near Eichmond, in Yorkshire, where he died on the 4th 
of May, 1 673, and was buried in the parish church of Cat- 
terick, near that place, " leaving behind him the character of a 
well-bred gentleman and a good neighbour." The following 
is the epitaph on his tomb : — 

Juxta sitae sunt 

Eicardi Brathwait 

de Burneshead in comitatu 

AVestmorlandias armigeri, et 

Marise ejus conjugis reliquiae. 

Ille quarto die Maii Anno 1673 

denatus est : Hsec undecimo Aprilis 1681 

supremum diem obiit. Horum films 

unicus, Strafford Brathwait eques 

auratus, adversus Mauros christiani 

nominis hostes infestissimos fortiter 

dimicans, occubuit : Cujus cineres 

Tingi in Mauritania Tingitana 

humantur. 

Requiescant in pace. 

Eichard Brathwaite must have possessed great versatility of 
talent, for we find even at the present day various works of his 
in verse and prose. 1 The only work, however, which is known 
to the general reader of the present day is "Barnaby's 
Journal." This poem, in Latin and English, both evidently 
proceeding from the same pen, had passed through six 
editions from the time of its first publication until the year 
1818, a lapse of two centuries, and no correct traces had been 

1 We have in our own possession, four works by this Author. 



336 BTOGEAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

discovered of the author. The hypothesis that obtained the 
greatest share of credit, during this long interval, was that the 
writer's name was Barnaby Harrington. This supposition 
was founded and supported solely on the following couplet in 
the Itinerary : 

" Thence to Harrington, be it spoken ! 
For name-sake I gave a token," &c. 

The Editor of the 7th edition, in an able dissertation, over- 
turns the hypothesis, and contends that the equivoque can 
be construed to imply nothing more than that the itinerant 
simply gave the beggar a harrington — a local token, about 
the value of a farthing, at that time in circulation. 1 The 
Editor of this edition adduces so many proofs in favour of 
Richard Brathwaite being the author of " Barnaby's Journal," 
by parallel passages and striking coincidences which occur in 
the works published under the real name of Brathwaite, and 
that of the fictitious Barnaby, that we think a doubt can no 
longer remain on the subject. We have room only to cite one 
or two of these coincidences : 

" Upon the Errata, in the Strappado for the Divel. Bv 
Richard Brathwaite. Know, judicious disposed gentlemen, 
that the intricacie of the copie and the absence of the 
author from many important proofes were occasions of these 
errors, &c. 

" Upon the Errata, in Barnaby 's Journal. Truth is, 
gentlemen, you are to impute the errors to the absence of 
the author," &c. 

" Upon the Errata" occurs also in Brathwaite's English 
Gentlewoman, 1631; and again, in his "Essays upon the 
Five Senses," 1635 : — 

" Once in the year laughs wise Appollo.'' 

Barnaby, p. 169. 

** Once in the year Appollo laughes." 

Brathwaite's English Gentleman, p. 174. 



1 The " harrington " token was issued by John, created (,in 1603) Baron 
Harrington, under a patent granted by King James I. for that purpose. 



EICHARD BRATHWAITE. 337 

Among the poems printed with the "Strappado/' is one 
inscribed to " the Worshipful Eecorder of Kendal," where it 
is said " my journey's at an end ; " and, as observes his last 
Editor, if these words may not be applied to one of the first 
two parts of the Itinerary, they have scarcely any meaning. 
The first part concludes at Staveley : 

"Where I'll stay and end my journay, 
Till brave Barnaby returne-a." 

The third Journal terminates at Kendal, with the following 
verse : 

" Thence to Kendall, pure her state is, 
Prudent too her magistrate is ; 
In whose charter to them granted 
Nothing but a Mayor wanted : 
Here it likes me to be dwelling, 
Bousing, loving, stories telling." 

To this allusion of a Mayor being wanted, there is, in the 
original edition, a couplet appended, by way of note : 

" Now Saturn's year has drench' d down care, 
And made an Alderman a May'r ! " 

This proves the time when the Itinerary was written, viz. 
between the Corporation grant in the 18th of Elizabeth and 
that in the 11th Charles I. 

In an early edition of Barnaby's Journal, at Dallam Tower, 
there is an ancient minute, in the handwriting of one of the 
Wilsons, of that place, which states that the writer knew the 
author of that book to be Eichard Brathwaite, of Burnes- 
head, commonly called Dapper Dick. At Dodding Green 
there is a portrait of Dapper Dick, supposed to be an 
original. 

The author of 'Drunken Barnaby' is inferior to none 
in vivacity, in wit, or in erudition ; and he is evidently, sub 
persona, a drunkard merely in masquerade. 

Besides the books above noticed, Brathwaite wrote the 
" Lives of the Boman Emperors," and two works in dramatic 
form, but these were never put on the stage. They were 
"Mercurius Britannicus, or the English Intelligencer," 1641 ; 
and"Begicidum," 1665. 



338 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

CHEISTOPHEE POTTER, D.D., 

Nephew of Barnaby Potter, was educated at Queen's College, 
Oxford, where he became Fellow, and, as we before said, 
Provost. He was accounted an Arminian, and was in high 
favour with Archbishop Laud. He was made chaplain 
to King Charles I. in 1635, and afterwards Dean of Wor- 
cester ; he was also nominated to a canonry of Windsor, and 
the deanery of Durham, but never enjoyed them, on account 
of the dissensions between King and Parliament. He was 
a very religious and exemplary man, learned in general, and 
a champion against popery. "He wrote," says Fuller, "an 
excellent book, entitled ' Charity Mistaken,' containing im- 
pregnable truth, so that malice may snarl at but not bite it 
without breaking its own teeth. Yet a railing Jesuit wrote 
a pretended confutation of it, to which the doctor made no 
return, partly because the industrious bee would not meddle 
with a wasp or hornet, and partly because a great master 
in school divinity, Mr. Chilling worth, took up the cudgels 
against him." 

Christopher Potter was a devout admirer and partizan of 
the learned Henry Airay, of Kentmere, in this county ; after 
whose death Potter edited and published two of his works, at 
that time highly popular. 

He died in Queen's College, March 3d, 1645-6, and was 
buried in the middle of the inner chapeL 

" He was a person esteemed by all that knew him to be 
learned, religious, exemplary in his behaviour and discourse ; 
courteous in his carriage, and of a sweet and obliging nature 
and comely presence." x 

SIR GEORGE WHARTON 

Was born at or near Kendal, on the 4th of April, 1617. 
We find the particulars of his life and writings in Wood's 
" Athenae Oxoniensis." He was descended from a genteel and 
ancient Westmorland family, richly possessed with lands 
and inheritance. He spent some time in the condition of a 
sojourner, in Oxford, 1633, where his natural genius leading 

1 Wood's <; Athen?e Oxoniensis." 






SIR GEOEGE WHARTON. 339 

him to astronomy and mathematics, he almost entirely 
neglected logic and philosophy ; and retired to his patrimony 
" to pursue his more favourite study. By the fictitious title 
of George JSTaworth, an anagram of his name, he published 
Almanacks. But, being discontented at the then growing 
rebellion, he turned all his inheritance into money, espoused 
his majesty's cause and interest, and raised a gallant troop 
of horse therewith. After several generous hazards of his 
person in battle, he was at last totally routed by the rebellious 
party in Gloucestershire, where he received several scars of 
honour, which he carried to his grave. Afterwards he retired 
to Oxford, where his majesty (King. Charles) was then re- 
siding, and in recompense for his losses, had an employment 
conferred on him as sub-paymaster of the artillery. At 
leisure hours he still followed his studies, and was entered a 
student of Queen's College, where he might have had the 
degree of M.A. conferred on him, but he neglected it. After 
the surrender of the garrison of Oxford, at which time the 
King's cause daily declined, our author, Wharton, was put to 
his shifts, and lived as opportunity served, went to the great 
city, lived as privately as he could, and wrote several small 
works, both in prose and verse, for a livelihood. But they 
giving offence to the Protector and his adherents, then in 
power, he was several times imprisoned ; in which sufferings 
he found a friend in Lilly, his former antagonist. After 
the Bestoration, he became treasurer and paymaster to the 
Ordnance, repaid Lilly his courtesy, and was finally, for his 
signal services during the reigns of Charles I. and II., created 
a baronet, by patent, dated 31st of December, 1677. Sir 
George was always esteemed the best astrologer that wrote 
the Ephemerides of his time ; and went beyond Lilly and 
Booker, the idols of the vulgar. He was a constant and 
thorough-paced loyalist ; a boon companion ; a witty, droll, 
and waggish poet. He wrote, besides his Hemeroscopions, or 
Almanacks, nineteen different astrological and chronological 
works. 

He died in Middlesex, August 10th, 1681, and was buried 
in the chapel of the Tower, in London. One of his de- 
scendants was dignified by the title of Earl of Wharton, and 

z2 






340 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

was made Lord Privy Seal, and of his majesty's Privy Council 
in the reign of George I. Another was created a Duke, whom 
Pope raised to a " bad eminence " in his Essay on Man. 

EPHEAIM CHAMBERS. 

Ephraim Chambers, author of the first Cyclopaedia, was the 
youngest of three brothers. He was born at Milton, near 
Heversham, Westmorland. His parents occupied a small 
farm there, and spent a harmless and unambitious life. 
They were dissenters, but not quakers, as has been affirmed ; 
neither were any of their children educated as quakers. He 
received a good classical education, partly at Heversham, and 
afterwards at Kendal grammar school, and laid a suitable 
foundation for those studies which afterwards distinguished 
him. 1 For a second son, Oxford University was too much for 
the means of the father, who, dissenter as he was, had sent 
his eldest son to study on the banks of Isis. All he could 
do for Ephraim was to apprentice him to a trade of some 
little scientific pretensions. Accordingly, he was indentured 
to " Mr. Senex, the globe maker," who lived and did business 
at the "Globe against St. Dunstan's Church," Fleet-street, 
London. There was considerable drudgery connected with 
Ephraim's duties in this business, which were very little to 
his taste ; but, fortunately, the master, Senex, had connexions 
with literature generally, and he found out that his apprentice's 
scientific habits could be made subservient to his interests, 
and he accordingly employed him with head and pen. It 
was behind the counter of Senex's shop, in Fleet-street, that 
Ephraim Chambers formed the idea of a great Cyclopaedia of 
the Arts and Sciences, an original notion then. Scientific 
knowledge had accumulated ; Boyle and others had written 
and experimented ; Sir Isaac Newton was alive, and honoured, 
while Chambers stood or sat behind the counter of Mr. Senex, 

1 "If schoolmasters may properly be allowed to participate in the honours 
of those whom they have educated, the greatest honour of my father's life 
will be the education of Ephraim Chambers. I have seen, among my father's 
papers, two school exercises, one in Latin, the other in Greek, signed ' Chambers. 
These circumstances render it probable, that the author of the Dictionary was 
not, as has been said of him, merely educated to qualify him for trade and 
commerce." — Bishop Watson's "Anecdotes of his own Life." 



EPHRAIM CHAMBERS. 341 

devoting his leisure hours to the arts, the sciences, and the 
languages. But, how much valuable knowledge, Ephraim 
thought, was scattered through hundreds of volumes which 
might be brought together in one big book, to the delight of 
the general reading public. At the beginning of the century- 
something of the kind had been done in a small way, the 
" Lexicon Technicum " of Dr. John Harris, a scientific man, 
who "read public lectures on mathematics, at the Marine 
Coffee-house in Birchin-lane ; " for, the diffusion of useful 
knowledge did not entirely originate with the nineteenth 
century, in which we have the honour and the happiness to live. 
Harris's " Lexicon Technicum ; or, an Historical English 
Dictionary of Arts and Sciences," compiled for the book- 
sellers, and published by subscription, in 1704, met with 
-considerable success, though its plan and scope were nothing 
to those of Chambers's book. Eevolving the idea behind the 
counter of the Fleet-street shop, Chambers, at last, broached 
the matter to the publishers (Longmans), who took it up, and 
on the counter itself were written some of its earlier articles. 
Ephraim Chambers received encouragement, and something 
more solid, from the London publishers ; to such an extent, 
indeed, that he could retire from the Globe in Fleet-street to 
quiet chambers in Gray's-inn-lane, where he wore out the 
rest of his life over his Dictionary : a work which, for those 
days, even deserves the designation of " great." It was pub- 
lished by subscription, in 1728, in two volumes, folio, at four 
guineas, and with a numerous list of subscribers. 1 And there 
were liberal publishers, too, before our own age ; for the 
" undertakers," delighted with the unexpected success of the 
work, presented Ephraim with a free gift of 500Z. Thomas 
Longman and his partner's property in the Dictionary was 
not large at first — not more, we believe, than a single sixty- 
fourth share of the whole — and for it they paid about 501 
But Thomas Longman, during his partner's life and after his 
partner's death, kept buying up shares (though " sellers were 

1 There is a copy of the 6th edition of this work, in two vols., in the 
library of the Kendal Literary and Scientific Society ; and also a copy of the 
7th edition, in four vols, (including two supplementary vols.), in a small 
library belonging to the Free Grammar School of Kendal. 









342 BIOGEAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

shy," as the Trade reports say), until, in the year 1740, he 
figures in the books of the Stationers' Company as the owner 
of eleven out of the sixty-four; a number larger than that 
held by any proprietor. Thomas Longman liked the book, 
and liked its compiler, working away in his Gray's-inn 
chambers, "very cheerful, but hasty and impetuous," not 
talking orthodoxy ; for if Samuel Johnson formed his style, 
he did not form his religious creed, on that of the West- 
morland dissenter. Chambers kept little company and no 
table. An intimate friend, who called on him one morning, 
was asked by him to stay and dine. "And what will you give 
me, Ephraim ?" said the gentleman. " I dare engage you have 
nothing for dinner." To which Mr. Chambers calmly replied : 
" Yes, I have a fritter ; and if you'll stay with me, I'll have 
two." Although he lived (metaphorically) in Grub-street, in 
his last will he declared that " he owed no debts excepting to 
his tailor for his roquelaure." He died on the 15th May, 
1740, after a sickness brought on by over work. In the five 
years alone, between 1728 and 1733, his amanuensis, a Mr. 
Airey, recorded, that, for his employer, " during that time, he 
had copied nearly twenty folio volumes, so large as to com- 
prehend materials, if they had been published, for printing 
thirty volumes of the same size as the Cyclopaedia. 

He was buried in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey ; and 
in the epitaph, written by himself and placed there, he says 
(autobiographically) : " Multis pervulgatus, paucis notus ; qui 
vitam, inter lucem et umbram, nee eruditus, nee idiota, Uteris 
deditus transegit," 

To the Gentleman's Magazine, for September, 1758, a cor- 
respondent " M. " contributed some particulars respecting 
Ephraim Chambers, and in the memoir occurs the following 
passage : — " It has been hinted that Mr. Chambers was not 
treated in the most liberal manner by the booksellers with 
whom he was concerned ; but this was far from being the case, 
as he experienced the most generous treatment from them. 
Mr. Longman, in particular, used him with the liberality of a 
prince, and the tenderness of a father ; his house was ever 
open to receive him, and when he was there nothing could 
exceed his care and anxiety over him ; even his natural 



JOHN WILSON. 343 

absence of mind was consulted, and during his illness, jellies 
and other proper refreshments were industriously left for him 
at those places where it was least likely he should avoid 
seeing them." Ephraim had basked in the smiles of royalty, 
both English and French; but "the liberality of a prince" 
he experienced only from the bookseller of Paternoster-row. 
The first edition of this Dictionary "was dedicated to his 
Majesty," King George II., "and Mr. Chambers had the 
honour of presenting copies of the work, in very elegant 
bindings, to the King and Queen, which produced him the 
smile of regal approbation," but nothing else. 

The book passed through five editions in the space of 
eighteen years ; a sufficient proof of its merits and popularity, 
the first edition, as before mentioned, appearing in 1728. 
During his last illness, when he was in France, vainly seeking 
for the recovery of his health, " he received an intimation," we 
are told, " that if he would publish a new edition there, and 
dedicate it to Louis XV., he would be liberally rewarded ; 
but these proposals his British heart received with disdain, 
and he rejected the teazing solicitation of men who were pro- 
voking him to a sordid retractation of the compliments he had 
paid to his lawful sovereign." Chambers owed nothing to 
kings ; what little he did owe (beyond the roquelaure to 
his tailor), he owed to Thomas Longman, whose interest in 
him did not cease with his death. 1 

JOHN WILSON, 

Or, as he was more commonly called, " Black Jack," author of 
a Synopsis of British Plants, in Bay's method, was a journey- 
man shoemaker of Kendal. He was the first who attempted a 
systematic arrangement, in the English language, of the in- 
digenous plants of Great Britain. He may be ranked among 
those who, without the advantages of a liberal education, 
have distinguished themselves from the mass of mankind by 
their scientific and literary accomplishments. He exchanged 
his first calling for the more lucrative employment of a baker. 
This business was principally managed by his wife, and thus 
he had leisure for pursuing his researches as a naturalist. 

1 "Life of Thomas Longman." 



344 BIOGEAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

The profits of this new business being considerable, afforded 
his family conveniences of life very superior to what have 
been represented by the author of British Topography. It 
was no easy matter to acquire the reputation of an accurate 
botanist, at a time when Linnaeus' admirable method of dis- 
criminating species had not given the science its most essen- 
tial improvement. But the subject of the present memoir, by 
a perseverance which, when stimulated by the love of know- 
ledge, often triumphs over every obstacle, overcame the 
difficulties inseparable from the enterprise, and justly obtained 
that character, from the intimate acquaintance which he 
proved himself to possess with the vegetable productions of 
the north of England. There is, however, good reason to 
believe, that he was not entirely self-taught ; for, under the 
article gentiana, he (accidentally) mentions his intercourse 
with Mr. Fitz-Eoberts, who resided at the Gill, near Kendal, 
and who was known to both Pettiver and Bay. The name of 
Fitz-Eoberts occurs in the Synopsis of the latter naturalist. 
Wilson's Synopsis was published in the year ] 744. It com- 
prehends that part of Eay's method which treats of the more 
perfect herbs, beginning at the fourth genus, and ending with 
the twenty-sixth. He promises, in the preface, to complete 
the work at a future period, but did not live to fulfil his 
promise. After lingering in a state of debility, which ren- 
dered him unfit for mental or bodily fatigue, for three or four 
years, he died July 15th, 1751. Many anecdotes are told of 
the singularities of his character and conversation. His dis- 
course abounded with remarks both pertinent and original. 
Being once in the county of Durham, he was introduced to a 
person who piqued himself highly on his cultivation of rare 
plants, and would show Wilson through his garden, animad- 
verting, in a high tone, on the list of rarities before them, and 
referring to authors where they were described. Wilson, in 
his turn, plucked a wild herb growing in a neglected spot, and 
presented it to his host, who endeavoured to get clear of the 
difficulty of classing it by pronouncing it a weed ; but Wilson 
immediately replied, " a weed is a term of art, not a produc- 
tion of nature ; " adding, " your explanation proves you to be 
a gardener, not a botanist," 



WILLIAM HUDSON. 345 

He was peculiarly remarkable for his eccentricities, which, 
in a literal sense, attended him to the grave ; for his last 
short walk was to the churchyard, where, addressing the 
sexton, and pointing to an unseemly puddle, he made this 
whimsical request : " If I have done but little good during 
life, I desire to be of use after death ; let my body fill up this 
hole." The petition was strictly observed, and the remains of 
the celebrated botanist were deposited in the puddle. 

He lectured on Natural History at different towns in the 
north of England. 

WILLIAM HUDSON, F.E.S., 

Author of "Flora Anglica," and other works, was born at 
the White Lion Inn, in Kendal (about the year 1730), then 
kept by his father. He received his education at the grammar 
school of his native town, under the tuition of the then 
master, Mr. Towers, who was reputed an able teacher, and of 
considerable attainments in classical literature. Hudson was 
removed to London in early youth, where he served an ap- 
prenticeship to an apothecary, and spent the remainder of his 
life. It appears that he had turned his attention to the 
science of botany when very young, for, during his apprentice- 
ship he obtained the prize which was annually given at 
Apothecaries' Hall, to the apprentice who should appear to 
have attained the greatest proficiency in the knowledge of 
plants. This prize was a copy of " Eay's Synopsis." The publi- 
cation of his "Flora Anglica," in 1672, which was received 
with approbation, is said to have contributed, principally, to 
the introduction of the Linngean system of botany into England. 
He did not, however, confine his attention entirely to botany, 
but extended his researches to different branches of Natural 
History, more especially to insects and shells. In the latter 
order he discovered, in the mountains of Cumberland, a new 
species, viz., the Trochus terrestris, which he communicated to 
to Mr. Pennant, by whom it was figured in the fourth volume 
of the " British Zoology." 1 In 1783, when the house was burnt 

1 More recent knowledge of land-shells has cast a doubt upon Trochus terres- 
tris being a distinct species. The young shells of Pupa bulimus and Clausilia 
are more or less of a trochiform type. These immature forms were apt to be 
taken by the older conchologists for Trochi. 



346 BIOGKAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

in which he lodged, he had the great misfortune to lose his 
cabinet of insects, and the greatest part of his herbarium. 
He retired from business after this misfortune, and died of a 
paralytic stroke in May, 1793. 

THOMAS SHAW, D.D., 

Was the son of Gabriel Shaw, a shearman-dyer. He was 
born at Kendal, in 1693, and was educated at the grammar 
school there. In 1711, he was admitted at Queen's College, 
Oxford. He received the degree of B.A. in 1716, and of M.A. 
in 1719. He was afterwards ordained, and appointed chaplain 
to the English Factory at Algiers. There he remained for 
several years, and thence travelled into various parts of the 
East. When he was absent, in 1727, he was chosen a Fellow 
of his college, and after his return became Doctor of Divinity, 
in 1734. In that year he was also elected a Fellow of the 
Eoyal Society in London. In 1738, he published the first 
edition of his " Travels in Barbary and the Levant," a work 
which, not only for its accuracy and fidelity, but on account 
of the illustrations it contains of natural history, of the classic 
authors, and especially of the Scriptures, 1 holds a distinguished 
place amongst the literary productions of this country. The 
first edition of his Travels was published at Oxford, in folio. 
They were translated into French, and printed in 4to., in 
1743, with several notes and emendations communicated by 
the Author. The second edition, with two supplements 
supplied by the Doctor shortly before his death, was published 
in 1757. Both editions, but especially the latter, sold at a 
high price, and having become extremely scarce, a third was 
published in Edinburgh, in 1808. He presented the L T niversity 
with some natural curiosities, ancient coins., and busts, which 
he had collected during his travels. Three of the last of these 
are engraved in the "Marmora Oxoniensis/' In 1740, Dr. 
Shaw was nominated, by his college, Principal of Edmund 
Hall ; and was Begius Professor of Greek till 1751, when 
death put a stop to his labours. 

He died in high reputation for knowledge, probity, and 

1 Editor of the 3rd edition of his Travels. 



THOMAS SHAW. 347 

pleasantry. His countenance was grotesque, but marked 
most strongly with jocularity and good humour, so as to 
diffuse into the company of his friends the full effects of his 
innocent and instructive mirth. 1 

On his monument, in Bromley church, is an epitaph, written 
by Dr. Brown, Provost of Queen's College, Oxford, of which 
the following is a copy : — 

Peregrinationibus variis 

Per Europam, Africam, Asiamque, 

Feliciter absolutis, 

Et exuviis mortalibus hie loci 

Tandem depositis, 

Ccelestem in patriam remigravit 

THOMAS SHAW, S.T.P. et R.S.S. 

Gabrielis Fil. Kendaliensis : 

Qui 

Consulibus Anglicis apud Algerenses 

Primum erat a Sacris ; 

Mox Coll. Reginae inter Socios ascriptus, 

Aulas dein Sancti Edmundi Principalis, 

Ac ejusdem munificus Instaurator ; 

Linguae demum Grsecae apud Oxonienses 

Professor Regius. 

De Literis quantum meruit Auctor celebratus, 

Edita usque testabuntur Opera, 

Pyramidibus ipsis, quas penitius inspexerat, 

Perenniora forsan extitura. 

Hie, Studiis etsi severioribus 

Indies occupatus, 
Horis tamen subsecivis emicuit 
Eruditus idem et facetus conviva. 

Optima quanquam Mentis indole 

Et multiplici Scientia instructus ; 

Literatorum omnium, domi forisque, 

Suffragiis comprobatus ; 

Magnatum Procerumque popularium 

Familiari insignitus Notitia ; 

Nee summis in Ecclesia Dignitatibus impar ; 

Fato tamen iniquo evenit, 

Ut Bramleyensis obiret Paroecise 

Vicarius pene Sexagenarius 

XVIII. Cal. Sept. A. D. 1751. 

Uxor JOANNA, Ed. Holden Arm. Consulis 

Algerensis olim Conjux, bis Vidua, 

M.P. 



1 There is an anecdote told of him and a brother of his, named Miles, a man 
of abilities, but not of equal honour with his brother. On one occasion, when 






348 



BIOGKAPHICAL SKETCHES. 



ANTHONY ASKEW, M. D., 

Was born in a house in the Market-place, Kendal, which, 
together with other property contiguous to it, belonged to his 
father, Adam Askew, M.D. He was born in 1722 ; and was 
educated at Sedbergh school, and afterwards at Emanuel 
College, Cambridge. He was made B.A. in 1745, then went 
to Leyden, where he remained a year, and next year visited 
Constantinople with the English ambassador, whence he 
returned through Italy, to Paris, in 1749, when he was made 
a member of the Academy of Belles Lettres. In 1750, he took 
the degree of M.D. at Cambridge. He proposed an edition 
of iEschylus, and published a specimen of it, but nothing 
more ; and died February 27, 1774, aged 52, leaving a family 
of five sons and four daughters. 

He acquired great reputation, at home and abroad, on 
account of his collection of Greek manuscripts, which was 
more numerous and more valuable than that of any other 
private gentleman in England. These manuscripts Dr. Askew 
purchased at a considerable expense in the East, and brought 
with him to England. His collection also of printed Greek 
books, when sold, was allowed to consist of a greater number 
of scarce and valuable editions of the classics than had ever 
before been exposed to sale in this country, and the sale 
realized upwards of 1,300?. "When abroad, he kept an album, 
which, among other testimonies to his merit from distinguished 
foreigners, contains many compliments and epigrams addressed 
to him by modern Greeks. This Album is now among the 
manuscripts of Emanuel College, Cambridge. 

The Appendix to Scapula, published in 1789, was compiled 
from one of his manuscripts. 1 



GEOKGE EOMNEY. 

The distinguished subject of this memoir, although not 
a native of Kendal, has given us a sufficient title to rank him 

the Doctor was preaching in Kendal church, he took for his text— "A good 
name is better than great riches." " So it may," says Miles, after he had 
heard the sermon out, " but how must they do that have neither ? " 
1 " Beauties of England and Wales," vol. xv. p. 235. 






GEORGE ROMNEY. 349 

among the eminent personages properly connected with the 
town. It was here that he was placed an apprentice to the 
art in which he obtained celebrity. It was here that his 
genius developed itself, and received the earliest encourage- 
ment. It was in this town that he made choice of a wife, 
and was married. And it was in this town that, after having 
attained the highest eminence in his profession, he sought the 
pillow of repose in the evening of life, and descended, full of 
honours, to the grave. 

It has been remarked, that, "of all our eminent artists, 
Eomney has perhaps been the most fortunate in his bio- 
graphers ; " 1 and since the publication of the Memoir in 
which this observation is conveyed, we think no one will 
doubt the justice of the remark. Cumberland, the dramatist, 
published a Memoir of Eomney, shortly after his death. 
Another, by Haley, the poet, followed soon after. In 1829, 
the Eev. John Eomney, the painter's son, wrote an account of 
his father's life. None of these publications, nor all of them, 
were, however, considered perfectly satisfactory ; and it was 
reserved for Allan Cunningham to winnow away the chaff 
from them, and to delineate, with a master hand, an exact 
portraiture of the man and the artist. 

George Eomney was born at Beckside, near Dalton-in- 
Furness, in Lancashire, on the 15th December, 1734. He 
was the son of John Eomney, of that place, a joiner and 
cabinet-maker, and a man of considerable ingenuity in prac- 
tical mechanics and architecture. George was at school till 
eleven years of age, when, having made little progress in 
learning, he was taken away to be employed in the trade 
of his father. His leisure hours, at this time, were principally 
devoted to carving on wood, constructing violins, and some- 
times performing on that instrument. He was also beguiled 
into the unprofitable and mysterious science of alchemy ; but 
this scheme soon exploded; and his other pursuits were 
gradually, and at length totally, abandoned, as the character 
of his mind unfolded itself in a devout passion for the arts. 
It appears that Eomney's father had a business intercourse 

1 Allan Cunningham's Memoir of Roinney, in " British Painters," kc. vol. v. 



350 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 



with Alderman Bedman, of Kendal, which superinduced a 
friendly intimacy between the families. Mrs. Gardner, 1 a 
sister of Alderman Bedman, and a lady of taste and judgment 
in the fine arts, being on a visit to the house of Bomney, and 
having perceived in the crude efforts of his son the cha- 
racteristic marks of genius, encouraged him to persevere, and 
interceded with his father, to let painting be his sole pursuit 
and profession. Mrs. Gardner sat to him for her portrait ; 
and the indications of talent became so decisive, that Ins 
father was induced to bind him an apprentice to a portrait 
painter of the name of Steele, at that time resident in Kendal. 
In this servitude Bomney complained that he was treated 
more like a drudge than a pupil. He confessed, however, 
that he acquired considerable knowledge in the preparation 
and mixing of colours, through his own spirit of observation, 
as well as from his master's instruction. 

It was during his apprenticeship, on the 14th of May, 
1756, that Bomney married Mary Abbot, of Kirkland, who, 
by the unanimous testimony of his biographers, was, in every 
respect, worthy of his affections and his fame. For more than 
two years he practised with Steele, accompanying him to 
Lancaster, York, and other places, as an itinerant portrait 
painter. After which, his master determining to leave 
England, Bomney prevailed on him to surrender his indenture ; 
and without further instructions or experience, he commenced, 
on his own account, when twenty-three years of age, 

Kendal was naturally selected as the scene of his first 
exertions ; and he appears to have commenced at a favour- 
able moment. At that time Colonel George Wilson was 
residing at Abbot Hall, and as he was a gentleman ever 
disposed to encourage rising merit, the struggling artist was 
taken under his especial protection. It is wisely and beauti- 
fully said, in the biography of Benjamin West, that "those 
who befriend genius when it is struggling for distinction, 
befriend the world : and their names should be held in 
remembrance." Mr. Wilson was the first public patron of 
Bomney, and as such deserves to be had in remembrance. 

1 Mrs. Gardner was the mother of Mr. Daniel Gardner, an eminent crayon 
painter in his day. and a native of Kendal. 



GEORGE KOMNEY. 351 

both for the individual merit of his patronage, and for the 
example which it displays to others, who have the power and 
the opportunity to do likewise. He introduced the artist to 
the Strickland family, at Sizergh, where Eomney had the 
advantage — the only advantage he had before going to 
London — of studying and copying a few pictures of other 
masters. One of his early productions was the representation 
of a hand holding a letter, which he painted for the post- 
master of Kendal. This painting formerly distinguished the 
window of the Post Office in this town. At Kendal he 
continued four years, painting portraits principally. He found 
leisure, also, to make about a score of compositions, which 
were disposed of in a lottery, composed of eighty tickets, 
price half a guinea each. 

On the 14th of March, 1762, Eomney set out for London. 
His thirst of fame was more powerful than his conjugal 
affections ; and whatever were his secret intentions towards 
his wife on his departure, all that has been said, or can be 
said, of his subsequent conduct, will not justify the estrange- 
ment which it produced. His visit to London brought him 
all the riches and all the honours that his fancy, in its 
brightest dreams, could have anticipated ; but his wife was, 
for thirty years, almost entirely neglected ; and not until he 
waxed infirm, and needed a nurse, was her society again 
courted. 

He set up his easel in Dove Court, London. The painting 
that first elicited public approbation was the Death of Wolfe, 
which obtained for him a prize of twenty-five guineas from 
the Society of Arts. Eeynolds was at that time at the 
meridian of his fame ; notwithstanding which, Eomney soon 
proved a rival so powerful that it was said " he divided the 
empire with Sir Joshua." In 1764, he visited Paris, where he 
remained six weeks, studying chiefly, in the Luxembourg 
Gallery, the works of Eubens. In 1773, he resolved to 
devote two years to study in Eome, believing, as Cunningham 
says all artists do, " that the way to perfection lies through 
the Sistine chapel." Whilst there, he devoted himself to 
intense and sequestered study. Having stored his portfolio 
with images of Italian beauty, both from dead and living 






352 



BIOGEAPHICAL SKETCHES. 



models, lie returned to London in 1775. Sitters now flocked 
to his studio, and for several years Bomney u had the ascen- 
dancy of Eeynolds in the scale of popular opinion." 1 Bomney 
was exceedingly industrious, and the intervals between sit- 
tings, and his leisure hours, were filled up with fancy sketches 
and historical delineations. A list of all the works which 
he executed in those busy days would occupy many pages ; 
and we will not therefore attempt to enumerate them, or 
make particular allusion to any. Too much of his time was, 
however, consumed with making sketches, which were merely 
indicated on the canvas, and no more touched. His pro- 
fessional progress is exceedingly encouraging and interesting, 
but we cannot here go along with the details. Jealousy 
between him and Sir Joshua Beynolds prevented Bomney's 
being admitted, or desiring to be admitted, an Associate of the 
Boyal Academy ; but Cunningham concludes his observations 
on this subject by saying, "that his name has lost nothing by 
coming down to posterity untagged with initials" 

Bomney continued to prosecute his labours in London till 
1799, when his mental energies began rapidly to decline ; 
and it was in the summer of that year that he repaired to 
his affectionate wife at Kendal, " who, surviving his neglect, 
lived yet to prove the depth of woman's love." In the fol- 
lowing year he sunk into helpless imbecility, in which state 
he lingered till the 15th of Xovember, 1802, when he had 
nearly completed his sixty-eighth year. He died in the house, 
in Kirkland, now occupied by Misses Wilkinson ; and his 
remains were interred at Dalton, the place of his birth. 

The character of Bomney, with the exception of the 
blemish it bears from his conduct towards his wife, appears 
worthy of his genius ; and his genius, it is proved, was 
in every respect worthy of the patronage he obtained. He 
was kindhearted, generous, and upright ; charitable to the 
poor ; and, what is a rare virtue in painters, indulgent and 
encouraging to young artists. His friendships were dis- 
interested and sincere ; and except, perhaps, in the case of 
Hayley, were all happily chosen. Adam Walker, the natural 



1 Cunningham's Memoir. 



GEORGE ROMNEY. 353 

philosopher, and Cockin, the poet and arithmetician, both 
connected with this county, were among the number of his 
friends ; the former of his earlier, and the latter of his 
declining years. It is too much the practice of persons who 
have enjoyed what is called a "liberal education" to derogate 
from the merit of others who, despite of this advantage, are 
rising, or have risen to enviable distinction in the world. 
Cumberland and Hayley, the two earliest biographers of 
Eomney, both, it seems, belonged to this class of soi-disant 
liberals ; and, from a coincidence of feeling, withheld the 
honours that were due for his extraordinary powers of mind. 
Cunningham has, however, carefully and cleverly analyzed 
the mental powers of the artist ; and amply recompensed 
whatever his fame had suffered by the neglect or injustice of 
his contemporary friends. 

If it should be wondered at that, with all his successful 
industry, so few of Eomney's paintings rank in the galleries 
of the present day, a reference to Cunningham's Memoir will 
explain the reason. If we inquire, says the biographer, con- 
cerning the fruit of his labours, we shall be told of abundance 
of great designs begun, and but few happily ended — of 
portraits enow of the beautiful, the rich, and the titled, — but 
next to none of men of genius, by the delineation of whose 
features and minds alone a portrait painter has much chance 
to reach posterity. He adopted or followed the fashion and 
feeling of his day more than a man who believes he is 
labouring for immortality ought ever to do. As to his his- 
torical and inventive productions, he allowed the first heat of 
his fancy to cool before he rendered some of his fine sketches 
and designs worthy of taking rank as works of art. The 
world has been a sad loser in consequence of the multitudes 
of noteless, nameless faces, which it sent to the painter's easel, 
to the continual interruption of his historic productions. The 
characteristic merit of his works consists in poetic dignity of 
conception, wherein Flaxman said he was the first of all 
English painters, and in the harmony and brilliancy of his 
colouring. 



A A 



354 



BIOGKAPHICAL SKETCHES. 



SIE ALAN CHAMBRE, KNIGHT, 

Was of an ancient and honourable family, which Dr. Burn 
has traced up to the time of Henry III. Sir Alan, who is 
the fifteenth in descent from that time, was the son and heir 
of Walter Chambre, Esq., Barrister-at-Law, and Mary, 
daughter of Jacob Mori and, of Capplethwaite, Esq. 

Sir Alan Chambre was born in 1740, in the house which 
is now the New Inn, in Highgate, Kendal, where his father 
lived previously to his residence at Abbot Hall. His father 
and grandfather were both Becorclers of Kendal. He obtained 
the rudiments of his education at the Free Grammar School, 
Kendal, under the tuition of Mr. Gilbert Crackenthorpe. 
From hence he was removed to Sedbergh school, eminent for 
scholastic honours, at that time conducted by Dr. Bateman. 
From Sedbergh, Sir Alan went into the office of Forth 
Wintour, Esq., solicitor, in Pall Mall, London ; and afterwards 
practised as a Barrister-at-Law, in Gray's Inn In 1796, he 
was elected Becorder of Lancaster, winch office he resigned 
in 1799. In 1800, he was appointed one of the Judges of 
the Court of Common Pleas, which he resigned in 1816, and 
was succeeded by Mr. Justice Park. He died in the eighty- 
fourth year of his age, at the Crown Inn, Harrowgate ; and 
his remains were brought from thence to be interred in the 
family vault at Kendal. 1 

Sir Alan was esteemed a wise, discreet, and upright judge, 
and was in high reputation at the bar, both for his pro- 
fessional talents, the justice of his decisions, and the purity of 
his principles. In private life he was exemplary in all moral 
relations, and in Christian benevolence. His heart was ever 
ready 

" To answer to the tender call 
Of God-like charity." 



Vide the inscription on his monument, at p. 73. 



JOHN GOUGH. 355 



JOHN GOUGH, 

Called, by Dr. Kitto and other writers, " The Blind Philo- 
sopher," was bom in Kendal, the 17th of January, in the year 
1757, and was the oldest child of Nathan Gongh, of Kendal, 
shearman-dyer, and Susannah his wife. 

His father was the only child, by a first marriage, of 
Thomas Gough, 1 skinner and glover, of Wyersdale, in Lan- 
cashire : his mother was the oldest daughter of Mr. John 
Wilson, a respectable yeoman, who had a good estate on the 
west bank of Windermere Lake. 

When a man has been a successful cultivator of any depart- 
ment of science, literature, or art, he becomes an object of 
public curiosity ; and the history of his childhood is examined 
for incidents which may shed a light upon the origin of his 
pursuits, and the development of his character. To the 
subject of this biographical sketch, there happened, at a very 
early age, an event, which, in his opinion, gave birth to his 
character. Before the completion of his third year, he was 
attacked with small-pox, which deprived him of his sight. 
The whole globe of the left eye was destroyed : the damage 
done to the other was not so extensive : for, though the greater 
part of the cornea was rendered opaque, there was a minute 
pellucid speck to the right of the pupil, which permitted a 
ray of light to fall upon the verge of the retina., and thus he 
was enabled to distinguish between day and night : but he 
had no perception of the form or colour of objects around 
him ; so that, for all useful purposes, vision was completely 
lost. 

During the bright days of childhood, brief as they were, 
the imagery of the external world had found access, through 
the infantile eye, to the mind ; and lasting impressions of a 

1 Thomas Gough was the son of James Gough, who was the son of William 
GofF, a general in the Parliamentary army, and one who signed King Charles' 
death warrant. At the time of the Eestoration, he escaped the axe of the 
executioner by an early flight. The reader may consult an interesting article 
on William Goff, entitled " The Cave of the Regicides, and how three of 
them fared in New England," in Blackwood's Magazine, Vol. LXL, March, 
1847. 

A A 2 






356 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 



few scenes and objects were registered on memory's tablet. To 
the latest period of bis life, Mr. Gougb had a distinct recol- 
lection of being an eye-witness of the last Kendal Guild, in 
1759. But the procession with all its gaudy pageantry, had 
no charms for him. On the contrary, having been carried 
into an upper chamber for a view of what was passing below, 
he was greatly alarmed by the multiplicity of strange sights, 
and, escaping from his companions, took shelter in a bed and 
concealed his face in the bedclothes. He had also a lively 
idea of an appearance, which he conceived to be a body of 
cavalry in motion ; but as a distant troop does not consti- 
tute an object of touch, he had no means of subsequently 
testing the truth of this supposition. Another object, which 
he recollected having seen, was a chimney-piece ornament. 
But as in this instance it was colour probably, to the 
exclusion of form, that arrested the eye of a child, he failed 
afterwards to discover by touch the counterpart of that which 
he had seen ; though his restless fingers were accustomed to 
run over every object within reach, even over the identical 
ornament itself; for it was on his father's mantelpiece. 
Hence he was led to remark, " I remember various appear- 
ances, which I cannot refer to any particular class of objects." 
Another object really seen was an earth-worm, crawling among 
a collection of dirt on a garden-bed, and by a curious coinci- 
dence, which we shall presently mention, he verified, " witli 
the greatest certainty," a fact that probably had a material 
influence in developing that fine appreciation of form, which 
he manifested so conspicuously at a more advanced stage. 
But now was a veil drawn over all the visible beauties of 
creation, and "wisdom at one entrance, quite shut out" for 
ever ; and though other inlets for knowledge were destined to 
be more widely opened, the time was not yet come. Long- 
after the malady had done its mischief, the victim of its 
ravages was a being of commiseration, for that watchful sen- 
tinel, the ear, was ignorant of its duties. Ordinary sounds 
added to his wretchedness ; because he knew not whence 
they were, or what was their nature. Time passed heavily. 
Neither did night bring any solace to the tedium of the day ; 
for his sleep, instead of being tranquil, was disturbed by 



JOHN GOUGH. 357 

dreams and visions ; so that his existence, at this period, 
seemed to mark him out as a child of misfortune. 

But this wretchedness was to have a limit. His situation 
began to improve : and by degrees he learned to substitute 
touch in place of sight, and to derive knowledge, as well as 
pleasure, from the use of his ringers. The education of his 
touch was promoted by his father, who encouraged him to 
investigate every object which could be handled with safety. 
It was on one of these occasions, that the parental instructor, 
while angling, gave him a worm to examine, in the first year 
of his blindness. He at once knew that it was a creature of 
the same kind that he had seen in the garden. The fact is 
interesting, and forms a curious instance how the image of an 
object, which has been once impressed upon the sensorium, 
through the retina, a nerve of special sense, may be afterwards 
reproduced and recalled to mind, when conveyed through 
another channel, a nerve of common sensation. 

About the expiration of a year from the time that he became 
blind a trifling incident happened, which greatly relieved his 
uneasy apprehensions : a hammer was accidentally placed in 
his hands as a plaything, which he exercised upon a boarded 
window-seat ; and after a few strokes had been given, by 
means of his own hand, he made an important discovery — the 
sound produced was similar to a noise which had disturbed 
him so much in the early days of his misfortune. Hence the 
result of these strokes with his own hammer, was proved to 
be identical with the perplexing sounds caused by the ham- 
mers of a number of carpenters at work in a neighbouring 
house. His fingers and his ears were now in active employ- 
ment. Various bodies, which he learned to discriminate by 
their forms and other tangible characters, were named for him 
by his parents and friends ; and whenever any such objects 
came a second time into his hands he had no difficulty in 
recognising them, and recalling their names. These homely 
lessons soon taught his inquisitive spirit to appreciate the 
value of conversation in supplying him with the materials of 
thought and instruction. He began to understand that 
numbers of animals existed in the world, in addition to the 
few which were domesticated. His questions, on this subject, 



358 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

were incessant in the presence of his father, who gave him, 
in return, popular descriptions of the forms and hab; 
lions and wolves, and various other quadrupeds, as well as 
of birds, and strange serpents and fishes. As a proof of 
his progress, he informs us, that before he was the age of 
four years and a half, he had a clear conception that the 
animal kingdom was divided into quadrupeds, bii 
serpents, insects, and crustaceous and testaceous anini 
a classification generally adopted at that period. 

The art of acquiring knowledge, thus begun and pursued at 
home, was soon extended to a wider circle. No( is the 

field of observation enlarged, but a greater variety of ol 
also was embraced The horns and violins of itin 
musicians were I to with delight; 1 1 1 • 

were examined ; and, tally, an 

elicit similar Bounds by the applicatio] 
fingers ; and, while in his fath 

handle tl monkey* 1 the 

Btreel later period, he waa introduced, by the 

cautious guardian, into a travelling m n ar- 

ment having with the keeper, h< 

many of the l 1 examined all the harmless an:: 

But the fulfilment o( this pari of th< 

the curiosity of the Mind boy: ged to be permit* 

handle the rest of the collection ; and 1. ailed. 

The result was, that he ran 11 the carniv 

animals, nothing daunted by their ex] 

bation; the hyena's cage being th- 
entered, though h< idy to make this venture 

not the keeper i\tn<'«l to Comply with his wish. 
Such were the simple rudiments of ! 

Mr. (lough, in his early youth, by his father. A thirst for 
more information than could be thus obtain 
o( the interest which he took in the stud] 

And. small as were these germs of thought in the spring-time 
of his mental evolution, yet. by self-help and incessant appli- 
cation, they were cultivated and matured, in length o( time, 
into a full and fruitful harvest of knowledg 

In the summer of 1761, before the completion of 



JOHN GOUGH. 359 

fifth year, a circumstance occurred, which materially con- 
tributed to a more refined culture of his sense of hearing. He 
became acquainted with an old man, and his son, who were 
both partial to music ; the former playing upon the violin, 
and the latter practising the same instrument, and the German 
flute also. To their performances the blind youth frequently 
listened with raptures ; and the old man as frequently ex- 
tolled the delicacy and correctness of his ear. The son took 
a fancy to give him instructions on the violin ; but this 
musical education, though calculated to administer to his 
enjoyment, was destined to receive an early check. For his 
father, who was a member of the Society of Friends, from 
religious scruples, put a stop to his further progress ; though 
at the same time, he had the good sense to perceive the value 
of some permanent employment. 

But the choice of a settled pursuit required due deliberation, 
and at length the study of Latin was selected. With this in- 
tention therefore, at the age of six, he was placed under the 
care of Mr. Eebanks, at that time master of the Friends' 
school, in Kendal. Some one of his class-fellows read over 
the rules of the Latin grammar and accidence, which he com- 
mitted to memory without much difficulty ; yet the amount 
of knowledge acquired was trifling, as compared with the 
time consumed. But, fortunately, when the young student 
was about twelve years old, Mr. Eebanks retired, in favour of 
Mr. Bewly, who was a good classic ; and under his tuition 
Mr. Gough made rapid progress in Latin. In addition to his 
classical knowledge, Mr. Bewly was well-read in the different 
branches of Natural Philosophy, a circumstance which, at 
a later period, proved of great advantage to the pupil. 

The study of classics, however, did not efface his early 
impressions. He admired the lives of illustrious men, as 
portrayed in the original language of Cornelius Nepos : but 
he loved more dearly living animals and their short histories, 
as given in the few books to which he had access. Nature 
was ever the idol of his mind ; plants found a place in his 
early affections. For we learn that, in his eighth year, he 
was in the habit of visiting an aged couple, who had a few 
flowering plants, standing at a window. The powerful odour 



360 BIOGKAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

of one of these (a Moldavian balm), attracted his attention : 

groping his way to the specimen, he examined its stem, 

leaves, and the whorl in which the flowers were arranged ; 

and as carefully also did he compare these differ 

with the corresponding parts of another plant, which stood 

beside the balm. And this comparison led him to conclude 

that as much pleasure and instruction might ted from 

the vegetable kingdom, as from a study of aniinak At tins 

period, his knowledge of plantt 

the information, bo acquired, had its value His fingers 

schooled in a minute perception of form ; and ev< 

specimen being distinguished by the relation which it h 

other vegetable productions   known to him, | 

itself as a new B] distinctive characters oi 

plant, therefore, were his own; for, hitherto N tui 

only book he consulted. Need we, then, be surprised at his 

own remarks ? — u My p 

a long time It is trui I I from the pui 

every plant thai fell in mj 

scrutiny. I treasured up in memory th multitude 

of vegetables, bo as to afterwards 

when I came to read their descripl 

Hitherto, he had no idea thai bonk- « 
Bui this ignorance was presently to in his 

thirteenth summer thai his father him and 

i into the fields, and observing a deeply 

in examining b handful 

of wild flowers, telling him, at the .••. thai plante 

been named and described in books ; and that this had 
done, in part, by a Kendal man. John Wilson. This intelli- 
gence excited his curiosity; and he m 
made himself mi 
British Plants." Bis first task v. 
of terms ; then, to master the clas od after 

preliminary qualifications, he commenced tl. 
botany by referring the p] hbourhood to tlu-ir 

class, genus, and In these attempts, he 

many difficulties. But finding thai Wilson made 
references to the writings of two ancient 



JOHN GOUGH. 361 

and Parkinson, he obtained their works. His next proceeding 
was, to form a small botanical class among his school-fellows. 
To these he explained his views, and smoothed the way by 
giving them elementary lessons on classification, and the use 
of technical terms. Excursions were then made, far and 
near, in search of plants. On their return home, Mr. Gough 
examined each specimen, while one of his fellow-students 
consulted and read the " Synopsis;" and when he had de- 
termined the species, the woodcuts of Gerrard and Parkinson 
were examined by the class, and compared with the specimen 
he had named. And the herbarium of his boyhood proves 
the industry and accuracy of his first botanical efforts. At a 
later period, Hudson's "Flora Anglica," according to the 
sexual classification of Linnaeus, became his favourite work ; 
and still later, he consulted Withering's "Arrangement of 
Plants," and Smith's " Flora Britannica." 

With the former of these botanists he was in frequent corre- 
spondence, previous to the publication of the third edition of the 
"Arrangement ;" and as a proof of Dr. Withering's confidence 
in the correctness of his discrimination, he informed his blind 
contributor that he would accept his habitats and remarks with- 
out reserve, and without any more specimens for verification. 
But his method of examining plants must be briefly told. 
Systems of classification were but little valued, except so far 
as they aided him in recognising individual form. The plant 
to be examined was held by the root or base in one hand, 
while the fingers of the other travelled slowly upwards, over 
the stem, branches, and leaves, till they reached the flower. 
If the species had been already met with, this procedure was 
sufficient for its recognition ; if it proved to be a novelty, its 
class was first determined by the insertion of the elongated 
tip of his tongue within the flower: thus he discovered the 
number and arrangement of the stamens and pistils. When 
the flower was small, he requested his reader to ascertain 
these points with a lens. The class and order being de- 
termined, the genus was next worked out, word by word of 
the description, so far at least as the state of the specimen 
would allow. But his perceptive power over form was most 
conspicuous in the analysis of species. It was truly wonderful 



362 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

to witness the rapidity with which his ringers ran among the 
leaves, taking cognizance of their divisions, shape, serratures, 
and of the presence or absence of hairs. The finest down was 
detected, by a stem or leaf being drawn gently across the 
border of his lower lip ; so fine, indeed, that a young eye 
often required a lens to verity the truth of the perception. 
Another peculiarity is worthy of notice. Eepeated perusal 
of descriptions had enabled him to pre-figure in his mind's- 
eye, the form without the presence of specimens ; so that, 
when a species for the first time came within his touch, he at 
once named it from memory. 

New plants, new animals, like all other subjects, indeed, in 
which he was greatly interested, caused him to betray outwardly 
the power that was actively at work within — the brightness of 
his intellect beamed upon his countenance. And it was, pro- 
bably, on one of these occasions, that Mr. Wordsworth, while 
describing the little cushion-like plant, with white roots and 
purple flowers, growing near Grisedale Tarn, caught the first 
glimpse of that conception which was afterwards expanded 
into the beautiful picture given of Mr. Gough in the Ex- 
cursion. Mark the Poet's recollections of the man, as he 
stood before him : 

" Methinks I see him — how his eye-balls rolled, 
Beneath his ample brow, in darkness paired ; 
But each instinct with spirit ; and the frame 
Of the whole countenance alive with thought, 
Fancy and understanding ; while the voice 
Discoursed of natural and moral truth 
With eloquence, and such authentic power, 
That in his presence humbler knowledge stood 
Abashed, and tender pity overawed." 

But some years before the period to which these remarks 
refer, the same psychological reading had also met the eye of 
S. T. Coleridge. In a short Essay on "The Soul and its 
Organs of Sense," he says: "The every-way amiable and 
estimable John Gough of Kendal, is not only an excellent 
mathematician, but an infallible botanist and zoologist. He 
has frequently, at first feel, corrected the mistakes of the 
most experienced sportsmen, with regard to the birds or 
vermin which they had killed, when it chanced to be a 



JOHN GOUGH. 363 

variety or rare species, so completely resembling the common 
one, that it required great steadiness of observation to detect 
the difference, even after it had been pointed out. As to 
plants and flowers, the rapidity of his touch appears fully 
equal to that of sight, and the accuracy greater. Good 
heavens ! it needs only to look at him ! Why, his face sees 
all over ! " 

We are prevented, by want of space, from giving more than 
a rapid outline of Mr. Gough's progress. At fifteen, he read 
Derham's Physico- Theology. From this work he gained en- 
larged views of the structure of the earth and its inhabitants. 
He was soon busy as an experimenter ; and his father's dye- 
house was used as his laboratory. Derham's notes, too, 
which were chiefly extracts from Latin authors, stimulated 
him to read more extensively the prose and poetical com- 
positions of the ancient authors. Interested by the beauties 
of the Greek and Latin poets, he courted also all the English 
poets, from Shakespeare to Goldsmith. Many poetical pas- 
sages, both from ancient and modern authors, which took his 
fancy, were committed to memory ; and so tenaciously were 
they retained, that between forty and fifty years after, he 
could repeat the greater part of them. 

"But poetry did not exactly harmonize with the character of 
his intellect. On closing Goldsmith, therefore, he returned 
with increasing ardour to the study of nature. 

He was now about his eighteenth year ; and continued for 
some time plodding among his birds, and plants, and simple 
philosophical experiments. To relieve the tedium of a wet 
day, the Puzzling Rings were placed in his hands. After 
several hours of toil he finally triumphed, extricating the 
nine rings from their staple. This feat, of itself, is of little 
moment. But the permutations necessary for disengaging 
the rings impressed him with an idea of numbers. He was 
now standing on the threshold of a new storehouse of know- 
ledge, for the successful prosecution of which he was indebted 
solely to his own ingenuity. On this point he says, "I 
learned arithmetic at home by a contrivance of my own, 
which is nearly like that used by Dr. Saunderson." From 
the interest which Mr. Gough took in this new study, he 



364 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

prevailed upon his father to enter him as a mathematical 
pupil, under the tuition of Mr. John Slee, at that time re- 
siding at Mungrisedale, a sequestered part of Cumberland ; 
and perhaps a more judicious choice of a tutor for such a 
pupil could not have been made. But as to his progress, all 
that we can do in this memoir is to give an abstract of Mr. 
Slee's account, as detailed in an interesting letter to a friend. 
He took up his abode under his teacher's roof, in some part 
of the year 1778 ; and his first step seems to have been to 
furnish himself with a more polished abacus, and a more 
extensive series of pins for numerical expressions. "He 
procured," says Mr. Slee, " a board of rectangular form on 
which lines were drawn at equal distances, both longitudi- 
nally and laterally. At the intersections of these lines the 
board was pierced with so many small holes, so as to receive 
the lower points of pegs or pins fitted to sink into them. 
The upper parts of these pins were of so many different forms 
as we use digits for numerical calculations ; and a consider- 
able number of each kind of these pins were put into so 
many different compartments, formed in a shallow drawer, 
made for that purpose. It is not difficult, with this con- 
trivance, to see how it would be practicable for him to per- 
form all the common operations of arithmetic He was 

now prepared to extend his inquiries to other subjects con- 
nected with the mathematics, and of course his first efforts 
were employed in reading the elements of Euclid. With 
Geometry he connected the study of Algebra ; and here again 
his mechanical apparatus came in for its share of utility. In 
Geometry, squares, rectangles, triangles, polygons, &c. were 
readily exhibited by putting a thread around the pins pro- 
perly placed ; and for the purpose of algebraic operations, 
a set of pins representing the symbols a, b, c, x, y, z, in 
common use, were, by their peculiar distinguishing varieties, 
at hand to supply all the purposes, for which their ordinary 
substitutes for quantities, known and unknown, can be made 
available." The time which Mr. Gough spent under Mr. 
Slee's teaching was about eighteen months. He became 
acquainted with the principles and elements of mathematics ; 
and in the prosecution of these studies he manifested much 



JOHN GOUGH. 365 

talent, and a peculiar interest in and predilection for the 
different branches of the science. In addition to the subjects 
before alluded to, he returned home with a knowledge of 
conic sections, mechanics, and a few initiatory lessons in 
fluxions. On his again becoming an inmate of his father's 
house, this latter branch formed a leading object in his pur- 
suits. To select a competent reader for him was no easy 
matter. At length, however, the choice fell upon his second 
sister. For some time his progress was slow, but all hindrances 
yielded to his perseverance and signal exertion of mental 
power. Every impediment to the acquisition of knowledge 
was now fairly overcome ; and for many years Mr. Gough 
enjoyed, with uninterrupted good health, the peaceful pursuit 
of his various studies. His acquirements in the higher 
branches of mathematics eminently fitted him as a teacher 
of that science in after-life ; and out of the number of his 
select pupils, some became senior wranglers at Cambridge. 
Among the most eminent of these pupils, were Dr. Whewell, 
now Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, who was second 
wrangler in his year. Dr. Dawes, present Dean of Hereford, 
was fourth wrangler. Dr. Joshua King, late Master of 
Queens' College, Cambridge, (esteemed one of the first mathe- 
maticians of his day), was senior wrangler in his year. The 
Eev. Thomas Gaskin, late tutor of Jesus' College, Cambridge, 
Mr. Gough's last pupil, was second wrangler of his year. 
John Dalton, the eminent philosopher, was four or five years 
under his instruction in mathematics and natural philosophy 
and has left a grateful tribute to the memory of his blind 
preceptor. 

We can only further add that, towards the close of the year 
1823, Mr. Gough's health began to decline. Eepeated attacks 
of epilepsy gradually undermined his bodily powers, and 
clearly pointed out the approaching termination of his earthly 
course. He died, at Fowl Ing, July 28th, 1825, in the sixty- 
ninth year of his age ; and his remains were interred in the 
parish churchyard of Kendal. 

His resting-place is marked by a simple slab, bearing the 
following inscription : 









366 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

IN MEMORY OF 

JOHN GOUGH, 

WHO DIED JULY 28™, 1825, 

AGED 68 YEARS. 

He was married at Kendal Church, in 1800, to Mary, 
daughter of Thomas Harrison, of Crosthwaite, and had issue 
nine children, four sons and five daughters. Of these, three 
survive to the present time, namely, Thomas Gough, surgeon, 
Kendal ; Mary Atkinson, widow, and Ann Bell, living at 
Manchester. 

In summing up his life it may be said of Mr. Gough, that, 
though, not to him returned, 

" Day, or the sweet approach of even or mora, 
Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer's rose," 

still every stage of life had its enjoyments ; every change of 
season brought a change of employment ; every day presented 
his fingers with novelties from Nature's endless territories, 
his mind with germs of thought from the vast storehouse of 
knowledge. Eesignation was a prominent feature of his 
character. The inconveniences attendant on his loss of sight 
never elicited an expression of murmur. And to ennui, early 
or late in life, he was a stranger. For his mind fed upon 
thoughts harmonious, that dissipated clouds of difficulties, 
and changed "ever-during dark" into hours of cheerfulness 
and mental sunshine. To be always employed, he well knew, 
was essential to his happiness, and no toil was too much to 
accomplish an object. Without staying, then, to inquire how 
far his success may have depended upon the inherent strength 
of the intellectual powers, we have a striking instance of 
the necessity of self-reliance and self-culture in breaking 
down every impediment, however much aided by physical 
imperfections, which may stand in the way of progress. By 
others, therefore, be they placed in more or less favoured 
circumstances, the subject of this memoir, and his achieve- 
ments, are worthy of remembrance. For knowledge is to be 
acquired by labour alone. "There is want only where no 
firm ivi'll exists, where no adequate efforts are made." 



JOHN GOUGH. 367 

The following is a List of Essays contributed by Mr. Gough 
to the Manchester Philosophical Society, viz. : 

1. (1790.) Eeasons for supposing that Lakes have been more numerous 
than they are at present, with an attempt to assign the causes whereby they 
have been defaced. 

2. The Laws of Motion of a Cylinder, compelled by the repeated strokes 
of a falling block to penetrate an obstacle, the resistance of which is an 
invariable force. 

3. 4. Experiments and observations on the vegetation of Seeds. 

5. (1786.) On the variety of voices. 

6. (1801.) An investigation of the method whereby men judge by the 
ear of the position of sonorous bodies relative to their own persons. 

7. The Theory of Compound Sounds. 

8. (1803.) A description of a property of Caoutchouc, or India Rubber, 
with some reflections on the cause of the elasticity of this substance. 

9. An Essay on the Theory of Mixed Gases, and the state of Water in 
the Atmosphere. 

10. (1804.) A reply to Mr. Dalton's objections to a late theory of 
Mixed Gases. 

11. Theorems and Problems intended to elucidate the mechanical prin- 
ciple called Vis Viva. 

12. (1811.) Observations on the Ebbing and Flowing Well at Giggles- 
wick, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, with a theory of reciprocating foun- 
tains. 

13. (1812.) Remarks on the Summer Birds of Passage, and on Migration 
in general. 

14. The Laws of Statical Equilibrium analytically investigated. 

List of Mr. Gough' s communications, published in Nichol- 
son's Journal : 

1. On the supposed revival of Insects after long immersion in Wine or 
other intoxicating Liquor. Vol. iii. 

2. A Statical Inquiry into the source of nutrition in succulent vegetables. 
Ibid. 

3. Instances of suspended animation in vegetables. Ibid. 

4. On the exhibition of a series of Primes, and the resolution of a com- 
pound number into all its Factors. Ibid. 

5. Facts and observations to explain the curious phenomenon of Ven- 
triloquism. Ibid. 

6. Reply to Dr. Young's Letter on the theory of Compound Sounds. 
VoLiv. 

7. On the nature of Grave Harmonics. Ibid. 

8. On the nature of Musical Sounds, in reply to Dr. Young. Ibid. 

9. The Theory of Compound Sounds. Vol. v. 

10. Experiments and observations in support of that theory of Ventrilo- 
quism which is founded on the reflection of sound. Vol. vii. 

11. Scoteography, or the Art of Writing in the dark. Vol. viii. 

12. On the Solution of Water in the Atmosphere ; and on the nature of 
Atmospherical Air. Vol. ix. 



368 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

13. Narrative of some less common effects of Lightning, by the Rev. 
Jonathan Wilson ; with remarks by Mr. Gough. Ibid. 

14. Strictures on Mr. Dalton's doctrine of Mixed Gases, and an answer to 
Mr. Henry's defence of the same. Ibid. 

15. Atmospherical Air not a mechanical mixture of the oxygen and azotic 
gases, demonstrated from the specific gravities of these fluids. Ibid. 

16. Experiments proving the necessity of atmospherical oxygen in the 
process of vegetation. Vol. x. 

17. Farther observations on the constitution of Mixed Gases. Ibid. 

18. Experiments and remarks on the augmentation of sounds. Ibid. 

19. A mathematical theory of the speaking trumpet. Ibid. 

20. Theorems respecting the properties of the sides of triangles inter- 
sected by right lines drawn from the three angles so as to meet in one point. 
Vol. xi. 

21. Investigation of the properties of the lines drawn in a circle, by Mr. 
Boswell. Vol. xii. 

22. On the division of an arch of a circle into two such parts that their 
sines, or co-sines, or versed-sines shall have a given relation. Vol. xiii. 

23. On the cause of Fairy Rings. Ibid. 

24. Experiments on the magnetism of slender iron wire. Ibid. 

25. Experiments on the temperature of water surrounded by freezing 
mixtures. Ibid. 

26. Observations and experiments to show that the effects ascribed by 
M. Dispan to the perpendicular descent of Hoar Frost are not so general as 
to support his theory. Vol. xv. 

27. Remarks on torpidity in animals. In two letters. Vol. xix. 

28. Description of a correct chamber barometer. Vol. xx. 

29. An essay on Polygonal numbers, containing the demonstration of a 
proposition respecting whole numbers in general. Ibid. 

30. A mathematical problem, with the investigation. Vol. xxi. 

31. Answer to Mr. Barlow's remarks on the essay on Polygonal numbers. 
Ibid. 

32. An abstract of a meteorological journal for the year 1807, and 1808, 
kept at Middleshaw, near Kendal. Vol. xxii. 

33. Experiments on the expansion of moist air raised to the boiling 
temperature. Vol. xxiii. 

34. An inquiry, geometrical and arithmetical, into certain properties of 
solids in general ; and of the five regular bodies in particular. Vol. xxv. 

35. On the place of a sound produced by a musical string. Vol. xxxi. 

36. Remarks on the perforations made in paper by electrical batteries. 
Vol. xxxii. 



JOHN THOMSON. 369 



JOHN THOMSON, M.D. 



Was born at Kendal, August 16th, 1782. He was the only 
son of John Thomson, Esq., of Stricklandgate, deceased. 1 
The subject of this brief memoir received his early education 
at the Free Grammar School at Appleby, under the tuition of 
the Eev. John Coward, and his successor, the Eev. John 
Waller.. In 1798, he became a divinity student at the New 
College, Manchester, at that time conducted by the Eev. 
George Walker, F.L.S. and M.E.S. Afterwards turning his 
thoughts to medicine, he pursued his studies at the University 
of Edinburgh, where he graduated in 1807. He enjoyed the 
friendship of Dr. Gregory and Dr. Hamilton, to whom he 
dedicated his inaugural dissertation. In 1808, he settled at 
Halifax, where he followed his profession, with eminent 
success, for nine years. During this time he was ever active 
in the establishment and promotion of public institutions, 
and still more in the prosecution of those acts of private 
benevolence which, silent and unostentatious in their progress, 
produce often greater blessings than deeds which are long 
and loudly applauded by the world. The Lancasterian 
School, and the Savings' Bank, in Halifax, owe their origin to 
his suggestions, and their success mainly to his exertions ; 
the Dispensary, also, was much benefited by his unremitting 
attention. His political sentiments were decidedly in favour 
of civil and religious liberty ; and though candidly and 
openly avowed, in a town distinguished for much diversity of 
opinion, were never known to interrupt the friendships 
formed with those who differed from him, nor shake the con- 
fidence which was reposed in him by the general voice of the 
public. In 1817, Dr. Thomson, courting a wider field for 
the exertion of his professional abilities, and active benevo- 
lence, removed to Leeds, where he died, May 18th, 1818. 
His remains were deposited in the burial ground of Blackley 

1 John Thomson, Esq., died on the 21st July, T831, aged seventy-five. He 
was a gentleman of enlightened understanding, and extensive erudition : 
endowments which he combined with that liberal spirit of intelligence which 
alone makes learning honourable to the possessor and useful to mankind. 

B B 



370 BIOGKAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

Chapel, near Elland, in the parish of Halifax, where a sar- 
cophagus is erected, bearing the following inscription to his 
memory : — 

M.S. Joannis Thomson, M.D., Qui Halifaxise in Agro Eboracenci. Annos 
circiter decern Artem Hippocraticam, caste caute, probeque exercuit. Xatus 
est Kendalise XVII. Cal. Septemb. A.D. MDCCLXXXIL Mortalis esse 
desiit Leodei XV. Cal. Junii A.D. MDCCCXVIII. 

[It may be noted that the above dates and those on the monument in North- 
gate Chapel (quoted below), are in accord, the above being reckoned by the 
Roman calends.] 

The sentiments of esteem which so generally prevailed for 
the public and private character of Dr. Thomson, and the 
veneration in which his memory was held, are strikingly 
illustrated by a sepulchral memorial, erected by public 
subscription, in Northgate Chapel, Halifax. This is a hand- 
some monument, executed by Chantrey, which cost 300 
guineas ; and such was the anxiety for contributing to its 
erection that the committee of directors were obliged to 
restrict the amount of subscription to 11, The monument is 
of white marble, and presents a profile bust of Dr. Thomson, 
in alto relievo, resting on ^Esculapius' staff, with the serpent 
coiled round it. The following is a copy of the inscription : 

To the memory of John Thomson, M.D., 

born at Kendal, Aug. 16, ] 752. 

After a residence of nine years in this town, he removed to Leeds, 

August, 1817, 

where he died, May ISth, 1818, aged 35 years : 

and was interred at Blackley Chapel, in this Parish. 

In testimony of public respect for great talents, improved by extensive 

learning, and employed 

in the faithful discharge of duty both to God and man ; 

for unwearied activity in the exercise of an useful and honourable 

profession, without distinction of rich or poor ; 

for enlightened zeal to promote the purity of the Christian faith, 

and especially the purity of Christian practice ; 

for animated eloquence, always ready in the support of plans of active 

benevolence, of seminaries 

of useful learning, and of the principles of civil and religious liberty : 

this Monument has been erected 

by the voluntary subscriptions of numerous friends 

in various parts of the kingdom. 

Of Dr. Thomson's literary labours, though they were 
neither few nor unsuccessful, we are unprepared to say much. 
He was the author of a pamphlet on Vaccination, published 



JOHN BELL. 371 

during his residence at Halifax, which had an extensive 
circulation. It was intended to point out the benefits of 
vaccination to the lower orders, and was reputed to have had 
considerable influence in removing many rooted prejudices on 
the subject. He was a favourite correspondent of the 
Monthly Repository, and other periodicals of his day ; the 
author of some unpublished poems, which possess the true 
spirit and power of poetry ; and had he not been early taken 
away, it is probable more of his writings would have been 
given to the world. 

JOHN BELL. 

John Bell, better known as * Jocky Bell," or, as he was 
also sometimes called, in legal circles, " the great Bell of 
Lincoln's Inn," was a celebrated Chancery barrister, of large 
and lucrative practice. He was born on the 23d October, 
1764, in a house in Finkle-street, Kendal, now occupied 
by Mr. Walker, shoemaker, opposite the printing-office 
of the "Kendal Mercury." His father, Matthew Bell, 
was a respectable grocer in this town. John received his 
early education, partly at Beetham School, and partly at 
Kirkby Lonsdale School. As a boy, he had a strong fancy 
for the sea, and would fain have been a sailor, but he had 
been afflicted with lameness by a fall from his nurse's arms, 
and was on this account, and by dissuasion of his friends, 
turned away from his maritime inclinations. He was sub- 
sequently removed to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he 
was admitted under the tuition of Professor Collier. He took 
the degree of A.B. in January, 1786, when he was Senior 
Wrangler of his year. In 1789, he became A.M., having 
been previously elected Fellow of the College. After some 
hesitation as to what profession he should adopt, he enrolled 
himself at Gray's Inn, being * called " in 1792, and he after- 
wards became a Bencher. He started in the profession with 
about 5000Z. personalty, added to the income of his fellow- 
ship 90?. per annum, and on this basis he raised a super- 
structure of at least 200,000?. Mr. Bell's reputation as a 
lawyer, certainly stood very high. He had a most retentive 
memory, which was well stored with cases and decisions. 



372 BIOGKAPHICAL SKETCHES. 

Although far from being gifted with the powers of oratory, 
and tinctured with a northern accent, yet such was the sound- 
ness of his judgment, he was listened to both by bench 
and bar with the most profound attention. He never sought 
for official preferment, often saying that he felt more inde- 
pendence in a private station. He had no penuriousness in 
his household, but kept a hospitable table, frequently 
honoured with the presence of judges, legislators, and men of 
eminence and science. He carried his nativity in his tongue, 
being fond of the Westmorland dialect, which he invariably 
spoke in all its raciness. He was a governor of the West- 
morland Schools' Society, in London, and attended its meet- 
ings and dinners as often as his legal engagements permitted. 
The custom of " supper with black puddings," at the London 
Tavern, — a custom still maintained annually in this Society 
— was duly honoured and relished by John Bell ; " no pud- 
dings no supper " being his maxim. But he rarely gave him- 
self relaxation, his habit being to remain in his chambers till 
midnight, or later, and to be there again at nine in the morn- 
ing. In 1810, Henry Bickersteth (afterwards Lord Langdale), 
became his pupil ; and he had other pupils, besides, who rose 
to distinction. Loed Eldox, of doubting notoriety, was 
Lord Chancellor in Mr. Bell's day, and Jocky's adverse 
politics became, consequently, a barrier to his preferment, 
else he ought to have been appointed Vice-Chancellor when 
Sir Launcelot Shadwell was made. His clear and perspicuous 
judgment was celebrated by the following epigram, popular at 
the time : 

" Mr. Leach, 

Made a speech, 
Impressive, clear, and strong ; 

Mr. Hart, 

On the other part, 
"Was tedious, dull, and long. 

Mr. Parker 

Made that darker 
Was dark enough without ; 

Mr. Bell 

Spoke so well, 
That the Chancellor said, * I doubt,' " l 



1 From " Law and Lawyers," Vol. II., p. 24S. 



JOHN BELL. 373 

And although the Chancellor withheld legal preferment, he 
ever acknowledged Mr. Bell's great superiority at the bar. 
For instance, when George III., at a levSe, once inquired of 
Lord Eldon, who was the best lawyer of the day, at the bar, 
the Chancellor replied, "the soundest lawyer that your 
Majesty has, at present, is a man who can neither write, walk, 
nor talk, but yet has got a headpiece." With regard to his 
handwriting, it was said, that he wrote three hands, — one 
that his clerk could read, and he could not ; another, that he 
could read, and his clerk could not ; and a third, that neither 
he nor his clerk nor Lucifer himself could read ! He was a 
staunch Whig, and like many other men of talent in his pro- 
fession, at first advocated the cause of the French Eevo- 
lution, but afterwards used to reprobate the violence of its 
sanguinary proceedings. He was always attached to his Alma 
Mater, and it may seem extraordinary, that when arrived at 
some eminence at the bar, he kept in his turn a Divinity Act 
at Cambridge. 

During the summer of 1835, he visited Burton, Kendal, 
and some other places in the north of England, where he 
invited his relatives, rich and poor, to dine with him at 
different Inns, affectionately observing, " this is the last time 
I shall ever meet you in Westmorland." It was, indeed, but 
too obvious that his dissolution was drawing on apace, for his 
habits had become very lethargic. The meek honesty of his 
character was such that, when elevated to distinction in his 
profession, he never forgot his former friends and connexions, 
and always stretched out a helping hand to indigent merit. 
Mr. Bell died at his house in Bedford-square, London, on the 
6th February, 1836, and his remains were deposited at Milton, 
near Canterbury, with great funeral magnificence. There is 
an inscription to his memory on the family tombstone in 
Kendal churchyard (facing the porch of the church). His 
immediate ancestors were buried there, as the other inscrip- 
tions on the same tombstone testify. Their obituary registers 
are on the top stone of the tomb. John Bell's epitaph is on 
one of the side flags. 

Mr. Bell has left one son behind him, now living, we 
believe, in the county of Kent. 



374 BIOGEAPHICAL SKETCHES. 



REV. JOHN HUDSON, A.M. 

This gentleman was vicar of Kendal, from the year 1815 
until 1843. Being the son of a farmer at Haverbrack, in the 
parish of Beetham, and presenting, in his career, an example 
of native talent and great industry, a brief Memoir of him 
is due in this place. He had the foundation of his scholarly 
attainments laid at Heversham School, a school which has 
been famous for the number of eminent men it has sent 
forth. 1 Mr. Hudson left Heversham for Trinity College, 
Cambridge, in 1793, and in 1797 he obtained the highest 
mathematical honours which the University has to bestow, 
being declared Senior Wrangler and Smith's Prizeman in that 
year. In the following year (at the age of twenty -five), he 
obtained a Fellowship in his College. He was distinguished 
not merely by sound scholarship, but also by considerable 
scientific attainments, with clear conceptions, and singular 
judgment. And accordingly, in 1807, he was appointed tutor 
of Trinity at thirty-four years of age. In this capacity he 
was successful in the highest degree, one of his pupils being 
Blomfield, Bishop of London, who was reputed to be among 
the best Greek scholars of his day. Blomfield was instituted 
to the see of Chester, and afterwards translated to London. 
Kendal, at the time, was within the diocese of Chester ; and 
when Blomfield made his first visitation at Kendal, he was, of 
course, the Vicar's guest. A select party were seated at dinner 
on the occasion, at the Vicarage, and the Bishop, recollecting 
the discipline of his former tutor, observed, — "I remember 
well, Mr. Hudson, how much I stood in awe of you at 
College." "Perhaps so," rejoined the Vicar; "but your 
Lordship has turned the tables upon me now." Mr. Hudson 
left the University to consummate an attachment which he 
had formed for Miss Culliford, (the only daughter of an officer 
in the army) and to settle down for the remainder of his days, 
in his native county. He was appointed Vicar of Kendal 
in 1815, and married the lady above named, who sweetened 

Bishop Preston, of Ferns ; Bishop Watson, and Professor Whewell, were 
educated here ; besides other men distinguished for their learning. 



KEV. JOHN HUDSON. 375 

his cup of life, and became an exemplar to all the ladies 
of the parish. Our readers will, many of them, recollect 
Mr. Hudson's good qualities. He was essentially " a fit person 
to serve in the sacred ministry of the Church ; " full of 
gentleness, kindness, conciliation ; teaching both by precept 
and practice, as old Chaucer says : 

" To drawen folk to Heven by fairnesse, 
And good example, was his besiuesse." 

He died, at Haverbrack, on Tuesday, the 31st October, 
184*3, in the seventy-first year of his age, and was buried in 
the interior of the parish church, at the south-east end, near 
Parr's Chapel (now the vestry). Archdeacon Evans (of 
Heversham) preached the funeral sermon, on Sunday, the 1 2th 
November, from 2d Cor. chap. v. 9 ver. The public monu- 
ment to his memory (for the inscription on which see ante, 
p. 63) stands against the south wall of the church, not far 
from the place of sepulture. That monument proclaims, very 
truly, the esteem in which Mr. Hudson was held by his 
friends and parishioners. 



APPENDIX. 



On tJie Roman Station " Alauna," at Borough Bridge, Westmorland. 

A Lecture delivered before the Members of the Kendal Natural 
History and Scientific Society, assembled on the Station. 

Two observations, founded upon history, will serve as an intro- 
duction to this lecture. The first is based upon a coincidence of 
natural and social phenomena, namely, that wherever the more 
violent convulsions in the earth's crust have occurred, in these same 
localities also have occurred, within later times, the greatest human 
contests and scenes of warfare. The other observation is, that 
mountain homes have ever been the sanctuary of liberty. In all 
ages, the dwellers in mountainous regions have been distinguished 
as the opposers of aggression, and the stoutest defenders of liberty. 
Hence the abundant memorials, in this locality, connected with the 
Roman, Saxon, Danish, and Norman conquests. 

We are here standing on a spot of ground, within the province 
of "Maxima Csesariensis," which, 1800 years ago, was occupied by 
a band of Roman soldiers. They were men highly disciplined in 
the arts of war; composed of cavalry and infantry, caparisoned 
in brass or iron mail, with the spear and battle-axe, which they 
could dexterously wield ; well clothed and well fed. Their victories 
had everywhere been so unchecked, that the world was lying at 
their feet ; and now, in the particular campaign which claims our 
attention, these soldiers were led by a General, Agricola, who 
ranked among the most famous of Roman Captains for his skill in 
battle and his discretion in dealing with conquered races. It had 
taken about forty-five years, under nine Propraetors, previous to 
Agricola, to bring under subjection the several nations of Britons 
who dwelt south of the Brigautes, that is to say, south of Chester 



378 APPENDIX. 

and Manchester. And, as the greatest achievements are fitly re- 
served for the highest talents, so the difficult task of conquering 
the Brigantes, on the west, was appointed to Agricola, the Pro- 
praetor, or Governor-General, of Britain. 

What were these people, the Western Brigantes ? And what was 
the condition of this district of country, at the time we are speaking 
of? Fortunately, we are not left entirely to conjecture, as to either 
the people or the country. Some knowledge has been communicated 
relative thereto by Caesar, and Tacitus, and the Saxon chroniclers, 
and some light has lately been thrown on the subject by modern 
philologists and archaeologists. It is pretty well agreed, that the 
southern parts of Britain were peopled by nations belonging to the 
Celtic tribes of Gaul and Germany, whilst the northern parts of 
this island were inhabited by races more closely related to the 
Scandinavian (Danish and Norwegian) stock. The very woof of our 
Westmorland dialect, which is classical English, and the current 
names of natural and common objects in this locality, are identified 
with the Scandinavian dialects. 

The Brigantes were divided into two tribes or nations, by a 
natural barrier — the great mountain chain (running from north to 
south) which cuts Yorkshire in two, and separates Durham and 
Northumberland from Lancashire, Westmorland and Cumberland, 
and which is sometimes called " the Backbone of England," and 
sometimes the "English Apennines." The Western Brigantes, 
occupying principally this, the western side of these Apennines, 
were the most powerful tribe of all the aboriginal Britons — powerful 
by their numbers, by their habits of war, and by the natural 
fortresses within which they were entrenched. And, besides their 
natural fortresses, they also constructed works of fortification. 
These were chiefly ramparts of earth, formed in parallel ridges, 
along the breasts of the hills. Many of these works may still be 
faintly traced in Westmorland. Perhaps the best example, and 
most accessible, is a British camp, right opposite the windows of 
Shap Wells Hotel, looking across the Birbeck. The one at Restane, 
in Staveley, I also believe to have been British, afterwards used 
by the Romans. The Britons were men of large limbs and 
fair hair. 1 They could despise luxuries; could endure hardships, 

1 Pope Gregory was moved to the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons by the 
sight of the "fair-haired captives " (Britons) in the slave-market at Rome. — 
Robertson's Christian Church, p. 19. 



ROMAN STATION, ALAUNA. 379 

even to standing for a whole day up to their chins in water ; they 
could exist even on the bark of trees. 

The face of the country was almost altogether covered with wood 
and swamps. Sylm Galedonis extended, in all probability, with 
slight intermissions, from the Solway, in Cumberland, to Morecambe 
Bay, — "a boundless contiguity of shade," — saving, perhaps, a few 
bare spots on the highest hills. The sacred Oak, the Ash, the 
Birch, and the Holly, clothed the slopes of the hills, whilst the 
valleys were, perhaps, still more thickly bearded with the aforesaid 
timber, mingled with the Alder, the Willow, the Hazel, and tangled 
brushwood of Brambles and Whins. Tarns, bogs, and morasses, 
everywhere abounded. The climate, therefore, must have been 
foggy, damp, and cold, better suited to the amphibious habits of 
the natives, than to the taste of Roman legionaries bred beneath 
the sunny skies of Italy or Gaul. The habitations of the Britons 
were rude huts or wigwams, made with the branches of trees, 
covered with mud. In times of peace, they occupied themselves 
in tending cattle, or shootiug (for food and clothing) the wolves, 
wild boars, and wild cats 1 that roamed through the primeval 
forests. The only article of manufacture known to belong to them 
are baskets. Their religious offerings were either to the mystic 
god Baal 2 (the Sun), or to the Oak with Miseltoe, or, for the most 
part, to the tutelar deity of the local Rivers ; for Gildas says, 
" Rivers were loaded with divine honours" by the Britons. Doubt- 
less they assembled themselves together, round the Druid's altars, 
on Potter's Fell ; on Kirkstone ; at Carl Lofts, on Shap Fells ; 
around " Long Meg and her Daughters," at Mayburgh ; at Pen- 
hurrock, on Crosby Fell ; and at many other places in the district 
where — 

*' The white-haired Druid, Bard sublime, 
Muttered his rite in Celtic rhyme." 

Their arms consisted of small targets, with swords and spears, of 
which many samples are in the British Museum. They had also 
chariots, armed with iron scythes, a kind of rude bayonet, project- 
ing from the extremities of the axle-trees. These chariots they 
managed with great dexterity r but it is hardly likely that they 

1 Hence " Wild-Soar-fell," and " Cats-de-c&m." 

2 Bal, in old Norse and Saxon, signifies " sacrificial fire." " Hill Bell ' 
and " Cat Bells " may be derived hence. Bel-atu-cader was a topical Deity to 
whom several altars were erected in Westmorland and Cumberland. 



380 APPENDIX. 

could be of much use in this hilly country. Agricola could 
manoeuvre his cavalry in many situations which would be in- 
accessible to the lumberly chariots of the Britons. 

Whether the Beacons, upon these hills, were employed by the 
Britons, for giving warning of danger, I am not able to make out. 
Dr. Whitaker rather inclines to that belief. If so, the Western 
Brigantes lighted the alarum fires, at the approach of Agricola, 
upon Warton Crag, on Ingleborough, on Barbon Beacon, on Whin- 
fell Beacon, on Orton Beacon, on Penrith Beacon, and, perhaps, on 
other hills whereof neither name nor trace is left. 

Let us inqaire into the date or the foundation of the Station at 
Borough Bridge. It is something to say, that, after a lapse of 
eighteen hundred years, we can fix, with tolerable certainty, the 
year of its foundation. Tacitus married the daughter of Agricola, 
and he must have known, as he was proud to record, the move- 
ments of his distinguished father-in-law. Agricola was made 
Propraetor of Briton, by the Emperor Vespasian, in the year 
a.d. 77, and was continued in that high office till the year a.d. 87. 
Tacitus says that he conquered the Western Brigantes from Deva 
(which is Chester) to the Sol way Frith in the year a.d. 79. The 
20th legion, * which was commanded by Agricola, had its head 
quarters at Deva, and the Editors of " Magna Britannia " state, 
that Deva continued head quarters of this legion for 200 years. 
Chester, therefore, to speak in modern phraseology, was Agricola' s 
"base of operations," in his campaigns against the Western 
Brigantes. From thence, he pushed forward, northwards, his "ex- 
peditionary " forces — (legions and auxiliaries) — by the line of Roads 
indicated on the Diagram, throwing up, as he proceeded, fortresses, 
mounds, and redoubts, and leaving, in his rear, garrisons and 
sentinels to watch and hold what was won. The auxiliaries of his 
army — Gallish captives, and native Britons, taken prisoners, — were 
made to hew down the woods, and construct the roads and earth- 
works. It is on record, that Galcacus excited the courage of his 
soldiers, the Britons, before engaging with Agricola, by telling 
them, that if they suffered themselves to be defeated, " they must 
expect to have their bodies worn and consumed in clearing woods 

1 A legion was composed of ten cohorts, and a cohort of six centuries. 
Thus, the numbers of a legion were 80 multiplied by 6, equal to 480, multi- 
plied by 10, equal to 4,800. But the first cohort (which had the custody of 
the Eagle), was sometimes double, or 960. So that a legion was usually 
soldiers. 



EOMAN STATION, ALAUNA. 381 

and paving bogs, whilst the Romans paid their wages in a thousand 
stripes." Some of the works so raised, still remain in this locality. 
One connected with this Station, (and a beautiful monument it is,) 
may be seen a little way higher up the valley, near Tebay, viz., a 
mons exploratorium, called " Castle How," constructed, no doubt, to 
guard the trajectus, or passage of the river, at that spot. This 
exploratory Mount commands the Station at Borough Bridge, the 
mountain pass to the north of it, and the two lateral valleys of 
Brederdale, on one hand, and Langdale on the other. It is made 
entirely of earth, in shape an oval, or rather a circle adjoined to 
an oval, the oval and circle having separate ditches and ramparts. 
The conjoined mounds are about 320 feet by 200 feet, at the 
swell. Close to this work is a large Brandreth-stone, — a green- 
stone boulder, — in a field called Gallowbar, ignorantly corrupted 
into " Galloper-field." When, in the Saxon era, after the departure 
of the Romans, Castle How became a tribune for dispensing justice, 
Gallowbar was, doubtless, the place of execution, where the gal- 
lows stood. I have elsewhere stated, that those mounds in the 
Vicar's Fields, at Kendal, were for the same purpose as this at 
Tebay, to guard the wath, or ford, at what is incorrectly called 
" Watts-field," instead of Wath-feld. But let me proceed with the 
history of this Station. Agricola, advancing by steps, and 
securing his steps as he advanced, planted a garrison at Bremeto- 
nac^! (Overborough). Having ascertained, by his scouts, or Vigilioe, 
the distance, in some measure, from Overborough to the pro- 
bable site of the first station to be planted beyond the great 
mountain barrier of the Orton Fells, on the banks of the Eamont 
or the Eden, Agricola would see the necessity of placing a 
garrison midway between those points. The country was hard 
to win, and not less hard to hold. A resting-place, and fortifica- 
tion, before the passage of the fells, became, therefore, a necessity ; 
and hence, it is pretty certain, that this Station was founded in the 
first year of the campaign, a.d. 79. No better situation could be 
found for shelter against the weather, or for protection against the 
enemy. Scouts, placed in advance, could signal the approach of 
the Brigantes from the north, down the Lune, or from the 
west, over Grayrigg Hause. A place between Tebay and Shap 
Wells still bears the name of Scout Green. It might not be till 
after several campaigns, and several years of occupation, that 
the paved roads, connecting this chain of Stations, were finished. 
The exact line of the Roman road, below Borough Bridge, is 



382 APPENDIX. 

very obscure. Mr. John Just was inclined to the opinion " that 
the Roman road corresponds with the modern road over the Hause 
and down to the Inn." With a strong wish to endorse so high an 
opinion, I am, however, bound to say, that I can find no evidence 
to support it. If ever there was a military way, or a vicinal way, 
"over the Hause," it would be for connecting Concangium, at 
Kendal, with this Station, and in that case it belongs to a later 
period, and to another chapter of history. The name " Hause " 
indicates nothing in connection with a road ; it is a Danish word, 
and signifies a neck, or sloping down from the shoulders of a 
mountain, — well applied in this case. "We cannot find out the 
crossing of the Lune, south of Borough Bridge ; if we could, the 
discovery of the line of road would be greatly facilitated, but as 
Mr. Just failed to discover the crossing, I may well despair of finding 
it. I may, however, make a suggestion. There is a rivulet one mile 
below called " Carnigill ; " so called, by reason of the gill washing 
the banks of a cairn, or tumulus ; and it is a historical fact that 
these tumuli stood by the sides of the Roman roads. My con- 
jecture therefore, is, that, coming northwards, the Romans kept 
to the east or left bank of the Lune, crossing the Rathay opposite 
to Sedbergh, till they came to CairngiU, then crossing Cairn- 
gill where the boundary post of the parish of Orton stands, 
close by the beautiful Cairn before alluded to. From Over- 
borough, upwards, the road proceeded by Casterton, as that name 
imports. Another name, two and a half miles north of Barbon, 
Borwens may be taken as a foot- print in the way ; for something 
Roman must have been where the name Boy-wens occurs. Beyond 
this, to Borough Bridge, few and faint traces only exist. But 
the great fact remains, that Agricola marched " straight as 
the track of a sunbeam;" and if you place a straight line, on 
Hodgson's Map of Westmorland, from Overborough to Tebay, you 
will find it touch upon Casterton, Barbon, and Borough Bridge. 
Adopting the statement of Tacitus, that all the country between 
the Dee and the Solway was conquered in this first campaign, the 
date of the several Stations on the straight line of communi- 
cation, on the Diagram, may refer to the same year. But it is 
hardly likely that the Stations on the west, at Lancaster, Kendal, 
and Ambleside, were founded until a future period. Even Agri- 
cola himself might be content with the line of country which lies 
in the direct route, for the spoils of one campaign. But, since the 
Stations at Lancaster and Kendal are both ascribed to Agricola, 



KOMAN STATION, ALAUNA. 



383 



it may easily be imagined how, with strong detachments and 
garrisons on the Ribble, the Lune, and the Eamont, he could, in 
two or three subsequent campaigns, reduce the Brigantes, on the 
shores of Morecambe Bay, and Windermere. 




The next subject of inquiry is the name by which this Station 
was called, and its connection with the other Stations north of it. 
Mr. Just observed that it is still " without a name ; " Horsley and 
Gale both omit all mention of it, and so does Camden \ Dr. Whit- 
aker gives nothing more than a hint that it may be either " Gala- 
cum " or " Alone/' I will venture upon a theory which may, at 



384 APPENDIX. 

least, have some plausibility. The 10th Iter of Autonine consists 
of nine Stations, lying between Hadrian's Valium and Mediolanum, 
in Cheshire. They are set down in the following order from north 
to south, viz. ; — 

ITER X. 

A. Glanoventa Mediolanum. 
Galava (or Calava ?) 
Alone. 

Galacum (or Calacum ?) 
Bremetonacis. 
Coccio. 
Mancunio. 
Candate. 
Mediolano. 

This Xth Iter of Autonine has been a puzzle to all antiquarians, 
especially to the early inquirers. And the Station " Alone," has 
been the most perplexing part of it, which may, perhaps, be 
accounted for by the fact, that Borough Bridge has lain out of the 
route of modern highways, and been, therefore, overlooked. In 
the new book, " Monumenta, Historica Britannica," published by 
Government, there is a map which places "Alone" at Ambleside, 
on the single authority of Reynolds, as far as I can find ; all other 
Antiquarians being against it. Horsley puts " Alone " at "Whitley 
Castle, on the Maiden Way, supposing the Xth Iter to have run 
from Hadrian's Vallum, whilst Reynolds and Mannert both place 
Galacum at Kendal. In all these cases, however, the designations 
are arbitrary, without the support of etymologies or inscriptions. 
If the hypothesis, which I am now about to advance, can be 
admitted, as placing " Alone " at Borough Bridge, then six Stations 
out of nine (from Mediolanum northwards), are accounted for, and 
the remaining three may be inquired into at a future opportunity. 
Mr. Whitaker, Dr. Whitaker, and Rauthmell, have proved the 
three Stations of Bremetonacse, Coccium, and Mancunium, to be 
indubitably Overborough, Ribchester, and Manchester. I take no 
notice here of Antonine's table of distances from one Station to 
another, because all Antiquaries have, in turn, rejected the obliga- 
tion of adhering to those tables. Rauthmell, and Dr. Whitaker, 
with the best evidence that lapidary inscriptions can give about the 
locale of Bremetonacse, Coccium and Mancimium, are yet obliged 



KOMAN STATION, ALA UNA. 385 

to take ten miles from one station, and add ten to another, in the 
distances of Antonine's Iter, referable to two of these stations, 
before they can make the names and distances agree. 1 Nor is it 
necessary to regard the stations as set down, with unerring accu- 
racy, in the direct order of succession. I shall take a smaller 
liberty with Antonine's Itinerary than many have taken, if I pre- 
sume only to transpose Galacum and Alone, putting the latter 
next to Brematonacse, and referring Alone to the station at Borough 
Bridge. 

In two separate places, in his "History of Richmondshire," 
(vol. i. p. 149, and vol. ii. p. 214), Dr. Whitaker notices the 
discovery, by previous antiquaries (Gale and Horsley), of votive 
altars, with inscriptions dedicated to the nymph Elaunce. In 
both cases, he appends commentaries (following the observations 
of Horsley, p. 306), to indicate his opinion, that the name of 
the river Lune (originally Lon ?), 2 is derived from this goddess. 
Nevertheless, with all his active imagination, and great powers of 
association, it seems never to have occurred to the Doctor, that if 
the nymph is to furnish the patronymic of the river, or vice versa, 
with equal propriety the river or the goddess has furnished the 
origin, also, of the name of this station, Alauna. Similar deri- 
vations of the names of Roman stations are not wanting (take 
KirJcby Thor, for an instance). I see no reason why the first 
syllable of Zo?i-govicum, and Zo^-caster, may not also be traced 
to the same nymph of this same river. The different spelling, 
Alone, by Antoninus, or his compilers, (whoever they were 1 ?) tells 
very little against the theory. If this Alone, be taken in the 
genitive, with a diphthong, " 86," the only alteration I make in the 
orthography is the • substitution of "au" for "o." But I do not 
care which spelling be adopted ; the etymology and signification 
are still the same. This property now belongs to the Earl of 
Lonsdale, whose peerage name may be traced back to the goddess 
" AlonEe," or " Alaunse," which you will. One of the altars above 
referred to was found near Rokeby, and the inscription is quoted 
in Gough's "Camden's Britannia" (p. 388), and in Horsley 's 
"Britannica" (p. 192, n. 62) : 

DEiE Nymphs Elanele, &c. 



1 " I draw no argument from numbers which, upon every hypothesis, are 
allowed to be corrupt." — History of Whalley. 

2 " The shallow stony Lone." — Spenser's " Faery Queen." 

C C 



386 APPENDIX. 

" Who is the nymph ? " says Dr. Whitaker. " These imaginary 
beings were topical deities. One of the mountain streams which 
unite with the Tees, still retains the name of Lune. Where is the 
improbability of supposing that its British-Romanised name was 
' Elauna,' and its nymph ' Elauneia 1 ' " The other altar was 
discovered among the Roman remains at Lancaster, and is in- 
scribed : — " Deo Ialono (conterraneo ?) Sanctissimo Julius Janu- 
arius," &c. "In this inscription (says the Doctor), no severity 
of reason, no coldness of caution, can check the enthusiasm of an 
Antiquary, who persuades himself that he has discovered the 
topical deity of Lune, Deo Ialono. Verbeice sacrum has, from 
the time of Camden, been allowed as a dedication to the nymph 
of Wharf, and Ialono is not more remote from the word Lune." 
Sound and sense, therefore, conspire to reconcile Alaunae, the river 
deity, with " Alone," the station set down in Antonine's Xth Iter. 
Every supposition appears to me to be in favour of this name. 
There is a station named " Alauna," by doubtful authority, in 
Lancashire. And among the Roman stations of Brittany (France), 
in Antonine's Itinerary, there is one named " Alauna," and so 
spelt. But, perhaps, the strongest fact in favour of my argument 
is, that this river Lune is called " Alauna," and so spelt, in 
Richard of Cirencester's (Ptolemy's) map of Roman Britain. There 
can be very little doubt that the name Lune, before the Roman 
invasion, applied to the whole length of this river, up to the 
source of the tributary now called Borough, or still more incor- 
rectly " Borrow," as well as to its other feeders, right and left, from 
Birkbeck Fells and Orton. The name " Borough," clearly, could 
not have been applied to the arm of this river above, until the 
Roman occupation ; and after that event, it is in no way sur- 
prising that, joining the sister stream so close to this station, it 
should have taken the name "Borough" as a distinction from 
Lune, which latter name clung to the other, larger, tributary. 
Now, with reference to the nymph Elaunse, it is to be observed, 
that she seems to have been a Deity of consideration and reputa- 
tion. Altars, dedicated to her, are found on both sides of the 
Penine chain ; among the Eastern Brigantes, as well as the 
Western Brigantes. She is supposed to have given name to a 
river (or the river its name to her ? ) on the eastern side of the 
country, as well as on the west. Her name and fame were, there- 
fore, everywhere spread abroad, at least, throughout the powerful 
nation of the Brigantes. On the other hand, Agricola was dis- 



ROMAN STATION, ALAUNA. 387 

tinguisked as muck for tke wisdom lie displayed in managing and 
propitiating the people he conquered, as for his skill in battle. 
" Having sufficiently alarmed them (says Tacitus), his next course 
was to allure them with the sweetness of peace, and he publicly 
assisted them to build temples, and places of assembling." Hence, 
it is most natural to suppose, that the founder of the station would 
seek to satisfy the feelings and veneration — not to say the religious 
prejudices — of the Britons, by adopting the name of their topical 
deity, who was held by them in such high repute, and so applying 
it to the station. He had less motive for consulting the Roman 
than the British vocabulary. His own legionaries were at his beck 
and call, willing and obedient, whilst, in all probability, at the 
time tke station was named, tke Brigantes were only partially 
vanquisked, and tkose brougkt under subjection were ill reconciled 
to tkeir master. If any one, dissatisfied witk tkis tkeory and 
derivation, can suggest any otker, consistent witk tke evidence of 
facts, or tke rules of logic, I will ckeerfully yield up Alauna. Till 
tken, it must stand, and tke station at Borough Bridge may, I 
kope, be kencefortk regarded as being redeemed from tke obloquy 
of an anonymous ruin. 

Witk respect to tke military way nortk of Borough Bridge, I 
can now speak with some degree of certainty. Thanks to Thomas 
Bland, and John Bland, his nephew, two Westmorland " worthies" 
(born geniuses, is the least I can say of them in tkeir presence), a 
clue kas been discovered wkick unravels almost all difficulties. 
Mr. Jokn Just spoke, from tradition, of tke road proceeding " over 
Orton-Low-Moor to Brougkam." But if, on tke contrary, tke 
military way can be traced from Borough Bridge to Kirkby Thor, 
then Antonine's Xth Iter goes northwards along it to Kirkby 
Thor, and thence by the Maiden Way, over Crackentkorpe Moor, 
past Whitley Castle, to Hadrian's Valium. In tkis case, tke four 
northernmost stations may thus be read off — " Alauna," at Borough 
Bridge; " Galacum," at Kirkby Thor ; "Galava," at Whitley Castle, 
and u Glanoventa," on the Wall. We shall find " Brocavum" next 
year, if we live, in the Vth Iter. Now, proceeding from Borough 
Bridge, tke Romans crossed tke river Borougk by a bridge, of 
wkick tke grout-work may still be seen, close to tkis station j and 
tke road is also clearly seen beyond ; tkey tkence went rigkfc on to 
tke Lune, and twice crossed tkat river, first at tke foot of Jeffrey's 
Mount, nortk of tke modern bridge over tke river, wkere a narrow 
lane points to tke ford ; and secondly, close to Castle How, at 

c c 2 



388 APPENDIX. 

Tebay, under the protection of that fort. Thence, on the west 
side of the village of Orton, over a depression in the long range of 
Orton Fell. The road, forward, descends Crosby Eavens worth 
Fell, by Wicker Street Thorn, where, for two miles, it is plain as 
a pike-staff, over ground which still retains the significant name of 
Wicker Street (the gate-way of the pass). It is at this point where 
John Bland made the grand discovery I before alluded to. The 
line of road is unquestionable, pointing direct to Kirkby Thor ! 
There is, also, here, a fine memorial, which I take to be the base- 
ment works of a British village, lying close to the Roman road. 
Who can tell what resistance the natives offered to the invaders, 
in these slopes, leading to the Lyvenet (musical river) at Ravens- 
wath ? The Roman legionaries had scaled the heights of Orton, 
and were now met, in this Valley of Jehoshaphat, by hardy 
Britons, fighting for their homes. I dare not give the reins to my 
imagination ; but I can state, soberly, that here are evident traces, 
on the ground, of Britons and Romans ; and, when the Pagan 
warriors are past and gone, there is proof, also, in the name of 
the village below, of the introduction of Christianity, for Crosby 
Rafenswath (Dano-Saxon) means a village by the ford where the 
Christians used to worship. Skirting Crosby Ravenswath, the road 
goes about half a mile west of the house where Addison's father 
was born, up to another Borwens [a good Roman name is better 
than a blind road], passing between the mounds at Borwens and a 
field called vulgarly " Crenylings," which should be Caerl-eng. 
Thence to two places of significant meaning, " Lufterns," and 
" Castrigg" (Caster- rig), both in the township of King's Meaburn. 
These places are, successively, in order, going straight towards 
Kirkby Thor, and I have traversed the road for thirteen out of 
the seventeen miles between Borough Bridge and Kirkby Thor. 
Brougham is now so far to the left, or north, that it is out of the 
line. In the meantime I stand upon the conviction that a Roman 
road communicates between Borough Bridge and Kirkby Thor. 

We have now further to inquire into the extent of the station, — 
its architectural plan and arrangements, and the number of soldiers 
it was designed to accommodate. If it be admitted that this 
station was constructed in Agricola's first campaign against the 
Brigantes, before those tribes were half conquered ; that it pre- 
ceded, by some years, the stations and lines of military way on the 
west, at Lancaster, Kendal, and Ambleside ; that it certainly, also, 
preceded the stations and the military way called Watling-street 



ROMAN STATION, ALAUNA. 389 

on the east, from Brougham Castle by Kirkby Thor, Brough, and 
Bowes j we should then expect to find, here, the evidences of 
a station, where a powerful garrison could be encamped. The 
situation was, as it were, the key which opened the door of the 
mountain pass ; and Agricola was too experienced, and too discreet 
a general, to proceed over Orton Fell into the plains of the Pettril 
and the Eclen, without first planting at Alauna, Borough Bridge, 
some veteran Lieutenant, at the head of a considerable detachment 
of well-tried soldiers. The Picts and Scots, terrible in fame, were 
before him, — the Brigantes were on both his flanks, and no means 
were at his command for estimating the numbers or positions of his 
enemies. The singular device of raising a watch-tower into the air, 
in the shape of a balloon, (successfully practised by the Emperor of 
the French at the battle of Solferino,) had not then been thought 
of. Therefore, it was not only necessary to place a strong garrison 
at Borough Bridge, but it was equally necessary to succour that 
garrison with defensive works and out-posts. The garrison alone 
might have to defend itself against unequal numbers ; or, the whole 
invading army, even, might be repulsed, and need a safe citadel. 
In any event (without reference to these possible casualties) the 
military way, or line of communication throughout the Lune 
valley, and the difficult pass of the mountain chain, had to be kept 
open by the band of soldiers planted here ; hence, we ought to find 
traces of a station of no mean magnitude and importance. 

It is on record that the Roman armies never halted for a single 
night without forming a regular entrenchment, termed a castrum. 1 
So essential was this operation considered, that even when preparing 
for an immediate engagement, or when actually assailed by an 
opposing force, it was never omitted. A portion of the soldiers 
were employed in constructing the necessary works whilst the 
remainder were standing to their arms or resisting the enemy. If 
a camp was designed to be held only temporarily, the field-works 
were but slight, and such camps took the general name of castra ; 
but if circumstances rendered it expedient for a force to occupy the 
ground for any length of time, the works were significant, and these 
larger camps were denominated Castra Stativa. That this station, 
Alauna, was designed for permanent occupation, there can be no 
doubt ; nor any doubt, therefore, that it belonged to the class 
Castra Stativa. The soldiers stationed here were a cohort of 

1 Dr. Wm. Smith's " Roman Antiquities," p. 244. 



390 APPENDIX. 

Nervians, according to the Notitia : — " Tribinus cohortis tertiae 
Nerviorum Alionae manebat." The word " manebat " (which occurs 
only occasionally in similar places), shows, that this cohort remained 
here, and the commander being a Tribune proves, that these 
soldiers were legionaries of Rome ; for, according to Caesar and 
Suetonius, "the Prsefects were appointed to command the allies 
in the same manner as the Tribunes commanded the legionaries. 1 
Mr. Noble, formerly of the Inn at Borough Bridge, dug up 
fragments of hypocausts (of which he said there were numerous 
traces), and pieces of charcoal, from the flues, which had been drawn 
in with soot, by the draughts from the fire. These fires and flues 
were for the double purpose of heating the baths, and for warming 
the tents, which stood in rows, like cottage houses in a street or 
lane. Several pieces of Roman pottery — some common, and some 
Samian wares were found by Mr. Noble, and are still on the spot. 
Four Querns, or hand-grinding mills, were dug up in the works for 
the railway. I had the honour of presenting two of these to the 
Kendal Museum, and the other two are here. Pieces of Roman 
money (leather pieces stamped as coin) were found here, but are 
now lost. 2 Here is, however, an undoubted Roman coin, of silver, 
which I conceive to be a coin of Vespasian, who was reigning 
emperor when Agricola was in Britain. Mr. John Just observed 
" sacrificial relics" among the remains, which are part of this 
pottery. These several remains, then, prove conclusively, that this 
station was occupied both in winter and summer, that baths were 
indulged in, that corn was ground and bread baked here, ko, 
Provision in luxuries, and necessaries, implies the presence of 
leaders as well as followers. " Sacrificial relics " indicate the 
presence of priests and augurs, with the performance of idolatrous 
rites. Priests and augurs may be reckoned as attendant upon the 
commanding officers and their staff, ready to proclaim good omens 
or expiate evil ones. 3 Altogether, theu, the inference is, that this 
station was permanently occupied for a considerable number of 
years, whether for a period extending from the time of Agricola 
till the final departure of the Romans, a.d. 434, must remain 



1 Adam's " Roman Antiquities," p. 371. 

2 " Beauties of England and Wales," p. 208. 

3 Certain birds and wild beasts crossing the road, before an army, gave 
presage of bad or ill luck. Our superstition, connected with a solitary mag- 
pie, may be a lingering instance of these omens. De Quincey puts this 
among the Pagan superstitions. 



EOMAN STATION, ALAUNA. 391 

undetermined. So long as the Lune Valley continued to be the 
great artery of communication between Britain and Caledonia, the 
station at Borough Bridge would be occupied and upheld. But in 
process of time, there were at least two, if not three, other military 
ways through Westmorland — one from Concangium, Kendal, by 
way of Reston, 1 over High-street to Brougham Castle, another 
from Dictis, Ambleside, over Woundale, uniting with the last 
named by " Scot-rake " at High-street, and possibly another from 
Ambleside over Dunmail Raise. Mr. Wordsworth believed in the 
Roman road over the Raise, 2 but it is more a matter of belief than 
of evidence. But, as regards the two roads converging upon High- 
street, I satisfied myself by actual traces of them, where portions 
of pavement are still visible. After so many lines of communication 
were opened, the station at Borough Bridge would lose some of its 
importance as a stratagetical position, and the number of its 
occupants would be reduced. What these numbers, when so 
reduced, may have been, we can never tell ; but we can tell, 
approximately, and with tolerable certainty, the total number of 
soldiers that could be accommodated here, for the internal arrange- 
ments and mode of encamping a Roman army were, in almost all 
cases, identically the same. 

" The general form of the inclosure for a camp," says Dr. Smith, 
" was an oblong square, so that the length should exceed the 
breadth by one-third." This station was, therefore, designed on 
the general plan. It is an oblong square, 420 feet from north to 
south, by 320 feet from east to west. The dimensions of the 
station at Old Penrith are 420 feet by 300 feet. That at Amble- 
side is 480 feet by 300 feet. It will be noted how very much of 
the same size these three stations are. The one at Brougham is 
upwards of 1,000 feet, by about 800 feet. The external defences of 
this station were a ditch and mound, technically called a fossa, and 
agger, or vallum. The agger, as it appears, on the west side, was 
constructed of earth, faced and strengthened by a barrier of stone. 
It is nearly five-and-twenty years since I first examined this 

1 Rhiw-stane, or Rey-stane, signifies " stony road, or paved road, over the 
hill," from Khiw, "a brow" (Brit.) and "stane" (Sax.) ! The first syllable 
of "Ky-dale," and the last syllable of " Elleray," are among the variable 
spelling of this word Rhiw. 

2 " The massy ways, carried across these heights, 
By Eoman perseverance, are destroyed," &c. 
Wordsworth, 1826. 



392 APPENDIX, 

station. The railway works, since then, have done something to 
change its features. I myself interceded with the surveying 
engineer, and begged hard that the " fine Roman hand " might not 
be effaced. But for this interference, the line of railway might, 
perhaps, have gone right over the Pretorium. The iron heel, of 
this iron age, might literally have pressed the neck of a centurion 
"dead and turned to clay." The Pretorian agger is nipped in 
between the railway and the turnpike road. What were the height, 
and thickness, of this fossa and agger, cannot now be accurately 
stated. The usual depth of the fossa was three feet, and the 
usual breadth across, five feet. The vallum of earth and stone 
together, would not be less than eight feet broad at the top, and six 
feet high. There were four openings into the area, within the 
vallum, and each opening, or porta, as it was called, was defended 
by an outwork of earth or stone. When special precautions were 
required, the portas were closed by regular gates, defended by 
towers. Such appears to have been the case in this instance. 
Luckily some of the posts, to which the gates had been hung here, 
have been dug up. One of these was taken away by Mr. Xoble, 
and put into the foundation of a chimney, in one of his farm- 
buildings. The other, fellow-stone, I have had removed to about 
the exact spot where it originally stood, at the Dextra gate. And 
a third, similar post, which was on a wall in a farm-yard, I have 
now placed at the same gateway, though this probably belonged to 
one of the other portae. You can see how the pivot of the gate 
has worked itself out of the socket, and enlarged the hole. The 
four entrances were called respectively, Porta Pretorium, Porta 
Decumana, Porta Dextra, and Porta Sinistra. The first was so 
called because it faced the Pretorium, where the Proprietor had 
his hall of audience, and where he bivouacked, with his staff, or 
body-guard. The Porta Decumana (at the opposite extremity of the 
camp), took its title from the circumstance of the tenth maniples 
being quartered in its vicinity. The Porta Dextra and Sinistra 
explain their own derivation. The Via Principalis took its name 
from that street being the promenade of the principal officers ; and 
those tents, which stood above it on each side of the intersecting 
street, were the officers' tents. The Porta Decumana was the gate 
through which a supply of water and provisions, generally, were 
carried into the fortress. It was uniformly placed farthest from 
the enemy, and, generally, nearest to the river. Four principal 
streets (as shown on the diagram) intersected the camp, cutting it 



EOMAN STATION, ALAUNA. 



393 



into four quarters; and these were again subdivided by lateral 
passages, leaving regular spaces for papiliones Y (tents), which were 
set in rows, or strigce, as they were called ; besides these lines, 
were spaces for stands of arms, for baggage, beasts of burden, 




PoTta jDccutikulo/ 



and cavalry horses. The common soldiers were quartered at the 
rate of ten men to each papilion ; but, since sixteen men, or four 
guards, in each century, were always out of camp, on duty, there 
were never more than eight men actually in a tent at the same time. 2 
According to the admeasurement, which I have already stated, this 
station occupied an area of about 130,000 square feet. Now, 
the space required for each cohort of 480 men, is stated to be 
21,000 square feet. It follows, therefore, that there was accommo- 
dation at Borough Bridge for six legionary cohorts of 480 men, or a 
total of 2,880 soldiers, supposing the garrison to be wholly of in- 
fantry, and the camp closely packed with common soldiers. But, since 
it is certain, that the army of Agricola was composed of horse as 
well as foot, some space must be allowed for horses, some extra for 
superior officers, and the number of men must be proportionately 



1 Hence our word " pavilion. 



Roman Antiquities," p. 254. 



394 APPENDIX. 

reduced. Mr. John Just said, with reference to the accommodation 
of the station, " each of these (four equal angles) would suffice for a 
century of soldiers, and four centurions, with their cohorts, would 
constitute the garrison." If he meant to say, that there would be 
four cohorts of 480 men (for he could not mean four centuries 
only), and, since he alluded to infantry alone, there seems to be 
little difference between my calculation and that of Mr. Just ; and 
an antiquary may be excused, for rejoicing in any data, and any 
coincidences of reckoning, which enable him to arrive at an ap- 
proximation of numbers, re-peopling, as it were, an encampment, 
or, as Wordsworth finely says, making — 

" The men that have been re-appear." 

In the Museum at Naples, is the skeleton of a sentinel, with the 
veritable helmet on his head, which the man wore at one of the 
gates of the city of Pompeii, when the lava of Vesuvius transfixed 
him to the spot. We cannot get any reality, or by aid of the most 
vivid imagination, anything that gives us such a distinct idea 
of the Romans "as they stood" at Borough Bridge; but we can 
put together a few facts, and several analogies, and by such means 
acquire some notion of the state of things as they existed here, 
during the Roman occupation. 

The last observation suggests, in conclusion, a moral to this 
story. I find it impossible to leave the subject without drawing 
one or two obvious reflections from it. One cannot look into the 
grey twilight of history, through a space of eighteen hundred 
years, comparing that time with the present, without thinking of 
the events that have intervened, or the steps of that grand march 
of social and national improvement, which is seen consummated in 
a contrast, between the forms of life- and the phases of society, in 
the first and those in the nineteenth century. The few sentences 
at my command will suffice only for a bare mention of the most 
striking of those events — the most marked period of the country's 
career; you will, in your own minds, fill up the details of the 
passing events, and supply all the connecting parts. 

It is a coincidence not to be omitted, that the very year (a.d. 
79), in which the Roman Propraetor, Agricola, was engaged in 
passing through these Westmorland defiles, was the same year that 
witnessed the overthrow of the Roman cities of Pompeii and 
Herculaneum. That terrible judgment overtook the " Mistress of 
the World," as she proudly called herself, at the moment she reached 



ROMAN STATION, ALAUNA. 395 

her farthest limit of conquest ; : and, it may also be said, at the 
moment of her greatest lust and luxury. The destructive element, 
pouring down the sides of Vesuvius, almost overtook thousands of 
people in the amphitheatre, at Pompeii, whilst revelling, with savage 
delight, in the "blood of gladiators — slaves, taken captive in the 
subjugated provinces of the Empire. After an occupation of 400 
years, the Romans withdrew from this island, leaving little behind 
them — little at least in this part of the country — but their paved 
roads and half-ruined fortresses. The Saxons succeeded better, 
and better deserved success. In their time, however, the country, 
and this district in particular, passed through much strife. The 
Danes — rival hrvaders — descended upon the northern coasts, and 
the frequency of old Danish and Scandinavian names among " these 
vales and valley streams," tell how long the Northmen must have 
contended with the Saxons, for permanent possession of the north 
of England. At length, the Saxon established his footing, gave 
laws and language to the people, and introduced Christian ordi- 
nances — the precursor of all other blessings. It is believed that 
Paulinus, the first Christian preacher, passed up the vale of Lune, 
as I have elsewhere supposed that he visited also the Kent. The 
poet Drayton thus sings of a fact, founded on history : 

"For when the Saxons first received the Christian faith, 
Paulinus, of old York, the zealous Bishop then, 
In Swale's abundant stream christened ten thousand men." 

That was the period of the foundation of the Saxon churches, 
(I do not mean the present structures, but the first Christian 
tabernacles), on the three rivers, all natives of Westmorland, the 
Lune, the Eden, and the Kent; that is to say, the churches of 
Kirkby Lonsdale, Kirkby Thor, Kirkby Stephen, and Kirkby 
Kendal. But, short were the respites and intervals of peace. Not 
long after this again, the sword was unsheathed ; and the bow again 
bent : — fresh shouts of war re-awoke the mountain echoes, and 
. much blood was spilt in these districts ; at the Norman Conquest, 
for instance, for the Domesday Surveyors reported, that they could 
make no schedule of the lands " in these parts," the said lands 
being so completely wasted and destroyed, and worth nothing! 2 

1 At that time the Roman Empire extended over 90 degrees of longitude 
and 45 degrees of latitude. 

2 "A. 965. — In this year Thoreth, Gunner's son, ravaged Westmorland. 
And that same year Oslac obtained an ealdordom." — The Saxon Chronicle. 



396 APPENDIX. 

The wars of the Roses, — of the Reformation, — of the Common- 
wealth, — and the Border wars, which lasted throughout all the 
others, — kept Westmorland men engaged in hostile occupations, 
with a continuance. Of one revolution, only, have we bloodless 
record (1688): 

" In eighty-eight, was Kirkby feight, 
When nivver a man was slain, — 
They ate their meat and drank their drink, 
And then com merrily hame again." 

But peace mingled her triumphs with those of war, and ultimately 
achieved the greater victories. If the blood of martyrs be the seed 
of the Church, the blood of patriots is the seed of the Nation. 
As the adversities of life chasten and improve the character of 
individuals, so the struggles of free citizens chasten and elevate the 
State. The procession of events, in the train of the peaceful arts, 
may be made up of the following (summary) catalogue : the con- 
solidation of property, — the " essarting " of woods, — the draining of 
lands, — the introduction of the plough, — the carving out districts 
into parishes, — the establishment of schools, — the institution of 
ecclesiastical dioceses, — the r great spread of churches (especially in 
the 13th century), — the introduction of printing, — turnpike roads, 
— stage coaches, — railroads, — mining, smelting, forging, weaving, 
&c. Such are some of the ameliorating agencies, stimulated by 
the human faculties strengthening with their strength, which have 
wrought the great change in men and manners, in habits, creeds, 
and opinions, evidenced in the contrast between the Roman era, in 
Britain, and the present time. Thus, it may be literally as well 
as metaphorically said, that the valleys have been exalted, the 
mountains and hills brought low, the crooked made straight, and 
the rough places plain. And thus has " freedom widened slowly 
down to our own times." What remains, then, for us, but to look 
gratefully back, through the long vista which I have faintly and 
imperfectly brought before your contemplation, and thank God 
that our lines have fallen in pleasant places. This is the true 
lesson of history ! 

August 9th, 1860. 



INDEX. 



A. 



Abbot Hall, 160. 

Adlington, Edmond, his Token, 132. 

Agricola, his conquests in Britain, 5. 

Agricultural Implement Manufac- 
tures, 249. 

Alauna, 377. 

All Hallows' Chapel, 78. 

All Hallows' Lane, 146. 

Altars, Roman, at Concangium, 13. 

Anchorite House, 78. 

Ancient state of the Town, 120. 

Animals of the District, 306—312. 

Archer's Charity, 223. 

Archers, Kendal, in Border Wars, 30. 

Arthur, King, his battles with the 
Saxons. 23. 

Askew, Anthony, M. D., Memoir of, 
348. 

Appendix, 377. 



B. 



Bank, for Savings, 153. 
Banks, the, 153. 
Banks's Charity, 224. 
Barnes, Rev. J. W. 49. 

„ his Monument, 64. 

Barometer (annual means), 262 — 265. 
Baron of Kendal, 282. 
Barony of Kendal, 26. 
Batemans, of Blease Hall, 117. 
Bateman's Use Money, 219. 
Bell, John, Memoir of, 371. 
Bellingham Chapel, in Church, 54. 
Bells of the Church, 44—46. 
Benson Knot, its elevation, 143. 
Bernard Gilpin, letter of, 193. 
Biographical Sketches, 323. 
Black Hall, 128. 
Blease Hall, 116. 
Blindbeck, 147. 

Blue Coat School and Hospital, 195. 
Book Club, 278. 
Border Wars, 28. 

Borough Bridge Roman Station, 377. 
Brathwaites, of Burneside, 112. 
Brathwaite, Richard, Memoir of, 333 
Bread Money, 232. 



British School, 204. 

Britons, whence they came, 1. 

„ their habits, 2. 
Brownsword House, 128. 
Building, ancient restrictions in, 125. 
Bull-baiting, 124. 
Bull ring, 124. 
Burgage Rents, 233. 
Burials in Cemetery, 76. 
Burneside Hall, 110. 
Butchers' Rows, 124. 

C. 

Caesar, Invasion of Britain by, 3. 

Canal, opening of, 147. 

Captain French Lane, 146. 

Card Making, 245. 

Carpet Manufactures, 249. 

Castle, 84 ; Building materials, 85 ; 
Destruction of, 95. 

Castle Dairy, 98—102. 

Castle hill, 143. 

Castle How Hill, 20. 

Castle Mills, 97. 

Castle Mills, Manufactory, 243. 

Castlesteads, Roman Camp, 18. 

Cemetery, 75. 

Chambers, Ephraim, Memoir of, 340. 

Chambre, Sir Allan, Memoir of, 354. 

Charities, 211. 

Charity Trustees, 234. 

Christianity, Introduction of, 35. 

Christian and Literary Institute, 281. 

Christian Brethren, 167. 

Chronological Table of Events, 284. 

Church, the date of, 38 ; Materials 
for, 39 ; Patronage of, 40 ; Altars 
in, 43 ; Bells, 44—46 ; Restoration, 
46 — 48 ; Clerestory windows, 49 ; 
Organ, 50. 

Cliff Side Terrace, 149. 

Climate, Health, Mortality, 252. 

Cocke, James, his Token, 134. 

Collin Field, 113. 

Colonel Walk, 161. 

Comb Manufacture, 247. 

Concangium, Roman Station, 8. 

Coney beds, Roman Camp, 19. 

Cooper, Rev. John, M.A., Vicar, 74. 



398 



INDEX. 



Corporation, silver cups, 128. 
Corporation Charters, 171, 176, 177. 

„ Arms, 179. 

„ Members of, 178. 
Reform Bill, 177. 
Countess of Pembroke, 114. 
County Court, 180. 
Court 'Leet, 180. 
Court of Conscience, 180. 
Court of Record, 180. 
Covered Market, 157. 
Crosby's (Rev. W.), Charities, 223. 
Cross Bank, 146. 
Cross houses, 126. 
Cunswick Hall, 109. 



D. 



Deanery of Kendal, 41. 

Directors of Railways, 155, 156. 

Dispensary, 230. 

Dissenting Places of Worship, 

161. 
Dodding Green, Roman Catholic 

Chapel, 162. 
Dole, Good Friday's, 229. 
Domesday Book, 36. 
Dowker's Hospital, 228. 
Druids in Britain, 32. 
Druids' Circles on Potter Fell, 33. 
Duchess of Kendal, 282. 
Duckett's Charity, 213. 
Duckett's Use Money, 219. 
Duke of Kendal, 282. 
Dwelling-houses, number of, 275. 

E. 

Earls of Kendal, 282. 
Ecclesiastical History, 32. 
Ethelburga, Queen, 34. 
Exhibitions at Free Grammar School, 

192. 
Exports of Kendal Cottons, 241. 



F. 



Fairs and Markets, 250. 

Farleton Tithes, 216. 

Fell Side Day and Sunday Schools,206. 

Finkle-street, 145. 

Fleming's Charity, 215. 

Flodden Field, Kendal bowmen at, 28. 

Fossils of the District, 313—318. 

Free Grammar School, 189. 

Friends' Meeting-house, 163. 

G. 

Galleried fronts, 126. 
Gaudy's, James, Charity, 231. 
Gas and Water Company, 158. 
Gates in Saxon times, 120. 



Gillthwaiterigg, 118. 

Gilpin's Charity, 211. 

Girls' and Infants' Schools, 204. 

Glass windows, when introduced, 123. 

Good Friday's Dole, 229. 

Gough, John, Memoir of, 355. 

Greets, stairs, 125. 

Green Coat School, 207. 

Gregory, Pope, 34. 

Guild, poetical description of, 139. 

H. 

Had wen, John, his Token, 135. 

Health, Climate, Mortality, 252. 

Helmet in Church, 55. 

Helsfell Hall, 119. 

Highgate, 145. 

High-street, Roman road over, 7. 

Hillocks, in the vale of Kendal, 143. 

Holme's Charity, 224. 

Hospital, St. Leonard's, 80. 

House of Correction, 150. 

Hudson, Rev. John, M.A., Vicar, Me- 
moir of, 374. 

Hudson, William, Botanist, Memoir 
of, 345. 

I, 

Ianson's Charity, 212. 
Independents' Chapel, 166. 
Infants' and Girls' Schools, 204. 
Inghamite Chapel, 164. 

K. 

Kemp, John, 235. 

Kendal and Windermere Railway, 155. 

Kendal Green, 238, 239. 

Kendal Library, 278— 2S0. 

Kendal Fell, its elevation, 143. 

Kendal Fell Lands, 181—183. 

Kendal Fell Trust, 181. 

Kendal Fell Trustees, 184. 

Kent, its flow, 143 ; its source, 145. 

Kent Lane, 148. 

Kent Terrace, 149. 

Kirkby Kendal, derivation of, 144. 

Kirkland, 147. 

Kirkland Court, 181. 

Kirkland Girls' and National School, 

205. 
Knott's (Dorothy) Charity, 227. 

L. 

Lancaster and Carlisle Railway, 155. 

Lancaster's Charity, 222. 

Law Courts, 179. 

Leather and Shoe Trade. 247. 

Lecture, Gifts for, 217. 

Literary Institi 

Local Militia, 169. 



INDEX. 



399 



Long Pool, 146. 

Long Pool Weaving Shed, 244. 

M. 

Manufactures, 235. 

Marble Works, 246. 

Market, Covered, 157. 

Markets and Fairs, 250. 

Maying and Morris-dancing, 127. 

Mayors, List of, 284—304. 

Maypole, 127. 

Meal Bank Woollen Mills, 244. 

Mechanics' Institute, 280. 

Members of Parliament for Kendal, 

275. 
Mercers' Company, their Token, 131. 
Miller Close Bridge, 148. 
Modern state of the Town, 143. 
Monuments in Church, 51. 
Moot Hall. 149. 
Mortality, 270. 
Museum, 279. 

N. 

National School for Boys, 202. 
„ „ for Girls, 203. 

Natural History and Scientific Society. 

278. 
Natural History of the District, 

306—322. 
New Biggin, 122. 
New Street, 147. 
Newspapers, 277. 

Nicolls', Sir Augustine, Epitaph, 65. 
Norman Castles in England, 26. 
Norman Conquest, 25. 

0. 

Obelisk on Castle How Hill, 21. 
Opening of Church, after restoration, 

49. 
Organ in Church, 50. 

P. 

Pack Horses, 117, 240. 

Paper Manufactures, 248. 

Parish of Kendal, original, 37. 

Parliamentary representation, 275. 

Parr, Sir Thos., his burial place, 89. 
„ Dame Maud, 91—93. 

PaiT, Queen Katherine, 323. 

Pan-, Win., Marquis of Northampton, 
330. 

Parr Chapel, in Church, 51. 

Parr's genealogy, 87. . 

Paulinus, his preaching and baptiz- 
ing, 35. 
avement 

Peerage Titles, 282. 

Petty Sessions, 181. 



Pews in the Church, 48. 

Places of Worship, dissenting, 161. 

Plague at Kendal in 1597, 20. 

Plants of the District, 318—322. 

Plat, Oliver, his Token, 132. 

Poor-Law Union, 187. 

Poor, management of, 184. 

Poor Stock, Charity, 233. 

Population, 274. 

Postal communication, about 1780, 

142. 
Potter, Barnaby, Memoir of, 333. 
Potter, Christopher, D.D., Memoir of, 

338. 
Primitive Methodists, 167. 
Prissoe's Charity, 21 9. 
Private Day Schools, 210. 
Public Schools, 189—209. 



Quakers, derivation of, 163. 
Queen Katherine Parr, Memoir of, 
323. 

R. 

Railways, 154-156, 243. 

Rain Tables, 254—258. 

Rainy Days, number of, 260 — 261. 

Rawlinsons of Gillthwaiterigg, 118. 

Rebels, visits of, in 1715 and 1745, 

135. 
Recorders, List of, 176. 
Registers in Church, 75. 
Religious Houses, 78. 
Religious Societies, Introduction of, 

162. 
Restoration of the Church, 46 — 48. 
Robin the Devil (Robert Philipson), 

55. 
Roman Catholic Church, 162. 
Roman Roads and Stations in the 

North of England, 6. 
Roman Station, at Kendal, Plan of, 

12. 
Romans, Subjugation of Britain by 

the, 3. 
Roman Station, Alauna, 377. 
Romney, George, Painter, Memoir 

of, 348. 
Rotten Row, 146. 
Rowlandson, Richard, his token, 135. 



Sampson, Rev. John, 194. 
Sandes, Thomas, his Token, 131. 
Sandes's, Thomas, Blue Coat School, 

195. 
Sanitary condition of the Town, 271 

—274. 
Savings' Bank, 153. 



400 



INDEX. 



Saxon Church at Kendal, 36. 

Saxons, Invasion of Britain by the, 
22. 

Scholars, total number of, 210. 

Scotch United Presbyterians, 165. 

Sepulchre, 79-161. 

Sessions, 179. 

Shaw, Thomas, D.D., Memoir of, 346. 

Shearmen, Company of, their Token, 
133. 

Simpson's, James, Charity, 220. 

Sizergh Hall, 102. 

Sleddall's Green Coat School, 207. 

Sleddall's Prayer-Book and Bible 
Charity, 225. 

Snuff Manufacture, 250. 

Society for relieving Sick Poor, 226. 

Sowtergate, 145. 

St. Anne's Chapel, Dockwra Hall, 79. 

St. George's Church, 77. 

St. George's School, 206. 

St. Leonard's Hospital, 80. 

St. Thomas' Church, 76. 

St. Thomas' School, 206. 

Stained glass windows in Church, 49. 

Stephenson's Charity, 221. 

Stewardson's Charity, 231. 

Stockings, 241. 

Stourbridge Fair, 237. 

Stramongate, 146. 

Strata in the Vale of Kendal, 144. 

Stratford's Charity, 225. 

Street Improvements, 147. 

Streets, derivations of the names of, 
145. 

Strickland Chapel in Church, 52. 

Strickland family, 108. 

Stricklandgate, 145. 

Summary of Public Day and Sun- 
day Schools, 209. 

T. 

Theatre, the, 156. 

Thermometer (Annual Means) 266 — 

269. 
Thomson, John. M.D., Memoir of, 

369. 
Thornburgh, Dame Thomasin, 59. 
Thwaite's Charity, 215. 



Tolls, 175. 

Towers' Charity, 219. 

Town Hall, 151. 

Town's Cross, 127. 

Tradesmen's Tokens, 130. 

Trustees of Charities, 234. 

Trustees of Kendal Fell, 184. 

U. 

Union Buildings, 147, 148. 
Unitarian Chapel, 163. 



Vicars of Kendal, 60. 

„ Monuments of, 61 — 63. 

„ Ceremony of Induction, 75. 
Vicarage House, old, 159. 
Vicarage House, new, 160. 
Volunteers in 1803, 168. 
Volunteer Rifle Corps, 170. 

W. 

Wakefield, Crewdson & Co.'s Bank, 

153. 
Walk Mills, 237. 
Watch Field, 17. 
Wedding Dinners, 129. 
Weslevan Methodist Chapel, 166. 
Westmorland, Bank of, 153. 
W barton's, Lord, Bible Charity, 233. 
Wharton, Sir George, Memoir of, 33S. 
White Hall, 129. 
Whitehead's Charity, 221. 
White Lion Inn," 126. 
Wildmau Street, 146. 
Wilson's Charity, organist, 220. 
Wilson, John, Botanist, Memoir of, 

343. 
Wilson, Thomas, his Token, 134. 
Woollen Manufactures, 235. 
Workhouse, 1S8. 
Working Men's Reading Association, 

281. 



Z. 



Zion Chapel, 167. 



SUBSCRIBERS TO THIS BOOK; 

Procured, upon the previous issue of a Prospectus, in order to obtain 
a Register of Persons and Places, for future reference : 

Addison, Robert, Esq. (Treasurer of the Westmorland Society), 
Regent Street, London (2 copies). 

Airey, Rev. H. H., Selside, Kendal. 

Airey, Mr. Thos., 45, Grafton Road, Kentish Town, London. 

Allen, Mr. James, Draper, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Argles, E. A. Esq., Eversley, Milnthorpe. 

Armstrong, Thos. Esq., 10, Park Place Villas, Paddington. 

Armstrong, Mr. William B., Organist, Highgate, Kendal. 

Armistead and Shepherd, Messrs., Chemists and Druggists, Strick- 
landgate, Kendal. 

Ashburner, James, Esq., 102, Broad Street, Pendleton, Manchester. 

Askew, Mr. Thomas Gibson, Liverpool. 

Aspland, T. L. Esq., Tower Bank, Esthwaite Water. 

Atkinson, Mr. T., 15, Rochester Square, Camden Villas, London. 

Atkinson, Mr. J. Otley, Dentist, Castle Crescent, Kendal. 

Atkinson, Mrs. Thomas, Belle Vue Cottage, Kendal (2 copies). 

Atkinson, Mrs. Thomas, Highgate; Kendal. 

Atkinson, Mr. Thomas, Saddler, &c. Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Atkinson, Mr. Thos., Proprietor of The Westmorland Gazette, Book- 
seller and Stationer, Kendal (10 copies). 

Atkinson, Mr. William, Angel Inn, Kendal. 

Atkinson, Mr. Wm., Boot and Shoemaker, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Audland, Rev. Dr., Milnthorpe (2 copies). 

Backhouse, Miss, Hilderston, Burton. 
Baird, Rev. James, M.A., Incumbent of Southgate, London. 
Ball, William, Esq., Glen Rothay, Rydal. 
Barrow, Mr. Joseph, Commercial Hotel, Highgate, Kendal. 
Barrow, Robert P. Esq., 65, Old Broad Street, London. 
Barrow, Mr. John Baker, Globe Inn, Market Place, Kendal. 

D D 



402 SUBSCRIBERS. 

Barrow, Mr. Thomas Henry, Allhallows' Lane, Kendal. 

Bateman, Mrs. N., Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Bateson, Mr. Thomas, Highgate, Kendal. 

Beadle, Mr. John, Painter, Cliff Terrace, Kendal. 

Bell, Mr., New Inn, Kendal. 

Bell, James, Esq., 4, Dalton Place, Old Trafford, Manchester. 

Bell, Mr. Thomas, Chemist and Druggist, Ambleside. 

Bellasis, Daniel H. Esq., Bowness. 

Bibby, Mr. John, Highgate, Kendal. 

Bindloss, Mr. Robert, Ironmonger, Kirkland. 

Bintley, Mr. Job, Engineer, Kirkland. 

Bird, William, Esq., Crouch Hall, London. 

Birkett, Mr. Allan, Ann Street, Kendal. 

Birkett, Mr. George, Tailor, Staveley, near Kendal. 

Birkett, Mr. G., 14, Regent's Park Road, Primrose Hill, London. 

Birkett, Mr. John, House of Correction Hill, Kendal. 

Birkett, Miss Dinah, ditto. 

Black, Rev. James F., B.A., Grammar School, Kendal. 

Blacow, Mr. James, Hatter, Finkle Street, Kendal. 

Bland, Mr. Thomas, Reagill, Westmorland. 

Blatherwick, Charles, Esq., M.D., Highgate, London. 

Blyth, Mr. John, Grocer, Far Cross Bank, Kendal. 

Boak, Mr. Thomas, Beast Banks, Kendal. 

Boucher, Mr. James, Excise Officer, Ann Street, Kendal. 

Bousfield, James, Esq., Broom Close, Kendal. 

Bowness, William, Esq., London. 

Braithwaite, C. L. Esq., Manufacturer, Kendal. 

Braithwaite, Mr. Charles Lloyd, jun., Highgate, Kendal. 

Braithwaite, Rev. George ; M.A., the Sub-Deanery, Chichester. 

Braithwaite, George Foster, Esq., Manufacturer, Highgate, Kendal. 

Braithwaite, Isaac, Esq., 6S, Old Broad Street, London. 

Braithwaite, Mr. J. C, Carpet Manufacturer, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Braithwaite, Rev. Robert, Keynsham Lodge, Cheltenham. 

Braithwaite, Mr. R., 11, Warrington Street, Oakley Square, London. 

Braithwaite, Mr. Thomas, Printer, Grandy Nook, Kendal. 

Braithwaite, Mr. Thomas, junior, Joiner, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Branthwaite, Edward, Esq., Lowther Street, Kendal. 

Briggs, Mr. Thomas, 36, Hunter Street, Liverpool. 

Brisley, C. Esq., Surgeon, Kent Lane, Kendal. 

Brockbank, Mr. Henry, Bookseller, Cartmel (2 copies). 

Brockelbank, Miss, Highgate, Kendal. 









SUBSCRIBERS. 403 

Brooks, Mr. Thomas, Tailor and Draper, Windermere. 

Broughton, Frederick, Esq. (Ulster Railway Company), Belfast. 

Brown, Mr. Martin, Brown Cow Inn, Kendal. 

Brumwell, James T. Esq., Surgeon, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Brunskill, Stephen, Esq., Sand Area, Kendal. 

Burnett, Mr. W. J., Castle Crescent, Kendal. 

Burrell, John Stamp, Esq., Merchant, Lancaster. 

Burrow, Mr. Davis, Carr Lodge, Leeds. 

Burton, Mr. Edward, Bock Ferry, Birkenhead. 

Burton, Mr. John, Auctioneer, Avenham Lane, Preston. 

Busher, Mr. James, Tobacconist, Gandy Street, Kendal. 

Butterwith, Mr. John, Grocer, &c, Highgate, Kendal. 

Butterwith, Mr. Robert, Grocer, &c, Kent Cottage, Kendal. 

Caine, Nathaniel, Esq., Iron Merchant, Egremont. 

Cannon, Mr. Thomas, Marine Store Dealer, Fell Side, Kendal 

Capstick, Mr. J., Tailor and Draper, Finkle Street, Kendal. 

Carlisle, Mr. Thomas, Stramongate, Kendal. 

Carradus, Sergeant James, Strickland Place, Kendal. 

Carradus, Thomas, Esq., Barwell Court, near Kingston, Surrey. 

Carter, Mr. John, Cliff Terrace, Kendal. 

Chaplin, Rev. W., Staveley, near Kendal. 

Chorley, Mr. R., 7, Church Terrace, Kentish Town. 

Churchill, Henry, Esq., Clapham Road, London. 

Clapham, Mr. G, 5, College Place, Camden Town, London. 

Clapham, Mr. J., 36, Rochester Road, Camden Road Villas, London. 

Clarke, Seymour, Esq., Hatfield. 

Clay, Miss, Green Bank, Kendal. 

Cockshutt, Mr. Edmund, Draper, Market Place, Kendal. 

Cookson, Rev. H. W., D.D., St. Peter's College Lodge, Cambridge. 

Cookson, Rev. J., Marton, near Blackpool. 

Compston, Mr. Samuel, Builder, Highgate, Kendal. 

Cooper, Mr. James, 9, College Street, Camden Town. 

Cooper, Rev. Canon, M.A., Vicarage, Kendal (2 copies). 

Cottam, H. R. Esq., Hornsey, London. 

Cowherd, James, Esq., Stony Dale, Cartmel. 

Cowherd, Miss, Lowther Street, Kendal. 

Cox, Mr. Eli, Architect, Kirkland, Kendal. 

Cragg, Mr. Christopher Robinson, 123, Stanley St., Pimlico, London. 

Cragg, Mr. Henry, Maltster, Mount Pleasant, Kendal. 

Crawley, Mr. Matthew, Marine Store Dealer, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 



404 SUBSCRIBEKS. 

Crewdson, G. B., Esq., J. P., Windermere. 

Crewdson, Edward, Esq., Banker, Kendal. 

Crewdson, Mr. John, Shoemaker, Allhallows' Lane, Kendal. 

Crewdson, William Dilworth, Esq., Helme Lodge, Kendal. 

Cropper, James, Esq., Ellergreen, Kendal. 

Crosfield, John, Esq., Rothay Bank, Ambleside. 

Crossley, H. D.,Esq., 11, Bentinck Street, Manchester Square, London. 

Dakin, Alderman Thomas, Hornsey, London. 

Davis, Mr. Benjamin, Plasterer, Highgate, Kendal. 

Dawson, James, Esq., M.D., Wray Castle, Windermere. 

De Lambert, Robert, Esq., Commonhead, Staveley, near Kendal. 

Dennison, Mr. John, 15, Inkerman Road, Kentish Town. 

Dent, Mr. Robert, Gas Works, Kendal. 

Derome, Mr. Matthew, Auctioneer and Accountant, Kendal. 

Dewhurst, Mr. Thomas, Green Area, Lancaster. 

Dinsdale, Mr. Alexander, House of Correction Hill, Kendal. 

Dinsdale, Mr. William, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Dixon, Capt. Thomas, 20th Middlesex Volunteers, Railway Clearing 

House, London. 
Dixon, John, Esq., Solicitor, Whitehaven. 
Dixon, Mr. Robert S. S., Post-Master, Kendal. 
Douglas, Mr. James, Grocer, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 
Duncan, Mr. Henry W., Schoolmaster, Highgate, Kendal. 
Dunnage, Thomas, Esq., Muswell Hill, London. 

Eady, William, Esq. (for the Hornsey Book Society), Campsbourne, 
Hornsey. 

Farquharson, Mr. James, 2, St. Mary's Place, Edge Hill, Liverpool. 

Farrer, Mr. John, Tea Dealer, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Fawcett, Mr. Christopher, Governor of the House of Correction, 

Kendal. 
Fawcett, Mr. Miles, Wood Bridge, Dent. 
Fell, William, Esq., Surgeon, Ambleside. 
Fenton, Myles, Esq. (Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway Company), 

Manchester. 
Fenton, Rev. Thomas, M.A., Ings, near Kendal. 
Fenwick, E. M. Esq., J. P., Burrow Hall, Lancashire. 
Field, Mr. Isaac, South View, Kendal. 
Fisher, Miss, Bebington, Cheshire. 
Fisher, Mr. John (Aid.), Builder, Stricklandgate, Kendal (2 copies\ 



SUBSCRIBERS. 405 

Fisher, Mr. William, Bookseller, &c, Stricklandgate, Kendal (6 copies). 

Fleming, Rev. Fletcher, M.A., Rector of Grasmere. 

Foster, Mr. William, 4, Seymour Crescent, Euston Square, London. 

Gabriel, Rev. E., B.A., St. George's Parsonage, Kendal. 

Gandon, Mr. H., 181, Euston Road, Euston Square, London. 

Gardner, C. Esq., Barwise Court, English Street, Carlisle. 

Gardner, Mr. Christopher, Brazier, Kendal. 

Garnett, Mr. John, Draper, Highgate, Kendal. 

Garnett, Mr. Anthony, Dyer and Drysalter, Kendal. 

Garnett, Mr. James, Collegiate Institution, Liverpool. 

Garnett, Mr. Thomas, Entry Lane, Kendal. 

Garnett, Mr. William, 8, Albion Place, Leeds. 

Garnett, Mr. W., Crosthwaite, near Kendal. 

Garnett, Mrs., Bank House, Barbon, Kirkby Lonsdale. 

Gaskell, Mr. George, Coal Dealer, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Gawith, Mr. J., Clogger, Highgate, Kendal. 

Gawith, Mr. Samuel, Tobacco Manufacturer, Lowther Street, Kendal. 

Gelderd, Geo. Atkinson, Esq. Aikrigg End, Kendal. 

German, Mr. Henry, Tailor, Highgate, Kendal. 

Gibson, George, Esq. Kent Terrace, Kendal. 

Gibson, Mr. Christopher, Architect, Kendal. 

Gibson, Mr. Matthew, Accountant, Kendal. 

Gillbanks, Mr. William, Rope Manufacturer, Allhallows' Lane, 

Kendal. 
Glyn, George Carr, Esq. M.R, Stanmore Park, Middlesex. 
Gott, Mr. Thomas A., Castle Street, Kendal. 
Gott, Mr. J. 38, College Place, Camden Town. 
Gough, Thomas, Esq., Surgeon, Kendal. 
Grant, Charles W. Esq., Solicitor, Highgate, Kendal. 
Grayson, Mr. Frank, 9, Edward Street, Hampstead Road, London. 
Grayson, Mr. John, Dentist, Highgate, Kendal. 
Green, Thomas, Esq. M.B., Aynam Lodge, Kendal. 
Gudgeon, Mr. Thomas, Shoemaker, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Hadwen, Miss, Highgate, Kendal. 
Halhead, Hilton, Esq., Merchant, Liverpool. 
Hargreaves, Mr. W. B., Ironmonger, Kendal. 
Harker, Mrs., Cartmel, Lancashire. 

Harris, Rev. Charles Butler, Luton> Beds, late Incumbent of Hes- 
lington. 



406 SUBSCRIBEKS. 

Harrison, Thomas, Esq., Singleton Park, Kendal (2 copies). 

Harrison, Daniel, Esq., Solicitor, Kendal. 

Harrison, Edmund, Esq., J. P., Abbot Hall, Kendal. 

Harrison, John, Esq., J. P., Summerlands, Kendal. 

Harrison, Mr. J. P., Castle Crescent, Kendal. 

Harrison, Matthew Benson, Esq. (High Sheriff of Westmorland), 

Ambleside. 
Harrison, Mrs. John, Hundhow, Kendal. 

Hartley, Mr. G. W., Baker and Confectioner, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 
Hartley, Mr. Isaac, Railway Clearing House, 101, Seymour Street. 

Euston Square, London. 
Hawkes, Rev. Edward, M.A., Parsonage, Market Place, Kendal. 
Hayes, Mr. Thomas, Market Place, Kendal. 
Head, Mr. Thomas, Draper, Westmorland House, Kendal. 
Heaps, Mr. James, Beast Banks, Kendal. 

Heslop, Mr. James, 15, Oxford Street, Caledonian Road, London. 
Hewetson, Henry, Esq., Entry Lane, Kendal. 
Hewitt, Mr., National School, Kendal. 
Hill, Mr. Thomas, British School, Castle Street, Kendal. 
Hiscock, Mr. William, Relieving Officer, Kendal. 
Hodgson, Miss, Highgate, Kendal. 
Hodgson, Mr. Rainforth, Brush Manufacturer, Kendal. 
Hogg, Mr. James, Painter, Kendal (2 copies). 
Hogg, Mr. James H., Photographic Artist, Kendal. 
Hogg, Mr. John, 7, Torriano Grove, Kentish Town, London. 
Hoggarth, Mr. Henry, Surveyor, Kendal. 
Hoggarth, Mr. W., 78, Westminster Bridge Road, London. 
Holden, Mr. John, Churchyard Cottage, Kendal. 
Home, Mr. Henry, Cabinet-maker, Highgate, Kendal. 
Howarth, Mr. Robert, Tailor, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 
Hubbersty, Philip, Esq. Wirksworth. 

Hubbersty, Rev. N., Eastwall Hall, near Melton Mowbray. 
Huck, Mr. Thomas, Highgate, Kendal. 
Huddleston, Mr. William, Union Bank, Liverpool. 
Hudson, Thomas, Esq., 3, Highbury Park, London. 
Hudson, Thomas, Esq., Stockbroker, Kendal. 
Hudson, Mr. Cunningham, Calcutta, India. 
Hudson, Mr. T. B. Bookseller, Manchester. 
Hudson, John, Esq., Larch How, Kendal. 
Hudson, Mr. John, Allahabad, India. 
Hudson, Mr. Richard, Chemist, Highgate, Kendal. 






SUBSCRIBERS. 407 

Hutchinson, Mr. George A., Fish-hook Manufacturer, Stramongate, 

Kendal. 
Hutton, Mr. Robert, 45, Grafton Road, Kentish Town, London. 

Inglis, Rev. John, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Ion, Mr. Thomas, Shoemaker, Lowther Street, Kendal. 

Ireland, J. G. J., Esq., Manufacturer, Kendal. 

Ireland, Mr. John, junior, Stramongate, Kendal. 

Ireland, Mr. Charles, Manufacturer, Stramongate, Kendal. 

Ireland, Mrs. G. W., West View, Kendal. 

Jackson, Mr. John, Master of Workhouse, Kendal. 

Jackson, Mr. George, Painter, Cliff Terrace, Kendal. 

Jackson, Mr. John, Academy Place, Warrington. 

James, Mr. Richard, 7, Chester Street, Toxteth Park, Liverpool. 

Jennings, Mr. Thomas, Tailor, Highgate, Kendal (2 copies). 

Johnson, J. Henry, Esq., Solicitor, 47, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. 

Johnson, James G. Esq., Funchal, Madeira. 

Johnston, Mr. John Henry, The Lound, Kendal. 

Jones, Rev. David, Independent Chapel, Kendal. 

Jopson, Mr. William, 17, Mark Lane, London. 

Kendal, Alfred, Esq. Heath Bank, Cheadle, Manchester. 
Knipe, Mr. Joseph, Collegiate Institution, Liverpool. 

Langhorn, Hugh, Esq., Wildman Street, Kendal. 

Lee, Rev. George, Finkle Street, Kendal. 

Lewthwaite, Mr. Thomas, Far Cross Bank. 

Line, Mr. John, 319, Wolverton, Bucks. 

Lipsett, Mr. David, Rainbow Inn, Highgate, Kendal. 

Livesey, Mr. James, Railway Inn, Wildman Street, Kendal. 

Long, Mr. William, Highgate, Kendal. 

Longmire, William, Esq., Surgeon, Stramongate, Kendal. 

Lyon, Mr. George, Painter, Highgate, Kendal. 

Lyon, Mr. Joseph, Pipe Manufacturer, Wildman Street, Kendal. 

Mabson, William, Esq., Hyning, Milnthorpe. 

Mackereth, Mr. Thomas, Accountant, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Mallinson, Mr. J., 16, Alma Terrace, Kentish Town, London. 

Mann, Mr. John, West View, Kendal. 

Mann, Mr. William M., Pear-tree Cottage, Kendal. 



408 SUBSCRIBERS. 

Marshall, Richard, Esq., The Limes, Muswell Hill, London. 

Marshall, Samuel, Esq., Kent Terrace, Kendal (4 copies). 

Martindale, H. Esq. County Treasurer, Crosthwaite, near Kendal. 

Martindale, Mr. William, Draper, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Martineau, Miss Harriet, The Knoll, Ambleside. 

Mason, Mr. John, Cabinet-maker, Highgate, Kendal. 

Medcalf, Mr. Edward, jun., Manufacturer, Highgate, Kendal. 

Meldrum, Mr. James, Seedsman, Market Place, Kendal. 

Miles, Joseph, Esq., Muswell Hill, London. 

Moffett, Mrs. Highgate, Kendal. 

Moore, Mrs. 25, Thomaston Street, Great Horner Street, Liverpool. 

Morland, Mrs. 99, Ebury Street, Eaton Square, London. 

Morphet, Mr., Bookseller, Kirkby Lonsdale. 

Morris, Mr. Thomas, Grocer, Highgate, Kendal. 

Moser, Roger, Esq., Solicitor, Kendal. 

Musgrove, Mr. William, Draper, Finkle Street, Kendal. 

Nelson, Mr. Richard, Carpet Manufacturer, Kent Terrace. 
Nicholl, Mr. Thomas, Supervisor, Stramongate, Kendal. 
Noble, John, Esq., 39, Cloudesley Terrace, Islington, London. 
Noble, Samuel Clarke, Esq., Surgeon, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

O'Connell, Mr. John, 15, Liverton Street, Kentish Town, London. 

Paisley, James, Esq., The Wray, Ambleside. 

Parke, Mr. Rowland T., Draper, Highgate, Kendal. 

Parker, Francis, Esq., Sydenham, London. 

Parker, Mr. James, Town View, Kendal. 

Parker, Mr. Rowland, Moss End, Preston Patrick. 

Pearson, Francis, Esq., Briery, Keswick. 

Pearson, Mrs. William, Border Side, Crosthwaite. 

Pennington, Mr. James, Grocer, Highgate, Kendal. 

Pickthall, Robert, Esq., Coal Agent, Kendal. 

Preston, Mr. Thomas, 4, Grafton Road, Kentish Town, London. 

Price, James, Esq., Clarence Terrace, Regent's Park, London. 

Proudfoot, Mrs. Milnthorpe. 

Redhead, Mr. Matthew, Ironmonger, Kendal. 

Relph, Miss, Highgate, Kendal. 

Relph, Mr. William, (Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway.) Liverpool. 

Rhodes, Mr. Samuel, Draper, Bank Top, Kendal. 









SUBSCKIBEES. 409 

Rhodes, Mr. John, Draper, Bank View, Kendal. 

Rhodes, Mr. William, Draper, Castle Park House, Kendal. 

Richardson, Mr. W. Gandy Street, Kendal. 

Richmond, Mr. Thomas, Grocer, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Rigg, Mr. George, Joiner and Builder, Castle Street, Kendal. 

Rigg, Mr. Richard, Windermere Hotel, Windermere., 

Robinson, Mr. Benjamin, Engineer, Houraw, Calcutta, India. 

Robinson, Mr. John, Horn Cop, Kendal. 

Robinson, Mr. Joseph, Shakspeare Tavern, Highgate, Kendal. 

Robinson, Mr. James, Bookseller, Kendal (5 copies). 

Robinson, Mr. William, Vale House, Garstang. 

Robinson, Mr. Richard L., Highgate, Kendal. 

Robson, Rev. William H., St. Helen's, Lancashire. 

Rodick, The Misses, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Rodick, Thomas, Esq., Ashmeadow House, Arnside. 

Rogers, Rev. T. W., M.A., Helsington. 

Russell, Mr. Thomas, Castle Inn, Castle Street, Kendal. 

Ruthven, Mr. George, No. 3, New Broad Street, London. 

Ruthven, Mr. John, Kirkland. 

Ruthven, Mr. John, Irwell Vale, Edenfield, near Bury, Lancashire. 

Scarisbrick, Mr. Thomas, Organist, Kirkland. 

Scott, Mr. James Wilson, Far Cross Bank, Kendal. 

Scott, Mr. John, Joiner, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Scott, Mr. William, Grocer, Highgate, Kendal. 

Shaw, Mr. Richard Carradus, Architect, Kendal. 

Shaw, Mr. Thomas, 4, North Place, Hampstead Road, London. 

Shaw, Mr. William, Constantinople. 

Shepherd, James C, Esq., Surgeon, Cross Brow, Ambleside. 

Simpson, Misses, No. 7, Highgate, Kendal. 

Simpson, Thomas, Esq., Manufacturer, Highgate, Kendal. 

Sinkinson, Mrs. James, Stramongate, Kendal. 

Sisson and Son, Messrs., Comb Manufacturers, Market Place, Kendal. 

Sisson, Mr. Edward, 109, Bishopsgate Street Within, London. 

Sisson, Mr. Richard, Comb Manufacturer (Firm of John Sisson, 

and Son), Kendal. 
Skelton, Mr. Robert, Market Place, KendaL 
Slater, Mr. William Bell, Coach Builder, Ann Street, Kendal. 
Slee, Mr. William, Seven Stars Inn, Kendal. 
Smallwood, Mr. William, Organist, St. George's, Kendal. 
Smith, Mr. William, Innkeeper, Stramongate, Kendal. 

E E 



410 SUBSCRIBERS. 

Smithson, Miles, Esq., Lane Head, Kendal. 

Somervell, John, Esq., Merchant, Kent Terrace, Kendal. 

Somervell, Robert M., Esq., Merchant, Windermere. 

Steele, John, Esq., Ivy Cottage, Burneside. 

Stock dale, Mrs., Kendal. 

Swainson, Joseph, Esq., Highgate, Kendal. 

Tatham, Edmund, Esq., Surgeon, Stramongate, Kendal. 

Tatham, Edward, Esq., J.P., Summerfield, Kirkby Lonsdale. 

Taylor, Mr.' John, Grocer, Highgate, Kendal. 

Taylor, Mr. Jones, Stricklandgate, Kendal (2 copies). 

Taylor, Mr. Isaac Platts, Manchester. 

Taylor, Mr. James, Union Bank, Liverpool. 

Taylor, Mr. John (Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway), Liverpool. 

Taylor, Mr. T., 1, New Hampstead Road, Kentish Town, London. 

Taylor, Mr. Thomas, Brazennose Street, Manchester (2 copies). 

Taylor, Mr. Thomas, No. 3, New Broad Street, London. 

Thompson, Miles, Esq., Architect, Lound, Kendal. 

Thompson, Mr. John S., Builder, Highgate, Kendal. 

Thompson, Mr. Thomas, Valparaiso, South America. 

Thompson, Mr. William, Painter, Highgate, Kendal. 

Thomson, J. P., 7, Leigh Terrace, Mere Lane, Walton, Liverpool. 

Thomson, Mr. William, Kendal Bank, Highgate, Kendal. 

Thornton, Joseph, Esq., Beaver Hall, Southgate, London. 

Thwaites, Mr. John, White Hart Inn, Kendal. 

Thwaites, Mr. Thomas, Dyer, Kendal. 

Tomlinson, Miss Elizabeth, Biggins, Kirkby Lonsdale. 

Turton, Mr. Benjamin, Staveley, near Kendal. 

Udall, Mr. W., Tailor, Low Fell Side, Kendal. 

Udall, Mr. Thomas, Woolpack Yard, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Wadeson, Mr. Joshua, Gandy Street, Kendal. 

Wakefield, John, Esq., J. P., Sedgwick House, near Kendal. 

Wakefield, William, Esq., Birklands, Kendal. 

Walker, Robert, Esq., Surgeon, Highgate, Kendal. 

Waller, Mr. John Johnson, Draper, Highgate, Kendal. 

Walling, Mr. Christopher, Wine and Spirit Merchant, Kendal. 

Washington, Mr. John, Parish Clerk, Kirkland. 

Watson, John, Esq., Albion Lodge, Stamford Hill, London. 

Webb, Mr. G. H., Claughton, Birkenhead. 



SUBSCRIBERS. 411 

Webster, Francis, Esq,, Marble Works, Kendal. 

Webster, Francis, Esq., Solicitor, Kendal. 

Webster, George, Esq., Eller How, Newton-in-Cartmel. 

Webster, Miss, Beezon Lodge, Kendal. 

Webster, Mr. C, Borough Surveyor and Land Agent, Kendal. 

Webster, Mr. Robert, Marble Works, Kendal. 

Webster, Mr. William, Cross House, Kendal. 

Welch, William, Esq., Spring Villa, Lancaster. 

Whinerey, Mr. John, Grocer, Stramongate, Kendal. 

Whinery, Mr. Samuel, junior, Highgate, Kendal. 

Whitaker, Mr. James, Blue Coat School, Kendal. 

Whittam, Mr. J., 25, Stevenson Terrace, Caledonian Road, London. 

Whitwell, Edward, Esq., Kent Street, Kendal. 

Whitwell, John, Esq., Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Whitwell, Mr. Thomas, Stockton-on-Tees. 

Whitwell, William, Esq., Tolson Hall, Kendal. 

Wilkinson, Charles, Esq., Solicitor, Bank House, Kendal. 

Wilkinson, Mr. James, Kendal. 

Wilkinson, Mr. R., 6, Roxburgh Terrace, Haverstock Hill, London. 

Wilkinson, Rev. Robert, Parsonage, Killington. 

Willan, Mr. Thomas, Sawrey, Spirit Merchant, Windermere. 

Willan, Mr. Simpson, Tailor and Draper, Stricklandgate, Kendal. 

Williamson, Mr. William, The Lound, Kendal. 

Willison, Mr. William, Pawnbroker, Highgate, Kendal. 

Willock, Mr. George, Cabinet-maker, Stramongate, Kendal. 

Wilson, Mr. I. Whitwell, Manufacturer, Castle Lodge, Kendal. 

Wilson, John, Esq., 17, Compton Terrace, Islington, London. 

Wilson, John, Esq., Solicitor, Kendal. 

Wilson, John Jowitt, Esq., Manufacturer, Kent Terrace, Kendal. 

Wilson, Mr. John, Strickland Place, Kendal. 

Wilson, Miss E., Stourport, Worcestershire. 

Wilson, Mr. Henry, Castle Park Terrace, Kendal. 

Wilson, Mr. James B., 4, Grafton Road, Kentish Town, London. 

Wilson, Mr. John F., Middlesborough-on-Tees. 

Wilson, Mr. Robert, 9, Edward Street, Hampstead Road, London. 

Wilson, Mr. Titus, Whitesmith, Market Place, Kendal. 

Wilson, Mr. Robert, Organist, Heversham. 

Wilson, Rev. John, D.D., Durham House, Chelsea. 

Wilson, Rev. W., Southampton, Vicar of Holy Rhood, and Canon 

of Winchester. 
Wilson, Robert, Esq., Forth House, Newcastle-on-Tyne. 



/ 



$6 



412 SUBSCRIBERS. 

Wilson, Mr. T., Bookseller, Highgate, Kendal (10 copies). 

Wilson, William, Esq., J. P., High Park, Kendal. 

Wilson, William, Esq., Manufacturer, Castle Meadows, Kendal. 

Wilson, Mr. William, 69, Pall Mall, London. 

Winder, Mr. Robert, Plumber, Highgate, Kendal. 

Wiper, Mr. William, Finkle Street, Kendal. 

Woffendale, Mr. Z. B., 6, Mary's Terrace, Camden Town, London. 

Working Men's News and Beading Association, Kendal. 

Wright, Mr. Henry, Windermere Villa, Windermere. 

Yeates, Anthony, G. Esq., Collinson House, Brixton. 






Mfc 



kiZ.T^ 



fo 



R. CLAY, SON, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS, BREAD STREET UIEL. 






£' 



V*o 




